EXCLUSIVE: Halle Berry Splits With Her Baby Daddy Gabriel Aubry

RadarOnline, April 30, 2010

Beautiful Halle Berry is a three time loser in love, RadarOnline.com has exclusively learned.

With two failed marriages behind her, it seemed Halle had finally found her soul mate in Canadian model Gabriel Aubry. The couple even had a child together, adorable daughter Nahla Ariela Aubry, who was born March 16th 2008.

But RadarOnline.com has learned that Halle and Gabriel have called it quits and worked out a financial and custody deal. They spent months hammering out a deal with a lawyer, RadarOnline.com learned.

A source close to the situation tells RadarOnline.com that Gabriel was the one who pulled the plug on their five year relationship and that the age difference – he’s 34, she’s 43 – played a role.

"Gabriel just felt it wasn't working anymore," the source says. "When they were first together the 9-year age difference between them didn't phase him, she was the most beautiful woman he had ever dated and he was totally in love.

"But as time went on he started feeling it more and more.

"Also, Gabriel started noticing other women, and being attracted to others, and he felt it just wasn't right to stay with Halle in those circumstances.

"Gabriel is a really nice, decent guy and he would never cheat on her, but I suspect that he had become attracted to someone and that he felt he needed to break it off with Halle before anything developed any further."

It's the latest in a series of emotional letdowns for Halle. Her first marriage, to David Justice, a former baseball player, ended acrimoniously after 5 years amid accusations from Berry of domestic abuse.

Halle's second marriage, to R & B singer Eric Benet ended after four years when Halle discovered Eric had cheated on her. Benet went into treatment for sex addiction but Halle filed for divorce.

Halle publicly declared she was over marrying again, and when she met Aubry she stated that her "life was already complete without the need for a marriage."

The source says that Gabriel and Halle quietly split a couple of months back, with Halle employing the services of Judy Bogen, a family law attorney from top Beverly Hills law firm, Hersch Mannis and Bogen, to iron out a custody and division of property agreement.

"Halle was terrified that Gabriel would go after her money," the source says. "But he's a decent and proud guy and that's just not his style.

"Gabriel's main concern was custody of Nahla, he loves that little girl more than anything, and wanted 50/50 joint physical custody of her, which Halle agreed to.

"Financially, Gabriel isn't in the league of Halle, but he still earns a decent amount from his modeling career, in the region of $700,000 per year, so he's comfortable and he didn't want a dime from Halle.

"All Gabriel has asked for is the house they own together in Canada. Halle put the full deposit down on

the house but Gabriel has made every one of the payments since.

"Halle agreed right away.

"As much as it can be it's been an amicable split. They both traveled a lot for work anyway, so they were used to spending time apart for long periods, but I think Halle has taken it pretty badly, she truly loved Gabriel and thought she had found the one."

wonderwall.msn.com

Halle Berry steps out with new mystery man as ex Gabriel Aubry confirms 'sad' split

By DAILY MAIL REPORTER

Last updated at 10:58 AM on 1st May 2010

Comments (0)

Add to My Stories

As Halle Berry stepped out with her new mystery man last night, ex-boyfriend Gabriel Aubry has confirmed that the pair have split-up.

The 43-year-old actress was pictured holding hands with an unknown gentleman leaving the critically-applauded Broadway play Fences, which stars Denzel Washington.

And if that wasn't enough to indicate the finality of Berry and Aubry's four-year relationship, the latter made a statement to Access Hollywood yesterday admitting the pair have separated.

Mystery man: Halle Berry was spotted leaving Broadway show Fences with an unknown gentleman

He said he was 'sad' to confirm the split and refused to comment on all of the 'wild inaccuracies' currently being reported by the media about his former relationship.

The 34-year-old, who has a two-year-old daughter Nahla with the Oscar-winning actress continued: 'She is, and will forever be, one of the most special and beautiful people that I have ever known, and I am certain that we will continue to have only love and respect for one another.'

Aubry added that their daughter is their main priority.

'Her happiness and well-being are the most important thing for both of us," he said. "Please respect our privacy during this very difficult time.'

Cofirmation: As Berry was seen holding hands with another man her ex-boyfriend Gabriel Aubry admitted the pair have split up

Rumours of the pair's split had been building in the showbiz circuit in recent weeks and reached fever pitch earlier this week when Berry attended an event on her own.

Although she is reported to be heartbroken, the actress remained professional throughout her red carpet appearance.

Showing off her stunning curves in backless grey sheath dress, she smiled and posed for the paparazzi when she arrived at the Linked Against Leukaemia DKMS charity gala.

Newly-single? Halle Berry looks stunning in a figure-hugging grey dress as she arrives at the DKMS' 4th Annual Gala at Cipriani in New York

The couple were said to have quietly split several months ago, but have remained on good terms as they continue to co-parent their little girl.

The handsome pair have been working out a 50/50 custody deal over their toddler daughter and Aubry has only asked for the couple's Canadian home as they divide their joint assets.

Rock chick: A leather-clad Halle Berry emerges from her New York apartment today

A source told RadarOnline.com: 'Gabriel just felt it wasn't working any more. When they were first together the nine-year age difference between them didn't phase him, she was the most beautiful woman he had ever dated and he was totally in love.

'But as time went on he started feeling it more and more.

Devoted parents: Berry and Gabriel Aubry with their daughter Nahla at Los Angeles Zoo on April 2 this year

'As much as it can be it's been an amicable split. They both travelled a lot for work anyway, so they were used to spending time apart for long periods, but I think Halle has taken it pretty badly, she truly loved Gabriel and thought she had found the one.'

During their relationship, Berry shot down expectations the couple would marry after going through two divorces herself.

Handsome couple: The pair started dating in November 2005 after meeting on a Versace photoshoot

Berry was previously wed to baseball star David Justice for four years in the early Nineties and soul singer Eric Benet.

The actress and Benet split in October 2003 after two years of marriage - just 18 months after she won an Academy Award for Best Actress in Monster's Ball.

Berry and Aubry started dating in November 2005 after meeting on set of a Versace photoshoot.

Appearing on the Tonight Show with Jay Leno last September, Berry admitted she fell for Aubry after seeing him on an advertisement on the side of a bus.

She said: 'He wasn't riding on the bus, he was on the side of the bus, you know, he's a model. I saw the picture and I just thought, hmm.'

Three days later, Berry was stunned to find Aubry was co-starring alongside her in the photoshoot, and after some gentle persuading by mutual friend Donatella Versace, the pair got together.

Berry enthused: 'I just remember making a mental note of, "Wow, that's a good-looking man," and then three days later, bam, there's that good-looking man.'

Ahead of the couple's four year anniversary last November, Berry admitted her relationship with Aubry had been her longest yet.

She said: 'Four years. The longest relationship I've ever had, yes, yes the longest one. For me, that's good.'

http://www.dailymail.co.uk/