Gabriel Aubry: Halle Berry's Claims Are Untrue, Irresponsible

Gabriel Aubry is speaking out about his custody battle with Halle Berry over their nearly 3-year-old daughter Nahla.

“While Gabriel is disappointed in Halle’s decision to falsely malign him publicly and for her own purposes, he refuses to be pulled into her dispute over a canceled film production. Gabriel also refuses to air their issues in the press as he believes this may ultimately harm their daughter,” his rep told Access Hollywood. “The fact is that Gabriel is a caring father who shares custody of Nahla.”

“Gabriel fully believes that a consistent and balanced living situation and two loving parents are crucial for their child even if Ms. Berry feels otherwise. He will always defend his rights as a father and will always consider Nahla’s best interest. Halle’s continuing allegations in the press are untrue and irresponsible,” added the statement.

On Monday, Halle’s rep said the 44-year-old actress had “serious concerns for her daughter’s well-being” while in Gabriel’s care and that she was prepared to go to court to “protect her.”

justjared.

I'm so confused about where this is all coming from?

I mean they broke up months ago and things seemed to be going well.

And now all hell has broken loose.

Oh and btw, I'm on Halle's side in this situation.

Gabriel may just be upset that he's not getting any money anymore

and if he gets full custody, he may be able to get child support in some way.

Sounds crazy, but these things happen, especially when the ex-spouse is a millionaire.

Does he not already have joint custody? It was my understanding that he already had joint custody

and now he's filing for FULL custody, because he's claiming Halle is an unfit parent?

And he's a successful model, but there's still a significant gap in the amount of funds Halle brings in compared to him. Just Sayin.

I don't think he ever claimed that halle was an unfit parent (she claimed that he was an unfit father to people.com ), he just wanted a judge to acknowledge him as Nahla's father.This whole mess started when Halle issued a public statement to People.com and making some very heavy allegations towards Gabriel .Guess who's on the cover of People magazine , that says how she is'' fighting for her child'' I dont understand why Halle decided to go to People , why not solve your issues in a discreet manner?

I get the feeling he wants to be acknowledged as Nahala's dad because perhaps he is not listed as such on the birth certificate? Smacks of sperm donor to me, and it could also be he just found out causing their supposed "amicable" breakup to be now down the crapper. This back and forth he said, she said situation is lose lose. The biggest loser is that sweet little girl who will undoubtedly be hurt when she gets older and reads this.

I'm finding it hard to be sympathetic to Halle because she has admitted to being estranged or completely stopped talking to her sister because she decided to contact their father before he passed. She seems like a person who is unforgiving and holds grudges. She nneds to thread lightely on what she is accusing him of. Once that damage is done, you can't go back.

Don't Call Gabriel Aubry's Daughter Black

The campaign to make Gabriel Aubry look like the official face of the KKK's line of tighty whiteys is in full swing. Gabriel has already been accused of calling Halle a racial slur and making derogatory statements about black people in the past, and now one of TMZ's sources is saying that he turns into a flaming cross of racist fire whenever anyone calls his daughter "black." Gabriel thinks that Nahla, who is 1/4 black, is a white girl and should be addressed as such. Are Mel Gibson and OctoSana co-writing this saga, because what in the name of Miss Sophia's fist is going on?

The source is saying that Gabriel would scream at Halle to ask for a retraction any time a magazine or newspaper or some kind of other media outlet referred to Nahla as being black. Gabriel would go into his "SHE'S WHITE! SHE'S WHITE!" rant before styling his locks to go with the white-loving dunce cap on his head.

Team Halle really needs to take their foot off the gas and back up a little bit. The "N" word thing went far, but now they're practically making him sound like he fell out of an Alex Haley novel. I'm not saying that I don't think it's possible for the fame wh*re virus in Gabriel's system to trump his David Duke gene, but Team Halle should pace themselves a bit. What's next? Photoshopped pictures of Gabriel in a KKK robe? Hopefully, they make those pictures semi-believable by making the eye holes in his hood extra-extra large. There's no way Gabriel would ever want to hide his purdy face. Because ho's vain gene beats all.

dlisted

This sounds like juicy gossip.

That Dlisted site, however.. it's just so polluted, every time I read bits of it, it just looks and sounds like a stinky dumpster, do we really need that amount of articles from the same source here??, surely someone else must be covering the same scandal in a cleaner way.. one kind of needs to scroll down fast and pick words apart to make sense of what actually happened/was said in the midst of all the "~wit~" and imaginary references from the writer. It's awful.