Russell Brand has reflected on his short-lived marriage to pop star Katy Perryin a rare remark about their past romance.

The comedian, 48, was married to pop superstar Katy, 38, for just over a year after the pair tied the knot with a lavish ceremony in India in 2010.

Their whirlwind romance saw a proposal and a wedding less than a year after they went public with their relationship in 2009, and the marriage broke down soon after, with Russell asking for a divorce via text at the end of 2011.

While Katy has previously said she hasn’t heard from her ex-husband since that text over a decade ago, Russell has now says he still has ‘feelings of affection’ for his ex as he showered her with praise.

Speaking on Running Wild with Bear Grylls: The Challenge, he said ‘some aspects’ of their relationship were ‘amazing’.

‘She’s an amazing person, and it was kind of incredible to live for a moment in that eye of the cyclone-type aspect of fame.’

But despite the ‘feelings of affection for Katy,’ he remembers that time as being ‘chaotic’ and ‘for myself, a little disconnected.’

Russell is now married to wife Laura Gallacher, and the pair have two daughters with another baby on the way.

Katy, meanwhile, moved on with fellow superstar Orlando Bloom, and the pair welcomed daughter Daisy, now three, in 2020.

Russell rarely speaks about their past romance, but in 2021 took part in a TikTok Q&A with fans and was asked about the relationship.

He insisted he has ‘nothing but positive feelings’ towards his ex-wife, who at that point had been estranged for over a decade.

Russell added that he ‘really tried in that relationship.’

Katy herself says she hasn’t heard from him since getting the text requesting a divorce, a moment seen in her 2012 documentary Katy Perry: Part Of Me.

She revealed in the documentary that the pair’s conflicting work schedules and her not feeling ready to have children were behind the split.

Got a story?

If you’ve got a celebrity story, video or pictures get in touch with the Metro.co.uk entertainment team by emailing us celebtips@metro.co.uk, calling 020 3615 2145 or by visiting our Submit Stuff page – we’d love to hear from you.

MORE : Katy Perry rocks double denim look at star-studded Vogue bash with Rita Ora and Shakira