Katy Perry has been within the public eye for reasonably a while, and whilst she could also be fascinated about being a first-time mother with fiancée, Orlando Bloom, her life wasn't always sunshine and rainbows. The "California Girls" singer married British comedian, Russell Brand again in 2010, on the other hand, regardless of the duo showing to be the picture-perfect couple, things turned bitter slightly speedy!

Only two years after saying their "I do's", Russell filed for divorce and left Katy completely heartbroken. Not most effective was their marriage over, however the duo had not signed a prenup. Considering Katy Perry had made nearly $44 million all through her time with Russell, that leaves him with 50% of her assets, however did he take it? Let's find out!

Related: Where Do Russell Brand And Katy Perry Stand Today?

No Prenup, No Problem

Katy Perry is these days celebrating being a first-time mother, which happened most effective weeks after the "I Kissed A Gir" singer released her newest album, "Smile". Katy, who debuted again in 2008, skyrocketed to international popularity and good fortune, and through 2010, after the singer had released her "Teenage Dream", album, she was once all any individual may speak about! It was during this time that Katy began courting British comic and actor, Russell Brand. Russell has proposed to Katy in January 2010 and the 2 were married on October 23, 2010.

Despite Katy Perry having been at the height of her profession at the time, it will most effective make sense for the singer to have signed a prenup, then again, that wasn't the case. Russell and Katy's courting became bitter sooner than anticipated, and after 14 months of marriage, the two had cut up. While the divorce was through no manner simple, Russel Brand could have made things much worse! Although Katy earned a whopping $Forty four million during their time in combination, Russell, who was legally allowed to 50% of that, decided to walk away with nothing!

Related: Here's What Russell Brand Thinks About Katy Perry And Orlando Bloom Expecting A Child

The comedian pledged to stay the divorce as "amicable as possible", and that included now not taking any of the cash Katy Perry earned all over the time they spent married. Russell Brand, who is currently worth an impressive $20 million, could have doubled his internet price had he walked away with the $22 million he was once legally allowed to. Despite the regulations put into position, Russell used to be adamant about no longer touching any of Katy's money, which fans concept to be fairly a mature and thoughtful act.

The duo reputedly fell out of love in 2012 and Katy Perry indisputably took it the hardest. Not simplest was Katy 25-years-old when she were given married, however Russell used to be 10 years older than the singer, which indisputably performed a task in the couple's cut up. While marriage without a doubt takes a lot of paintings, every so often it just doesn't play out the best way you anticipated. While Katy and Russell might have taken a hit all over the divorce, the two have since moved on from one every other and are doing their own factor!

Next: Remember Katy Perry And Russell Brand? Here's What We Forgot

ncG1vNJzZmivp6x7tbTErZ%2Bippeoe6S7zGilqGWgp7Kvwc9mn6ivXaLCpLSMnaCdZZuWwbp5z56pq7Fdna63sYytpmaoka56s8HSrJylpF2Xv6K6w2g%3D