Russell Brand infamously deleted a picture of Katy Perry - his then-wife - during their marriage after seemingly receiving a tongue-lashing from the Firework singer. The pair's marriage was short-lived, and they split in 2012 after a whirlwind romance and subsequent marriage.

During their marriage, Channel 4 comedian Brand took to Twitter to share a somewhat unflattering photo of his then-wife. The tweet was subsequently taken down 48 minutes later - with no comment from the My Booky Wook writer or his pop star wife.

Speaking to Vogue in 2013, Perry claimed Brand had become controlling in their relationship, before she learned that she wasn't to blame for their fallout. She said: "At first when I met him he wanted an equal, and I think a lot of times strong men do want an equal, but then they get that equal and they’re like, I can’t handle the equalness.

READ MORE Met Office and BBC announce exact dates final hot weather of year will hit

"He didn’t like the atmosphere of me being the boss on tour. So that was really hurtful, and it was very controlling, which was upsetting. I felt a lot of responsibility for it ending, but then I found out the real truth, which I can’t necessarily disclose because I keep it locked in my safe for a rainy day. I let go and I was like: This isn’t because of me; this is beyond me. So I have moved on from that."

Brand was married to US pop star Perry from 2010 to 2012, and is now married to Laura Gallacher, the sister of presenter Kirsty Gallacher. The couple have two children, Mabel and Peggy, with a third on the way. In recent years Brand has seemingly become a prominent conspiracy theorist, using his YouTube channel with millions of followers to cover topical news stories, including alleged misinformation surrounding the Covid-19 pandemic and being an outspoken sceptic of vaccination.

As Dispatches aired on Saturday evening, Brand appeared as scheduled at the 2,000-capacity Troubadour Wembley Park Theatre in north-west London to perform a sold-out comedy gig.