Russell Brand has opened up about his marriage to ex-wife Katy Perry. The comedian, 48, married the singer, 38, in 2010, after meeting just months prior on the set of the film, “Get Him to the Greek”. Their marriage then ended in divorce just two years later.

Despite the pair parting ways over a decade ago, Brand has shared new insights into his former relationship with Perry, revealing that despite his personal hardships, he attempted to make things work with the “Roar” hitmaker. Speaking to his followers on TikTok in August, as reported by MailOnline, the comedian said: “I really tried in that relationship. I have nothing but positive feelings for her.”

He further added some context around his first marriage in a 6 Aug. episode of “Running Wild with Bear Grylls: The Challenge”. “Some aspects of it were like amazing. She’s an amazing person, and it was kind of incredible to live for a moment in that eye of the cyclone-type aspect of fame,” he said, as he sat amongst nature speaking to Grylls. “Aside from my sort of feelings of affection for Katy, it’s a time that I remember being a little bit chaotic and a bit, for me, to speak for myself, a little disconnected.”

Brand has been vocal about his struggles with addiction in the past, and previously told Oprah, via USA Today that addiction “never really goes away.” He added: “It’s always there – dormant. If something provokes it, you’ll be back out there. I know that about myself.”

In 2017, he went on to marry Laura Gallacher, and the couple share two daughters, Peggy, four, and Mabel, six. In June 2023, podcast host Stephen Barlett revealed on Brand’s episode of “The Diary of a CEO” that the family are expecting a third baby. “You fell in love and you’ve got two children. You’ve got a third on the way, around the corner. That’s a very special love you have found,” Barlett said on the podcast.

Meanwhile, Perry got engaged to her fiancé Orlando Bloom, 44, in 2019 after three years of dating, and the pair welcomed their first child, a baby girl named Daisy, now aged two, in 2020.