Russell Brand has opened up about his short-lived marriage to Katy Perry.

On a recent episode of Running Wild with Bear Grylls: The Challenge, the British actor, 48, said his ill-fated union with the singer, 38, took place at a very “chaotic” time in his life.

The pair tied the knot in 2010 and were married for 14 months before Brand famously dumped Perry by text just minutes before she was due to perform on stage.

Opening up about that period of time in his life, Brand admitted that he “didn’t really start making a proper living” as an actor until his 30s.

“You had to live through so much that publicly,” Grylls told Brand about his marriage to Perry.

“That was when I was sort of most in the public eye and working in America,” the Forgetting Sarah Marshall actor said, adding that “some aspects of [that time] were amazing”.

“She’s an amazing person,” he said of the singer. “It was kind of incredible to live for a moment in that eye of the cyclone type aspect of fame.”

“Aside from my sort of feelings of affection for Katy, it’s a time that I remember has been a little bit chaotic and a bit for me … a little disconnected,” he added.

After their split, Perry went on to date John Mayer before ultimately finding love with actor Orlando Bloom.

The pair welcomed daughter Daisy Dove in August 2020.

For his part, Brand married author Laura Gallacher in 2017 and went on to welcome daughters Mabel, 6, and Peggy, 4.

They recently announced that they’re expecting a third child.

Perry previously opened up about her ill-fated marriage to Brand, saying she still “believed in Disney Princesses” when the pair tied the knot.

“It’s easy to be single and not to be called out on your stuff, living your awesome single life thinking you’re the greatest, and the best, and doing anything you want,” she told Paper magazine in 2019. “But then when you get in a partnership you guys are there to teach each other lessons.”

“I’m very pragmatic and logistical and I am less fantastical about things. I mean, I was married when I was 25,” she reflected.

“I was like, ‘One person for the rest of my life’, and I’m not so sure that that idea is for me. I’m just such a different person than I was.”