Russell Brand's marriage to Katy Perry only lasted 14 months.

The now 48-year-old Brand began dating the popstar in September 2009, and the pair married the following year at the Ranthambore Tiger Sanctuary in Rajasthan, India on October 23 2010. Their union lasted only fourteen months before their divorce was finalised in 2012. And in the following years, Russell candidly spoke out about their split, in particular putting the breakdown of their marriage down to the "vapid" lifestyle that came with Katy's A-list pop star lifestyle.

This year, while appearing on Running Wild With Bear Grylls: The Challenge, Russell continued to blame fame, as well as their hectic lifestyles, for being unable to make their marriage work. "Some aspects of [that time] were amazing, she's like an amazing person," he told the show's host, Bear. "It was kind of incredible to live for a moment in that eye of the cyclone type aspect of fame."

He continued: "Aside from my sort of feelings of affection for Katy, it's a time that I remember has been a little bit chaotic and a bit for me, to speak for myself, a little disconnected." Meanwhile, back in 2017, when asked why he had intentionally kept details of his marriage to Katy private, he told UK TV's John Bishop: "Well, thinking about it now, I must have been conscious on some level that it would be very challenging if there were external influences [to the marriage]."

He continued: "Katy was obviously very, very occupied and very busy. I was [also] occupied and busy. Not to the same degree, I recognise… Obviously, the marriage didn't last for a very long time, and I think that is to do with the undulating nature of fame."

Meanwhile, two years after their split, Katy had her own say about why their marriage didn't last. She told Vogue in 2013 that while Russell had wanted his partner to be his "equal" when they first met, he ultimately could not "handle the equalness".

"He didn't like the atmosphere of me being the boss on tour. So that was really hurtful, and it was very controlling, which was upsetting," she recalled. "I felt a lot of responsibility for it ending, but then I found out the real truth, which I can't necessarily disclose because I keep it locked in my safe for a rainy day. I let go, and I was like: This isn't because of me; this is beyond me. So I have moved on from that."

The unearthed interviews come in light of Brand being at the centre of an investigation by The Times, the Sunday Times and Channel 4's Dispatches over rape allegations and claims of sexual and emotional abuse, which are alleged to have taken place between 2006 and 2013. Brand has denied the allegations and said that his relationships have been consensual. He shared a video on Friday ahead of the documentary in which he denied the "very serious, criminal allegations".

Follow the Mirror US News page on Facebook to make sure you're not missing out.