POP STAR Katy Perry and comedian Russell Brand were both at the height of stardom when they met.

Here's everything you need to know about their marriage and what the pair have said about each other following their split.

When were Katy Perry and Russell Brand married?

Comedian and actor Russell Brand was previously married to American singer-songwriter Katy Perry.

They tied the knot in October 2010 in a traditional Hindu ceremony in Rajasthan, India, at the Aman-i-Khas luxury resort.

The ceremony took place next to the tiger sanctuary where he proposed ten months earlier.

Why did Katy Perry and Russell Brand split up?

During their marriage, rumours circulated that the pair were on the verge of a divorce.

On December 30, 2011, Brand filed for divorce and according to Katy, informed her of his decision a day later on New Year's Eve.

Sources claimed the split was down to the pair’s busy work schedules.

They divorced after 14 months of marriage.

The comedian married his wife Laura Gallacher in August 2017 and they have two children with their third on the way.

What has Katy Perry said about Russell Brand?

Katy previously told Vogue that Brand was the one who decided to end their marriage when he sent her a text message on New Year's Eve 2011, informing her that he planned to file for divorce.

"He's a very smart man, and I was in love with him when I married him," Katy said at the time.

"Let's just say I haven't heard from him since he texted me saying he was divorcing me December 31, 2011."

In 2020, the singer spoke of their relationship once more, calling her marriage to Brand as like a "tornado".

Katy also described the relationship as the "first breaking of my idealistic mind."

"I was having great success at 23, 24 and 25 and then I met someone that was interesting and stimulating. It was just like a tornado, it was everything happening at once," she revealed.

What has Russell Brand said about Katy Perry?

In October 2017, Brand gushed over his ex-wife during an appearance on the US chat programme, The Wendy Williams Show.

Talking of their relationship, he said: "But it was a very, very wonderful time.

"She was lovely. She’s such a lovely person I’ve got nothing but love for her.”

Brand also went on to give his take about her job as judge on American Idol.

He continued: "I don't know much about American Idol or things like that.

"I certainly think that she's probably a very good judge, so I certainly wouldn't comment on how much she's earning in the negative. I wish her all the best in all of her endeavours."

In September of that same year, Brand revealed that he wanted to be friends with the American pop-star, six years after their marriage ended.

Speaking to Grazia magazine, Brand said: “I’m willing and open for reconciliation, any kind.

"Because if we can’t overcome our relatively trivial personal disputes in this world, what hope is there for us?”

The Get Him to Greek star continued: ''It was a very important and lovely time in my life. I don’t regret being married to Katy at all.

''I have very positive feelings about that whole experience and Katy is an extraordinary woman.''