Probably best known for his Discovery Channel TV show, Wheeler Dealers, which has aired for an incredible 20 years, Mike Brewer is also the chairman of Coventry Transport Museum, an Ambassador for Ford and GardX, patron of the SeeSaw charity and the Sporting Bears Motor Club, a friend of Ben Charity, and now a CamperKing Ambassador! And in his own words, “not bad for a car dealer from South London”.

At CamperKing, we are immensely proud to say that Mike Brewer came to us and chose a CamperKing campervan for his own personal use. Due to his impressive motoring calibre, we just had to ask him to be an ambassador and we are delighted that he agreed.

For those that don’t know, Mike is a car dealer turned TV presenter who has worked on shows including Driven on Channel 4, Deals On Wheels and Pulling Power on the Discovery Channel, and has presented coverage of the British Rally Championship on Sky Sports, in addition to the aforementioned, Wheeler Dealers.

Surrounded by motors all his life as his dad was heavily involved in car customising, Mike discovered his passion for motoring as a teenager and knew this would be his career.

Soon after entering the motor trade, Mike quickly earned a reputation for being sharp and honest. In no time at all, he had the biggest 4×4 centre in the south of England, and was importing cars from around the globe.

Mike embarked on his television career through pure luck. He answered a friend’s telephone and discovered he was talking to a television producer. A long chat and a few anecdotes ensued and he was hired for the first series of Deals On Wheels.

His success in this role led him into the presenter’s position on Driven for Channel 4, followed by Auto Trader, Pulling Power, Deals on Wheels, Wrecks to Riches, and Revved-up as well as several other non- motoring programmes for Discovery Channel and ITV. But it was Discovery’s Wheeler Dealers that struck the heart and the toolbox of petrolheads all over the world.

Now broadcast in 217 territories with a global audience of over 200 million, Wheeler Dealers is celebrating its 20th season in 2023. For his television work, Mike has received numerous accolades including the Royal Television Society’s Best In-Vision Personality award and has been named Broadcast Journalist of the Year twice.

In addition to his television work, Mike is also a fan favourite at motoring exhibitions all over the world, and importantly, he is still a car dealer. Along with his wife, Michelle, Mike has opened Mike Brewer Motors dealerships in Luton and Sheffield.

Stay tuned for more exciting developments during Mike Brewer’s journey as a CamperKing Ambassador!