Publish date: 2024-08-03

Mike Brewer Bio | Wiki

Mike Brewer is a popular English car trader turned presenter of motoring television programmes who currently presents Wheeler Dealers on the Discovery Channel alongside Marc “Elvis” Priestley. His television shows have included Driven on Channel 4, Deals on Wheels, Pulling Power, Wrecks to Riches, Auto Trader, Wheeler Dealers as well as Wheeler Dealers Trading Up.

Having the exception of Driven and Pulling Power, all these shows have subsequently aired on the Discovery Channel. Mike has appeared in a series called Revved Up in which cars are modified and presents coverage of the British Rally Championship on Sky Sports. Mike has presented a show called Remote Madness, in which people with remote-controlled mini cars, boats, planes plus helicopters compete in a multi-challenge race.

In 2010, Mike changed direction and fronted a new Discovery Channel series Frontline Battle Machines, where he went to Afghanistan, and accompanied front-line troops, showing how they use their motorised equipment. At some point Mike’s helicopter took enemy ground fire, injuring the pilot in the head and damaging a hydraulic line, forcing a landing.

Mike Brewer Age

Mike was born on August 28, 1964, in Lambeth, London, England, UK. He is 58 years old. Mike celebrates his birthday on August 28, every year.

Mike Brewer Height

He is a man of above-average stature. Mike stands at a height of 5 ft 11 in (Approx 1.78 m).

Mike Brewer Family

He was born in Lambeth, London, to Roger Wilks and Doreen Fitzgerald. Mike’s father Roger worked as the owner at one point of a Ford Popular named “Mr Popstar”, and became heavily involved in vehicle customizing, which also helped Mike discover his passion for motoring.

Mike Brewer Wife

Mike is married to his wife Michelle. The pair married in 1992. He and his wife Michelle live in Warwickshire and have one daughter named Chloe Brewer.

Mike Brewer Wheeler Dealers

In October 2003, Mike became hired by the Discovery Channel to present their new motoring show, which was to be titled Wheeler Dealers. After its launch, the programme was met with success and featured Edd China as co-host and mechanic. After changes to the show’s production, China also stepped down as co-host in 2017 and became replaced by Ant Anstead.

In 2013, a spin-off of Wheeler Dealers became founded called Wheeler Dealers – Trading Up. This show featured Brewer travelling around the globe buying and selling various cars to reach the final goal of owning a supercar.

January 2020 saw the premiere on the Discovery Channel of the spin-off series Wheeler Dealers: Dream Car. Mike and retired Formula 1 mechanic Marc “Elvis” Priestly also help car owners trade up their unwanted vehicles to get them the car of their dreams.

Mike Brewer Motors

Besides his TV career, Mike is still active in the car industry, opening Mike Brewer Motors in 2012. The dealership has bases in Sheffield and Luton. Mike has also launched the only annual awards for used car dealers in the UK.

Mike Brewer Salary

He earns a satisfying amount from his work as a car trader turned presenter of motoring television programmes who currently presents Wheeler Dealers on the Discovery Channel alongside Marc “Elvis” Priestley. $ 98,565 per year.

Mike Brewer Net Worth

Mike gets his wealth from his work as a car trader turned presenter of motoring television programmes who currently presents Wheeler Dealers on the Discovery Channel alongside Marc “Elvis” Priestley. Therefore, Mike has accumulated a decent fortune over the years. Mike’s estimated net worth is $1.5 million.

Who Is Mike Brewer

Mike works as a car trader turned presenter of motoring television programmes who currently presents Wheeler Dealers on the Discovery Channel alongside Marc “Elvis” Priestley. His television shows include Driven on Channel 4, Deals on Wheels, Pulling Power, Wrecks to Riches, Auto Trader, Wheeler Dealers as well as Wheeler Dealers Trading Up.

How Old Is Mike Brewer

Mike is a 58-year-old who was born on August 28, 1964, in Lambeth, London, England, UK.

Is Mike Brewer Married

Yes. Mike married his wife Michelle. The pair married in 1992. He and his wife Michelle live in Warwickshire and have one daughter named Chloe Brewer.

Mike Brewer Social Media Handles

Twitter – @mikebrewer

ncG1vNJzZmiekZjBtK7UnZuyZpOkunC5yKScZpqimsSmvo4%3D