Are you an EPFL student looking for a semester project?

Work with us on data science and visualisation projects, and deploy your project as an app on top of GraphSearch.

Learn more about Graph Apps.

Andrew Jackson Montague (October 3, 1862 January 24, 1937; nickname "Jack") was a Virginia lawyer and American politician. He served as the 44th governor of Virginia, from 1902 to 1906, and a Congressman from 1912 until his death in 1937. A Democrat, Montague was the first Virginia governor since the American Civil War not to have served in the Confederate military. Initially a Progressive, Governor Montague expanded the state capitol building, supported public education and the Good Roads Movement and opposed the Martin Organization. However, later as U.S. Congressman, he became a Conservative Democrat and supporter of the Byrd Organization. The son of prominent Confederate and later state judge Robert Latane Montague, Andrew Jackson Montague was born in 1862 in Campbell County near Lynchburg, Virginia. He was named after his father's youngest brother, a cadet at the Virginia Military Institute who died defending Richmond at the Battle of Gaines Mill months before during the American Civil War. After the war, his family returned to the Tidewater area; since their enslaved workers had been freed and many left, Montague worked on the family farm and attended schools in Middlesex County and Williamsburg. After his father died in 1880, Montague left the farm and went to Richmond, Virginia. He attended Richmond College (predecessor to the University of Richmond), where he gained a reputation as a skilled orator and debater. After several years as a private tutor, Montague began legal studies at the University of Virginia, graduating with a law degree in 1885. He later received an honorary doctorate of laws degree from Brown University in 1905. After admission to the Virginia bar, Montague began his legal practice in Danville, while becoming increasing involved with the local Democratic party. In the presidential election campaign of 1892, Montague developed a relationship with Grover Cleveland, who then appointed Montague in 1893 as the United States Attorney for the Western District of Virginia.