House For Sale In Aster, Edmonton, Alberta

$354,998 QuickQuoteTM: Not Available

2 Beds

3 Baths

Details

Map

Demographics

Street View

Get Directions

ACTIVE

1124 Aster BV NW, Edmonton, AB, T6T 2N8

$354,998

2 Beds

3 Baths

Property Information:

NO CONDO FEES and AMAZING VALUE! You read that right welcome to this brand new townhouse unit the “Demi" Built by StreetSide Developments and is located in one of Edmonton's newest premier South East communities of Aster. With almost 1100 square Feet, it comes with front yard landscaping and a single over sized attached garage, this opportunity is perfect for a young family or young couple. Your main floor is complete with upgrade luxury Vinyl Plank flooring throughout the great room and the kitchen. The main entrance/ main floor has a large sized foyer with a 2 piece bathroom. Highlighted in your new kitchen are upgraded cabinets, upgraded counter tops and a tile back splash. The upper level has 2 bedrooms and 2 full bathrooms. *** This home is under construction, Photos used are from a previously built unit which is the exact layout and the home will be complete by the end of this year***

Building Features:

Floor Space: 102.19

Property Features:

Bedrooms: 2

Bathrooms: 2+1

Amenities/Features: See Remarks

Basement: None

Basement Development: No Basement

Building Type: Residential Attached

Built in: 2023

Efficiency Rating: High - 92%+ Efficiency

Exterior: Stone, Vinyl

Floor Space (approx): 102.19 Square Metres

Flooring: Carpet, Vinyl Plank

Goods Included: See Remarks

Irregular: Yes

Lot Shape: Irregular

Parking: Over Sized, Single Garage Attached

Road Access: Paved, Paved Driveway to House

Site Influences: Airport Nearby, Fenced, Landscaped, Park/Reserve, Playground Nearby, Public Swimming Pool, Public Transportation, Schools, Shopping Nearby

Style: 2 Storey

Title to Land: Fee Simple

Heating Type: Forced Air-1

Data was last updated 2024-07-10 at 07:28

The data relating to real estate for sale on this web site comes in part from the Internet Data exchange (“IDX”) program of the REALTORS® Association of Edmonton. IDX information is provided exclusively for consumers' personal, non-commercial use and may not be used for any purpose other than to identify prospective properties consumers may be interested in purchasing. The data on this website is deemed reliable but is not guaranteed accurate by the REALTORS® Association of Edmonton. Information deemed reliable but not guaranteed.

Copyright 2024 by the REALTORS® Association of Edmonton. All Rights Reserved. Data is deemed reliable but is not guaranteed accurate by the REALTORS® Association of Edmonton.

QuickQuoteTM

There is not enough data on this property to provide a QuickQuoteTM at this time, please click the button below for an in-person valuation.

Thinking of Selling?

Start by finding out what your home might be worth in today's market.

Market Price Trends