House For Sale In Aster, Edmonton, Alberta

$474,888 QuickQuoteTM: Not Available

3 Beds

3 Baths

Details

Map

Demographics

Street View

Get Directions

ACTIVE

1121 ASTER BV NW, Edmonton, AB, T6T 2V2

$474,888

3 Beds

3 Baths

Property Information:

Step into the unparalleled comfort of a brand-new Impact home w/ SEPARATE ENTRANCE. The inviting 9' main floor & basement beckons w/ an expansive open concept kitchen featuring ceramic tile backsplash, S/S appliances, quartz countertops, and upgraded cabinets. The spacious living & dining room, coupled with a convenient half bath, perfect the main floor ambiance. Ascend the stairs to discover the upper level oasis, where the primary bedroom awaits with a luxurious 4-piece ensuite and a generously sized closet. Two additional bedrooms, upstairs laundry facilities, & a well-appointed main bathroom complete the upper level. Beyond the stylish design and meticulous craftsmanship that define every Impact Home, rest easy knowing that all our homes are safeguarded by the Alberta New Home Warranty Program. *Home is Under Construction. Photos are not of actual home. Some finishings may vary*

Building Features:

Floor Space: 129.51

Property Features:

Bedrooms: 3

Bathrooms: 2+1

Amenities/Features: Carbon Monoxide Detectors, Ceiling 9 Ft., Detectors Smoke, Programmable Thermostat, Vinyl Windows, HRV System

Basement: Full

Basement Development: Unfinished

Building Type: Detached Single Family

Built in: 2024

Exterior: Vinyl

Floor Space (approx): 129.51 Square Metres

Flooring: Carpet, Non-Ceramic Tile, Vinyl Plank

Goods Included: Dishwasher-Built-In, Hood Fan, Oven-Microwave, Refrigerator, Stove-Electric

Lot Shape: Rectangular

Lot Size: 232.80 Square Metres

Parking: Parking Pad Cement/Paved

Road Access: Paved

Site Influences: Back Lane, Playground Nearby, Public Transportation, Schools, Shopping Nearby

Style: 2 Storey

Title to Land: Fee Simple

Heating Type: Forced Air-1

Courtesy of: MaxWell Challenge Realty

Data was last updated 2024-07-19 at 17:44

The data relating to real estate for sale on this web site comes in part from the Internet Data exchange (“IDX”) program of the REALTORS® Association of Edmonton. IDX information is provided exclusively for consumers' personal, non-commercial use and may not be used for any purpose other than to identify prospective properties consumers may be interested in purchasing. The data on this website is deemed reliable but is not guaranteed accurate by the REALTORS® Association of Edmonton. Information deemed reliable but not guaranteed.

Copyright 2024 by the REALTORS® Association of Edmonton. All Rights Reserved. Data is deemed reliable but is not guaranteed accurate by the REALTORS® Association of Edmonton.

QuickQuoteTM

There is not enough data on this property to provide a QuickQuoteTM at this time, please click the button below for an in-person valuation.

Thinking of Selling?

Start by finding out what your home might be worth in today's market.

Market Price Trends