STEVE Jobs is best known for co-founding Apple Inc. in an effort to create personal and practical computers.

Jobs built his company under the assumption that Apple’s products and features would change the world.

How did Steve Jobs die?

Jobs died on October 5, 2011 at age 56 from pancreatic cancer complications.

Despite a long and public journey with the disease, he remained the face of Apple as he underwent treatment.

A frail Jobs continued to introduce new products for a global market in his trademark blue jeans.

In 2004, Jobs underwent surgery, received a transplant in 2009, and took three medical leaves of absence as Apple’s chief executive before stepping down in August 2011.

Who was Steve Jobs?

Jobs was born on February 24, 1955, in San Francisco, California.

He was married to Laurene Powell Jobs and had three daughters named Lisa, Erin and Eve, and one son named Reed.

Jobs was an American business magnate, industrial designer, investor and media proprietor.

He was the chairman, chief executive officer (CEO) and cofounder of Apple Inc. and the chairman and majority shareholder of Pixar.

He was also a member of The Walt Disney Company’s board of directors and the founder, chairman and CEO of NeXT.

Jobs is widely known for his efforts in the personal computer revolution in the 1970s and 1980s, along with his early business partner and fellow Apple co-founder Steve Wozniak.

Jobs helped usher in the era of personal computers and then led a cultural transformation in the way music, movies and mobile communications are obtained.

According to The New York Times, Jobs considered himself a “technology leader, choosing the best people possible, encouraging and prodding them, and making the final call on product design.”

What did Steve Jobs accomplish?

Eight years after founding Apple, Jobs led the team that designed the Macintosh computer and broke through creating personal commuters that were easier to use.

In 1997, Jobs oversaw the creation of the iPod, the iPhone and the iPad, which transformed not only product categories like music players and cellphones but music and mobile communication industries as a whole.

Outside of Apple, Jobs built a team of computer scientists, artists and animators that became Pixar Animation Studios.