Apple co-founder Steve Jobs was laid to rest Friday at the Alta Mesa Memorial Park in Palo Alto, California, according to a death certificate obtained from the Santa Clara County Public Health Department.

He will be surrounded by some of the artists he loved, the technologists who inspired him, and a former U.S. Secretary of the Interior for good measure.

Jobs, 56, died Wednesday, October 5 at 3 pm of respiratory arrest. His occupation was listed as 'entrepreneur.'

You can see a copy of the death certificate here

Jobs suffered from a ‘metastatic pancreas neuroendocrine tumor’ first diagnosed five years ago, according to the death certificate. No biopsy or autopsy was performed on the body, according to the certificate, which confirms Jobs was laid to rest Friday, October 10.

(Jobs’ Social Security number, and the signature of the embalmer, local registrar, certifier, and deputy coroner were withheld. In addition, Forbes is withholding the address of the Jobs family home).

Jobs will be in good company at the Alta Mesa Memorial Park. The leafy cemetery in the Palo Alto foothills is the final home for a wide range of artists and technologists, according to web site Find-A-Grave.

They include country singer country singer ‘Tennessee’ Ernie Ford and Grateful dead member Ronald ‘Pigpen’ McKernan.

Technologists buried nearby include Hewlett-Packard co-founder David Packard and engineer Lewis Terman, who mentored Packard and HP co-founder Walter Hewlett.

Reflecting the eclectic array of people buried at the memorial park, the park’s gravestones range from sober to playful. One gravestone includes a picture of the deceased's pet cat. Another includes an engraving depicting the grill of a Mercedes Benz and the inscription ‘he who dies with the most toys wins.’

Jobs’ marker, if one is erected, it will likely be less flamboyant. Jobs is known for understated taste. While Jobs shipped many products while leading Apple, however, when it came to designing his own home he seemed less decisive.