PALO ALTO, Calif. — Apple co-founder Steve Jobs died of respiratory arrest caused by pancreatic cancer at his home in Palo Alto, Calif., according to his death certificate.

Details of the certificate — released by the Santa Clara County Public Health Department in San Jose, Calif., Monday and published by Bloomberg — show Jobs, 56, died about 3:00pm local time on Wednesday.

Respiratory arrest is listed as the immediate cause of death, with “metastatic pancreas neuroendocrine tumor” as the underlying cause.

No autopsy was performed and Jobs’ occupation was listed as “entrepreneur” in the “high tech” business.

He was buried at a non-denominational cemetery in Santa Clara County on Friday, according to the certificate.

Jobs had battled serious illness in recent years, and in August stepped down as chief executive of Apple, having taken three medical leaves of absence since 2004.

The first came when he was diagnosed with pancreatic cancer, a usually fatal form, but he managed to recover with treatment. He also underwent a liver transplant in 2009, then earlier this year, he was granted another leave for an undisclosed illness.

Jobs’ death was first announced by Apple’s board of directors on Wednesday, but his cause of death was not revealed at the time.

Apple announced Monday it will hold a celebration of his life October 19 in the company’s outdoor amphitheater.

In an internal email to employees reported on the Apple-related website 9to5Mac, chief executive Tim Cook wrote, “Like many of you, I have experienced the saddest days of my lifetime and shed many tears during the past week…

“Although many of our hearts are still heavy, we are planning a celebration of his life for Apple employees to take time to remember the incredible things Steve achieved in his life and the many ways he made our world a better place.

“The celebration will be held on Wednesday, October 19, at 10am in the outdoor amphitheater…”

An internet movement for an unsanctioned “Steve Jobs Day” on October 14 has been building, with a budding campaign encouraging people to wear black in his honor, AFP reported.

Jobs was known for his trademark outfit of black turtleneck shirt, blue jeans and sneakers.