Tailored Timber Expertise for the Lower North Island

JSC's Wellington branch stands as a beacon of timber expertise and innovation in the lower North Island, offering access to our rich 120-year history in sustainable timber solutions. While our principal manufacturing and innovation processes occur in our Auckland headquarters, the Wellington office plays a critical role in catering to the unique demands of the lower North Island region, including locations like Palmerston North, Napier, Wellington, Whanganui, Hawea, Hastings, Masterton, and Castlepoint.

Our Wellington branch, functions as a professional space for in-depth consultations and client meetings, focusing on the specific requirements of each project. The Wellington team are happy to travel for meetings off-site. This approach is deeply rooted in our commitment to personalised service and high-quality timber solutions, all stemming from our Auckland-based production hub.

Contact Information:

Email: sales@jsc.co.nz

Phone: (0800) 57 26 88

Address: 61 Seaview Road, Seaview, Wellington

Business Hours: Monday to Friday: 08:00 AM - 05:00 PM *By Appointment Only - this makes sure you are getting the best service by ensuring you are being assisted by the most knowledgeable team member concerning your individual requirements. | Please note hours may vary during holidays & on public holidays

Wellington Cladding

JSC Wellington is a leading provider of high-quality weatherboard cladding solutions. We offer a wide range of colours, styles, and wood species to meet the unique needs of your project. Our team of experts can help you choose the perfect cladding material to enhance the beauty and durability of your building.

Our systems: VertiClad | RustiClad | BevelClad | Board & Batten

Wellington Decking

JSC Wellington offers a wide variety of hardwood decking timber species, colours, and grain types in both standard and custom profiles, to cater to any aesthetic, taste, or architectural requirement.

The JSC Hardwood Timber Decking range offers FSC® certified options alongside our most popular specialty decking species and profiles.

FSC® Licence Code - C003608