Our logo pack can be downloaded below. If you have any questions about using the Wellington City Council logo, please contact our Workflow Team at workflow@wcc.govt.nz.

Wellington City Council logo pack (4.2MB ZIP)

Logo guidelines

Please take a moment to familiarise yourself with our guidelines for the logo.

For print

Minimum size is 25mm wide.

If you are working in graphic design software like Illustrator or InDesign, use the AI or PDF logo.

If you are working in other programmes like Word or PowerPoint, use the JPG or PNG logo.

For digital

Minimum size is 320px wide.

Use the JPG or PNG logo.

Please ensure the clearspace around the logo is kept free of any elements. The clearspace is built into the file and will show when the file is placed.

Send us a copy

For feedback on logo use please contact our Workflow Team at workflow@wcc.govt.nz. We’re happy to offer advice and love to be aware of where our logo is being used.

Primary brand colours

Yellow

CMYK: 0C 10M 100Y 0K

Pantone: Pantone 109 C

RGB: 255R 221G 0B

Resene paint: Absolutely Yellow

Hex: #FFDD00

Black

CMYK: 0C 0M 0Y 100K

Pantone: Pantone Black C

RGB: 0R 0G 0B

Hex: #000000

Wellington City Council Supported by logo

Download our Supported by logo pack (2.9MB ZIP).

If you have been supported with funding (through a grant or multi-year funding contract) by Wellington City Council it is expected that our support be acknowledged wherever appropriate, in any promotional material, verbally/presented at any event or function and at other appropriate occasions.

The amount of funding provided by the Wellington City Council should also be clearly identified within the body or notes of your annual accounts.

The Wellington City Council ‘Supported by’ logo should be placed on all relevant publications and support from WCC acknowledged on your online profile, website etc relating to projects and activity assisted under this agreement. This logo is to be used in accordance with Council brand standards.

For more information on using our Supported by logo please contact Mark Farrar at funding@wcc.govt.nz.

Legal reminder

These graphics are proprietary and protected under intellectual property laws. They must only be used in accordance with understandings or agreements with Wellington City Council.

In particular, please note that these graphics may not be:

altered in any way, or combined with any other graphics, without written consent from Wellington City Council

used as part of your own product, business, or service’s name

used as part of a media release or statement without written consent from Wellington City Council.

used in any way that infringes any provision of the Flags, Emblems, and Names Protection Act 1981, or would infringe such provision if the relevant use occurred within New Zealand.

Special requirements

If you have any questions or special requirements regarding our brand assets, contact:

Workflow Manager

Email: workflow@wcc.govt.nz