After working some years in the private sector, in 1997 he started his professional career at the Central Bank of the Republic of San Marino, holding, over the years, various top management positions, including Official responsible for the Treasury Department, Official responsible for the Tax Collection Service, Official responsible for the Compliance Service, Official responsible for the International Relations service, Official responsible for Human Resources and Official responsible for Anti-Money Laundering issues.

In parallel with his studies and work, he has always dedicated himself to politics. He has been a member of San Marino Christian Democratic Party (PDCS) since 1993 and has been an uninterrupted member of the Party Leadership and Central Council since 2010. He was Deputy Secretary and has been Chairman of the Central Council since 2017.

In 2006 and subsequently from 2008 to 2012, he held the position of Coordinator of the Department of Finance and Budget in the Ministry of Finance of the Republic of San Marino.

During this activity, he personally contributed to the drafting of several regulations, including the General Income Tax Reform, the establishment of the Single Tax Collection Service and the main regulations transposing international tax cooperation standards.

Over the years, he has represented San Marino as member of several delegations in San Marino’s relations with the IMF, OECD, Moneyval and the EU. In particular, he was part of the negotiating team with the EU for the San Marino-EU Monetary Agreement and for several tax agreements (DTAs and TIEAs).

He was elected member of the Great and General Council (Parliament) for the first time in 2012. In the 28th Legislature, he served as Captain Regent (Head of State) during the semester 1 April - 1 October 2014 and was a member of the Permanent Parliamentary Commission for Finance and Budget and of the Special Parliamentary Commission on the Infiltration of Organised Crime.

In 2014, upon initiative of the President of the Italian Republic Giorgio Napolitano, he was conferred the Knight Grand Cross decorated with Grand Cordon of the Order of Merit of the Italian Republic.