The micro-State of San Marino was initially governed by the Arengo, initially made up of the heads of families. In the 13th century the institution relinquished its powers in favor of the Great General Council. In 1243, the first two regent captains were appointed by that Council and this form of appointment continues in use today.

Legislative bodies

The Great General Council (Consiglio Grande e General)

Main article: Grand Council of San Marino

The Council is made up of 60 members elected every 5 years through a system of proportional representation in the nine castelli. These administrative divisions correspond to the old parishes of the Republic, and each one is governed by a Council headed by a Captain elected every 5 years. The Great General Council approves the budget as well as elects the Captains Regent, as heads of the Executive.

Parliament and chamber

The legislative body is made up of the Grand General Council, Parliament, and a Chamber. Members of Parliament are elected every five years and are responsible for legislation, justice and resolving jurisdiction issues. They are also in charge of the election of the Regent Captains, the State Congress, the Council of Twelve, the Advisory Commission. Parliament is also in charge of ratifying treaties with other countries. Parliament is divided into five Advisory Commissions made up of 15 members who study, propose and debate the incorporation of new laws that will be discussed in the Great General Council.

Executive bodies

The Regent Captains

Main article: Regent Captain of San Marino

Every six months, the Council elects two Captains Regent to serve as Heads of State. The Regents are chosen from among different parties, with which the Headquarters is balanced. The investiture takes place on April 1 and October 1 of each year. When the term ends, the citizens have three days to file complaints about the acts carried out by the Regents. If they are admitted for processing, legal proceedings are opened with the former head of state.

The practice of dual rule, as well as the frequency of re-election, derive directly from the customs of the Roman Republic. The Council is equivalent to the Roman Senate and the Regent Captains are the modern version of the consuls of ancient Rome.

The State Congress

The State Congress is made up of 10 Secretaries that exercise executive power. It is actually a cabinet of ministers. The 10 secretariats are:

Secretary of State for Foreign and Political Affairs.

State Secretariat for Internal Affairs and Civil Defence.

State Secretariat for Finance, Budget and Programming, Information and Relations with the Office of Numismatics and Philatelia.

State Secretariat for Education, Culture, University and Justice.

State Secretariat for Agriculture, Environment and Territory.

State Secretariat for Social Security and Health.

Secretary of State for Trade and Relations with the Citizen Council.

Secretary of State for Communications, Transport, Relations with the Azienda Autonoma di Stato, Service Tourism and Sports.

State Secretariat for Industry and Crafts.

Secretary of State for Labour and Cooperation.

Judicial bodies

The Council of Twelve (Consiglio dei XII)

The Council of Twelve is elected by the Grand General Council for the entire legislature, serving as the judicial body and also acts as a third instance in the Court of Appeals. Two government inspectors represent the State in financial and patrimonial matters.

Judicial organization

San Marino's judicial system is entrusted to outsiders for both historical and social reasons. The only native judges are the Justices of the Peace, who can only handle civil cases that do not exceed 25 million Liras (about 13,000 euros). The Council of Twelve serves as the court of appeal in third instance.

Political parties

See also: Annex: Political Parties of San Marino

San Marino is a multi-party democratic republic. The three main political parties are the San Marino Christian Democratic Party (PDCS), the Party of Socialists and Democrats (PSD), and the San Marino People's Alliance (APSM) along with several smaller ones such as the United Left coalition of San Marino (IUSM) or the New Socialist Party of San Marino (NPSSM). Due to the small population and territory of the country, it is difficult for any party to achieve an absolute majority and most of the time a coalition is formed. As a result of the June 4, 2006 elections, the PDCS and PSD hold the majority of seats on the Council.

Because tourism represents more than 50% of the economy, the government has abolished taxes and customs duties, except for the sale of coins and stamps. In addition, the Italian government gives San Marino an annual budget after the Basic Treaty signed by both parties.

Current Affairs

The main issue facing the current government are the economic and administrative problems derived from San Marino's status as an Italian enclave, which leads it to a total financial and commercial dependence on the neighboring country while at the same time it does not belong to the European Union. The other priority is to increase the transparency and efficiency of Parliament and its relations with the Cabinet and the Captains Regent.

Main data

From the CIA World Factbook.

Country Name:

Conventional long form: Republic of San Marino

Conventional short form: San Marino

Local long form: Republic of San Marino (RSM)

Local short form: San Marino

Code: YE

Type of Government: Republic

Capital: San Marino

Administrative divisions: 9 municipalities (castelli, singular - castello); Acquaviva, Borgo Maggiore, Chiesanuova, Domagnano, Faetano, Fiorentino, Montegiardino, San Marino, Serravalle

Independence: 301 (by tradition)

National holiday: Anniversary of the founding of the Republic, September 3, (301)

Constitution: October 8, 1600; The electoral law of 1926 sometimes performs constitutional functions.

Legal system: Based on a system of civil laws influenced by the Italian ones. It does not accept the jurisdiction of the ICJ.

Suffrage: 18 years old; universal

Executive body:

Head of State and Head of Government: Captain Regent Ernesto Benedettini and Captain Regent Assunta Meloni (for the period from October 1, 2008 to April 1, 2009). See also: Captain Regent of San Marino.

Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs and Politics Fiorenzo Stolfi (since July 27, 2006)

Government: State Congress elected by the Great General Council for a period of five years.

Elections: The regent captains are elected by the Great General Council for a period of six months; the last election took place on September 16, 2008 (the next one will be in March). The Secretary of State for Foreign and Political Affairs is elected by the Great General Council for a period of five years.

note: The great General Council elects two of its members as Captains Regent. They preside over the meetings of the Great General Council and their government (State Congress) which has ten other members, all elected by the Great Council, assisting the regent captains there are several State Secretariats (Foreign Relations, Internal Affairs and Finance etc.), The Foreign Affairs assumes the prerogatives of a prime minister.

Legislative body: The unicameral Great General Council or Consiglio Grande e Generale (60 seats; elected by popular vote with 5 years)

choices: The last one took place on June 4, 2006.

Election results of previous elections: percentage of votes by party - PDCS 32.91%, PSD 31.83%, APSM 12.05%, IUSM 8.67%, NPSSM 5.41%, NS 2.53%; seats by Party - PDCS 21, PSD 20, APSM 7, IUSM 5, NPSSM 3, NS 1

Judicial body: Council of Twelve or Consiglio dei XII

Political parties and leaders: Communist Refoundation or RC (Giuseppe Amichi); Democratic Movement or MD (Emilio Della Balda); Democratic-Christian Party of San Marino or PDCS (Cesare Antonio Gasperoni, Secretary General); Popular Democratic Action of San Marino or APDS (Antonella Mularoni); Democratic Progressive Party of San Marino or PPDS (Stefano Macina, Secretary General); Socialist Party of San Marino or PSS (Maurizio Rattini, Secretary General); Socialists for the Reform or SR (Renzo Giardi)