What's up GQ?

I'm Pat Bev and today [knocks] I'm going undercover

on the internet.

Here we go. [whimsical music begins]

Yep, it's actually me.

Quora, you ever heard of that?

I've never heard of this in my life.

Love that name.

Hey, is Patrick Beverley a good defender

or does he just get away with a bunch of reaching fouls?

A little bit of both, except the word good.

Take that out, put great.

But that's what happens, when you're a defender

you get away with a bunch of reaching fouls,

just like if you are an offensive player

you go to the free throw line a lot.

I mean come on, casual fans, let's be great.

And he only three followers, so say less.

Who are the biggest trash talkers in the NBA?

Draymond for sure.

KD for sure.

Low key, Luca Doncic.

Low key as hell.

I'm definitely somewhere up there.

Russ.

Yeah, Russ up there.

Cool little five.

Twitter.

This is gonna be interesting.

[whimsical music continues]

Saw Hoop Dreams for the first time,

and now I'm seeing there's a sequel

with Pat Bev called Hoop Reality.

This is very true.

I had a camera following me around

my entire senior year trying to get, I don't know,

a part two, like from Hoop Dreams.

I mean as a senior in high school I thought it was lit.

I was hooping, team was winning.

Nationally ranked team, we got a camera

following me and the homies around every day at school.

So no, that's true, that was a vibe.

I had a ton of fun with that.

Why is Pat Bev crying like they win a ring or something?

First off, you can't write a sentence the right way.

That's first off.

Before you get traded, you get traded to a spot

where, you know, you get a chance to win,

get a chance to win the championship.

I got traded to the Minnesota Timberwolves,

a team who hasn't been in the playoffs,

I don't know, 16, 17 years, whatever.

So before season start, I'm the guy who likes to go mirror,

check mirror, these are my goals.

These are things I want to do.

I like to manifest things.

I like to speak things into existence.

I wanted to make sure this team went to the playoffs.

That was my only goal.

That's the only thing I wanted to do.

We did it.

We did it against the team that traded me.

I asked the team that traded me for money,

they didn't want to give it to me.

Minnesota gave it to me.

We beat them, knocked them out the playoffs,

we going to the playoffs.

Emotions build up.

I'm happy as fuck.

Is a man allowed to be happy?

Why do we always have to cry tears of pain?

We can't cry tears of joy?

So that's all it was, just me crying tears of joy.

Whoever don't like it, fuck 'em.

I mean, I don't know if I could say that,

but that's how I talk, so do what you need with that.

How the hell does the NBA bubble championship not count?

Pat Bev can't pick and choose which titles matter

and which ones don't 'cause of the conditions.

It's very hard to answer this.

It counts, it does count.

But when you're playing in an environment

where you're not going against any part of, like crowd,

We had a team down 3-1, The Denver Nuggets.

Give Denver a lot of credit, they came back and won

and did everything they supposed to do in a bubble.

But that looks very different

if 3-1 was closeout game in LA Clippers,

or closeout game in LA or, you know, stuff like that.

So for me saying the bubble ring doesn't count,

I think it's the part ignorant,

but at the same time the bubble didn't give you

all the normal conditions that you would have

on facing other teams.

And I'll just leave that at that.

YouTube.

[whimsical music continues]

Bev and Russ becoming best friends

was something I did not see.

Me neither.

On god, me neither.

Russ the homie.

Russ really the homie.

Really, Russ the bro.

When I first came to LA, he was the first person

to kind of like, anything you need?

And he was at my press conference throughout the season.

Dinners, wine, fat wines.

Fat wines all the time.

We had a Christmas dinner together.

Think about that.

Me and Russ.

Really misunderstood.

Really misunderstood.

NBA great.

Legend for sure.

Next, Pat Bev, you should have came to Golden State.

Would've had a chance to win a ring this season.

Heard that you chose joining the Bulls over the Warriors.

Is that true?

This is absolutely true.

But people understand in this game, right?

You talk to these NBA teams,

you talk to these GMs, these presidents.

The Golden State Warriors wanted me to wait.

They wanted me to wait to see

how the Gary Peyton thing played out.

They wanted to wait and see how

the Steph Curry injury played out.

And in this business, or any business,

if you have an opportunity that's waiting on you,

I don't think any normal person would wait on an opportunity

that's not fully there already.

So I took what was available to me at that time.

And what if I did wait, and the Bulls close up

and Golden State Warriors said no,

now I'm left without a job.

But these are the casual things

that casual fans don't think of.

They think that, you know, you have this and this,

and oh you chose.

No.

If the Warriors would've said, Pat Bev,

we want you to come to Golden State.

I would've happily been with the Warriors the next day.

But that wasn't the case.

The Bulls did that and that's the decision I made.

Back to Twitter.

[whimsical music continues]

Pat Bev with the best technical foul earned in NBA history?

The man showed a camera to the ref.

I don't think this should have been a technical foul.

Not because the actual foul did not happen,

but the fact that it's been guys showing iPads,

it's been guys showing clipboards,

there's been guys showing whatever

that didn't receive a technical foul.

I guess the name on the back of the jersey,

you know, for me, if I do any little thing

I get a technical foul.

It's just part of the business with me though.

But I've seen this happen play after play,

and you never see a guy gets a technical foul.

But, man that was a good game.

That was a fucking good game.

Skip Bayless on national television,

I will give Patrick Beverley, he tweeted this?

'Cause that's not how you spell my name.

But, Skip Bayless on national television,

'I will give Patrick Beverley a ring

and not Russell Westbrook.

I just don't like him.'

How are these media shows allowed

to blatantly slander a player with extreme bias?

Me, you know, on my pod,

we had a real big debate about this,

how the media kind of controls the narrative players,

and the control of narrative from players

can actually help or hurt a player when it comes from,

I don't know, making $200 million to $150 million.

You know, if you're in that range,

or from being in the NBA or not being in the NBA,

I agree with this.

The blatant slander with extreme bias

can cause somebody to lose on a ton of money.

So use your words, don't use your words at people,

and make sure your words are factual when you do use them,

especially if you're part of the media.

So that'd be my answer to that.

Does any NBA player think about another player

as much as Pat Bev thinks about Chris Paul?

I don't know how to answer that.

Do you think about another player as much as Chris Paul?

No, I don't.

More Quora.

[whimsical music continues]

How was Patrick Beverley able to guard Kevin Durant

in the first two games of their playoff series

despite the substantial height difference?

So me and the homies, right?

We talked, before the playoff series, we talked.

We didn't know Maeve C., we started two rookies.

Our legion scorer is two guys off the bench,

Lou Will and Trez.

Obviously no one in the world thought we had

any slight chance of beating Golden State,

probably except us.

So me and the homies, okay, Pat, who you got?

I said, man, I told coach, man, gimme K.D.

They said, all right, fuck it.

How you thinking about guarding him?

So I got homie, homie like 5'9.

I had homie stand on couch, now homie kind of KD height now.

So like we at the crib, he got ball in hand,

I'm putting my butt all up on the couch and shit.

Like, yo, that's what I'm gonna do bro.

I gotta chop off his legs bro.

I can't give him power, 'cause he gonna shoot right over me.

So the key to that game was being aggressive as shit.

I understood the refs wasn't gonna call a ton of fouls,

'cause they wanted to see that.

It's always a build up from each series.

They wanted to see both of us on the courts.

The game says I had six fouls,

but I knew I had really nine going in,

if you know what I mean.

So I was able to be really aggressive with him, foul a lot,

use my strength, use my lower body on his lower body,

and kind of like, you know, kind of throw 'em off.

But yeah, that was how I was able to

kind of get that job done the first couple games.

What should NBA teams do to prevent star players

from demanding trades?

Ooh, that's a good one.

Hold on.

What should NBA teams do to prevent star players

from demanding trades and exerting too much control

over their futures?

It's a business, right?

Like the next 30 years is gonna be somebody else

calling themselves The Claw, or The Beard,

or there's gonna be a kid shooting no look threes again,

I promise you it is.

So this game is a revolving door.

I don't think it has to do with preventing star players,

I think that everyone should have a freedom to, you know,

if you're not happy in this situation,

and it's your future,

you should be able to control your future.

And if you want something better,

then I think that's up to you.

Obviously are the one who has to deal with

the media backlash, the opportunity of,

is there another team, or relocation.

That player is going through all that.

None of the teams are.

No, I think you should be in control of your own destiny

and your own future.

I don't think the NBA should do anything

to prevent anything like that.

Actually I think it makes it a better league.

Who is a better defender, Tony Allen or Patrick Beverley?

Two different defenders, but I'm gonna say me for sure.

But you gotta understand, me and Tony Allen,

Tony Allen's like the big bro.

He's from Chicago.

So like I've learned a lot, a ton.

Like I asked a ton of questions.

I've learned a lot from him.

But there's two different defenders.

He's, you know, 6'5, 6'6, I'm 6, 6'1.

He played the passing lanes really well.

I really don't play the passing lanes.

I'm really on ball.

He guarded the post really well.

I'm shorter, so it's kind of tough for me for guard post,

just two different defenders.

But I'm gonna still choose me.

Let's check Twitter.

[whimsical music continues]

Can someone tell me what is the roadmap

for Pat Bev to win defensive player of the year?

I don't know.

I don't know the roadmap.

A lot of media people don't like me,

so this is a media based vote.

So the road might be hard, it might not.

Well who cares?

As long as I continue to impact

and leave my legacy on the game,

that's really the most important thing for me.

I think you should ask the coaches.

I'm a firm believer, just ask the coaches

who blows up their ATOs, meaning after timeout plays,

or ask the coaches who give their players

the hardest route during the game, or ask the coaches,

like damn, I gotta tell my big to keep screening Pat Bev

because he's so attached to whoever that ball handler is.

Just ask the coaches.

Back to YouTube.

[whimsical music continues]

Pat, what's harder,

coming back from a blowout loss in the playoffs

or coming back from a really close game

you lose in crunch time?

I think that the really close game you lose in crunch time.

You know, you come back from a game, it's close,

and then you still lose.

I think you find little things, ah,

if I could've did that better, if I could've did that,

I mean I should have passed it there,

or I should shot it there.

Oh, I should have rebounded there.

You see things to kind of fix.

When you get blown out, especially in the playoffs,

just, man, scrap that game, on to the next type of vibe.

You know what I'm saying?

So yeah, I think that's harder,

coming back from a game in crunch time.

Pat, are you looking forward to being able to play

in more arenas like Boston Garden and MSG

now that you're a sixer?

Since you are someone that knows and loves the game,

is that like an added bonus to play in new arenas?

It is, and I don't care what you say.

Like any NBA player, basketball player tell you,

like MSG, always, always, you look forward to that.

You got the fit planned out for that.

Like you locked in, you got haircut for a trip,

like you locked in on that game.

And Boston for sure.

I mean it's so much history with it,

like some of the old court is still on it.

Like there's so much history with it

that you embrace these points of playing

in arenas like this.

So yeah, for sure, a hundred percent.

Signing off, GQ, thank you guys for everything.

The questions were great.

YouTube was great.

Quora was great.

Thank you, thank you, thank you.

Until next time.

[whimsical music fades]