Choose black-and-white film based on its reciprocity failure rate.

If you have a tripod and are planning to shoot long exposures, you’ll need to consider reciprocity failure. In film photography, reciprocity failure is the rate at which the emulsion’s sensitivity decreases as the exposure time passes about one second.

One of the best options for long exposures in black-and-white is Fujifilm Neopan Acros II. It needs no adjustments for shutter speeds up to 120 seconds and only ½ stop of additional exposure for up to 1000 seconds of an open shutter (16min 40sec).

Choose black-and-white film based on its push & pull tolerance.

You may not have a film handy with the ISO rating you want. Perhaps you’d like to shoot handheld at night, but you’ve only got Ilford HP5+? It just so happens that this film can be pushed successfully to EI 3200. But not all black-and-white films will behave as nicely when pushed +3 stops, so you’ll need to do some research.

Choose black-and-white film based on development times and development chemistry.

The development times vary for black-and-white films; some may take a long time in a tank, and thus, you may want to choose something quicker if you are in a rush.

Ilford FP4+ is one of the fastest films to develop at just 4:15 for the box speed in Ilfosol 3.

And if you don’t have a black-and-white developer or if your lab only processes C-41 (colour film), Ilford XP2 Super is the only film that will work for you.

Choose black-and-white film based on its dynamic range.

Many black-and-white emulsions come with a wide dynamic range that lets you make exposures in high-contrast lighting without worrying about losing detail in shadows or highlights. But not all. For example, Adox CMS 20 II is the highest-resolving 35mm emulsion; unfortunately, it is also exceptionally contrasty and difficult to expose and develop without losing detail.

You can learn more about matching your film, dynamic range, and photographic technique to your scene in this article: “How to Make Perfect Exposures on Film.”

Choose black-and-white film based on its light spectrum sensitivity.

Photography lets us see the world in more ways than just how we perceive it. Infrared film can make your grass and trees look eery white, X-ray film will render a unique glow, and orthochromatic film (like Ilford Ortho+) will paint all the reds black.

These types of film are the easiest to tell apart from the rest, no matter how they were developed and scanned.

Choose black-and-white film based on its archival properties.

If you want your film negatives to last for generations, you may want to choose a polyester-based emulsion. JCH StreetPan is an example of such film, which may stay intact for over 200 years if stored properly. Most other films will last about 50 years.

Choose black-and-white film based on its base thickness, curl, and colour.

If you develop and scan your own film, you know that handling emulsions that do not dry flat is a pain. Depending on climate, chemicals, and film brand, you’ll get varying results. I’ve had a good experience with JCH StreetPan and Ilford HP5+, which have zero curl and are easy to scan and store.

Your scanner may also work best with films of a certain thickness and colour. For example, Ilford XP2 Super dries freakishly purple (which typically isn’t a problem for me, but may trip some scanners).

Choose black-and-white film based on format.

Ilford is famous for its ULF program, which allows photographers shooting immense 8x10 and even 20x24 cameras to get their hands on matching negatives. Lomography is one of the few distributors of the 110 format.

While the best choice of film is still in 35mm, virtually any format has fresh monochrome selections (including Instax and Polaroid).

Choose black-and-white film based on price.

And finally, having considered the above, you may pick an option that suits your budget.

The cheapest fresh 35mm film is Fomapan 100 Classic (you can find more average market prices for film in the Film Price Tracker app).

However, your location may have different pricing than another country. For example, in my city of Vancouver, Kosmo Foto Mono costs less than Fomapan 100 — even though the Mono is rebranded (identical to) Foma.