Finley Arthur Donoho is no one other than the son of American actress Holly Marie Combs. Let’s read further about Finley, his life, lesser-known facts, social media presence, his mother Holly, her life, career, success, and much more.

Mini Bio

Finley was born on 26 April 2004 in the United States of America. Though there is no exact information on where he was born, it is believed that he was born in the USA only. He is the son of Holly Marie Combs and David W. Donoho. His mother is an actress and his father is also an actor. As he is very young not much is known about him.

Social Media Presence

As per our research and knowledge, it is believed that Finley is currently active on social media. He is currently active on Instagram. By looking at her Instagram profile, we can assume that he is fond of cars and serves in the US Army. Moreover, he likes to click pictures and post them on Instagram. Besides being active on Instagram, he is also active on Facebook. As he loves to stay away from the limelight and media he has not posted much on Instagram as well as Facebook.

Why Is He So Famous?

Finley is famous among the netizens as well as the public. He is famous because he is the son of famous celebrities. His parents themselves live in the limelight as well as the media so being their son he also gets attracted to the limelight and media. So these are a few reasons why he is so famous among the netizens as well as the public.

Parents’ Love Life

Finley’s mother Holly was married to actor David. They both tied the knot in 2004. It is believed that before marriage both were dating for a long time. They both conceived two children named Finley and Riley in this relationship. Unfortunately, due to some differences in the marriage, both parted ways in 2011. Since then Finley and Riley have lived with their mother Holly.

Before marrying David, Holly was married to actor Bryan Travis Smith. They both married in 1993 but unfortunately, they divorced in 1997 due to differences in the relationship. After divorcing David, Holly dated Mike Ryan till 2019, and then both got married in 2019.

Finley’s Mom: Holly

Finley’s mom Holly was born on 3 December 1973 in San Diego, California, United States. She is the daughter of Lauralei Combs and David Combs. She made her debut at the age of 14 in the movie Sweet Hearts Dance. Then, she appeared in the movie Born on the Fourth of July. She has appeared in movie and TV shows like New York Stories, Dr. Giggles, Chain of Desire, Evil in the Basement, Corky, Charmed, Sins of Silence, Hell’s Kitchen, Sins of Silence, Our Mother’s Murder, See Jane Date, and Grey’s Anatomy. She recently appeared in the movie Corky as a narrator.

Besides being an actress, she is a producer. She has produced movies like Mistresses, Charmed, Naked in Venice, Off the Map with Shannen & Holly, and Why Just One? Sharkwater Extinction.

Conclusion

Finley is a loving and proud celebrity kid of his parents. He stays with his mother and is very close to her. It is believed that he may or may not follow his parent’s legacy in the entertainment industry.