San Juan Comaltepec Map — Satellite Images of San Juan Comaltepec

original name: San Juan Comaltepec

geographical location: Dist. Mixe, Oaxaca, Mexico, North America

geographical coordinates: 17° 18' 0" North, 95° 59' 0" West

detailed map of San Juan Comaltepec and near places

Welcome to the San Juan Comaltepec google satellite map! This place is situated in Dist. Mixe, Oaxaca, Mexico, its geographical coordinates are 17° 18' 0" North, 95° 59' 0" West and its original name (with diacritics) is San Juan Comaltepec. See San Juan Comaltepec photos and images from satellite below, explore the aerial photographs of San Juan Comaltepec in Mexico. San Juan Comaltepec hotels map is available on the target page linked above.

Do you like this map? Link to it or recommend it!

Register at San Juan Comaltepec or add new placemark for San Juan Comaltepec.

Get your personal map homepage and much more for free.

San Juan Comaltepec hotel reservations

Book hotel in San Juan Comaltepec online and save money

San Juan Comaltepec hotels »

Browse & Book hotels in Mexico »

San Juan Comaltepec hotels – sortable list of all San Juan Comaltepec hotels »

Search for hotels in

Check-in date

Check-out date

San Juan Comaltepec hotels: low rates, no booking fees, no cancellation fees.

Maplandia.com in partnership with Booking.com offers highly competitive rates for all types of hotels in San Juan Comaltepec, from affordable family hotels to the most luxurious ones. Booking.com, being established in 1996, is longtime Europe’s leader in online hotel reservations.

At Maplandia.com you won't be charged any booking fees, cancellation fees, or administration fees – the reservation service is free of charge. The reservation system is secure and your personal information and credit card is encrypted.

We have put together also a carefully selected list of recommended hotels in San Juan Comaltepec, only hotels with the highest level of guest satisfaction are included.

San Juan Comaltepec hotels map

The location of each San Juan Comaltepec hotel listed is shown on the detailed zoomable map. Moreover, San Juan Comaltepec hotel map is available where all hotels in San Juan Comaltepec are marked. You can easily choose your hotel by location.

San Juan Comaltepec hotel reviews

Many photos and unbiased San Juan Comaltepec hotel reviews written by real guests are provided to help you make your booking decision.

San Juan Comaltepec hotel deals

Luxury hotels (including 5 star hotels and 4 star hotels) and cheap San Juan Comaltepec hotels (with best discount rates and up-to-date hotel deals) are both available in separate lists. Always bear in mind that with Maplandia.com and Booking.com the best price is guaranteed!

Hotels nearest to the centre of San Juan Comaltepec

San Felipe (in Oaxaca de Juarez, distanced approximately 79 km)

Hotel Suites Lena Real *** (in Oaxaca de Juarez, distanced approximately 81 km)

Hotel Casa Bonita ***** (in Oaxaca de Juarez, distanced approximately 81 km)

Hotel Angel Inn **** (in Oaxaca de Juarez, distanced approximately 81 km)

Hotel Villa Oaxaca (in San Felipe del Agua, distanced approximately 81 km)

Mision Oaxaca San Felipe *** (in Oaxaca de Juarez, distanced approximately 81 km)

Mision De Los Angeles **** (in Oaxaca de Juarez, distanced approximately 82 km)

more San Juan Comaltepec hotels »

San Juan Comaltepec car rental

Compare San Juan Comaltepec car rental offers of 500+ suppliers

We search over 500 approved car hire suppliers to find you the very best San Juan Comaltepec rental prices available. You can compare offers from leading car hire suppliers like Avis, Europcar, Sixt or Thrifty as well as budget rental deals from Holiday Autos, Budget, Economy, EasyCar, or 121 carhire. Choose San Juan Comaltepec car hire supplier according to your preferences. The booking process is secured and is made as simple as possible. You don't have to browse through several websites and compare prices to find cheap car rental in San Juan Comaltepec — we will do it for you!

Car hire San Juan Comaltepec and neighbourhood

Car rental offices nearest to San Juan Comaltepec the city centre. Compare San Juan Comaltepec car rental offers by various suppliers.

Oaxaca - Downtown car rental (distanced approximately 83 km)

Merida-Hotel Merida Mision Calle 60 car rental (distanced approximately 84 km)

Oaxaca - Airport car rental (distanced approximately 86 km)

Nuevo Vallarta - Riu Pacifico Hotel car rental (distanced approximately 150 km)

Huatulco car rental (distanced approximately 170 km)

more offers and San Juan Comaltepec car hiring guide »

Flights from airports close to San Juan Comaltepec

Search and compare flights

Flights to nearby airports to San Juan Comaltepec »

Overview of flights to and from Mexico »

Flights search »

Compare prices on flights to and from the closest airports to San Juan Comaltepec. We search through offers of more than 600 airlines and travel agents. When you find a deal you want, we provide link to the airline or travel agent to make your booking directly with them. No middlemen. No added fees. You always get the lowest price.

Airports in San Juan Comaltepec and in the neighbourhood

Airports nearest to San Juan Comaltepec are sorted by the distance to the airport from the city centre. Follow relate airport hotel guides for accommodation booking.

Oaxaca Airport (distanced approximately 86 km) – airport hotels

Ixtepec Airport (distanced approximately 130 km) – airport hotels

Iztepec Airport (distanced approximately 130 km) – airport hotels

Salina Cruz Airport (distanced approximately 150 km) – airport hotels

Bahias Dehuatulco Airport (distanced approximately 170 km) – airport hotels

San Juan Comaltepec 3D map in Google Earth

3D map of San Juan Comaltepec in Mexico

You can also dive right into San Juan Comaltepec on unique 3D satellite map provided by Google Earth. With new GoogLe Earth plugin you can enjoy the interactive San Juan Comaltepec 3D map within your web browser.

See the 3D map of San Juan Comaltepec, Mexico in Google Earth »

Get more out of San Juan Comaltepec map

Add placemark to San Juan Comaltepec

No placemark has been added to this place yet. You can add the first.

users registered in this area

No users is registered to this place. You can be the first.

recommend this page

If you would like to recommend this San Juan Comaltepec map page to a friend, or if you just want to send yourself a reminder, here is the easy way to do it. Simply fill in the e-mail address and name of the person you wish to tell about Maplandia.com, your name and e-mail address (so they can reply to you with gracious thanks), and click the recommend button. The URL of this site will be included automatically. You may also enter an additional message that will be also included in the e-mail.

San Juan Comaltepec google map link options

link to us:

small San Juan Comaltepec google map image link

medium San Juan Comaltepec google map image link

large San Juan Comaltepec google map image link