La Victoria (Oaxaca)

Learn about small village of La Victoria through its pictures, maps and population statistics.

All the information about this town of 77 inhabitants of the State of Oaxaca

The town of La Victoria (Oaxaca) belongs to the municipality of San Juan Comaltepec. There are 77 inhabitants and it is 1,061 meters altitude. It is the most populated town in the position #6 of the whole municipality.

Last Update: 29.05.2024

Data: In La Victoria, 36% of individuals have completed secondary education and 0% of households have a personal computer, laptop or tablet. More interesting data at the bottom of this page.

To locate this beautiful town inside the municipality, you must know that La Victoria is located at 1.9 kilometers (in direction North) from the locality of Lachixova, which is the one that has more inhabitants inside the municipality. Also, from the capital of the municipality (San Juan Comaltepec) it is at 1.2 kilometers in direction West. With our webpage and with our satelital map that you can find below, you can know where is and visit the surroundings of La Victoria.

#1 Where is La Victoria? How to go? Map

What is the route to get to La Victoria (Oaxaca)? Find out on this map the access to this town. With the zoom controls you can zoom in and out to the icon

MORE MAPS OF LA VICTORIA - PICTURES OF LA VICTORIA

Do you want to know if your last name is among the most common in the Oaxaca State? Here is a complete list of the most popular ones

#2 The population of La Victoria (Oaxaca) is 77 inhabitants

Population data in La Victoria (Oaxaca)YearFemale InhabitantsMale inhabitantsTotal population202038397720102127482005222345

Evolution of the population in La Victoria: Total Men Women Comparison of percentages of indigenous population in the town of La Victoria, compared with its municipality, with the percentage in the State of Oaxaca, and in the country as a whole.

Find out more interesting facts about all the towns in the Municipality of San Juan Comaltepec (statistics, pictures, maps, restaurants...) at this link.

Comparison of percentages of single persons in La Victoria (over 12 years), comparing the same percentage with the municipality, with the State of Oaxaca, and with the total for the country.

#3 Satellite photo of La Victoria

Amazing satellite GPS maps of La Victoria, to see from space this beautiful village, as well as the surroundings of the municipality of San Juan Comaltepec. You can search free satellite map (2024) of La Victoria.

#4 Hotels and Accommodation near La Victoria

Many people want to stay in the town of La Victoria itself, but unfortunately there are no hotels in the village yet. Don't worry, we have created this list of the closest accommodations, so you can ask if they have rooms available:

CASA DE HUESPEDES SANTIAGO CHOÁPAM: 12 km away, direction Northeast (8 minutes by car)

HOTEL YAKMATAAMBA: 14 km away, direction Southwest (10 minutes by car)

CASA DE HUESPEDES: 13 km away, direction Southwest (9 minutes by car)

HOTEL MUNICIPAL DE ZACATEPEC: 32 km away, direction South (23 minutes by car)

#5 What to do in La Victoria

Want to know what to see in La Victoria if you are visiting this town?Here are some ideas of activities to enjoy La Victoria.

Mountains in La Victoria for hiking and trails:

Cerro Peña Blanca (1703 meters): 5.7 km walk (70 minutes), heading Southwest.

Cerro La Mitra (Anyukaats) (2281 meters): 10.7 km walk (178 minutes), heading Southwest.

Cerro Pie (2394 meters): 10.1 km walk (163 minutes), heading West.

Cerro Kojm Kääts Neap (2769 meters): 14.6 km walk (209 minutes), heading Southwest.

Other towns near La Victoria:

Lachixova (677 inhabitants): Located 2 km to the East (2 minutes by car)

Chinantequilla (519 inhabitants): Located 3 km to the Southwest (3 minutes by car)

San Juan Comaltepec (689 inhabitants): Located 3 km to the North (3 minutes by car)

San Juan Lealao (985 inhabitants): Located 7 km to the East (7 minutes by car)

This information is based on geographical data. Distances may vary depending on terrain, driving style or walking conditions.

#6 Population pyramid of La Victoria (Oaxaca)

We have compiled data on number of inhabitants of La Victoria by age and gender, to show you the following population pyramid of the town, from the year 2005. You can check how the percentages of children and adults are distributed, in addition to women and men. With this data you can analyze the demographic structure, and know if in La Victoria there is a generational replacement.

Data of the age pyramid of the town La Victoria (inhabitants year 2020)Age rangeNumber of womenNumber of menTotal populationInfants (0-5 years)5914Youth (6-14 years)81018Adults (15-59 years)221840Elderly (60+ years)325

#7 Pictures of La Victoria

Would you like to see what this town looks like and enjoy landscape pictures of La Victoria? We have located on the Internet several beautiful images of places and locations nearby, so you can see the beauty of this Mexican town. Some are artistic pictures and others are simply panoramic pictures taken by amateurs and friends who simply like La Victoria.

Enjoy pictures of La Victoria at this link

#8 Vote for La Victoria as the most beautiful town in Mexico

Do you like La Victoria or don't you like it very much? Now you can vote for La Victoria to let everyone know about it. Use these stars ("0" you don't like it much, "5" you like it a lot) to rate it with your opinion.

In the following links you can check the list of the best (and most beautiful) towns in Mexico and the State of Oaxaca, by popular vote:

- The best towns in Mexico

- The most beautiful towns in Oaxaca

#9 Comments and opinions about La Victoria

>>> Map with all the towns inside the municipality of San Juan Comaltepec

>>> Click here to see more towns in the State of Oaxaca (statistics, pictures, maps, restaurants, hotels,...) <<<

#10 Other towns in the Municipality of San Juan Comaltepec