Pallavi Basu aka Mishti Basu is a well-known web series actress and model. She has worked in many web series and has got pretty much attention.

Her real name is Pallavi Basu and she has a significant fanbase. Mishti is quite active on her social media handles, especially on Instagram where she shares her glamourous pics and videos in stylish outfits. She gains lots of love from her thousands of followers.

Mishti was born on 13 November 1996 in a Hindu family in Kolkata, West Bengal, India. Brought up in the same city, she is a Bengali beauty. Currently, she is 27 years old and lives in Mumbai, Maharashtra, India.

Mishti Basu Wiki / Bio

Physical Appearance

Family And Relationship

Education & Qualification

Career

After graduating, Mishti decided to enter the world of entertainment. She did some bold photoshoots in the first three years of her career. Then in 2019, she was offered a major role in a web series “Desi Tadka”. She did a great job in her debut web series where she had to do some sensual scenes too.

Later, she kept getting offers from various web series. She caught the attention of predominant producers and directors, compelling them to cast her in so many web series. Now, she is a well-recognized actress.

She became famous for her amazing acting skills and hot scenes. Thereafter she worked in many web series in which she has delivered some bold scenes. Her web series includes “Lodam Bhabhi”, “Palang Tod Aadha Adhura Pyaar”, “Charmsukh Salahkaar”, and “Jism”. Also, read about Angie Varona.

Net Worth

Mishti has done many web series and shows which makes her a wealthy lady. Her main sources of income are web series, shows, and promotional posts. Mishti Basu’s net worth is estimated to be about Rs. 1-2 crore INR. Her monthly income is not known yet.

Favorites

Interesting Facts

Mishti’s name is associated with the International Fashion and Glamour Magazine.

Sana Sundi is her best friend.

She has also worked as a vocal artist.

Contacts & Social Media

Also Read: