Posted by Devon Partnership Trust in #ProudofDPT, Events and conferences, News, South West Provider Collaborative on 17th November, 2023

We are delighted to announce that our South West Provider Collaborative (SWPC) has won in the category of 'Reducing Healthcare Inequalities for Children and Young People' at this year’s Health Service Journal (HSJ) Awards, recognising an outstanding contribution to healthcare.

Our entry Transforming access to, and experiences of, Specialised Mental Health Care for Children and Young People in the South West, was recognised by the judges as a targeted approach that has undoubtedly changed lives. They were impressed with our use of resources to absolutely transform pathways in our region, as well as the improvement in access to appropriate care for children and young people.

Following a comprehensive needs analysis of specialised Child and Adolescent Mental Health Services provision in the South West, we co-created a whole care pathway redesigned to meet the complex needs of our region’s children and young people.

In the first 18 months after taking on commissioning responsibilities, we reinvested more £3m of efficiency savings to improve quality and access to mental healthcare, with a focus on the most vulnerable and marginalised children and young people. Inpatient bed usage was reduced by 60 per cent and, through early intervention, significantly decreased the numbers being sent out of region for treatment by 84 per cent.

A ‘record-breaking’ 1,456 entries were received for this year’s Awards, with 223 projects and individuals reaching the final shortlist, making it the biggest awards programme in the award’s 43-year history.

Dr Jason Fee, SWPC Medical Director said “This really is fantastic news! Being selected as a winner in a year when the competition was so tough, with an unprecedented volume of entries from so many other equally deserving Trusts and individuals, is a huge boost for our team.

“We are so proud to have the opportunity to share our learning with colleagues from across the entire sector.”

Photo credit: Health Service Journal (HSJ)