The library's collection of print and electronic books cover many areas of healthcare management and policy topics. Our collection is constantly updated in line with user recommendations and the release of new editions.

Books

You must be a member of the library if you wish to borrow a book; Register to join online. Search our catalogue to find the books you need, as well as: check item availability and locations, request or reserve titles and manage your existing loans. Books can be sent to any Barts Health site for collection and all library sites have a book return box, so you can return books at a time that suits you.

Accessing the majority of our Healthcare Management journals can be done anytime, anywhere via the internet. The titles and databases listed below contain some key industry titles such as the HSJ and Harvard Business Review. Members can choose to browse all our electronic titles using BrowZine. For assistance and tips on how to successfully navigate and find the resources you need, please contact us.

Health Service Journal (HSJ)

Our subscription to the Health Service Journal provides Barts Health staff free online access to HSJ articles and content. HSJ helps to inform your leadership and strategic thinking by giving you access to the insight and intelligence you need to provide better patient care.

Staff will need to contact the library to register for access. Once we have your request, we can send you out an activation link via email.

Once you have clicked on the activation link, and completed your registration, you will then be able to download the HSJ App.

As part of our subscription we also have access to HSJ solutions, a unique database of all the shortlisted and winning entries from carefully selected categories within the last three years of the HSJ Awards, HSJ Value Awards and Patient Safety Awards.

Harvard Business Review

Harvard Business Review is the leading destination for smart management thinking. Through its flagship magazine, books, and digital content and tools published on HBR.org, Harvard Business Review provides professionals around the world with the rigorous insights and best practices they need to help lead themselves and their organizations more effectively.

EBSCO Health Business Elite

All staff have access to the Health Business Elite database - providing access to 600 full text* journals for healthcare administration and other non-clinical aspects of healthcare institution management. It can be searched as a database,

Search Health Business Elite database

You can also search for individual journals. Please note, you will need your OpenAthens credentials to login.

British Journal of Healthcare Computing

Director

Forbes

Fortune.com

Harvard Business Review (see below for more information)

International Journal of Health Care Management

Management Today

Personnel Review

People & Strategy

People Management

Public Budgeting & Finance*

Women in Business

Please see the EBSCO Health Business Elite publisher page for a link to the full list of titles*.

*Please note that some titles will have limited runs or embargoes on access.

EBSCO Business Source Corporate

From 1 April 2019 Barts Health staff can access the Business Source Corporate database. It contains full text from more than 2,700 quality magazines and journals. Additional sources include more than 1,400 country economic reports from EIU, Global Insight, ICON Group International, CountryWatch, etc; 10,150 substantial company profiles; and over 5,200 full text industry reports.

Search the Business Source Corporate database

Or you can access BSC content through our Discovery Search. You will need to use your OpenAthens credentials to log in.

Please see the Business Source Corporate publisher page for a link to the full list of titles*.

*Please note that some titles will have limited runs or embargoes on access.

The Health Management and Policy Database, from the Healthcare Management Information Consortium (HMIC)

Barts Health librarians have access to the HMIC Database from Ovid. It brings together the bibliographic database of the Department of Health's Library and Information Services and King's fund Information and Library Services.

Search the Health Management Information Consortium (HMIC) database

You will need to log in via OpenAthens. Please contact the library to find out more.