Why Do We Want You?

We are looking for an experienced Journalist/ Editor to join for one of the UK’s leading and most successful specialist titles!

We’re looking for someone who enjoys working with a wide and diverse range of people, who plans well and who deals with challenges calmly.

You will be interested in delivering high quality projects which satisfy both reader and client needs.

About Us

Wilmington Healthcare, (Part of Wilmington Intelligence) is a market leading provider of healthcare data, education, news and information resources with outstanding analytics capabilities.

We built on trust and knowledge, to provide our clients with market leading insight into local health economies, complemented by increased access to senior health stakeholders and the wider NHS enabling improved outcomes for patients.

Our leading insight and news service, the Health Service Journal, provides the most influential people in health with vital intelligence, analysis and advice.

As a Projects Editor for HSJ, you will manage the delivery of all commercially supported, editorially controlled projects to the agreed specification, adhering to timelines and budgets. You will report into our Editor and join our senior editorial team.

HSJ is read by the great majority of senior figures working for and alongside the NHS.

HSJ has set the agenda for the coverage of NHS performance and policy ever since the service’s 1948 birth. It now operates across three digital platforms.

About You

As our Projects Editor you will be responsible for:

Leading all aspects of the development and delivery of all editorial products, ensuring they are produced to the required standards, and within the agreed timescales and budget. These include roundtables, webinars, immersive features, and a range of other editorially controlled products.

Support clients in selecting the right product to meet their needs and to develop bespoke elements designed to enhance those outcomes where appropriate and possible.

Working closely with HSJ colleagues in the editorial and sales departments and liaising with clients, as well as maintaining and managing a strong stable of freelance project managers, writers, photographers and videographers.

Line-managing HSJ’s Editorial Assistant.

Resolving any issues regarding content and publication date as quickly and efficiently as possible.

In order to be successful in this role you must have:

Journalism experience with a strong track record as a writer and/or editor, able to make credible contributions.

The ability to devise a project outline, refine it in conjunction with stakeholders, create a realistic timetable for delivery, and ensure the delivery to time and budget.

Proactive approach to problem-solving, ideally identifying them before they arise and taking the appropriate action to ensure they do not, or taking swift action to resolve them as quickly as possible.

The ability to work well within a team, to communicate clearly, as well as to quickly establish strong relationships with clients and colleagues.

It would be great if you had:

Knowledge of the most significant issues facing the NHS and those companies that work with it.

Familiarity with video and interactive content, and the use social media to publicise projects.

Before you go… Find what you’re looking for!

Our people sought out empowerment and opportunity. And they found both here. You’ll find what you’re looking for too.

Our values help us achieve our goals – whether they’re personal, professional or those of our client. We believe in inclusivity and collaboration; we stay curious and ambitious and champion innovation. Here, colleagues are trusted partners who act with integrity.

We are brave and passionate. Courageous and creative. We are Wilmington PLC. Are you?

How To Apply

Please apply with your CV and cover letter directly to liam.walker@tribepost.co.uk