TORONTO -- An investment of $11,000 turned into the payoff of a lifetime for Toronto-based David J. Foster in 1983. That year his Sunny's Halo became only the second Canadian horse to win the Kentucky Derby.

The Toronto stock broker still marvels at the triumph, in which a 'big, handsome' horse he bred won the Derby.

'It was like winning the lottery,' recalled Foster. 'People spend millions of dollars a year trying to win the race. It was the little guy against the big guys.'

Foster won $426,000 plus a gold cup then valued at $42,000.

Although Sunny's Halo's bloodlines weren't spectacular, Foster knew the horse was something special.

'We liked his looks. He'd be running around with the other horses and he'd always be out in front,' Foster said.

The top Canadian horses have started to look south after the success of Northern Dancer in 1964, Canada's greatest race horse and considered one of the greatest of all time.

The first Canadian to win the race, Northern Dancer was owned by Windfields Farm. Small but spirited and muscular, the horse set the standard for what's now known as the 'Northern Dancer type'. The 29-year-old horse, retired in 1987 after exceptional breeding success, is enjoying a leisurely life on a Maryland farm.

Four years earlier, Windfields' Victoria Park placed third, the first significant showing by a Canadian horse in the race's history.

Charles Taylor, son of Windfield founder E.P. Taylor, said that until the late 1950s, Canadian racing was a fairly shabby affair known as 'the leaky roof circuit'.

Taylor said his father led the move that upgraded Canadian facilities and purse structures, and that Northern Dancer's triumph helped generate enthusiasm for racing not only among horsemen but among the general public.

Taylor said it's only been 'fairly recently' that Canadians have turned their thoughts to the United States and the Kentucky Derby instead of focusing exclusively on Canadian racing and it's equivalent prize, the Queen's Plate.

'They're looking south of the border,' Taylor said. 'The border is not a factor.'

Ernie Samuel, president and owner of Toronto-based Sam-Son Farm, said for most Canadian horsemen the Derby is a distant dream, whereas the Queen's Plate is a more tangible goal they can legitimately shoot for.

'The Derby is a bit dreamy,' said Samuel, who will decide this week whether to enter Slew of Angels in the May 5th race.

'His other primary goal this year will be the Queen's Plate. We don't want to run him needlessly. I wouldn't run a horse (in the Derby) just for the sake of running,'

Samuel's Regal Classic placed fifth in the 1988 Kentucky Derby. That year marked the first time two Canadian horses entered the same race. The other was 11th-placed Granacas, owned by Toronto supermarket magnate Steve Stavro.

An ankle injury prevented highly-rated Sky Classic from being entered by Samuel in last year's Derby.

'He was our dream horse,' Samuel said.

With the high purses and prestige available in Canada, sometimes the top Canadian horses don't make an appearance in the Derby.

With Approval won the 1989 Canadian triple crown for Kinghaven Farms in Toronto. Kinghaven president David Willmot decided not to enter the horse in the Derby, as they didn't want to hurt his Queen's Plate chances by putting him through the tough pre-Derby schedule.

'From a pure business point of view, I'd love to win the Derby,' said Willmot.'We made a decision not to go (to the Derby) because of what was available up here.'

Kinghaven Farms was the third most successful owner in North America last year based on over $4.1 million in purse earnings, and the second best breeder based on over $5.4 million in purse earnings, Willmot said.

Willmot said it's unusual that an operation as successful as Kinghaven in its 23 years has never entered a horse in the Kentucky Derby.

In addition to Sunny's Halo and Northern Dancer, a third Derby winner had a Canadian connection.

George Smith, the 1916 winner ran most of his races in Canada, but was Kentucky-bred and American-owned.NEWLN: