Michael Burns has jokingly been referred to as “Karsh of the Backstretch”, as he has photographed the likes of Northern Dancer, Sunny’s Halo, Secretariat and countless other thoroughbreds.

For over forty years he has been the official photographer for the Ontario Jockey Club. He has several awards from the Professional Photographers Association of Canada, and has won an unprecedented five Sovereign Awards for excellence in thoroughbred racing photography.

Michael is the only Canadian photographer to have won the Eclipse Award twice. He was inducted into the Canadian Horse Racing Hall of Fame.

Residing in Etobicoke for more than thirty years, Michael Burns is regarded as one of Canada’s finest sports photographers, covering all major sporting events including Kentucky Derbies, Breeder’s Cup Extravaganzas, World Cup skiing, World Cup curling, championship boxing, Olympic and Commonwealth games, and National Hockey League games, for more than fifty years.

Walter H. Jackson, more commonly addressed as “Pete”, began his teaching career as a mathematics and physics teacher at Etobicoke High School, now called Etobicoke Collegiate.

Because of his interest in sports, he volunteered to coach various teams at the school. Coaching teams was not a job requirement for Pete, but he assumed the role of Etobicoke Collegiate’s football coach for 27 years, from 1932 to 1959.

During that time, Pete coached the junior football teams to victory in the TDIAA (Toronto District Intercollegiate Athletic Association) in 1942, 1943, 1949 and 1950.

Following this success, the senior teams were victorious in 1951, 1952, 1954, 1955 and 1956, and were chosen as TDIAA representatives in the Red Feather (now United Way) games in 1951, 1952, 1953 and 1955.

In 1944, under Pete’s guidance as substitute coach, the junior and senior basketball teams and the track and field teams won championships.

Pete continued his career as vice-principal for 7 years, then principal for 1 year at Royal York Collegiate before retiring as principal of West Humber Collegiate in 1970.

Pete excelled as a respected coach for over 27 years, touching the lives of hundreds of students, believing in the values of team play and encouraging sportsmanship achievement.

Jocelyn Lovell is a premier cyclist who still hods the Pan American record for the 1000 metre time trial. At the 1970 Commonwealth Games in Edinburgh, he won the Gold, Silver and Bronze. These were the first such medals for a Canadian cyclist in 32 years.

Jocelyn competed in the 1968, 1972 and 1976 Olympic games. No other Commonwealth cyclist has won more Commonwealth medals.

While residing in Etobicoke from 1972 to 1983 Jocelyn was honored by mayor Dennis Flynn for his outstanding performance at the 1978 Commonwealth Games in Edmonton. At the time he was also ranked second in the world at the 1978 World Cycling Championships in Munich.

In 1975 he was named Canada’s Athlete of the Year and wa inducted into Canada’s Sorts Hall of Fame in 1985. Paralysed in a training accident, Jocelyn is the Canadian Co-ordinator of the cure research organization of the Canadian Spinal Cord Society.

Former NHL player Mark Napier began his career with the Toronto Marlies, winning the Memorial Cup in 1975. His professional career began in the WHA with the Toronto Toros in 1975 where he won Rookie of the Year award.

Mark played 6 years with the Montreal Canadiens, winning the Stanley Cup before being traded to the Minnesota North Stars for a year.

After two and a half years playing for the Edmonton Oilers and another Stanley Cup in 1985, Mark spent two and a half years with the Buffalo Sabres.

He played in Europe in the Italian league. He led the league in scoring while playing in Milano for two years, winning the Italian championship both years.

Mark lent his time coaching the Humber Valley Midget A A team and was appointed first head coach of the Toronto St Michael’s Majors OHL Junior A team.

Dave Dryden was born in Hamilton. He was raised in Etobicoke, where he became actively involved in hockey and baseball. He played minor baseball in the early years of the Kingsway Baseball League, and assisted in coaching atom baseball and hockey with his father.

He played minor hockey with the KI/Y, T.H.L and King Clancy leagues before beginning his junior hockey career with St Mike’s and the Toronto Marlboroughs. He later played senior hockey with the Galt Hornets.

During his NHL career, Dave goal-tended for the New York Rangers, Chicago Blackhawks, Buffalo Sabres and the Edmonton Oilers. He played for the Chicago Cougars and the Edmonton Oilers while in the W.H.A. It was in his last season in the W.H.A that he won the league’s Most Valuable Player award.

Dave was one of three goaltenders who transformed modern goaltending and pioneered the redesign of goaltending equipment which has generated the contemporary goaltending style.