Saudi Arabia has announced the establishment of a Global Water Organization, to be headquartered in Riyadh. According to a press release by the Saudi Press Agency, the new body will integrate and enhance global efforts to achieve water sustainability.

The launch of the new organization underscores the Kingdom’s commitment to solve water supply challenges on a global scale. Saudi Arabia plays an important role in ensuring water issues are a high priority in the global agenda, and has allocated more than $6 billion development aid funds to water and sanitation projects all over the world.

The new organization will collaborate with countries to address their water challenges and prioritise water projects on their national agendas. As part of its activities, it envisages the exchange of expertise and advanced technologies to promote innovation in water resource management. High-priority projects will be funded to achieve universal access to water resources and manage them sustainably.

This new initiative is aligned with Saudi Arabia’s efforts to contribute to global sustainability and development, bringing together the international community for a long-lasting impact.

Assistant professor of environmental engineering at King Saud University Sattam Al-Mojil told Arab News that, although there are numerous international organizations dedicated to the water sector, they work within specific areas, while the current situation needs an international body that is more comprehensive in nature. It should address aspects like research, innovation, and technology development, as well as financing, policy and regulation, among other elements involved in water sustainability.

Moreover, Faisal Al-Fadl, secretary-general and founder of the Saudi Green Building Forum, has linked this announcement to the Kingdom’s commitment to Vision 2030, noting that the newly established global body can have a positive influence, addressing challenges related to water crises as well as climate change.