The Saudi Press Agency (SPA) is the national news agency in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, and the official entity responsible for news in the Kingdom. It was established in 1971 before becoming an independent public body in 2012, by virtue of a decision issued by the Council of Ministers. The agency is headquartered in the capital, Riyadh.

Foreign relationships of the Saudi Press Agency (SPA)

The agency is a founding member of the Federation of Arab News Agencies, the Gulf News Agency, the Islamic News Agency, and the Non-Aligned News Agencies Pool. It holds global cooperation and news exchange relations with five agencies: Reuters, Associated Press, United Press, Agency France-Press, and the German Press Agency (dpa).

SPA fields of work

SPA works on collecting and disseminating local and international news in the Kingdom and abroad. It also broadcasts its content via its website available in five languages in addition to Arabic. The site can be browsed in English, French, Russian, Chinese, and Persian.

SPA's Twitter accounts

SPA is provided with state-of-the-art technological equipment. It constantly monitors local, regional, and international news persistently. In 2019, in addition to its existing accounts, the agency opened several new accounts on Twitter's social media platform under the following handles: SPA Royal Decrees, SPA Lifestyle, SPA General, SPA Economics, and SPA Sports.

SPA Royal News disseminates the news of The Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques, ‎‏the Saudi King, and His Royal Highness Crown Prince. It also publishes Royal Decrees and Orders. It covers the news of the Council of Ministers and publishes official statements. Economic SPA is concerned with covering the Saudi Vision 2030 programs and the most notable changes and activities related to the local and global economy and financial markets.

SPA Lifestyle publishes news on all aspects of lifestyle in the Kingdom, while SPA General publishes news on local and international public affairs, in addition to the news of the public and private sectors. SPA Sports is an account concerned with following and publishing local and international sports news. The SPA Persian account publishes local and international news in Persian.