Tommy Johnson tells us that being a clown saved his life.

He was a “big-time” drug dealer in Los Angeles. He went to jail. These facts are recounted early in “Rize,” David LaChapelle’s rousing, moving documentary about a whole different kind of gang activity taking hold in Los Angeles’ poorer neighborhoods.

Johnson’s assessment of his business acumen might be a bit of biography inflation. What we do learn from “Rize” is that being a clown didn’t just give Johnson purpose. For a number of years, clown dancing – along with its even more furious wild child, krump dancing – has transformed the lives of some of L.A.’s most vulnerable residents.

After the 1992 riots, sparked by what is often erroneously called the Rodney King verdicts (after all, King wasn’t on trial – police officers were), Johnson started appearing at barbecues and birthday parties as a rainbow-wigged, gigantic-shoe-sporting funnyman.

Arriving at these neighborhood gatherings with a boombox and a penchant for busting moves, he was a hit. He became, as one woman testifies, a “ghetto celebrity.” He wanted to do something positive for his community and he did.

Tommy the Clown’s success spawned acolytes and imitators. “Rize” features a number of them, many with backgrounds rougher than Tommy’s.

In the biographical notes of some of the documentary’s more compelling characters – Lil C and Tight Eyez – a few claim to have founded krump. Was it Tommy the Clown who invented krump dancing? Or did some rival clown group find what he did a bit too tame and turn up the volume?

One thing “Rize” makes clear: A number of young people began avoiding allegiance to the colors of the Crips and Bloods by donning greasepaint and dancing the dance.

So instead of being frustrated by the bleed between clowning and krumping (and the gyrating “stripper dancing”), we are better off understanding that the movements are freestyle variations on a theme.

Clowning and krumping are urban art and art therapy in motion. Some moves look like a jagged, low-to-the-ground version of pole dancing, hence the strip-club moniker. Sometimes the dancers resemble a martial arts sparring session – think Brazilian Capoeira. Or a full-bodied pantomime of aggression and attraction.

In a night scene LaChapelle returns to a few times, a crowd watches participants take each other on. Who vanquishes whom with what power moves becomes spectacular sport.

At one point LaChapelle juxtaposes krump with footage from an African tribal ritual. So this is where these mind-blowing, whiplashing moves come from? It’s more complicated than that.

Already, “Rize,” which screened at this year’s Sundance Film Festival, has been compared to Jennie Livingston’s fine 1991 documentary “Paris Is Burning,” about the drag competitions held in New York City during the late 1980s. Much the way that film showed how black and Latino drag divas invented the voguing made famous in Madonna’s 1990 video, some of us have already seen krump delivered via MTV.

Clowning is serious business. How serious becomes clear when the film follows two rival clowning troupes (Tommy’s and Lil C’s) to a Battle Zone duel. The showdown, held in November 2003, makes the scene at the gym in “West Side Story” look like a tea dance.

LaChapelle uses the lead-up to the Battle Zone as a way to give the movie some feature-style tension while exposing cultural issues.

“Rize” opens with a montage of the riots that razed L.A.’s Watts neighborhood in 1965 and gave South Central a beating in 1992. Rising out of the ashes of urban destruction takes a special vigor, a will to survive.

But in the midst of its celebration of a vibrant underground movement bursting forth, “Rize” reminds us that not every phoenix gets its day.

LaChapelle dedicated the movie to Quinesha Dunford. The teen dancer was shot and killed walking with a friend.

Film critic Lisa Kennedy can be reached at 303-820-1567 or lkennedy@denverpost.com.

“Rize”

***

PG-13 for suggestive content, drug references, language and brief nudity|1 hour, 25 minutes|DOCUMENTARY|Directed by David LaChapelle; photography by Morgan Susser; edited by Fernando Villena; featuring Tommy the Clown, Larry, Dragon, Baby Tight Eyez, Swoop, Daisy, La Nina, Lil Tommy, Mr. Prissy |Opens today at the Mayan.