“Rize”

Lions Gate Films

Directed by David LaChapelle

Starring: Tommy the Clown, Tight Eyez, Dragon, Miss Prissy, La Nia and Lil C

Rated PG-13/86 minutes

Opened Sept. 2, 2005

Three out of four stars

There is a disclaimer at the beginning of the new documentary “Rize” stating that nothing in the film has been sped up in any way. Such a declaration turns out to be quite important; without it, the images seen in the film might look too impossible to be believed.

Directed by photographer and music video director David LaChapelle, “Rize” chronicles a dance movement that has been gaining steam in L.A.’s inner cities since the Rodney King riots of 1992.

In the beginning, it was called clowning after its creator, Tommy the Clown, a former drug dealer who turned his life around and started Tommy’s Hip-Hop Clown Academy, performing at birthday parties and the like.

Eventually, clowning progressed, and an offshoot developed called krumping: a more eclectic and extreme version of clowning featuring some astounding feats of physical ability-hence the opening disclaimer.

Krumping is something the dancers themselves take very seriously.

One calls it “ghetto ballet” and describes it as a positive way to release anger, aggression and passion.

The film plays like a sports movie in many regards-it climaxes in The Battle Zone, a competition between the Clowns and the Krumpers that takes place at the Great Western Forum.

It may remind some of “8 Mile,” “Drumline” and this year’s “Murderball.”

But LaChapelle doesn’t focus solely on the dances themselves. This isn’t some Flavor-of-the-Week MTV doc about the latest dance craze.

Instead, “Rize” is about dancing as an alternative to, and reaction against, the infamous gang life of Watts, Compton and Inglewood. Krumpers outright reject the thug life and even consciously defy mainstream hip-hop culture.

The stars of “Rize” have created their own culture, something non-violent and proactive, a movement that outwardly spurns the culture they grew up around.

LaChapelle even draws an interesting comparison, crosscutting krumping with African tribal imagery as a comment on the movement’s significance in and impact on black culture.

Yes, “Rize” remains interesting because of its stars’ visually stunning achievements. But what makes the film work is that, like all successful documentaries, it focuses on its characters.

We care who wins The Battle Zone trophy but not nearly as much as we care about the Clowns and the Krumpers themselves.