"Rize," the new documentary directed by the fashion photographer David LaChapelle, begins with an unusual disclaimer: "The footage in this film has not been sped up in any way."

The reason for such reassurance soon becomes clear. Twenty-four frames per second, the rate at which film traditionally moves through a camera -- and the speed at which, according to Jean-Luc Godard, cinema discloses the truth -- seems too sluggish for Mr. LaChapelle's purpose, which is to record a form of dance that flourishes in some African-American neighborhoods in greater Los Angeles.

Called "clowning" or "krumping" -- the terms refer to distinct but related styles -- this kind of dancing is fierce, fast and frenetic, turning its practitioners into whirlwinds of flying limbs. Part of the pleasure of watching "Rize" is the sheer astonishment at their performances, which are shot and edited cleanly, with the focus on dance rather than movie-making technique.

Sometimes the dancers appear to have been possessed by angry spirits or set on fire, which in a sense they have been. This movie is, among other things, a celebration of the daemon of creative discipline and of the burning need for self-expression, community and pride.

That, at any rate, is how the clowners and krumpers describe what they do, and Mr. LaChapelle wisely lets them do most of the talking, rather than stepping in to interpret their experiences for us. He begins with images of urban upheaval -- the Watts riots of 1965 and the Rodney King disturbances 27 years later -- to establish that krumping is an art form that has arisen against a backdrop of poverty, violence and despair. These hard facts are never far from the minds of the dancers themselves, many of whom have joined clowning and krumping groups as an alternative to gangs. In the course of the film, one dancer, a 15-year-old girl named Quinesha Dunford (known as Lil Dimples) is killed in a drive-by shooting, and "Rize" is dedicated to her memory.

It is also dedicated to the exploration of an extraordinarily lively and complex subculture, though that sociological term seems a bit limiting. If this is not culture -- art, family, sport, religion, friendship -- then what is? Indeed, the movie sometimes has trouble living up to the richness of its subject, or keeping up with the dances' rapid spread and evolution. You may find yourself wishing that you could know some of the characters better and see more of their lives.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.