NEW YORK: An inspiring documentary on the life and mission of Shaheed Benazir Bhutto on Monday received the Peabody award, the most coveted prize in electronic media, at a glittering presentation ceremony held for the 38 recipients in various categories.

Bilawal Bhutto Zardari, the PPP Chairman and her son, was in attendance at the two-hour ceremony, and was recognized by Patrick Stewart of Star Track fame, who was presenting the awards.

His aunt Sanam Bhutto was also present. "Bhutto," the 111-minute documentary about the two-time Pakistani prime minister who was assassinated in Rawalpindi while campaigning in 2007, gives a strong sense of her endearing personality and courage, mixed with single-mindedness devotion to promote democracy and human rights.

The film's directors, Duane Baughman and Mark Siegel received the awards before a large and distinguished gathering at the Grand Ball Room of Waldorf Astoria hotel. "I was happy that the documentary on Shaheed BB got a prestigious award," Bilawal Bhutto Zardari, who was wearing Pakistani dress for the occasion, said in an interview with APP correspondent.

He said the film recognized her sacrifices for the cause of democracy and for the hard work she put in for the welfare of the Pakistani people.

"It is an absolute honour to have been recognized with an award as widely respected as the Peabody is," said Baughman, director and producer of the multi-award winning film.

"Benazir Bhutto's story is an inspiring, heroic, and barrier-shattering for women across continents, religions, and ethnicities. I am humbled to have been able to share her legacy with the West, the world and women everywhere." Siegel, the co-director, also paid tributes to Bhutto's work in promoting democracy and rebuilding the country.

"Jeeay Bhutto", he shouted as he left the stage. "The range of the Peabody Awards' search for excellence has never been wider or deeper than this year," said Horace Newcomb, Director of the Peabody Awards.

Newcomb described "Bhutto" as a documentary where "Benazir Bhutto's life story unfolded like an epic novel, with a fairy tale beginning, a martyr's death and years of social awakening and political courage in between."

Bilawal Bhutto Zardari arrived in New York on Sunday for an eight-day visit to the United States during which he will meet American lawmakers, senior officials and media organizations, and address a number of think- tanks.

PPP officials said he will try to explain Pakistan's position on various issues, remove misperceptions and create a favourable environment for improving US-Pakistan relations.

Other winners included Homeland, Showtime's psychologically intense anti-terrorist drama; the classic game show Jeopardy; TED.com, a website devoted to making creative thinkers' ideas available to one and all; remembrances of 9/11 collected by StoryCorps and broadcast on National Public Radio; and Toxic Secrets, a powerful series of reports by Phoenix's KPHO-TV about American soldiers and South Korean children exposed to Agent Orange three decades ago.

My Perestroika, a POV documentary that examined Russia's difficult transition from communism through the prism of five schoolmates who lived through it, was honored with a Peabody, as was Intersexions, a South African public-service drama aimed at curbing the spread of AIDS.

Other international recipients included A Year in the Clouds, a Taiwanese documentary about life in a remote mountain village; People's Republic of Cheating and Misjudged Cases, a pair of investigative reports from Hong Kong's TVB; Fuji Television's The Untold Stories of the Tsunami in Japan, which emphasized human interest as much as gob smacking flood footage; Somalia: Land of Anarchy, a BBC1 report from deep inside a country decimated by never-ending war; and NHK's Surviving the Tsunami, a meticulous post-mortem of the tidal wave and nuclear disaster with an eye to lessons for the future.

The anti-tyranny demonstrations in the Middle East, flaring up like wildfire, inspired some of the most impressive news reporting of the year.

CNN earned a Peabody with comprehensive "Arab Spring" coverage that included the reports Egypt Wave of Discontent and Uprising in Libya. National Public Radio's Arab Spring from Egypt to Libya, vividly reported by Lourdes Garcia-Navarro, was cited for its excellence as was Inside Syria, a trio of enterprising undercover reports by Clarissa Ward for the CBS Evening News with Scott Pelley.

Al Jazeera English was cited for its wide-ranging coverage of the escalating wave of protests it labeled the "Arab Awakening." The Peabody board also noted CNN's GPS series, citing Fareed Zakaria's commentary and analysis regarding Iran's nuclear ambitions as well as a special report, Fixing the American Dream, addressing problems with the US educational system.

Other entertainment programmes receiving Peabodys for 2011 include HBO's Game of Thrones, a fantasy-drama that immerses viewers in a richly imagined dark-ages society, and Trem, a note-perfect evocation of everyday life, love and music in post-Katrina New Orleans.

NBC's Parks and Recreation was cited for its sweet and prickly take on friendship and rivalry within a small town's parks department, and Portlandia, shown on IFC, was recognized for the freshness and amiability of its send-ups of Oregon's trendy city.

Austin City Limits, public television's venerable showcase for roots, rock, country and pop music, was voted an institutional Peabody for its eclectic taste and unflagging commitment to quality. And Comedy Central's The Colbert Report won its second Peabody for its deadpan anchor's "Super PAC" segments lampooning the rise of megabucks politics.

According to the organization itself, "The Peabody Awards recognize distinguished achievement and meritorious service by broadcasters, cable and Webcasters, producing organizations, and individuals."

Named after George Foster Peabody, these awards were first handed out in 1941. They used the idea behind the Pulitzer Prize as a guide for these honors.

It has been noted that there is no set number that can be awarded in any given year, but not more than 38 can be given out. Again, the intent is "to recognize the most outstanding achievements in electronic media, including radio, television and cable."