Mercury Network is centered on a flexible “middleware” technology layer of SaaS (Software As A Service) and PaaS (Platform As A Service) solutions connecting appraisers’ desktop software to their clients. Mercury is an advanced desktop and cloud-based valuation supply chain technology that connects the various parties involved – the appraisers, agents, loan officers, underwriters, reviewers, managers, and so on – routing data between them and analyzing it as needed.

Any lender or AMC can connect Mercury Network to their workflow at the front end (public or vendor facing), the back end (invisible), or any combination of the two. The software is designed as a set of interactive pieces that can be mixed and deployed to suit the needs of the client.

For more information on integration options to suit your operations, call 1-800-434-7260.

No integration fees, minimums or contracts. Integrations are built based on customer requests.

Published API for fast, easy development

API is documented along with XML examples for every inbound and outbound event

Interfaces are provided as Basic Web Services

Industry standard data formats - Appraisals are delivered in MISMO 2.6 valuation response format

All document transfers support base64 encoding

Integrations work “outside” the system so we can customize them to specific workflow requirements.

AMC Integrations

More than 300 AMCs accept orders on Mercury Network so lenders can place and manage orders with their AMC partners. Out of those 300+ AMCs, 116 have integrated their internal systems with Mercury Network. While a lender placing orders to AMCs won’t notice any difference when using an integrated AMC, the AMC has a lot of benefits because the order will flow directly from Mercury Network into their software, saving them time and making their workflow more efficient. AMCs interested in learning more about all the benefits of integrating with Mercury can contact our integration department at integrationsupport.VSG@corelogic.com.

For the full list of AMCs, visit www.MercuryVMP.com/AMC and for a list of integrated AMCs, visit www.MercuryVMP.com/AMCPartners.

UCDP

Mercury Network’s direct integration to UCDP is second to none, with automatic or manual submission options. Vendor revisions are handled inside the system, so processing is simple and fast.

FHA Portal

Our FHA Portal integration is as seamless as our UCDP integration, with the same easy submission and results processing. For more information on the FHA Portal, visit www.MercuryVMP.com/FHA.