Description

The Arum or Calla 'Captain Fuego', also known as Zantedeschia, is a unique variety with bright orange spathes with golden yellow reverses, washed with varying degrees of red! It is a stemless tuberous perennial that produces a clump of large sagittate leaves, green with white markings. The flowers appear between the months of July and October and last a long time when cut. This plant requires a light, rich, and moist soil, as well as a bright but not scorching exposure. It can tolerate temporary drought and is mainly grown in pots for easier wintering.

Zantedeschia 'Captain Fuego' is one of the many hybrids obtained by cross-breeding two main species native to Eastern and Southern Africa, Zantedeschia rehmannii and Zantedeschia elliottiana. 'Captain Fuego' is a stemless species with large sagittate leaves, dark green heavily speckled with transparent white. It is of medium size, measuring approximately 45cm (18in) in height and 20cm (8in) in spread. Like other hybrids, this plant requires specific growing conditions to flower. The flower, typical of Arums, produces a highly ornamental spathe, almost 10cm (4in) in diameter, concealing a golden yellow spadix at its centre. Its thick roots penetrate perpendicularly into the growing medium, resembling fleshy and trailing rhizomes. In nature, this plant grows in marshes that generally dry up in summer, under warm year-round climates. Vegetation dries up, and the tuber enters a period of dormancy. This vegetative cycle must be strictly respected in cultivation. Florist's arums can live for many years if the cyclic rest period is well respected.

Zantedeschia 'Captain Fuego' is particularly suited for container cultivation as long as it receives regular watering. It can also be grown in moist soil, near a water source, or even partially submerged, in less than 20cm (8in) of water during summer. Its exotic appearance blends beautifully with large ferns, sedges, and creeping Lysimachias in a lush and humid environment. In regions with cooler climates, dig up the rhizomes and store them dry at 10 ºC before replanting them in the next spring. Otherwise, mulch with a minimum of 10cm (4in).

In order to encourage gardeners to interact and share their experiences, Promesse de fleurs offers various media enabling content to be uploaded onto its Site - in particular via the ‘Photo sharing’ module.

The User agrees to refrain from:

- Posting any content that is illegal, prejudicial, insulting, racist, inciteful to hatred, revisionist, contrary to public decency, that infringes on privacy or on the privacy rights of third parties, in particular the publicity rights of persons and goods, intellectual property rights, or the right to privacy.

- Submitting content on behalf of a third party;

- Impersonate the identity of a third party and/or publish any personal information about a third party;

In general, the User undertakes to refrain from any unethical behaviour.

All Content (in particular text, comments, files, images, photos, videos, creative works, etc.), which may be subject to property or intellectual property rights, image or other private rights, shall remain the property of the User, subject to the limited rights granted by the terms of the licence granted by Promesse de fleurs as stated below. Users are at liberty to publish or not to publish such Content on the Site, notably via the ‘Photo Sharing’ facility, and accept that this Content shall be made public and freely accessible, notably on the Internet.

Users further acknowledge, undertake to have ,and guarantee that they hold all necessary rights and permissions to publish such material on the Site, in particular with regard to the legislation in force pertaining to any privacy, property, intellectual property, image, or contractual rights, or rights of any other nature. By publishing such Content on the Site, Users acknowledge accepting full liability as publishers of the Content within the meaning of the law, and grant Promesse de fleurs, free of charge, an inclusive, worldwide licence for the said Content for the entire duration of its publication, including all reproduction, representation, up/downloading, displaying, performing, transmission, and storage rights.

Users also grant permission for their name to be linked to the Content and accept that this link may not always be made available.

By engaging in posting material, Users consent to their Content becoming automatically accessible on the Internet, in particular on other sites and/or blogs and/or web pages of the Promesse de fleurs site, including in particular social pages and the Promesse de fleurs catalogue.

Users may secure the removal of entrusted content free of charge by issuing a simple request via our contact form.