Nancy Gibbs, the first woman to lead Time magazine, is stepping down as editor in chief, ending her four-year run at the publication’s helm.

“It felt like it was time,” Ms. Gibbs, 57, said in a telephone interview on Tuesday night. “I’m now going to go do my next thing.”

Ms. Gibbs, who joined Time in 1985 as a fact-checker and was named the magazine’s top editor in 2013, helped steer the nearly century-old magazine through a period of great transition for its parent company, Time Inc. Since the company spun off from Time Warner in 2014, it has brought on a new leadership team that has implemented an aggressive strategy to transform the print magazine publisher into a digital media company as it combats declining print advertising and circulation. This year, after fielding interest from potential suitors, the company said it had decided not to sell itself.

Ms. Gibbs said that she had embraced the changes at Time Inc., whose stable of magazines also includes Sports Illustrated and People.

“Change doesn’t scare me,” she said. “I know that our industry faces all kinds of uncertainty — I recognize that. But this is the golden age of storytelling, so if you’re not changing, you’re missing the opportunity.”

Her decision comes on the heels of two other significant leadership announcements in the magazine industry. Last week, Graydon Carter, the editor of Vanity Fair, announced he would step down in December after a 25-year run. And on Monday, Robbie Myers, the longtime editor of Elle, also said she was leaving her post.

Ms. Gibbs said she would stay at Time Inc. through the end of the year as the editorial director of company’s news group, a position she has held since last year, and would help with the magazine’s transition.

“Today marks the end of an era,” Rich Battista, the chief executive of Time Inc., and Alan Murray, the company’s chief content officer, said in a note to employees. “Nancy is one of a kind and cannot be replicated,” they added. “Nancy has built not only a remarkable legacy but also a remarkable news organization, and we are determined to maintain its power and relevance in the years ahead.”

Time Inc. did not name a successor to Ms. Gibbs, but Mr. Battista and Mr. Murray said they planned to “move quickly” to appoint the magazine’s next top editor.

The news that Ms. Gibbs was stepping down was first reported by Vanity Fair.

During her 32 years at Time, Ms. Gibbs interviewed five presidents, including Bill Clinton, George W. Bush and Donald J. Trump, and numerous other leaders. Though she said she did not know what she would do next, she said she was eager to return to writing.

“There are a number of things I can imagine would be interesting to explore,” she said.