The Toyota Concert series—having served as official photographer second year running and I got to meet CADAQUES ORCHESTRA and SEAN GHAZI last year and this year, the VIENNA OPERETTA ORCHESTRA (featuring AMY MASTURA)—that’s quite an honour and I hope to carry fourth my Classics portfolio in the years to come. This post combines images from the rehearsal and evening event and being among the early birds at the venue, I ventured upstage to get acquainted with the instruments and other interesting elements.

↓ The arrival of Her Royal Highness Yang Teramat Mulia Paduka Seri Pengiran Anak Isteri Pengiran Anak Sarah binti Pengiran Salleh Ab Rahaman accompanied by Mr Ninan Chacko, Managing Director of NBT.

↓ HRH meets with Soprano Izabela Labuda and Amy Mastura in the Royal lounge at the International Convention Centre during intermission.

↓ This year I went backstage and captured this exchange between Amy Mastura and conductor Siegfried Andraschek minutes before Amy was due to make her apperance of the evening.

PRESS RELEASE—NBT SCORES AGAIN WITH TOYOTA CLASSICS

It was another successful night for the Toyota Concert series featuring the Vienna Operetta Orchestra. Under the patronage of Her Royal Highness Yang Teramat Mulia Paduka Seri Pengiran Anak Isteri Pengiran Anak Sarah binti Pengiran Salleh Ab Rahaman. The 40-member orchestra dazzled all present with their performance right from the beginning with their beautiful and touching rendition of the national anthem.

Their repertoire consisted of a highly entertaining mix of classical music, dance and songs. Featured vocalist Soprano Izabela Labuda and Tenor Michael Suttner was joined by the multi-talented singer, songwriter and actress from Malaysia, Amy Mastura. She proved to be a hit with her rendition of Malam Ini and the highly infectious, Cinta and gamely responded to calls of an encore.

It was also a night where the less fortunate were remembered as 100% of ticket sales were donated to 3 charity organizations—Pusah Ehsan Al-Ameerah Al-Hajjah Maryam, Learning Ladders Society and Smarter Brunei. A total of $90,000 was presented to the organizations at the beginning of the concert by Her Royal Highness. Mr Ninan Chacko, Managing Director of NBT, the organizer of the event said, “This is the perfect setting not only for us to meet our customers but also an opportunity to do our bit for charity. Definitely, a win-win situation.” It was indeed a magical night and without a doubt, everyone ended a winner.

All images © Jan Shim Photography for NBT (BRUNEI) SDN BHD and TOYOTA MOTOR ASIA PACIFIC. All rights reserved. No part of SHIMWORLD and its external galleries may be used or reproduced without written consent of its owner (or respective copyright holder of materials used herein).