WILLIAM FITCH, late a retired merchant residing in Norwich, where he died December 22, 1880, was born in Bozrah, Conn., on October 27, 1800. He was the youngest son of Colonel Asa and Susanna (Fitch) Fitch, and was a descendant of James Fitch, who came to America in the ship "Defense" in 1635.

James Fitch, when sixteen years of age, studied theology under the instruction of the Rev. Messrs. Hooker and Stone, of Hartford, Conn., and was ordained at Saybrook in 1649. After remaining as pastor there fourteen years, the Rev. Mr. Fitch removed thence to Norwich with the larger part of his congregation, and continued active in the work of the ministry till very near the close of his long, and useful life, his death occurring at Lebanon, Conn., November 18, 1702. He was a native of Bocking, County Essex, England, the date of his birth being December 24, 1622. The Rev. James Fitch married first, in 1648, Abigail, daughter of the Rev. Henry Whitfield. She died in 1659; and he married in October, 1664, Priscilla Mason, daughter of Captain John Mason. He had fourteen children, six by his first wife and eight by the second. Their descendants are very numerous. Thomas Fitch, who settled in Norwalk, Conn., and Joseph Fitch, who settled permanently at Windsor, and was the ancestor of John Fitch, the inventor, were brothers of the Rev. James Fitch; and a Samuel, schoolmaster, who was married in Hartford in 1654, it is said "may have been another brother."

Samuel Fitch, born in 1655, son of the Rev. James and Abigail (Whitfield) Fitch, is said by Stiles in his History of Windsor, Conn., to have been the ancestor of the Bozrah Fitch families.

Colonel Asa Fitch, father of the subject of this sketch, was born in Bozrah, February 14, 1755. He was a farmer and iron manufacturer at Fitchville. By his first wife, Susanna, he had ten children, five sons and five daughters. The maiden name of his second wife was Mary House.

William Fitch in his boyhood for some years worked on his father's farm summers and attended school winters. Later, in his sixteenth or seventeenth year, he attended Bacon Academy at Colchester, where he completed the course of study, and was graduated. He had always been fond of books and study, and he next applied himself for several terms to teaching school. At the age of twenty he began his business career, going with his brother Douglas to Marseilles, France, joining in business their elder brother, Asa Fitch, Jr., who had been in New York City for some years, and who there founded the mercantile house of Fitch Brothers & Co., who sixty years ago and more were doing an immense commission business. In a volume entitled "Old Merchants of New York City" we read that nearly all the American vessels and American produce sent to Marseilles were consigned to "the great firm," also that the United States government appointed this house agent of the navy, charged with supplying the provisions and making the payment, etc., of the American squadron in the Mediterranean. Returning to this country in 1825 or 1826, Mr. William Fitch was engaged for about twelve years in the New York office of the house, having in this period entire charge of the same. Mr. Fitch returned to his native town in 1848, and there remained until 1858, when he removed to Norwich. In this city he became the owner of considerable real estate. The house that he bought in 1857 of Edward Worthington, and which has since been the family home, was built one hundred and thirty years ago or more by Colonel William Bradford Whiting, who sold it in 1771 to Azariah Lathrop. A picture of this historic mansion may be seen in the volume entitled "Old Houses of the Ancient Town of Norwich."

Mr. Fitch was married October 14, 1857, to Mary K., daughter of Dr. Elias and Mary Ann (Hillhouse) Williams. A biographical sketch of Mrs. Fitch follows this. Biographical Review Volume XXVI

Containing Life Sketches of Leading Citizens

of New London County Connecticut

Boston

Biographical Review Publishing Company

1898

pgs 10 - 11