2.  George Papanicolaou  George Seferis  Odysseas Elytis  Domenikos Theotokopoulos (El Greco)  Nikolaos Gyzis  Maria Kallas  Manos Hadjidakis CONTENTS

3.  This is a true genius. The Greek physician- researcher became established as the founder of a new medical specialty, exfoliative cytology, and went down in history as one of the leading researchers in medical science. In the mid 20th century he discovered the famous Pap test and saved the lives of thousands of women.

4.  In 1917 he studied vaginal smears of animals and then went on to study the same in humans. His research established the groundwork for early diagnosis of cancer.

5.  He was one of the most important Greek poets of the 20th century. His poetry was influenced by the Asian Minor disaster. He appeared in Greek literature in 1931 with the poetry collection “Strofi”. In 1963 he was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature

6.  Considered to be one of the greatest modern Greek poets, whose rich imagination renewed Greek poetry. He wrote assimilating the most essential elements of surrealism. 1979 was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature.

7.  He was one of the great Renaissance painters. He lived and worked in Spain most of his life, hence the nickname El Greco (The Greek). Since the beginning of the 20th century his work has begun to be recognized and he is now considered one of the all time leading artists who influenced modern art painters.

8.  Some of his greatest paintings include the "Assumption of the Virgin", "The Trinity," "The Resurrection of Christ", "The Christ" martyrdom, "Espolio" (scene from the Passion of Christ), "The Laocoon" and " Pentecost".

9.  Nicholas Gysis is one of the most important representatives of the academic realism of the late 19th century, both in Greek and at a European level. He participated and won many Greek and European competitions, from 1870 to 1900. After his death in 1901 he was honored with an exhibition of the 8th International Art Exhibition of Gklaspalast

10.  Greek soprano, the absolute diva in the field of opera. With her unique vocals and theatrical talent she renewed opera and its repertoire.

12.  Her first success was with “Gioconta" of Amilkare Ponkieli. Her career was launched when she sang at "Scala" in Milan and the Metropolitan Opera House. Her swan song was Norma, staged in Paris in 1965.

13.  The greatest musical genius of Greece. His first appearance in the Greek music world was in 1944 with the "Last White crow‘ by Alexis Solomos at Karolos Koun Art Theatre. A major chapter of his works is the music composed for key films of Greek and international cinema.