Janson is a Belgium-based multidisciplinary business law firm, specialising in a range of practice areas including banking and finance, competition and EU law, corporate law, mergers and acquisitions, private equity, insurance and liability, intellectual property, IT and data protection, mediation, real estate and construction, restructuring and insolvency, tax and white-collar crime.

Janson has earned a reputation for excellence in litigation and dispute resolution, which is deeply ingrained in the firm's DNA. The team's experience in courtroom advocacy significantly enhances the firm’s ability to advise clients on contractual arrangements and mergers and acquisition deals with precision.

Recognised as one of Belgium's oldest and largest independent business law firms, Janson carries the name of Paul Emile Janson, an attorney and former prime minister of Belgium. Throughout its growth, Janson has maintained its independence while expanding its services across all sectors of the economy. The firm's diverse client base includes industries such as energy, communication, automobile, finance, environment and health. Janson assists both Belgian and international clients, as well as public authorities, funds and nonprofit associations.

With a team of approximately 100 lawyers and offices in Brussels, Ghent and Mons, Janson delivers extensive multilingual and multidisciplinary services across various industries. This enables clients to find tailored solutions to a wide range of legal matters.

As an internationally recognised firm, Janson has a well-established reputation for serving a diverse range of domestic and international clients. Remaining attuned to the legal, regulatory and technological challenges faced by businesses, Janson continuously monitors and optimises its services to meet the needs of clients in today's increasingly globalised and technological environment.

In addition to its comprehensive legal services, Janson strives to help clients to navigate the complex landscape of international regulations and make informed decisions in a rapidly changing geopolitical climate. The firm advises on the intricate rules governing foreign investments and subsidies within the European Union, and provides guidance on trade measures, including the EU's sanctions imposed on specific countries. Janson's expertise enables clients to navigate the complex landscape of international regulations and make informed decisions in a rapidly changing geopolitical climate.

Janson's commitment to excellence is reflected in its recognition by a variety of rankings. The Chambers and Partners Europe rankings place Janson's dispute resolution practice in Band 3, while Leaders League's 2022 rankings has recognised the firm in 15 different practice areas.