Decorate your interiour with personal memories

Photo frames add a personal touch to your home. They display photos that evoke fond memories of moments with friends and family. They cherish treasured memories, such as cards and greeting cards.

Eichholtz photo frames embellish artworks by everyone from children's first drawings to professional painters. In addition, they serve as stylish wall decoration. Let your creativity run wild and decorate your home with treasured memories and works of art, presented in our beautiful photo frames. Choose your favourite sizes and design your own unique photo gallery that puts a smile on your face every day!

Choose the best photo frame size from Eichholtz

At Wilhelmina Designs, we have a range of Eichholtz photo frames available in different sizes, such as S, M and L. The smaller sizes (S) are perfect for adorning your wall shelves, bookcases, sideboards or as part of a stylish display on your side and console tables. Go for the larger sizes (M) and (L) to create striking eye-catchers on your blank walls or above the mantelpiece. For example, why not experiment with a collection of large picture frames in your hallway for a gallery-like experience?

Variety of materials

For a luxurious and timeless look, opt for a marble photo frame, which will give your memories a stylish look. On the other hand, if you are looking for a modern and sleek look, glass photo frames are an excellent choice. For an industrial touch, go for a metal photo frame, which will add a cool and contemporary touch to your interior.

Private shopping in the Eichholtz showroom

Would you like to see Eichholtz photo frames first before buying? Request a private shopping in our 4,000 m² Eichholtz showroom in Noordwijkerhout!

Get in touch with us for the best advice

Do you have questions about our extensive collection of Eichholtz photo frames or need style advice? At Wilhelmina Designs, we are ready to help you further. Our expert staff will be happy to answer all your questions and advise you on making the right choice. You can easily use our live chat on the website to get in touch with us directly. We also offer multiple contact options: