by Brian Kunde

Time for another de Camp highlight. The subject on this occasion is The Glory That Was (Avalon, New York, 1960), one of my favorite de Camp novels, which should be one of yours, too. If it isn’t, maybe I can convince you. First, however, I’ll regale you with my usual bibliographic and descriptive stuff, because that’s what I do.

The story first came to light in the April 1952 issue of Startling Stories. I presume it was expanded for book publication, given that it’s a novel, and novels don’t usually fit into single magazine issues. De Camp had trouble with this one, and credits Isaac Asimov with helping him through some difficulties in the writing. Asimov himself recalls visiting de Camp’s home at the time and being awed at all the books he had lying around as reference material. You can read his account of the visit in another book entirely, The Continent Makers and Other Tales of the Viagens, to which Asimov wrote the introduction, and in which he reports the anecdote.

You may wonder why it isn’t in his introduction to this book. Simply, because Asimov didn’t write the introduction to this book. Robert E. Heinlein did. Which was unusual; unlike Asimov, Heinlein didn’t go around writing introductions willy nilly. Here’s how it happened. Heinlein’s collection The Green Hills of Earth (Shasta, 1951), was originally slated to have a de Camp introduction, one Heinlein described as “wonderful,” but which the publisher inexplicably “dumped.” Heinlein’s intro to Glory was in recompense. (Patterson, William H., Jr. Robert A. Heinlein: In Dialog with His Century. Volume 2: The Man Who Learned Better (Tor, 2014, pages 68, 79). You may wonder what became of the dropped de Camp piece that was so wonderful. I dunno. As far as I can tell, it has never been published anywhere. But hey, we do have Heinlein’s intro to this book. So that’s something. I’ll go into it further later on.

The Glory That Was has had a decent number of editions. Nothing to match Lest Darkness Fall, but not bad. First came the Avalon Books hardcover, supposedly mirrored in Canada by one from Ryerson Press—though de Camp bibliographers Laughlin and Levack doubt the Ryerson one exists. Simultaneous American and Canadian publication, or rather claims of such, while common from the 50s through the 70s, usually just masked arrangements between publishers in the two countries giving each exclusive distribution rights to the other’s books. So if you’re able to find an actual Ryerson edition of Glory, well done!

The Avalon hardback was followed by a paper edition from Paperback Library (New York, March 1971), again in tandem a Canadian version (this time from the same publisher, and apparently real). Another paper edition was issued by Ace Books (New York, July 1979), and a third by Baen Books (Riverdale, New York, April 1992). There was the usual SF Gateway/Orion ebook in Britain (September 2011), and, finally, a trade paperback and ebook from Phoenix Pick (Rockville, MD, September 2014).

There were also Italian and German editions. First came the Italian paperback (but with a dust jacket!), La macchina del tempo (literal translation: The Time Machine) (Romana Periodici, Roma, December 1962), translated by “Niktò.” Then the German paperback, Thalia—Gefangene des Olymp (literal translation: Thalia—prisoners of Olympus) (Ullstein, Frankfurt, April 1974), translated by Ingrid Rothmann. Then a second German paperback, Von glorreichen Zeiten (Literal translation: From glorious times) (Ullstein again, May 1987), which was the same translation, retitled.

I analyzed the covers associated with most of these editions in an earlier posting (“Best de Camp Covers – Part 2: The Glory That Was,” Dec. 13, 2019) at the de Camp Facebook page. But rather than make you hunt that one up, I’ll do it again. Here we go!

The Startling Stories cover did not feature The Glory That Was, but rather a Martian scene for the issue’s other featured story, Leigh Brackett’s “The Last Days of Shandakor.” No more need be said of it here.

The Avalon dust cover was perpetrated by noted SF artist Ed Emshwiller. It’s adequate but bland. It has a man’s face, likely representing viewpoint character Knut Bulnes, occupying the lower right quarter, behind which muddy emanations swirl aloft, containing classical sculpture and architecture; Myron of Eleutherae’s Diskobólos, the Acropolis, and the sculpted head of some bearded philosopher. All in white. You’d never guess from these that the Greeks painted their marbles in bright colors, as do Hindus in India today. In white also is the title, and in red the author’s name and the subscription “science fiction,” which is both helpful and necessary. If not for the subscription, the book might be mistaken for a dull work of history or art history, rather than an exciting mystery of faked time travel. Not exactly spot-on for Emshwiller.

The Paperback Library edition (both versions) has art by Richard Powers. Here we get more instances of Greek art (one a bronze head with a hole in it through which we see an antique worldscape) and architecture, interposed with futuristic devices, a compass map symbol, and a tiny human figure overwhelmed by it all. Symbolic out the wazoo, but it effectively juxtaposes the supposed antiquity of the setting with the future technology behind the scenes.

The Ace paperback, with art by Steve Hickman, gives us yet another symbolic cover—a metal statue of a Greek archer with glowing red eyes, atop a manhole cover that rises to show machinery beneath. Dramatic and effective, though Powers already played this angle; seems like half our covers are going with this dodge.

The Baen paperback, with art by Doug Anderson, is a wowser. A dramatically backlit specimen of Classical red-figure ware of the type that usually shows mythical, battle, or domestic scenes—but this one, a particularly fine-looking krater, shows two hapless moderns (our heroes Knut Bulnes and Wiyem Flin) menaced by two ancient Greek warriors! In front of the krater is a futuristic pistol, which clues us in that the moderns are not our moderns, but future moderns. Yes, it’s the Powers juxtaposition yet again, but really cleverly done, this time. And Anderson gets points for showing both our protagonists in a jam beyond their (initial) fathoming, effectively capturing the story’s mood, drama, and cleverness. I don’t recall a scene like this in the book, but who cares?

The SF Gateway ebook—sorry, but I have to include it—is, sigh, the usual words on a yellow background. No freaking way this could ever draw anyone into the book. Open up a trap door under this one! (Yes, Yzma, this is why we have that lever!)

Then there’s the Phoenix Pick trade paperback and ebook, the most recent editions available, and the only ones that, along with the SF Gateway ebook, you can still get new. A gladiator lifts shield high against a shuttle-like space/aircraft. That’s right, a gladiator. Which was a Roman thing, not a Greek. Sure, he looks awesome, but where’s the authenticity? Or creativity? And, who done the art? No telling, but he’s playing the same game as Powers and Hickman and Anderson.

The Italian cover, done by Mario Ferrari, seems to show the protagonists’ sailboat, conflated with the trireme it subsequently encounters, penetrating the force barrier to pseudo-ancient Greece. A woman to the foreground at the right is likely intended to be Wiyem Flin’s kidnapped wife Thalia, on whose account Flin and Bulnes hazard the barrier in the first place. But artists like putting women on covers regardless of whether there’s one important to the story, so who knows? Points for trying to illustrate an actual scene; points off for not doing it very well.

The first German version has a striking Frazetta cover, lifted from a 1972 Fawcett Crest paperback edition of Child of the Sun, Kyle Onstott and Lance Horner’s 1965 historical novel about the Roman emperor Elagabalus. (I can’t take credit for sourcing this image—someone else, I think Morgan Holmes, pointed out where Ullstein swiped it from.) It’s a nice period cover, slanted toward nudity, with an orator, a chariot driver, and (possibly) slaves, and was doubtless selected to suggest classical antiquity—which it does. But it really has nothing to do with de Camp’s story.

The second German cover, by Joe Bergeron, shows a lovely, white-haired lady in a white gown, backlit in white, with white mist rising into a blue sky in the background, on a grey stone surface. I think Bergeron liked white. There is just enough detail in the stonework to suggest Greek architectural elements, so the artist may actually have intended the image to apply to this book. (If so, the woman is likely Thalia again.) But, like the old Emshwiller cover, nothing about it says science fiction.

My copy is the Ace paperback, though to my mind the Baen best represents the story. Its art has the slightly oddball quality that ought to accompany any good de Camp yarn. Below that, in order, I would rate the Paperback Library cover highest, for being the first to give us the ancient/futuristic juxtaposition, then the Italian edition, for giving us an actual scene from the book, then the first German one, because Frazetta, and then my Ace copy and the Phoenix Pick. The others (sorry, Ed Emshwiller and Joe Bergeron) either weren’t really trying or just plain get the buzzer. (Looking at you, SF Gateway!)

On to the content. First, the Heinlein intro, in which the Master discusses humor in SF at some length, and lauds de Camp (along with Henry Kuttner) as a practitioner of the same. “This, I maintain, is, in an age of hydrogen bombs and iron curtains, a very desirable trick.” He also approves of the meatiness of the author’s stories, his erudition, and his restraint: “the characters are no more than lifesize and the[ir] actions are the actions of men, not demigods. De Camp has never destroyed a galaxy and has only rarely and excusably rescued the human race.” Heinlein concludes with his oft-quoted quip that he “would class de Camp’s fiction as a very dry martini.” This is the source of that quip.

The story itself follows; I draw on the description I once wrote for Wikipedia for this summary. Twenty-seventh century Earth is united by a worldwide democratic government presided over by a constitutional monarch, though the former is veering toward totalitarianism and the latter is a megalomaniac. To neutralize World Emperor Vasil Hohnsol-Romano (AKA Vasil IX), his power-hungry prime minister Rudolf Lenz has ceded to him control of Greece for use in a mysterious secret project. Now Greece is surrounded by a force field cutting it off from the rest of the world, and people of Greek descent everywhere have vanished, presumably spirited away to the isolated region by the Emperor’s agents.

One such kidnapped citizen is Thalia Flin, Greek-born wife of classical scholar Wiyem Flin. Anxious to get her back, he recruits his friend, magazine editor Knut Bulnes, into a desperate attempt to penetrate the force barrier. Bulnes, hoping for the exclusive story on the Emperor’s mysterious project, agrees. The two succeed, sailing a boat through the barrier when it is temporarily disrupted by a storm.

Inside the force field, Flin and Bulnes are astounded to find themselves not in 27th century Greece, but to all appearances the Classical Greece of Perikles and the Peloponnesian War. Pretending to be foreign philosophers, they establish themselves in Athens as they attempt to unravel the mystery, and begin to discover that all is not as it seems. The wife of the playwright Euripides, for instance, appears to be Thalia, though she does not recognize Flin and has no knowledge of her former life.

After meeting the astronomer Meton, Flin and Bulnes discover that the north celestial pole is right where it should be as of the twenty-seventh century, proving that they cannot really be in ancient times. Bulnes discovers a hidden subterranean building containing modern machinery and people speaking twenty-seventh century language. The pair eventually deduce that the entire country is an elaborate charade, with most of the inhabitants being controlled by a “mind conditioning” device that erases their memories and replaces them with manufactured personas, era-appropriate to ancient Greece.

They decide to convey this information to the Athenian leader Perikles by masquerading as an oracle of the god Apollo. Perikles appears for the meeting at the Acropolis, but when they make their revelation he attempts to shoot them with a modern gun. Only then do they realize that Perikles is actually World Emperor Vasil IX himself, who, unlike everyone else, in perfect possession of his faculties. Escaping the false Perikles, Bulnes and Flin discover an elaborate system of machinery and antennas hidden in the colossal statue of Athene Promachos.

“Perikles’s” mistress Aspasia is discovered to be another self-aware modern, and a secret spy for Prime Minister Lenz. Vasil shoots her, and before she dies she tells Bulnes and Flin the emperor’s goal in recreating Classical Greece is to achieve an ideal, stable civilization, which, through conditioning, he will then extend to the rest of the world. Viewing the Classical era as a high point in civilization and in the happiness of those who lived through it, Vasil intends in the role of Perikles to guide Athens in such a way as to rectify the original Perikles’s mistakes, avoiding the catastrophe of the Peloponnesian War and achieving his imagined utopia. The cynical Lenz has coddled Vasil’s delusion and facilitated the conditioning project so as to hijack it at the proper moment in the service of cementing his own world-wide tyranny.

Aghast at both prospects, Bulnes and Flin seek aid from Kleon, political opponent of “Perikles,” who they are surprised to discover is actually the Emperor’s long-lost scapegrace brother, Prince Serj, conditioned and blind to his true identity, like the rest of the Greeks. Nonetheless, “Kleon” sees in the murder of “Aspasia” an opportunity to topple his rival. He rallies his followers to confront “Perikles,” who counters by calling on Athena herself (in the form of a public address system built into the Athene Promachos statue) to support him. Bulnes convinces “Kleon” it’s a trick and a stand-off ensues, during which, on Bulnes’ instigation, the statue is set on fire, and the conditioning machinery destroyed. With the jig up, Vasil shoots and kills Serj, but is himself riddled with arrows in the ensuing melee. As the people recover their wits and memories, Bulnes takes charge, filling them in and organizing them to take control of the situation. He then penetrates and captures Vasil’s sanctum, from which he broadcasts the news of the Emperor’s and Prime Minister’s plots to the world.

Returning to the house of “Euripides” (now back in his right mind as one Kostis Vutiras), Bulnes finds Flin and Thalia reunited, and news spreading on reactivated tech of the collapse of Lenz’s government. All seems well, until Vutiras ponders whether “even in your so-called normal, modern, twenty-seventh-century world, you may be merely somebody’s puppet, as Mrs. Flin and I were in this one—only you haven’t been clever enough to penetrate backstage?” Flin: “Oh, what a perfectly beastly idea!”

De Camp’s his main idea here—using brainwashed people to reenact the past—is evidently one that took hold of him, as it is also hinted at in some of his other works. We find the germ of it as early as Lest Darkness Fall (1939), in which main character Martin Padway briefly considers the possibility that instead of being thrown back in time he has found himself in a Rome that Benito Mussolini has forced to imitate the 6th century. (He dismisses the idea as impractical.) Subsequently, in the fantasy novel The Carnelian Cube (1948) by de Camp and his collaborator Fletcher Pratt an actual reenactment of the Biblical siege of Samaria by the Assyrians is performed, directed by astrology-guided archaeologists using drafted and hypnotized participants. And in the story “Cornzan the Mighty“ (1955) actors are conditioned to believe the scenario they are performing is real.

The main problem with any large-scale application of the idea is illustrated by Padway’s take on it, a probable de Camp doesn’t really address in The Glory That Was. Which is, how could anyone possibly bring this sort of thing off? It boggles the mind how Vasil and Lenz manage to hatch their scheme, remake Greece, and spirit away and brainwash so many people, with all the vast expenditure of time and resources such a vast undertaking entails. And how, for that matter, they manage to keep what they’re doing running and secret for years on end—seventeen, if I remember correctly from the book. At minimum, one suspects mind-wiping a heck of a lot more people than just the Greek victims would be needed! And could there even be enough money in the world to do it all, even seven centuries on from de Camp’s date of writing?

This is the sort of thing that calls for a certain amount of hand-waving. Which de Camp doesn’t really do. There are other instances in his work of similar inattention to tidying up plot holes, even in some of his most admired works, like, say, The Hand of Zei—but that’s a whole separate review. My point here is, de Camp hasn’t papered over what he needs to in The Glory That Was. Sometimes I wonder if this is the difficulty with the book he needed Isaac Asimov’s help with. If so, Asimov must have told him “No one will notice. Just ignore it and finish the damn story!” (Only, one does notice, if attentive enough.) That said … I’m going to ignore it. I still consider Glory a great de Camp book. Not just a fun one for which you must overlook a thing or two to maintain your suspension of disbelief. No, a great one. Why?

Well, here’s how I summed it up back in 2006, when I wrote the Wikipedia article on the novel. “The book is a tour de force for de Camp, bringing together features of several of the types of fiction he specialized in, including his time travel stories, historical novels, and trademark ‘domestic science fiction,’ in which ordinary people encounter the extraordinary—though as it turns out no time travel is involved, it is not a historical novel, and the ‘ordinary’ people live in the twenty-seventh century.”

Yeah. This is the novel de Camp put pretty much everything into, and somehow made it all work together. Once you have an insight like that, it changes how you look at the thing. It did for me, anyway. Perhaps it will for you as well. It seems unlikely I would have been first to see this, but I haven’t seen anywhere else it was said previously. And I certainly haven’t seen that phrase—tour de force—applied to Glory before I did.

I reiterated the assessment more briefly in 2007, in a list of de Camp’s most significant works that I added to his main Wikipedia article: “The Glory That Was (1960) – a tour de force incorporating most of de Camp’s major interests into one work.”

These two statements in Wikipedia seem to have started something, as they are now echoed in descriptions of The Glory That Was more generally—most notably in Phoenix Pick’s blurb on their edition of the book, issued in 2014. Probably just because when people want to know about things, Wikipedia is where they look. Still, it’s odd to think that that through my writing there I may have become an unsung, and largely unknown, influence on what others think about de Camp.

The book is dedicated “To Isaac Asimov, who helped to push this one over the hump.” Whatever level of assistance the dedicatee provided, de Camp really appreciated it!

# # #