Overview: Nidimys occultus is a multituberculate which existed in the United States during the Edmontonian faunal stage of the upper Cretaceous period, and the only species in the genus Nidimys.

Overview: Lavocatia is a genus of extinct mammal from the Lower Cretaceous of Spain. It was a member of the also extinct order Multituberculata, and lived alongside of dinosaurs. Like most Mesozoic mammals, it was ...

Overview: Hahnodon ("Hahn's tooth") is a genus of extinct mammal from the Early Cretaceous Ksar Metlili Formation in Morocco. Although originally considered to be a relatively early member of the extinct clade ...

Overview: Liaobaatar changi is a multituberculate which existed in China during the lower Cretaceous period. It is the only species in the genus Liaobaatar.

Overview: Iberodon is a small, extinct mammal of the Lower Cretaceous from Portugal. It was a member of the also extinct order Multituberculata, and led its obscure and plant-eating existence in the company of ...

Overview: Gerhardodon is an extinct genus of mammal from the Lower Cretaceous of southern England. It was a member of the also extinct order of Multituberculata, and lived with such dinosaurs as Iguanodon. It lies ...

Overview: Ecprepaulax is a Lower Cretaceous mammal from Portugal. It was a member of the also extinct order Multituberculata and shared the world with dinosaurs. It lies within the suborder "Plagiaulacida" and family ...

Overview: Bernardodon was a small, Lower Cretaceous mammal from Portugal. It is part of the extinct order Multituberculata, living at the same time as the dinosaurs. Differs from Pinheirodon in having I3 wider and ...

Overview: Henkelodon was a small mammal of the Upper Jurassic. It was a relatively early member of the extinct order Multituberculata. Henkelodon was a European herbivore that lived during the "age of the dinosaurs" ...

Overview: Paulchoffatia is a genus of extinct mammal of the Upper Jurassic - Lower Cretaceous. It was a relatively early member of the also extinct order Multituberculata, within the suborder "Plagiaulacida" and ...

Overview: Arginbaatar is a genus of extinct mammal from the Lower Cretaceous of Mongolia. It was a member of the Multituberculata, an order which is also extinct. It belongs to the family Arginbaataridae (Hahn & ...

Overview: Essonodon is a mammal genus from the Upper Cretaceous of North America. It was a member of the extinct order Multituberculata and lived towards the end of the "age of the dinosaurs." It is within the ...

Overview: Monobaatar is a genus of extinct mammal from the Lower Cretaceous of Mongolia. It was within the also extinct order Multituberculata, and lived during the "age of the dinosaurs". It is also within the ...

Overview: Proalbionbaatar is a small mammal from the Upper Jurassic of Guimarota, Portugal. It's the most derived member of the order Multituberculata known from that locality, and shared the world with the much ...