Jonah Hill is a 39-year-old actor who many of us remember as a funny, clumsy guy from hit comedy flicks. But we’d like to tell you about how he’s become a Hollywood style icon and set a new movie trend, all while staying true to himself.

© Accepted / Universal Pictures and co-producers, ODD ANDERSEN / AFP / East News

Jonah Hill was born in Los Angeles into the family of a costume designer and a tour accountant for Guns N’ Roses. He made his film debut in the 2000s, around the same time another comedic actor, Seth Rogen, started his career. They acted together in the popular 2007 movie, Superbad. In this movie, Hill played a simple, funny guy, and this type of character stuck with him for almost a decade.

But Hill always dreamt of acting in serious movies. In his teenage years, he wrote plays and stand-up comedy bits and performed them in a bar. This is why he didn’t want to play funny losers all the time and wanted to find his place in independent movies.

This was one of the reasons why he turned down a starring role in the movie, The Hangover.

Hill even lost 40 pounds to get closer to the career of his dreams. The actor believed that this would help him get more serious roles. At the same time, he tried himself as a screenwriter and created an animated series, but it got negative reviews and was ultimately canceled.

But Hill didn’t stop there. In 2011, he landed a role in the drama, Moneyball. Both the movie and Hill’s performance were praised by critics. He was even nominated for a Golden Globe and an Oscar. This picture was his first dramatic experience.

Even though Hill wanted to achieve new heights in acting, he still continued to act in comedies for some time. For example, he starred in flicks like The Watch and 21 Jump Street.

Hill’s career changed after meeting Martin Scorsese, who invited Hill to act in his movie, The Wolf of Wall Street, which earned the actor his second Oscar nomination. By the way, he accepted the Screen Actors Guild’s minimum wage of $60,000 for this gig.

But in 2014, Hill ranked 28th on Forbes magazine’s list of today’s highest-paid actors.

Jonah Hill says that his heroes are Bill Murray and Dustin Hoffman. He thinks they are great actors that do both comedies and dramas seamlessly.

Hill’s popularity continued to grow. In 2018, he was included in the list of the best-dressed celebrities. He also continued to develop his screenwriting career and co-wrote projects such as Bruno and 21 Jump Street.

In the movie, Don’t Look Up, Hill played the friend of the main hero and the son of the president, played by Meryl Streep. But despite his growing popularity, he always stays true to himself.

Hill visited one of his press conferences with a whoopee cushion. His managers asked him to leave this toy at home many times, but he didn’t care.

In 2022, Hill directed the documentary, Stutz, in which he discusses the problems of psychological health with his therapist. This simple film unexpectedly earned 100% on Rotten Tomatoes. Everyone was amazed at Hill’s courage to make such a frank project.

In January 2023, a new comedy starring Hill is planned to be released. He plays a man who asks his Black fiancée’s parents to bless the marriage. Eddie Murphy also acts in this movie.

Steven Ferdman / Everett Collection / East News

In October 2021, Hill asked fans to stop making comments about his physical appearance, no matter if they were good or bad. The fact is, many people discuss his weight loss and changes in his style online.

Hill is a promising actor who’s risen to fame thanks to playing funny, simple guys, but he’s proved himself as a dramatic actor too. We hope that his future acting career will help him reveal his full dramatic potential.