Best known as Pascale Bussières’s ferocious teenage daughter in Emporte-Moi and the steely survivor of the Montreal massacre in Polytechnique – for which she won a best-actress Genie – Karine Vanasse has spent most of the last two years lightening up.

In 2011, she played a French-Canadian temptress who takes a Manhattan suit (Rossif Sutherland) for a life-changing drive to North Bay in low-budget road movie I’m Yours. And then she turned up alongside Christina Ricci and Kelli Garner as a resourceful 60s flight attendant in retro TV series Pan Am. (Vanasse can also be glimpsed, briefly, in Woody Allen’s Midnight In Paris she’s inside the carriage that arrives to spirit Owen Wilson and Marion Cotillard back to the 1890s.)

At the Toronto Film Festival just after the first screening of I’m Yours, we sat down to talk about acting, accents and trying to sound more European.

The last time we talked, Polytechnique was about to open in English Canada. That seemed to go well.

Yeah, it did really, really well – not in terms of money especially. In Quebec, it had pretty good box office for that kind of movie. But as you know, it’s so difficult here to have a Canadian movie that works.

It really did work, though. And you spent years getting it made – that had to have made an impact on you.

Polytechnique changed everything in my way of working. I became an adult, really, during those five years. I didn’t work on anything else but Polytechnique. I didn’t focus on [breaking into] the American market, working on my accent, going to France to explore other markets – I thought, for me, it was over. I chose Polytechnique instead of expanding my career.

So you thought you’d missed your window?

Yeah, exactly. But funnily, everything happened just right after Polytechnique for the past two years, I’ve been working a lot. Different things, trying stuff, going back to theatre, doing an action movie in France, and now Pan Am and everything – so it’s good. Polytechnique just allowed me to go back and say, “Okay, why do I like this job? What do I love about it?” It’s not only a matter of choosing roles, but also who am I working with? Am I learning something from that experience? So, yeah, it was amazing.

I’m Yours is your first English-language leading role after a string of French-language films. Was that a conscious choice, a way of crossing over to the anglo market?

I always worked mostly in Quebec. I never thought of the States, somehow. I don’t know – I don’t have blue eyes or blond hair. I thought I didn’t fit with the stereotype of America. So I came to Toronto, and I thought, “Well, maybe it’s my last chance, I’ll give it a shot in Toronto.” I met with some casting directors and some agents. They were looking for Daphne, and she wasn’t supposed to be francophone at all. She wasn’t supposed to be from Quebec or anything. But I auditioned, it worked, and then from that experience I met my agent – and she sent me to Pan Am. It really opened doors for me it allowed me to think that even with my accent it was possible to dream of a job in English.

Honestly, your accent’s not that bad.

It’s gonna get better [laughing]! I always feel that I can’t express myself as much as I do in French, with precision. But it’s fine. And on both productions, I’m Yours and also Pan Am, I was allowed to keep my accent. Well, for Pan Am, it has to be sort of European, so it can’t be totally my own.

That sounds like it could be fun.

Yeah! It is [laughing]!

Did you model your Pan Am accent after anyone in particular?

If you go back to the 60s, to Anna Karina and everybody – that way of playing with words I’m trying a little bit. My [dialogue] coach was telling me to say all the lines in European French, try to keep that same rhythm and way of playing with words and intonations and everything.

That’s definitely your own accent in I’m Yours, though.

That was good. That was really, really good. But I saw the movie yesterday and I was like, “Hmm. In a year I think I’ve evolved a little bit.” And I had two weeks to prepare it was a very last-minute thing.

How small was the production exactly?

It was a $500,000 budget, a small production. We were shooting in North Bay, it was only three weeks. It was a really small bubble, but having this chance to play with Rossif [Sutherland], to work with Leonard [Farlinger], to share the screen with somebody else – that’s something I never really had.

It’s true. In Polytechnique, even when you’re in a scene with other actors, you’re essentially isolated from one another.

I’m still by myself, exactly. And so to share the screen with somebody, to share the story with somebody, to sort of have to lay eyes on somebody and [hold] the look? I really appreciated that experience, and I’m sure it’s helping me a lot right now. You can’t always be the one looking away from the camera, just thinking [laughing].