Pascale Bussières purses her lips around a cigarette as she ponders the question. Does she find it easier to act in English or in French, her mother tongue? "Surprisingly, it often feels like doing it in English is easier," she says, leaning back in her chair in a café on Montreal's Boulevard St. Laurent. "There's already a distance between myself and the character if I'm speaking the role in English, because I'm not really fluent yet. So it gives me a distance and a capacity to see that character differently."

It's a question Bussières may well have already pondered, given her hefty CV. She has been courted by some of the most prominent directors in both solitudes. They include: Micheline Lanctôt ( Sonatine, Deux actrices); Denis Villeneuve ( Un 32 août sur terre); Guy Maddin ( Twilight of the Ice Nymphs); Bruce McDonald (TV's Platinum); Patricia Rozema ( When Night is Falling); and Jeremy Podeswa ( The Five Senses). In the process, she has become the most successful crossover act since Geneviève Bujold, steadily working, leaping between French and English roles, seemingly without effort.

Tonight points to another landmark for Bussières, when La Beauté de Pandore will have its world premiere at the 18th annual Rendez-vous de cinema Québécois, the Quebec film industry's prestigious roundup of home- grown fare. The film is the third and final instalment in filmmaker Charles Binamé's celebrated trilogy, which began with Eldorado (1995) and continued with Le Coeur au poing (1997).

The film is loosely based on the Greek myth of Pandora and it develops the ideas about urban angst raised in the two previous works. A construction contractor (played by Jean-François Casabonne) finds that his life gets turned on its side after a romantic tryst with Bussières, who plays the film's namesake, Pandore.

For both Binamé and Bussières, the role presented an intriguing challenge. As Pandore, Bussières was to play shame, an emotion she says she'd had little experience with. So the preparation called for some odd exercises. "I walked down St. Catherine Street wearing bandages all over my face. No one recognized me, but looked at me as something or someone weird. I felt like someone totally exposed to my own drama. It worked, somehow. Luckily I only had to do it once."

La Beauté de Pandore did feel "a lot like coming home" for Bussières, whose working relationship with Binamé dates back to 1993, when she starred in Blanche, a TV miniseries he directed. The historical melodrama proved a massive ratings success, with virtually half of the televisions in Quebec tuned in. Ironically, Bussières reports that the exposure did more for her profile in English Canada than in Quebec.

Blanche led directly to her role in When Night is Falling, where she played a student of the Calvinist faith who finds herself in love with another woman. Rozema's film called for Bussières to act in some explicit love scenes, both hetero- and homosexual. But Bussières says she had no hesitation whatsoever playing the role. ("Playing a Calvinist was harder than playing a lesbian," she recalls.) The film, she notes, had a huge impact in France, playing at one cinema in Paris for more than a year and a half.

"I was in Paris last week to meet with some directors. That film really has a following there. I should call Patricia and thank her, actually. It really was an interesting film at the right moment. The film has a cult lesbian following. I've received some very interesting letters over the years." (Quebeckers may notice Bussières's contribution to Rozema's last film, Mansfield Park, where she supplies the voice for one character in the dubbed French version now showing in the province.)

In addition to Pandore, Bussières has a number of other projects coming to fruition. She has recently returned from Cuba, where she worked on a particularly anarchic shoot. She has just signed on to play opposite Stephen Baldwin in her first science-fiction film, an as-yet-unnamed American project to be shot in Montreal this summer (the plot involves terrorists and alien abduction, à la Invasion of the Body Snatchers). And, in April, she will appear in Symfolium, a bit of "philosophical, political theatre" in which she will improvise in a debate among fools in a Montreal theatre. (The latter is a collaboration with friends she met during her involvement with the Rhino Party in the early nineties). She's also building a house in the Eastern Townships with her boyfriend.

Sitting across from Bussières, it isn't hard to figure out why she's been cast so far and wide. She has perfect, almost translucent skin, delicate features matched by a dramatic bone structure and amber eyes. As with Marlene Dietrich, the camera is clearly her friend. Her on-screen appeal is locked somewhere between high glamour and an unpretentious earthiness. But Bussières says acting wasn't initially something she wanted to do. "It just happened, really. I got more and more busy in front of the camera, with no specific wish to become an actress. I thought I'd just do it for a couple of years and see what happened."

Bussières did take a break in the late eighties, to attend Montreal's Concordia University and complete a degree in film production. "I enjoyed directing," she says of the short films she made. "Again, I feel more and more drawn to the idea of screenwriting. Being an actress, you're beholden to calls. And when there are no calls, you feel like there's nothing to do. Even two or three movies a year doesn't seem to fill my time. I like to be busy."