Are you feeling stuck in your current job and responsibilities? The Career Ignition quiz can help you break free from the rut and unlock your full potential. Our recent survey revealed that only 10% of respondents were completely satisfied with their jobs. Take the quiz now to discover your strengths, weaknesses, and opportunities for growth. https://lnkd.in/eueWCPCQ

Thinking of taking the next steps in your career? Not sure if the time is right? We've created the Career Ignition Scorecard to help benchmark your current role and help unlock your potential Discover where you stand in the ever-evolving technology landscape and get actionable insights to boost your career across four crucial dimensions: · Skillset Power-up · Industry Accelerators · Career Satisfaction & Fulfilment · Roadmap to Success By taking the scorecard, you'll receive tailored tips to level up your skills, keep up with industry trends, optimise work-life balance, and align your career trajectory with your aspirations. Get started with the scorecard here: https://lnkd.in/euqtnhee #career #technology

Demand for contractors is up. The recent REC & KPMG report shows the rate of growth being the fastest for 7 months. This echoes what we’re seeing, that companies are increasingly turning to temp workers to deliver their key tech projects

We've been running our Career Ignition Scorecard for the last month, with some interesting results 82% of respondents show room for growth in their overall score Discover where you stand in the ever-evolving technology landscape and get actionable insights to boost your career across four crucial dimensions: Skillset Power-up Industry Accelerators Career Satisfaction & Fulfilment Roadmap to Success By taking the scorecard, you'll receive tailored tips to level up your skills, keep up with industry trends, optimise work-life balance, and align your career trajectory with your aspirations. Get started with the scorecard here: https://lnkd.in/euqtnhee

Lots of reports, echoing what we’re seeing, that companies are increasingly turning to contract workers in the current economic environment. For us, we’re seeing significant month on month increase in demand for contractors - how is your business is adapting to the current hiring landscape?

Calling all CTOs and Tech Leaders! Are you seeking to enhance your tech talent acquisition strategies? Look no further! We have developed an exclusive scorecard, designed specifically for you - the CTO's Guide to Evaluating Tech Talent Acquisition Strategies: Benchmark Your Company's Performance. Gain access to valuable insights by evaluating your organisation across three key areas: 1️⃣ Strategy and Planning 2️⃣ Recruitment Process and Candidate Experience 3️⃣ Technology and Collaboration You will receive a personalised report with customised recommendations to help you make informed, data-driven decisions and keep your company ahead of the rapidly evolving tech landscape. Don't miss out on this opportunity to elevate your talent acquisition game. Try the scorecard now at: https://lnkd.in/gM8pNH8G #CTO #TechLeaders #TalentAcquisition #Recruitment #Technology #Innovation

Interesting article in the press this morning, based on a British Chamber of Commerce survey, saying 60% of businesses are hiring (my feeling in Tech is its higher), and of those hiring 80% are struggling to access the right talent. Are you seeing the same issues?