Job Description

Hello, Good Geeky Citizen!

Are you tired of living half your life in a drab gray cubicle working with drab gray people?

Wouldn't it be nice to work from the comfort of your own gaming chair within easy reach of your espresso maker?

Ignition, Inc. (www.ignitionit.com) is seeking an IT Help Desk Master of Disaster to work from the comfort of your own home, and we hope that person is you!

ABOUT IGNITION

We're a 23-year-old I.T. Managed Services Provider based in San Francisco. Currently, our team is 11 people.

We serve businesses of between 20 to 250 people, with a unique (but not exclusive) focus on cybersecurity, mobile and remote workforce technologies, and macOS.

But really, we're the anti-MSP: We're not stuffy. We're not stiff. There's no uniform. Most of us dislike Windows even if we support it all the time. Our motto is "49% tech support, 51% human support." We hire people with deep emotional I.Q. instead of folks with lots of certifications that start with the letter M.

Our customers feel the difference. They enjoy working with us, as you will, too.

Our employee turnover is practically zero. Folks enjoy working at Ignition. We respect your humanity because we share it.

ABOUT THIS JOB

Our Help Desk is drowning, and we need more talented folks like you to get in there with swinging elbows! Some of your duties will include:

Triage incoming support requests, making sure the most urgent ones get attended to, the clients get replied to, and nothing gets ignored

Answer the Help Desk phone either resolve support issues independently, collaborate with your colleagues, or escalate to someone else

Assist our other engineers in resolving the issues they're working on

When you see balls start to approach the floor, scream like a motherf**ker and make sure somebody grabs them before they hit!

But, be forewarned: we do NOT have a formal training program. We're not going to send you to Microsoft University™ to get a bunch of useless certs. You'll learn like the rest of us learned: in the trenches, asking questions and hoping that somebody else on our team has a couple minutes to give you an answer. Thus, you'd better be a quick learner, able to do your own research and devise your own curriculum... and you'd better hurry because the client is on the phone and it's 6:00 on a Friday evening and you are late for your own wedding!

(Just kidding. If you were getting married, we'd cover for ya.)

THE IDEAL CANDIDATE

This position is ideal for someone with a few years of IT troubleshooting and tech support experience, either formal or informal.

While we don't require formal I.T. work experience, we do require demonstrable tech savvy and mighty, earth-shattering Google Fu. Our interview process will test your ability to find answers to questions about which you know nothing. It's less important that you get the answers 100% correct than that you demonstrate that you know how to find them with minimal guidance.

In addition to being a geek-minded hobbyist and tinkerer, you should be warm, friendly, and empathetic. Only 49% of our job is technical support: the remaining 51% is human support, helping our clients feel well-fed and productive with their technology. If people can hear the smile in your voice over the phone, they'll forgive you for not immediately knowing all the answers.

BASIC REQUIREMENTS

Be available to work full time, weekdays from 9:00 A.M. to 6:00 P.M. Eastern time

Be a naturally friendly person who's easy to work with

Write clear, useful technical documentation, and clear, articulate end-user correspondence

Have a quiet place in your home from which you can work, with reliable Internet

COMPENSATION

We pay on an hourly basis according to your experience. We also provide medical, dental, and vision insurance; a 401(k) plan; holiday, sick, and vacation pay; stipends, and an annual bonus.

TO APPLY

Visit https://forms.gle/T6NCzuw6cJpaJZCB8

SEE YA SOON

Ignition is an equal opportunity employer supporting diverse workplaces. We look forward to considering all qualified applicants. Thanks for reading!