Many times, I’ve been asked, “Mary, why do bad things happen to good people?”

What purpose does pain and suffering serve… and does it come into our lives because we deserve it in some way?

Whatever form the question takes, the answer is nearly always the same:

No one deserves to suffer, but suffering CAN be a doorway that allows us to step into a fuller, freer, more expansive version of ourselves.

After investing decades studying the invisible side of success, and coaching and mentoring tens of thousands of people all around the world in how to create lives they truly love living, I’ve been fortunate to meet some pretty extraordinary people.

I’ve had the opportunity to speak to heads of state at the United Nations on several occasions with the Gandhi Foundation and MLK Jr. Foundation on the subject of non-violence.

I’ve also been invited to co-convene three different week-long meetings with His Holiness the Dalai Lama and different world leaders in Dharamsala, India.

But when I was offered the opportunity to meet with President Nelson Mandela in Cape Town, South Africa to discuss some of the most pressing issues that our world was facing…

Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela was born in South Africa in 1918, and was instrumental in the fight to dismantle the country’s discriminatory apartheid policies.

Because of his vocal protests for justice and equality in the face of an apartheid-led government, he was imprisoned for 27 years, from 1962 until 1990, for what his government deemed to be crimes against his country — a country he would later lead, as president, from 1994 to 1999.

After his term as president, Nelson Mandela continued to work as an activist and philanthropist until his death in December of 2013.

He’s widely recognized as one of the greatest change agents of our time.

Out of all the people in the world that I wanted to sit down and talk with, he was the one with whom I MOST wanted to have a conversation, and I was overjoyed to have the chance to finally meet him face-to-face.

It was a fascinating experience!

We were asked not to use any kind of flash photography to capture the moment, because President Mandela’s eyes were so damaged from his years of working in the blinding sun, that he couldn’t tolerate even the brief flare of the camera’s bulb.

We were, however, allowed to ask him questions.

I had just one thing I wanted to know:

“How is it that you were imprisoned for almost three decades, and sentenced to hard labor, and there’s not a shred of anger or resentment in you for all of that time you lost, all of those years that you could have been with your family, that were stolen from you?

"And then, you went on to, not just forgive your captors, but to lead your country in the fight against apartheid. How did you do it? How did you find it in your heart to forgive?"

President Mandela gave me a simple response: “The man who went to prison never could have become president.”

But he went on to explain that, in his younger years, he was violent, angry, and unable to make sense of his circumstances and conditions.

He protested and fought against apartheid, and was arrested for it, and sentenced to life in prison.

He told me that, at first, sitting in prison, he thought over and over again, "All is lost.”

But then one day, a new thought began to seep into his consciousness, like a drop of water on parched earth, “Maybe all is NOT lost.”

He had no reason to hope that life would get better. He was in prison with no hope of release in his lifetime…

And yet, a tiny bit of hope remained, and he told me that he hung onto it, “like a desperate person hanging onto a branch before he plummets off a cliff to his death.”

For many years, nothing happened to justify this hope.

But one day, President Mandela had a new thought…

President Mandela slowly began to realize that there might be a larger purpose to his imprisonment.

As he started to think about this, he began to wonder: “If my imprisonment was part of the end of apartheid, how will I ‘be’ while I am in this prison?”

He chose to start becoming the person who could fulfill his vision to end apartheid — a strong and compassionate leader — and this is what led him to begin writing letters that would go on to change the world.

He was allowed to send one letter per week from prison, and he used this method of communication to garner support from the media and from various influential people for the end of apartheid.

Each and every week, Mandela wrote faithfully, forgetting his own pain in the light of his growing role as a symbol of hope and freedom for his people.

The rest is history.