Jona Sacred (ヨナ・セイクリッド) is a system engineer at the Epstein Foundation.

Profile[]

Appearance[]

Jona is a young adult with bright blue eyes, freckles and curled blonde hair. When he was younger, Jona wore a multicoloured hoodie, primarily blue, red and white with a cream-coloured hood. There is a dog tag hanging from one of the cords. Jona also wore baggy three-quarter length shorts of blue color and red sneakers.

In his older appearance, Jona now wears glasses. keeping the dog tag, Jona now wears a grey shirt beneath his blue and red jacket, which keeps the same color scheme as his original hoodie. He still wears three-quarter length shorts but they are now of a khaki-brown colour. He wears the same style of shoes, with brown socks now visible.

Personality[]

Jona has a quite-self centred personality, seeking a hedonistic lifestyle where he can utilise his technological talents. He cares little for his physical health, neglecting exercise and having a very unhealthy diet of mostly junk food. he seems to be quite mischievous, playing pranks often and trying to get access into places without permission, just for the fun of it. He gets quite annoyed when forced to do any physical work or complete tasks which take away from his interests.

Background[]

Jona was born in S.1191.

Since childhood, Jona has been attending special education for talented children at Epstein Foundation. This course is geared toward system engineering. Although Jona is naturally gifted, his grades suffer from his poor behavior.

Following a "prank" that ruined one of the Foundation's experiments and caused them to suffer severe losses, Jona left for Crossbell before he could be reprimanded, where he has been illegally occupying the terminal room of the Geofront until the Cult Incident in S.1204.

Trails from/to Zero and Azure[]

Jona lived in the terminal room, which served as his office to sell information and survived on pizzas he had delivered. He was very well aware that he was situated at the heart of the Orbal Network in Crossbell with access to documents regarding businesses and surrounding nations, and had to deal with another hacker, Kitty. He first met the Special Support Section when he was requested to send an e-mail in the name of Yin.

Jona was confident that the SSS would be unable to track him, as no one else had been able to. He failed to notice that Tio Plato was with the group, who was easily able locate him with her own skills. This in turn resulted in him being discovered, and he was worried that she would try to bring him back to the Foundation. He was relieved that she had no intention to do so, but was warned by Lloyd Bannings not to overdo it. Jona proceeded to give them a memory quartz, which Yin had instructed him to do should they find him.

Together with Tio, he returned to the Epstein Foundation headquarters in Leman. Jona worked hard to redeem himself at the foundation. In his absence, the terminal room had been taken over by Enforcer No. 0, Campanella, who had hacked into the system of the Orchis Tower at the time of the West Zemuria Trade Conference, which Jona had to restore the security measures. He installed the latest model of the terminal in the Orchis Tower itself, making it much harder to hack into.

During the Imperial occupation of Crossbell, Jona made himself useful by lending his skills to the resistance.

Trails of Cold Steel IV[]

Jona continued to operate inside Geofront. Despite his "treasonous" posts, the Imperial authorities were unable to trace him. He was in contact with Scherazard Harvey and looked after by Sully Atraid, who would occasionally give him healthy food and drinks, much to his annoyance.

After new Class VII returned to Crossbell to search for the Occult Point, Jona took notice of their arrival and sent an orbal mail to Louise, telling them to meet him at Geofront Block X. The group found it suspicious, but choose to investigate further, seeing that he was aware of their identities. His lack of stamina caused him to lag behind severely and he ended up tripping after a run-in with Heiyue, forcing Ash Carbide to carry him out. He was unappreciative of Ash's efforts, comparing it to being dragged around like luggage.

The day before the World War, Jona went to Mishelam Wonderland, where Tio and Jingo had him record a special reserve show of Mishy for them. He complained about having to record a child's mascot show, but was quickly scared into compliance after Tio threatened to leak his past onto the Orbal Network if he ruined her day.

A few minutes before the war began, Jona sent surveillance footage of the battlefield to key members of Mille Mirage, Radiant Wings and their allies and supporters in preparation for the coming war.

Jona attended the Imperial wedding.

Trails into Reverie[]

In the operation to liberate Crossbell from the remnants of Rufus' personal guard, Jona works on comms from a terminal in the Geofront. he gives access to the elevators after the guard had previously disabled them and gives updates on the guard's movements to the roof.

Jona remains working on the terminals, trying to locate the source of some new online communication trying to force its way onto the network. He laments the others' attempts to get him to eat more vegetables, insisting pizza and fizzy drinks are enough. he is invited to a party at the SSS headquarters where he gets fed up with Mireille and Randy's 'lover's quarrel'.

Afterwards, Jona helps with the combination of networks between international parties and gets excited at the thought of many companies opening branches in the building. After the takeover by Supreme Leader Rufus Albarea, Jona helps Tio behind the scenes and determines the site of the Reinford factory as the source of the Zauber Soldats with the help of the others.

He is amongst the individuals called into the Castle of Mirrors to investigate the terminal present there. He is later assisting at the medical college. During the final battle, Jona is present on the newly unveiled Arseille II, working on its bridge.

Character Notes[]

Trails of Cold Steel IV[]

Trails into Reverie[]

Jona Sacred Epstein Foundation A systems engineer for the Epstein Foundation. With talent and cockiness in equal measure, the one who can best reign him in is longtime friend Tio. With Tio

Jona and Tio flee to St. Ursula Medical College, later learning of a suspicious military factory site nearby that they believe warrants investigation.

Gallery[]

Trails from Zero[]

Trails to Azure[]

Trails of Cold Steel IV[]

Trails into Reverie[]

References[]

Characters Playable Lloyd Bannings - Elie MacDowell - Tio Plato - Randy Orlando - Wazy Hemisphere - Noel Seeker - Alex Dudley - Yin - Estelle Bright - Joshua Bright Major Alex Dudley - Arios MacLaine - Cecile Neues - Dieter Crois - Ernest Reis - Estelle Bright - Fran Seeker - Garcia Rossi - Grace Lynn - Guy Bannings - Henry MacDowell - Ian Grimwood - Joachim Guenter - Joshua Bright - KeA - Marconi - Mariabell Crois - Renne Hayworth - Rixia Mao - Sergei Lou - Yin - Zeit Minor Abbas - Bennet - Cao Lee - Chaco - Clarice Seeker - Colin Hayworth - Eugene - Harold Hayworth - Hartmann - Ilya Platiere - Imelda - Jona Sacred - Joerg Rosenberg - Kate - Kilika Rouran - Lau - Lechter Arundel - Michel - Mireille - Oscar - Pierre - Plie - Roberts - Shanshan - Shizuku MacLaine - Sonya Baelz - Sophia Hayworth - Sully Atraid - Theodor - Wald Wales - Wendy Locations Crossbell Ancient Battlefield (Sun Fort) - Armorica Village - Bellguard Gate - Crossbell Cathedral - East Crossbell Highway - Mainz (Mine) - Mainz Mountain Path - Mishelam (Mishelam Wonderland) - Moon Temple - Old Armorica Road - Rosenberg Studio - St. Ursula Medical College - Stargazer's Tower - Tangram Gate - Ursula Road - West Crossbell Highway Crossbell City Administrative District (CPD) - Back Alley (Revache & Co.) - Central Square (SSS - Times - Genten) - Downtown District - East Street - Entertainment District (Arc en Ciel) - Geofront (A Sector - B Sector) - Harbor District (IBC - Heiyue - CNS) - Residential District - Station Street (Station) - West Street Erebonia Garrelia Fortress Gameplay Terminology Bracer Guild - Crossbell Police Department - Crossbell Times - D∴G Cult - ENIGMA - Gnosis - Heiyue - Holy Beast - Orbment - Ouroboros - Revache - Red Constellation - Septian Church - Septium - Special Support Section - Zemurian Ore - Zephyr Mechanics Action Time Battle - Battle Evaluation - Bonding (Details) - Combat Mechanics - Combat Orbment - Combo Craft - Craft - Fishing - Orbal Art - Quartz - S-Craft - Status Effects - Support Craft - Clock Memories Lists Achievements - Armor - Books - Chests - Crafts - Enemies - Fish - Fishing Equipment - Fishing Spots - Orbal Arts - Quartz - Quests - Recipes - Rewards - Shops - Weapons - Credits Illustrations Types Character Artwork - Concept Art - Official Artwork - Screenshots - Visuals Music Albums Original Sound Track - Evolution Original Soundtrack - Super Arrange Songs Way of Life

Characters Playable Lloyd Bannings - Elie MacDowell - Tio Plato - Randy Orlando - Noel Seeker - Wazy Hemisphere - Rixia Mao - Alex Dudley - Arios MacLaine - Garcia Rossi Major Arianrhod - Campanella - Cecile Neues - Dieter Crois - F. Novartis - Fran Seeker - Grace Lynn - Guy Bannings - Henry MacDowell - Ian Grimwood - Jona Sacred - KeA - Mariabell Crois - Sergei Lou - Shirley Orlando - Shizuku MacLaine - Sigmund Orlando - Wald Wales - Zeit Minor Abbas - Bennet - Cao Lee - Chaco - Clarice Seeker - Colin Hayworth - Duke Cayenne - Ernest Reis - Estelle Bright - Garcia Rossi - Giliath Osborne - Harold Hayworth - Hartmann - Harvard Fisher - Ilya Platiere - Joerg Rosenberg - Joshua Bright - Julia Schwarz - Kate - Kevin Graham - Kilika Rouran - Klaudia von Auslese - Lau - Lechter Arundel - Marcel Nielsen - Michael Gideon - Michel - Mireille - Minneth - Mueller Vander - Olivert Reise Arnor - Oscar - Ozma Seeker - Renne Bright - Ries Argent - Roberts - Samuel Rocksmith - Shanshan - Sonya Baelz - Sophia Hayworth - Sully Atraid - Wendy - William Lakelord - Xin Lu Locations Crossbell Ancient Battlefield (Sun Fort) - Armorica Village - Bellguard Gate - Boathouse - Crossbell Cathedral - Crossbell Police Academy - East Crossbell Highway - Knox Forest - Knox Forest Road - Mainz (Mine - Old Mine) - Mainz Mountain Path - Mishelam (Mishelam Wonderland - Castle of Mirrors) - Moon Temple - Old Armorica Road - Rosenberg Studio - St. Ursula Medical College - Stargazer's Tower - Tangram Gate - Ursula Road - West Crossbell Highway - Wetlands - Azure Tree (Domain of Passion - Domain of Vanity - Domain of Fate - Domain of Penance - The Farthest End) - World of Zero/World of Ein Sof Crossbell City Administrative District (CPD) - Back Alley - Central Square (SSS - Times - Genten) - Downtown District - East Street - Entertainment District (Arc en Ciel) - Geofront (B Sector - C Sector - D Sector) - Harbor District (IBC - Heiyue - CNS) - Orchis Tower - Residential District - Station Street (Station) - West Street - Thaumaturgical Sector Erebonia Garrelia Fortress Calvard Altair (Altair Lodge) Gameplay Terminology Bracer Guild - Crossbell Times - Cryptid - D∴G Cult - ENIGMA - Heiyue - Holy Beast - Orbment - Ouroboros - Pleroma Grass - Red Constellation - Salt Pale - Sept-Terrion - Septian Church - Septium - Special Support Section - Stigma - Zemurian Ore - Zephyr Mechanics Action Time Battle - Battle Evaluation - Bonding (Details) - Burst - Combat Mechanics - Combat Orbment - Combo Craft - Craft - Fishing - Master Quartz - Orbal Art - Pom! Pom! Party! - Quartz - S-Craft - Status Effects - Support Craft - Clock Memories Lists Achievements - Armor - Books - Car Items - Chests - Crafts - Enemies - Fish - Fishing Equipment - Fishing Spots - Master Quartz - Orbal Arts - Quartz - Quests - Recipes - Rewards - Shops - Weapons - Trails in the Chest, Part 2 - Credits Illustrations Types Character Artwork - Concept Art - Official Artwork - Screenshots - Visuals Music Albums Original Sound Track - Evolution Original Soundtrack Songs "Aoi Kiseki" - "Aoki Negai" (EVO OP)

Characters Playable Rean Schwarzer (Valimar) - Alisa Reinford - Agate Crosner - Altina Orion - Angelica Rogner - Ash Carbide - Aurelia Le Guin - Celine - Crow Armbrust (Ordine) - Duvalie - Elie MacDowell - Elliot Craig - Emma Millstein - Ennea - Estelle Bright - Fie Claussell - Gaius Worzel - George Nome - Ines - Juna Crawford - Joshua Bright - Jusis Albarea - Kurt Vander - Laura S. Arseid - Leonidas - Lloyd Bannings - Machias Regnitz - Musse Egret - Renne Bright - Randy Orlando - Roselia - Sara Valestein - Severing Chains Kreuger - Tio Plato - Tita Russell - Toval Randonneur - Victor S. Arseid - Vita Clotilde - Xeno Major* Alfin Reise Arnor* - Arianrhod (Argreion) - Black Alberich - Bleublanc - Campanella - Carl Regnitz - Cassius Bright - Cedric Reise Arnor (Testa-Rossa) - Claire Rieveldt* - Elise Schwarzer* - Fernand Hyarms - G. Schmidt - Gilbert Stein - Giliath Osborne (Ishmelga & the Great One) - Irina Reinford - KeA Bannings* - Klaudia von Auslese - Lechter Arundel* - Michael Irving - Mariabell Crois - McBurn - Millium Orion* - Mueller Vander - Olivert Reise Arnor* - Rosine - Rufus Albarea (El-Prado) - Rutger Claussell (Zector) - Scherazard Harvey* - Shirley Orlando - Thomas Lysander - Towa Herschel* - Vandyck - Wallace Bardias Minor Ada Grant - Alan - Albert von Bartholomeus - Annabelle - Anton - Aurier Vander - Becky - Bennet - Beryl - Bridget - Cao Lee - Cecile Neues - Celestin - Chaco - Clarice Seeker - Cody MacMillan - Crawford Family - Diana - Dorothee - Edel - Emily - Eugent Reise Arnor III - Ferris Florald - Fiona Craig - Franky - Fritz Geithner - Freddy - Gareth - Grace Lynn - Gustaf - Gwyn Reinford - Herschel Family - Hugo Kleist - Jessica Schleiden - Jingo - Jona Sacred - Josette Capua - Kaela MacMillan - Kai - Kairi - Kate - Kenneth Lakelord - Lau - Leonora - Linde - Lucy Seiland - Louise - Marcel Nielsen - Maya - Miguel - Mint - Munk - Neithardt - Olaf Craig - Oscar - Pablo - Patrick T. Hyarms - Patiry - Priscilla Reise Arnor - Reiner - Rex - Samuel Rocksmith - Sandy - Shanshan - Sully Atraid - Tatiana - Theresia - Tilia - Valerie - Vincent Florald - Vivi - Wayne - Wendy - Wilhelm Ballad - Xin Lu - Zechs Vander Locations - Erebonia Imperial Government controlled Heimdallr Lamare Province Alster - Avon Hills - Bryonia Island (Sol Shrine) - Leeves - Milsante (Lake Gala) - Ordis - Osgiliath Basin (Tuatha de Danann) - Raquel Sutherland Province Eryn (Eerie Woods - Saint-Gral Labyrinth) - Hamel - Isthmia Great Forest - Parm - Saint-Arkh Crossbell Province Crossbell City - Mishelam - St. Ursula Medical College Locations - Other Unknown Black Workshop - Celestial Globe Gameplay Terminology Ark Rouge - Artifact - Awakener - Black Records - Black Workshop - Class VII - Crossbell Times - Cryptid - D∴G Cult - Divine Knight - Dominion - Erebonian Curse - Gnomes - Great One - Great Twilight Plan - Great War - Heiyue - Hercules - Hexen Clan - Holy Beast - Lost Zem - Nidhoggr - Northern Jaegers - Northern War - Orbment - Order of the Moonlight Horse - Ouroboros - Panzer Soldat - Phantasmal Blaze Plan - Pleroma Grass - Red Constellation - Reformist Faction - Round of Seven - Salt Pale - Sept-Terrion - Septian Church - Septium - Seventy-Seven Devils - Silver Whales - The Gardens - War of the Lions - Weissland Army - Zauber Soldat - Zephyr Mechanics Abnormal Status - Battle Order Bonus - Bonding (Details) - Brave Order - Combat Link - Combat Orbment - Craft - Enhanced - Master Quartz - Orbal Art - Pom! Pom! Party! - Quartz - S-Craft - Vantage Masters Lists Books - Brave Orders - Character Profiles - Chests - Crafts - Credits - Enemies - EX Orbs - Fish - Master Quartz - Orbal Arts - Quartz - Quests - Recipes - Trophies - Weapons Illustrations Types Character Artwork - Concept Art - Key Visuals - Official Artwork - Screenshots - Sen no Kiseki IV Official Visual Collection Music Albums Sen no Kiseki IV -The End of Saga- Original Soundtrack Songs "Ashita e no Kiseki" - "Ai no Uta"