Baldacchino History, Family Crest & Coats of Arms

Origins Available:

Italy

The distinguished surname Baldacchino can be traced back to the ancient and beautiful region of Lombardy. Although people were originally known only by a single name, it became necessary for people to adopt a second name to identify themselves as populations grew and travel became more frequent. The process of adopting fixed hereditary surnames was not complete until the modern era, but the use of hereditary family names in Italy began in the 10th and 11th centuries. Italian hereditary surnames were developed according to fairly general principles and they were characterized by a profusion of derivatives coined from given names. The most common type of family name found in the region of Lombardy is the patronymic surname, which is derived from the father's given name. During the Middle Ages, Italians adopted the patronymic system of name-making because it perfectly complemented the prevailing Feudal System. In Italy the popularity of patronymic type of surname is also due to the fact that during the Christian era, people often named their children after saints and biblical figures. The surname Baldacchino came from the Germanic word baltha, which means gallant, bold.

Early Origins of the Baldacchino family

The surname Baldacchino was first found in the city of Cremona, which lies just south of Milan. The earliest records of the family lie here with the Baldesio family in the 8th century.

Early History of the Baldacchino family

This web page shows only a small excerpt of our Baldacchino research. The years 1160, 1281, 1296, 1298, 1343, 1507, 1550, 1553, 1579, 1585, 1624, 1650, 1683, 1695 and 1703 are included under the topic Early Baldacchino History in all our PDF Extended History products and printed products wherever possible.

Baldacchino Spelling Variations

Enormous variation in spelling and form characterizes those Italian names that originated in the medieval era. This is caused by two main factors: regional tradition, and inaccuracies in the recording process. Before the last few hundred years, scribes spelled names according to their sounds. Spelling variations were the unsurprising result. The variations of Baldacchino include Baldo, Baldi, Baudi, Baudo, Bauda, De Baudi, Debaudi, Baldelli, Baldella, Baldetti, Balde, Baldini, Baldin, Baldinotti, Balducci, Baldocci, Baldoni, Baldizzone, Baldacchi, Baldaco, Baldacchino, Baldecchi, Baldacci, Baldassi, Baldasso, Baldas, Baldassini, Baldasseroni, Baldassarini, Baldana, BaldaChina, Baldassin, Baldazzi, Baldani, Baldan, Baldaro, Baldari, Baldesi, Baldrati, Baldironi, Baudino, Baudinelli, Bauduccio, Baudone, Baudizzone, Baudacci, Baudassi, Baudasso and many more.

Early Notables of the Baldacchino family

Prominent among bearers of this family in early times was Rinaldo Baldacchini in Cortona in 1160, who owned much land and many castles; his son Filippo d' Antonio Baldacchini was a count in a Papal castle; Cino Baldi of Novara was a famous religious man in 1296 and Lapo Baldi took his position and status in 1298; Percivalle Baldissone was ambassador to Pope Martino IV in 1281 in Genoa. A soldier of the Baldacchino lineage at this time was Pace Baldassino, who lived in Gubbio in 950. Also from this family in Gubbio was Baldoino Baldassini who was a count, San...

Another 180 words (13 lines of text) are included under the topic Early Baldacchino Notables in all our PDF Extended History products and printed products wherever possible.

Baldacchino Ranking

In France, the name Baldacchino is the 8,856th most popular surname with an estimated 500 - 1,000 people with that name. 1

Baldacchino migration to the United States +

The records on immigrants and ships' passengers show a number of people bearing the name Baldacchino:

Baldacchino Settlers in United States in the 20th Century

James Baldacchino, aged 43, originally from Malta, arrived in New York in 1919 aboard the ship "Giuseppe Verdi" from Genoa, Italy 2

Vincenzo Baldacchino, aged 30, originally from Camastra, Italy, arrived in New York in 1919 aboard the ship "America" from Napoli, Italy 2

Giuseppe Baldacchino, aged 31, originally from Milano, Italy, arrived in New York City, New York in 1919 aboard the ship "Dante Alighieri" from Genoa, Italy 2

Contemporary Notables of the name Baldacchino (post 1700) +

Joseph Baldacchino (1894-1974), Maltese archaeologist

Godfrey Baldacchino (b. 1960), Maltese-Canadian social scientist

Francis Baldacchino (1937-2009), Kenyan Roman Catholic bishop

Ryan Lee Baldacchino (b. 1981), English professional footballer

Peter Baldacchino (b. 1960), Maltese-born Catholic bishop in the United States

Clifford Gatt Baldacchino (b. 1988), Maltese international footballer

Related Stories +

Citations +

http://www.journaldesfemmes.com/nom-de-famille/nom/

Ellis Island Search retrieved 15th November 2022. Retrieved from https://heritage.statueofliberty.org/passenger-result