But if things go to plan it could be the name on everyone's lips over the next couple of years.

The 19-year-old winger earned some rave reviews last season after a string of impressive performances for Blackburn Rovers Under 19s.

And now the Leicester-born teenager plans to make his mark at senior level during the next 10 months.

But first, Baldacchino has some unfinished business with Rovers' Youth set-up.

Too old to play for the club's Academy Under 19s, he does however qualify for the Jersey International tournament.

And before he graduates to the senior squad, he wants to leave with a winners medal.

"It's a tournament everyone is really looking forward to because there's some good teams out there," said Baldacchino. "As players, we all want to play against the best young teams around and the likes of Manchester United and Chelsea certainly fit into that category."

However, what Baldacchino is really relishing is the chance to test himself against foreign opposition.

The whispey winger has had to watch from the sidelines while Rovers Under 19s have played a string of top friendlies against international opposition like Boca Juniors and Rosenborg over the summer.

But now he is looking forward to pitting his wits against Sporting Lisbon and Benfica in Jersey.

"It's great experience playing against foreign opposition because they play a different style to what we are normally used to," said Baldacchino.

During the summer, Baldacchino was one of three players from the Academy who were invited to go on the club's pre-season tour of Germany.

And now he's had a taste of the big time, he's keen to sample more.

"I think I did okay in the matches I played and the chance to train with the first team on a daily basis was fantastic.

"Obviously, first team football is a lot faster and you need to sample playing at that standard to get used to it.

"But I haven't set myself any specific targets as such.

"Hopefully, I'll get some more opportunities to play in the reserves this season and if I play well then I'll see where I go from there.

"But the Academy here is the best I've seen and there's plenty of good young players about."