Tudástár

Wikipedia (angol)

>

Barry B. Longyear (born May 12, 1942) is an American author who resides in New Sharon, Maine.

Career

David Gerrold

Barry B. Longyear: Enemy Mine · Barry B. Longyear: The Enemy Papers

Rebecca Roanhorse

The novella helped Longyear to win the John W. Campbell Award for Best New Writer in 1980. He was the only writer to win the Hugo, Nebula, and Campbell during the same year until this was matched by Rebecca Roanhorse in 2018.

He also wrote the series Circus World and Infinity Hold, several stand-alone novels, numerous short stories, and two books for the Alien Nation novelisation series. His trilogy "Infinity Hold", "Kill All the Lawyers", and "Keep the Law", was released during 2002 in a single paperback volume titled Infinity Hold 3 by the Author's Guild in a Backinprint.com edition. His recent Jaggers & Shad mystery stories, featuring two detectives in the Artificial Beings Crimes Division (Devon Office) are set mostly in Exeter and the surrounding Devon countryside and villages. The first of the tales, The Good Kill won the Analog AnLab award for Best Novella in 2006 and Murder in Parliament Street won the same award for 2007. The Hook won the 2021 Prometheus Award.

The Circus World series chronicles the adventures of a space-going circus troupe whose spaceship crashes, marooning them on a deserted planet without contact with the outside world.

The Infinity Hold series addresses the question of what type of society would develop from a group of violent convicts dumped on a new planet without police or government.

Saint Mary Blue is a novel about the course of treatment of a man who has substance abuse and mental health issues, while resident in a treatment facility.

The God Box is a stand-alone fantasy novel with a protagonist who finds himself the keeper of a small wooden box that provides cryptic guidance from the gods. He must stay ahead of a deadly manhunt and play his role in an ancient prophecy. The box, if asked, takes what he does not need, and gives him what he does need—but what he needs, and what he thinks he needs are usually very different. This lends itself to humorous and unexpected situations.

Longyear has also written two mystery series, the Joe Torio mysteries (2011) and "Rope Paper Scissors" (2013).

Published works

Stand-alone novels

Enemy Mine series

Barry B. Longyear: Enemy Mine · Barry B. Longyear: The Enemy Papers

Infinity Hold series

Circus World series

Recovery works

Writing instruction

Short story collections

External links