Original title: Enemy mine.

Title of this edition: Enemy mine.

Author: Barry B. Longyear and David Gerrold

Gender: Fantasy / Science Ficction.

Saga: Enemy mine.

Editorial: Charter Books.

Edition year: 1, 1985.

Prizes: …

Synopsis [Warning: Spoiler]: There is war between Humans and Dracs about respective borders. One human, Davidge and one Drac, Jeriba Shigan, both soldiers, are stuck marooned in a desert planet. Their only way of surviving is forgetting about the war, becoming friends and learning from each other. Since the Drac only have one sex, one individual can gave birth at any moment… and that is what happens to Jeriba Shigan before he dies. Davidge, alone in the planet with a young Drac has to survive and pass his knowledge to the Drac. Most important, if they manage to scape from the planet, he is in charge of going to the high council in Draco planet and present the young Drac. Doing this is the only way of the young Drac to become a citizen, otherwise he will be put aside.

Eventually the war ends, Davidge is rescued and the Drac gets enslaved and later sent to Draco as a mental ill Drac. When Davidge manages to go back to Draco, he has to overcome the Drac society which stands on honour codes to be able to rescue the Drac and present him as a citizen.

Personal Review: This novel is famous for the film adaptation “Enemy mine” with Dennis Quaid as main character. But is the first novel of a series written by Barry B. Longyear. Before getting into the book, let’s compare it with the movie and let’s start saying that I watch the film years back and I kind of like it. It’s not as funny as The last Starfighter or Explorers but it was better than non science fiction movies.

After reading the book I found that the film changed completely the end of the book, to have action in the movie. While in the book is a series of legal discussions at Draco, in the movie is a fight against the people that have enslaved the young Drac. Why they decide to do that? Because there is no way this book can be turned into a science fiction/action movie. The book is about self discovery, about learning from other people and understand their point of view, and the way it does it is into forcing two enemies to cooperate. There have been many movies about similar topic, but they focus things in different way. I would say the problem is they try to make it into funny action science fiction movies like most of the science fiction of the 80’s and this plot needs to be treated seriously.

The whole argument spins around the Talman book of the Drac and his prophet Shizumaat… and Mickey Mouse from earth. The Talman is a very important book that every Drac has to carry and from all philosophy comes from… Mickey Mouse is the answer from Davidge to what is the profphct from earth. Personally I think it’s not possible for a galactic civilization to stick to one single phylosophy, there must be different cultures inside of it, so they book for me it’s a little bit artificial. But despite of that, I would say that having the book is a good starting point because it helps the story. It helps the Drac to become a teacher for the human, it helps the human to have something to do, and it helps the end of the story because it allows the human to have a way of earning money (by translating the book) to get to the Draco planet.

The part I like the most from the book is that the Drac language has to be singed, so the same word has different meaning depending on your pronunciation. I don’t know if that feature is used by any human language, but I would say it is something that can be, so it’s a good point for the book.

Now, my critic. Despite the book is well written and easy to read, it is not good. There is no science fiction, just to different characters stranded somewhere, with the interesting point that one of them gives birth. My point here is that the whole story can be completely told as human beings in a desert island and you will not loose anything from the original story…. so the science fiction is not necessary here. It’s part of the background, but not necessary. That is why I don’t like the book. As a story it is good, as science fiction is bad.