Barry B. Longyear - The Enemy Papers (White Wolf 1998)

Barry B. Longyear may not be as famous as many other US science fiction writers. Some may remember Enemy Mine, a movie that was based on his short story of the same name.

As it happens, Longyear has the same problem with that movie as Stephen King reputedly had with the movie version of Shining - the main theme of the story is different. This book is apparently Longyear's final say about these stories in the form he likes it.

Dracs are reptile-like aliens, parthenogenetic hermaphrodites that could conceive by themselves. Their lifespan is shorter than that of humans and their metabolism is only slightly different. Psychologically speaking they are completely human with the full range of human emotions from prejudice to compassion.

First chapters of the book include snippets from Talman, the holy book of the dracs. Talman tells the history or Dracs in their original homeworld and the story of the first empire and the war that built it. Talman's main prophet Shizumaat is more concerned about problem-solving and constantly changing rules of the world than spirituality.

All the three short stories of the book are linked to the interstellar war between humans and dracs. In the original Enemy Mine, human pilot Willis Dawidge and drac pilot Jeriba Shigaan shoot each other down, crash onto the same planet and have to cooperate to survive. No space pirates in this "writer's cut".

War continues. In The Tomorrow Testament human infantry captain Joanne Nicole becomes a prisoner of war and loses her sight when she saves drac children from a burning building. Drac aristocrat takes her to its home and tries to get her help in trying to stop the war - thought not in a way the most bloodthirsty in the either side would favour.

By the time of The Last Enemy, the interstellar war has been over for thirty years but dracs and humans on the planet Amadeen still wage genocidal war against each other. Drac youngster Yazi Ro escapes through ineffective planetary blockade, visits Dawidge and even the homeworld of scheming Timan species and comes back as a member of a different kind of peacekeeping force.

Stories do include two plot points that I usually dislike; Mind Control As A Solution and Third Party Is To Blame/i>. However, despite of the space opera background, these tales are about people - human and drac - not about humongous weapon systems, climactic space battles or planetary bombardments. They may also be heartrending, if you are prepared to like the characters.

lj book reviews

The Enemy Papers

Barry B. Longyear

what are you reading?.

make your own book badge | read lj reviews of this book

Current Mood: enthralled