While the upcoming Ghostbusters reboot is a complete overhaul on the beloved comedy franchise, most of the main actors involved in the original series – Bill Murray, Dan Aykroyd, Sigourney Weaver and Ernie Hudson – will appear in new cameo roles. Noticeably absent from that list, however, is Rick Moranis, who played Louis Tully in the original film and its sequel. After it was revealed that Moranis wouldn’t appear in the reboot, the uproar over his absence was so vocal that Moranis granted a rare interview to admit that the new Ghostbusters production reached out to him, but the actor turned them down.

“I wish them well. I hope it’s terrific. But it just makes no sense to me. Why would I do just one day of shooting on something I did 30 years ago,” Moranis told The Hollywood Reporter of the reboot. As is well known among fans who grew up with Ghostbusters, Honey I Shrunk the Kids or Little Giants, Moranis largely left the movie industry in 1997 following the death of his wife to breast cancer. The actor retreated from starring roles to raise his children out of the spotlight, but he continued to do voice work for animated films over the past two decades.

Trending

With his children grown up, Moranis is once again considering reappearing in front of the camera. However, the Ghostbusters reboot wasn’t the right project to make his return. “I took a break, which turned into a longer break,” he says. “But I’m interested in anything that I would find interesting. I still get the occasional query about a film or television role and as soon as one comes along that piques my interest, I’ll probably do it. [But Ghostbusters] didn’t appeal to me.

“It’s hard to come up with original material,” Moranis continued. “Occasionally, they get it right or else they wouldn’t attempt to do these things. I’m surprised that Disney hasn’t done Honey, I Shrunk the Grandkids. But I’m happy with the things I said yes to, and I’m very happy with the many things I’ve said no to. Yes, I am picky, and I’ll continue to be picky. Picky has worked for me.”