The right Portuguese boy name has the potential to influence your son’s lifelong journey. Every Brazilian Portuguese family has one or two traditional names scattered among uncles, but we guarantee you haven’t heard the unique and trendy options we’ve discovered.

A first name connects your son to the strong roots of his family tree and culture. As you dream of the days that you will hold him and whisper into his ears wishes for a bright future, this gentle verbal embrace also honors the past and paints a vivid picture of the patriarchs who came before him.

Gender

Sort by

Style

Search

🕵️ No results found. Clear the Filters?

105 Most Popular Portuguese Names for Boys

A detailed list just in time to choose passionate and inspiring Portuguese boy names.

Abel

A newborn son will be a breath of fresh air into your family and allow you to inhale the winds of prosperity and change. The name originates from the biblical story of Cain and Abel and is a popular Portuguese male name for devout families.

Origin: Hebrew

Meaning: Breath, Vapor

Pronunciation: a-BEHL

Namesakes: Abel Salazar, a Portuguese physician, lecturer, researcher, writer, and painter.

Abilio

With the name Abilio your son will ground your family with his intelligence and skills. Abilio is dominant in many different trades and sectors, allowing your future cool guy to have many role models to look up to.

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: Skillful, Expert

Pronunciation: u-BEE-lyoo

Variations: Abele, Abelia

Namesakes: Abílio Brandão, an Olympic Portuguese sports shooter. Abílio Fernandes, a Portuguese botanist, and taxonomist. Abílio Neves dos Reis, a Brazilian soccer player.

Abrahan

Abraham is a biblical Brazilian-American choice for your newborn son. This Portuguese name for boys suits a devout family that wishes to honor previous patriarchs. It’s common for people to have two given names in Portuguese culture, and Abrahan is an excellent choice to lead your son’s title.

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: Father of a powerful nation

Pronunciation: a-bra-AM

Variations: Abraham

Namesakes: Abraham Ruíz Merchant, a Mexican soccer player for Puebla F.C. Premier. Abraham Velázquez Iribe, a Mexican politician. Abrahan Alfonso Gavilán, a Cuban volleyball player.

Adão

This Portuguese boy’s name connects with the earth and nature. It’s an excellent choice for families who enjoy trips into the mountains or prioritize spending time outdoors. Adão reflects a modern variation of the Hebrew name Adam and will easily blend your child among his peers.

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: Man of the earth

Pronunciation: AHD-AW

Variations: Adam

Namesakes: Carlos Manuel Pereira Pinto, referred to as Adão by his fans, a Portuguese central mid-field soccer player. Eurípedes Adão Amoreirinha, a Portuguese soccer player on F.C. Penafiel. Adão Iturrusgarai, a Brazilian cartoonist.

Afonso

While parents will do everything to protect their children, the Portuguese male name Afonso will also keep your son aware and alert of his surroundings. A battle is not only in the physical sense, and your modern Brazilian son will be prepared to battle with his brain or wit if necessary.

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: Ready for battle

Pronunciation: uh-fawn-soo

Variations: Alfons, Alphonse,Alfonso, Afonso,Alfonse

Namesakes: Afonso Alves, a Brazilian soccer player. Nadir Afonso Rodrigues, a Portuguese geometric abstractionist painter. Zeca Afonso (José Manuel Cerqueira Afonso dos Santos), a Portuguese folk and political musician.

Popularity: In 2020, Afonso was ranked #15 among popular Portuguese boy names in Brazil.

Agostinho

Every parent exalts and sings their son’s praises the day they’re born. Continue to rejoice by choosing the Portuguese male name Agostinho. Encourage your son to examine all sides of a discussion and opinion before voicing his thoughts to a crowd.

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: Exalted

Pronunciation: aw-GUS-tin

Variations: Augustus, Augustine

Namesakes: Agostinho da Silva, a Portuguese philosopher, essayist, and writer. Joaquim Agostinho, a Portuguese professional bicycle racer. José Maria de Santo Agostinho, a Brazilian mystic and religious leader of the countryside community rebels during the “Contestado War ” of 1912–16.

Alberto

A son named Alberto will be a bright spark of joy in any room or community he enters. While your newborn son will continuously light up your life, when anyone meets him, they will automatically be drawn to his bright and bubbly personality.

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: Bright, noble

Pronunciation: ahl-BER-toh

Variations: Adalberto

Namesakes: Alberto Bello, an Argentinian actor recognized for his role in Madam Bovary. Alberto Cavalcanti, a WW2 Brazilian film producer, and director. Alberto Santos Dumont, a Brazilian aeronaut, sportsman, and inventor who built and flew the first gasoline-powered dirigible or blimp in 1901.

Aleixo

A son named Aleixo will defend his friends and family for all of his days. It will be a simple choice for him to make sure those around him are safe and that he accommodates or stands up for those less fortunate than himself.

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: Defender

Pronunciation: a-LAY-shoo

Variations: Alexis

Namesakes: Aleixo de Abreu, a Portuguese physician and tropical pathologist whose text Treatise on the Seven Diseases was the first novel published on tropical medicine. Pedro Aleixo, elected Vice-President of Brazil from 1967 to 1969.

Popularity: In 2020, Alexis was ranked #37 in Brazil among popular baby boy names.

Alexandre

Choosing Alexandre is a powerful masculine name for your newborn. If this is your first child, it’s an excellent pick as he will be a protector of his siblings.

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: Defender of mankind

Pronunciation: a-leh-SHUN-dree

Variations: Alexander

Namesakes: Alexandre Herculano de Carvalho e Araújo, a historical writer, poet, journalist, historian, and politician. Alexandre Sarnes Negrão, a Brazilian race car driver whose fans call Xandinho. Alexandre de Serpa Pinto, Portuguese explorer of Southern Africa.

Popularity: In 2020, Alexandre was a top 10 pick among Portuguese boy names. It ranked #8 in Brazil and remains popular every year.

Aloisio

If you and your partner have waited a long time for your boy, Aloisio is the perfect Portuguese boy name to praise your son’s fighting spirit. While our children begin as tiny miracles, we are forever impressed at their sheer strength and resilience as infants.

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: Famous fighter

Pronunciation: a-loi-se-oh

Variations: Aloysio

Namesakes: Aloísio Chulapa, a beloved Brazilian soccer player whose career ended after a freak accident on the field when he lost consciousness. Aloísio da Silva Filho, a Brazilian goalkeeper for Potiguar de Mossoró.

Alvaro

Encourage your newborn son to protect anything around him with this strong and masculine Portuguese boy name. Álvaro Siza’s best-known works are located in his hometown of Porto, Portugal. They include the Boa Nova Tea House and the Faculty of Architecture. Alvaro is a creative and unique choice for Brazilian-American families who want to show their heritage with their son’s name.

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: Protector of all.

Pronunciation: AHL-vah-ro

Namesakes: Álvaro Siza, a Portuguese architect with buildings across Europe and Asia, known for designing The Serralves Museum of Contemporary Art.

Anacleto

Every Portuguese boy usually grows into a man that loves soccer or football. In São Caetano do Sul, São Paulo, in Brazil, your son can hear his name chanted by 100’s of fans as they enter the Estádio Anacleto Campanella football stadium.

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: One who is called back

Pronunciation: a-na-KLEH-to

Namesakes: José Anacleto Montt Goyenechean, a Chilean politician and lawyer who served as an elected Member of Santiago Parliament from 1852 to 1855. Francisco Anacleto Louca, a Portuguese economist and politician with novels published in Portuguese and Chinese.

André

This trendy and strong Portuguese boy’s name makes parents think of creative entertainers and famous soccer players. Watching your newborn grow into an energetic young boy, André will sing from your lips as you praise him for multiple accomplishments.

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: Brave

Pronunciation: AHN-dray

Variations: Andrew, Andreas, Andrés

Namesakes: André de Gouveia, a Portuguese humanist and pedagogue. André Luíz Alves Santos, a Brazilian soccer player and midfielder for FC Seoul. André Trindade da Costa Neto, a Brazilian soccer player, currently registered as a midfielder for Fluminense.

Popularity: In 2010, André was in the top 100 boys’ names in Rhode Island State in the U.S.

Anselmo

Every parent prays for their child to be protected, and your will Anselmo will certainly be watched over day and night. This Portuguese male name is strong and, even though traditional, remains modern in 2022.

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: Divine protection

Pronunciation: an-SEHL-mo

Namesakes: Anselmo Fernandez, a Portuguese architect, and football manager. Anselmo Aieta, an Argentine bandoneon musician, composer and actor. Vic Anselmo, a Latvian singer-songwriter.

António

In your eyes, everything your son does is worthy of praise, so why not choose a name that will also encourage people to give him compliments. António is also a name popular in romantic languages and will find your son beloved by many.

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: Worthy of praise

Pronunciation: un-TO-nyoo

Variations: Anthony

Namesakes: Antonio di Benedetto, an Argentinian writer who published novels, magazine columns, and short stories during his career. Antonio Cermeño, a two-time world champion Venezuelan boxer. António Maria de Mello Breyner Félix da Costa, a Portuguese race car driver and 2019-20 Formula E champion.

Popularity: In 2021, António was the 12th most popular boy’s name in Brazil.

Armando

With this Portuguese name for boys, your son will be fearless and brave. Armando resonates with inner strength and will guide your son in potential opportunities to make a change.

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: Soldier

Pronunciation: ar-MAN-do

Namesakes: Armando Becker, a Venezuelan basketball player on the Venezuelan national team who competed at the 1990 FIBA World Championships. Armando Christian Pérez, the professional entertainer known as “Pitbull.”

Artur

Artur will encourage your son to stand up straight and tall. He will not back down and will love his family and friends ferociously like a bear. This Portuguese boy’s name remains popular over time and is a variation of Arthur.

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: Bear-like

Pronunciation: ur-TOOR

Variations: Arthur

Namesakes: Artur Sérgio Batista de Souza, a Brazilian soccer player who plays left-back for Goiás and whose fans call Artur.

Popularity: In 2021, Artur ranked #48 among popular boys’ names in Brazil.

Badreddine

Badreddine is a unique choice for your son in a Portuguese community. It is growing in popularity due to the diverse range of athletes in Brazil and Portugal. With a son named Badreddine, you will always find your way home, and the sky will never be dark again.

Origin: Morocco

Meaning: Full moon

Pronunciation: ba-dre-deen

Namesakes: Badreddine Mouelhi, a soccer player who plays midfield for ES Tunis.

Popularity: In 2021, Badreddine was in Brazil’s top 100 popular boys’ names and ranked #66 on the list.

Baltasar

Choose Baltasar for your future Brazilian warrior and watch as he protects his father and anyone else near your home and kingdom. Balthasar belongs to several minor characters found in William Shakespeare’s plays, including Romeo & Juliette, The Merchant of Venice, and The Comedy of Errors.

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: God protects the king

Pronunciation: bal-ta-SAR

Variations: Balthazar, Balthasar, Balthassar, Baltazar

Namesakes: Baltazar Maria de Morais Júnior, a retired striker Brazilian soccer player.

Benedito

A newborn son is a blessing for every family, and with the Portuguese male name Benedito, your community will spread the good news. Any child is a miracle, but Benedito is also a great choice for a second-born son or your final baby.

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: Blessed

Pronunciation: be-neh-dee-toh

Variations: Benedict

Namesakes: João Paulo Feliciano Neves Benedito, a retired Portuguese futsal player who played goalkeeper for Sporting CP, Playas de Castellón. Pope Benedict XVI, also known as Benedito XVI by his devout Portuguese followers, served the church from 2005 to 2013. Benedito Calixto de Jesus, a Brazilian painter.

Bernardo

While a newborn son can add one more animal to the zoo of your household, you should never lose sight of the important future this baby represents. Teach baby Bernardo strength and patience, and he will emulate the quiet and thoughtful nature of the heroic bear.

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: Strong as a bear

Pronunciation: behr-NAR-dho

Variations: Bernhard

Namesakes: Bernardo Guimarães, a Brazilian poet and novelist. Bernardo Fernandes da Silva Junior, a Brazilian soccer player and son of Bernardo Fernandes da Silva, also an iconic Brazilian soccer player.

Bonifacio

Bonifacio is a historical Portuguese boy’s name, no longer a popular choice unless passed down through generations. Bonifacio carries the promise of a bright and prosperous future that your family continues working towards every day.

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: The promise of a good fate

Pronunciation: bo-nee-FA-syo

Namesakes: Bonifacio del Carril, an Argentinian writer, and lawyer who also held the position of Foreign Minister in 1962. José Bonifácio the Younger, a French-born Brazilian poet, teacher, and senator.

Bruno

This trendy Portuguese boy name is recognized due to musical artist Bruno Mars. The pop singer’s full legal name is Peter Gene Hernandez, and he has been lighting up soundwaves since 2004.

Origin: German

Meaning: Brown

Pronunciation: BROO-noo

Namesakes: Bruno Bonifacio, a Brazilian racing driver. Bruno Caboclo, a Brazilian basketball player. Bruno Campos, a Brazilian actor, recognized for his role in the sitcom Nip/Tuck as Dr. Quentin Costa.

Popularity: In 2021, Bruno was in Brazil’s top 100 popular boys’ names, where it ranked #53. It’s also in the top 100 lists of the United States, Canada, and Europe.

Caetano

In Latin, Caetano is similar to Cajetan, and you will find variations of this name throughout the romantic languages and Europe. Caetano suits a newborn baby boy swaddled in the fabrics of his family’s love and culture.

Origin: Italian

Meaning: Refers to a resident from Caieta, a region in Italy

Pronunciation: ca-eh-TA-no

Namesakes: Caetano Emanuel Viana Teles Veloso, a Brazilian composer, and singer known for his activity in the Tropicalismo movement. Caetano Prósperi Calil, a Brazilian soccer player drafted to AC Siena.

Carlos

Every family hopes they can make their children’s dreams come true, and your son will grow into a free man as long he continues to speak his truth. His namesake, Carlos Castro, was best known for coming out on public television in the 90s.

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: Freeman

Pronunciation: KAR-loos

Variations: Carl, Karlos

Namesakes: Carlos Caridad-Montero, a Venezuelan film director. Carlos Castro, a Portuguese journalist and television personality.

Casimiro

Casimiro is a strong force among inspiring Portuguese male names. Feel the light and love a newborn son brings into your home. You will be amazed at everything he does for the rest of his life.

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: Bringer of peace

Pronunciation: ka-see-MEE-roh

Namesakes: Casimiro de Abreu, a Brazilian poet, novelist, and playwright known internationally for the poem Meus oito anos. Casimiro de Oliveira, a Portuguese race car driver.

Celestino

In Latin communities, Celestino is a popular given name and surname. A newborn son looks and feels heavenly, and parents feel supernatural holding their baby for the first time. Celestino is a Portuguese male name that matches a baby’s magic tingles up your arms.

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: Heavenly

Pronunciation: seh-lehs-TEE-no

Variations: Celio

Namesakes: Celestino Caballero, a professional boxer from Panama. Celestino Cavedoni, an Italian ecclesiastic, archæologist, and numismatist. Celestino Corbacho, a Spanish politician who held the Minister of Labor and Immigration position.

Celso

A son named Celso will join the noble and proud patriarchs that came before and share his family’s passion for their heritage. Latin-American communities teach their children to be proud of their roots and ancestry, and Celso will encourage your son to be proud of his lineage every day.

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: Noble, proud

Pronunciation: SEHL-so

Namesakes: Afonso Celso, a Brazilian politician and the last Prime Minister of the Empire of Brazil. Zé Celso, also known as José Celso Martinez Corrêa was a Brazilian actor, director, and playwright. Celso Murilo, a Brazilian musician, composer, and arranger.

Cesar

If your family shares this genetic trait of having a thick head of hair, the Portuguese male name Cesar is a handsome match. Whether your son is blessed with thick curls on his head or long thick eyelashes, he will be smothered with love and affection every day of his life.

Origin: Spanish

Meaning: Thick head of hair

Pronunciation: SEH-zukh

Namesakes: César Batiz, a Venezuelan investigative journalist. César Augusto Soares dos Reis Ribela, a Brazilian goalkeeper for Esporte Clube Juventude.

Popularity: In 2021, Cesar was Brazil’s 45th most popular baby boy name.

Clemente

While you raise your son to be strong, it’s important to teach him to be gentle and merciful. Clemente is a son that will be tender to anyone he gives his heart to in the future.

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: Gentle, merciful

Pronunciation: kleh-MEHN-chee

Namesakes: Clemente Álvarez, a Venezuelan baseball player signed to the Philadelphia Phillies in 2000. Clemente Isnard, a Brazilian Catholic bishop in the Roman Catholic Church until his death in 2011.

Cosme

Cosme is a Portuguese boy’s name that will remind you that everything is falling into place. Be prepared to hear it chanted as soon as Spanish goalkeeper José Sirvent Bas steps on the field. All his fans love to call him by this nickname and get the thrill of their lives watching him keep the scoreboard.

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: Order

Pronunciation: KOZ-meh

Variations: Cosmé

Namesakes: Cosme Damião, a Portuguese football player and coach. Cosme Delgado, a Portuguese Renaissance composer at the Cathedral of Évora.

Cristiano

The most iconic namesake is famous soccer player Cristiano Ronaldo, who plays as a forward for the Premier League club Manchester United and captains the Portugal national team. Cristiano Ronaldo is also recognized for his generous contributions to his community- named the world’s most charitable sportsperson in 2015.

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: Follower of Christ

Pronunciation: krees-CHYU-noo

Variations: Christian

Namesakes: Cristiano Godano, an Italian musician that was the frontman for the 90s Italian rock band, Marlene Kuntz. Cristiano Souza, a Brazilian mixed martial artist.

Popularity: In 2021, Cristiano ranked #31 among Brazil’s most popular boy names.

Daniel

Daniel is mainly recognized as a traditional Biblical name, inspired by the Book of Daniel in the Old Testament. In the Bible, Daniel had prolific visions and spoke with God through his dreams.

Origin: Hebrew

Meaning: God is my judge

Pronunciation: du-neehl

Variations: Danyal, Daniil

Namesakes: Daniel Alves, a Brazilian soccer player on the Paris Saint-Germain team. Daniel Barenboim, an Argentine-Israeli pianist, and conductor. Daniel Márcio Fernandes, a Portuguese-Canadian soccer player, drafted to Birkirkara F.C. as a goalkeeper.

Popularity: From 2007 to 2008, Daniel was the 5th most popular baby boy name in the United States.

Darren

In 2021, a viral video of Darren Till gained him popularity in Brazil. The MMA fighter revealed he lived in Brazil for three years and began to speak fluent Portuguese in an interview. This interview clip made him a household name in Brazil and is potentially why its popularity.

Origin: Irish

Meaning: Great or Oak Tree

Pronunciation: DAR-en

Variations: Darron, Derren, Darin, Daron

Namesakes: Darren Till, a British mixed martial arts fighter.

Popularity: In 2021, Darren ranked #29 among popular baby boy names in Brazil.

Davi

Davi is the Brazilian version of the Hebrew name David. Among all Portuguese names for boys, Davi will sum up your family’s feelings perfectly, as they set eyes on your adorable newborn son for the first time.

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: Beloved

Pronunciation: da-VEE

Variations: David, Davide

Namesakes: Davi Kopenawa Yanomami, a Brazilian activist. David ben Yom Tov ibn Bilia, a 13th-century Portuguese-Jewish philosopher. David da Silva Livramento, a Portuguese professional road bicycle racer who rides for the UCI Continental team.

Popularity: Davi did not rank among Brazil’s popular baby boy names, but in 2021 the variation David was 25th on the list.

Diamantino

Diamantino is a Portuguese male name that pops up in many cultural categories. It also refers to a municipality in the Brazilian state Mato Grosso, and is the name of a popular Brazilian 2018 fantasy comedy-drama movie.

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: A determined leader

Pronunciation: dy-ah-man-ti-noh

Namesakes: Diamantino Manuel Fernandes Miranda, a Portuguese professional football manager.

Diogo

The meaning of this modern name is traditional and seems out of place in 2021. A son named Diogo will forever be a tiny newborn prince in your heart, but it’ll also bring you joy to watch him grow and flourish in the community.

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: He who reigns over the land

Pronunciation: jee-O-goo

Variations: Diego, Jacob

Namesakes: Diogo, Constable of Portugal, a Portuguese royal prince in the 14th-century. Diogo Pinheiro Sousa, a Brazilian soccer player, who plays midfielder for the Spanish club Marino de Luanco.

Popularity: In 2021, Diogo was the 3rd most popular baby boy name in Brazil.

Djalma

An interesting fact about Djalma Pereira Dias dos Santos- he was one of three soccer players in the world to play on three FIFA World Cup All-Star teams. This rare Portuguese boy’s name is not very common but holds a mystical quality when pronounced.

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: He who holds the waters of the earth

Pronunciation: DJAHL-mah

Variations: Djalmo

Namesakes: Djalma Pereira Dias dos Santos, a retired Brazilian soccer player. Djalma Cavalcante, a Brazilian soccer player, and coach.

Donato

Donato is a strong masculine name that follows passionate Portuguese boys and men as they pursue their goals and prioritize family above everything.

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: Man of heart

Pronunciation: do-NAH-toh

Namesakes: Donato Gama da Silva, a Brazilian-Spanish soccer player, and coach.

Duarte

When we look at our children, we see rare gems. Duarte has been in the Portuguese royal family for centuries. It’s a name that crowns your newborn prince with hidden jewels that sparkle through his eyes and acts of generosity.

Origin: Iberian

Meaning: He who shines

Pronunciation: doo-AKH-chee

Variations: Edward, Edwardo

Namesakes: Duarte Pio, Duke of Braganza, a claimant to the Portuguese throne and the eldest son of Duarte Nuno, The Duke of Braganza. Duarte Cordeiro, a Portuguese economist and politician.

Popularity: In 2021, Duarte was the 17th most popular baby boy name in Brazil.

Durvalino

Durvalino is an exceptional name for families with a passion for being outdoors. Watch your son gallop across fields, mountains, and beaches in the diverse landscape of Brazil.

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: He who rides horses

Pronunciation: dur-vah-leen-yo

Variations: Dorvalino

Namesakes: Dorvalino Alves Maciel, a former Brazilian soccer player that fans call Lino. Durvalino Couto, the mayor of Teresina, Brazil, in 1947.

Edmundo

Regardless of how far your son wanders, parents will never stop waiting for them to return home. Edmundo may be a fantastic way to encourage an adventurous spirit in your boy’s life.

Origin: Spanish

Meaning: He who searches

Pronunciation: edh-MOON-do

Namesakes: Leonel Edmundo Rivero, an Argentine tango singer, composer, and impresario.

Eleuterio

In Portuguese tradition, it’s popular for sons to receive two given names, and Eleuterio is an excellent second or first choice for your son. Eleuterio remains prevalent in many Latin-American families and isn’t limited to just the Portuguese culture.

Origin: Italian

Meaning: Free

Pronunciation: aaey-leuw-TEY-Riy-ow

Namesakes: António Eleutério dos Santos, a Portuguese soccer player. Leandro Eleutério de Souza, a fourth-tier football player, signed to ASA FC.

Elpidio

A child can symbolize many things, especially hope for a brighter future. A son named Elpidio will continue to keep your hope alive and show you the changes future generations can muster.

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: Hope

Pronunciation: ehl-PEE-dhyo

Namesakes: Elpidio González, an Argentinian politician who served as Vice President from 1922 to 1928. Elpídio Barbosa Conceição, a retired Brazilian soccer player whose fans called Dill.

Enzo

Teaching your son patience is never easy, but it will be in your son’s blood with this trendy Latin-infused name! Enzo is a popular name in Brazil, Italy, and many other romance-language countries. It’s a common short form of Lorenzo and Vincenzo.

Origin: Italian

Meaning: He who waits

Pronunciation: EHN-tso

Namesakes: Enzo Pérez, an Argentinian soccer player currently playing midfield for River Plate and The Argentina National Team.

Popularity: In 2021, Enzo was the 30th most popular boy’s name in Brazil.

Fausto

Fausto is a solid Portuguese male name that will anoint your son with luck. It’s a popular name in Portuguese and Italian communities, with many inspiring namesakes in sports and entertainment.

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: Luck

Pronunciation: FOWS-to

Namesakes: Carlos Fausto Bordalo Gomes Dias, a Portuguese composer, and singer whose debut album Fausto in 1969 won the Revelation Award. Fausto Fernós, a Puerto Rican podcaster, performance artist, and drag performer. Fausto Silva, a Brazilian television presenter well known for hosting the show Domingão do Faustão since 1989.

Felipe

While we love and cherish the days when babies are small, soon they grow up and run wild across fields, towns, oceans, and even countries. Choose the Portuguese boy name Felipe, and your son will enjoy introducing himself!

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: Friend of horses

Pronunciation: feh-LEE-peh

Variations: Phillip, Filip

Namesakes: Felipe Drugovich, a Brazilian race car driver and the 2018 Euroformula Open champion. Felipe Franco, a silver medal Brazilian water polo player. Felipe Kitadai, a Brazilian Olympic medalist judoka.

Popularity: In 2021, Felipe was the 24th most popular boy’s name in Brazil.

Fernando

A family always stays calm in the face of a storm, especially when they have many people to turn to for support. A son named Fernando expertly stays afloat in unexpected waves and will help your family swim through tough times.

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: He who dominates the waves

Pronunciation: fehr-NAHN-doh

Variations: Ferdinand, Fernandino, Fernão

Namesakes: Fernando Collor de Mello, a former Brazilian president who served from 1990 to 1992. Ferdinand Magellan, a Portuguese explorer that lead the 1519 Spanish expedition to the East Indies.

Popularity: In 2021, Fernando was ranked the 57th most popular baby boy name in Brazil.

Francisco

Francisco is a popular option for Brazilian families settling in North America. A son with this strong masculine name is commonly also given the nickname Chico. Pope Francis, who became the head of the Catholic Church and sovereign of the Vatican City State in 2013 is referred to as “Papa Francisco” in Spanish and Portuguese communities.

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: Free-man

Pronunciation: frahn-SEES-ko

Variations: Franciscus

Namesakes: Francisco Buarque de Hollanda, a Brazilian singer, guitarist, composer, dramatist, writer, and poet. Francisco Alves Mendes Filho Cena, a Brazilian rubber tapper, unionist and environmental activist. Francisco de Assis França, a Brazilian singer, composer and one of the founders of the “Mangue Beat” cultural movement.

Popularity: In 2020, Francisco ranked #1 among popular Portuguese boy names.

Frederico

Sometimes, the smallest household member can hold the largest amount of power. Frederico is a trendy and strong choice for a family that thrives on communication.

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: Peaceful ruler

Pronunciation: freh-deh-REE-koo

Variations: Frederick

Namesakes: Frederico Barbosa, a Brazilian poet who won the 2008 São Paulo Prize for Literature. Federico Ágreda, a Venezuelan composer and DJ.

Gabriel

A son will be your source of strength and also uplift his community. Gabriel is a traditional Biblical name, referring to the famous angel who announced to the Virgin Mary that she would bear the Son of God.

Origin: Hebrew

Meaning: God has given me strength

Pronunciation: ga-bree-EW

Variations: Gavrilo

Namesakes: Gabriel Contino, a Brazilian singer-songwriter and rapper. Gabriel Gonzaga, a Brazilian jiu-jitsu and UFC fighter.

Popularity: In 2019, Gabriel ranked 37th among popular boy’s names in the United States.

Getulio

Getulio is a common Portuguese name popular within the Brazilian community. Another famous namesake is Getúlio Dornelles Vargas, the president of Brazil and nicknamed “the president of the poor.” He served as president twice, from 1930 to 1945 and 1951 to 1954.

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: He who announces the spring

Pronunciation: ge-chu-lio

Namesakes: Getulio Agostini, a Venezuelan botanist, and secretary of the Venezuelan Association for the Advancement of University Research.

Gonçalo

A fierce Portuguese son is also a warrior for his family and community. This popular name has been in the top 10 baby boy names for several years and shows no sign of losing favor.

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: War

Pronunciation: gon-saa-low

Variations: Gonzalo

Namesakes: Gonçalo Nicau, a Portuguese professional tennis player. Gonçalo Coelho, a Portuguese explorer who commanded two expeditions along the coast of Brazil.

Popularity: In 2021, Gonçalo was Brazil’s 4th most popular baby boy name.

Gualter

Gualter is an excellent choice for a firstborn son. As you continue to give him more siblings, he will be an amazing big brother that is always available for advice or to lead his siblings into great adventures.

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: Ruler of the army

Pronunciation: guh-al-ter

Variations: Walter

Namesakes: Gualter Aurélio Oliveira Bilro, a Portuguese soccer player who plays midfielder for Futebol Clube 11 Esperanças. Gualter Salles, a Brazilian open wheel race car driver.

Guilherme

It’s exciting for parents to begin growing their families and the birth of your first son is an important milestone. Choose the name Guilherme and watch as he protects future younger siblings. This Portuguese male name is well respected and has been a traditional choice for many years.

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: Determined protector

Pronunciation: gee-LYEHR-mee

Variations: Guilhermino

Namesakes: Guilherme Berenguer Santiago, a Brazilian actor best known for the films Malhação and Bang Bang.

Popularity: In 2021, Guilherme narrowly missed being in the top 10 and ranked 11th among popular boy names in Brazil.

Gustavo

As Gustavo suggests, your son will be someone you can lean on during tough times. Gustavo is a popular name in Portuguese, Spanish and Italian communities. The meaning “staff of the god” can remind you how your children keep you balanced through many circumstances.

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: Staff of the god

Pronunciation: gus-tah-voh

Variations: Gustav, Gustaf

Namesakes: Gustavo Assis-Brasil, a Brazilian jazz guitarist. Gustavo Boccoli, a retired Brazilian-Israeli soccer player, drafted to Maccabi Haifa.

Popularity: In 2021, Gustavo was the 52nd most popular baby boy name.

Haroldo

Babies grow into busy toddlers, and they love to explore by crawling and eventually leaping into trouble. Parents can get prepared to yell this Portuguese boy’s name as they search for their curious and adventurous son.

Origin: Spanish

Meaning: The leaping man

Pronunciation: a-RAWL-doo

Variations: Harold

Namesakes: Haroldo Domingues, a Brazilian soccer player whose fans called Haroldo. Haroldo Rodrigues Magalhães Castro, a Brazilian soccer player on the national team circa 1953.

Heitor

Heitor represents a son who holds fast to his mother’s love. It’s a great name if you wish to encourage your son to love openly and to have a compassionate ear for friends and family. Another famous namesake is Heitor Rodrigues da Fonseca who ranked as one of the best under 20 athletes in South America in 2021.

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: Holding fast

Pronunciation: HH-AHT-ER

Variations: Hector

Namesakes: Mário Heitor Brandão de Andrade, a Portuguese soccer player who now coaches Gondim-Maia FC. Heitor Dhalia, a Brazilian film director and screenwriter.

Henriques

Henriques is a very traditional Portuguese given and family name. It belonged to the 16th-century Henriques family that had several family branches. Henriques is an excellent choice to pay tribute to your husband or any patriarchs in your family.

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: Son of henry

Pronunciation: ehn-REE-kes or ehn-HEE-kes

Namesakes: Henriques Dias Milao-Caceres, a Portuguese merchant forced to leave during the Spanish Inquisition. Moises Henriques, a Portuguese cricketer who currently plays for New South Wales.

Hermenegildo

Hermenegildo is a rare Spanish name extremely popular in Portuguese communities and is the perfect definition of a new baby. As soon as you find out that you are expecting a baby, your body begins to carry a priceless treasure. Your life will be enriched beyond your wildest dreams with your newborn son’s arrival.

Origin: Spanish

Meaning: Immense treasure

Pronunciation: ehr-meh-neh-KHEEL-do

Variations: Ermengild

Namesakes: Saint Hermenegildo, a Spanish saint who gave up a life of royalty to pursue life as a humble catholic martyr. Hermenegildo Capelo, a Portuguese explorer who traveled to Southern central Africa from 1870 to 1880. Hermenegildo Sábat, an Argentine-Uruguayan caricaturist.

Hilario

While they start small, a baby boy can grow up to be a strong leader in their community. Choose Hilario as your son’s name to encourage him to stand strong in the face of chaos. Your Brazilian prince will be a mindful adult with a family that keeps him level-headed.

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: A powerful man in the army

Pronunciation: hi-RAHL-do

Namesakes: Hilario Barrero, a Spanish writer. Hilário Conceição, a Portuguese soccer player who played in the 1966 FIFA World Cup.

Hugo

This cute Portuguese boy’s name will echo through your home and match your son’s contagious laughter. Hugo means a “spirited and excited personality or spirit.” Having a Hugo in your household will encourage laughter and energetic activity.

Origin: Germanic

Meaning: Spirited

Pronunciation: HOO-go

Variations: Hugh, Ugo

Namesakes: Hugo Alves Velame, a retired Brazilian soccer player. Hugo Viana, a Brazilian mixed martial artist.

Popularity: In 2021, Hugo was the 62nd most popular baby boy name in Brazil.

Ignacio

Ignacio is a traditional Latin-American name that exists in several communities. It’s popular in the world of saints and martyrs and will give your son many pious men to admire.

Origin: Latin

Meaning: Fire

Pronunciation: eeg-NAH-syo

Variations: Inacio

Namesakes: Ignacio Figueredo, a 20th-century Venezuelan folk musician. Ignacio Merino, a 19th-century Peruvian painter.

João

Throughout history, João has belonged to several kings and princes who have shaped Portuguese culture and history. The list includes João I of Portugal to Dom João Dharmapala Peria Bandara, the last ruler of the Kingdom of Kotte. With an endless list of powerful role models, you can watch your son emulate their confidence every day.

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: Jehovah has been gracious

Pronunciation: jowow

Variations: John, Joãozinho

Namesakes: João Cabral de Melo Neto, a Brazilian poet recognized for his poetic play Morte e Vida Severina. King João I of Portugal, a King of Portugal from 1385 to 1433.

Popularity: In 2021, João was the most popular Portuguese boy name in Brazil.

Joaquim

Every child is an amazing miracle gifted to families and loving parents. While God makes a child, a child is also shaped by those around them. Surround your son with Portuguese culture and let him absorb the passion and virtue that will enlighten him for the rest of his life.

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: Made by God

Pronunciation: zho-a-KEEN

Variations: Joachim

Namesakes: Joaquim Cruz, a Brazilian Olympian 800m runner. Joaquim Guedes, a Brazilian architect.

Jorge

Jorge is the perfect fit for a family who plans to bring their sons into nature. From a young age, show off the beauty of the world to your son by sitting and having picnics as a family, exploring trails, or watching luminous sunsets.

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: Earth-walker

Pronunciation: ZHAWR-zhee

Variations: Jorginho, George, Georgia

Namesakes: Jorge Alves Barcelos, a member in the Brazilian music group Jorge & Mateus. Jorge Antonio Chávez Dartnell, a Peruvian aviator.

Popularity: In 2021, Jorge ranked the 19th most popular baby boy name in Brazil.

José

José is a Portuguese and Spanish name extremely well-known in the United States. Each child your family welcomes will increase the gifts you have received from God and keep you in his gracious standings.

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: God increases

Pronunciation: zho-ZEH

Variations: Josefo, Josetxu, Josetxo, Xosé,

Namesakes: José Maria Alkmin, the 15th Vice President of Brazil.José Martiniano de Alencar, a 19th-century Brazilian politician, lawyer, orator, novelist, and dramatist.

Popularity: In 2019, José was the 92nd most popular boys name in the United States.

Laertes

In Greek mythology, Laertes is the father of Odysseus. Laertes was also the brother of Ophelia in the Shakespeare play, Hamlet. A son with this strong Portuguese male name has the opportunity to become a devoted member of the family.

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: A devoted man

Pronunciation: lay-AIR-tez

Namesakes: Laerte Coutinho, a Brazilian cartoonist, and screenwriter, known for creating the comic strip Piratas do Tietê.

Leandro

Leandro is a Portuguese boy name heard on and off the playing field. Many athletes have this given name who could inspire your son to lead an active lifestyle.

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: He who shouts

Pronunciation: leh-AN-droh

Variations: Leander, Lysander

Namesakes: Leandro Lessa Azevedo, a Brazilian soccer player. Leandro Barbosa, a Brazilian basketball player. Leandro Dos Santos, a Brazilian soccer player whose fans refer to as Leandro.

Popularity: In 2021, Leandro was the 18th most popular baby boy name in Brazil.

Lenz

Lenz is also a popular German surname. Lenz remains popular in Portuguese and Italian communities as a nickname- a great way to pay tribute to family members who have passed away.

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: He who carries the flame

Pronunciation: LENTS

Variations: Lorenz, Laurentius

Popularity: In 2021, Lenz ranked #61 among Brazil’s top 100 baby boy names.

Lourenço

Lourenço references the old area of west Italy currently labeled as Alban Hills. Lourenço also references the town located in the Brazilian municipality of Calçoene. Parents should consider Lourenço to inspire their son to visit the places that helped build his heritage.

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: From the city of Laurentum

Pronunciation: lo-REHN-soo

Variations: Laurence, Lawrence

Namesakes: Lourenço de Almeida, a Portuguese explorer and military commander who made the first Portuguese voyage to Ceylon in 1505. Lourenço Mutarelli, an underground Brazilian comic book artist in the 80s. Lourenço Ortigão, a Portuguese actor recognized for his roles in the films Perdidos and Morangos com Açúcar – O Filme.

Lucas

The moment you hold your son for the first time you’ll bubble up with joy and be overwhelmed by the light of a new life. It will rush over you and instantly wrap you and your precious cargo in a blanket of love. Lucas is the perfect name to capture this shining expression of joy and will serve any son well on his future paths.

Origin: Latin

Meaning: To shine

Pronunciation: LOO-kus

Variations: Luke

Namesakes: Lucas Leiva, a Brazilian defensive midfield soccer player playing for Series A Club, Lazio FC. Lucas Licht, an Argentinian-Israeli soccer player drafted to Gimnasia La Plata FC. Lucas Rios Marques, a Brazilian soccer player for the Under 20 national team and for Figueirense.

Popularity: In 2021, Lucas was in the top 50 popular baby boy names in Brazil, where it ranked #48th.

Luis

Luis is an extremely popular name among European royalty. The French King Louis IX is a well-known namesake. He is joined by other Portuguese kings and princes such as King Luís I of Portugal and Prince Luís, the Duke of Beja. Luis is a cute and strong name for your bouncing baby boy and will be adorable to hear among relatives and friends.

Origin: Spanish

Meaning: Famous warrior

Pronunciation: LWEES

Variations: Lewis, Lluís, Luiz

Namesakes: Luis Díaz, a Venezuelan volleyball player. Luís Dutra Jr., a Brazilian mixed martial arts fighter. Luis Antonio Rivera, a Puerto Rican actor, comedian, and television show host, known as Yoyo Boing.

Popularity: In 2021, Luis rounded out the top 10 most popular boy names in Brazil, proudly finishing at #10.

Manuel

While we put our blind faith and trust in God, having children is a way to see his work every day. Children are pure miracles and remind our whole family of the power of faith during tough times. Manuel is an excellent Portuguese male name for a spiritual family.

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: God Is With Us

Pronunciation: ma-noo-EW or mu-noo-EHL

Variations: Immanuel

Namesakes: Manuel Cardoso, a Portuguese composer from 1566 to 1650 who focused on polyphony music specific to the organ. Manuel Cardoso, a Portuguese road bicycle racer. Manuel Cardoso, a Portuguese gymnast who competed in the 1952 summer Olympics.

Popularity: In 2021, Manuel was the 21st most popular boy name in Brazil.

Marcos

Marcos is an athletic and environmentally conscious choice. This Portuguese boy’s name is found in every industry and pairs well with boys who contemplate all options before making a decision.

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: He who draws out

Pronunciation: MAKH-koos

Variations: Marco

Namesakes: Marcos António da Fonseca Portugal, a Portuguese classical composer, who achieved international fame for his operas. Marcos Suzano, a Brazilian percussionist who played with many bands including Gilberto Gil, Nando Reis, and Titãs.

Popularity: In 2021, Marcos was ranked #21 among popular boy names in Brazil. Its variation Marco was a little lower on the list, coming in at #36.

Martim

Looking at Martim’s meaning, the planet Mars has many unique traits and translations. It’s associated with the God of War and is recognized as a planet of desire, action, and energy. One of the popular traits found in Portuguese communities is passion, making this fiery and unique masculine name a perfect fit.

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: Son of Mars

Pronunciation: makh-CHEEN

Variations: Martin

Namesakes: Martim Carvalho Neto, a Portuguese midfield soccer player currently on Benfica B in Liga Portugal. Martim Afonso de Sousa, a Portuguese fidalgo, explorer and colonial administrator.

Matias

Each child is a “gift of God,” so why not choose a strong Portuguese male name that shouts and celebrates it! Matias is a very modern choice in Portuguese, Italian and Spanish communities. It’s also slowly gaining popularity in Sweden and Finland.

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: Gift of God

Pronunciation: MAH-tee-ahs

Variations: Mateus

Namesakes: Matias Aires, a Brasilo-Portuguese philosopher. Matías Carlos Adrían Rueda, an Argentinian professional boxer who held the Argentina featherweight title from 2013 to 2016.

Mauricio

This Portuguese boy’s name compliments your son if he’s born with a gorgeous dark complexion. Mauricio could also be an ideal fit for a family that spends time on the beach together building memories in the sand.

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: Dark-skinned

Pronunciation: mow-REE-syo

Variations: Maurice,Morris,Maurício, Moritz, Maurizio, Maurits

Namesakes: Mauricio Borensztein, an Argentinian comedian. Maurício Rua, a Brazilian mixed martial arts fighter.

Popularity: In 2021, Mauricio was the 65th most popular boy’s name in Brazil.

Miguel

The velvet voice of singer Miguel made thousands of fans fall in love with his music instantly. His talent matches the definition of this name and will match your future son’s many successful endeavors.

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: God-like

Pronunciation: mee-GEHL or mee-GEW

Namesakes: Miguel de Cervantes, a Spanish author who wrote Don Quixote. Miguel Jontel, a Mexican-American recording artist who was named one of Time Magazine’s 100 Most Influential People in the World in 2013.

Popularity: In 2021, Miguel was the 2nd most popular baby boy name in Brazil.

Octavio

While you may feel biased, this Portuguese male name is an excellent choice for your newborn Brazilian champion. Octavio is a traditional name that remains popular in the Arts & Culture realms. Octavio is also popular due to being the name of a character in the hit film Scarface.

Origin: Spanish

Meaning: He who triumphs

Pronunciation: ok-TA-byo

Variations: Octávio, Otávio

Namesakes: Octávio Merlo Manteca, a Brazilian professional footballer who plays for Bulgarian club Lokomotiv Sofia. Octávio Trompowsky, a Brazilian chess player. Octavio Vazquez, a Spanish-American composer of classical music.

Popularity: In 2021, Octavio was the 33rd most popular baby boy name in Brazil.

Osvaldo

Osvaldo is a unique and strong choice for your Portuguese son. To hold “God’s power” is a breathtaking and humbling experience. Your future son will be surrounded by his community as he discovers his dreams and talents.

Origin: Italian

Meaning: God’s Power

Pronunciation: oz-BAL-do

Namesakes: Osvaldo Cochrane Filho, a Brazilian water polo player. Osvaldo Pugliese, an Argentine tango musician.

Pablo

In the 1960s and 70s, Pablo Manzoni was known professionally as “Pablo of Elizabeth Arden,” awarded the COTY Award for leadership in cosmetics. Embrace your son having endless possibilities to follow any creative path he desires.

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: Tiny, little

Pronunciation: PAH-blo

Namesakes: Pablo Manzoni, an Italian make-up artist. Pablo Miyazawa, a Brazilian journalist, and editor-in-chief of Rolling Stone Brazil.

Popularity: In 2010, Pablo was the 3rd most popular baby boy name in Spain.

Pascoal

Easter is a time for rebirth and rejoicing. Welcoming a child around this holiday, or finding out you’re pregnant on this holy day deserves a name that will match this springtime jubilee.

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: Child of Easter

Pronunciation: PAASK-OWL

Variations: Pascale

Namesakes: José Pascoal Jr., a Brazilian professional racing cyclist. Pascoal Ranieri Mazzilli, a Brazilian politician who served twice as interim President of Brazil.

Patrick

While our children may be the smallest family members, it doesn’t take them long to become tiny rulers of our households. Patrick is a traditional and old-fashioned choice for modern Portuguese families. With its deep Latin roots, Patrick is heard internationally across the world.

Origin: Latin

Meaning: Ruler

Pronunciation: pah-treek

Variations: Patrik, Patricio, Patrizio

Namesakes: Patrick da Silva, a Brazilian soccer player for Liga Futebol Timor-Leste club Karketu Dili.

Popularity: Patrick has not been in the top American baby boy names 100 since 1997, but in 2022, it registered at 223rd.

Paul

Paul is a Portuguese male name with strong ties to the church. Six Popes were named Paul and the name continues to be recognized as a pious and traditional choice for international families.

Origin: Latin

Meaning: Small, little

Pronunciation: pawl

Variations: Paulo, Paulus, Paolo

Namesakes: Paul Anka, a Canadian singer, and songwriter. Paul Wight, an American wrestler who performed under the name “Big Show.”

Popularity: According to the 1990 census, Paul was the 13th most popular baby boy name in the United States. Its variation Paulo was the 13th most popular boy name in Brazil in 2021.

Pedro

The origin of Pedro is split between Portuguese, Spanish and Galician communities. Pedro is a cute and playful masculine name and an adorable choice to welcome the newest member of your family.

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: Son of Peter

Pronunciation: peh-throh

Variations: Peter

Namesakes: José Pedro Azevedo Ferreira, a Portuguese soccer player referred to as Pedró. Pedro Lamy, a Portuguese Grand Prix driver. Pedro Lima, a Brazilian boxer.

Popularity: In 2021, Pedro is the 5th most popular baby boy name in Brazil.

Pio

Pio is the perfect one-syllable Portuguese name for your angelic boy. One tiny heart to match the single-syllable name that will bring endless years of joy to your whole family.

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: Pious

Pronunciation: piy-ow

Namesakes: Pío Collivadino, an Argentinian post-impressionist painter. Pío Corcuera, an Argentinian soccer player who played the majority of his career with Boca Juniors.

Quintino

Quintino is a rare Portuguese name for boys. It’s not common in the 21st-century but holds a romance of centuries past. Quintino is a traditional name that feels nostalgic for families living far away from the beautiful beaches and culture of Portugal.

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: The fifth

Pronunciation: KIHN-chi-noh

Namesakes: Quintino Bocaiuva, a former secretary of foreign affairs in Brazil in 1889.

Rafael

Rafael is recognized in pop culture as an animated toucan character in the film Rio and as one of four teenage ninja mutant turtles. This fun and energetic name will match your son’s energy regardless of what he puts his mind to.

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: God has healed

Pronunciation: rah-fah-EHL

Variations: Raphael, Raphaël, Rafael, Raffael, Raffaello, Raffiel, Refoel, Raffaele, Refael

Namesakes: Rafael Bittencourt, the Brazilian composer, and songwriter in the heavy metal band Angra. Rafael Romero, a three-time Olympic Venezuelan track and field athlete.

Popularity: In 2021, Rafael was the 38th most popular baby boy name in Brazil.

Raul

Raul is the Portuguese variation of the French name Raoul. It’s a modern update and connection that’s popular all over Europe. Raul’s meaning of “running with wolves” also connects your son to be a future leader of the pack.

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: A man connected to wolves

Pronunciation: ru-OOL

Variations: Raoul, Ralph, Rudolph

Namesakes: Raul Boesel, a Brazilian race car driver. Raul Plassman, a former Brazilian goalkeeper, and frequent TV commentator.

Ricardo

Ricardo is an excellent choice for a firstborn son, or for families growing their families as first-generation immigrants. Our children become our eyes and ears in new surroundings and settings. Similar to Ricardo’s definition, your son will be encouraged to lead your family and make decisions that benefit everyone.

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: Strong in rule

Pronunciation: ree-KAR-dho

Variations: Richard

Namesakes: Ricardo de Araújo Pereira, a Portuguese comedian and political commentator. Ricardo Izecson dos Santos Leite, a Brazilian soccer player whose fans call Kaká.

Rodrigo

Build your family legacy by choosing this strong Portuguese male name. While it varies across Latin America, Rodrigo calls upon community and love.

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: Famous ruler

Pronunciation: roo-DREE-goo

Variations: Roderick

Namesakes: Rodrigo Damm, a Brazilian mixed martial artist. Rodrigo Santoro, a Brazilian actor recognized for his roles in the movies Love, Actually and 300.

Popularity: In 2021, Rodrigo was the 44th most popular boy’s name in Brazil.

Sebastião

This traditional name originally refers to a location in Brazil but has since evolved and connects with modern lifestyles. The original destination of Sebaste is now called the ancient town of Phrygia, in Turkey. Its variation Sebastian remains an upbeat and popular choice among men worldwide.

Origin: Latin

Meaning: A man from Sebaste

Pronunciation: seh-BAS-tee-oh

Variations: Sebastian

Namesakes: Sebastião Alba, a Portuguese poet who spent most of his life in Mozambique. Sebastião I, a Portuguese king, known as Sebastian of Portugal, who ruled from 1557 to 1578.

Popularity: While there is not much data supporting the Portuguese version, Sebastian ranked in the top 20 baby names in the United States in 2018.

Salvador

Parents willingly pour all their energy into their children’s well-being. Salvador is the perfect Portuguese male name, and when Salvador Thiam Vilar Braamcamp Sobral won Eurovision, it was the first time Portugal had won at the annual international talent competition.

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: Savior, Salvation

Pronunciation: sal-ba-DHOR

Namesakes: Salvador Thiam Vilar Braamcamp Sobral, a Portuguese singer who won the 2017 Eurovision contest.

Samuel

Samuel is popular among many communities, perfect for parents who feel their prayers were answered with their new baby boy. Finding out you’re pregnant can be one of the most memorable experiences, especially if you’ve waited a long time. Choose Samuel and celebrate the arrival of your son for the rest of his life.

Origin: Hebrew

Meaning: God has heard

Pronunciation: sa-MWEHL

Namesakes: Samuel Firmino de Jesus, a Brazilian soccer player who plays center-back for Taubaté football club. Samuel Rosa, a Brazilian lead singer, and guitarist for the rock band Skank.

Popularity: In 2018, Samuel was the 28th most popular baby boy name in the United States.

Tiago

Every parent whispers the same prayer when they hold their baby boy in their arms. They whisper “may God bless and protect you” into tiny ears in households across the world. Tiago covers your son with this protection every day no matter how far from home he wanders.

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: May God protect

Pronunciation: chee-AH-goo

Variations: Thiago, Jacob, James

Namesakes: Thiago Alcântara, a Brazilian-Spanish soccer player and midfielder for the Premier League Club Liverpool. Tiago Splitter, a Brazilian professional basketball player playing on the Brooklyn Nets.

Popularity: In 2021, Tiago was the 14th most popular baby boy name in Brazil.

Tomás

Tomás is the perfect choice for a family welcoming a pair of twin boys! Its unique definition holds a special place in Brazilian-American families.

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: Twin

Pronunciation: toh-MAS

Variations: Tomaz

Namesakes: Tomás de Jesús Mangual, a Puerto Rican crime reporter. Tomás de Torres, a 16th-century Portuguese teacher, astrologer and doctor to King John III of Portugal. Tomaz Morais, a Portuguese rugby union coach.

Popularity: In 2021, Tomás was the 7th most popular baby boy name in Brazil.

Valentim

Valentim is an elegant choice for Portuguese or Spanish families. It’s pronounced differently depending on your region and is still recognized as a tribute to Valentim dos Santos de Loureiro Com by soccer fans.

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: Strong

Pronunciation: va-lehn-TEEN

Namesakes: Valentim dos Santos de Loureiro Com, a Portuguese politician, and former chairman of Boavista football club. Valentim da Fonseca e Silva, a Brazilian artist and urban planner in the 17th-century.

Vasco

The Basque region sits between Spain and France and is a beautiful slice of landscape with a unique culture and language. These friendly geographical neighbors provide endless inspiration for your next family adventure!

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: A person from the Basque region

Pronunciation: VAS-koo

Namesakes: Vasco Da Gama, a famous Portuguese explorer. Vasco Gonçalves, the Prime Minister of Portugal from 1974 to 1975.

Popularity: In 2021, Vasco was the 32nd most popular baby boy name in Brazil.

Vincente

Vincente Minnelli is also the famous father of iconic Liza Minnelli. United with your children you will begin to conquer the world. Choose Vincente as a pledge to the hopes, dreams, and ambitions which your family will accomplish together.

Origin: Portuguese

Meaning: Conquering

Pronunciation: VEHN-SAHNT

Variations: Vincent, Vicente

Namesakes: Vincente Minnelli, an American stage and film director. Vicente Henriques, a Brazilian water polo player. Vicente Aleixandre, a Spanish writer who won the Nobel Prize for literature in 1977.

Popularity: In 2021, Vincente was ranked the 58th most popular baby boy name in Brazil.

Xavier

A household feels refreshed and brand new, with the birth of a son. This trendy Portuguese male name symbolizes a fresh start. Embrace your growing family and your Portuguese heritage with this sassy and passionate name, Xavier.

Origin: Spanish

Meaning: The new house

Pronunciation: sha-vee-EHR

Variations: Javier, Xaver, Xabier, Xaveria, Xavi, Xavia, Xaviell, Xaviera, Xaviero

Namesakes: Xavier Dirceu, a Brazilian soccer player. Xabier Arzalluz, a Basque nationalist politician.

Zosimus

Zosimus is a truly unique and special name for your newborn Portuguese prince. It belonged to martyrs and saints from the 2nd and 3rd-centuries. While not much information exists on the name today, your son can spark a revolution of nostalgia to make it popular again.

Origin: Portugueses

Meaning: Able to survive, full of life

Pronunciation: so-SEE-mos

Variations: Zosimos, Zosima or Zosimas

Namesakes: Zosimus, a 5th-century hermit who discovered the Saint Mary of Egypt in the desert.

Feedback: Was This Article Helpful?

Thank You For Your Feedback!

Thank You For Your Feedback!

What Did You Like?

What Went Wrong?

About the Author

Chelsea Gallagher

Chelsea Gallagher is a Canadian freelance writer living abroad in Vietnam. Since 2019 she has explored numerous noodle soups, breathtaking landscapes and focused on polishing her diverse portfolio. In her spare time, she co-organizes and leads two book clubs, and recently learned embroidery.