Bannockburn, IL, Feb. 26, 2003 Novar plc of the United Kingdom is to acquire the trade and assets of Alerton Technologies, Inc. of Redmond, WA. Alerton is a leading designer and manufacturer of building automation and control systems for heating, ventilation and air conditioning applications. The transaction will be completed on March 3, 2003.

The name of the acquired business will be changed to Alerton Inc. and it will become a member of Novar’s Intelligent Building Systems (IBS) division as a wholly owned subsidiary of Novar Controls Corp. Alerton Inc. will remain in Redmond and the Novar and Alerton brands will be positioned for growth through the combined and coordinated activities of the two companies’ expanded dealer network across North America and around the world.

Alerton is recognized in the building automation and controls industry as a technological pioneer and innovator. It is a pioneer in the development of the BACnet protocol, the leading communications protocol for open systems, in addition to its proprietary family of controls. It also pioneered the advancement of Direct Digital Control technology to provide building-wide temperature control and automation systems.

The BACnet protocol provides building owners with greater flexibility and more choices in addressing system needs in building automation. Implementation of Alerton’s BACnet technology provides a foundation for future system expansion or upgrade including the ability to integrate other building controls systems such as fire, security and life safety.

The Novar network of North American dealers, known as Novar Technology Centers, and Alerton’s North American dealer organization will be combined to form one of the strongest dealer networks in the building management systems industry today.

Alerton’s international dealer network includes representation in Central and South America, Europe, Asia, Australia and other countries. These dealers are likely to form part of Novar’s international dealer organization following a planned merger process.

The Novar Controls and Alerton businesses will continue to focus on the needs of their customers. Major organizational change is unlikely in the near term.

[an error occurred while processing this directive]

[Click Banner To Learn More]