Hayden Christensen may have had a rocky start when he first joined the Star Wars franchise. But now, he is one of the most memorable and beloved parts of it. When he first played the role of Anakin Skywalker in Episode II and Episode III of the prequel series, his performance was met with mixed reviews from both critics and fans. However, the man eventually ended up receiving great appreciation from fans over the years.

Advertisement

Before landing a role in Star Wars: Episode II – Attack of the Clones, Hayden Christensen had done a handful of projects here and there including the 2001 film Life as a House. While going undercover on the Internet, the actor shared a piece of advice given to him by his co-star, which he has carried with him into the future.

How Christen Henderson Fractured His Hand

Recently, Hayden Christensen joined GQ where he went undercover on social media and replied to his fans on platforms like Twitter, Instagram, Reddit, and more.

Advertisement

When he finally logged onto IMDb, he came across a trivia point about him that read,

He fractured his hand during the filming of a rather violent scene in ‘Life as a House’ (2001) in which his character hits a wall.

Christensen then dived into the story about what actually happened during filming. He revealed that while the fun fact was true to some extent, the scene wasn’t intended to be violent, it just happened. He also added that he didn’t punch a wall, as the trivia says, but rather a wooden post.

This is true, it wasn’t intended to be a rather violent scene. It was just something that I did in one take. And I actually think it was a wooden post that I punched which makes it even kind of more stupid cause’ I wasn’t really expecting my hand to go through some dry wall.

Directed by Irwin Winkler, Life as a House had been released in 2001, just a year before Attack of the Clones. Henderson played the role of Sam Monroe, the son of Kevin Kline’s George Monroe.

Advertisement

The One Advice Hayden Christensen Should Never Forget

Kline has been in the film industry for over five decades now having played parts in projects like Sophie’s Choice, Wild Wild West, The Pink Panther, and so much more. The man has many awards to his name including an Oscar for the 1989 film A Fish Called Wanda.

Not only did Kline play the role of Henderson’s father in Life as a House, but he also continued the mentorship off-screen by giving his co-star a piece of advice to remember forever.

After Henderson recalled the story of him punching a wooden post, he added,

Advertisement

It was a movie I did with Kevin Kline where I play his son. And Kevin came up to me afterwards and he said, ‘Hayden, that was really great, but I think you’re gonna make a lot of movies in your lifetime and you only get one body, so take care of it,’ which I think is sage advice.

Kline’s words were wise enough for Henderson to carry this piece of advice into his blooming career after Life as a House. It’s always nice to see co-stars being there for each other even after the director yells ‘Cut!’