Web Master

Life as a House

Starring: Kevin Kline, Kristen Scott Thomas, Hayden Christensen

Directed by: Irwin Winkler

by Peter Hanrahan

Life as a House is a tearjerker-one of those sad, hopeful, life-affirming movies that grates against your intellect and upends your emotions. And it is effective.

Almost maudlin, Life as a House doesn’t seek out sentimentality, but thrives in it. The film is afire with well-orchestrated tricks designed-nee calculated-to manipulate your emotions, and yet it doesn’t plummet into the overwrought sob-story that it could be. Instead, Life as a House works with not unusual ingredients-the dying father, the misfit son, the unhappy ex-wife-and it finds heart amid a mountain of mawkishness.

Driven by Kevin Kline’s powerful performance, Life as a House finds time to be sweet and endearing and thoughtful and odd. Kline plays George, a middle-aged architect who finds he’s lost his job of twenty years and that he’s dying-in the same day. Faced with a short-lived lease on life (about four months), George determines-without telling anyone of his pre-determined fate-to rekindle relations with his estranged and embittered teenage son Sam (Hayden Christensen) by removing him from his drug-laden lifestyle to a cabin on the coast.

George has lived in this “house” all his adult life, and now its peeling paint and rotting siding help temper the royal property values of the wealthy community that’s been built up around him. All the while, though, George has held onto the thought of building his dream house-a modest construction hemmed in by glass walls that look out onto the ocean. But as it is, George hardly has a functional toilet, and Sam, still miffed about his muffled summer plans, sees fit to call the building inspector to have the place condemned. But George pulls through, resolved to tear the shack to shreds and stand something valuable in its place.

Soon enough, George’s determination-coupled with a close call with the cops and an attractive neighbor who’s generous with her shower-persuade Sam to stay on and help out with the house. Robin (Kristen Scott Thomas), George’s ex-wife and Sam’s mother, begins to bring the boys lunch everyday, and eventually helps out herself, gradually falling in love with George all over again.

Kline’s George is buoyant, brimming over with life, and made believable by Kline’s typical honesty. Thomas wafts to and fro throughout the film, holding onto sadness and anger like the good ex-wife-and beholden of heart as well. Christensen turns out a surprisingly vivid performance as the troubled teenager, and bit parts by Mary Steenburgen and Jena Malone as sultry mother-and-daughter next door neighbors add some spice to the mix.

But the success of any sentimentality lies in the applicability of external emotions to our own internal lives. Life as a House crosses that barrier, bringing sweetness and sadness enough to shine through the contrivance of the plot and the TKO of its terminal metaphor. Life as a House is not a well-made film. It does not push limits. It does not ask questions. It does feel. And sometimes that’s enough.

***

The One

Starring: Jet Li, Carla Gugino

Directed by: James Wong

by Bryan Keithley

If ever there was an argument for rebel cops and “shoot first, ask questions later” tactics, this is The One. The villain spends a good fourth of the movie simply looking down the barrels of policemen’s guns with a cool confidence; the cops, who cannot pull the trigger because of “policy,” can only stand there quivering before they are inevitably beaten with kung-fu.

Countless opportunities abound for our Boys in Blue to kill villain Yulaw and put the movie out of its misery . . . alas! no one can defy their destiny as Yulaw’s punching bag, and the projector keeps wading through film.

Martial arts star Jet Li (Lethal Weapon 4, Kiss of the Dragon) does double duty, starring in two roles as both hero and villain. Personally, I thought the dual role martial arts film had achieved perfection in Jean-Claude Van Damme’s 1991 smash Double Impact. How do you improve upon perfection?

Director James Wong starts with a highly implausible story world that keeps getting less interesting. There are about 123 multiverses parallel to our own. Differences between multiverses are as big as Hell versus Paradise universes, to as insignificant as Gore being president in one versus Bush in another. I guess Wong is a Ralph Nader supporter. Whenever a black hole explodes, travel between multiverses becomes possible for a short time. Due to “policy” and a respect for balance, multiverse travel is highly restricted and policed. One man, Yulaw (Li) would defy the laws, as he travels between ‘verses systematically killing each version of himself until he gets to the last copy, Gabe (Li), a cop here on earth.

Why this extreme self-loathing? When a self dies, all the other selves get stronger, faster and quicker. Too bad increased smarts doesn’t come with this life spirit; Gabe would have gone to see a better movie (oh wait, that was me).

Jason Statham and Delroy Lindo play multiverse cops who try their policy-restricted best to prevent Yulaw from killing Gabe and becoming The One. Add a gaggle of other assorted police officers and you’ve got ample opportunity for gun-pointing, “Freeze!”

yelling, and Li sneering. How can the cops be so savvy in continually getting the jump on Li and yet so savagely inept in using their firearms? What are the particulars of any of these “policies” that prevent Yulaw from becoming lunchmeat, other than plot contrivances? Nothing is sufficiently answered. Even an impossible world needs to stay consistent.

The special effects, which would have seemed more amazing in the pre-Matrix era, nonetheless become the star of the show, perhaps from lack of anything else. Time stands still (for the cops as well as the audience) as Li moves in normal time, allowing for some highly original, if synthetic, fight sequences. Carla Gugino, as Gabe’s love interest, displays a Herculean effort in working with her lines, and moments with her are bright spots.

On an end note, it was not The One but about ten people that walked out of the theater halfway through the showing. How many weeks before going straight to video? Just The One.

*

The Man Who Wasn’t There

Starring: Billy Bob Thornton, Frances McDormand

by Kevin Murphy

The Man Who Wasn’t There is a fanciful trip against the devised constructs of social pleasantries, again sifting out soul and meaning, placing them above the lies, madness, and incoherence of life. In tradition with the darker Coen brother films, there is murder, betrayal, and always, dumb luck.

Billy Bob Thornton, genius as ever, delivers as Ed Crane, the second chair barber of the shop he’s married into. He works alongside his bubbly, childish brother-in-law Frank, played by Michael Badalucco (O Brother Where Art Thou?). Also numbering among the former cast members of prominent Coen films, Doris, played by Frances McDormand of Blood Simple, Raising Arizona, and Fargo, remains Ed’s not-so-loving wife, with a love of alcohol and big career goals. Ed, portrayed as the typical, classic black and white cinema tight-lipped tough guy, passes through everyday 1949 life making as little conversation as possible. Surrounded by small talk and his wife’s social functions he passes his time puffing away cigarette after cigarette. A man desperately in need of adventure, Ed’s stoic face seems carved of stone as he leaps at a new business opportunity. A businessman played by Jon Polito (The Big Lebowski) mentions to Ed the next revolution: dry-cleaning. Ed would be–literally–the perfect silent partner. He needs $10,000 though.

From there, the madness that is life makes itself more apparent. Through a mesh of circumstance, just a jumble of mistakes really, Ed gradually loses everything that was his life. As that changes, he inadvertenly uncovers everyone’s secret lives. Throughout it all though, people need their haircut. That’s what Ed does. He’s the barber. No matter what goes on outside on the streets, Ed keeps on cutting inside. This odd mix of madness and consistency drives the film.

The lighting has an air of good old classic detective movies. When the movie starts up, that is the role Thorton plays. The stark black and white adds to the feeling that everything is very matter of fact.

The Coen brother’s films have always been soulful, putting life under the looking glass for a better view. The Man Who Wasn’t There takes in the whole picture. Even as Ed is losing his entire life it’s presented as simply matter of fact. The film does not feed you emotions to feel, you feel them. For all the many Coen brothers fans out there, Joel and Ethan have outdone themselves again. For everyone who is not a Coen brothers fan, by ignorance or choice, it’s a good time to be one.

*****