Old Mother Riley was an odd one to say the least. An Irish washerwoman (with barely discernible accent) played by an English man (Arthur Lucan) with a grown-up daughter played, in the early part of the characters career, by Lucan’s wife Kitty McShane, Old Mother Riley was a screeching harridan born in the British music halls in 1934. She was a hugely popular character at the time, her mix of bad jokes, worse slapstick and idiotic situations striking a chord with audiences for two decades. In 1936, she made the transition to the big screen in Stars on Parade. one of a host of music hall favourites going through their routines at Cricklewood Studios for directors Oswald Mitchell and Challis Sanderson.

The character proved just as popular on screen as she had on the stage, trade paper Motion Picture Herald hailing Lucan the sixth biggest attraction at the UK box office in 1943. Old Mother Riley appeared in 18 films in all, all but the last, Old Mother Riley Meets the Vampire (1952) featuring McShane as his daughter Kitty (Lucan and McShane had separated in 1951). The films established Lucan as the premiere drag act in the UK (albeit, perhaps, the least glamorous act of its kind to tread the British boards or appear in British films) and Lucan continued to take his character to the stage, particularly in pantomime and music hall revues.

Old Mother Riley’s Ghosts is fairly typical of the series of Old Mother Riley films – if you like this one, you may well enjoy the rest but if this leaves you cold it might be advisable to look elsewhere in future. The 8th film in the series, it finds Riley working as a charwoman at the offices of Cartwright & Co, causing her customary chaos while going about her daily tasks. After being sacked, she ends up in the park sharing her lunchbreak with the penniless John Cartwright (John Stuart), son of the head of the company, who has been disowned by his father. Riley takes pity on him and invites him home for tea where he meets Kitty (McShane) and lodger Jem (Dennis Wyndham), an amateur inventor. Cartwright and Jem team up to work on the experimental fuel that he was developing before being thrown out of the company. Jem and Kitty are also fired (such coincidences and contrivances are part for the Old Mother Riley course) but things take a more positive turn when Riley learns that her late husband’s family have all did and left her an old castle. The group moves in and are met by caretaker McAdam (the always very welcome John Laurie), unaware that a gang of spies – among them a lookalike for Riley (Lucan playing a rare male role) – are trying to get their hands on Cartwright’s invention and are posing as ghosts to scare everyone away.

Lucan’s stock in trade was screeching at full volume, falling over a fair bit and over-reacting to every situation as though he’s still trying to be seen and heard by the back row of the music hall. Everything is amped up to 11 and it becomes very tiring with extraordinary speed. Most of the supporting cast try to anchor the film in some semblance of normality, but Lucan keeps tearing around yelling and some of the cast succumb and join in the mayhem.

Director John Baxter was an old music hall man himself, working as a theatrical agent and manager before becoming a director, but also made a name for himself as the director of films about the everyday of lives of working-class people. The same year that he made Old Mother Riley’s Ghosts, for example, he made the highly regarded Love on the Dole, but he also worked with other music hall veterans Flanagan and Allen and made two other films with Lucan, Old Mother Riley in Society (1940) and Old Mother Riley in Business (1941). All of this was a long way from his best work, but he at least knows enough to just leave Lucan alone to get on with whatever it was that the crowds seem to love so much.

What seems staggering today is that it took no fewer than three sets of hands to write this nonsense, Lucan being joined at the typewriter by Geoffrey Orme and Con West. One suspects that Lucan’s contributions were the skits that he’d perfected on stage and that Orme and West came up with the rest which might explain why it all feels so disjointed. The industrial espionage business feels very out of place, the ongoing story about the new super fuel drifting in and out of the plot seemingly at random. The pacing is all over the place, taking half of the film’s mercifully brief 92 minutes before it actually gets to the business with the supposedly haunted house. And once we get there, we have a few minutes with the ghosts before it’s back to the slapstick and shouting.

Lucan died in May 1954 aged 68 and was planning to make another Old Mother Riley film, tentatively titled Old Mother Riley Goes to Mars. Fittingly perhaps, he died at the Tivoli Theatre in Hull while touring a stage adaptation of the 1938 film Old Mother Riley in Paris. His long-term understudy Roy Rolland took over the role, but only on the stage and largely in pantomime in the Welsh seaside town of Rhyl. He continued to play her (or a version of her – a disagreement with McShane led him to rename his stage persona Old Mother Kelly for a while) until he retired in 1977. There’s a clear line of descent from Lucan to Brendan O’Carroll who played a similar role in the BBC’s equally tiresome sitcom Mrs Brown’s Boys (2011-), a character whose popularity is as hard to fathom as Riley’s.

Old Mother Riley’s Ghosts barely qualifies as horror of even fantasy (the ghosts are fake and barely in it) but the scientists and their new fuel qualifies it (just) as science fiction. A couple of the other Riley films are known to have fantastical elements – in Old Mother Riley’s Jungle Treasure, she and Kitty meet the ghost of the pirate Captain Morgan (played by Sebastian Cabot) before she’s made queen of a native tribe, and in the aforementioned Mother Riley Meets the Vampire (My Son, the Vampire in the States) features a down on his luck Bela Lugosi trying to earn enough money to get back to the States after the collapse of his UK tour of a stage version of Dracula.