France is known as the first country in which fundamental rights and freedoms have been progressed and a strong democracy tradition has been established during the history of world. If the basis of mass communication is regarded as the pluralism and democracy, the developments in the France have had a big impact on this. France is one of the leader countries, in the field of broadcasting throughout Europe, in which private or independent radios have been founded by demolishing the government monopoly. The radio broadcasts started with the pirate broadcasts in the second half of the 1970s created a de facto status and gained a legal status after being accepted by the French society. The social groups, worrying about not being represented enough in the government broadcasting organizations, established the subject stations in order to make their voice heard. Although the French government had not accepted those illegal radio broadcasts at the outset, the new governments came to power had legislative efforts on this issue. By the way, frequencies were assigned to the Non-governmental organizations and social groups that wanted to broadcast and they even were supported financially. These subject developments, started with pirate broadcasts and ended up with the demolishing of government monopoly, ensured the social groups make their voices heard which had been impossible through radios before and also reawakened the radios by democratizing. This trend started in the second half of the 1970s in France has not only been restricted with to France but also affected the whole Europe. The radio, which had lost its effectiveness against to television many years ago and been near to be junked, gained its prestige back by this means. After this period, it can be said that mass media has started to utilize its educational and cultural functions which they’re accused with not to do so. The pirate radios in France were defined as local-private and foundational radios and categorized such as social communication radio, community radio stations, universities and schools, radio and rural radios with the legal regulations. The Turks living in France have started make their voices heard from the radios established at that period This study, primarily states the developments that enabled the demolishment of the broadcast monopoly of the government, then mentions Turkish broadcasting community radios and lastly current Turkish broadcasting radios. The scope of the study is limited to the radios in France.