1. Brief History of Radio

2. When was radio established?  There is no specific date in which radio was invented. it was first established twenty years after the telephone invention became a success.  Telephone was used as a communication device which was also used to send music.  A man named Guglielmo Marconi used the same method to send radio signals.

3. Guglielmo marconi  Marconi was born in Italy (1874 to 1937).  He analyzed Heinrich hertz’s early discovery of radio waves.  It gave Marconi inspiration and motivation to carry out experiment.  This would then be trailed and tested huge potential in the idea being successful.  Marconi had vast amount of knowledge of radio ways, he understood that radio ways can be used for sending and receiving telegraph messages (wireless Telegraph) he knew that his invention had potential.

4. How it all began?  The invention was first offered to the Italian government. However, the proposal was turned down.  He migrated to England Where he carried out further experiments on his radio invention.  Radio was first broadcast in Britain in 1922, by the BBC (British Broadcasting Company) named at that time.  so, it was set up by the Government so they could control it and monitor it at all times.  The first radio factory was established in Chelmsford,Essex. A radio link between Britain and France was discovered.

5. What was the radio used for?  The Radio was mainly used for soldiers in the war and to communicate news on scientific topics include space, physics, planet earth, discoveries, NASA, including satellite information were discussed.  They were able to communicate to senior authority figures in USA.

7. Radio:  Radio is the technology of using radio waves to carry information from one place to another, such as sound, by systematically modulating properties of electromagnetic energy waves transmitted through space.  When radio waves strike an electrical conductor, the oscillating fields induce an alternating current in the conductor.  The information in the waves can be extracted and transformed back into its original form.

8.  Radio systems need a transmitter to change some property of the energy produced to impress a signal on it.  Radio systems also need an antenna to convert electric currents into radio waves, and radio waves into an electric current. An antenna can be used for both transmitting and receiving.  The electrical resonance of tuned circuits in radios allow individual frequencies to be selected. The electromagnetic wave is intercepted by a tuned receiving antenna.  A radio receiver receives its input from an antenna and converts it into a form that is usable for the consumer, such as sound, pictures, digital data, measurement values, navigational positions, etc.  Radio frequencies occupy the range from a 3 kHz to 300 GHz, although commercially important uses of radio use only a small part of this spectrum.

9.  A radio communication system requires a transmitter and a receiver, each having an antenna and appropriate terminal equipment such as a microphone at the transmitter and a loudspeaker at the receiver in the case of a voice communication system.

10. Different Channels of Radio:

12.  Management Department: • Take care of overall administration of the station. • Divided under business manager, Accounting manager, Human resource manager, public relation manager, Promotion manager.  Programming Department: • This is an important component that specially deals with the media related responsibilities of the station.

13.  Programme Director: • He/she is the In charge of all works related to program planning, research, production, and permitted for transmission. • The first category include on air talent, DJs, Reporters who are normally not on the regular payroll of the station. • The other category includes production director, program executive , sport director, music director who re-directly responsibility for the production and supervision of the segment allotted to them.  Engineering Department: • The technical aspect of the station has handled by this department under the supervision of chief Engineer and Assistant Engineers.

14.  Sales Department: • It is another important section which monitor and ensure financial flow to the station. • The sales department organized on the basis of the business model followed by this station.  Radio Programms: • Radio program can be categorized into two : News and non-news(entertainment) programs.  News: • News is important because it keeps us informed as to what is happening in our community and what is happening in other communities which impinge upon our own.

15.  News bulletion: • It increase the importance in radio broadcasting and it broadcaster evening newspapers reached the streets and had been sold.  Newsreel: • It is more important to separate comment from the news. • It consist eye-witness accounts, extracts of speeches and reports of other events, commentaries ,short talks and reports and interviews in much the same way as a newspaper include pictures and feature articles.  Documentaries: . The documentary program is a story of something between 15 to 60 minutes in length. • An industrial and agriculture development may warrant 30 minutes and historical program may from 45 to 60 minutes.

16.  Talk Program: • A good radio talk , well constructed and well delivered can sparkle like a gem against the back ground of the other program which make u[p the broadcast day.  Talk: • The radio talk in neither a lecture nor a public address. The audience does not have to stay and listen and not see the speaker . Everything in a radio talk has to be carried in the words.  The best radio talk is a friendly chat built around one subject.  Interview: The radio interview is the variation of the talk by bringing to the microphone people who have something to say but who can not write talks

17.  Classified under two headings: • The personality interview which seeks to bring out the personalty of the interviewee and tells us something g about his life and ideas.  Discussion: • The discussion program provides a platform for the exchange of ideas.or intended to entertain us.  Entertainments: • Light entertainment is a rather loose term used by many station like • Light musical entertainment , comics, community singing etc.  Music: • Music fills by far the grater part of the broadcast day.

18. Characteristics of Radio as a Mass Medium

19. Radio is background medium:  Specialty of background medium is that it can be used while doing other jobs.  It means when we are busy in some other works and wants to listen the Radio . We just ON the Radio and listen any news , songs e.t.c while doing work. Radio is Cost Effective medium  Advancement of technology made radio production and transmission less expensive.  Production format is sound which can be produced at a minimum rate.

20. Radio is a public medium:  Radio can be accessed by any number of people simultaneously without much technical paraphernalia.  It means Radio is that technology which can be brought and kept by any common person.  Radio does not need much technical equipments. It can be easily used by common person. Radio is speedy medium:  Instant live broadcasting with less equipment is possible in radio section.  This point clears that how we get fast information by radio.  It is simple to use and have less technical techniques that’s why it is speedy medium

21. Radio is mobile medium  We can listen to Radio while we are moving  Radio is a mobile medium because due to this technology we does not need to sit in front of radio .  We Can listen the radio by walking Radio need less energy  In that sense it is an environment friendly medium.  Radio does not need more energy like electricity or any energy source  It can be used by Cells

22. Radio is an audio medium:  Being an audio medium, radio is accessible to the visually challenged also.  It means that radio is a listening medium. We can just listen the sounds from radio. Radio formats:  Overall content broadcasting over a radio station.  In today’s age of radio many radio formats are designed to reach specifically defined segment or niche of listening population based on such demographic criteria as age , ethnicity, background.  News , talk, sports formats  Country music formats  Contemporary hit radio(CHR) music formats  Adult contemporary music formats  Rock and alternative music formats  Urban music formats  Jazz and classical music formats  College student formats

23. Types of radio station: Commercial stations :  Stations under this category support themselves financially by selling time on their airwaves to advertisers. Non commercial stations:  Non-commercial stations do not receive financial support from advertisers in the sense of airing commercials.  Funded by the governments,  Donations from private foundations and organization are the major sources of income of non- commercial stations.