March 2022

"I am very satisfied with the use of the 1KA online survey tool - designing a questionnaire for our company's potential customers was easy. I was able to formulate relevant questions with appropriate forms of answers, but above all I am satisfied with the appearance and usability of the survey when the user completes it. The analytical tool is also great and I was able to analyze the answers with it."

A. S., future entrepreneur

"1KA allowed me to create a very simple survey that I recommend to anyone who needs it for research."

Ž.K., Doba

"I used it for my graduation seminar paper and I am very pleased as I had a nice overview of all the answers. This was very helpful to me and it was easier to statistically process the results."

Ptuj High School

"With the help of 1KA, I quickly and easily created a very high-quality survey. Most questions can be formatted with a few clicks. In the future, I will definitely use 1KA again to create surveys."

D.D., Faculty of Economics

"1KA is a very good website, you create surveys with ease, and also you have a lot of help available online."

III. high school Maribor

"Only positive experiences, all OK."

N.F., Alma Mater Europaea

"Very nice look of the final survey and easy reading of the final data."

Traffic school

"My experience with using 1KA is excellent. I had no problems, I created the survey very quickly."

Kristina Milenkov, Secondary Administrative School of Ljubljana

"Useful and excellent website. I recommend!"

D.F., Faculty of Health Sciences Novo mesto

February 2022

"Easy to use, transparent and understandable statistics, in short, I recommend."

Martin Vrašec, Slovenian Railways, d.o.o.

"A great tool for quickly creating a survey."

Barbara

"1KA is a great tool for making and later analyzing a survey. Very useful!"

Jolanda Perger, Abitura

"I recommend using it to anyone who wants to create their own questionnaire."

A.V., Almamater Europae

"I love simple, transparent and useful pages and that’s 1KA."

Nataša Šrot, organizer of the social

"The 1KA survey is a great tool. Easy to use. I will be happy to use it again."

Faculty of Design

"Simple, it works, affordable."

UL FŠ

January 2022

"A very handy app for measuring employee satisfaction."

T.H., Hisense Gorenje Europe

"I am very pleased. There are many features available and it is quick and easy to use."

T.V., Davorin Jenko Elementary School

"1KA is a very sophisticated tool for creating online surveys. Easy to use, with clear, concise instructions and all the useful features for quality execution."

S. B.

"A great tool."

Karmen Kasesnik, trade union Kindergarten Velenje

"1KA for our company represents fast and efficient, even accurate collection of the desired data. It is easy and quick to use. It provides a wide range of options for choosing the type, form of the survey question, and also offers an interesting choice of the layout of the survey. Highly recommended."

Tina Porenta, Sports Union of Slovenia

"For my master's thesis, I made a questionnaire in 1KA, which was crucial for the research part. It contributed to the successful content of the task itself."

Irena Podlipec Izak

December 2021

"Given that I am a beginner in the preparation of the survey questionnaire and have little knowledge of computer use, I am very pleased that the website guided me and offered me everything I can use in compiling the survey. Thank you 1KA."

Silva Viher, LU Ptuj

"1KA is an excellent tool for preparing and conducting surveys, analyzing results and presenting them graphically."

A.P., Regional Development Agency for Podravje - Maribor

"Using the 1KA tool is easy, it allows you to prepare quick analyzes for both professional and private purposes. With the 1KA tool, I also prepared, among other things, an analysis for a master's thesis. I highly recommend it!"

S.M., Ministry of Health

"1KA is a very simple and useful tool for creating a variety of surveys. Excellent clear and short videos help in creating the survey."

B.V

"Simple, efficient, fast."

E.L., SŽ Vit d.o.o

"1KA is very easy to use and to create surveys. In addition, it offers an excellent final analysis of the answers."

Maša Cesar, Dobrovita d.o.o.

"I had a positive experience, I will continue to use the 1KA survey tool."

Mateja Peterec, Association of the Physically Handicapped of Slovenia VIZIJA

"Excellent application availability and performance. Good forms of help. Great survey templates."

K.K.

"Excellently set, we recommend using it!"

Bohinj Tourist Association

"Creating a survey was very easy, the tools offered were appropriate. I recommend!"

Diana JT

November 2021

"It is extremely easy to create a survey. Very useful for quickly checking the knowledge and mood of the team."

S. K., NKBM

"I recently found out about the possibility of creating an online survey on 1KA from my wife's daughter, who uses it often. In the first use recently, she guided me at the beginning, but my wife and I quickly completed the procedure. It seemed transparent and understandable enough to us, so we had no particular problems. The tool has many different options that I have not been able to test yet. Upgrading to the paid package provides additional services in case we need them. I recommend."

M.Š., pensioner

"1KA is a simple and easy tool for conducting a survey - both for the surveyor and the respondent."

K. J., ICP Maribor

"Useful and easy-to-use application for research purposes."

Faculty of Health Sciences Novo mesto

"For the purpose of creating an online survey, I used 1KA for the first time - a good experience, as the tool is easy to use, transparent, and offers a good selection of basic functions."

M.R.

"Very easy to use, prepare and analyze results. Also suitable for non-experts like myself."

Janja

"Easy and fast creation of a functional survey."

Tinkara

October 2021

"Great tool, easy to use!"

MK, Eubioma

"Creating surveys and questionnaires with 1KA is really easy and fast. I would recommend 1KA to anyone."

Maruša Prosen, Optius.com

"Simple, at hand, imaginative."

ZKR ZD

September 2021

"I was lucky that my colleague recommended me the 1KA tool. It was my first time creating a survey and using 1KA made it a great experience thanks to its simplicity and clarity."

Mariem Z., Innorenew CoE, Tunisia

"Simple and clear."

Triglav consulting

"1KA is a user-friendly platform for creating surveys and analyzes. I would be happy to recommend it to anyone who needs it in their field of research."

Faculty of Government and European Studies

"I am very satisfied with the usability of the application and will continue to use it in the future."

Tanja Golja, POSLOVNI STUDIO, Tanja Golja s.p.

"1KA is easy to use and offers free access for basic testing. The basic version already provides enough tools for daily work support, and at not a high cost, tools are available for a more demanding user."

Katarina Podnar, ZRISP

"One of the best Slovenian tools with which I can easily and quickly obtain processed data."

Alma Ignjatovic, Elementary School Škofljica

"1KA offers solutions that are suitable for everyone. You can create a very simple survey that doesn’t take a lot of time, but you can also browse through more advanced features and create something seemingly complex. With the support of videos and manuals, anything is possible!"

K.L., DSMO Milje, Italy

"I was very pleased with the use of 1KA, it is easy to use and I will continue to use it!"

Sašo P., a student at the Faculty of Health and Social Sciences Slovenj Gradec

August 2021

"I had a very good experience."

T.Č., Šentjur School Center

"Easy to use even with complex questionnaires, with a rich set of options."

Vesna B., University Medical Centre Ljubljana

July 2021

"A very good tool for obtaining data for a diploma thesis."

M.P., Lampret College CONSULTING d.o.o.

"Transparent, easy to use."

I.J., Ministry of Education, Science and Sport

"I was impressed with how easy it is to use, even for those of us who are not computer experts."

Andreja Žlebnik, College of Accounting and Finance

"Great."

N.K.

"Great and easy experience, very useful!"

V.H.

"I recently created my first online survey and used the 1KA platform for this purpose. I made the survey quickly and without the need for additional instructions, and this is what means the most to me - that I can be maximally efficient at work."

Katarina Kerševan, s.p.

"I came across the creation of the survey questionnaire for the first time, but it was a very easy process with 1KA and at the same time an interesting experience."

K.J.

"The survey is simple, transparent and easy to complete."

E.Ž.

June 2021

"The experience of creating and using 1KA is positive. Results achieved. Everyone is happy."

K.B.

"1KA is one of the better solutions for obtaining answers and conducting short surveys when working remotely. It is also easy to use."

Nives Hudej

"Simple, practical, powerful."

A.M.

"Very convenient, fast and accessible."

K.M., University of Maribor

"1KA is by far the best survey tool I’ve used. For a slightly older citizen like me, who last used similar tools decades ago and would not know them now, 1KA made my work much easier, as it is very clear and easy to use, and the final product is also suitable for business or mature use."

Dean J., Sora Development Agency

"Under time pressure (due to the sudden absence of the person who usually prepares the survey and then displays the results), I was forced to create the survey myself, very inexperienced at such work. I can even say that I am not comfortable with such work. With the help of the instructions, I succeeded, the participants got the survey. I was very happy that 1KA is available and that it is so easy to use that even people with less knowledge and experience can make the basic surveys."

Živa Novak Antolič, Medical Trainers, FIC, PRIZMA Project

"Very easy to use even for first time users."

A.D., Wcycle Institute

"Simple and transparent to use, I was also able to easily edit it."

U.Č., Faculty of Applied Social Studies, Nova Gorica

May 2021

"Easy navigation, everything is straightforward."

Tseko Mofokeng

"A fast and efficient way of creating a survey and obtaining, collecting, and analyzing data."

N.K., Kindergarten Studenci Maribor

"1KA is the perfect tool for creating a business survey. Kudos to the creators."

Vesna Grgič, Nova KBM d.d.

"Simple and fast-to-manage survey system."

I.Š., Health Center Slovenska Bistrica

"1KA is the website where I created a survey for the vocational matura. It is the best option among all the others as it provides many good features to make surveying easier, simpler, and more attractive. In case of ambiguity, with the help of contact via e-mail or through frequently asked questions I quickly got the information or solved the problem. In case I need to create another survey, I will use 1KA again."

Patrik Vujičić

"1KA is a great tool for conducting an online survey. It is easy to use and offers many options for questions and answers. You will also be satisfied with the processing of the results."

M.M., University of Maribor Faculty of Organizational Sciences

"Great, easy, and fast."

Monika Poboljsaj, Faculty of Economics and Business Maribor

"Great tool."

Igor Škvarč, General Hospital Nova Gorica

"I was very happy using 1KA."

A.M., College of Hospitality and Tourism Maribor

"I was creating a survey in 1KA for the first time, so I had watched a video guide on how to create a survey beforehand. The video guide guides you nicely through the whole process. Creating a survey is a lot of fun. I am also very pleased with the simplicity and clarity of 1KA. I really recommend it to anyone who needs to create some kind of survey."

K.F., Faculty of Economics and Business

April 2021

"I had a good experience in evaluation and completion of surveys."

Alex Simon, University of Nairobi

"A great way to create beautiful and clear looking surveys."

School center Rogaška Slatina

"Great."

T.N.

"A super simple tool that offers a short basic analysis without additional data processing. Easy and useful."

M.Č., House on the Kras

"Simple, transparent, functional."

Stopar Tadej

"Very great application for creating surveys."

Žiga Ostrš, Duplek Primary School

"Using 1KA itself - making the questionnaire itself as well as solving certain surveys via 1KA, is very simple. Above all, I find it important that the whole matter is very transparent and extremely useful when working in offices, schools, etc., and useful mainly from the point of view of obtaining certain information."

Blanka Kosi Raušl, Municipality of Sveti Tomaž

"Excellent."

Gea College

"Primary choice for young people (e.g., high school students), accessible to everyone and reliable."

M.A., France Prešeren High School

"Great."

School center Slovenj Gradec

"Great! Site is very easy to use. You can also test the survey before publishing, you can also change it later, you have an insight into what the survey looks like on different devices. It’s also great that you get a lot of feedback on the survey, and it’s all free."

Karin, student

"Very efficient and fast tool. Thanks!"

Škofljica Kindergarten

"Great."

Petrol

March 2021

"1KA is very user friendly and nicely designed. It provides researchers with a substantial number of options and adequate support yet being very affordable."

I.S., Institute of Social Sciences (Zagreb, Croatia)

"Everything was great when creating the survey."

T.M., Faculty of Organizational Sciences

"Creating a survey in 1KA was a great experience, I learned something new and useful. The use is professional and simple, I think anyone can create it because of simplicity."

D.L., Doba Faculty, Maribor

"Very satisfied with the preparation of the survey questionnaire on the 1KA portal. Easy to use, fast interface operation and transparent analysis are the reasons why we will use your portal many more times."

Darko

"I find the site very useful! When I was still in school, we had to do everything by hand and it was very time consuming, so minimal energy is required here to make a questionnaire."

L.P., Erudio Education Center

"Very easy, even for the beginners in this field."

M.V., Domel d.o.o.

"Very satisfied."

A.R., Secondary School of Economics and Business

"1KA makes it easy to prepare a survey questionnaire. At the same time, it also offers good, clear analyzes of the results."

Jana P., Academy of Fine Arts and Design

"In the 1KA tool, the survey is made in a very simple and clear way. However, if you have problems making the survey, you can turn to several help manuals provided by 1KA. If I have to make a survey in the future, I will most likely use the 1KA survey tool again. The experience was phenomenal because of the simplicity and many different tools in creating the survey."

B.V., SC PET

"A very simple and easy tool to make a survey. It is intuitive and you can easily master the basic functionalities you need to create a simple survey."

Primož Satler, State Attorney's Office of the Republic of Slovenia

"A very good and useful website that I will continue to use in the future."

Faculty of Commercial and Business Sciences Celje

"Easy to use."

M.Ž.

"Great experience, considering I am a beginner and not a computer expert. I will still use it in my work and school work."

D.F., Faculty of Health Sciences

"Very easy to use with all the features you need when preparing a survey."

T.S.

"The experience was great, I didn’t run into any problems, survey creation was easy. 1KA drastically helped me with the preparation of the graduation seminar paper."

A.H., First Gymnasium Maribor

"Simple and transparent."

A.T., Savinjsko-šaleška Chamber of Commerce

"Easy and fast to use, certainly one of the better tools for creating and analyzing online surveys!"

Nina, Faculty of Design

"The 1KA experience was great: easy, fast and efficient. If there are any questions and ambiguities, videos, explanations, manuals are available to us. Something for everyone. I recommend 1KA to anyone who has encountered the survey creation for the first time."

M. S., Gymnasium Ptuj

February 2021

"I was looking for a free online survey site that allows me to use a particular type of visual analog scale for it to be used by the students I supervise. This site is not only the single one I have found that does that for free, it does a lot of things brilliantly. It does offer an incredible number of configuration options for each form, down to the slightest detail. Yet it is very intuitive and extremely easy to use: though I only watched the very short youtube explanatory video on how to get started, I was able to configure everything the way I wanted for my surveys, which include many different form (question) types. It has a great visual rendering and reliable online presence. All in all, I do recommend this survey site over the ones we usually make use of. To be totally honest, I only used the free features and they do allow for a lot of things already. I have also perused through the paid features and they seem even better. Given the price of the paid options packages, they are, in my opinion, totally worth it (I will use them myself when needed."

Serban C. Musca, Associate Professor, Univ Rennes, Rennes, France

"1KA has been and still is a great help to me. It allowed me to quickly and easily design a survey that I created for study purposes. It has many different question types that are useful and interesting for the respondent. I recommend 1KA to anyone who wants to do any type of survey."

Electronics - SC Novo mesto

"Making a survey in 1KA is very simple. The biggest advantage of 1KA is that the data is processed and that you can access various data analyses."

ZUDV DORNAVA

"Highly recommend!"

Karmen

"Great tool."

Faculty of Law

"It benefited me and allowed me an immediate approach to the opinion of the respondents."

Miro P., Elektro Maribor

"I have no complaints."

T.K.

"Very simple and transparent."

U.M., Kindergarten

"Useful and simple tool for online surveys. The free version already allows for a wide variety of questions. The analysis of the results is transparent and in the free version is sufficient for the everyday needs of surveys."

Igor Filipič, Archdiocesan Archives of Maribor

"Very useful and transparent tool."

Patricija Lovišček, Blue December Institute

"1KA suits me for the needs of my workplace. I quickly "figured it out", even though, in my opinion, I am not very computer literate. It gives me confidence that I can’t do anything that can’t be corrected or re-set."

Lucija Lešnjak, Public Institution Gornja Radgona Library

"My experience was very good. When I created the survey, I did it without any problems."

H.L., Elementary School dr. Janez Mencinger

"Easy to use."

University of Ljubljana

"Considering I’ve done it once so far, I feel like I’ve gotten around pretty quickly."

P.L., Faculty of Health Sciences Novo mesto

"A very functional and fast way to prepare a survey with many different types of questions."

Natalija Andrejka, ŠCC Gymnasium Lava

"A very easy way to create surveys."

K.F., Abitura d. o. o.

"Simple - it works."

Anka Zajc, Zajc In d.o.o. in LU Ajdovščina

"Very happy. The survey is created quickly and if you close the tab by mistake, the survey is saved in real time, which is very convenient."

Higher Vocational School for Hospitality and Tourism Maribor

"Satisfied with the use."

D. K., Paratus D. O. O.

"Ease of design and the time it takes to create a survey is the most important factor for me personally. A fast, easy and efficient tool for retrieving primary data."

Dragana M., Faculty of Economics and Business Maribor

"I have been following 1KA since its inception, during which time it has progressed as an application and as an organization that offers the market a truly quality offer. I use it both privately (in my own research) and for business (mostly with user satisfaction evaluations). It is simple, functional, with excellent customer support, and also in Slovene, which represents an important advantage over other, foreign providers. I recommend it to anyone who needs a reliable tool to conduct online research, without unnecessary complications."

dr. Jana Nadoh Bergoč, Perspektiva Business Incubator

January 2021

"I used the 1KA to create a survey for a project at my university. I went in with no prior knowledge on how to use 1KA tool, and I managed to figure everything out very quickly because of the simplicity of the interface and the logic behind the tools. The questions I had during the use were listed in Q&A. I found it very useful that you can restrict the range and the type of answers in preventing invalid input. I am curious on the features of premium users and I happen to need 1KA more often I would definitely switch to premium subscription."

M.K., University of Banja Luka

"Positive experience, gained the information I was looking for."

Samo Golenač, FS Maribor

"Great to use."

N.J., education

"Very well and clearly designed website."

L.K., Lava Gymnasium

"The 1KA online survey enables quick and easy design of surveys, as well as a transparent display of the obtained results."

Katja Krese, a student at the Faculty of Organizational Studies in Novo mesto

"Great tool, commendable."

N.M., Elementary school Milojke Štrukelj NG

"The 1KA tool is very convenient, its use is quick to master, it has good analytics."

Ana Godec, ŠC PET, Ljubljana

"It's great."

T.F.

"Although I have never used online surveys, the 1KA website has allowed me to not spend several hours trying to figure out how to use it."

Elementary school student

"Simple, transparent."

M. Š., Elementary School Jurija Dalmatina Krško

"I am very pleased. The site is simple and I figured out how and what very quickly."

Melani Tomašinjak

"Easy and simple even for someone without prior experience."

FZV NM

"If you read the instructions or video guides, you can easily create a survey or questionnaire for students or parents."

Nevenka Urbanija, Elementary School Toneta Okrogarja Zagorje ob Savi

"Using and creating a survey is simple, functional and fast."

N.K., University of NM, Faculty of Health Sciences

"Simple page, but very accurate and transparent."

ŠC PET

"Simple and transparent."

B.M., Izola Secondary School

"I have a good experience, it is practical, functional and useful."

I.S., ICP MB

"Useful tool."

A.H., Faculty of Health Sciences NM

"I am very happy with 1KA as it is very easy to use. Premade templates significantly simplify the work and help create surveys faster."

Azra Fazlić

"Great and fast!"

Ana M., Fudš

"Simple and easy to use even for not (too) experienced users of software tools!"

K.Č.

"I am very pleased."

Natalija Golob, FDŠ

"Preparing a survey in 1KA is simple, the application is very transparent and user-friendly. I like it because the most common types of questions are pre-prepared and you can only enter text. For once, I prepared simple surveys in 1KA, but I believe I would be able to prepare a more demanding survey as well. I recommend!"

mag. Barbara Jančar Rozman, Kamnik Regional Chamber of Crafts and Entrepreneurship

"Preparing an online survey with 1KA is easy and fast. I recommend it to anyone who is still deciding which tool to use."

Alenka S., New University

"1KA is a very good tool for researching opinions and views and I wish it would continue to develop in the direction of optimal use value for further statistical processing."

P.L.

"The tool is very easy to use even for those who are not so good at working with a computer. In addition, it also offers surprisingly good advice in designing the content of the survey and draws attention to the potentially inappropriate form of the question asked. Praise itself!"

Ana

December 2020

"A very positive experience for a complete beginner, the display of use is understandable and illustrative."

Aleksandra Pal

"Given that I am not skilled in working with online tools and I have resistance to them, I learned to work with 1KA very quickly (at least the basics) on my own, without the help of others. However, I have not yet done any concrete analyzes. But 1KA is definitely very easy and very useful to make questionnaires."

Alenka Križnik, Slovenian Hospice Association

"My experience was great. Everything worked very easily and quickly. I would highly recommend it to others as well, as the use is not demanding."

Kaja Krašnja

"Easy to use after multiple uses."

FZSV SG

"I am very pleased with your website as it guide us through the entire survey with instructions and recommendations. I created the survey for the first time and I find it great that you point out what would be wise to change before posting. Praise itself, all the best!"

S.P., Alma Mater Europea

"A great online platform that helps you with your school and study work, while still being easy to use."

Nika Pirnovar, PeF

"Great."

Agnes Bogataj

"The application is convenient and easy to use. What it offers in the basic free package is more than enough to make simple surveys. If you get stuck, help is only 1 click away."

S.S., VZSCE

"Pleasant experience, easy to use and very good transparency of results."

R.C., Alma Mater Europea

"An excellent and easy tool for creating survey questionnaires."

S.S.

"Great. I am very excited."

Gašper Bela

"Great."

Ana Debelak, Celje Secondary Medical School

"1KA is a great and simple website for quick survey creation, I had no problems creating it, I also like that you can see the exact results of the answers."

J.P., SŠZ

"User-friendly and easy e-tool for creating simple online surveys."

Faculty of Administration

"Great experience."

M.Š., TOTI DCA Maribor Association

"It provides essential tools and allows you to create high-quality questionnaire."

Boris Vučkič

"I have been a user of 1KA and other online survey tools for over ten years. Although I didn’t like 1KA in the beginning, it has been constantly evolving and improving over the years and today is my first choice as it has all the functionalities I need and is intuitive and easy to use. Compared to others, I find the support it offers in the development and testing phase of the questionnaire useful, as it warns users of certain types of errors in the questionnaire and allows them to comment on individual questions during testing."

Ana Slavec, InnoRenew CoE

"The survey was created quickly, as the program is extremely transparent and easy to use. I will continue to use the 1KA tool and I recommend it to anyone who needs a quick and high-quality survey creation tool."

Tina Lampreht, Trzin kindergarten

"I really like it, it is simple and offers everything I need."

Petra B., SZSCE

"Quite easy and fast compilation of a questionnaire or survey."

Nazarje Primary School

"Done quickly."

Edita Samastur

"Easy to use."

Angelo Mimmo, University of Bergamo

November 2020

"I created the survey quickly and without any problems, so I am very satisfied."

A.M., VGŠ Bled

"I am very satisfied, creating a survey on this website has helped me a lot with certain tasks at the faculty."

L.B., Faculty of Health Sciences

"1KA employees promptly assist with planned market research and are highly responsive in resolving any ambiguities. They also help to clarify methodological correctness! I highly recommend!"

Jordan Berginc, Studio of Entrepreneurship Ljubljana

"I’ve never had any experience with online surveys before, but 1KA offers very good features for composing questions and works very fast. I will definitely use 1KA again."

Z.H.

"The experience is good, I am satisfied with all the options and features."

P.R., School of Economics Celje

"Very useful and easy-to-use survey tool, I am very satisfied."

S.P.S.

"1KA is very easy to use. I first used it to survey students and teachers during school closures. I am very happy with it and will use it more often in the future."

Nataša V., School centre Ptuj

"1KA is easy to use and monitor results. It is transparent and very useful."

Simona Martinšek, Centre for Social Work

"The best."

S.S.

"Excellent survey tool with all the necessary tips and instructions, survey previews and exports."

Student at the Faculty of Organizational Sciences

"Creating a survey is quick and easy. The interface is very transparent, so you can easily adjust the look of the survey. At the end, the program reviews the survey and gives you helpful tips for recommended survey modifications. The option to test the survey before distributing it to the target group is also very useful. I am more than satisfied!"

E.A., SV

"1KA is very useful and easy to use. It has beautiful backgrounds that help enrich the survey. It is also simple for further data processing. I recommend."

Andreja Feltrin

"Easy to use, share survey and analyze results. I recommend it to anyone who needs a survey tool."

M.M., B2 School

"Very good website, I recommend it to others as well."

David Koncilija

"Great."

Elementary school Ravne

"I recommend the 1KA survey tool for study purposes as well as for other uses. It enables the creation of very complex questionnaires, which I myself used to my advantage in conducting research for my master's thesis. It is also very easy to submit surveys and their availability on several types of devices - computer, tablet, smartphones. The obtained data and the basic analytics available in the tool enabled me to move faster to more complex analyzes and thus significantly shorten the processing time. After I completed my study, I also used the tool for short simple surveys, and I will definitely use it again in the future."

Vesna Zagoda Peperko, MBA, completed postgraduate study at the Faculty of Economics and Business, University of Maribor

"Very satisfied. The survey is created quickly and easily."

Edvard Arnuga, SV

"A very useful tool."

Urban planning Institute of the Republic of Slovenia

"Easy to use and collect data, while also offering fast data analysis."

Ema Dornik, IZUM

"Great."

Mojca Seljak

"The best thing about 1KA is that it works quickly and efficiently. It saves a lot of time, and also the whole process is easy, with a lot of services."

Christian Volčanšek, FUDŠ

"I'm satisfied."

Anja Mazej

"Creating a survey using 1KA is easy. Very high transparency."

Romana Šarec Rojc, principal of Šmihel Primary School

"The tool for creating the survey is simple and transparent, and the obtained results are very important."

M.S.

"1KA helped me with my study obligations in my master's program. I used it for the first time and I got the desired result without any problems. I recommend 1KA."

B.R., New University, European Law Faculty

"I was satisfied. It is practical to use."

Teja Barle

"Easy and transparent to use."

Adela Čolnik, FZV Maribor

"I think this website is one of the most useful. With the help of these surveys, I learned a lot, and above all, they came in handy for my school obligations."

Urša Adamič, Velenje College of Environmental Protection

October 2020

"Using 1KA is easy and suitable for users at all levels (even a beginner can quickly create a survey)."

Dejan, teacher

"1KA is a simple and easy tool that makes it easier to create, distribute and analyze surveys. By upgrading to 2KA or 3KA, we can export data and analyze it, e.g. in SPSS, Excel ..."

Polonca Krobat

"Very great website, I also use it myself. I find it very useful and instructive."

F.N.

"As users of the online survey tool, we have a positive experience. We are glad that the online surveys were well-received by our respondents, who are our key target group."

NOVUS society

"1KA is easy to use, offers a large number of functions, has good support and annual trainings, which help to make even better use of the tool and to keep up to date with new features."

Slovenian Forestry Institute

"I am very satisfied with the 1KA, as it allows you to easily create an online questionnaire, even for those who are not the most computer-savvy. I use 1KA for study purposes, for seminar papers, and this year especially for the master's thesis. I like it very much because you can change the look of your survey, the ability to export graphs and tables, and more. I would warmly recommend it to anyone who wants to conduct research from start to finish."

A. F., Faculty of Education

"I am very satisfied and I will definitely use it in the future."

Barbara Kovač, Elementary School and kindergarten Apače

"Given that I'm not the most adept at using technology, 1KA didn't cause me any problems."

Secondary Health School Ljubljana

"1KA survey tool helped me to do the seminar paper, I created the survey quickly and without major problems."

L.K., B2 High School

"Simple, transparent."

A. M., University of Ljubljana Faculty of Theology

"With the 1KA survey tool, as a cultural association, we can quickly and easily obtain the opinions of our viewers, which are important for our further direction."

Špas teater

"A great tool for research."

Grm Novo mesto

"It helps me a lot in school, because with the 1KA survey tool I can quickly create a survey and obtain different answers."

Jan Rajh, Secondary School of Economics Maribor

"With the help of the 1KA online survey tool, I was able to easily create an online survey for the needs of my research. Later, based on the analyzes offered by 1KA, I came to useful data and graphical representations."

M.E., Alma Mater Europaea ECM

"Very good."

Nastja Gonza, II. Secondary School Maribor

"Excellent."

Jasna Rituper Hari, Secondary School Murska Sobota

"Quick and easy to use."

M.D., Secondary School Ledina

"I like 1KA because it has all the tools I need to create a survey."

Jovana Stanković, Environmental and communal protection, VSŠ Novo mesto

"Satisfied."

Sara Regina, Gea College

"The graphical interface of the application is very user friendly."

Gregor Čadež, Faculty of Health Angela Boškin

September 2020

"I would highly recommend using 1KA tool for survey purposes as it is really user friendly and easy to work on."

Asmita S., Research Scholar at VJTI.

"Great tool! I would recommend it to anyone who needs a quick and easy survey creation."

Barbara Vraničar, Development and information center Bela krajina

"The 1KA web application is very useful for all types of research. It is easy to use and to perform analysis."

Robert Gajšek

"My first encounter with online surveys was in research work a good ten years ago. Since then, I’ve tried a few different tools for making online surveys and 1KA is definitely the best for my needs. It offers all the options I need. In times when I don’t know how to proceed, telephone help is also available, which is extremely valuable for anyone who prefers to ask rather than write messages and watch video guides. The possibilities of automatic creation of graphs, bilingual surveys and questionnaire templates are very welcome. What I might change is the simplification of the interface for users who only need basic functions and are confused rather than dazzled by many additional features. I really like the graphical user interface, the simple and clean design supports the functionalities and simplifies the procedures, making them easier to remember. I took part in an educational web survey day, where I also found out what makes 1KA so good. Its creators do their work passionately and with a high degree of professionalism. Thanks and keep up the good work"

Saša Podgoršek, Faculty of Arts, University of Ljubljana

"Simple, useful and high quality."

Sanja Š., Elementary School Dekani

"User friendly and easy to use."

Jasna Z, Secondary School Slovenska Bistrica

"Easy, fast and transparent."

Marija Arh Ivanšek, SGTŠ Radovljica

"1KA enables easy and fast creation of questionnaires, so I always use the system on this occasion."

N.Z.

"Very easy to use and also the graphs we get from data analysis are nicely clear."

BI, Education centre Memory

"Clear, transparent, efficient, fast."

Domen Zupan, Faculty of Tourism, University of Maribor

"Arrived, wrote, analyzed."

Gašper Žemva, Institute for Urbanism Maribor

"1KA provides all the necessary tools needed to create a survey. All types of questions are available (from those with 1 correct answer, to those with several correct answers, etc.). I highly recommend!"

Secondary School Koper

"Satisfied."

Nina K., elementary school teacher

August 2020

"I was very pleased with the survey creation in 1KA."

Faculty of Organizational Sciences

"Great! I had no problems at all."

VK, Pef (UNI LJ)

"Because it is simple and effective."

Kaja Grum, Erudio

"Quick, easy and straightforward!"

R.K., Public Administration

"Worth using."

GSŠRM Kamnik

July 2020

"Very easy to use, many different options for making different surveys, transparent data analysis."

Aleksander Žitko, Dušan Bordon Semedel Elementary School, Koper

"The app is easy to use."

Matej Mogilnicki, Gorenje

"Preparing a survey at 1KA is very simple and user-friendly."

Ana Marija Krč, Faculty of Education

"1KA is useful, transparent and very easy to use."

Larisa Berginc, Verlag Dashöfer, d.o.o.

"Great templates, quick survey creation."

Alexander Majetic, Cdi Universe

"A user-friendly tool that can serve as a standard tool for preparing opinions, while already providing analysis with a suitable structure."

N.P., NIJZ

"A very good and handy tool for making surveys."

Aleksander Žitko, Dušan Bordon Elementary School, Koper

"Useful and free."

AT

"With the 1KA survey, we gained valuable opinions from those we addressed. Making a survey is so easy that even those who are not exactly skilled in it can make it."

Matjaž Črešnovar, RKS - Žalec Regional Association

"A quick and easy way to get feedback."

JP CČN Domžale-Kamnik

June 2020

"The experience was good. Everything worked without any problems. I like it because the data has already been processed and analyzes have been done, which is very suitable for diploma and master's theses."

Mateja Rupnik, Faculty of education

"Online surveys allow us to communicate with our target audience and allow the latter to hear their opinions. 1KA offers us a handy tool that is always available to us."

LB

"In 1KA surveys, I especially like the ability to process data in many different ways."

Taja Pajmon Rak (UP FAMNIT)

"Quick and practical survey."

DF, Institute of St. Stanislav

"1KA is very useful, transparent and clear. Even though I conducted this form of survey for the first time, I had no problems."

School Centre Nova Gorica

"I was looking for a simple and functional way to make a survey, and 1ka came in very handy. What I liked most was that I did it quickly and that the survey also worked professionally (logo, question on each page, typography, white background) - all this makes the experience more beautiful for users as well. In the past I filled out surveys on 1ka and I remembered it, precisely because of its ease of use and beautiful design. Thanks also for all the tips and answers in the FAQ section. Stay great."

Anita Grgic, Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science

"I've already filled out a survey questionnaire on 1KA many times and I've never had a problem with that. I also created a survey on the site, it was very easy :)"

Maja, University of Ljubljana

"1KA is a great tool for creating an online questionnaire. The appearance is extremely transparent, the user manual is simple. The entered texts are saved in real time. The added value of the 1ka portal is setting conditions that allow respondents to be divided into groups according to the type of answer. public opinion research. I also make evaluation questionnaires in it."

Ana Peklenik, Andragogy Center of Slovenia

"Very easy to use and a pre-prepared answer structure makes the job much easier. The work is also made easier by the already made graphs."

Faculty of Arts MB

"Simple, intuitive, good architecture and good coverage of the logic of user needs / functionalities required in surveys. The tool is parametrically open."

Bojan Ručigaj

"Excellent tool for making and processing survey questionnaires. Absolutely worth recommending. I will use it in the future as well. Thank you 1KA !!!"

Piotr Micyk Faculty of Management UP Koper

"Easy, fast and efficient to online survey and data export including basic statistical methods."

Matej Kalar, student, DOBA Business School

"I'm very happy with the 1ka web tool, it has all the functionality you might need and you can customize the design quite a bit to your liking."

Nick Gatnik, France Bevk Elementary School Ljubljana

"For the free app, 1KA offers a lot of content. For something more, of course, you have to pay."

Danilo Kovačič student, DOBA Business School

"1KA is a useful tool for quickly creating an aesthetically designed survey, which also suggests improvements and gives you generated feedback, which you can then further process on your own."

IS

"When completing the survey, everything was very nicely described and distinct that I didn't need help. Commendable."

Dragan Bera

"I like the 1KA tool because making the survey in this tool is relatively easy, the observed data is clearly presented in the survey results."

Marjana Turnšek, Gimnazija Celje - Center

"Easy to use! I have no other experience, but it is very functional and user-friendly."

M. P. (Central Library of Celje)

"I created an online survey on 1KA for the first time, but despite my inexperience, I managed to create it in a short time and without any problems. It seems really simple to use. For me, it turned out to be a great tool for getting feedback on customer experience."

Petra Kolarič, Institute Bodidobro

May 2020

"1KA was very useful for me when creating the survey questionnaire, because I had no experience with composing surveys before. It is very useful, the instructions follow well, and help is offered at every step, so I would recommend 1KA to anyone who would like to create survey questionnaire."

SB, Secondary Medical and Cosmetic School Maribor

"Simple, convenient and professional."

Mateja Magdalenič, school for principals

"Great to use, very functional."

AV, SZKS Maribor

"My opinion is that 1KA is an extremely well made and user friendly environment."

Bojan Božnik, DOBA (student)

"1KA is a tool with which we have simplified and improved the quality of communication between members and management of the association and within the executive board of the association. 1KA is used for membership votes on certain issues and for correspondence meetings when there is a need to vote. We have also successfully used 1KA to hold a general meeting. Due to the latest pandemic, we have not been able to organize a general meeting with the physical presence of members. Easy to use, many useful suggestions and excellent results."

Jernej Jenko, Society of Security Engineers Ljubljana

"A very high quality and simplified survey program. I recommend it to everyone."

S. G., FDV

"A simple, useful and sophisticated tool that really makes it easy for you to create the perfect questionnaire. You constantly have control over the data you need and you can even do a quick analysis."

Tina Jerman

"I'm very, very happy with the 1KA survey. I would absolutely use it next time to make a survey. Quick and easy."

Neja Tekavec, Biotechnical Faculty

"1KA made it possible and easier for me to work remotely during COVID-19."

U. B.

"The application or tool 1KA is completely suitable, flexible and with a little skill perfectly appropriate for making surveys. Regardless of the initial difficulties in use, I am very satisfied with the use itself and I recommend it."

PZ, Faculty of Commercial and Business Sciences, Celje

"Creating a survey is quite easy even for those who are starting to create an online survey for the first time. I recommend it."

Katarina Prelesnik

"1KA is a quality online tool that provides quick answers. Anyone who learns to use the app gains a lot."

Nina Papež, Gymnasium and Secondary School Kočevje

"The 1KA online tool is very useful - when I did my first survey, I got a lot of praises from my colleagues from the counselling service. None had prepared an online survey by then, but only a paper-pencil format."

Božena Stritih, counsellor, Najdihojca kindergarten Ljubljana

"Very satisfied. The site works fast. Surveys are easy to compile."

PGD ​​IC Konus

"1KA contains everything you need to create and process a survey."

Maja D.: IBS International Business School

"I came across online surveys for the first time. Your online platform allowed me to create a survey fairly quickly and without complications. I also had no major problems reading the results. I liked that 1KA allows automatic graphing, which was quite useful in interpreting results of the survey."

M. K., DOBA EPIS d. o. o.

"A very useful and easy survey tool."

University of Primorska

"Before I started making the survey, I admit I was nervous. After watching the introductory video, I realized that the thing is simple and, above all, easy to use. Very satisfied."

M.A. School Centre Kranj

"A very good and useful tool."

Andreja Pavlin, Good Society Institute

"I used the survey to check students' prior knowledge while learning from home."

Maja Garbajs, CVIU Velenje

"The easiest way to check opinions!"

Milan Krajnc, County Academy

"Great tool, fairly easy to use. Possibility of basic statistics. Possible use in teaching processes, lectures, etc. I recommend."

T.P., UKC LJ and MF

"Very easy to use, transparent."

Gymnasium Ptuj, Ema Golub

"I used an online survey to teach, to test students' knowledge at a distance."

Mojca Križnik, Ljubečna Primary School

"1KA is extremely easy to use and made in a user-friendly way. I definitely recommend designing any survey, as you can design the survey extremely easily exactly as you would like."

A. U.

"1KA works smoothly, the site is user-friendly, once you figure out where something is, it goes great."

Kaja Ševeček, FERI UM

"Very useful and above all faster for data retrieval."

Karin Kirm, Faculty of Management

"Thank you for existing because you saved me a tremendous amount of time."

s.g. Koper University of Education

"Extremely easy to prepare surveys and very well done analyzes, easy to export. Great!"

Maja Kitano

"Easy to fill and user friendly to inexperienced users for conducting a survey."

ARZ (Faculty of Philosophy UL)

"Simple, accessible, efficient and functional."

Svetlana Subić, Faculty of Maritime Studies and Transport

"The experience with 1KA is positive. The big thing is that all the instructions are in Slovene."

Mira Anderlič, Primary School Destrnik-Trnovska vas

"1ka is a fast, very useful, clear online tool. The results at the end of the survey are also useful and do not need to be processed. The video guide helped me a lot in making it, otherwise the appearance of the tool is clear, so there are no major problems in making a survey."

K.T., counsellor at the elementary school

"1KA- easy, efficient, fast and transparent survey creation and survey results review. I recommend."

K.S. Faculty of Philosophy

"Very simple and useful for everyone."

Marija Holc

"I came across 1KA survey at work when the survey among employees was conducted by the management of the institution (primary school). We also received the results of the survey and were aware that there is not much work with the analysis, as the program offers many analyses of the results. I had to collect some data, which I usually collect via e-mail, but this time I decided to collect it with the help of a survey. The composition of the questionnaire took me surprisingly little time, and I was very happy with the time savings, as I did not need edit and count the results."

M.S.

"1KA is a reliable tool for designing survey questionnaires. It is easy to use. It allows a variety of options. It offers sufficient challenges for slightly more demanding questionnaires. I would definitely recommend it."

Viktorija Osolnik Kunc, Faculty of Philosophy

"I needed a very simple survey. Even though I haven't come across an online survey yet, everything was very easy with 1KA. The data obtained is transparent and easily transferable to Excel. I recommend it."

Ana Rebov, KRG Narodni dom

"Fairly easy and fast to use."

Neža R., FDV

April 2020

"1KA is a very good free tool for creating and analysing surveys. Data transfer to Excel is also very useful."

Franc Rant, Elementary School Železniki

"I use the 1KA survey to check and consolidate my knowledge in primary school (6-9th grade BIO, NAR). The possibility of inserting pictures into assignments would help me."

Alenka Malešič

"The 1KA survey has simplified my work as it is very easy to do a survey and besides, it seems to me that as a composition the survey itself is beautiful. It includes a lot of options on how we can put together what I think is great."

Oriana Jekl I. gymnasium in Celje

"I liked that the instructions were clear and understandable, and the survey presented a lot of possibilities, which allows flexibility in the preparation of the survey. I also liked the statistically processed data or analyses performed by the system itself."

Dominika S.

"I used 1KA for the survey in the seminar paper. Since I was doing the survey for the first time, I wasn't so good yet, but I did a great survey with the help of a video explanation."

A.K. I. gymnasium in Celje

"Easy to use, even for beginners. I highly recommend."

Tanja Boltin, Litija High School

"I am extremely pleased with the use of 1KA, because it allows easy and comprehensive use of the tool even for complete beginners."

E. Žitko, for IBBY

"I was extremely pleased with this app."

Barbara Kastigar, Preschool Faculty

"Great tool: easy and effective with instant results. Congratulations!"

Mag. Tatjana Štinek, OOZ Celje, SPOT consulting Savinjska

"Recently, for the first time in my life, I created an online survey, I used your portal. Since I don't have this kind of experience, I was a little "scared" when I started creating the survey that I wouldn't be able to do it properly. I did very well. If I were to do a more demanding survey, I would have to take a little more time to review all the options. So far, I am very happy with your site. Thank you! "

Mojca Žugman

"The 1KA website is great, especially for users without any experience with similar sites."

Etrš Brežice

"The site is useful and ok."

JF Dragotina Ķette Primary School Ilirska Bistrica

"Easy and fast."

M.M. UP PEF Koper

"Using the tool is very simple and allows you to quickly and efficiently create questionnaires, with a variety of types of questions. I was particularly impressed by the easy availability of questionnaires, as well as the ability to freely edit the layout - font, background and other settings."

V.G. Gymnasium Ptuj

"1KA is very convenient, recommended and suitable for work in schools."

Secondary school Veno Pilon Ajdovščina

"I am very satisfied; it will be of great help to me in the future."

Ijs

"I've been using the 1KA online survey for a very long time. Years ago it was easier for me to use than it is now. The site has been very updated and allows for a very diverse survey, which I like, but it takes quite some time to “learn” everything. I don't have a bad comment, it's great for me."

BIC Ljubljana

"This is the first time I've done an online questionnaire in 1KA. At first I was afraid of possible problems, but I found myself right away. It wasn't hard for me. I found everything and also understood."

Petra Kožuh

"Hello! As I indicated in your 1KA survey itself, that I don't know of any other tools for getting anonymous opinions, using them has helped me a lot on a particular topic."

BBL, NOVUS Velenje

"Very convenient and easy to use, my sister used it several times for college for various research assignments and she was very happy with the service."

Zlata Čehić, Medvode Elementary School

"Very easy, quick to use."

Sanja Vukovic

"The 1KA tool is user-friendly and easy to use. If you get stuck when designing a survey, there are very useful user guides."

BH

"The experience was good, nicely explained how to use the survey, lots of options on how to put together the survey and quite simple."

M. Ekart; Novo mesto Vocational College

"A great tool for making surveys. Very simple and clear to use, also the results in the analysis are clearly presented. I really recommend it."

Maša Kastelic, Society for the Protection of Animals Ljubljana

"1ka is a great tool that I really liked because of its ease of use."

Miha Osredkar, Želimlje High School

"I am very happy that I did a survey in 1KA, if I ever have a survey to do, I will choose you again."

Katarina Renko, participant in the World of Entrepreneurship program

"1ka.si online surveys are awesome! Easy to use, understandable video manual, quick solutions. I am very happy for the 1ka.si website and the use is free!"

Klemen Nikolič

"1KA is a great website. I had trouble writing questionnaires. I looked up how the questionnaire is done, and then it was easier."

Sara Radevska School center Novo mesto

"Nomen est omen. 1KA is one of the best online survey tools."

Eva Matjaž, Polygon Creative Center

"It's great for getting data."

Mfpdš

"1KA is easy to make, everything is unambiguously written, easily accessible, without some numerous registrations. The analysis of the surveys is then simple. I am grateful to my friends for referring me to this page."

Jana Dovnik, Ivan Cankar Elementary School Ljutomer

"Out of distress during Covid-19, we used the 1ka survey, because it is a really useful tool for fast and transparent data collection and processing; we will include its use in education for employees at our school. Best regards."

mag. Francka Mravlje, Elementary School Kajetan Kovič Poljčane

"I recommend it for conducting short surveys."

Barbara Krajnc

"A nice online tool for creating a survey. A good overview of constantly updated and processed statistics. Kind of like this: easy, fast, transparent and extremely useful."

Klemen Kotnik, Drago Kobal Primary School MB

"I started preparing an online survey for the first time and, honestly, I was worried. However, all concerns were dispelled when I started making the survey. At 1KA, the instructions were clear and user-friendly, so there were really no problems. I'm impressed and will gladly continue to use it."

H.P.

"The 1KA online tool helped me a lot in distance learning, as I was able to do a questionnaire in an easy way, and the students got the result as soon as they filled it out."

Monika Vogelnik Jesenice High School

March 2020

"1KA is a great program for creating a survey. I always use this site because I can create a survey quickly and with quality. In addition to creating a survey, it also provides excellent data analysis."

T.K. GFML

"Great website for conducting various surveys!"

K.B. – UNG

"1KA is fairly easy to use."

Darja Košnik, Primary School Kranj

"Simple and fast."

Loti Gorenc, Biotechnical Faculty - Department of Landscape Architecture

"The 1KA survey is extremely simple. It can be customized for individual projects, as it has the ability to enter logos. In addition, the analysis is quite simple and transparent when the surveys are completed. We are very satisfied."

Eldina Čosatović, RAGOR

"It's great because it analyses all the answers and makes graphs, it helped me a lot because I didn't have to count the answers myself and I actually just copied the graphs to my master's degree. I regret not using it for my thesis. It would have saved me a lot of time."

Nataša, FDV

"Making a survey is easy, I like that there are so many gadgets if you don't understand something. I would recommend it."

Btš Naklo

"Your survey made it easier for me to work with, I was especially pleased with the instructions, as I made the product easier. I will definitely need to rehearse a little more for a new survey."

Vojka Kovačič, Elementary school

"Through online survey tools, I have created online survey for distance education students. In this way, I learned about their way of working and whether or not they understand the explanation, I even prepared some repetition material for them. I am very satisfied with the use of this app, it helped me a lot with my work and the work of students. Thank you! "

Helena Kramar Skubic (Ivan Skvarce Primary School, Zagorje ob Savi)

"Surveys on 1KA are very useful and easy to compile. Collection or data processing is also very useful. I recommend!"

Sabina

"Transparency of received answers, automatic editing of answers in the form of graphs, various forms of data exports."

Jasna Jakopič Meze of Ivan Cankar Elementary School (SRP)

"The tool is easy to use and allows a lot in a free account."

P.N math teacher

"Making surveys via 1KA is easy and intuitive. I especially like the modern look of the surveys."

B. G., University of Ljubljana

"A great tool for creating even the most demanding questionnaires!"

Silva Grobelnik Mlakar, UM, Faculty of Agriculture and Biosystem Sciences

"I had to do one survey quickly and since I had never done a survey before, I first remembered this 1KA site. I easily found myself doing it as I wanted and could use it the next day for an online survey."

Neža Hladnik, UP PEF

"The 1KA survey is very useful, easy to navigate, it is very easy to make, if you don't know how to do something, you have help on video guides so there are no problems. It's simply great."

Secondary School of Hospitality and Tourism in Ljubljana

"When creating the questionnaire, I liked the window with the additional options that helped me improve it, so I got all the answers I needed."

K.R., University of Economics Ljubljana

"Simply made with minor complications."

Julia Bečan, Institute of St. Stanislav, Diocesan Classical High School

"Making a survey is extremely simple and quick; it's a very useful way to quickly review an understanding of a learning topic that students also like."

Nataša Zidar, Elementary School Podgora Kuteževo

"Despite concerns that I don't know the application that probably requires demanding knowledge, the work after watching the video guide went easily. I prepared and edited the survey in a very short time, as the application is really user-friendly."

U. J., Gymnasium NG

"It's fast, easy and useful, because in the end, there is also an analysis."

DG, Primary School

"1ka is a very high quality tool for creating and analysing surveys. It's easy, even if you are meeting it for the first time and you are not a great computer expert. Data analysis is also very high quality and useful."

Tea Žgajner, Hudinja Primary School

"1KA is easy to use and very practical."

L.S., Primary school

"Very useful and high quality."

T.Š.

"I used an online survey tool for the first time, and I am extremely pleased that this is exactly what I came across - I compiled it without difficulty, users (students and teachers) also filled it out with ease. I was most impressed with the answer analysis and the option of exporting the results in a transparent pdf format. Thank you that for existing and being completely free - it is a rarity in today's world :)"

Mateja Šparovec, Radovljica High School of Hospitality and Tourism

"Easy and efficient, with excellent professional support (video guides) for quick and easy learning."

Miha Gorenc, Šentjernej Primary School

"The 1ka survey was easy to use and high quality."

V.L. Gymnasium Kranj

"Useful and above all easy to use. Good analysis."

J. Hudales Elementary School Jurovski Dol

"I prepared the 1KA survey as one of the tasks of the seminar. The instructions are very clear, transparent. I watched the video guides and then easily compiled the survey. I like that you can prepare a presentation of the results in different ways. I also recommend it to beginners!"

Alenka B. Demšar, Elementary School Bled

"During these days of working remotely, the 1ka tool allowed me to check students' knowledge in a very easy way with the help of quizzes. As I am a new user, I do not know all the options and settings, but I would be very happy to see quiz analyses and how was it solved by individual students."

Mateja Samastur, Primary School Ljubečna

"I think it's a very good website. It came in very handy when I needed a survey for a seminar paper as I couldn’t give out a piece of paper to other students to solve. I really like it :)))"

Ema Hrnčič, Eight hostages Primary School

"The survey gives a quick insight into the work of all students."

Nataša Č.

"Very quick and easy to use, I'm happy to recommend it;)."

Tina Zabovnik, GSKŠ Ruše

"Very intuitive tool. It also does basic statistical analysis. I recommend."

IR, Faculty of Biotechnology UL

"The 1KA survey met my expectations and I will continue to use the application. Thank you."

Zuhra Horvat, Library School Center Slovenj Gradec

"Very easy to use, transparent web site, good templates and nice graphics."

Matjaž Stanič

"I can gather useful data analysis."

M.C, Primary School of the Istrian Detachment Gračišče

"It's great for us beginners."

Brigita Blaževič

"1KA not only allowed me to compose a survey quickly and easily, but also enabled me to analyse the results perfectly. The results are stored and processed by yourself, which allows you to make graphs easier and have a better overview of the answers. I would recommend it to anyone doing the survey for the first time, because you often do not think about the opportunities offered or advised by 1KA, as well as those who are in need of a survey in quickly :). "

G.N. Gymnasium Kranj

"1KA is a great survey site. It provides various types of questions and answers, is easy to use and free of charge. The data is perfectly processed and the data review is very good. I would recommend it to anyone who wants to do a survey or maybe a questionnaire as a distant learning aid."

Barbara Vidic, elementary school teacher

"Using 1KA is very convenient, you have everything in the palm of your hand, from analysis, graphs to useful options."

Veronika Saje, High School Črnomelj

"The surveys are transparent and well designed. I compiled the survey quickly and within a few days I received feedback as most of the respondents filled it out. It is also great that the surveys do not need to be processed as this is done by the program and the survey analyses are transparent. "

Andreja Gračner, Biotechnical School Maribor

"I recommend it especially to those who work for school and some don't know about 1KA, I recommend it because it's a really good thing and everything goes as it can."

Janja Peklič

"Easy for the user. We can also help with the video guides. When you do the first survey, you know everything. Just like riding a bike :)."

M. Š.

"Transparent. Understandable. Useful. I recommend :)."

Damjana H.

"I'm new to this field, but working with your help has been made much easier for me. Thank you."

JG (Faculty in Primorska)

"I think it's very transparent to both, the person making it and the user. Keep on going!"

Požek Vanesa, elementary school of Belokranjski Semič detachment

"1KA is a useful tool that makes it very easy to create a survey. Using the tool seemed easy to me. You need to click a little through what is offered, but if you run into a problem, there are several types of help with instructions that are clear. "

L.L., employed in elementary school

"Simple and fast poll creation with all the tools added. I recommend it!"

Jana Nerat, teacher at the Bled Elementary School

"1KA surveys are easy to use, quickly made survey, quick statistical analysis - great for work in and out of class :)"

Mojca Strgar, BIC Ljubljana

"The production of the questionnaire went smoothly. All the tools that 1KA allows came in handy so that I could easily create the questionnaire."

K.R., University of Economics Ljubljana

"Quickly and easily create a survey questionnaire."

N.K.

"1KA helped me a lot with the research."

High school

"I would like to commend the online survey with 1KA. I especially like that the instructions are clear and transparent enough, that the use of the survey is simple enough and that it offers many possibilities for use in education."

AD, Primary School Šmartno pod Šmarno goro

"I was very pleased with the conduct of the survey. Also with the statistics that the program provides at the end."

MŠ Graduation course of high school Poljane

"From the principal of the school where I work, we were given the task to obtain information from parents of students, class teachers how many students have access to the Internet, computer, tablet, phone and printer at home. Based on this information, we then prepared a distance learning plan. It has been running since March 15, 2020 and with it we have adapted the work to individual students."

Stanka Grah, Simon Jenko Smlednik Elementary School

"1KA allows you to design an online survey in a quick and easy way, works flawlessly and offers quality help in case of problems."

Tanja Beber, Joze Gorjup Elementary School Kostanjevica na Krki

"My opinion of 1KA is positive I have no criticism everything is great."

Barbara Zupančič, student at VSGT Maribor

"Easy to use and a great help in data analysis."

Urška Šteh, Brinje Grosuplje Primary School

"The survey is very user friendly because the way to share the survey among the respondents is easy. Also processing data and graphs is very fast. I used to use SPSS before, but not anymore."

Barbara Sitar, SC Nova Gorica

"I'm happy with the design of your online survey."

MŠ Rubicum finance d.o.o.

"I watched a few videos to make the survey, the use itself is very easy and convenient, no jams, it's transparent."

Tjaša J., High School

"Great tool, easy to use, automatic analysis, good support for work. I recommend distance learning through Arnes to learn how to ask questions and answers correctly. Great thing."

Miha Gorenc, Šentjernej Primary School

"During distance learning, 1KA came in very handy as a teacher. I easily designed a questionnaire, which I gave to the students. I also got great feedback or analysis of the answers."

Elementary school Spodnja Šiška

"Working with 1KA is easy, it has a huge range of possibilities that can be purposefully exploited by getting questionnaires for dedicated users."

MV Forestry school Maribor

"Easiest to use and quick to share. Great."

LZ, Gymnasium Litija

"Using the 1Ka online tool is really easy. My students also get to know it during their research work in primary school, and they quickly learn to use the tool. I recommend it."

Barbara Vevar, Primary School dr. Janez Mencinger Bohinjska Bistrica

"My experience with 1KA surveys has been great, otherwise I only used it for a few surveys, but I am very pleased."

Laura G. Elementary School

February 2020

"Easy to use."

Marko Klemenčič

"Great, easy, fast :) really awesome for making quick surveys."

BS, RIC Nm

"Super awesome, easy to make."

Gim Žel

"It's great and very easy, lots of options in the making .... :)"

Špela Capl

"1KA has been a great help to me in writing my diploma. It provides many opportunities for quick survey creation."

Uroš Medvedec, Police Academy

"I'm very pleased."

Ana Lebar

"Excellent, I just need to check that the data in the analysis can be used by complex, or if it is possible to subsequently sort and partially evaluate only part of the data through analysis. For now, if I want to process only part of the data from the whole survey, I have to export it to Excel and process them “manually”. It's probably possible, but I'm not familiar with it yet."

Peter Valic, Dobravlje Elementary School

"1KA made it very easy for me to do the survey myself, and it also allowed me to process data quickly and thoroughly."

Live Vita Vertačnik, gymnasium Ravne na Koroškem

"I was browsing the web to find a page that would help me create a survey for my seminar paper. At the discovery of 1KA, I was very pleased with the site. The guidance and assistance they provide on the site is very helpful and enables you to create a survey in a very short time. I would recommend the site to anyone who wants a simple and easy survey making. Good luck to everyone in creating a survey."

Ana A. H.

"A very good way of survey making, I’ll use it for the final exam."

Medina Ziberi

"An excellent application for conducting internal surveys in the society. A great advantage over other foreign websites is that both questions and the tool are in the Slovenian language!"

NP, PGD Hoče

"I had some problems doing online surveys until I heard about 1KA at the Faculty of Management. I decided to try out the application and despite some problems with creating an online survey, I am very happy with 1Ka. I’d recommend it to anyone conducing an online survey, as well as anyone who is pursuing a bachelor's, master's degree, research, ... "

Briana Bolčina, UP FM Koper

"Easy to create an online questionnaire. You don't have to have the computer skills to do a quality survey."

Petra Majcen, University of Primorska

"My experience is very good. I knew about the program before, but I learned to use it in high school. It seems very useful and well-composed. Useful in everyday life. "

Luka F., Franz Miklošič High School Ljutomer

"Using the 1KA survey is very easy and I would recommend it to anyone who wants to get the opinion of their users, customers."

Marija Rogan Šik, PGZ SPOT

"Easy, it helped me with my study."

P.O. FZSV Slovenj Gradec

"1KA is an extremely useful online survey service. It's fast and easy to use and offers a lot of features for creating and executing an online questionnaire. What I like most is that it has many options for analysing the information obtained, the ability to segment your audiences, and to process statistical data. The site contains all the information I needed to create my first survey. Thank you for your service!"

D. G.

"Very fast and easy to make, very useful. It displays the data nicely with the graph."

Vid Faganel

"I used it once. I got stuck a few times but had no bigger problems in the making."

Nastja Jurjevčič; BIC Ljubljana

January 2020

"A great data acquisition tool!"

Matej C.

"No complaints."

Jožica Jurkovič, Spominčica Society

"A very good and simple tool."

Igor Kuželj, Primary School Podbočje, Primary School Raka

"Working with surveys is very easy. It's fairly intuitive and easy to get to the product you want. It's better than other (even paid) tools and I would recommend it."

University of Ljubljana

"The survey tool is easy to use. The instructions are clear and transparent. I prepared, tested, and put the survey to work quickly and easily. The reports are transparent and very helpful."

Andrej Novak, Primary School of the Letonja brothers, Šmartno ob Paki

"The 1KA is a very handy survey tool. I recommend it to anyone who wants a good and fast survey."

Litija High School

"The app is great, showing respondents' answers could be shown better / on more different ways."

Lara SC, II. high school Maribor

"1KA is effective and easy to compile as well as to complete the questionnaire. It is transparent and provides complete statistics and analysis of the respondents. I recommend :)"

Damira Jukič, Celje Higher School of Economics, major in Social Networking

"I am not the type of person who is attracted to technology and various computer tools, but I work for an organization where I develop new and upgrade existing programs. For this purpose, it is very important to know the current state and build based on user needs. 1ka is transparent and effective tool that gives me just that insight. I am impressed by this simplicity, accessibility, smooth flow, instant answers, lots of help files ... I use it, I will continue to use it and I definitely recommend it to everyone that need to process different data. Thanks 1KA!"

T.P., MZPM

"Making a 1KA questionnaire is easy and I would recommend 1KA to anyone who wants to post their questionnaire to as many people as possible."

Zala Stošicki, Gymnasium Bežigrad

"The 1KA online tool is a quick and easy survey tool (better than Google, as I was choosing between the two). I will still use it and also recommend it to others."

Petra

"A great tool for creating a survey for my master’s degree. A very sophisticated tool. I recommend it."

Katja B.

"Transparency and simplicity are at a high level."

U.U., MFDPŠ

"I created the survey for the first time without any problems. Video guides and well-kept documentation have contributed to getting started quickly. I will definitely use 1KA for the next surveys."

Tomo Bogataj, Iskratel

"The 1KA tool is very transparent, easy to use, what seems to me to be the most important, exporting data for further analysis is very easy and transparent. I recommend it to everyone!"

N.P.

"An excellent website where you can create a survey with some will and ingenuity, share it with your research population and get general statistical results with graphs in a few clicks. It's simple. I recommend it."

Nesta Anis

"When I need a more complex survey (and not just an \" opinion form \ "), 1KA is the solution."

Maruša, independent educator

"The 1KA survey tool is really very useful. I was thrilled when doing the survey for the first time. Just be brave and it's going to work."

Mojca Bogataj, teacher in elementary school

"The 1KA website has positively amazed me with its ease of use, its abundant choice in survey design, and especially the survey analysis option."

B. H., VSGT MARIBOR

"With 1KA, I like that we can adjust the survey to the respondent (if he answers a certain question, for example, with YES, it opens a new set of questions, otherwise not). I also really like the analyses that are already done automatically and make it easier to process data."

Martina Mrakovčić, Piran Sports and Youth Center

"A super-efficient thing."

K.P.

"The 1KA survey tool is very useful, simple and evident. I recommend it."

Nina Rogelja

December 2019

"Fast, easy and most important - with minimal work, you get a huge amount of data."

T.P.

"10 out of 10."

Blaž Č.

"Surveying with the 1KA web application is simple and fast, suitable for beginners as well as more demanding users. I like that it keeps up-to-date and add new user-friendly functionality (in this case, I have in mind making it possible to complete the survey also via mobile phones). "

JK, University of Maribor

"Great, easy to use."

Breda Božič, Dobrepolje Primary School

"A great tool for survey design and analysis. Very helpful FAQs to help you create an effective survey and meaningfully asked questions."

Matevž Zalar, Elementary - architectural studio

"The survey is very simple to design. It also looks nice and transparent to the respondents. It's good because the results are presented in many ways."

Katherine Jerele, Montessori Institute

"It's a great tool if you need it to do a seminar or graduate thesis. It's also a really, really easy toolto create (surveys)."

Matej Škorič, a student at Areme - College of Regional Management

"A great site for quick creation of survey."

Faculty of Administration

"I used to be a total newbie, the questionnaires are useful, user friendly, the analysis is great. With the help of 1KA I passed statistics!"

Miha Novak

"Simple and great site."

KP

"A very good and easy survey application."

Katarina Gafnik, FUDS Nova Gorica

November 2019

"1KA is a great online tool to easily create a questionnaire and send it to people through various online links, which is awesome =)."

Nives Bogataj

"User - friendly, easy, transparent."

Tamara Boh

"So far, I am very pleased with the 1KA tool, because it offers a comprehensive questionnaire analysis design."

Aleksandra Senčič

"With the 1KA online survey, we have significantly increased the proportion of returned surveys at our institute compared to past surveys."

Blaž Kölner, Kindergarten Mehurčki

"I'm glad there was this option, since making my survey was quick and easy."

Stanka Novak, AVP

"A good, simple, quick form of questionnaire composition."

Rosanda Drufovka College of Health Sciences, Izola

"Fast production, feedback and data processing."

Barbara Jenko, Anton Žnideršič Primary School Ilirska Bistrica

"Very easy to use, provides a fast way to collect data and does basic statistics."

Blaz F; University of Primorska

"The tool is also easy to use for users who are not very skilled and don’t do this often."

Žan Pinterič, Faculty of Public Administration

"I recommend the site; it’s very easy to use."

NL Maribor High School of Commerce

"I attended an online education of online surveys. Through education, I was able to easily make my first online survey through video guides. I am confident that I will be able to use 1KA again for research purposes."

A.R., OŠ TABOR MARIBOR

"A very useful tool, useful analysis and fairly simple SPSS data transfer."

Matej C. FOV Kranj

"I encountered 1KA at school for the first time, at first this application was of no use to me, but when I got into college I realized that without it I would not be able to do seminar work, let alone graduate. I think this application is very useful and relevant to students or anyone who wants to do research. "

Faculty of Health Sciences Novo mesto

"The survey helped me a lot with my diploma thesis. It allowed the respondents to solve the survey online and made my job a lot easier. When you create the survey, the system will eventually write you suggestions to complete the survey, which I find very useful. "

T.J., Faculty of Public Administration

"I did a survey for the first time for the needs of the university, with no help and very little trouble."

Sabina Jug, NTF

"Considering that I am a new user, I received a suggestion at the first login to view a video guide on how to create a survey on 1KA.si. The guide was very instructive; it showed how to create a survey and different types of questions, details and additional features. I didn't have any problems creating a survey because of the guide. Completing the surveys through this portal is also very easy. "

Katarina Kerin, Faculty of Philosophy

"A very useful tool."

Milan Hlade, Koroška Bela Primary School, Jesenice

"I didn't know how to do the survey before this educational course. I liked that the instructions were simple, straightforward and logical, and even if I stopped during making the survey, I simply flipped the video forward."

Alenka Črnkovič

"Very fast and easy to do and get immediate results."

VSŠGT Maribor

"The 1KA application is a quick and easy tool for creating online surveys. It helps me with my work, as it also enables a transparent analysis of the questionnaires."

Prof. B. Kalisnik, Stane Žagar Lipnica Primary School

"Since I first used the online survey, the video guide has helped me to easily do the survey I want."

Anita K. Senior Vocational School SG

"Great tool."

Helena V.

October 2019

"Simple, useful, quick analysis and presentation of results."

Katarina Požun Brinovec, Senovo Elementary School XIV. Division

"I like to use 1KA in my work because it is simple enough, practical and has very transparent and useful analyzes."

Tanja Hočevar Ziherl, School Counselor, Moste High School

"The 1KA online survey application helped me when writing my diploma. Thank you very much."

V.Š., Academia Maribor

"1KA is great!"

AP Higher vocational school Velenje (program: catering and tourism)

"I have prepared countless surveys in different tools. For the first time, I have used 1ka for study purposes. I am absolutely impressed and I highly recommend it! It's easy to use even for the more complex types of questions, easy to review with comments, also the subsequent statistics and analysis, the ability to export reports, are remarkable!”

Barbara Ülen, SEB MBA, Medis d.o.o.

"I always choose 1KA when making a survey, because it’s the easiest for me and I have no problems."

Lucija Petek, GESŠ Trbovlje

"I am very pleased because it helped me with my degree."

Memory Dutovlje

"We used the online survey portal 1KA for the needs of our sports association, where we wanted to gain insight on the organization of the association, the way we work, the satisfaction of the players and the suggestions for improvement of all of these areas. The survey was very positively accepted, we also obtained useful data and information and managed to make a satisfactory analysis. We will definitely use 1KA survey questionnaires in the future. Thank you. "

S.T., Tennis League DS

"The tool is great !!! It is very powerful and really allows a high degree of flexibility. Your work is amazing, keep it up! "

Marko Režek, Intesa Sanpaolo Bank d.d.

"1KA made it easy for me and my classmates to do their research work. We had no problems while working on it, everything was clear and explained."

Selma Hamzic

"Simple and very useful."

Bernarda Potočnik, Glotta Nova

"Extremely easy data analysis using the 1KA survey."

Suzana Zorec, DOBA

"I advise students to use this tool because demographic questions are already set by default and it is quite easy to create their own questions. If they use 1KA I do not need to explain specifically how to create a questionnaire because the database is already available after entering it."

Mirna Macur, FZAB

"A very fast and efficient method for constructing a questionnaire."

JZ, elementary school

"The experience of using the 1KA survey has been very positive, despite the fact that I was introduced to this application for the first time. Although I did not use all the tools provided by 1KA, I was able to compile a survey and was impressed by the analytics that ultimately allow you to export data to other applications, and as a result, quick analysis. "

Employment Service of Slovenia, Labor Office Ptuj, B.T.

September 2019

"1KA enables the preparation of questionnaires for different purposes and allows the analysis for very different contents or areas. In my case, I am considering starting a new company and it is even more important to me, that I have a quality free tool available so I can analyse the entry of a product into the market."

EKOINO - a startup company

"The experience with the 1KA tool has been phenomenal and has led me to complete my master thesis in a very simple and effective way, I recommend!"

Rožle Siljan, Faculty of Economics Ljubljana

"It is a great tool for getting feedback, at work and studying,also research. I am able to access the information I need for my work in a fast and efficient way. It takes little time, it is fast and easily accessible."

Albina Klevže Jagodič, kindergarten Rogaška slatina and Faculty of Doba

August 2019

"A great questionnaire preparation tool. Creating a survey is very easy and transparent. The 1KA web application works great and is user-friendly. I highly recommend using it."

Tjaša Kukovič, Minitec d.o.o.

"A very useful application."

T.P.

"The 1KA online surveying tool is extremely transparent and useful. I was familiar with it at the time of school and it never disappointed me. It's also extremely easy to use."

JS, BC Naklo

"A positive experience, useful in writing a master's thesis, as you can get the information you need. Creating a survey is easy, it's always helpful if you get stuck or don't know something. I recommend."

Sara Rupert

July 2019

"Great tool for preparing a questionnaire, very friendly and helpful staff."

D.V., UKC Ljubljana

"I used the survey for the first time, and I simply used the obtained data in the form of graphs and text in my diploma work."

K.Š. ECM

"1KA reminds me of Apple products in terms of functionality, appearance, intuitiveness and necessary before knowledge. 1KA is great, even if the user has no experience in web surveys can create the survey fast and stress-free. Just like Apple computers: you plug in and use."

Niko Kumar, VALTEX & Co. d.o.o.

June 2019

"Making the survey is very simple and transparent, it works very professionally and you don’t need any knowledge for the design and form. It's great because it can all be in English. Also the video guides are very useful. "

Mojca Grafenauer, Geberit

"Very simple tool, suitable forms of help, online results."

Barbara Gorše, First Personal Insurance Company, d.d.

"1KA is very easy to use."

University of Maribor PEF

"With user experience, creating a survey on the 1ka.si website, I was very pleased. It is simple and transparent to use. It enables a quick and transparent viewing and analysis of the survey results." I would certainly recommend to anyone who wants to create an online survey. "

R.Š., EPF MB

"Very fast, easy, efficient and anonymous web survey design."

Branka Globočnik, VIZ Višnja Gora

"The 1KA web application is excellent and user-friendly, and the video instructions are accurate and user-friendly. It's also easy to change the settings when the survey is ready, I would especially like to thank the built-in statistical tools and the possibility of exporting data."

Primož Krašna, Institute of the Republic of Slovenia for Education

May 2019

"I am really satisfied that the possibility of using such a good tool is free of charge. 1ka offers quick and efficient data collection and preparation for further analysis. My final task for studying goes faster with your help ... Thank you."

Simona, FZAB Jesenice

"The experience with the 1KA website is very good and pleasant, it's the fastest way to create a survey, it's logical and intuitive. I miss just one small thing when I export data to excel (maybe I don’t know it yet), there are no data available such as the validity of the survey, date version, serial number..."

Primoz Satler - VŠPV-B2

"The tool is quick and complete, although I miss the storage button; you’re not sure if it's really automatically saved."

FF

"Fast, easy and efficient."

Danijela Maric

"When I compiled the survey for the first time after a few years, I was impressed with the choice of tools, even the IF function, which allows you to make certain questions appear based on the answers to previous questions."

Ž.K. Student

"1KA is great. Simple to use, good visibility and excellent data analysis."

Dunja Lemajic, FVV

"The 1KA tool is extremely easy to use, and I would recommend it to everyone, even for less skilled computer users, since it guides you with video guides and concrete instructions from the beginning to the end of the survey, and it is also great that it enables data processing and you don’t need other tools. "

Š. B. Faculty of Philosophy

"Simple, functional and, above all, easily accessible."

Jure Gramc, Faculty of Mechanical Engineering Ljubljana

"1KA as a tool for making surveys and I would highly recommend it. It is very convenient and easy to use. Also, the analysis proposals already prepared are already sufficient in the vast majority of cases."

Student of Waldorf High School Ljubljana

"1ka surveys are easy to use, they offer many uses and have high added value through automated processing."

Klavdija Novak, Afenbach

"The application is very useful for getting surveys, answers. It greatly facilitates implementation."

Barbara Vindiš Bratušek, Faculty of Education

"1KA makes it easy to create a survey, in which case the tool is intuitive to use. The tool provides an easy and transparent way of viewing already completed surveys."

Ana Lubej, Faculty of Arts, University of Maribor

"A quick and easy way for creating surveys, which are helpful in university."

N.Š., Faculty of Health Sciences

"Responsive, professional, great!"

MOJCA R., FUDŠ

"A short presentation film with the necessary guidelines for making the online survey was explicit and clear. The website is transparent and easy to use."

A.V. - kindergarten

April 2019

"The online survey proved to be a very useful substitute for official correspondence. All the functionality was fully operational, including the basic statistics offered and exports to the SPSS, I quickly prepared a more complex structure with a bit of video help."

Gregor Lesjak, Ministry of Culture

"Excellent business and private tool for conducting research."

Suzana Šuklar, Health Center Murska Sobota, 3rd level of study at Foš Novo mesto

"Making the survey is simple, fast and effective, and the display of the obtained results is transparent. It is a very simple tool for collecting data and it has allowed me to expand the fulfilment of study obligations."

Ž. Likar, Faculty of Natural Sciences and Engineering

"I was very satisfied with the 1KA online survey, because it is easy to use for those with little experience in the field of surveying. I highly recommend using it."

Brigita Sinur, School Center Novo mesto

"It's great, stay that way. It's nice that you don’t have to pay anything."

AM, Gimnazija Vič

"For the first time I did an online survey for the master's thesis. First, I watched the video and other instructions that were very useful and I easily formed a survey. I am satisfied with the results of the survey analysis."

Student at the Faculty of Arts in Ljubljana

"A great tool for preparing questionnaires, surveys and analysing them. 1KA is also suitable for older people or people who do not have computer experience, since the preparation of the survey is very simple and the web site is designed to guide you through the process, which is big plus for someone who is doing it for the first time, or someone who doesn’t know how to use the computer. As long as the website is free and continues to be well maintained, I will definitely recommend it to other users."

Maja Turel

"I used the 1KA tool to create a survey with which I had no experience before. I think the application is suitable for all types of users, as it can easily be used by beginners as well as more skilled users. In addition to basic features and tools, it also makes it more demanding. I was also satisfied with the format of the results obtained, since the data is written very transparently, which makes the analysis easier."

B. E. – Gymnasium Vič

"Very easy to create a survey."

Julija Šinkovec

"Easy to use, produce and analyse data obtained."

Vesna Lešnik, MFDPŠ Celje

"Practical, simple and useful website."

Š.S.

"Easy to use."

Tjaša Kovačič, Oš Preserje

"A simple, user-friendly and professional tool, useful in multiple languages."

Bina Š., FOV

March 2019

"1KA is a very transparent web application for making any kind of survey. Making a survey with 1KA is easy and successful. Best regards."

Pef Lj

"1KA is great for making questionnaires, it’s not complicated, so everyone would be able to use it. I really recommend it to anyone that needs to make a questionnaire."

Enrika Bradaš, Doba Faculty

"The survey was relatively easy to assemble, I like the testing option and a real-time review, it's a good thing that the program alerts you if there are any problems / irregularities with the questions, the results are also clear enough."

Monika Žunko, FF Mb

"Very useful."

Gaja Jakop

"Quick and effective assemble of online surveys, and therefore this creation of a research project. I always go back to 1KA. Very satisfied."

L.D. - master studies in progress

"Once you get to know what the app is all about, it's very simple."

P. O. MFDPŠ

"At 1KA, I like the variety of tools it offers to create a survey, it is also excellent in managing statistics in terms of obtaining data and calculations based on them. I’ve used 1KA before and I want to recommend it to my closest ones who want to design a web survey."

Anže Dejak, Faculty of Philosophy

"The use of 1KA is a simple and transparent tool for creating online surveys, it is also supported by various forms of assistance. It allows multiple forms of online surveys so that each user can make a survey in their style and depending on the level of complexity of questions or answers. Also feedback and tips from 1KA to the online survey are awesome."

Simona Poljansek, student of the DOBA Faculty

"I recommend to anyone who wants to conduct a variety of surveys."

Urša

"Extremely useful platform, friendly to both - those who make surveys as well as those who fulfil it."

L.R., Intersport

"I made the survey in 1KA quickly, easily and without complications. I was also very satisfied with the obtained data and calculations."

M.D.

"When the computer is at the service of a person and not the other way around, plus, it's free."

Andrej Podlogar

"I am very grateful that this tool is available for free and that it works so well."

Urša Jaklič Žagar, student of PeF

"1KA offers high performance and proper functionality for the production of various surveys, whether in the business environment or for scientific research purposes."

EC, Municipality of Ptuj

"Very good site for making a survey. Quick and easy."

NG

"Many options for different types of questions, easy to assemble surveys and control over data collection and analysis."

Ž.P.

"The tool was great, but I had trouble registering my profile, and I only succeeded when I created a new g-mail address and registered via the new one. I could not figure out what the problem was."

Nevenka Kregar Velikonja, UNM Faculty of Health Sciences

February 2019

"Simple to make a survey, transparent, user-friendly, time-rational."

Nevenka Alja Gladek, ACS

"I'm very satisfied with 1KA, it's easy to use and very practical ..."

Lea Armeni, middle school of economics

"Working with 1ka was efficient and fast. I definitely recommend it."

D.C.

"Easy to use and super analysis, especially with the ability to use filters..."

Miha Š., Environmental protection, B & B Kranj

"Very good. I strongly recommend to everyone."

Zlatko Grenko, Vsšsg

"The 1KA online tool is very helpful in designing and analysing the questionnaire, it also facilitates access to respondents (with a link), the analysis is also more simple. In short, I have a good experience with that web tool."

N.N.

"The 1KA application meets all the needs that arise when you are preparing, publishing and analysing online surveys. Great tool!"

Janko Petek, MFDPŠ

"Super page, there were no graphs I needed to work on."

N.N.

"I thought that assembling the survey would take more time and require a lot of research, Google tools and their performance, but because of video guides and an intuitive design, I did the job much faster."

Ula N. Ratajec, student FF

"1KA is a very useful tool. As a complete amateur, I easily created an online survey quickly. I was offered suggestions and, of course, video instructions and answers to frequently asked questions."

PK (MFDPŠ)

"It's very easy to set up the survey, but more importantly, you do not need a lot of time for that."

Simon Gracner, Biotechnical School Maribor

"1ka has what you need and what's important about the survey".

Jerica Smrečnik

"A very good website for making surveys."

Petja Balažič, Economic School of Ljubljana

"This year I first heard about 1KA at the faculty and we used it for a certain task in one of the subjects. I am very excited about the simple use and all the options 1KA offers (prepared demographic templates, the possibility of exporting documents, already made analysis (graphs, tables ...). I absolutely recommend it."

S.M. - MFDPŠ Celje

"A super site to help with surveying and analysing results."

TŠ Faculty of Education Maribor

"I wanted to submit my surveys to the respondents in writing, although I was aware that it would be complicated with receiving and distributing, and I would have to do all the analyses myself, which means that it would take me extra effort and time. My cousin reminded me that I can also create an online survey and recommend 1KA. I was happy with the advice, and even more so with the results. So my questionnaire has been filled by more people, the analyse was made by itself anyway, and I was just monitoring how my work was also effective with much less effort. I recommend to those who feel that working with computers is not for them. They will probably need a little more time to get things done than they imagined, but they will."

F.P.

"My user experience using 1ka is very good because it offers really great functionality and solution for free registration. The preparation of the survey is very intuitive and user-friendly, where no programming knowledge is required."

N.N.

"Great thing!"

Nastja K.

"You're great, really! I generally like your platform very much."

SK – Agado

"I will continue using 1ka. I am very pleased with it and would recommend to all who make surveys."

Rok Štempihar

January 2019

“Very good application, I don’t have any comments, it works perfectly and I recommend it to everyone.”

F.T.

“1KA survey is very transparent and easy to use. Nevertheless, it has features that enable more useful things.”

Jure Č.

“Very transparent and simple, graph analyses are the best thing ever.”

Stanko Soršak FVV

“I am very satisfied with the use of 1KA web site. Videos helped me a lot in constructing the questionnaire. The response to the questionnaire was much larger in 1KA than in paper form.”

JJ Pef Lj

“Before I started making the questionnaire, I didn’t imagine that it would be so easy. Since I don’t know much about computer work, such an application is extremely important to me. Thanks 1KA team!”

Sara Černe, Fudš

“1KA is simple, transparent and offers different analytical options for creating questionnaires”.

Darinka Osojnik, Primary school

“I haven’t completed the whole process, but so far, everything has been going well. I hope that I will succeed in analysing the data in the same way.”

B.A. Faculty of Education

“A very effective site that makes it easier for you to work with surveys and follow-up analyses.”

Karmen S.

“Very cool platform, everything is great, greetings from Opatija!”

N.S. FMTU Opatija

December 2018

“The tool is easy to use, guides are great, when you get stuck on a question or an idea, how to put it in a survey.”

Darjan Gale, VŠPV

“An excellent tool for many areas, with a very wide range of options, resulting in a wide range of use.”

Luka Florjanc, company: LEPOLEPO, faculty: FDV

“The design of 1KA surveys has often facilitated both official work and the conduct of studies, especially in the segment of statistical survey processing and when it was necessary to interview a larger population.”

Teja Leben, Municipality of Brežice, Faculty of Tourism in Brežice

“It was very helpful for me to complete my postgraduate study.”

US, family medicine specialization

“It’s a very good application, plus it’s free.”

SCM Kodeljevo

“1KA is great tool for making and completing surveys and analysing the results.”

MB. Centre of Janez Levec Ljubljana

“Super application! Simple and effective.”

M.M.

“Super for fast and effective data processing.”

Tina Saje

November 2018

“In any case, it was a positive experience with 1KA.si, so I highly recommend the application to anyone who needs a good tool for creating your online surveys, as well as for analysing all the information obtained.”

Daniel Lovšin, Casabela Piran

“When I was making a survey, I quickly found myself across the page; it is very transparent and offers everything I need.”

MM

“Simple, understandable and useful survey. Thank you.”

LM., SB Trbovlje

“An excellent tool for carrying out surveys. Both the layout and the implementation of the survey are fast, simple and intuitive. In case of any problems, there are always several sources of help.”

Urška Tuškej, FDV

“The first use went slowly, but went I got to know the tool better, I was extremely positively surprised. In any case, I will continue to use the tool in the future, because it simply shows what we want and the results of the survey. Th