Rabindranath Tagore, India's first Nobel laureate, was born in Kolkata on May 7, 1861. He was a poet, writer, playwright, composer, philosopher, social reformer and painter. In 1913, Tagore became the first non-European to win a Nobel Prize in Literature and second non-European to receive a Nobel Prize after Theodore Roosevelt for Gitanjali, his best-known collection of poetry.

Tagore was awarded the Nobel Prize "because of his profoundly sensitive, fresh and beautiful verse, by which, with consummate skill, he has made his poetic thought, expressed in his own English words, a part of the literature of the West."

Did Rabindranath Tagore return the Nobel Prize?

In 2018, Tripura CM Biplab Kumar Deb, on the occasion of the 157th birth anniversary of Tagore had said, "Rabindranath Tagore had returned his Nobel prize in protest against the British."

However, this is not true. Rabindranath Tagore did not return the Nobel Prize.

He renounced the title of Knighthood in protest against the Jallianwala Bagh massacre in 1919.

Rabindranath Tagore rejected knighthood

The Bengali poet was awarded a knighthood by King George V in 1915, however, he repudiated it after the 1919 Jallianwala Bagh massacre.

Renouncing the knighthood, Tagore, in a letter addressed to Lord Chelmsford, the then British Viceroy of India, wrote, "The disproportionate severity of the punishments inflicted upon the unfortunate people and the methods of carrying them out, we are convinced, are without parallel in the history of civilised governments...The time has come when badges of honour make our shame glaring in their incongruous context of humiliation, and I for my part wish to stand, shorn of all special distinctions, by the side of my country men."

Theft of Rabindranath Tagore's Nobel Prize

On March 25, 2004, Tagore's Nobel medal and the Nobel citation were stolen from the safety vault of the museum of Visva Bharati University, Santiniketan, along with several other personal belongings of the poet.

In December 2004, the Swedish government presented two replicas of Tagore's Nobel Prize, one made of gold and the other made of bronze, to the Visva-Bharati University.

In November 2016, a baul singer named Pradip Bauri was arrested from Birbhum district in West Bengal for his alleged involvement in the theft. A Bangladeshi national, identified as Mohammed Hossain Shipul, was the mastermind of the plot and two Europeans were also involved in the theft.