2. What is a psychological thriller? A psychological thriller is defined as a fictional thriller story which mainly focuses on the psychology of the characters in the film and their unstable emotional states. A psychological thriller is classified in the sub-genre category as it is part of the broader range of the thriller genre. A psychological thriller film often involves elements from other genres such as mystery and drama genres, it also joins in with the horror genre, mainly the psychological horror sub-genre.

3. Narrative: The narrative to a psychological thriller is very different for each film, however, the main plot theory seems to run the same in most psychological thrillers. The plot goes as the following; Equilibrium Recognition of the New disruption equilibrium Disruption of the Attempt to repair equilibrium the damage

4. Literary devices and techniques: Stream of consciousness: This is a literary technique where an individuals point of view is produced as a written equivalent, so the audience is able to see an individual characters thought process. In psychological thrillers the narrative often manifests a characters psyche through word usage, descriptions, and/or visuals. First person narrative: This literary technique involves the way in which the storyline is narrated by one or more of the characters. This technique is often used to make the audience feel more involved with the characters. This helps the audience understand how the characters mind works. Backstory: This technique involves showing the history behind the situation at the start of the main storyline. This deepens the psychological aspect of the storyline, as it allows the audience to fully understand the main character, especially the characters motives behind their actions and how their past has shaped their current state of mind.

5. Common themes: • Reality • Perception • Mind • Existence • Purpose • Identity • Death • Use of dark, isolated places • Psychological thrillers also often use the plot of the film to shape the characters personalities, as usually as the character develops in their film so does their true identity, this often means the characters loss of innocence is shown as they develop into the ’baddy’ or the ‘heroine’.

6. Codes & conventions: • Deceptive mind games • Flashbacks • Black and white colour themes • Tense music • Mind • Perception • Reality • Purpose/ existence of a character

7. Iconography: • Shadows, fears, confined spaces, running water, mirrors. • Low-key lighting, contrasting colour temperatures, quick camera movements, prolonged action, suspense. • Non-diegetic sound, high pitched sounds, silence, muffled sound, dialogue. • Knives: Knives are commonly used to indicate danger to the audience, as they are a way to harm another. They are often linked to danger, violence, blood, pain and brutality. An example of the use of knives in a psychological thriller would be Alfred Hitchcock's Psycho. Weapons are often used in thrillers to entice the audience, this causes them to carry on viewing the product. • Shadows/ silhouettes: When an audience views a shadow or a silhouette in a thriller are used to connote a sense of mystery and suspicion. Shadows and silhouettes are often used to help build tension and fear with an audience. Normally they are used when an antagonist is behind a ’victim’ or watching their ‘victim’ closely in an area they aren’t supposed to be.

8. Iconography (continued): • Shadows/ silhouettes: Shadows are often used in psychological thrillers to create a tense on edge atmosphere for the audience. Shadows and silhouettes are commonly associated with fear so they are often used to create tension within a scene so that the audience feels on edge. Shadows and silhouettes also help base the enigma as they are often used to create mystery and make the audience want to find out what is hiding in the shadows/ who or what is the silhouette. • Barred/covered widows and fences: This creates the idea to the audience that the character is trapped and imprisoned to the audience. This will also make the audience become more engaged to the character and feel sympathy for the character do to the situation they are in, this will also cause the audience to feel as the character feels as they will feel as though they are in the journey together with the character as they watch the film, this connection with the audience is also helped by the tense atmosphere which is common in a psychological thriller which supports the idea that the character is 'trapped' as the atmosphere helps play on the characters fear of being isolated.

9. Mise-en-scene: Shadow/ low key lighting: These are typical conventions used in psychological thrillers, they are used to help build tension in a scene, and to show the ‘darkness’ of a character in the film. Props: Mirrors are often used in psychological thrillers as they are used to denote a characters inner self, this connotes that there is more to the character than what the camera sees, suggesting they have a ‘dark side’. Costumes: It is common for costumes in psychological thrillers to convey surreal themes, this is done with the use of ‘normal clothing’ to create a sense of realism. It is also typical for the ‘villain’ to dress differently to denote that they are the ‘odd one out’, and to also give the impression that something isn’t quite right about them.

10. Locations: Most locations used in psychological thrillers reflect real life, so that a sense of realism is created. It is normal for a location of a psychological thriller to be overly theatrical, and fairly stereotypical of the area in which it is set. An example of this would be the setting of Donnie Darko, this film is set in suburban America. The setting of the film is shown in the opening sequence as the audience are shown the ‘perfect’ area, as people are cutting their lawn, cycling, playing golf etc. The houses also appear ‘perfect’. This is then contrasted by the underside of working in the factories, as this is shown to be cold, grimy and gritty.

11. Sound: It is common in psychological thrillers to use eerie and tense music to build up tension to the audience. By doing this the audience is made aware that something bad is about to happen. Sudden breaks and silences from eerie and tense music are often used in psychological thrillers to build up the ‘fear factor’. This technique is also used to help create jump scares within a scene.

12. Camera movement: Camera movements are a key factor when making a psychological thriller. Most psychological thrillers use quick camera movements to help build tension and panic to the audience. Also by using quick shots to show how the character within the scene is feeling so that the audience are able to relate to them, this also makes the audience feel as though they are on the journey with the character.