What it does: Technology services and products ranging from search engines to consumer electronics.

Mission: To organize the world's information and make it universally accessible and useful.

Size & Presence: 1,39,000 employees located across 170 cities and 60 countries around the world.

Best known for: Inventing the world’s most popular search engine.

The good bits: Industry leader and pioneer in numerous computer-based technologies that are widely in use worldwide, making it a great place to start a career for anyone. Great compensation package coupled with challenging yet impactful work, regardless of what role you’re taking up at the company.

The not-so-good bits: Most of Google’s employees leave the company after a year; mainly because they get a better job offer. Entry-level and internship positions are extremely competitive.

The Google Story

Google Inc. was founded in 1998 by Larry Page and Sergey Brin, who met each other in 1995 during a Stanford University campus tour. Brin was already pursuing grad school in the university’s computer science program, while Page was in the midst of considering doing the same.

Page and Brin started working on their search engine algorithm as part of a research project while they were both still PhD students at Stanford University, and by 1997, the site went live.

Since then, Google continues to expand its services and has become known as more than just a search engine. Some of Google’s most known brands today are YouTube, Google Chrome, Android OS, Google Drive, TensorFlow, and Google Pixel.

Culture & Vibe

Google’s main headquarters, called Googleplex, in the United States, is located in California’s tech company haven, Silicon Valley.

Work here typically starts at the usual 8-hour work shift, and to get to the office, employees can choose to hop on Google’s shuttle bus that runs between San Francisco and Mountain View. While on the bus, employees can check their email by phone or even pop open their laptops since the bus has a speedy wifi connection.

On arrival, employees can saunter over to the Google cafeteria for some breakfast. When they’re done - it’s time to work; which depending on their roles, could mean staring at lines of codes or lots of meetings, either virtually or in-person, to coordinate with people located in the same complex or halfway across the world.

Recruitment Process

Google has several programs available for both Bachelor’s degree students and recent university graduates, although opportunities for the latter are quite scarce and you may be competing with people who already have full-time work experiences prior to application.

With that being said, Google does have the following internship programs available for individuals who are currently pursuing a Bachelor’s degree in the U.S:

Student Researcher Internship, available only to experienced researchers who are currently enrolled in the following Bachelor’s degree programs: Computer Science, Linguistics, Statistics, Biostatistics, Applied Mathematics, Operations Research, Economics, Natural Sciences, or a related technical field.

Software Engineering Internship is available only for students who are studying software engineering or other related technical fields.

BOLD (Building Opportunities for Leadership and Development) Internship, limited only to third or fourth-year Bachelor’s degree students who belong to groups that are underrepresented in techs, such as Black, Hispanic, students with disabilities, and veterans.

All internship programs last between 12-14 weeks. To apply, you just need to submit your application through Google’s career page. The process can take 8-10 weeks from the time that an application is screened, and will involve either a phone or virtual interview by a Google recruiter.

As for entry-level positions, Google has two unique programs called Associate Product Marketing Manager and Associate Product Manager. These programs are designed for people without a lot of prior work experience, and applications to them are not limited only to those who hold technical degrees.

Business Competitors

Due to Google’s ever-increasing line-up of products and services, it’s difficult to pinpoint the company’s direct competitor. And in the case of Google Search, there is almost no true rival to the product, with a 2020 news article from the New York Times stating that it currently has nearly 90% of the market share.

Nevertheless, there are certain companies that are directly competing with some of Google’s products and services, such as Microsoft’s OneDrive (against Google Drive), Mozilla Firefox (against Google Chrome), and Apple’s iOS (against Android OS).

Remuneration & Career Growth

All of Google’s interns receive a base pay of around $5,000-6,000 per month. There is also additional compensation that could range between $2,000-3,000 per month, which usually includes housing stipends, relocation costs, and others.

As for the Associate Product Manager and Product Marketing Manager roles, which accepts application from recent Bachelor’s degree graduate, the gross base pay is between 132,000-149,000 per year, plus additional compensation of around $6,000-$75,000, including a bonus (cash and stock) as a well as profit-sharing.

Social Contribution

Google has a charitable foundation associated with the company, known as Google.org. In practice, many of its philanthropic projects are conducted jointly with other Google subsidiaries. The following are several charitable initiatives that Google engages in as part of its ESG contributions: