INTRODUCTION

Charles Hutton value your patronage and respect your privacy rights. Hence, we are openly providing you this Statement of Privacy for your reference.

PERSONAL INFORMATION

“Personal Information” is information through which you can be identified. Charles Hutton only collects Personal Information that you voluntarily provide to us. This information is collected by our website, depending on the nature of your activities which may include but not limited to the following:

completing a survey,

contacting us for information or registering for a promotion,

joining a forum, and/or downloading software

Participation from any of the above-mentioned activities may collect information from you that may include your name, address, email address, employer, phone number, login and password, order information, and comments that may identify you, and other information that you voluntarily provide.

USAGE OF COLLECTED PERSONAL INFORMATION

We use your Personal Information to identify and to respond to your online email requests when you visit our website and choose the “Contact Us” option, to register you for certain activities/access on the website at your request, to confirm a registration, to identify you in the event you forget your password, to provide you with free gifts and other promotional offers, and to otherwise maximize your access to our online services and products, and order processing/fulfillment.

GENERAL INFORMATION COLLECTION AND USAGE

“General Information” is the information we collect through your connection and interaction with our website. It does not identify you personally but can be used to compile statistics about our visitors and their preferences. In turn, we use the General Information collected to improve our website. Please note that there may be instances where it is possible to link General Information to your Personal Information so always be guided.

Use of Cookies

Our website uses cookies to improve your customer experience, to keep track of your shopping cart, and to honor your preferences. It is an important data element that frequently contains an anonymous unique identifier sent from the website to your browser. It is stored in your system for future use.

CHILDREN’S ONLINE PRIVACY PROTECTION ACT (“COPPA”)

For all users under 13 years of age, we highly recommend that you refrain from using our website without adult supervision. Any child under the age of 13 who will send any Personal Information to us will be reported directly to his/ her parents for guidance.

SECURITY

A high level of security measures is implemented to prevent any unauthorized release of or access to, any Personal Information collected through the website. Several technical security measures are observed such as browser encryption, routers, and firewalls to safeguard Personal Information against unauthorized access. Please note that we have secure servers that are not generally accessible by any third parties. However, in the event of a security breach, this may become vulnerable to anyone.

LINKS AND OPT-OUT PROCEDURES

Links connected to any third-party websites are solely designed for the convenience of our visitors only. All sites linked to and from our website are not necessarily under our control and we shall have no responsibility or liability whatsoever for the content or privacy practices of any such linked sites.

On the other hand, information about opt-out procedures is provided in every promotional email we send to you. If you would like to unsubscribe from our mailing list, please click on the link provided in the mail then follow the procedures.