Dream Wife are a London based band, with a punk rock, pop and indie rock style.

Their band consist of, Rakel Mjöll (lead vocals), Alice Go (guitar, vocals), and Bella Podpadec (bass, vocals). And they have been supported by Alex Paveley on drums since 2018.

They blessed Clwb lfor Bach with their presence for their headline show on their tour, in the small intimate venue, on the 28th of March. After a nearly 2 yearlong break due to covid.

The venue was flooded with fans of all ages and spilt between both genders, and the girl band did not disappoint any one of them.

Starting of their 16-song set with the crowd-pleasing song ‘Hasta La Vista’, the lead singer Rakel, shouted to the adoring fans, “yes this is going to be fun, I can just tell.” And she was not wrong. And with her engaging stage presence and interactions with the crowd, they had the audience’s attention with every word. And this is how a concert should be, I was very impressed.

They performed songs from their most recent album ‘So when you gonna’. These included popular songs such as, ‘Hey Heartbreaker’, ‘Let’s Make Out’, ‘Sports!’ and ‘Hot’, and despite the small venue they filled the room with their huge stage presence and vocals, which hit every note. And not forgetting the brilliantly played base and guitar from Bella and Alex.

And the songs themselves were political, upbeat and empowering. With my favourite lyrics of the night being, ‘I am not my body, I am somebody.’ And ‘So familiar yet so new.’ From their songs ‘Somebody’ and ‘Old Flame’. Which was very impactable on the adoring audience.

And honestly this group, couldn’t have looked like they belonged anywhere else, other than on a stage. They rocked it!

The support act, LimeGarden also rocked it. As the girls took to the stage by storm. With a similar genre to Dream Wife, LimeGarden sang a couple of their most popular hits, such a ‘Clockwork’ and ‘Pulp’ Also mentioning it was their first time in Wales, and they ‘were so honoured to be here and supporting such an amazing and talented band.”

So, the night was full of love, good vibes and raw talent. I was blown away by Rakel’s vocals and the bands influential and feel-good lyrics gave the room an unmatchable vibe, only one you could describe if you were there. And I was lucky enough to be!

So, this is a concert I highly recommend, and wouldn’t pass up the opportunity if I got to see them again.

Ellie Spark