Description

Zantedeschia elliottiana, golden arum or golden calla lily, is a herbaceous ornamental plant in the family Araceae. It grows from a bulb. It is said to occur in the province of Mpumalanga in South Africa, although other sources say that it is not found in the wild but appears to be a hybrid of garden origin. Zantedeschia elliottiana is a herbaceous plant up to 60 cm (2 ft) tall, with large deep green leaves spotted with white. It is summer-flowering plant with a yellow spathe marked with purple at the base. The spathe surrounds a yellow spadix which occasionally produces a spike of bright yellow berries that are attractive to birds. It (or its cultivar(s)) is a recipient of the Royal Horticultural Society's Award of Garden Merit. It has been shown that, as with other members of the family Araceae, immersing Zantedeschia elliottiana bulbs in gibberellic acid (GA3) solution and planting them at the end of February increases the emergence rate and the number of emerging shoots. Zantedeschia is a genus of eight species of herbaceous, perennial, flowering plants in the family Araceae, native to southern Africa from South Africa north to Malawi. The genus has been introduced on all continents except Antarctica. Common names include arum lily for Z. aethiopica and calla and calla lily for Z. elliottiana and Z. rehmannii, although members of the genus are neither true lilies of Liliaceae, true Arums, nor true Callas (related genera in Araceae). The colourful flowers and leaves of both species and cultivars are greatly valued and commonly grown as ornamental plants. Zantedeschia species are rhizomatous, herbaceous, perennial plants with some species, e. g., Zantedeschia aethiopica, growing to 1.2m tall, while Zantedeschia rehmannii does not exceed 60 cm in height, growing in clumps or clusters. All species are endemic to central and southern Africa, from Nigeria to Tanzania and South Africa. Z. aethiopica grows naturally in marshy areas and is only deciduous when water becomes scarce. It grows continuously when watered and fed regularly and can survive periods of minor frosts. Z. aethiopica is a very strong and sturdy plant, being able to grow in many soils and habitats, multiplying by rhizome-offsets; it is naturalised and regarded as a weed throughout much of the world. Z. odorata is a rare species, resembling Z. aethiopica, but deciduous and smelling like freesia, endemic to a few localities in South Africa.