Zantedeschia is a genus of eight species of herbaceous perennial flowering plants in the family Araceae, native to southern Africa from South Africa north to Malawi. The genus has been introduced on all continents except Antarctica. Common names include arum lily for Zantedeschia aethiopica, calla, and calla lily for Zantedeschia elliottiana and Zantedeschia rehmannii although it is neither a true lily, nor an Arum or a Calla. The colourful flowers and leaves are highly valued, and both species and cultivars are widely used as ornamental plants.

Extensive commercial production of Zantedeschia for cut flowers and/or planting material occurs in California, Colombia, New Zealand and Kenya. Plant breeders in California and New Zealand continue to produce an extensive range of new hybrid cultivars. The so-called white calla is derived from Zantedeschia aethiopica. All varieties with flowers with shades of yellow, orange, red, purple are mainly derived from Zantedeschia albomaculata, Zantedeschia pentlandii, Zantedeschia elliottiana and Zantedeschia rehmanni.

Photos: Flower Dome, Gardens by the Bay, Singapore [20160606]

Source: Wikipedia

More photos: Camellias, Winter Blooming Shrubs

Camellia is a genus of flowering plants in the family Theaceae. They are found in eastern and southern Asia, from the Himalayas east to Japan and Indonesia. There are 100–250 described species, with some controversy over the exact number.

This genus is famous throughout East Asia; camellias are known as cháhuā (茶花) in Chinese, “tea flower”, an apt designation, as tsubaki (椿) in Japanese.

Today camellias are grown as ornamental plants for their flowers; about 3,000 cultivars and hybrids have been selected, many with double or semi-double flowers. Camellia japonica is the most prominent species in cultivation, with over 2,000 named cultivars. Next are Camellia reticulata with over 400 named cultivars, and Camellia sasanqua with over 300 named cultivars. Some varieties can grow to a considerable size, up to 100m², though more compact cultivars are available.

There is great variety of flower forms:

single (flat, bowl- or cup-shaped)

semi-double (rows of large outer petals, with the centre comprising mixed petals and stamens)

double – paeony form (convex mass of irregular petals and petaloids with hidden stamens) – anemone form (one or more rows of outer petals, with mixed petaloids and stamens in the centre) – rose form (overlapping petals showing stamens in a concave centre when open) – formal double (rows of overlapping petals with hidden stamens)

Photos: Gardens by the Bay, Singapore [20150609]

Source: Wikipedia

Cosmos bipinnatus, commonly called the garden cosmos or Mexican aster, is a medium-sized flowering herbaceous plant native to Mexico. The species and its varieties and cultivars are popular as an ornamental plant in temperate climate gardens. It can also be found in natural areas in much of North America, where it is a garden escape and in some habitats becoming a weed.

Dahlia is a genus of bushy, tuberous, herbaceous perennial plants native to Mexico. A member of the Asteraceae [or Compositae], dicotyledonous plants, related species include the sunflower, daisy, chrysanthemum and zinnia. There are 42 species of dahlia, with hybrids commonly grown as garden plants. Flower forms are variable, with one head per stem; these can be as small as 2 in [5.1 cm] diameter or up to 1 ft [30 cm] or “dinner plate”.

Photos: Flower Dome, Gardens by the Bay, Singapore [20150125]

Source: Wikipedia

Gladiolus [from Latin, the diminutive of gladius, a sword] is a genus of perennial bulbous flowering plants in the iris family [Iridaceae]. It is sometimes called the ‘Sword lily’, but usually by its generic name [plural gladioli, gladioluses, glads]. The genus is distributed in Mediterranean Europe, Asia, Tropical Africa and South Africa. The center of diversity of the genus is located in the Cape Floristic Region, where most species were discovered.

^ Gladiolus hybrid, Grandiflorus group

The genus Gladiolus contains about 260 species, of which 250 are native to sub-Saharan Africa, mostly South Africa. The flowers of unmodified wild species vary from very small to perhaps 40 mm across, and inflorescences bearing anything from one to several flowers.

^ Gladiolus hybrid, Grandiflorus group

The spectacular giant flower spikes in commerce are the products of centuries of hybridisation, selection, and perhaps more drastic manipulation.

Photos: Flower Dome, Gardens By The Bay, Singapore 20130713

Source: Wikipedia