Liberal Arts Blog — Thursday is the Joy of Music Day

Today’s Post: The Origins of “Fair Harvard” — “Believe Me If All Those Endearing Young Charms” and an Ancient Irish Air

Walking through the Yard the other day, I heard a band playing “Fair Harvard” at freshman orientation and was struck by the beauty of the tune. I suspected that it was an ancient Irish love song but I was not sure so I decided to check it out. I learned that, sure enough, it is an old Irish air used most famously in a song by Irish poet Thomas Moore (1779–1852) entitled “Believe Me If All Those Endearing Young Charms.” Today, first the lyrics of the song. Second some notes on the “Irish Melodies” of Thomas Moore. Third, a little trivia on the use of the melody in Warner Brothers cartoons as well as many historic Hollywood films. The first link below is a rendition of the song by the Irish tenor, John McCormack. Experts — please chime in. Correct, elaborate, elucidate.

BELIEVE ME IF ALL THOSE ENDEARING YOUNG CHARMS (lyrics)

1, “Believe me, if all those endearing young charms, Which I gaze on so fondly to-day, Were to change by to-morrow, and fleet in my arms, Like fairy-gifts fading away, — Thou wouldst still be ador’d as this moment thou art, Let thy loveliness fade as it will; And, around the dear ruin each wish of my heart Would entwine itself verdantly still!”

2. “It is not while beauty and youth are thine own And thy cheeks unprofan’d by a tear, That the fervour and faith of a soul can be known, To which time will but make thee more dear! Oh! the heart, that has truly lov’d, never forgets, But as truly loves on to the close; As the sun-flower turns on her god, when he sets, The same look which she turn’d when he rose! “

THOMAS MOORE (1779–1852) — the Irish equivalent of Scotland’s Robert Burns

1. His “Irish Melodies” (“published in ten volumes over 26 years”) was a huge popular success — with one song, “The Last Rose of Summer,” selling over a million copies in the United States.

2. Lord Byron is said to have memorized them all. Sir Walter Scott was a huge fan.

3. Later he was criticized by Irish nationalists for his “whining lamentations” and subservient spirit.

HOLLYWOOD — Cartoons and Classic films — from Bugs Bunny to Shirley Temple to “The Treasure of Sierra Madre” and much more (wikipedia, second link below)

1. “Endearing Young Charms” became a staple of Warner Brothers cartoons, appearing first in the 1944 Private Snafu short “Booby Traps.” Subsequent uses included the 1951 Merrie Melodies animated cartoon Ballot Box Bunny, 1957 Looney Tunes short Show Biz Bugs, 1965 and 1994 Road Runner cartoons Rushing Roulette and Chariots of Fur, respectively, and finally in a new twist on the gag, with Slappy Squirrel’s 1993 introductory episode, “Slappy Goes Walnuts”, from Animaniacs.”

2. “Little Virgie (Shirley Temple) sings the song to her father (John Boles) in the 1935 film The Littlest Rebel.”

3. “The first verse was sung by the character Alfalfa in a 1936 episode of MGM’s The Little Rascals titled “Bored of Education.”

NB: “Walter Huston plays the melody on the harmonica in the firm “The Treasure of the Sierra Madre.” Debbie Reynolds and Barbara Ruick sing the first stanza in the 1953 film “The Affairs of Dobie Gillis.”

John McCormack — Believe Me If All Those Endearing Young Charms/Killarney

Believe Me, If All Those Endearing Young Charms — Wikipedia

Thomas Moore — Wikipedia

Thomas Moore | Poetry Foundation

John Gary ~ Believe Me If All Those Endearing Young Charms

Joni James “Believe Me, if All Those Endearing Young Charms”

John McCormack (tenor) — Wikipedia

The Arnold Book of Old Songs: №4, Believe Me, If All Those Endearing Young Charms

LAST FOUR YEARS OF POSTS ORGANIZED THEMATICALLY

PDF with headlines — Google Drive

ATTACHMENTS BELOW:

#1 A graphic guide to justice (9 metaphors on one page).

#2 “39 Songs, Prayers, and Poems: the Keys to the Hearts of Seven Billion People” — Adams House Senior Common Room Presentation, 11/17/20

YOUR TURN

Time to share the coolest thing you learned in the last week related to music. Or the coolest thing you learned in your life related to music. Say your favorite song or songs. Or your favorite tips for breathing, posture, or relaxation. Or some insight into the history of music….Or just something random about music… like a joke about drummers. jazz, rock….or share an episode or chapter in your musical autobiography.

This is your chance to make some one else’s day. And perhaps to cement in your memory something important you would otherwise forget. Or to think more deeply than you otherwise would about something that matters to you.