Tag Archives | Congo

WOGO wins Sharecare Award

Please join us in celebrating WOGO’s Congo Medical Mission video, winner of the Health/Science: Program/Special ShareCare award! This Thursday, WOGO Surgeons, Dr. Robyn Hakanson and Dr. Kathleen Hogan were on hand in Atlanta, Georgia at the Sharecare Awards Ceremony. They were thrilled to receive the award on behalf of WOGO and EBU Productions, the company who created […]

The Luis Salas Jr. Memorial Scholarship

The Luis Salas Jr. Memorial Scholarship was founded after the untimely loss of our friend and WOGO team member Luis Salas following our Congo medical mission trip. Luis was a member of the WOGO team from its inception. His hard work, his cheerful demeanor and his love of giving back endeared him to all who […]

WOGO is a Finalist in the ShareCare Awards – You can VOTE!

BIG NEWS! Please join us in celebrating that WOGO’s Congo Medical Mission video is a finalist in the ShareCare awards! News Release: https://about.sharecare.com/press-releases/sharecare-names-finalists-for-inaugural-sharecare-awards Sharecare, the digital health company that helps people manage all their health in one place, today announced the finalists in the Sharecare Awards, a competition to inspire and honor the creators of health […]

#Cargo4WOGO is Happening Now!

— “I love everything about the holidays: the decorations, the parties, and spending time with friends and family. What I love most is that feeling of giving back. Every bit counts.” – Brad Goreski — We invite you to join the WOGO team in participating in 2017’s #GivingTuesday campaign in support of our efforts to […]

Planning is ON!

Announcing a new location for WOGO is always exciting. Sharing our next TWO locations made us very proud. It means that WOGO is growing up and able to plan further ahead which is great for everyone. Planning for a medical mission trip takes many tiny steps and several large ones. Our beginning steps include picking […]

WOGO Team Sets Medical Missions for Cuba and a Return to the DRC

Press Announcement Sunday, June 11, 2017 for immediate Release WOGO Team Sets Medical Missions for Cuba and a Return to the DRC Pinehurst, NC – June 11, 2017 – Women Orthopaedist Global Outreach (WOGO.org) announced the location of their next two medical missions for 2018 and 2019. The team will travel to Havana, Cuba following […]

WOGO Doctor to Run 1000 Mile “Iditasport Impossible” Alaskan Race

NEWS RELEASE January 23, 2017 WOGO Doctor to Run 1000 Mile “Iditasport Impossible” Alaskan Race ROANOKE, VIRGINIA – January 23, 2017 – Women Orthopaedic Global Outreach (WOGO) team member, Dr. Jan Kriska will compete as a runner in the 1000 Mile Iditasport Impossible Big Lake to McGrath to Nome, February 19, 2017. Dr. Kriska is […]

Wishing you many blessings in 2017

We consider you to be one of ours! As we step into this new year, we wanted to thank you for all of the support you provide to WOGO, by following our adventures, attending our events, and your generous donations. We had a busy and exciting 2016. We: Completed the first-ever joint replacement surgeries in […]

WOGO Joins the Global #GivingTuesday Movement

WOGO Joins the Global #GivingTuesday Movement Pledges to return to DRC to continue their mission of restoring mobility through life-altering joint replacement surgeries— ROANOKE, VIRGINIA – November 18, 2016 – Women Orthopaedic Global Outreach (WOGO) has joined #GivingTuesday, a global day of giving that harnesses the collective power of individuals, communities and organizations to encourage […]