James Wilber Poe (October 4, 1921 – January 24, 1980) was an American film and television screenwriter. He is best known for his work on such films as Around the World in 80 Days (for which he jointly won an Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay), Cat on a Hot Tin Roof, Summer and Smoke, Lilies of the Field, The Bedford Incident, and They Shoot Horses, Don't They?.

He also worked as a writer on the radio shows Escape and Suspense, writing the scripts for some of their best episodes, most notably "Three Skeleton Key", "Blood Bath" and "The Present Tense", all of which starred Vincent Price.

Poe was married to actress Barbara Steele from 1969 to 1978.

Sol turns thousands of years of human wisdom from the world’s spiritual traditions into a totally unique personality profile. To get your own profile, check compatibility with friends and much more, download the Sol App today.

Some of their strengths

James Poe has many admirable traits.

Based on spiritual traditions from around the world, they are someone who can be described as Imaginative, Intelligent, Energetic, Extroverted, Practical, Kind, and Passionate.

Intelligent and Inquisitive

According to Mysticism’s Astrology tradition, James Poe is someone who is an intelligent, inquisitive, and imaginative person, who is practical, considerate, kind, and diplomatic in dealings with others. A person who is known for being a good communicator.

Active and Precise

Based on Daoism’s Ba-Zi or ‘Chinese Zodiac’ tradition, people who know James Poe well know them as someone who can be tough, active, and sharp, like a sword.

Imaginative and Sentimental

According to Hinduism’s Jyotisha or ‘Vedic Astrology’ tradition, many would also describe James Poe as someone who is imaginative, sentimental, and in touch with emotions.

A person who has extremely good memory and analytical skills, likes to make sure that everyone gets along, enjoys all kinds of situations and people, has a talent for travel and languages, and who makes lifelong friends.

Influential and Dynamic

Based on the Mayan Tzolk’in or ‘Mayan Astrology’ tradition, James Poe is someone who tends to be focused on spreading ideas, information, and activities.

They are also someone who is reflective, mysterious, and purposeful, who enjoys quiet and solo work, and who thrives in positions where there is no need to report to someone else.

Justice-seeking and Peaceful

According to Judaism’s Kabbalah tradition, James Poe tends to be someone who loves peace and is ready to go to any costs to achieve it. Who has a taste for the good things in life, tends to be a good organizer, has a thirst for knowledge, and who tends to have the respect of friends and acquaintances.

Some of James Poe's challenges

While James Poe has many strengths, nobody is perfect. They also have some challenging traits they need to manage.

For example, James Poe can be Irritable, Hesitant, Narcissistic, Complicated, Brusque, Arrogant, and Status-seeking.

Hesitant and Narcissistic

One of James Poe's key challenges is that they are someone who can be hesitant and narcissistic.

Irritable and Moody

James Poe is someone who can be irritable and moody, have a tendency to experience self-doubt, be too secretive, can take too many risks, and who can have an extreme approach to managing personal finances.

Pleasure-seeking and Indecisive

Finally, James Poe also can put others first too much, and hem-and-haw too much when making a decision.