Allowing the Dell Service website to detect your product or enter your device's Service Tag is the quickest and easiest way to identify your product model and receive specialized support. Alternatively, you can choose your product from a list. This third option gives generic support information based on your product model rather than the specifications and capabilities of your specific machine.

The Dell laptop model number can be found on product labels applied to the laptop body or cardboard package. The positioning of the product label might vary.

Look in the following places, according to Dell Support:

The product's bottom cover, base, or rear

Storage for batteries

The screen, the keyboard trim, or the palm rest

On your PC, look for the product label:

Most computers have the product model number on a label or sticker on the exterior of the chassis. For Dell, its under the laptop with specific serial number and warranty number on them

Tablets and laptops:

The label might be on or near:

The product's bottom cover, base, or rear

Storage for batteries

The screen, the keyboard trim, or the palm rest

Desktops and all-in-one computers

The label might be on:

The tower case's back, top, or side.

Back of a multi-purpose case

Launch the Dell SupportAssist for Windows program:

SupportAssist is a Dell program that is pre-installed on your computer. It employs updates and proactive resolution tools to help identify and prevent problems. When you launch the app, your product model is shown.

Using SupportAssist to locate your product model:

Window 10:

Enter SupportAssist in the Search Box.

To access the program, select SupportAssist from the search results. If SupportAssist does not appear in the search results. It is because the application is not installed on your computer. See the SupportAssist for PCs and Tablets page for further information to download and install SupportAssist.

The main screen of the program displays your product model.

Microsoft Windows 8 (8.1):

Swipe in from the screen's right border or drag the pointer to the upper right corner until the Charms Bar displays.

Choose Search.

Enter SupportAssist in the Search Box.

To open the program, tap or select SupportAssist in the search results. If SupportAssist does not appear in the search results. It is because the application is not installed on your computer. Visit the SupportAssist for PCs and Tablets website for further information to download and install SupportAssist.

The main screen of the program displays your product model.

Launch the Windows System Information dialogue box:

Windows System Information (also known as msinfo32) displays a computer summary menu that includes information such as your machine's model, manufacturer, and operating system version.

Windows 10:

Enter System in the Search Box.

Under settings, pick System from the list of search results.

Look in the System section for the model.

Microsoft Windows 8 (8.1):

Swipe in from the screen's right edge, then hit Search (If you are using a mouse, hover over the lower-right corner of the screen, move the mouse pointer up, and then click Search).

In the search box, type msinfo32

Tap or click msinfo32 in the search results to access the System Information window.

Look in the System section for the model.

Windows 7 and Vista:

Click the Start button, then put System Information into the search box.

Under Programs, click System Information to open the System Information window.

Look for the model in the System section.

Windows XP

Select the Start option.

Right-click My Computer.

Click the Properties button.

Look for the model in the System section.

Navigate the BIOS Of your Computer:

BIOS is an abbreviation for "basic input/output system." This program checks to see if your hardware is operational when you switch on the computer before allowing Windows to start. You may access the BIOS without using Windows to obtain information about your machine and its components.

Use the BIOS to locate your product model.

Start your PC.

Hit the F2 key once per second to enter BIOS when you see the Dell logo screen. If Windows boots, you must restart your computer after it has finished booting and try again.

Find the product model in the menu title or displayed under System Name on the BIOS menu.

Knowing the brand of your laptop is no longer sufficient. Knowing the correct model number is critical as many laptops are available under many brand names and product lines. The model number is a unique collection of digits that can assist you in obtaining adequate assistance, checking the warranty, purchasing compatible components, and even locating the relevant handbook.