Even though earlier Hungarian films by Szabo (presented in this program) also

won international awards, it is a less known fact that they are at least as

valuable works of art as his later co-productions that reached wider world

audience.

István Szabó, one of the great European directors, is first of all famous for

his films from the ‘80s, made as opulent West German-Hungarian-Austrian

co-productions: Mephisto (1981), Oberst Redl (1985)

and Hanussen (1988).They won numerous prestigious international

awards and caused great interest with the audience. A constant theme from the

author’s opus is present in all of these films: destiny of an interesting

individual who is at first used by a social system (in the first and third film

Nazi system and in the second Austro-Hungarian), which allows him certain

privileges, only to finally be destroyed by it. Younger audiences could be

familiar with the equally attractive film, Sunshine (1999) also made as a

co-production between a few countries. The film is a story about the destiny of

a Hungarian Jewish family from the last few years of the Austro-Hungarian

monarchy until the fall of Communist regime in Hungary. In Croatia, it went

straight to video and television, which says a lot about the change of theatre

screening policy and not about this film’s value. With this film Szabo won a

Golden Globe for the best director.

Even though earlier Hungarian films by Szabo (presented in this program) also

won international awards, it is a less known fact that many critics claim that

they are at least as valuable works of art as the later co-productions that

reached wider world audience. These Hungarian films are in a certain way more

consistent, because they were made in a system when producers did not care about

their commercial success. Also, constant threat of censorship led the author to

be more inventive in the search for a technique with which to indirectly – which

in film is always a better way, and in those times enabled the escape from

ideological condemnation - show his view of life when crucial historical moments

and dramatic social changes break ideals and very often destroy lives of

individuals.

In his debut Álmodozások kora (1966), award in Locarno for the best

debut) that happens to a young generation facing real life.

For his most personal film, Apa (1967), he shared the Grand prix

in Moscow and in Locarno won the special jury award. In this film he used

autobiographical elements in creation of his main character (played by András

Bálint) who investigates the death of his prematurely deceased father.

He used such strong emotional tension in a different manner in his masterpiece

Szerelmesfilm (1970) which greatly shaped the belief that Hungarian

cinematography of that time was one of the leading in Europe. Complex

relationships in Hungary were shown as a love story happening in Paris. In 1956,

after the rebellion in Hungary, a Hungarian and a girl who just emigrated from

Hungary, fall in love.

Perhaps his best film,Bizalom (1980) won the Silver Bear

for the best director in Berlin), is also an unusual love story about two people

at the end of the WW II. Even though they have never seen each other before,

they have to pretend to be married in order to escape prison. One of Szabo’s

constant traits is evident here: showing only echoes and consequences of

horrific events on human psyche, he achieves a more tragic impression than he

would if he was to visually create those horrors. (Tomislav Kurelec)