Hanussen marks the completion of a film trilogy, the creation of Hungarian writer-director Istvan Szabo and Austrian actor Klaus Maria Brandauer. Their efforts have been uncommonly successful: The first installment, Mephisto, won the Best Foreign Language Film Oscar in 1981; Colonel Redl was nominated in the same category in 1985. Hanussen also picked up a nomination in this year’s category.

Hanussen, like its predecessors, concerns itself with the collapse of democracy in Europe in the early part of this century. It is also taken loosely from fact, basing its central character on an actual clairvoyant who enjoyed a vogue in Berlin during the 1920s and early 1930s.

Brandauer plays this character, who develops his mental powers after suffering a head wound in battle in World War I. Under the care of a psychoanalyst (Erland Josephson), he learns about hypnosis and eventually about his ability to predict the future.

His name’s Schneider, but he changes it to Erik Jan Hanussen, which becomes his stage name. Hanussen displays his powers through Central Europe, then settles in Berlin, the capital of decadence. While he insists on his lack of political interest, Hanussen is showing that people can be manipulated into almost anything – a trick also being practiced by another rising star in Germany, Adolf Hitler.

When Hanussen reluctantly but correctly predicts that Hitler will win the German chancellorship, he thrusts himself into the political scene. Despite his avowed neutrality, he cannot seem to escape Hitler’s shadow, a fate he shares with the rest of Europe.

Hanussen is an interesting movie, though it struck me as a bit dramatically undernourished. Once you get the idea of the parallels between Hanussen and Hitler, there’s not quite enough to carry this unusual character along (an exception is Hanussen’s interlude with a beauty-obsessed filmmaker, a character obviously based on Triumph of the Will director Leni Riefenstahl).

Brandauer, the virtuoso whose best-known English-language role has been as Meryl Streep’s husband in Out of Africa, gives another superb performance. Hanussen’s wolf eyes gleam as he uses his gifts to rise in the world, but Brandauer always bring out the more pathetic elements of his character. Brandauer’s fire keeps the film burning.

First published in The Herald, June 20, 1989

It sounds like a great idea for a movie, and Hanussen’s life story is a strange one. It seems odd that after this film, Brandauer’s career did not continue on its upward trajectory – but who can know about these things. I remember Robert Duvall declaring, after seeing Mephisto, that Brandauer was the only other actor alive who scared him, in the sense of having as much talent as Duvall had. They did The Lightship, directed by Jerzy Skolimowski, together, a big disappointment. My review of Colonel Redl is posted, too.

An actor often waits a lifetime for a part as colorful and flamboyant as the leading role in the Oscar-winning 1981 Hungarian film Mephisto. In that role, Klaus Maria Brandauer played a rampaging actor wrestling with ethical questions in the Europe of World War II.

In a performance that made audiences all over the world stand up and take notice, Brandauer shouted, pranced, whimpered, and snarled through the role with awesome agility. Robert Duvall was reported as saying that, for the first time in his life, he was actually frightened by another actor’s talent.

Brandauer, short and balding, doesn’t have conventional leading man looks. But he’s landed a couple of plum supporting roles in big-budget movies since Mephisto: a James Bond villain in Never Say Never Again, and Meryl Streep’s philandering husband in the current Out of Africa, for which he’s already won a few year-end awards.

Now, Brandauer has joined forces with the Mephisto team again, including director Istvan Szabo and screenwriter Peter Dobai, for another historical drama. It’s another major part for Brandauer, but the role – and the film itself – is quite different from Mephisto in a couple of important ways.

Colonel Redl tells the life story of Alfred Redl, from his boyhood days writing poems in praise of the emperor, through his patriotic military career in service to the Austro-Hungarian Empire in the years prior to World War I, to his death following an espionage scandal.

There was a real Colonel Redl, who committed suicide under mysterious circumstances in 1913. But the film admits in a prologue that his life as seen in the movie has been largely invented for dramatic purposes, and influenced by a previous fictionalization of Redl, John Osborne’s play A Patriot For Me. Szabo is out to drape his own morality play around the bones of Redl’s life.

It is the portrait of an opportunist surviving in an oppressive society. The young Redl quickly learns the rules of the game while at military school: He has a chance to save himself and his best friend Kubinyi, if he rats on a classmate. This he does, and afterword he calls himself a Judas; but the pattern of his life has been set.

He rises through the mllitary ranks with similar shrewdness and earns a reputation as a fierce leader. But something torments him, and as the film progresses, it becomes clear that Redl harbors a secret homosexual longing for Kubinyi (Jan Niklas) – a longing that is not sidetracked by sleeping with Kubinyi’s sister (Gudrun Landgrebe).

Redl becomes a confidant of the Crown Prince (Armin Mueller­-Stahl), and is appointed head of a secret security force. But his own secret, once exposed, brings his career crasing down around him.

It’s an involving story. But there’s a basic problem that keeps Colonel Redl from catching fire more often: unlike Mephisto, its subject matter is low-key. Mephisto was full of pyrotechnics, possibly because it was set in a theatrical milieu; Colonel Redl is more military drab.

Brandauer has fewer opportunities to shine, since he spends much of his time smoldering. But he has at least one unforgettable scene: Redl’s preparation for suicide, which strikes to the heart of despair and torture. Robert Duvall was right about Brandauer: In a scene such as this, he can genuinely frighten you.

First published in the Herald, January 2, 1986

As I write this during the pandemic, theaters are closed. But some distributors are teaming up with arthouse theaters to stream films so that the theaters can share in the take. It goes for new films, but, in the case of Kino Lorber’s re-release of three films directed by Istvan Szabo, it also applies to re-releases. So this movie is currently available again, with Mephisto and Confidence (wonder where Hanussen went?). Anyway, I’m sure that despite the letdown I obviously felt over Brandauer’s less spectacular work here, nobody could watch the actor’s work as Redl and not be wowed. (The local link to this series is via SIFF: https://kinonow.com/szabo-siff)

If Burning Secret exists for any reason, it is to give a splendid role to Klaus Maria Brandauer, the marvelous actor who made a great splash in the international cinema with his bravura performance in Mephisto and who more recently played Meryl Streep’s husband in Out of Africa.

Brandauer seems to prefer his stage work in Vienna, for he doesn’t make many films. But he dominates Burning Secret, in which he has a plum role as a wealthy and titled man of mystery.

Brandauer plays a baron, vacationing at continental sanitorium in the winter of 1919. A new arrival catches his eye; a married American woman (Faye Dunaway) and her young son (David Eberts), who are at the resort because of the boy’s asthma.

The baron quickly strikes up a friendship with the child, but it gradually becomes obvious that his interest lies in the mother. And the lady, it further develops, is not averse to the attention; her husband (Ian Richardson) is back in Vienna shuffling papers.

As the adults gravitate toward one another, the boy feels betrayed. In the movie’s most amusing scene, Brandauer and Dunaway propose leaving the kid alone at a skating pond while they go off to town alone. The boy insists on coming along. But surely, his mother says, you would be bored at the art gallery. “I love paintings,” he says stubbornly. “Seventeenth century Bavarian landscapes?” asks the baron. The kid blanks out for a moment, then recovers: “They’re my favorite.”

The film, written and directed by Andrew Birkin, is told from the child’s point of view. This allows fur the slow unfolding of the baron’s motives, as well as a keen sense of the boy’s hurt.

Not a lot happens in the film and Birkin’s direction is a bit flaccid, so the characters tend to explain a lot in conversation. The baron is always saying things such as, “To consummate love is to make it mortal,” and otherwise stating the movie’s ideas. Only because Brandauer’s performance is so dextrous, full of cat-like movement and curious smiles, does the movie keep from being completely static. Even so, it’s awfully slow going.

The script is based on a story by Austrian writer Stefan Zweig, whose work also provided the basis for one of Hollywood’s most exquisite films, the 1948 Letter From an Unknown Woman. That movie breathed glowing life into the same themes that are present here, the sense of romantic tragedy and love unfulfilled. Burning Secret manages to smolder only occasionally.

First published in the Herald, December 1988

No recollection of this one, but Brandauer makes anything worth a look. Birkin must be an interesting person; along with being Jane Birkin’s brother, he wrote on some interesting projects, was an assistant to Stanley Kubrick, and directed the very interesting Ian McEwan adaptation, The Cement Garden. And oh, look: turns out Kubrick developed his own adaptation of Burning Secret in the 1950s.

Out of Africa is a chronicle of the early womanhood of Danish author Karen von Blixen, based on her writings (under the name Isak Dinesen) and on biographies about her. The film traces the years approximately surrounding World War I, a period in von Blixen’s life during which she lived in Africa.

What a story it is, full of adventure, exotica, disaster, and romance. But what a frustratingly pedantic film version, with few flights of poetry.

On a sheer storytelling level, the film gets off to a good start. We see a glimpse of Karen (Meryl Streep) in 1913 Denmark, proposing marriage to a casual friend, the Baron von Blixen (Klaus Maria Brandauer). They’re not in love, but she wants his title, and he wants her family’s money, so they agree to the match.

Soon after, she joins him in Africa, where they establish a coffee plantation. Their idyll, during which she surprises many with her pre-women’s lib gumption, is broken when she contracts syphilis, a side effect of the Baron’s philandering. She goes to Denmark for a cure, and on her return to Africa, the marriage exists in name only.

That clears the way for her friendship with Denys (Robert Redford), a hunter who encourages her uncanny skill for telling stories. Soon he’s keeping residence at her house, for the few days when he returns between safaris.

This love story takes up the last 90 minutes of the movie—and as I examine the thumbnail synopsis above, it is difficult to believe that this film actually takes more than two-and-a-half hours to tell its story. But it does.

The problem is that, after the promising opening, director Sydney Pollack (Tootsie) falls prey to the curse of the Big Movie Syndrome, in which ideas and events must be drawn out and overemphasized, so that the people who vote for the Oscars will be sure to notice. He pads the carefully constructed screenplay by Kurt Luedtke with countless shots of breathtaking plains and hills.

Most of this travelogue stuff is impressive indeed, thanks to the beauty of the continent and David Watkin’s handsome cinematography. The high point of this is a lovely sequence wherein Denys pilots his new plane for Karen, and they fly over an ocean beach, scattering thousands of pink flamingos.

But Pollack overdoes things. He doesn’t just put Karen in peril of a lion attack once—he does it three separate times. And he can’t integrate the importance of the war or the issue of native freedom in any sensible way.

Even more troubling, he hasn’t gotten his actors up to snuff. Redford, in what is essentially a supporting role, appears uneasy and distant. Streep is technically very impressive, but she doesn’t have the depth to reach the nitty-gritty of what must have been an amazingly gutsy woman. Together, they fail to strike sparks—both are inward-directed actors.

This all makes Out of Africa sound worse than it actually is; it’s not an inept film, and there’s a lot to look at and enjoy. But, given the material and the credentials of the filmmakers, it certainly is a disappointment.

First published in the Herald, December 19, 1985

Perhaps you heard this went on to win the best picture Oscar? I would watch it again, as a big fan of Dinesen and a big fan of Africa on film. But I mean I thought some things needed to be said, right? And though Meryl Streep hardly lacks depth, I did think she missed a level, even if she’s still very good in the picture. Brandauer’s great, by the way, slinking off with the movie under his arm.