The year is 1187 and the crusader kingdom of Jerusalem is beginning to collapse. Chain-mail clad soldiers are clashing as knights charge into battle chanting in Arabic and looking to behead their Christian enemies.

The Battle of Hattin remains a decisive battle in Crusader history, where the legendary Muslim commander, Saladin, defeated the Crusaders, leading to the fall of Jerusalem.

Now some 60 history buffs have been busy re-enacting the famed battle near an extinct volcano in northern Israel overlooking the Sea of Galilee.

Carrying their swords, shields and body armor, the group quick marched 17 miles over the weekend whilst re-enacting one of the most significant battles of the Middle Ages.

The red and white painted shields of Crusader shields and heavy chainmail armour appears formidable against the loose linen tunics of the Muslim armies, armed with their curved blades and light spears.

Such was the commitment to accuracy, the re-enactors even used basic wooden and ceramic utensils and hand-woven undergarments reflective of the time.

Even the weather was realistic to the time, with the severe heat playing a crucial part in Saladin's ingenious strategy to shatter the Crusader forces. The Kurdish commander, who rose through the ranks to lead a mighty Muslim army to Cairo and Damascus, used fire to cause panic amongst the crusader ranks.

Just like the re-enactors, the bone dry grass quickly caught alight, creating a curtain of fire which began to engulf the Crusaders defensive line. With the thick smoke reducing the Crusaders visibility, their ranks were crushed by the advancing Muslim forces of Saladin.

Despite the heavy casualties being suffered by many civilians over the border in Syria, re-enactors remain wholly committed to their part, even lying on the ground when they are 'killed' in battle.

Interestingly, almost a third of the committed re-enacters actually flew in specially from Russia. Bringing her own gear, the band of re-enactors congregated on the Horns of Hattin, just like Saladin's forces had done so all those years ago.

The creative project is supported by the Lower Galilee Regional Council and appears to be a way of bringing the rich history of the region to life.

'It's a direct way of connecting to history, not through books and not through the computer,' said Genadiy Niznik, who organized the event and heads the only Israeli chapter of the 'living history' trend.

Niznik, who is completing a master's degree in archaeology at Haifa University and researches attire and textiles from the Holy Land of the 12th century, hopes the trend will begin to catch on in the Holy Land.