Share via:

Alfred Bester (1913–1987) was an American science fiction author, TV and radio scriptwriter, magazine editor and scripter for comic strips and comic books. He is best remembered for his science fiction, including The Demolished Man, winner of the inaugural Hugo Award in 1953.

Science fiction author Harry Harrison wrote, “Alfred Bester was one of the handful of writers who invented modern science fiction.”

Shortly before his death, the Science Fiction Writers of America (SFWA) named Bester its ninth Grand Master, presented posthumously in 1988. The Science Fiction and Fantasy Hall of Fame inducted him in 2001.

In his first period of writing science fiction (1939–1942), Alfred Bester had been establishing a reputation as a short story writer in science fiction circles with stories such as “Adam and No Eve”. However, Bester gained his greatest renown for the work he wrote and published in the 1950s, including The Demolished Man and The Stars My Destination (also known as Tiger! Tiger!).

The Demolished Man, recipient of the first Hugo Award for best Science Fiction novel, is a police procedural that takes place in a future world in which telepathy is relatively common. Bester creates a harshly capitalistic, hierarchical and competitive social world that exists without deceit: a society in which the right person with some skill (or money) and curiosity can access your memories, secrets, fears and past misdeeds more swiftly than even you.

Originally published in three parts in Galaxy, beginning in January 1952, The Demolished Man appeared in book form in 1953. It was dedicated to Gold, who made a number of suggestions during its writing. Originally, Bester wanted the title to be Demolition!, but Gold talked him out of it.

Alfred Bester – First Edition identification points and Guide

Note: This list only includes works published prior to 1977.

Alfred Bester – First Printing Dust Jacket identification points

Gallery of First state Dust Jackets of Alfred Bester’s works. Only includes the first appearance in book form. Either the UK or US edition and does not include later printings.

Reference: