Marcel Duchamp, a French-American artist and a peculiar man who could be best described as ‘one of a kind’, revolutionized the world of art.

With a porcelain urinal.

I saw a copy at Tate Modern and was quite impressed by the story behind it — and here’s why.

Instead of a preamble: As usual, the post starts with some unnecessary personal blather, feel free to skip the next four paragraphs. :)

Hazy Scottish summer of 2019. No viruses, no lockdowns, just me and my summer project for university — I was trying to model an individual decision to vote for a populist politician using some fun maths.

Spending days in the library. Level 5, postgrad area, as usual. Taking the derivative of my cute concave function, then another one, then plugging them into Matlab. Iterations, iterations… Was it my laptop simulating data points, or was it me simulating that I knew what I was doing?

Anyway, it was the perfect time for spontaneous purchases. So I opened Trainline and — woohoo, got tickets to London. Leaving in a few days. It was August. Did I tell you it was a hazy Scottish summer? Around +12C outside.

London is warmer and, importantly, bigger. So, anticipating big city vibes, I couldn't wait to finally see Duchamp’s urinal and artwork that revolutionized the industry once, at Tate Modern in the flesh.

The Fountain 1917

April 1917, Washington. President Wilson is urging Congress to declare war on Germany. Meanwhile, in New York, three well-dressed young gentlemen — two Americans and a Frenchman — leave a duplex apartment at 33 West 67th Street, a block away from Central Park, and head towards Broadway. As the Americans walk and discuss the world’s latest developments, the Frenchman suddenly stops. The final destination of his journey is reached. He stares into the window of a plumbing store. He desperately needs to buy something before the sun goes down and the place closes. He quickly gets in, and ferrets around among the bathroom and door handles on display. “I’ll buy it”, the Frenchman calls the store assistant over and points to a white porcelain urinal.

The two Americans hail a taxi. The third man stands on the sidewalk. Marcel Duchamp (1887–1968), a French-American artist, was a very peculiar type. An odious womanizer and a restless romantic. In his appearance and attitude, there was something that screamed that he had come into this world to transform the art industry.

He is holding the urinal, amused by his plan to use the purchase as a prank to cause a bit of a stir in the stuffy art world.

The urinal, signed and dated in black point on the left-hand side of the outer rim as “R. Mutt 1917', was submitted as artwork to the 1917 Independents Exhibition, staged at the Grand Central Palace in New York under the name Fountain. The exhibition was organized by the Society of Independent Artists, a group of free-thinking, forward-looking intellectuals taking a stand against the conservative pompous art world. Yet the Fountain was never placed in the show area. Although Duchamp was the Society's director, and the Society’s rules stated that all works would be accepted from artists for a small fee, the exhibition’s organizing committee took exception to Fountain.

They believed that a piece of sanitary ware — that one associated with bodily waste — could not be considered a work of art.

This was no small matter: the idea of having a jury-free exhibition of contemporary art had been compromised, as well as New York’s aspirations to become a dynamic artistic centre that would rival and even outstrip Paris.

Readymade & Dada

In Duchamp’s mind, he had invented a new form of sculpture: one where an artist selects any pre-existing object of mass-production with no obvious aesthetic merit and frees it from its functional purpose (in other words, make it useless) by giving it a name and changing the context and angle from which it would be normally seen. The artwork is ready. He called the new form of art-making a ‘readymade’: a sculpture that is already made.

With his readymades, Marcel wanted to question the very notion of what constituted a work of art as decreed by academics and critics.

He believed that it was for artists to decide what was and what was not artwork. His stance was that if an artist said something was a work of art, having influenced its context and meaning, then it was a true work of art. Although this was a simple concept to grasp, he realized that it could cause a revolution in the art world.

The pseudonym for Fountain was not chosen randomly: it was a play on words. The name Mutt is a play on Mott, the store in New York City from which the urinal was purchased. The initial R perhaps stands for Richard, a French colloquialism for a ‘moneybags’: Duchamp’s artwork was a critique of greedy, speculative collector and pompous museum directors of that time.

Interestingly, some of Duchamp’s artworks are signed as ‘from’ and not ‘by’ Marcel Duchamp, thus highlighting his role in the process: this was an idea ‘from’ an artist as opposed to a work of art ‘by’ an artist.

Marcel Duchamp, along with his friend Man Ray, another American visual artist, were the most prominent representatives of New York Dadaism. The art movement of the European avant-garde was initiated in Zürich and quickly spread to other artistic centres of the time: Paris, Berlin, Cologne, Netherlands and America. The Dada movement gathered under one roof artists who rejected the logic, reason, and aestheticism of modern capitalist society instead of expressing nonsense, irrationality, and anti-bourgeois protest in their artworks.

Duchamp’s other famous readymades include Bottle Rack (1914) (a bottle-drying rack), In Advance of the Broken Arm (1915) (a snow shovel), L.H.O.O.Q. (1919) (a parody of the Mona Lisa with a moustache and goatee; the inscription L.H.O.O.Q., when read out loud in French quickly, sounds like “Elle a chaud au cul”, or “She has a hot ass”), Belle Haleine, Eau de Voilette (1920) (a perfume bottle with an attached photo of Duchamp dressed as a woman, made with the help of Man Ray).

Along with Pablo Picasso and Henri Matisse, Marcel Duchamp is regarded as one of the three artists who helped to revolutionize the development of conceptual art in the 20s century.