by Hannahachiever07

CAINTA, RIZAL

Our Lady of Light Parish Church is a Roman Catholic parish church located in Cainta, Rizal. It is also known as “Cainta Church.” The church operates a neighboring school, The Cainta Catholic College. It was first constructed in stone by a Jesuit priest named Father Gaspar Marco in the year 1707. In the year 1727, a painting of Our Lady of Light was brought from Italy and was chosen as the new patroness of the church. By the year 1760, it was officially declared that the church is a separate parish. However, the church that we see today is not the original one because in 1853, an earthquake struck that caused the roof and a wall to collapse and left cracks. During the Filipino-American war, the church was burned down including the venerated Marian image inside. The church was left as ruins for 67 years.

Even through war, hope was not lost for the worship place because in the mid-1960s, Galo Ocampo was instructed to study the possibility of reconstructing the church in its original site. The reconstruction began in the year 1966. However, when one of the beams collapsed, the reconstruction was put to a pause for further study on how to rebuild the church that can withstand natural calamities. The reconstruction was resumed in the year 1967 and was finally completed a year after.

As for the painting, National Artist, Fernando Amorsolo was commissioned to replicate the icon of the Blessed Virgin Mary. The replica was considered as the Filipino version of the painting from The Kingdom of Sicily. On February 25 1968, the church was fully restored, reconstructed, and blessed by Rufino Cardinal Santos.

Whenever I visit the Philippines, I never took the church of much seriousness because I am not Catholic. However, I always see my aunt attending mass in this church whenever she visits us in Cainta. Learning the history and hardships of the church made me realize that people are willing to sacrifice time and effort just to build a solid sacred place of worship and that realization made me thankful for those people who restored the church. If I ever go back to my hometown, I will always remember this church as a work of patience and hard work.

Sources and Photo credits:

http://philippineartruthpanagsagan.blogspot.com/2017/10/philippine-art.html

Blog Written by: Louise Ramirez