My People FC’s Sani Emmanuel notched two goals in the space of five minutes in Nigeria’s 5-0 mauling of New Zealand, taking his goal tally to three from two games…

At tournaments like this, stars are made. The 2009 FIFA U-17 World Cup may turn out to be Sani Emmanuel’s tournament. The lad who has played only two matches in this tournament has notched up three goals.

In his first match of the tournament, Emmanuel, who plays for My People Football Club, came from the bench to score Nigeria’s second and winning goal against Argentina in their last group game played at the Abubakar Tafawa Balewa Stadium in Bauchi. The goal came from the penalty spot after the Argentines had fouled a Nigerian player in their goal area.

After coming from the sub’s bench in the 73rd minute to score two goals in five minutes against New Zealand, My People FC’s Sani Emmanuel is already making a name for himself…

In the Golden Eaglet’s round of 16 matches against New Zealand yesterday at the Abuja National Stadium, Emmanuel, who came into the match in the 74th minute as a replacement for Omo Ojabu, struck a minute later to increase Nigeria’s lead to 4-0. The goal was the work of sublime skill as the player, waltzing into the New Zealand eighteen, outpaced his markers and coolly slotted the ball past the New Zealand goalkeeper.

Four minutes later, collecting a pass from Stanley Okoro, he fired from eight yards out to score Nigeria’s fifth goal. With his future spread before him, the player whose explosive playing style and close ball control closely mirrors that of super eagles forward, Obafemi Martins, may not have to wait for long before getting a look in from handlers of the Super Eagles.

With three goals under his belt, he has put himself in contention for the Golden Shoe, an award reserved for the tournament’s highest goal scorer.

By Tunde Eludini

SOURCE: Next

Explore posts in the same categories: Articles Of Interest

This entry was posted on November 6, 2009 at 6:52 pm and is filed under Articles Of Interest. You can subscribe via RSS 2.0 feed to this post's comments.

Tags: Bodens BK, Emmanuel TV, Golden Eaglets, John Obuh, My People FC, Obafemi Martins, Sani Emmanuel, Shaibu Amodu, Stanley Okoro, TB Joshua

You can comment below, or link to this permanent URL from your own site.