For My People FC’s Sani Emmanuel, the best is definitely yet to come!!

The young African player of the year is an award presented by CAF to the most talented African footballer who is yet to clock 23. In scope, the award covers all African footballers, whether professional or amateur, who have had the opportunity to showcase their talents to the world.

The trend observed in the past shows that no player has ever won the award after emerging the best player at any age group competition. The closest observed so far was John Obi Mikel who won the award on the back of his performance at the U-17 world cup in Finland in 2005.

In the year 2009 alone, young African players have showcased their talents to the world again; winning the MVP awards at both the U-20 and the U-17 competitions. It is expected that one of these will win the award for the young African player of the year 2009.

Dominic Adiyiah:

Dominic Adiyiah was a member of the Black Satellite’s team that conquered the world at the U20 level. He scored a total of Eight (8) goals and was awarded the Golden Ball as well as the Golden Shoe. He has since moved from Fredrikstad FK to A.C. Milan.

Sani Emmanuel:

Sani Emmanuel was a member of the Super Eaglets team that lost the final match of the U17 world cup to Switzerland. He scored a total of five (5) goals in a remarkable 221 minutes of play and was awarded the Silver Shoe as well as the Golden Ball. There have been rumours of several European football clubs hoping to acquire his services. Sani Emmanuel is known to celebrate his goals by going down on his knees to thank God. At a young age of 16, he has promised to establish a foundation that will give other footballers the opportunity to succeed.

Alexander Song:

Alex Song is a member of the Cameroonian team. A formidable midfielder who has imposed himself into Arsene Wenger’s young Arsenal team thanks to his consistent performance. He has matured into a reliable defensive midfielder who can also play as a central defender. He is a niece of the Cameroonian legend Rigobert Song.

John Obi Mikel:

John Obi Mikel is a regular member of the Nigerian Super Eagles’ team. A defensive midfielder who has effectively combined with Michael Essien to fill the void left by Claude Makelele. He won the award in 2005. He led played a prominent role in Nigeria’s last minute qualification for the 2010 world cup.

Other notable names are:

Dede Ayew

Ramon Azeez

Ransford Osei

Emmanuel Agyeman-Badu