Sani Becirovic Origin/Culture/Country: Slovenia

Sani Becirovic: Height 195 cm Year of Birth 1981 Nationality Slovenian Position Point / Shooting Guard NBA Draft 2003 # 46

Sani Shehu Emmanuel Origin/Culture/Country: Nigerian

Sani Shehu Emmanuel: commonly known as Sani Emmanuel, is a Nigerian footballer, who currently plays for My People FC as a striker, as well as having a stint with Swedish outfit Bodens BK. He played a prominent part of the 'Golden Eaglets' Nigerian U-17 Team's campaign in the 2009 FIFA U-17 World Cup. Emmanuel played for the Nigeria U-17 team at 2009 FIFA U-17 World Cup in Nigeria . He scored the winning goal for Nigeria through a penalty kick in their match against Argentina, which saw Nigeria top their group with 7 points.

Sania Mirza Origin/Culture/Country: Indian

Sania Mirza: an Indian tennis player. She was born in Mumbai, brought up in Hyderabad. Coached by her father, Imran Mirza, (as well as her other family members) she began playing tennis at the age of six, turning professional in 2003. She is the highest ranked female tennis player ever from India, with a career high ranking of 27 in singles and 18 in doubles. She was ranked 91st in the singles category and 44th in the doubles category in the WTA rankings of Sept 8, 2008.

Sanibal Orahovac Origin/Culture/Country: Slavic

Sanibal Orahovac: is a Montenegrin footballer who plays as a striker or an attacking midfielder.He only played for Vitória in the 2004–05 season and managed to make only six domestic league appearances for the club without scoring any goals. He continued to play in Portuga

Sanidis Origin/Culture/Country: Greek

Sanidis: was a Greek shooter. He competed at the 1896 Summer Olympics in Athens.

Amru Sani Origin/Culture/Country: Jamaican

Amru Sani: was a singer and actress who experienced short-lived fame in the United States during the 1950s and 1960s.A "tall, exotic creature with a powerful, bluesy voice,"[1] she identified herself during her American heyday as hailing from India, but earlier newspaper references identified her as Jamaican. A 1954 edition of the Kingston, Jamaica, The Gleaner called her a "'Jamaican 'enchantress of song.'"[2]Sani once claimed to have been born in Panama, to have grown up in India, to have been educated in Europe, and to have served as an airplane mechanic in England during World War II because she was too young to become a female pilot.[3] Whether some of this information is merely show-business hype is unknown. However, the Kingston Gleaner did note in 1943 that Sani — who was already known in Jamaica as a singer — was "going to England shortly . . . to join the W.A.A.F.S." (This article also listed her as "the only daughter of Mr. and Mrs. M. P. Sani of 10, Lundford Road, St. Andrew," Jamaica.)[4]

Aminu Sani Origin/Culture/Country: Nigerian

Aminu Sani: is a Nigerian professional football player.Sani started playing professionally in Katsina United, but soon, with only 17 years, he came to Italy and signed with Atalanta Bergamo. After one season, he signed with top Belgian club Club Brugge where he stayed until 2003. In the last season he was loaned, in the last half of the season, to FC Brussels, known in that period by the name of KFC Strombeek. In summer 2003, he moved to Israel to play in Hapoel Be'er Sheva. A serious of injuries made him almost give up, but in December 2006, he signed with a lower Italian league side Alghero Calcio where he expected to return to his maximum form. In 2008, he moved to Serbia to play in Radnicki Kragujevac.