Message from Trustee Shawn Xaviour

Thank you for Choosing a Dufferin-Peel Catholic Education

Dear Parents and Guardians:

It seems that, all of a sudden, summer weather is upon us and so, incredibly, is the end of the 2014-15 school year. As we reflect back over the year, we can see that it was, in fact, a very successful year for Dufferin-Peel students in terms of achievement, success and well-being. With steadily rising EQAO scores, matching or surpassing the provincial standard and averages in most assessment areas, and graduation rates that are among the highest in the province, this board continues to be defined, in part, by our high levels of success and achievement. Yet, we are much more than that. Our commitment to helping each student fulfill their potential, through the Ontario Catholic School Graduate Expectations, means that our students graduate with the tools to become good, solid contributing members of the communities in which they will live.

As trustees, we see the contribution of dedicated teaching and support staff, administrators and senior management working together with trustees facilitate conditions that we can to facilitate success. We also see, firsthand, the important role of our parents/guardians, working in concert with the school and the parish in fostering conditions for success and well-being.

So, as we complete the final leg of the journey that is the 2014-15 school year, we thank parents/guardians for choosing a Dufferin-Peel Catholic education for your child(ren) and for entrusting them into our care. It is a responsibility for which we are grateful and one that we cherish very much. To our students, thank you for all you have done to contribute to the life of your school. For those who are graduating and moving on to post-secondary education or the world of work, may God continue to go with you and bless you on your journey. To our returning students and families, we look forward to seeing you in September.

Blessings and best wishes for a peaceful and restful summer.

- Shawn Xaviour

Personal Electronic Devices

April 20, 2015

Dear Parent/Guardian,

In the Dufferin-Peel Catholic District School Board, “we believe that each one, created in the image and likeness of God, is called by name into the Dufferin-Peel Community to realize the Ontario Catholic School Graduate Expectations to the fullest extent possible as we all journey from the early years to vocation.” As we monitor and refine our support, programming continues to ensure that each child is well on their way to achieving the Ontario Catholic School Graduate Expectations within the context of learning in the 21st century.

St. Thomas Aquinas Secondary School will be participating in a pilot that will permit students to bring personal electronic devices to school for educational purposes. We recognize the value of using Personal Electronic Devices (PEDs) to enhance learning and curriculum delivery. As such, we support the responsible and ethical use of PEDs in keeping with the Catholic Code of Conduct and the DPCDSB’s Policies and General Administrative Procedures.

Through the authority of the principal and under the direction of staff, students are permitted to use the school board’s wireless network and their registered PEDs for educational purposes during this pilot. Further details are included in the following two attachments: PED Parent letter 2015 and the Personal Electronic Device User Agreement.

PED Parent Letter 2015

Personal Electronic Device User Agreement

Online Reporting Tool

To promote a positive school community, this Safe @ St. Thomas Aquinas - Online Reporting Tool has been created so students who become aware of bullying incidents and other negative behaviours that impact the school environment can report them.

When you fill out this form, you are not required to provide your name or any other information that identifies you. If the information is provided anonymously, it may be dealt with in a general way, as there may be no means to respond specifically if limited information is provided. Depending on the type of information you provide, you may be identifiable.

In some cases, if you are identifiable based on the information provided, the school principal/vice-principal may approach you to provide more information on a confidential basis. If you choose to identify yourself in the reporting process, the principal and/or vice-principal may follow up directly with you.

Uniforms

All our students are expected to be in full and proper uniform every day at school. This includes being in the halls, library, and cafeteria. Students who do not comply with the school uniform policy will receive appropriate consequences.

Shirt: (RJ McCarthy Only)

-> Aquinas Crested Rugby Shirt

-> Hoodies are not permitted

Pants: (RJ McCarthy Only)

-> Black Dress Pants with the Cardinal Logo on the right thigh

-> Pants must be worn at the waist

Shoes:

-> Black Dress or casual shoes with Black laces only

-> All students must wear socks with their shoes

Optional Summer Uniform: (RJ McCarthy Only)

For September to Thanksgiving, and May 1st to Final Exams only

-> Aquinas Monogrammed White Golf Shirt, instead of Rugby Shirt

Please note: the last day that students can wear the optional "summer uniform" is Thursday, October 10th. All students must be in their rugby shirt after Thanksgiving.

Uniform items may be purchased through R.J.McCarthy located at 44 West Drive in Brampton. For more details go to www.rjmccarthy.com. To see a picture example of the uniform, click Aquinas Uniform .

Elections for executive positions will be held during the meeting. If you wish to nominate yourself for a position, please print out the nomination form below, and submit to the school main office by Friday, September 18, 2015. The first Parent Council meeting is September 22, 2015.

STA School Council Nomination Form 2015

*****

All parents are welcome to visit this page for information on issues of interest to parents, and upcoming Parent Council meetings. You will also find other information specifically for our parent community, including the Aquinas Parent Handbook, in the "Parent Corner" link at

The Parent Corner

*****

If you'd like to see a breakdown of how student fees at St. Thomas Aquinas are spent, check out:

STA Itemized Activity Fee Breakdown

*****

The following links will assist parents in accessing the D-P brochure on School Councils in addition to the CCCSC Handbook.

CCCSC Handbook

School Council Brochure

*****

Council Dates for the 2015-2016 School Year

School Council Elections / 1st Meeting:

Tuesday, September 22. 20157:00 p.m.

*****

Parent Council Members

2014-2015

Chair John Creighton Treasurer Michele Drenters Secretary Susan Hall Parish Rep Kristina Burns Member Valerie Peters Member Dina Scheitzbach