See other formats

ah gis Anite Phalds 75h wese oi ee ne een in te mada RaARAe! emt “ eee ner, ever ny foe on . a lasohile - ¥ = AN th ae at : : % : nih - irae sens ems eae - p: sa hateka tae wat a eaten Bk ce Matias “ 3 , : - 3 - - aR arm" 0) oe oat iba AWN Theale wSM te thts AW Pata aa atom ! ae Es ; aiegrataRe tas ntoto ti : “inert " : a Kaan hats oc : - : 2 : : : : : - : har ets Nag al alia Se a Bobet ate! Pew ; 4 pr Setar att cate ot ered eh ati Forme ‘ : 3 Esl ee Real” Hees Seer Seneca cs Sees arenes se a Te eerpaten near near " : ‘ a E resi erg aie rebels ere a r < r areca ov Fy ks - a —— AMINA ME ahs bate ah mabe nba Maks ; vin ahve tp onto atin ess io oe he mL 4 “s hie ot ipsa : eb ten NE Migtlece Than eae Miaeoee : " noe . ot oars a 4 ? 5 7 te gd ‘ Wi) Vv 4 . ‘ ‘ fs. | \ ’ a, ; 1 ) ’ ay ‘ iM i : : ; See ' ’ “21 i 4 ie 8 Se acs 29-2 —" SEER oi ~ Ws, a oo. “1317-1997 ~The Official Catholic Directory" Anno Domini N997 | = Dart ts | Moyorecotcl i catlesutver-\cem-levene Coltrane Section a uated Nrdetelterescieltatel Diocesan Data ™ U.S. Church Statistics Updates and Additions @ Products and Services Guide UNITED CHURCH DIRECTORIES A ‘Company PWeiallicoiam ial mem elelire|iave my. Weralll coral M el-le)e) (=m body | ; ee : i ae t i : Li i anesthe oie @ hi QO DOS bd Bo: i ag re Miia ie “ but An BOSTON PUBLIC LIBRARY Copley Square Che Official | Catholic Directory” ~— Anno Domini 1997 eDart lls @ Special Pilgrimage and Tourist Section @ Worldwide Archdiocesan and Diocesan Data m@ U.S. Church Statistics Updates and Additions @ Products and Services Guide Published by P.J. Kenedy & Sons in association with National Register Publishing, a division of Reed Elsevier Inc. Darryl! Fisher, Chief Operating Officer Andrew W. Meyer, Publisher Copyright ©1997 by Reed Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means stored in any information storage and retrieval system, without prior written permission of National Register Publishing, 121 Chanlon Road, New Providence, NJ 07974. International Standard Book Number: 0-87217-962-1 International Standard Serial Number: 0078-3854 Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 81-3096] Printed and bound in the United States of America National Register Publishing has used its best efforts in collecting and preparing materials for inclusion in The Official Catholic Directory Part IT, but does not warrant that the information herein is complete or accurate, and does not assume, and hereby disclaims, any liability to any person for any loss or damage caused by errors or omissions in The Official Catholic Directory Part I! whether such errors or omissions result from negligence, accident or any other cause. The Official Catholic Directory Part II was prepared by National Register Publishing’s Database Publishing Group. John R. Agel, Publisher Publisher’s Staff includes: Jeanne Hanline, Managing Editor Betty Hromoko, Executive Secretary Database Publishing Staff includes: Christina Fry Moxley, Managing Editor Joseph C. Stewart, Senior Editor Kathleen F. Jurcsek, Associate Editor Faith Shepherd, Assistant Editor Linda Hummer, Diane R. Moxley, Editorial Assistants Dean Hollister, Vice President, Production-Directories Thomas Bachmann, Senior Editorial Director : i (_3e s > + ‘ ine} TH ; vig “4 ~~ rare are) s ’ s Aye \ earns ie > qin) acceler septate 2 quindatigat wiiaga® sat ; oF ea at cbt ay. ~sthwlace Ta * wid: ; peed S Sipe aes “Kp so rat Sunil ; 7F Table of Contents (SSVI sage ere ra ate ap oar pee eR ee Vil MEMES HOCSUTIALIONS i. sere eee G sri vi cto CoA E etree are le a l Pirelidioceses & Dioceses of the World 0:......0...s:licieceessslsldesolonsbessdllsdissdesedvvbndenlecle 45 Archdioceses & Dioceses of the World - Geographic Index .............ccceceeseeeeeeeeeee 139 See oe onuichinthesWnited States Men oi.csieceeteretee ivi vaee etcccvenserereteeccneess [53 Alphabetical List of the Cardinals, Archbishops, Bishops, Peuaanotsand Abbots of the United States. icc wii. eigen dieeeeveeslicerees seen eee 1557 Mameoestaics Catholic Conference National Organizations .......-.:..-.-c--0n---seesee4e00 nus! Mieeces( Albany- Victoria, Eastern Rites, Territorial Sees)...........2....-.-ecesseeeeoees las IRSA CLIUITCS OMY OL CIN eocetet ccc ccsect crass cose. SoU se casceneeds Moles tecuis spncnnunceeseonares 226 Ne eee rissccs ve tee chs aesereie nae cases eel ety catgeceees entre tare 228 a ESSER TSTERSIU GATT a ae eo Ae Ir | @ natHad 70. $i d sf j ariofen af 7s tous aosrees- SOURED S Bae v . a ' 7 Jf « ‘ d nN 3, ¥% d PV, * " } onl *n , Lae | ' ‘ Pidalt pio it ; oS iy . ; ite ae ) £ - } 0b ad > s # - ma 4 ‘ - f i. 3 Ti ‘ ile ¢ me , : - a's * 7. P a ade | ONNO? 2 i 79 + (OPRDLY «7a J . a ort a ; ers +a “e ec ie Pes Ly Y ; Pied ote: ; 3 ~o" r } co an ; i ass oe = . o> WT ee ew we ee o- eri fis isrt ieee . a 7 ae . a} és =f x (sd Bees ot j sb ie 4 ~_- fou @ r ret + Nap ae 5 ; : ~~ a: J). aad ns y Opi iw = wea aie ike “~ anys ; . nn me be boat = de i ne. aes om 4 H.- i et oF ’ a - - ity ‘ ag a es ips ’ : eae oat al re er oe aa 7 = P ' Li ; 4 ‘ ‘ + Zs * avy , ? : : . a ¥ . < ' sil —— he Official Catholic Directory ——— Sohn B. Ayel Kiblisher FOREWORD We are pleased to present this edition of Part II of the Official Catholic Directory. The section listing Archdioceses and Dioceses of the World is current and up to date reflecting the name of the Ordinary of the See, address, telephone and fax number if available. Permission to reprint this information from the 1997 AnnuarioPontificio has been secured and we wish to graciously thank the Vatican Secretariat of State, the Vatican Press and Archbishop Cacciavillan, Apostolic Pro-Nuncio to the United States, for their invaluable assistance and cooperation. The ilgrimage Destination continues to expand highlighting places of special interest. Information is supplied concerning the primary importance of the specific location and also offers other invaluable information relative to the surrounding area. Pilgrimages are being encouraged more than ever as we approach the new millennium. It is our hope that you find this section enjoyable to read and helpful in assisting your decision to visit one or more of these amazing sites. Additional updates and other information not found in the main volume also appear in Part II of the Official Catholic Directory pertinent to the Archdioceses and Dioceses of the United States. In closing, we wish to thank the ecclesiastical authorities and all those involved for their cooperation and responsiveness. John R. Agel Publisher Published by P.J. Kenedy & Sons 121 Chanlon Road ¢ New Providence, NJ 07974 # 908-665-6680 rk ~ trotsarit ailrarlts; » beta) aD ’ _ . a ‘ Fi nf o : oe > — cs x. (fc tile " TAOWS 7 ‘ on ‘ ‘ 7 oo wy > ith -fau 2 rity « L “ — S — p< 7 — as . “y Y= ¥ a. et a oe oe t rend “ P ¢ 7 ‘ “ ‘ , a 7 d : j , J } 4 t a < ' ’ r % i uP WD, wh geri ti 7% a vile P L Y j ) oe TOL & t lum ori 2) Drwo) Fon odes rte | bla } v1.0 lee v. ay i 5 ; 7 2 wr TP ‘ TI0) wrest i =~ dagtas. > dea S re 2 ee -— ia at Pop” hy vio cont Doe, ceosthp yb fig areaissiogs t io deeiven « = one evar ae ne ates peeing < “7 = A” ad : es 7 ‘ \ s * \ 1 + . i Pies a mh ‘ ot im i ts > _- - : - a erro ee OL LLL LL A A act are : i 7 ‘ Py 7 ; . SP a ee, i ss Viegote Bl 020-200-800 + STORM siomeshivois tas Poy em ’ Fh a Seoe yw f4oly Land Art Company For over seventy years, Holy Land Art Company has been a leader in design and fabrication of liturgical furnishings and artwork. —______—_—_—_@— Holy Land Art Company offers a full array of services: Liturgical Designs Consultations Custom Wood Custom Metal Stone Fine Arts Stained Glass Seating Ecclesiastical Painting 160 Chambers Street 12 Sullivan Street New York, NY 10007 Westwood, NJ 07675 800-962-4659 800-334-3621 300 Prosperity Farm Road North Palm Beach, FL 33408 800-526-1294 Creating a Family Pictorial Album is fast and simple with Olan Mills’ New Horizons The Catholi Pictorial Album Advisory Board & © Directory Program. Olan Mills “In this age, when many parish members don’t see each other except at Sunday Mass, we need such a vehicle more than ever.” — Bishop Placido Rodriquez "WE MAKE IT SPECI Olan Mills Church Directory Division 1-800-845-1157 ERS _ Contact us to find out how you can receive an exclusive framed limited edition 24x30 portrait of Pope J hin ‘*Plans fail when there is no counsel, but they succeed when counselors are many.” Proverbs 15 :22 In today’s world, it can be overwhelming to be faced with the task of choosing counsel from the many options available. With that in mind, Ruotolo Associates was founded with a vision of providing quality, contemporary fund raising counsel to advance the mission of our Church. Since 1979, we have proudly and successfully served the Catholic Community through innovative strategies designed to meet the fund raising, development, and public relations objectives of each of our clients. Experience the difference quality counsel can make. For a free consultation to discuss our services and solutions, call us today. ee REESE Borer eee American Avsecistion of A Fund-Ratsing Comneei, tne. SSCL lA —~— NC a Horizon Square, 29 Broadway, Suite 210, Cresskill, New Jersey 07626 (201) 568-3898 * FAX: (201) 568-8783 Offices in Massachusetts, Washington, D.C., and Wisconsin ober| Vestments Stoles Albs Paraments Fair Linens Banners Funeral Palls Choir Robes Cassocks Surplices Accessories Please write or call for a complimentary copy of our General and Parament : Ree OCTCTOXAY a YY o Bera an 200 N. Janacek Road, Brookfield, WI 53045-6153 - Toll-free: 1-800-784-6868 + 414-784-6800 + FAX: 414-784-7567 PILGRIMAGE DESTINATIONS CONTENTS IntClOdUCHON@er te et 1 theiHolyitand@e = ie. sae MD IR OMG Bee rr tr ee oe 4 ASSIS en Eid Cor enone ee rae Ae. 6 EOtetO gp eiae tg ote cy eee ae icra i EAC Ud eee Pte Sree ee, or. 9 UTiNieweme rene 2. ee eet ee TS 10 DOUTOCS tte We CE Whe: wacliSin, 11 ROL eI Speer ere ee ee 13 SPOUTS eer te 2c of Se rete oe SSR art 14 |i.) GEA Es Sac eee 16 Mont-Saint-Michel ................. 17, Ghartresmewr vers) 2. Alaris. Gece ot 18 SZ CRLOCNOW Alte ree ee hn wy ecy a 19 atiinamerrer cc ee res ee te 21 Santiago de Compostela ............. 22 Golognc Aachene. 7... 24 Munich Bavatiaee... soe te. 0. 26 (CHVIITU OIA? C5 Se ee ane ee 27, \WAIGING EIT, <5 5 Sees ao op i noerenae 28 Glastonburyewer 2. Prien 30 Sit a: ge bas Oe ot eee ee ee eee 31 WedsUS OT) Comment. itn ete tet te o2 @uadalupege were... . 220% 804 Gee oS Sainte-Anne-de-Beaupré ............ 38 AUITICS ViLLCMmmmete arti ae ee ane 36 GiMayO gerry. 2... gelalaer bie uta codes: 38 INTE) . aceon eee eee 39 National Shrine of the Immaculate Conception, WV ASTID OtON pL): Cem ct et eet ae 40 =] “—¢ . . v # fe = at sin Mane 1997 OFFICIAL CATHOLIC DIRECTORY INTRODUCTION Pilgrimages—journeys to sacred places for religious motives—are as old as civilization. Since the earliest times, such journeys have been made as acts of devo- tion, penance, or thanksgiving or in search of blessings or miracles. The concept crosses all ideological boundaries. In the ancient Near East, a portion of the harvest was car- ried to shrines to be offered to the gods in gratitude and homage. Muslim law prescribes a pilgrimage to Mecca, the birthplace of Muhammad, for all who are able to undertake the journey. For Hindus, a pilgrimage to Varanasi (Benares), to bathe in the sacred waters of the Ganges, is considered an obligation. Christian pilgrims, from early in the second cen- tury, traveled great distances to venerate places in the © Holy Land sanctified by the presence of Jesus Christ, the Virgin Mary, or the Apostles. The number of pil- grims increased greatly in the fourth century, after Emperor Constantine I converted to Christianity and legalized the faith throughout the Roman Empire. He and his mother, Helena, were themselves the most influential of pilgrims. The historian Eusebius of Caesarea attributed to Constantine the discovery of Christ’s tomb, the Holy Sepulcher; other accounts cred- it his mother with finding the True Cross. Word of the discoveries spread, spurring the pil- grimage movement. Although travel was always diffi- cult and often perilous, by the end of the fourth century pilgrimages to the Holy Land were relatively common. Rome, as it became the center of the Christian faith, became a frequent pilgrimage destination, as did Greece and Egypt, where the faithful could follow the footsteps of the Apostles. By the Middle Ages, pilgrimages had become a significant part of Christian devotional life, whether they involved a journey between neighboring cities or across half the civilized world. Churches and cathe- drals throughout Europe holding relics of the Holy Family, the Apostles, and other early saints drew throngs of the faithful, from common people and parish priests to emperors and popes. The role of such relics—particularly those that were instruments of Christ’s Passion—is strong in pil- grimage, and many have survived to our time. Notre Dame Cathedral in Paris, for example, enshrines part of the Crown of Thorns, wood from the Cross, and a nail from the Crucifixion. Kept in individual reliquaries encased in a gilded ark, they are on view only during Lent. The Sancta Sanctorum Chapel in Rome has relics of the Cross, Christ’s sandals, and a portrait of Christ “not painted by mortal hands.” At Aachen, Germany, relics include the infant Jesus’ swaddling clothes and the Virgin’s veil. The Shroud of Turin, believed by many to be Christ’s burial cloth, is world famous despite continuing questions about its origin. Corporeal relics—the bodies of saints, or parts of them—have also formed the basis of many famous shrines. Prominent among such places is Santiago de Compostela in northern Spain, revered since the early ninth century as the burial place of the remains of Saint PILGRIMAGE DESTINATIONS James the Apostle, who was beheaded by King Herod in Judea in A.D. 44 and whose body was thrown to dogs. The heads, hearts, and various limbs of other saints were sometimes removed—not by their enemies, but after death by their adherents—and enshrined sep- arately. In Paris, the heart of Saint Catherine Labouré is kept in a crystal reliquary. In Goa, India, millions were drawn a few years ago to a week-long exposition of one of Saint Francis Xavier’s arms. Counted among shrines marking the tombs of saints are those of Saint Martin in Tours, France (once the most frequented shrine in Europe), and that of his mentor, Saint Hilary, in nearby Poitiers, both dating from the fourth century. There are scores of others, on every continent. Holy objects other than relics have given rise to many other popular shrines. At Czestochowa, Poland, the icon Our Lady of Czestochowa, also known as the Black Madonna, is believed to possess miraculous powers and has been venerated since the fourteenth century. At the shrine of Our Lady of Guadalupe in Mexico City, millions come to see the peasant’s cape on which the Blessed Virgin’s image miraculously appeared following an apparition in 1531. In Brazil, an image of the Virgin was discovered on a rock by a small child and has led to a wide cult following. In Ancona, Italy, a weeping statue of the Virgin has drawn pilgrims since the early nineteenth century. Numerous places have become the destinations of pilgrims because of apparitions of the Blessed Virgin, particularly in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. Famed among them are Lourdes and La Salette in France and Fatima in Portugal; at all three, the Virgin appeared to young children and urged mankind's repentance and prayer. Pilgrims now number in the millions, and devotion has resulted in numberless reported favors and cures. Lourdes is today the most popular shrine of the Roman Catholic world, surpass- ing both Jerusalem and Rome. Church authorities are cautious about giving cre- dence to accounts of apparitions of Mary and approv- ing of devotion at the places where they occur. Since the early nineteenth century, about 200 reports of such apparitions have been investigated, and only about 1 in 40 has received canonical sanction. In addition to Lourdes, La Salette, and Fatima, sanctioned apparitions since 1842 have occurred at the church of Saint Andrea della Frate in Rome and at Illaca in Croatia, Philippsdorf in Germany, Pontmain in France, Knock in Ireland, and Beauraing and Banneux in Belgium. No country in Europe is without its Christian shrines. In England, a number of shrines that were widely known long before the Reformation of the early sixteenth century are the object of growing devotion today. Chief among them are Walsingham, Glastonbury, and Canterbury. (Chaucer’s pilgrims of The Canterbury Tales were on their way to the shrine there of the martyred Saint Thomas Becket.) Other shrines honor the founders of religious orders. Three of these, all in Italy, are the shrines of Saint Benedict at Monte Cassino, Saint Dominic in Bologna, and Saint Francis at Assisi. PILGRIMAGE DESTINATIONS New places of pilgrimage continue to arise. At Akita, Japan, an apparition of the Virgin in 1973 was declared “worthy of belief” by the Vatican, and the resulting shrine is attracting increasing numbers of the faithful. Pilgrimage typically begins even before such apparitions are recognized by the Catholic Church. Such is the case with the small village of Medjugorje in Bosnia, where millions of people visit the site of appari- tions of the Virgin that have occurred since 1981, although there has been no ruling from the Vatican on their validity. The simple “desire to honor Catholic beliefs or devotions” gives rise to still another class of shrines, such as the Basilica of Sacré-Coeur on the summit of Montmartre in Paris, built by national subscription as a manifestation of contrition and hope after the Franco- Prussian War. Canada and Latin America have numerous Christian shrines, and more than 100 are listed within the United States, chief among them the National Shrine of the Immaculate Conception in Washington, D.C. Some were created in thanks for prayers answered or to remind the faithful of the messages received at Fatima and Lourdes; others mirror shrines in the Old World, ISRAEL 1997 OFFICIAL CATHOLIC DIRECTORY such as Czestochowa, or mark scenes of martyrdom of early missionaries to the New World, such as the Shrine of the North American Martyrs near Albany, N.Y. The popularity of Christian pilgrimage has waxed and waned, but it has lived on despite such cataclysmic events as the Reformation and the French Revolution and despite the skepticism of modern times. The reasons for an individual pilgrimage are var- ied, but the results are often the same. Chateaubriand wrote: “There never was a pilgrim who did not come back to his village with one less prejudice and one more idea.” Many, it is said, return stronger in body and at peace with God. THE HOLY LAND Christian pilgrims have journeyed great distances to the Holy Land since at least the second century to visit the sites of the founding of their faith. All the major events in the life of Jesus Christ— the Annunciation, the Nativity, his ministry, and the Passion, Crucifixion, and Resurrection—took place in what today is Israel, a country only about the size of New Jersey. The sites of those events have been revered, preserved, desecrated, destroyed, rebuilt, and in some cases lost and relocated over the following cen- turies as sovereignty over the Holy Land has repeated- ly changed. There is scholarly disagreement about whether some of the sites are correctly identified; alternate loca- tions that seem to fit with scriptural accounts have been suggested for some of them, notably the Holy Sepulcher. Two conditions must be fulfilled for any of the holy places to be considered authentic: The location must not contradict the data of the Bible, and the tradition con- nected with the site must go back to Apostolic times. This is the case with all the sites of the Holy Land, including those over which there is some question. Although Christian pilgrimage to the Holy Land began in the second century, it was in the fourth centu- ry, when Emperor Constantine I legalized Christianity throughout the Roman Empire, that the number of pil- grims increased substantially. Encouraged by the emperor and by such influential scholars as Jerome (an early Bishop of Bethlehem, who translated the Bible into Latin), Christian pilgrims of Gentile origin flocked to Jerusalem, Bethlehem, Nazareth, and other places sanctified by the presence of the Holy Family and the Apostles. Jerusalem’s religious significance, of course, pre- cedes the Christian era by more than 1,000 years. The city is sacred to people of three faiths—Christianity, Judaism, and Islam—and therefore to a third of the world’s population. Here, in the ancient City of David, Solomon the Wise built the Temple to the Lord about 950 B.c.; near the site of that temple is the Western Wall or Wailing Wall, sacred to Judaism. Here, too, are the Dome of the Rock and the al-Aksa Mosque, which according to Muslim tradition are at the place at which Muhammad had his vision of heaven and received from God the commandments for the faithful. 1997 OFFICIAL CATHOLIC DIRECTORY For Christians, the same part of Jerusalem is the scene of the Passion, the Crucifixion, and the Resurrection. The Way of the Cross, or Via Dolorosa, in the Old City is believed to be the path Christ walked carrying the cross from the place of his trial to the place of his execution and entombment. The route passes the 14 Stations of the Cross, and countless pilgrims follow it, many of them with a procession by Franciscans each Friday at three o’clock. The last five stations are within the Church of the Holy Sepulcher. Commissioned in 326 by Constantine, the church has been rebuilt and modified time after time. Since the Crusades (1099-1260), it has enclosed the traditional locations of both Christ’s crucifixion and burial. Numerous Christian denominations have a pres- ence in the Church of the Holy Sepulcher: the Greek Orthodox and Roman Catholics are prominent, followed by Armenians and Copts, who have their sections, and Ethiopians and Syrians, who have access rights. Nearby, but outside the walls of the Old City, is Mount Zion, the place long recognized as the tomb of King David. It is also the location of the Cenacle, the “apper room” in which the Last Supper—a seder meal that evolved into the Christian Eucharist—took place. The Mount of Olives offers a broad view of the Old City, and at its foot is the Garden of Gethsemane, where Christ prayed and sorrowed and where he was arrested by Roman soldiers on the last night of his life. On the crest of the Mount of Olives is the Chapel of the Ascension, traditionally believed to be the place at which Christ ascended into heaven. Bethlehem, Jesus’ birthplace, is only a few miles from Jerusalem. The original Church of the Nativity was built in the fourth century to enshrine the site, but—like the Church of the Holy Sepulcher—it has been rebuilt and extensively repaired many times. Under an old arrangement, it is shared by Roman Catholics (represented by the Franciscans), Greek Orthodox, and Armenian Orthodox. And as is true at the Church of the Holy Sepulcher, the relationship has not always been happy; a disagreement between the Franciscans and the Greek Orthodox was a factor lead- ing to the outbreak of the Crimean War (1854-1856). There are still occasional heated disagreements over who is in charge of what; sometimes the participants have come to blows, to the surprise of pilgrims expect- ing a scene of peace and tranquillity. The Church of the Nativity is built over the cave where Jesus was born. In a grotto beneath the main altar, a silver star marks the traditional place of the actual birth, and nearby is the Chapel of the Manger, where Mary placed her newborn child. The principal Roman Catholic church in Bethlehem, Saint Catherine’s, is linked to the Church of the Nativity by a connecting door. Manger Square, just outside, is the scene of color- ful Christmas Eve celebrations held on various dates. Christmas for the Greek Orthodox is January 7; for the Armenians, it is January 19. On December 24, the fes- tivities continue long into the evening, and the mass is shown on an enormous outdoor television screen for those unable to get inside the church. It is also broad- cast around the world via satellite. PILGRIMAGE DESTINATIONS Nazareth—the scene of the Annunciation, when the angel Gabriel appeared to Mary and told her she would bear the Christ-child—was a small village in Christ’s time and is now an Arab city of about 50,000. About half its inhabitants are Muslim, half Christian; it is consequently quiet on Fridays and Sundays, the sab- baths of the two faiths, but exceptionally busy on Saturdays. The cave dwelling where the Annunciation is believed to have taken place has been revered for at least 1,600 years. A Byzantine church built on the site in the fifth century was rebuilt by the Crusaders in the twelfth century, then destroyed in the thirteenth centu- ry by the Mamluks. A Franciscan church was built in the early eighteenth century and was razed in 1954 to be replaced by the huge church now on the site, dedi- cated in 1969 and containing some of the remains of the earliest structures. Nearby is the Church of Saint Joseph, said to be on the site of Joseph the Carpenter’s workshop. The Church of Saint Gabriel marks the source of the spring at which some traditions say the Annunciation took place. On the road toward Tiberias from Nazareth is the Arab village of Kafr Kana, the biblical Cana, where Jesus performed his first miracle, turning water into wine at a wedding and thus beginning his public ministry. The route from Nazareth to Megiddo passes Mount Tabor, the traditional site of the Transfiguration (although some scholars favor Mount Hermon), where the disciples Peter, James, and John saw Christ “trans- figured” (“his face shone like the sun and his garments became as white as light”) and saw him in conversation with Moses and Elijah. Transport Getting to the Holy Land by air from the United States can be easily arranged from all major airports. A non- stop flight takes from 9 to 11 hours. Numerous tour operators offer Holy Land pilgrimage packages of vari- ous durations. Within Israel, air service is available between major centers, and regular rail service links Jerusalem, Haifa, and Tel Aviv. The best way to travel between or outside major towns is by road, either in a rented vehi- cle (care is advised; Israeli drivers are notoriously reck- less) or by bus, limousine, or minibus. In town, taxis are plentiful. Accommodation There is the widest possible selection of hotel accom- modation in Israel, from modest guest houses to luxury hotels. Most major American chains are represented. There are also numerous holiday villages, Christian hospices, youth hostels, campsites, and kibbutz guest houses. Similarly, restaurants run the gamut from snack stands in the streets to elegant restaurants. Fast food is plentiful and ranges from pizza to falafel. PILGRIMAGE DESTINATIONS Contact Information U.S. Consulate General, 27 Nablus Rd., Jerusalem. Tel. [972] (2) 625-3288. Fax [972] (2) 627-2233. U.S. Embassy, 71 Hayarkon St., Tel Aviv. Tel. [972] (3) 519-7575. Fax [972] (3) 516-0315. Internet: www.christusrex.org ROME In A.D. 67, during the reign of Emperor Nero, Saint Peter was crucified—head downward, at his own request—in the middle of a Roman racecourse. Nero was celebrating his thirteenth year as emperor with bloody entertainments that included every type of torture and execution. Peter, the former Galilean fisherman appointed by Christ as an apostle, had brought Christianity to pagan Rome; he was chief among the emperor’s victims. After Peter’s death, some of the faithful built a simple tomb for his remains in the center of a pagan cemetery on Vatican Hill. The tomb soon began draw- ing pilgrims, and over the next few years their number steadily increased. The Roman Catholic Church grew from Peter’s apostolate in Rome, and from his grave site grew the Basilica of Saint Peter and the Vatican palaces that today serve as the center of the faith and a magnet for the faithful from around the world. The apostle Paul, a tentmaker and scholar before his conversion, traveled widely in the ancient world spreading the gospel. His travels were perilous; he was flogged, stoned, shipwrecked, imprisoned, and ban- ished from numerous cities, until his ministry ended in Rome; he was beheaded there by Nero, probably in the same year that Saint Peter was crucified. His martyr- dom similarly drew an increasing number of pilgrims over the following decades. It was after the year 313, however, that pilgrimage to Rome increased enormously. With the Peace of the Church—when Emperor Constantine I legalized Christianity throughout the empire following his own conversion—there was a flurry of church building in Rome that included a basilica on Vatican Hill over the old cemetery. The Basilica of Peter the Apostle was richly decorated and furnished and began attracting pilgrims from the far reaches of the empire. Another basilica, San Paolo fuori le Mura (Saint Paul’s outside the Walls) was built by Constantine to enshrine Saint Paul’s tomb. By the late fourth century, crowds of pilgrims came to worship at both basilicas and at the catacombs, the vast network of underground cemeteries where early Christians held their forbidden services and hid from frequent persecutions. Saint Jerome, about A.D. 365, described crowds of visitors at the catacombs and martyr churches in Rome; and Saint John Chrysostom, writing in 387, spoke of the heads of state, generals, and consuls who were traveling to Rome to venerate the tombs of Saints Peter and Paul—“a fisherman and a tentmaker.” 1997 OFFICIAL CATHOLIC DIRECTORY Turin: Paduae * ITALY Bolognae Loreto Assisie _ Tyrrhenian Sea Mediterranean Sea As Rome declined as an imperial power, both the role of the city as the center of the Christian faith and pilgrim traffic increased. Scholae, or hostels, were built for pilgrims from different nations; the earliest is believed to have been built by King Ine of Wessex about 730. By the Middle Ages, pilgrimages to Rome had become entirely too popular in the view of some church officials. In canon law, the usual penalty for striking a cleric was a pilgrimage to Rome, because for- giveness for this crime could only be granted by the pope. But historians say that with the rise of the uni- versities the penalty had to be abolished—too many students were taking advantage of it. Pope Boniface VIII, in 1300, proclaiming the first Holy Year, prescribed visits to the basilicas of Saint Peter and Saint Paul as required of all pilgrims. In 1350 Pope Clement VI added Saint John Lateran (San Giovanni in Laterano); and in 1400 Pope Urban VI added Saint Mary Major (Santa Maria Maggiore). Ever since, visits to these four basilicas have been the cus- tom for pilgrims to Rome. By the late fifteenth century, Constantine’s Basilica of Saint Peter had fallen into disrepair and was structurally unsound. Over the next two centuries, it was replaced by the present basilica and the buildings of today’s Vatican. _ The Vatican’s spiritual, historical, and architectur- al wonders are well known, from Saint Peter’s (the world’s largest church and among the highest architec- tural achievements of the Renaissance) to the famed Sistine Chapel and the Vatican Museums. Saint Paul’s outside the Walls (so called because it was beyond the walls of the old city) was originally 1997 OFFICIAL CATHOLIC DIRECTORY even larger than Saint Peter’s. It eventually fell into disuse and disrepair and remained neglected until the eleventh century, when it was restored and again became a center of pilgrimage. In 1823 fire destroyed all but the cloisters; and although the original basilica was replaced, only the cloisters give an idea of the first building’s grandeur. The Basilica of San Giovanni in Laterano is the Cathedral of Rome and the official seat of the Bishop of Rome—the pope. Its present facade, which dates from the mid-1930s, mimics that of Saint Peter’s. Much of the rest of the present building is about a century older, although parts of its predecessor structures remain, dating back to Constantine’s time. Among San Giovanni's relics, enshrined in a four- teenth-century Gothic tabernacle, are what are believed to be the heads of Saint Peter and Saint Paul. Nearby, in a sixteenth-century building, are the Holy Steps (Scala Santa), which are said to be the marble steps from Pontius Pilate’s palace in Jerusalem. The fourth church requiring a visit by the true pil- grim, Santa Maria Maggiore, has had far less rebuild- ing and is therefore one of the oldest churches in Rome, dating from about 440. Legend holds that the Virgin Mary appeared to Pope Sixtus II] and ordered him to build a church in her honor at a place, in Rome, where snow would fall on August 5. The snow fell, the church is on that spot, and the miraculous event is commemo- rated every August 5 with the feast of the Madonna of the Snows. During a special mass, white rose petals cascade from the ceiling. There are many more churches awaiting the mod- ern pilgrim. Rome is a city of churches, many of them of considerable historical, religious, and architectural importance. Among the more noteworthy are: e Saint Andrea della Frate, where there was an apparition of the Blessed Virgin in 1842 e Il Gesu, mother church of the Jesuits, designed in 1568 and second only to Saint Peter’s in the opulence of its decoration e the shrine of Saint Philip Neri, founder of the Oratorians, in the Chiesa Nuova (new church), formally known as the Church of Santa Maria in Vallicella e San Pietro in Vincoli (Saint Peter in Chains), which was built to hold the chains with which Saint Peter was bound after his arrest in Rome, and which houses Michelangelo’s famous stat- ue of Moses Papal Audiences Most pilgrims hope for an audience with the pope, and this is frequently possible. The pope holds mass audi- ences on Wednesday mornings. From March to October, they are held in Saint Peter’s Square or at the summer papal residence at Castel Gandolfo; during the winter, they are held in an auditorium that holds about PILGRIMAGE DESTINATIONS 7,000 people. Tickets are required and must be applied for in advance; one of the most convenient ways to obtain them is through a tour operator or travel agency. When the pope is in Rome, he also makes a week- ly appearance at the window of the Vatican Palace on Sunday at noon. Visitors to churches, particularly Saint Peter’s, must observe dress codes. While women are no longer required to cover their heads, they must cover bare arms and shoulders. Skirts and dresses should fall below the knees. Neither women nor men may wear shorts. No restrictions apply to the mass papal audi- ences; for other types of audiences, consult the Vatican Information Office. Elsewhere in Rome For the modern pilgrim, the possibility of seeing the pope and visiting the shrines of the Apostles may be the main purpose of the voyage, but the relics of Rome’s ancient glory are there as well. These are among the most noteworthy: e The Colosseum, ancient Rome’s most famous building, dates from the first century A.D. As many as 80,000 Romans of all classes—from Caesar to slave—would fill the huge amphithe- ater in its heyday to witness spectacles of sav- age brutality put on as public entertainment. e The Roman Forum, the heart of Rome before imperial times, is in ruins. Some of these date from about 500 B.c.; others from about A.D. 400. e The Pantheon, the “home of the gods,” was built by Emperor Hadrian in the second centu- ry A.D. and converted into a church four cen- turies later. e Trajan’s Column was built to memorialize the Emperor Trajan’s successful second-century campaign in Yugoslavia. ¢ Also of note are the many monuments of Renaissance Rome, the city’s numerous muse- ums and galleries, its parks and gardens, and its scores of fountains—a fixture of the city even in ancient times. Transport Getting to Rome by air from the United States can be easily arranged from all major airports. Numerous tour operators offer pilgrimage packages of various dura- tions, sometimes combining Rome with the Holy Land or with the Marian shrine at Medjugorje in Bosnia. Rome is well served by public transportation, but visitors keen on seeing as much as possible should be prepared to do considerable walking; much in the old city cannot be reached by a vehicle of any kind. The city is linked by air, rail, and road with the rest of Italy and Europe. PILGRIMAGE DESTINATIONS Accommodation Rome offers all types of accommodation in all price ranges. Most major American hotel chains are repre- sented. Restaurants of every sort are also plentiful, from fast food to haute cuisine. Contact Information U.S. Embassy, Via Veneto 119/A, 00187 Rome. Tel. [39] (6) 46741. Fax [39] (6) 467-42217. U.S. Embassy, Vatican City: Via Delle Terme Deciane 26, Rome 00153. Tel. [39] (6) 46741. Fax [39] (6) 638-0159. Italian Government Tourist Offices: New York 212-245-4822, Chicago 312-644-0990 or 644-0996, Los Angeles 310-820-1898. Internet: www.cin.org; www.roma2000.it; www. christusrex.org. ASSISI The picturesque hillside city of Assisi in Umbria, cen- tral Italy, is one of the capitals of Christendom. Saint Francis (founder of the Franciscans, the largest of all religious orders) and Saint Clare (one of his devoted followers and founder of the contempla- tive order known as the Poor Clares) were born there in the late twelfth century. Assisi is dominated by reminders of their lives and work. Saint Francis was born in 1181 or 1182, the son of Pietro di Bernardone, a wealthy textile merchant. In his early years, Francis’s love of life and worldly pleasures made him a popular figure and a leader of Assisi’s youth. But after being imprisoned at about the age of 20 during intercity fighting between Assisi and Perugia, and later falling seriously ill, he became dis- satisfied with his life and entered a period of deep self- analysis and prayer. His conversion in 1205 followed a vision: At the Church of San Damiano, he heard a voice from a cruci- fix saying, “Go, Francis, and repair my house, which is in ruins.” He renounced his possessions, broke rela- tions with his father, and began a life of rebuilding churches and of service to the poor. His love of man and nature and his mystical approach to poverty and simplicity soon drew others to him, and the first order was formed. Francis called his followers “friars minor” (lesser brethren). In 1209 or 1210, the order received the approval of Pope Innocent III, who gave the friars permission to preach and made Francis a deacon. The order expanded quickly. Francis devoted himself to its spiritual growth and continued to travel and preach widely, but frequently he retreated to a soli- tary hermitage. On September 14, 1224, during a pro- longed period of fasting and prayer, he received the stigmata—the imprint on his own body of the wounds suffered by Christ in the Crucifixion. His was the first documented occurrence of stigmatization. 1997 OFFICIAL CATHOLIC DIRECTORY At the end of his life, Francis was blind and seri- ously ill. He died at Assisi on October 3, 1226, and was canonized on July 16, 1228, by Pope Gregory IX, who the following day laid the cornerstone of the church that would contain Francis’s remains. His generosity, his love of nature, his humility, and his devotion to God and man place Francis among the most beloved of saints. He was proclaimed patron of Catholic Action in 1916, and in 1939 he was named patron of Italy. More recently, Pope John Paul II pro- claimed him the patron saint of ecologists. In addition to establishing the Franciscan order, he is commemorat- ed in the names of numerous other religious organiza- tions. His feast day is October 4. Clare and the Second Order Like Saint Francis, Saint Clare was born to a well-to-do Assisi family. In 1211, after hearing Francis speak a Lenten message, she became one of his fervent follow- ers. The two perfectly understood each other’s desire to flee from a worldly life and to give themselves fully to a life of contemplation. About a year later, on the night after Palm Sunday (March 18, 1212), 18-year-old Clare and a close friend secretly went to the Portiuncula, a small chapel that had become the cradle of Francis’s movement. There, he and his friars dressed her in the Franciscan robe, cut her hair to consecrate her to a life of penance, and thus formed what is known as Francis’s second order. The friend who accompanied her, Pacifica di Guelfuccio, was the first to join the order. Clare’s example was soon followed by her sister Agnes and later by their mother, Ortolana, and another sister, Beatrice. The order took as its mother house the Church of Saint Damian and initially was called the Poor Women of Saint Damian’s. In 1215, Pope Innocent III granted Clare the privilege of taking the vow of poverty, and her rule was approved in 1253, just a few days before her death. Clare was canonized two years later. She is vener- ated as the patron of good weather and of television, and her intercession is sought in cases of eye disease and in childbirth. Her feast day is August 11. The Poor Clares followed Francis’s ideal of pover- ty: Individual sisters, and their community, were for- bidden to hold property of any kind and were to live “as strangers and pilgrims in this world . . . content to serve the Lord in poverty and humility.” Assisi’s Shrines Assisi, which now has a population of about 25,000, is a major spiritual and artistic center and has long been a favored pilgrimage destination. In some years marking anniversaries of major events in Saint Francis’s life, pil- grims to Assisi number in the millions. Assisi’s fortunes have varied since the time of Saints Francis and Clare, but in the past century its importance as a center of the faith has increased. Much of ancient and medieval Assisi is intact; even during World War II, when much of central and northern Italy was heavily bombed, Assisi escaped 1997 OFFICIAL CATHOLIC DIRECTORY damage because the Germans designated it a hospital town. Assisi’s religious buildings—which include eight major Romanesque and Gothic churches—are particu- larly noteworthy. The impressive Basilica of San Francesco, which enshrines Saint Francis’s remains, is one of Italy’s most famous monuments (although its grandeur seems to some to be in opposition to the simplicity in which the saint so fervently believed). Richly decorated and orna- mented, its features include a fresco cycle by Giotto that is considered a masterpiece and that includes the well-known scene “Saint Francis Preaching to the Birds.” The thirteenth-century Basilica of Santa Chiara contains Saint Clare’s remains and the crucifix that spoke to Francis and led him to a religious life. (That event took place about a mile away at the eleventh-cen- tury Oratory of San Damiano.) The Basilica of Santa Maria degli Angeli (built 1569-1676 and rebuilt in 1836) is a massive baroque structure enclosing the Portiuncula, the little chapel restored by Francis that became central to the forma- tion of his order and years later was the place of his death. About two miles from Assisi is the Hermitage of the Carceri, a monastery on the thickly wooded slopes of Mount Subasio at the place where Francis and his followers first lived and to which he often returned. Shrines elsewhere in Italy honor the founders of two other religious orders—the shrine of Saint Benedict at Monte Cassino and the shrine of Saint Dominic at the church of San Domenico in Bologna. In the Region Umbria, “The Green Heart of Italy,” is a picturesque region of hills and valleys that contains some of Italy’s most memorable scenery as well as noteworthy medieval and earlier buildings and other man-made structures. Perugia, a well-preserved medieval city and Umbria’s largest, is situated atop a group of hills. The Duomo (cathedral) and its adjoining museum are among the old town’s principal features. Other sites of historical and artistic importance are the Collegio del Paduae ™ “ITALY Pp .. Bologna € Loreto & Assisie Tyrrhenian Sea PILGRIMAGE DESTINATIONS Cambio with its late fifteenth-century frescoes and the Archaeological Museum of Umbria, which offers arti- facts dating back beyond the Roman era to the city’s Etruscan origins. Near Perugia is the wine-making cen- ter of Torgiano. Northeast of Perugia is the medieval mountain town of Gubbio. The thirteenth-century Duomo and the Palazzo Ducale are among its best-preserved build- ings. South of Assisi is Spoleto, another scenic medieval town whose walls enclose quaint cobbled streets and centuries-old buildings. Spoleto is dominat- ed by a fourteenth-century castle (until recently used as a prison) and known for its Ponte delle Torri (Bridge of the Towers), built in the same era as the castle on Roman foundations. Spoleto is known as a quiet place except during June and July when it hosts an arts festi- val, the Festival of Two Worlds, which packs the town and its environs with visitors. Near Spoleto is the Church of San Salvatore, one of Italy’s oldest. Built by Eastern monks in the fourth century, it has changed little since a renovation in the ninth century. Loreto in the neighboring province of the Marches, known to pilgrims for its House of the Blessed Virgin (see following pages), is within easy reach of Assisi. Transport and Accommodation Assisi and other major towns and cities in Umbria are easily accessible from Rome by train, bus, and automo- bile. Hotel and inn accommodation of various classes is plentiful in most of Umbria, but reservations are rec- ommended, particularly in summer and during the times of festivals. Restaurants are also numerous and many of them are of superior quality. Contact Information Tourist information for Assisi can be obtained from this address: Piazza del Comune 12, Assisi, Italy. Tel. [39] (75) 812534. Internet sites for the region include www.assind. perugia.it/umbria/assisi/assing.htm and www. italy-hotel.com/perugia.html. (For additional contact information, see Rome.) LORETO Saints-to-be, princes, and more than 50 popes are among the countless pilgrims who have visited the Italian town of Loreto and its Holy House of the Blessed Virgin, one of the most revered monuments of Christianity. Loreto’s significance dates back more than 700 years to the late thirteenth century. The Holy House is believed to be the home of the Blessed Virgin, flown from the Holy Land to its present site by a band of angels. PILGRIMAGE DESTINATIONS According to tradition, the angels felt that the house—which had been turned into a church by the Apostles in the first century—needed to be moved because Nazareth had fallen into the hands of Muslim invaders with the fall of the Latin Kingdom of Jerusalem in 1291. The legend, as recorded by Pietro di Giorgio Tolomei in 1470, says that the angels first took the house—containing a statue of the Virgin made by Saint Luke—to Tersatto, near Rijeka (Fiume) in present-day Croatia, in 1291. When it was not properly venerated there, it was moved about three years later (again by angels) to a wooded area near the Italian village of Recanti overlooking the Adriatic coast. Eight months later, it was moved again, to a nearby hillside, but this spot also was deemed imperfect and the angels moved the house a fourth time, a short distance to its present location. Within about a year, the Virgin revealed the origin of the 31- by 13-foot house to a holy man in a dream. Word spread, and the people of Recanti took steps to protect the building and sent a 16-member delegation to Nazareth to look into the matter. The delegation returned to report that the building was no longer where it had been in Nazareth, having “vanished,” and that the foundation left behind there was of the same dimensions as that of the house that had mysteriously appeared near their village. The Holy House quickly became a shrine. Its rough stone walls are now enclosed in a elaborate mar- ble tabernacle, which in turn is enclosed in the magnifi- cent Basilica of the Holy House. The basilica, begun in 1468 and completed in 1587, includes the work of many of Italy’s foremost architects. Its facade is by Donato Bramante, the dome is by Giuliano da Sangallo, and beneath the dome is the marble tabernacle executed by Andrea Sansovino and more than two dozen other artists. The frescoes decorating the cupola are by Melozzo da Forli and Marco Palmezzano (1477), and the sacristy was painted by Luca Signorelli in 1479. Numerous other painters and ceramists of noted Renaissance schools also contributed their artistry. The shrine was made a parish in 1482 and placed under papal protection two years later. It became a col- legiate church in 1514 and was made a minor basilica in 1728. An Office of Loreto in the Breviary and Missal (1699) was extended to all of Italy in 1916. In 1920 Our Lady of Loreto was declared the patron of airmen and air travelers. A prayer for safe flight, composed by Pope John Paul II, is available at the shrine in numerous languages. Investigations in recent times have shown that the stone of which the house is built is not found near Loreto but is commonly found around Nazareth and that the house has clearly been moved from another site. A hypothesis raised is that the house was brought to Italy not by angels but by Crusaders. Whatever its precise origin, the shrine has been the scene of many miraculous cures and has drawn pil- grims from far and wide and from every level of soci- ety for centuries. The throngs reach their peak at Easter and at the Feast of the Holy House on December 10. 1997 OFFICIAL CATHOLIC DIRECTORY In the Region Loreto is north of Rome and east of Umbria, in the region of the Marches. While scenic, the region is not among Italy’s most-frequented tourist destinations and is highly recommended as an off-the-beaten-track locale. The city of Urbino is the Marches’ second most popular destination. The hilltop city has been a center of learning for centuries and is still home to a universi- ty and a number of respected fine-arts academies. In appearance, Urbino is much as it was in its fif- teenth-century heyday. It centers on its famed Ducal Palace, built in that era by Duke Federico da Montefeltro. The palace, considered an example of the spirit of the Renaissance at its height, now houses the National Museum of the Marches. The museum’s large and well-displayed collection of sculpture, paintings, and other works of art includes numerous noteworthy pieces, among them Paolo Uccello’s “Profanation of the Host,” Titian’s “Resurrection” and “Last Supper,” and Piero della Francesca’s “The Flagellation of Christ.” Urbino is also the birthplace of the painter Raphael, and the house in which he was born is open to visitors. Another well-known native of the city is the Renaissance architect Donato Bramante, who designed the facade of Loreto’s basilica. Ascoli Piceno is another Marches city of interest to tourists. In a valley on the Tronto River, Ascoli Piceno’s historic center includes the Piazza del Popolo with its Palazzo del Popolo (a town hall dating back to the thirteenth century) and the Gothic church of San Francesco. Ascoli Piceno is also known as the place of origin of the liqueur anisette. Ancona is a busy port on the Adriatic that was largely rebuilt after being very heavily bombed during World War II. Although little of the old city remains, it is a handy point of embarkation by ferry for Venice or other Adriatic ports. Assisi in neighboring Umbria (see previous pages) is within easy reach of Loreto. Transport and Accommodation The Marches is accessible from Rome by rail and road. Because of the hilly terrain and a relative lack of mod- ern highways, however, travel within the region by road or rail is often slow. As in neighboring Umbria, hotels, inns, and restaurants are numerous and many are of excellent quality. Seafood is a specialty, and in Loreto itself much of the local cuisine is game-based. Contact Information Tourist information for Loreto can be obtained from this address: Via Solari 3, Loreto, Italy (Tel. [39] (71) 977139). (For additional contact information, see Rome.) 1997 OFFICIAL CATHOLIC DIRECTORY PADUA Homage to Saint Anthony of Padua—preacher, teacher, and wonder-worker—draws throngs of pilgrims to the ancient Italian city of his surname. Padua (Padova) was Saint Anthony’s last home, and he is entombed there in the magnificent Basilica of Sant’ Antonio. Anthony was born to a noble family in Lisbon, Portugal, in 1195 and received his early education at Lisbon Cathedral School. In 1210, as a teenager, he joined the Augustinian Canons Regular and engaged in study at Coimbra, then the Portuguese capital. In 1220, when the relics of the first missionary martyrs of the newly founded Franciscan order were brought to Coimbra for burial, Anthony was inspired to follow in their footsteps. He obtained his release from the Augustinians, became a Franciscan the follow- ing year, and embarked for North Africa. But he was not destined for martyrdom, and North Africa was not to be the place where he would do his work. Illness forced Anthony to return, but his voyage was diverted when his ship was driven off course by bad weather and landed in Sicily. He made his way to Assisi, where Saint Francis had founded the new order. For a brief period he lived in solitude and penance in the hermitage of Monte Paolo near Forli, but his repu- tation as a scholar and inspiring preacher soon brought him to prominence. Francis commissioned him to preach against heretics in northern Italy and southern France and also assigned him to teach his brother friars as the order’s first lector in theology. Anthony was a short man, inclined to chubbiness and in frail health, but he had a powerful and attractive personality. This, combined with his superior knowl- edge of the scriptures and his great talent as a speaker, caused his reputation to grow. Wherever he went, throngs came to hear him speak, and many were brought to the faith. He became known as “the ham- mer of heretics” and often preached against usury and avarice. After the death of Francis in 1226, Anthony remained at Padua, where he was greatly revered. His frail health gave out, however, and he died on a trip back to Padua from a retreat on June 13, 1231, at the age of 36. A great popular devotion to him rose and he was canonized within a year. Many miracles were attrib- uted to him, particularly after his death, and he contin- ues to be revered as a worker of wonders. Saint Anthony is frequently invoked for the return of lost objects, and he is believed to protect the pregnant and travelers. He also is the patron saint of the poor, and alms given to obtain his intercession are frequently referred to as “Saint Anthony’s bread.” At Saint Anthony’s canonization in 1232, Pope Gregory IX called him a “teacher of the Church,” and in 1946 Pius XII made him a Doctor of the Church with the title Doctor evangelicus. PILGRIMAGE DESTINATIONS The City According to legend, Padua was founded by the mythi- cal Trojan prince Antenore. It received Roman citizen- ship in 49 B.c. and in the time of the emperor Augustus was probably the empire’s second wealthiest city after Rome. Its fortunes varied, however. It was destroyed by the Lombards in the sixth century, then revived in the tenth. Over the following centuries, it was under the jurisdiction of various nation-states until it became part of the Kingdom of Italy in 1866. It was prominent among the northern Italian cities that were the cradle of the Renaissance. The city is rich in sites of religious interest, many of which predate Saint Anthony. Notable among these is the ninth-century Chiesa di Santa Sophia. The Basilica of Sant’Antonio, which dates to Saint Anthony’s time, is Romanesque-Gothic with Venetian and Byzantine elements; in its interior are sculptures by Donatello and Sansovino, paintings by Titian, and mar- ble reliefs by Tullio Lombardo. (Donatello, who lived in the fifteenth century, executed a series of bronze reliefs illustrating Saint Anthony’s life that are among the basilica’s most famous treasures.) Elsewhere in Padua are the Cappella degli Scrovegni, an early fourteenth-century chapel with frescoes by Giotto; Chiesa degli Eremitani, a thirteenth- century church with frescoes by Mantegna; and Chiesa di Santa Giustina, a sixteenth-century church with paintings by Veronese including the huge altarpiece “The Martyrdom of Saint Justine.” The University of Padua was established in the early thirteenth century and counts the poets Dante, Petrarch, and Tasso among its alumni. In the Region Padua is only about 25 miles to the west of Venice, which dominates the region and was once its ruler. Venice offers countless artistic and historical treasures, and the region as a whole is rich in art and architecture and is one of Italy’s best-known wine-producing areas. Another popular tourist destination is Verona (the setting for Romeo and Juliet), whose attractions include a well-preserved Roman amphitheater built in the first century. Among its notable churches are the Gothic Sant’ Anastasia and the Romanesque Duomo. Transport and Accommodation The region’s principal airport is Venice’s Marco Polo, which handles international and domestic traffic. Padua is linked by rail to Milan, Florence, Bologna, and Rome; Venice is a rail trip of less than half an hour. Bus service links smaller centers as well as the major cities, and there is a modern and efficient highway system. Padua offers a range of accommodation and restaurants, and both hotels and eating places are plen- tiful in the region as a whole. In and near Venice, prices are higher. PILGRIMAGE DESTINATIONS Contact Information Tourist information services in Padua are headquar- tered at the main train station, Tel. [39] (49) 875-2077. (For additional contact information, see Rome.) TURIN The Holy Shroud, believed by many to be the burial cloth of Jesus Christ, draws countless pilgrims to the northern Italian city of Turin (Torino). Their number is expected to soar in 1998 and again in 2000 when the shroud will be on exhibition, an event that rarely occurs. Over the years, it has been exposed to public view only once or twice per century. Cardinal Giovanni Saldarini, Archbishop of Turin, announced in June 1997 that the shroud would be pub- licly displayed in Turin for six weeks in April and May 1998 and again for about six weeks in April, May, and June of 2000. The 1998 exhibition will mark the five-hundredth anniversary of the consecration of Turin’s Cathedral of Saint John the Baptist. It also coincides with the centen- nial of the exhibition of 1898, when the shroud was photographed for the first time. In 2000, the exhibition will herald the new Christian millennium. The shroud is a rectangular length of woven linen cloth measuring 14 feet 3 inches (4.3 meters) long by 3 feet 7 inches (1.1 meters) wide. Normally, it is kept inside a sealed silver reliquary in the cathedral. On the shroud is the image of a man whose wounds correspond with accounts of the Crucifixion— whip marks, head wounds from the crown of thorns, nail wounds, a wound in the side. The shroud’s history is known with relative cer- tainty back to the early 1350s, when it was displayed in Lirey, France. It came into the possession of the House of Savoy at Chambéry, France, in 1453 and in 1578 was taken to Turin. But several noted historians believe that it is in fact the Mandylion, or “Veronica,” a piece of cloth bearing the likeness of Christ that was venerated by early Christians. The Mandylion was displayed ina wooden case, the face visible through an oval opening; the supposition is that the entire shroud was folded within the case. That theory aside, the earliest references to Christ’s burial shroud come from the fifth or early sixth century and are attributed to Saint Nino. Additional references come from the seventh century, when repli- cas of a such a shroud were used in the Byzantine litur- gy. In 1171, William of Tyre reported that the burial shroud of Christ was preserved in the imperial palace in Constantinople. In 1203, Crusaders reported that the shroud was displayed in Constantinople and that the image of the Lord was clearly visible. It is possible that when Constantinople seemed likely to fall back into Oriental hands the shroud was taken away. It disappeared dur- ing the fourth Crusade in 1203, and the Latin emper- or’s prime minister, who had access to it, returned to France at about that time. He was of the family of 10 1997 OFFICIAL CATHOLIC DIRECTORY Loreto ‘Ligurian Sea _ . Assisie — . ee SS . Adriatic Sea : Tyrrhenian Sea Geoffrey de Charny, who brought the shroud to Lirey about 1354. The shroud has narrowly escaped destruction by fire three times, the most recent in 1997. The date of the first fire is unknown, but burn marks were already evi- dent on the shroud before 1532, when the second fire took place. On that occasion, fire struck the Cathedral of Sainte Chapelle in Chambéry, and the reliquary was subjected to such extreme heat that it started to melt. Before it was taken from the burning church, molten silver had dropped onto the shroud, causing burns along both sides of the image. The third fire, in April 1997, extensively damaged Turin’s fifteenth-century cathedral. The fire began in either the dome of the chapel, which was undergoing renovation for the upcoming public exhibitions, or in the west wing of the Royal Palace, which adjoins it. The fire quickly spread through the complex and approached the place where the shroud had been tem- porarily placed during the renovations. The reliquary was sealed within a large enclosure of bulletproof glass an inch and a half thick; a fireman wielding a large sledge hammer managed to smash through the glass and the shroud was carried to safety as pieces of the burning dome fell around its rescuers. Authorities later said that if the shroud had been in its normal resting place it would have been consumed by the flames. The cathedral buildings were extensively dam- aged, but they will be repaired. Funds from govern- ment and other sources in Italy and elsewhere were quickly pledged to the project. Anew enclosure for the shroud already had been designed for the planned 1998 and 2000 exhibitions, one in which it will be kept unfolded. Because of the dam- age to the cathedral, the locations of the two exhibitions were uncertain during the months following the fire. The shroud is probably the world’s most-studied artifact. It has been subjected to scientific tests of many kinds, but none have conclusively proved or disproved its origins. Although radiocarbon dating in the late 1997 OFFICIAL CATHOLIC DIRECTORY 1980s indicated that the cloth might be only about 700 years old, research a decade later indicated that it may well be centuries older. In 1997, several eminent scien- tists cast doubt upon the results of the earlier radiocar- bon-dating tests for a number of reasons. It has been said, however, that for unbelievers, no amount of proof is sufficient, and for believers no amount of proof is necessary. Whether or not the shroud is the burial cloth of Christ, it is one of the world’s most venerated objects. As Pope Paul VI said in the 1970s, “Aside from what scientists and researchers have said or may yet say about the shroud, this incomparable portrait of the Man of Sorrows will continue to touch the minds and hearts of people for ages to come. It will speak to them of the boundless love of Christ for mankind.” In the Region Turin, on the Po River 320 miles northwest of Rome, is Italy’s fourth largest city and dates back to pre-Roman times. It is the regional capital of Piedmont, the center of several of the country’s leading industries, particu- larly automobiles, chemicals, and metals. But Piedmont and neighboring Valle d’Aosta also offer some of Europe’s most spectacular Alpine scenery and histori- cal attractions, from the Matterhorn and Mont Blanc to the well-preserved Roman city of Aosta. Turin’s cathedral, Chapel of the Holy Shroud, and Royal Palace are in the heart of the city. Nearby is the seventeenth-century Church of San Lorenzo, designed by Guarino Guarini, the priest and master of baroque architecture who also designed the chapel. Also among his creations are Turin’s Palace of the Academy of Sciences, which now houses two museums, and the Palazzo Carignano, the birthplace of two kings and the meeting place of Italy’s first parliament. About 12 miles west of Turin is the Abbey of Sant’ Antonio di Ranverso, founded in the twelfth cen- tury as an abbey hospital to care for victims of the crip- pling disease Saint Anthony’s Fire. Over the centuries, it was the destination of throngs of pilgrims seeking cures or giving thanks for recoveries. A short journey from there leads to the secluded and impressive Abbey of Saint Michael (Sacra di San Michele), built in the eleventh century on Monte Pirchiriano. North of Turin are the Matterhorn (Monte Cervino), which straddles the border of Italy and Switzerland, and Mont Blanc (Monte Bianco), Europe’s highest peak. The small city of Aosta, founded as a Roman gar- rison in the first century B.C., retains many of its ancient structures, including the Arch of Augustus built in 25 B.C. Ecclesiastical buildings include the Collegiata di Sant’Orso, dating from the sixth century and added to or modified numerous times since and thus exhibiting a wide variety of architectural styles. The oldest parts of the city’s cathedral date from the tenth century. Transport and Accommodation Turin is a major transportation hub, with road and rail connections in all directions. The region’s international 11 PILGRIMAGE DESTINATIONS airport, Aeroporto Caselle, is about 10 miles from the city. Turin is also on the main rail line from Rome to Paris and is only about an hour and a half from Milan. Rome to Turin is a six- to nine-hour rail trip. As a major city, Turin has plentiful lodging and many restaurants of all classes. Outlying areas of Piedmont and Val d’Aosta, because of their numerous tourist attractions, also offer abundant and varied accommodation and notable cuisine. Both winter and summer are prime seasons for tourism. Contact Information Tourist information for Turin can be obtained from this address: Via Roma 222, Torino, Italy (Tel. [39] (11) 535-901). Two Internet sites dedicated to information on the Holy Shroud are www.shroud.com and www.cais.net / npacheco/shroud /turin.html. (For additional contact information, see Rome.) LOURDES Lourdes, in the French Pyrenees, is the most frequented pilgrimage site of the Catholic world, surpassing both Rome and Jerusalem. The town has a population of only 18,000, but between Easter and October each year it draws between four million and five million visitors, making it France’s most often visited city after Paris. Lourdes has been drawing pilgrims since 1858, when the Blessed Virgin appeared to 14-year-old Bernadette Soubirous, the daughter of an impoverished local miller, in the Massabielle grotto along the Gave de Pau river. There were 18 further apparitions over the following few months. During the ninth of these, Bernadette dug at the ground with her hands and a gush of water was released from a previously unknown spring. Belief spread that the water had miraculous healing powers, and crowds began to accompany her to the grotto. As the apparitions contin- ued, the throng grew to about 8,000 and armed soldiers had to escort her. Local church authorities remained skeptical for some time. After a four-year investigation, the miracle was authenticated by Rome, the visions proclaimed authentic, devotion to Notre Dame de Lourdes autho- rized, and a sanctuary erected over the grotto. The first organized procession was held in 1864. The grotto has since been restored to the condi- tion it was in at the time of Bernadette’s visions, although the river has been diverted some distance from its entrance. A statue of the Virgin stands in the natural recess in which the apparition first appeared. At the statue’s foot are inscribed the words in the Gascon dialect that Bernadette heard on March 25, 1858: “Que soy era Immaculada Councepciou (I am the Immaculate Conception).” PILGRIMAGE DESTINATIONS Bernadette became a nun and died in 1879, at age 35, ata convent in Nevers, France. She was canonized 195: The annual pilgrimage season begins at Easter, when Lourdes is the site of the Festival International de Musique Sacrée, and continues through October. There are now six Official annual pilgrimages, the most important on August 15, the Feast of the Assumption, and that date marks the height of the season. The Caverne des Apparitions, better known as La Grotte, where Bernadette experienced the apparitions, is the focus of the town. During the pilgrimage season there are long lines, including many elderly or ailing pilgrims seeking miraculous cures. Among other sites related to Bernadette in Lourdes is the Musée Bernadette, a museum that is devoted to her life and that also offers an illustrated history of the pilgrimages. There is also the Moulin des Boly, the mill where she was born on January 7, 1844, and the “shabby little room” in the Cachot, a disused jail where her family lived at the time of the appari- tions; both are open to visitors. Lourdes has two nineteenth-century basilicas (Basilique Supérieure, 1871, and Basilique du Rosaire, 1889) in the New Gothic and Romano-Byzantine styles, respectively (one guidebook comments: “Their spiritu- al function far outweighs their aesthetic appeal”), as well as the vast underground Basilique Saint-Pie X, the world’s largest underground church. The latter was consecrated in 1958 to mark the centenary of the apparitions and can hold up to 20,000 worshippers. In season, particularly during the weeks follow- ing August 15, Lourdes is extremely busy and crowds can be daunting. While many visitors are true pilgrims, many are simply sightseers. In a mixture of religion and commerce, there are scores of souvenir shops offering religious keepsakes rang- ing from the inexpensive to the quite expensive. Restau- rants of all types abound, from haute cuisine to pizza. Lourdes has more than 350 hotel rooms at all prices. Some hotels are run by religious organizations and are specifically for pilgrims as opposed to tourists. Out of season, there are few pilgrims or tourists. As a consequence, most shops are shuttered and the majority of the restaurants and hotels are closed. Earlier History Before 1858, Lourdes was a much-disputed fortress. A former feudal chateau, Lourdes Castle, perched on a rocky outcrop, became a prison in the seventeenth cen- tury and was later a barracks. It is mow Musée Pyrénéen, considered to be one of France’s best provin- cial museums, devoted to popular customs and arts throughout the Pyrenees and Béarn regions. In the Region Lourdes has been called the Gateway to the Pyrenees, and the region is known for its dramatic mountain scenery. It is an easy day trip to nearby Pau or Cauterets, and train and bus service are excellent in 1997 OFFICIAL CATHOLIC DIRECTORY Area of Detail ! FRANCE Paue eLourdes season. Other nearby destinations offer points of scenic, religious, and historic interest. One of France’s most renowned spas and resorts, Cauterets is 19 miles (an hour by bus) from Lourdes and only about eight miles from the Spanish border. It is located in a scenic valley on the edge of the Parc National des Pyrénées Occidentales, which attracts international crowds to its green pastures and exten- sive network of hiking trails. Since Roman times, Cauterets has been known for its hot springs, revered as a miracle cure for female sterility and ailments of the throat, sinuses, and ears. The town and spa were visited and lauded by Rabelais, Victor Hugo, George Sand, and Viscount Francois René de Chateaubriand. The Cauterets region also offers some of the best skiing in the Pyrenees, both downhill and cross-country. In some years, skiing lasts until May. About 25 miles northwest of Lourdes, Pau is the historic capital of Béarn. Early in the nineteenth centu- ry, it became popular as a winter resort for the wealthy British, who once made up a third of its population. The vacationers created France’s first golf course there in 1856, introduced fox hunting, and launched the Pont-Long steeplechase, which remains a popular attraction. Pau’s chateau, built in the fourteenth centu- ry, was turned into a Renaissance palace in the six- teenth ceritury by Marguerite d’Angouléme, sister of King Francois I. Her grandson, Henri IV, was born there in 1553. Gavarnie, about 20 miles from Cauterets, is at the foot of the Cirque de Gavarnie, one of the world’s most remarkable examples of glacial erosion. When the upper snows melt, numerous streams cascade from the cliffs to form spectacular waterfalls, the longest of which falls nearly 1,400 feet. Among other towns of note in the area are Saint- Savin, an important religious center in the Bigorre region; Argelés-Gazost, a popular summer resort and 1997 OFFICIAL CATHOLIC DIRECTORY spa with a church dating from the tenth and eleventh centuries; Baréges, which offers a spa, casino, and win- ter sports; Bagnéres de Luchon, an area known for its shooting, hiking, and ski resorts (and where the spa waters are said to benefit the vocal cords); and Bagneres de Bigorre, another popular spa known since Roman times, which boasts a fifteenth-century church and convent, and the remains of the thirteenth-century Cloitre Saint-Jean. Contact Information U.S. Embassy, 2 Ave. Gabriel, 75008 Paris. Tel. [33] (1) 43-12-22-22. Fax [33] (1) 42-66-87-83. French Government Tourist Offices: New York: 444 Madison Ave., 16th floor, New York, NY 10022-6903 (Tel. 212-838-7800, fax 212-838-7855); Chicago: 676 N. Michigan Ave., Chicago, IL 60611-2819 (fax 312-337-6339, e-mail fgto@mes.net); Los Angeles: 9454 Wilshire Blvd., Suite 715, Beverly Hills, CA 90212- 2967 (fax 310-276-2835, e-mail fgtola@juno.com); Toronto: 30 St. Patrick St., Suite 700, Toronto, ON M5T 3A3 (Tel. 416-593-4717); Montreal: 1981 Ave. McGill College, Suite 490 Montreal, PQ H3A 2W9 (Tel. 514-288-4264). Internet: www.francetourism.com. POITIERS The ancient city of Poitiers in west central France has been an important religious center since the fourth cen- tury, largely because of its first bishop, the scholarly Saint Hilary. Its roots go considerably deeper. Poitiers sits on a promontory at the confluence of the rivers Clain and Vienne that was occupied from very early times. In the Roman era, it was known as Limonum and was the seat of the propraetor of Aquitania from Caesar’s con- quest of Gaul until the barbarian invasion of 276. But it was Hilary—the leading theologian of Western Christianity of his time—whose influence brought the city to prominence as the destination of pil- grims and a hub of religious activity in the early days of Christianity in Europe. Many signs of that early importance remain, among them the oldest Christian building in France: the Baptistére Saint-Jean (Baptistery of Saint John). Hilary was born into a distinguished family at Poitiers in 315 and trained in philosophy and the clas- sics. He married and had a daughter, Abra, before his conversion to Christianity in early manhood. His con- version came about, he wrote, through his study of the Bible and how its teachings contrasted with the materi- alism of pagan mythology. Hilary became Bishop of Poitiers in 353 and soon became embroiled in the controversy over Arianism, a heresy that negates the Holy Trinity by denying the divinity of Christ. His anti-Arian efforts resulted in his exile to Phrygia (in what is now central Turkey) from 356 to 359 by Emperor Constantius II. His opposition to Arianism continued, however; he was released from 13 PILGRIMAGE DESTINATIONS exile in large part because his enemies in Phrygia regarded him as a “sower of discord and the trouble- maker of the Orient.” He was allowed to return to his episcopacy at Poitiers in 360, and his persecution over Arianism ended with Constantius’s death the follow- ing year. Hilary spent the rest of his life repairing the dam- age Arianism had done to the church in Gaul and Italy. He preached, wrote, and suffered exile in defense of the divinity of Christ, strengthening the faith of the clergy and laity in this fundamental dogma. Soon after his return to Poitiers, Hilary had one of his disciples, who was later to be Saint Martin of Tours, found the nearby monastery of Ligugé, probably the first monastery in France. Hilary died at Poitiers in 368 (the date is uncer- tain) and was proclaimed a doctor of the church by Pope Pius IX in 1851. His tomb is in the eleventh-centu- ry Church of Saint-Hilaire-le-Grand, one of Poitiers’s many noteworthy religious monuments. Poitiers’s importance increased over the centuries. Clovis defeated the Visigoths near the city in 507, and it became part of the Frankish kingdom; in 732, Charles Martel stopped an Arab expedition from Spain near Poitiers; as the capital of the Duchy of Aquitaine, it was fought over for years by the French and English. Charles II often held court there and founded a univer- sity. Joan of Arc went there in 1429 to have her mission studied and approved. Benedictine abbeys arose in Poitiers, then other religious houses founded by Jesuits (1604), Calvairiennes (1617), and Brothers of Saint John of God (1619). John Calvin was among numerous scholars associated with Poitiers, and the first Calvinist confes- sion of faith was composed there in 1558. ePoitiers e Niort © La Rochelle FRANCE e Angouleme e Lourdes PILGRIMAGE DESTINATIONS Noteworthy Buildings Radegunda (later Saint Radegunda), wife of King Clothar, founded a convent of nuns at Poitiers in 552, and in 569 it was dedicated to the Holy Cross upon pre- sentation of a relic of the Cross by Emperor Justin II. Radegunda founded the Church of Saint Mary outside the convent’s walls and was buried there in 587. Pilgrimages to her tomb are as popular as those to Saint Hilary’s. A stone at her tomb is said to bear the footprint of Christ, left when he visited her just before her death. The oldest religious building in Poitiers—and in all of France—is Saint Hilary’s Baptistery of Saint John. Begun in the fourth century and enlarged in the sev- enth and eleventh centuries, it includes an octagonal baptismal pool fed by a Roman aqueduct. It is now a museum dedicated to the Merovingians, the first dynasty of Franks to rule that part of Europe. At the church of Notre-Dame-la-Grande, built in the eleventh and twelfth centuries, one finds the vener- ated sixteenth-century statue of Our Lady of the Keys, commemorating the deliverance of Poitiers from a siege. The building is held to be one of France’s most outstanding examples of Romanesque architecture. Saint-Hilaire-le-Grand, consecrated in 1049, which contains Saint Hilary’s tomb, is noted for its twelfth-century murals. Other religious buildings include Saint-Jean-de- Montierneuf, consecrated in 1096, Saint-Porchaire (1520), and a seventeenth-century Jesuit college, now a lyceum. Transport As a major center, Poitiers is easily reached by road and rail. The journey from Paris, which has the nearest international airports, is about 160 miles. In the Region Poitiers is equidistant from a number of noteworthy cities. Within 80 miles are Angouléme, Limoges, and Chateauroux. Tours and the Loire valley are also nearby. Niort, about 45 miles southwest of Poitiers, con- tains the remains of a castle built by the English kings Henry II and his son, Richard the Lion-Hearted. It now houses a museum with a major collection of costumes and arms. West of Niort is the region known as Marais Poitevin, also called the Green Venice because of its extensive network of canals running through a patch- work of fields. Small boats can be rented in local vil- lages, with guides and without. In the region are the ruins of the Abbaye de Maillezais, once a bishop’s seat as well as an influential monastery. The earliest part of the ruins dates from the eleventh century. West of the Marais Poitevin, on the sea, is La Rochelle, with its picturesque harbor buttressed by two fourteenth-century towers. Boats leave daily in summer for the islands of Ré (with its oyster beds and vineyards), Aix, and Oléron. The former Abbey of Ligugé, founded by Martin under Hilary’s direction and probably France’s earliest 14 1997 OFFICIAL CATHOLIC DIRECTORY monastery, is about five miles south of Poitiers. Gallo- Roman remains have been identified, including the apse of the fourth-century basilica built by Martin, as well as some fifth- and sixth-century Merovingian tombs. The nearby Church of Saint-Martin dates from the sixteenth century. Tours, about 80 miles north of Poitiers, was a highly frequented pilgrimage site and religious center from the fourth century. It is known for its numerous churches and other religious buildings, including the tombs of Saint Martin and Saint Gregory. Contact Information U.S. Embassy, 2 Ave. Gabriel, 75008 Paris. Tel. [33] (1) 43-12-22-22, fax [33] (1) 42-66-87-83. French Government Tourist Office: 444 Madison Ave., 16th floor, New York, NY 10022-6903 (Tel. 212-838-7800, fax 212-838-7855). (For other French Government Tourist Offices, see Lourdes.) TOURS In the early Middle Ages, Tours—in the Loire valley of west central France—was the most famous and most frequented pilgrimage center in Christendom. For cen- turies, monarchs and popes were among those who came to pay homage or seek favor at the shrine of Saint Martin. Martin was Bishop of Tours from 371 to 397, and two aspects of his episcopacy are of basic importance: He evangelized the countryside, establishing the first six rural parishes in France, and he gave monks an important role in this apostolate. Martin was born about 316 along the Danube in Upper Pannonia, now part of Hungary, and was raised in Pavia, Italy. His parents were pagans, but he became a catechumen on his own initiative at about the age of 10. When he was 15, he enrolled in the imperial cavalry, a move that may have been required because he was a Roman officer’s son. While Martin was stationed at Amiens, an inci- dent is said to have taken place that tradition has made famous. According to the legend, on a bitter winter day he saw an old man at the gates of the city, starving, nearly naked, and begging for alms. Martin removed his own cloak, cut it in half with his sword, and gave one piece to the beggar. That night, in his sleep, he saw Christ—dressed in the half of the cloak he had given away—and heard him say, “Martin, yet a catechumen, has covered me with this garment.” According to the contemporary historian Sulpicius Severus, the young soldier “flew to be bap- tized.” Thereafter, he described himself as “a soldier of Christ” rather than of Caesar, and within five years he was discharged. Martin went to Poitiers, where the future Saint Hilary was bishop, and became one of Hilary’s disci- ples. Some time later, he returned to his home and con- verted his mother and others to Christianity, but his zealous activity there against Arianism (a heresy that 1997 OFFICIAL CATHOLIC DIRECTORY negates the Holy Trinity by denying the divinity of Christ) put him in disfavor and forced him into exile. Martin entered the monastic life at Milan but was driven away by the Arian bishop Auxentius, where- upon he went to the island of Gallinaria in the Gulf of Genoa. Hilary, meanwhile, had been exiled by the Arian Emperor Constantius II and was away from France during the same period. When Hilary was allowed to return to Poitiers in 360, Martin also returned. Martin established at Ligugé (about five miles south of Poitiers) what may have been the first French monastery, a community of monk-hermits. He lived there for a decade, preaching throughout the country- side, and numerous miracles were attributed to him. In 371, having been drawn to Tours by a ruse, Martin was consecrated its bishop, an office he is said to have “accepted with great reluctance.” Soon after- ward, he established another monastic center at nearby Marmoutier and lived there as a monk while carrying out his duties as bishop. Every year he traveled through the district, visit- ing each of the outlying parishes. His apostolate extended to Chartres, Paris, Autun, Sens, and Vienne, and he was in a remote part of his diocese—and more than 80 years old—when he died at Candes on November 8, 397. Legend holds that as his body was being carried by boat to Tours, trees suddenly sprouted leaves, flow- ers bloomed, and birds sang. In France, the warm peri- od after frost has since been known as “Saint Martin’s Summer.” A vast crowd attended Martin’s burial at Tours. According to Sulpicius Severus, who had become one of his disciples, more than 2,000 monks were among the mourners. The Abbey of Saint-Martin became famous. Successive kings of France preserved Martin’s cape and kept for themselves the title Abbot of Saint Martin. Martin became the patron saint of France and his feast is November 11, the date of his burial. The shrine was highly frequented for the next 800 years, but it lost importance in the early thirteenth cen- tury as Rome, the Holy Land, Santiago de Compostela in northwestern Spain, and Mont-Saint-Michel in Normandy became more popular. The monastic community founded at Ligugé grew into a great monastery that continued until 1607 and was revived by the Solesmes Benedictines in 1852. In 853, a Norman invasion led to the saint’s relics being moved to Auxerre, but they were returned in 885. In all, the relics were dispersed three times: in 853, in 1562, and in 1793, during a campaign of dechristianiza- tion late in the French Revolution. The saint’s tomb was rediscovered late in 1860. The modest sanctuary built to hold Saint Martin’s remains was replaced in the thirteenth century by a sumptuous basilica. It was sacked by the Huguenots in 1562 during the Wars of Religion, and all that remains are two restored towers. Today, the new Basilica of Saint-Martin, completed in 1924, occupies a corner of the old structure and claims to preserve the tomb in its original location. 15 PILGRIMAGE DESTINATIONS Transport The closest international airports to the Loire valley are the two principal Paris airports, Charles de Gaulle and Orly. The region is served by regular trains from Paris and other major cities. By road, the journey from Paris is about 80 miles. Blois Angers Tours ® ePoitiers FRANCE Area of Detail z s In the Region The city of Tours has been an important center since ancient times. It was the capital of the Gallic tribe Turones and a Gallo-Roman civitas under the name Caesarodunum (Caesar’s Hill). It increased in impor- tance—particularly as regards the church—throughout the Middle Ages and the Renaissance. Although it suf- fered heavy damage during World Wars | and I, its surviving monuments have been preserved and restored. Tours was the home of a number of other saints (among them Saint Gregory, one of Martin’s successors as bishop), the monk Alcuin, who was an advisor to Charlemagne and Abbot of Saint-Martin in the eighth century, and such later figures as the painters Jean Fouquet and Francois Clouet. Another native was Honoré de Balzac, who set much of his writing in Tours. Old Tours, which includes the basilicas of Saint- Martin, centers on Place Plumereau, with its fifteenth- century half-timbered houses, shops, restaurants, and cafes. Other religious sites in Tours include the Cathedral of Saint-Gatien, begun in the thirteenth cen- tury and completed nearly 300 years later, which shows the full evolution of the Gothic style. The interior includes thirteenth- to fifteenth-century stained-glass windows. Near the cathedral are the Cloitre de la Psalette, with fifteenth- and sixteenth-century frescoes, and the PILGRIMAGE DESTINATIONS Musée des Beaux-Arts, one of the leading art museums of the Loire valley. Other cultural attractions, restaurants, and accommodations are plentiful. Tours is a central point for the exploration of the Loire valley, westward to Angers or eastward to Orléans. The region is known for its wines, scenery, and chateaux. Angers is about out 70 miles west of Tours. Its attractions include a Gothic cathedral, a number of art galleries, and a medieval fortress filled with noted tapestries, among them the 120-yard-long Apocalypse Tapestry, completed in 1390, which illustrates 70 scenes from the Book of Revelation. Saumur, known for producing about 100,000 tons of mushrooms a year, is between Tours and Angers. Among its sights is an elegant fourteenth-century _ chateau, its Musée des Arts Décoratifs, and its Musée du Cheval, which traces the history of the horse. Nearby is Fontevraud, known for its medieval abbey. Founded in 1099, the abbey contains the tombs of Henry II of England; his wife, Eleanor of Aquitaine; and their son, Richard the Lion-Hearted. Napoleon made the abbey a prison, and it remained one until 1963. Among the picturesque towns east of Tours are Amboise, with its numerous hotels and restaurants, busy market, and noted chateau (built on the site of a Stone Age fortress and once a royal palace); Chenonceaux, also the location of a famed chateau; Loches with its noteworthy Church of Saint-Ours; and the larger center of Blois, whose chateau is among France’s most famous. Poitiers (See preceding pages), which is closely connected with Saint Martin, is about 80 miles south of Tours. It offers the oldest Christian building in France, Saint Hilary’s Baptistery of Saint John, begun in the fourth century. The baptistery is now a Merovingian museum. Among its other noteworthy religious build- FRANCE Aix-les-Bains @ Grenoble Turin @ Mure e - e Briancon La Salette” Vallogise ®@ Gap 16 1997 OFFICIAL CATHOLIC DIRECTORY ings are the Cathedral of Saint-Pierre, built between 1162 and 1271, and Saint-Jean-de-Montierneuf, conse- crated in 1096. Contact Information U.S. Embassy, 2 Ave. Gabriel, 75008 Paris. Tel. [33] (1) 43-12-22-22, fax [33] (1) 42-66-87-83. French Government Tourist Office: 444 Madison Ave., 16th floor, New York, NY 10022-6903 (Tel. 212-838-7800, fax 212-838-7855). (For other French Government Tourist Offices, see Lourdes.) LA SALETTE On September 19, 1846, two peasant children were tending a small herd of cows in a mountain glen near the village La Salette in the French Alps. Suddenly a “beautiful lady,” resplendently dressed, appeared before them in a globe of shining light. She was weep- ing. ; The lady gave the two children a message: Unless there was repentance from widespread religious apa- thy, there would be universal calamity. She asked them to pray and told each of them a secret. The children—15-year-old Melanie Mathieu- Calvat and 11-year-old Maximin Giraud—were gener- ally disbelieved. But when a spring suddenly appeared at the spot where they saw the apparition and numer- ous miraculous cures were ascribed to its waters, word spread and pilgrims began coming to the spring in growing numbers. There was considerable skepticism; it was noted that the children had virtually no secular or religious education—a factor that was argued both in favor of the authenticity of their vision and against it. The bishop of nearby Grenoble, Philibert de Bruillard, began an inquiry that proved unusually exhaustive, continuing without any announcement for five years. He then ruled that the apparition had the appearance of truth and that there were grounds for believing in it and in the resulting miracles. The result was the authorization of devotion to Our Lady of La Salette. The children passed the secrets the lady had told them to Pope Pius IX, who confirmed La Salette and the cult. A proper Mass and Office was granted nearly a century later, in 1942. Neither Maximin nor Melanie became manifest saints, but the authenticity of a vision is not dependent upon the persons to whom it is revealed. Maximin, who died at age 40 in nearby Corps, was quoted as say- ing “Our Lady left me as I was.” Melanie, who lived until 1904, made several efforts to become a religious but did not succeed. Neither ever repudiated their account of the vision. In 1852, after completing his investigation, Bishop de Bruillard organized a group of diocesan priests to serve at the church being built on the spot at which the apparition took place. From this group grew the Missionaries of Our Lady of La Salette. Their early 1997 OFFICIAL CATHOLIC DIRECTORY work was in Norway and Switzerland, and missions were established later in Madagascar, the United States, Canada, Poland, and South America. In the United States, the order has established a number of seminar- ies and colleges. In the Region In any season, the Grenoble region offers much for the visitor, from world-famous ski resorts in winter to spas, lakes, and Alpine scenery in the summer. Grenoble itself is a large, cosmopolitan city. A cable car climbs to the Fort de la Bastille, a vantage point for panoramic views of the city and the River Isere. Other attractions within the city are the Musée Dauphinois, a regional museum housed in a seven- teenth-century convent; the Musée de Peinture et de Sculpture, which offers a noted collection of modern art that includes the work of Picasso, Gauguin, Matisse, and Modigliani; and the church of Saint Laurent, whose sixth-century crypt is one of the oldest Christian structures in France. | North of Grenoble, in the Chartreuse Mountains, is the old town of Chambéry with its fourteenth-centu- ry Chateau des Ducs de Savoie. The Gothic chateau has impressive stained glass and a replica of the Shroud of Turin. The spa town of Aix-les-Bains on the Lac du Bourget has had thermal baths since Roman times. The Roman Temple of Diana, dating to the second and third centuries, now houses an archaeology museum. Across the lake from Aix-les-Bains, and accessible by regular boat service, is the Abbaye de Hautecombe, where mass is celebrated with Gregorian chant. Within easy access of Grenoble are numerous Alpine reserves, among them the Parc du Vercors, the Parc des Ecrins, the Parc du Queyras, and the Parc de la Vanoise. The Italian Alps are to the east, Lyon and the Rhone valley to the west, and Provence to the south. Contact Information U.S. Embassy, 2 Ave. Gabriel, 75008 Paris. Tel. [33] (1) 43-12-22-22, fax [33] (1) 42-66-87-83. French Government Tourist Office: 444 Madison Ave., 16th floor, New York, NY 10022-6903 (Tel. 212-838-7800, fax 212-838-7855). (For other French Government Tourist Offices, see Lourdes.) MONT-SAINT-MICHEL Silhouetted against the sky atop a towering crag off the Normandy coast, Mont-Saint-Michel is one of the world’s most impressive sights. Historian Henry Adams wrote in 1913 that it was an “assertion of God and Man in a bolder, stronger, closer union than ever was expressed by other art.” More than 500 years in the building, the abbey has withstood storm, war, revolution, fire, and neglect. But through it all, as the principal shrine of the 17 PILGRIMAGE DESTINATIONS Archangel Michael, it has drawn pilgrims from far and wide for nearly 13 centuries. The abbey’s origins go back to the early eighth century when the archangel appeared in a vision to Aubert, bishop of nearby Avranches, and commanded him to build a chapel in his honor on the rocky hill. At the time the hill was known as Mont Tombe and rose from a dense forest. But not long afterward the sea inundated the forest and the hill became an island, iso- lated from the mainland by fast-moving tides that rise as much as 45 feet. The bishop built a small circular oratory, which soon attracted pilgrims. Two centuries later, in 966, Richard I, Duke of Normandy, established a Benedictine abbey at the site and replaced Aubert’s small chapel with a rectangular Carolingian structure. In 1017, Richard II was married there and ordered con- struction of a Romanesque church. This took 60 years to build, and was no sooner complete than Abbot Hildebert II ordered that the 250-foot summit of the rock be leveled to build still another new church, the first step in a plan to cover the rock with monastic buildings. That goal was finally accomplished in 1520 with the elaborate Gothic and Romanesque complex that remains today. In the meantime Mont-Saint-Michel had become a center of medieval intellectual life and was drawing pilgrims from across Europe. Thus it remained for about a century, until a long period of decline set in; discipline waned and the size of the abbey community dwindled, although Maurists (given charge of the abbey in 1622) remained there in decreasing numbers until the French Revolution. During the eighteenth century the abbey was used in part to imprison enemies of the crown, and its status as a prison became official with the Revolution. It continued to serve only that function, notoriously, until Emperor Napoleon II]—responding to a public outcry—shut it down in 1863. A decade later, it was declared a public monument and restoration began. Since 1922 the monastery church has been once again a place of worship, and monks have been able to live and work on the Mont for the past quarter century. The complex includes the Church of Saint Michael at the top, a cloister, a medieval refectory and crypts, great halls, and the monks’ residence. A town clusters at the feet of the abbey, complete with inns, restaurants, and a profusion of religious and secular souvenir shops. Because of the throngs who visit Mont-Saint- Michel during the summer, many pilgrims opt for the off-season, from September to May. In the Region Because of its location on the sea at the western edge of Normandy, Mont-Saint-Michel has been at the cross- roads of conflict time and again. In 1066 Norman forces en route to the Battle of Hastings made their last stop there before crossing the Channel to England. During the Hundred Years War (1337-1453) it was attacked repeatedly. In more recent times, it was near heavy PILGRIMAGE DESTINATIONS fighting during the Invasion of Normandy in World War II. About 45 miles northeast of Mont-Saint-Michel is Saint-Lo, which played a pivotal role in the Battle of Normandy in 1944 and was almost totally destroyed in the process. It lies inland, but near the Calvados Coast beaches of Operation Overlord, known by the code names Utah, Omaha, Gold, Juno, and Sword. Omaha, where nearly 10,000 American troops died, is near the town of Colleville-sur-Mer. The Monument du Débarquement near there stands among the largely undisturbed remains of bunkers and trenches. The Musée.du Débarquement at Arromanches chronicles the invasion, and remnants of one of the floating har- bors built for the invasion can still be seen in the bay. A short distance inland is Bayeux, which offers the Bayeux Tapestry, a 225-foot scroll embroidered in 1067 that depicts the story of William the Conqueror’s victory in the Battle of Hastings the year before. Other attractions in Bayeux include the Cathédrale Notre- Dame, a notable combination of Gothic and Norman design, and another museum tracing the events of June through August 1944, the Musée de la Bataille de Normandie. Seventeen miles from Bayeux is Caen, which also has a museum on the Normandy Landings (the Mémorial). The town is also known for its Abbaye aux Hommes (Men’s Abbey), a monastery built by William the Conqueror, and Abbaye au