Lady Attenborough, who has died aged 93, was the actress professionally known as Sheila Sim who, as a rising star of British film and theatre during the 1940s and 1950s, chose to forsake a thriving career for an equally successful role as the wife of Richard Attenborough.

When she married Attenborough on January 22 1945, Sheila Sim became half of a marriage that would endure longer than most in showbusiness. Together they were to share great happiness – bringing up three children and seeing Attenborough win eight Academy Awards for Gandhi (1982) – and immense trauma when, on Boxing Day 2004, they lost three members of their family to the tsunami that hit the coast of southern Thailand.

At the time of her marriage Sheila Sim had made her name playing the headstrong land-girl, Alison Smith, in Michael Powell and Emeric Pressburger’s wartime oddity, A Canterbury Tale (1944). In the film three latter-day pilgrims – Bob Johnson, an American sergeant (played by John Sweet, a real-life soldier from Oregon), a British sergeant (Dennis Price) and Sheila Sim’s plucky Alison – are marooned in the fictional Kent village of Chillingbourne. The trio discover that the idyll is being disturbed by the “glue man” – a sinister figure who pours glue over the heads of girls who go out at night. Alison draws the two soldiers into her investigations before the three continue to Canterbury (and their various fates).

The part of Alison Smith had been written for Deborah Kerr, Michael Powell’s lover and by then a huge star. But, as Powell admitted, the relatively unknown Sheila Sim “made it her own”, delivering a performance of “depth and sincerity”.

In 1952, she starred alongside her husband in the opening West End production of Agatha Christie’s The Mousetrap. To cinemagoers Sheila Sim was the quintessential English rose of British film and to theatrical audiences she was the archetypal Agatha Christie suspect. To her husband, however, she was simply “Poppy”.

Sheila Beryl Grant Sim was born on June 5 1922 in Liverpool. Her father worked for Barings bank and Sheila’s younger brother Gerald would become known as an actor for his roles as dotty vicars in To the Manor Born and The Fall and Rise of Reginald Perrin.

The family moved south to Croydon when Sheila was young and she met her future husband at Rada, where they both studied during the war. One lunch break, Attenborough crept into the school’s basement theatre and practised on the piano – singing along to the national anthem – not knowing that Sheila Sim had sneaked in behind him to watch. She was told that the man she had her eye on was called “Dickie Edinburgh”.

An old-fashioned courtship followed and in 1941 Noël Coward gave the couple their first chance in the theatre, touring for 22 weeks. Sheila Sim had a small part in This Happy Breed and was an understudy in Present Laughter and Blithe Spirit.

Her break into film came two years later through a chance encounter with Michael Powell at a party, who recalled: “I had met two enchanting young people, deeply in love, and who looked as if they had just burst out of an enormous egg, like the character in the final act of Shaw’s Back to Methuselah. They spoke when they were spoken to and an air of innocence and freshness seemed to cradle them. I offered the part of the land-girl to the female of this enchanted couple. Her name was Sheila Sim.”

She was well prepared for the role, having volunteered to work with the Women’s Land Army on a farm in Herefordshire during the harvest of 1940. The film, however, fell flat with audiences, who found the “glue man” storyline too peculiar. But it was restored in the 1970s and hailed by critics as a masterpiece.

A series of lead and supporting roles followed. In Great Day (1946) she played a girl juggling the affections of two suitors as her village prepares for a visit by Eleanor Roosevelt, while the gangland melodrama Dancing with Crime (1947) allowed her to work with her husband, playing a dance hall hostess to his cab driver.

While the couple were shooting The Guinea Pig together in 1948 they found their first home – a bomb-damaged two-up, two-down just off the King’s Road in London. They furnished the house thanks to a successful flutter on the Grand National – £10 on Sheila’s Cottage to win, bringing a windfall of £500.

The next year Sheila Sim appeared in Love’s a Funny Thing at the Ambassadors while her husband was starring in another play – he would sit through the opening hour of her matinée before setting off for his theatre, and rush back after his curtain to see her final few minutes (he missed the middle of the play).

In 1951 she appeared in the film Pandora and the Flying Dutchman with Ava Gardner and James Mason.

They appeared on stage together the same year for a long run in the comedy To Dorothy, A Son. Their greatest collaboration, however, came the following year when they joined the inaugural cast of The Mousetrap (also at the Ambassadors before transferring to St Martin’s Theatre).

Sheila Sim played Mollie Ralston, the proprietor of Monkswell Manor, snowed-in for a country-house murder investigated by Detective Sergeant Trotter, played by Attenborough. The pair received good notices and the play became a theatrical phenomenon. The couple took a 10 per cent share in the profits, which Attenborough described as the wisest business decision he ever made.

Sheila Sim became something of a society figure, appearing in the diary and fashion pages – her ocelot skirt for The Mousetrap received its own write-up. “I need summery cocktail dresses,” she announced to The Daily Telegraph as she departed for the Uruguay Film Festival in the winter of 1955, “and they’re not easy to find at this time of year.”

The Attenboroughs lived for more than half a century in a large 17th-century house on Richmond Green. Sheila’s measured personality counterbalanced her husband’s flamboyance. “I’m not one of those spectacular people who punch the air with their fist and jump on to someone’s back at sudden happenings,” she said. “I tend to go the other way and remain silent.”

Sheila Sim retired from acting in the late 1950s to concentrate on family life; by then the couple had a son and two daughters. Her last film was the The Night My Number Came Up (1955), a thriller with Michael Redgrave. She continued to orbit the film industry for the rest of her life, “partly involved and partly witness, buffeted or elated according to what’s occurring”.

In 1981, when Richard Attenborough was filming Gandhi in India, she nursed her husband at the Lake Palace Hotel in Udaipur when he fell ill. She was also with him taking shelter from a hurricane while filming Jurassic Park in Hawaii more than a decade later. “Sheila was right there beside me,” Attenborough said, “as she was in Hollywood, Taiwan, Morocco, Chicago, Zimbabwe, Malta, Arizona, Deventer, New York, Venice and a whole host of other less salubrious locations, including, on Oh! What a Lovely War, a municipal rubbish tip in Brighton.”

On December 26 2004, however, their family was torn apart. On holiday in the Thai resort of Khao Lak, their daughter, Jane, 15-year-old granddaughter, Lucy, and Jane’s mother in-law, were killed by the tsunami. Another granddaughter Alice, who was then 17, was injured. “My memory of that terrible morning is so completely blank I’ve obviously buried it very deeply,” said Attenborough.

On the set of her husband’s final film, the wartime drama, Closing the Ring, two years later, Lady Attenborough (her husband was created a life peer in 1993) revealed that she empathised with one of its characters, a bride who refused to acknowledge the death of a loved one. “Because that’s what I’ve done,” she said. “That’s exactly what I’ve done.”

Lady Attenborough spent her final years at Denville Hall, the actors’ home in north-west London, where she and Lord Attenborough had their own table and lunched together every day. She had great dignity and exquisite manners.

In 2007 the Attenboroughs gave their collection of ceramics by Pablo Picasso to Leicester City Art Gallery to commemorate the lives of their daughter and granddaughter.

Lord Attenborough died in 2014. Lady Attenborough is survived by their son, the theatre director Michael Attenborough, and younger daughter, the actress Charlotte Attenborough.