Richard Attenborough's wife Sheila Sim has died aged 93 - more than three years after she was diagnosed with dementia.

The sad death of Ms Sim, well known as Lady Attenborough, was announced after last night's performance of The Mousetrap in Nottingham's Theatre Royal.

She had previously performed the role of Mollie Ralston in the original production of Agatha Christie’s thriller, alongside her late husband in 1952.

The hugely popular production is still running in the West End after more than six decades.

Her famous actor husband died just over a year before, in August 2014.

The announcement was made to the audience at the end of the performance by one of the cast before the traditional "keep the Mousetrap murderer secret" speech.

Sheila performed in a stream of successful film and stage productions throughout the 1940s and 1950s, including School for Spinsters in 1947, Love’s a Funny Thing in 1949 and To Dorothy a Son in 1950.

According to reports, she had been living at the actors’ retirement home Denville Hall since 2013, after being diagnosed with dementia the year before.

The couple's son, theatre director Michael Attenborough, revealed his mother's illness in 2012 in an interview with The Stage.

“I’m running their affairs for them now, so there is a lot when I see them that I have to tell and bring them up to speed about. They have been together 70 years now," he said, before his father passed away.

Richard Attenborough made a moving last request before he passed away - for his ashes to be placed with those of his beloved daughter and granddaughter who died in the Boxing Day tsunami.

Lord Attenborough, who was one of Britain’s leading actors, was devastated by the death of his daughter Jane Holland, 49, and granddaughter Lucy, 15, in the disaster which killed around 230,000 people in 2004.

Probate records reveal that the Labour peer who died aged 90, left a net estate of £1.5m in the UK and a request in his will that he be cremated.

He asked for a third of his ashes to be ‘interred in casket together with or alongside’ the ashes of his daughter and granddaughter in a vault at St Mary Magdalene church, Richmond, Surrey.

The vault containing the ashes is under a flagstone with an inscription in memory of the pair on the floor of the nave of the 16th century church.

The church is only a short distance from the £11.5m house where Lord Attenborough - the director of Oscar-winning film Gandhi and the brother of wildlife guru David Attenborough - lived for many years with his wife Sheila.

Lord Attenborough, who read a lesson at the national memorial service for tsunami victims at St Paul’s Cathedral in May 2005, described the Indian Ocean tsunami as “the worst day of my life”.

Mrs Holland, who was a charity arts officer, and her daughter Lucy, died when their private villa in Khao Lak, southern Thailand, was destroyed by giant waves caused by an underwater earthquake while they were on holiday.

Read more: Richard Attenborough's moving last wishes

Her husband Michael, a shipbroker, and actor son Samuel escaped because they were playing golf at the time on a course a mile or so inland with other male friends and their children.

Mrs Holland’s mother-in-law Audrey, 81, who was on holiday with them, died in the disaster, but her other daughter Alice, then 17, who was also in the villa, suffered serious injuries and survived.

Lord Attenborough, who appeared in 60 films and directed a dozen others during his career which spanned six decades, left the bulk of his estate in trust for his wife of 69 years.