Full names: Sadie Cunningham (left) and McKayla Hooper (right)

From the 2017 film Tragedy Girls

Played by Brianna Hildebrand and Alexandra Shipp respectively

These two are the epitome of two high school besties. They love to hang out, text each other, take selfies together, hang out with the popular kids, talk about the cute boys they date, brutally murder people… Oh, yeah. I guess that’s a bit of a deviation. The premise of the film is that McKayla and Sadie are trying to make themselves famous by causing a school tragedy and surviving it. They show no concern for anyone other than each other and are willing to kill anyone just for fame.

McKayla: Look, we’re about to graduate and go to college, and we haven’t even started our first killing spree. Is that what you want?

Sadie: Of course not.

[SPOILERS BELOW; SPOILER-FREE VERSION HERE]

They’re extremely callous to the murders they commit and would be shameless about their cruelty if it were socially acceptable. It’s likely that they don’t even care about their own families. At the beginning of the film, they’re trying to dismember a body and they don’t even see it as a problem. McKayla even starts talking about how scared the girl was like it’s a joke while holding her decapitated head! Killing people has the same amount of emotional weight to them as choosing the right Instagram filter. Even when it seems like Sadie cares about Jordan, she doesn’t hesitate to kill him when he figures out they’re killers.

One especially discomforting thing about them is how easy it is for them to appear like normal teenage girls. Like the joke I made at the beginning of this profile, they do all those things just like other girls. They have flawless masks of sanity and even their boyfriends don’t pick up on their true nature until it’s too late for them to do anything. It helps that they see murder as casually as tweeting. They can also use this superficial charm to manipulate people whenever it’s necessary. Not only that, but they end up tricking a girl into being bait for a(nother) serial killer. When she dies, they express no concern about it and only express glee when their plan goes well.

Both of them happen to have different ends of the sociopathy spectrum. Sadie (being on the high-functioning end) appears to be a psychopath since she’s more calculating and cunning with her murders. She considers the consequences of her actions to make sure they don’t get caught and look like normal girls. McKayla, on the other hand, appears to be more of a sociopath with her poor impulse control. She’s rather hotheaded and doesn’t tend to think things through (being a low-functioning example). The best show of this is when McKayla mocks the death of Jordan’s mother and Sadie chides her for it. However, this is only because they killed her and Sadie’s making sure she doesn’t give them away.

The curious thing about them is that the reason they’re like this is… completely unknown! They weren’t abused as children, were never bullied, had normal families that loved them and pretty much led normal lives aside from their hobby of murder. The film goes through great pains to push this point. For all we know, they were born like this. While Sadie had a pretty easy time getting into murder, McKayla wasn’t comfortable with her first time murdering someone. However, she did get over it by the time the film begins. And when was that first time they murdered people? When they were children. Even though they had great parents and otherwise normal lives, they ended up becoming remorseless murderers.