Rasheed Wallace lasted all of 42 minutes with the Atlanta Hawks.

Wallace, 30, was traded Thursday to the Detroit Pistons after playing one game with the Hawks, who acquired him from Portland on Feb. 9.

Although he totalled 20 points, six rebounds and five blocked shots, the volatile power forward's $17 million US contract was too rich for Atlanta's blood, prompting Thursday's three-way trade involving Detroit and the Boston Celtics.

"We clearly feel like he's a guy that can fit," Pistons president of basketball operations Joe Dumars said. "We think he's a guy that can come in and give us some juice.

"We'll make it very clear when he gets here that we'd like to have him here and that we'd like for there to be a long-term relationship."

The transaction saw the Hawks peddle Wallace to the Pistons for centre Zeljko Rebraca, guard Bob Sura and a first-round pick.

Detroit also dealt guards Lindsey Hunter and Chucky Atkins, a first-rounder and cash to the Celtics, who then shipped forward Chris Mills to the Hawks and guard Mike James to the Pistons.

RELATED:

Player bio: Rasheed Wallace

Player bio: Zeljko Rebraca

Player bio: Bob Sura

Player bio: Lindsey Hunter

Player bio: Chucky Atkins

Player bio: Chris Mills

Player bio: Mike James

While Atlanta now has approximately $20 million US in salary-cap space, Detroit boasts Mehmet Okur sandwiched between the two Wallaces, Ben and Rasheed, up front, making it a legitimate contender in the NBA Eastern Conference.

"It gives us a real shot to compete at the highest level in the NBA right now," Dumars said. "The fact that we didn't have to break up our team and we were able to add the guy we did, it made it a no-brainer move for us.

"It created ($10 million US in) cap space and we didn't mess with our core, so it was a great deal for us."

Wallace is averaging 17.1 points per game, his lowest output since 1999-00, as well as 6.6 rebounds, 2.5 assists, 1.7 blocked shots and 37.3 minutes through 45 games.

Yet for all his faults and questionable temperament, he remains an impact player.

"We know about all the issues," Dumars said. "We feel this is a guy who can help us make a run when it comes to playoff time.

"We've said for a while now that we wanted to add an impact player.

"And we feel he's the type of guy who can impact our team."

Even so, Wallace set an NBA record with 41 technical fouls three years ago and, last season, was suspended seven games for threatening an official.

"I don't think you've ever seen him have issues with his coach or with his teammates," Dumars said. "His issues have always been with officiating and getting upset about calls.

"This is not some volatile team that he's coming into. Or some shaky characters.

"I think he's going to be surrounded by high-character guys. It's going to be a great environment for him to be in."

Prior to his one-game stint with Atlanta, Wallace spent all but his rookie NBA campaign with Portland, who acquired him along with Mitchell Butler from Washington for Rod Strickland and Harvey Grant on July 15, 1996.

Wallace was selected fourth overall by the Bullets in the 1995 NBA Draft.

The North Carolina product has averaged 16.1 points, 6.7 rebounds, 1.9 assists, 1.2 blocks and 34.7 minutes in 610 NBA games (552 starts).