Thandie Newton is one of the top actresses in the world. She has starred in several films such as Mission Impossible 2, Crash, For Coloured Girls, and Beloved.

Who is Thandie Newton – the woman, not just the actress? While she is a household name in the entertainment industry, there is more to her than just acting. Here is more about her childhood to her ethnicity, royalty roots, family, career, and net worth.

Thandie Newton profile summary

Name: Melanie Thandiwe Newton

Date of birth: November 6, 1972 (48 years)

Place of birth: London, United Kingdom

Education: Downing College, Cambridge

Profession: Actress

Husband: Oliver Ol Parker (married 1998 - present)

Early life

Thandie Newton (real Melanie Thandiwe Newton) was born on November 6, 1972, in London, United Kingdom. There had been rumours that her birthplace is in Zambia. However, this is not true; her parents lived and worked in Zambia but visited London.

Thandie Newton is of Zimbabwean and British ancestry. Her mother is of Shona ethnicity - one of the largest ethnic tribes in Zimbabwe – while her father is of British descent.

Thandie spent three years as a child in Zambia, where her parents worked in the healthcare sector. However, her parents would later move back to England – with her father taking up the family business. She then spent the rest of her childhood in Penzance, Cornwall.

Thandie Newton attended St. Mary’s Roman Catholic school and later a private school – The School of Claire – in Penzance. She has admitted to feeling out of place while growing up, especially while attending catholic school. To start with, she was a black girl with African roots attending an all-white school. She was also an atheist in a Catholic school operated by nuns.

Growing up in Penzance was not easy for Thandie, despite the beautiful environment. She was a victim of racial abuse by bullies – the town was primarily white in racial composition. She also faced a lot of pressure to fit in. For example, her name Thandiwe – an African name meaning 'beloved' - was 'whitewashed' to a more western version – Thandie. It is only recently that she has reclaimed her real name.

While growing up, Thandiwe attended Tring School for the Performing Arts, where she studied dance. Later, after finishing her secondary education, she enrolled at Downing College in Cambridge. In 1995, she graduated with a Social Anthropology degree from the institution.

Career

Thandiwe started her career in the film industry in 1991, with her debut role in the movie Flirting. She would later land another role in 1994, acting alongside Tom Cruise and Brad Pitt in the film Interview with the Vampire. However, her breakthrough came in 1995 when she played the role of Sally Hemings in Jefferson’s film in Paris.

Following her Jefferson in Paris role, Thandie was cast in the filmed Beloved as a titular character. She played alongside other top stars – Danny Glover and Oprah Winfrey. Later, she would land another role in Mission Impossible 2 and several other films.

Aside from the big screen, Thandie Newton also landed roles in television shows. Her first significant TV role was in 2003, where she played the character Makemba Likasu in ER. Other prominent TV roles she has had include Rogue (2013), The Slap (2015), and her most memorable one, Westworld (from 2016).

There are several other Thandie newton movies and TV shows. They include:

The Young Americans

In Your Dreams

The Journey of the August King

The Leading Man

Gridlock’d

Besieged

It Was an Accident

The Truth About Charlie

Shade

The Chronicles of Riddick

W. (as Condoleezza Rice)

Retreat

American Dad

Line of Duty

Big Mouth

RuPaul’s Drag Race

Vanishing on the 7th Street

Gringo

2012

The Pursuit of Happiness

Solo: A Star Wars Story

Good Deeds

Half a Yellow Sun

Family

Thandie Newton is a recognizable public figure, especially following her successful career in the film industry. But, what is her personal life like? Below is a look at her family life – from parents and siblings to husband and children.

Parents and siblings

Thandiwe Newton’s parents are Nyasha Newton (birth name Grace Nyasha Jombe) and Nick Newton. Nyasha is an African princess, the daughter of the Shona tribe chieftain from Zimbabwe.

She migrated to London in 966, where she worked as a nurse. Nick Newton, on the other hand, was a rock band guitarist. After his band disbanded, he moved to London to find work, where he met Nyasha.

Aside from Thandiwe, her parents also gave birth to another child – and her younger brother – Jamie Newton. Unlike Thandie, he was born in Zambia before their parents moved back to England.

Is Zoe Saldana related to Thandie Newton?

Zoe Saldana is another top actress; people mistake her for Thandie or her sister due to their likeness. They are so alike that Zoe Saldana admitted to her mother confusing her with the Westworld star.

However, Thandie and Zoe are not related by blood despite their appearance. They met the first time on the red carpet, which was awkward. However, they have since become friends and contact each other regularly. Zoe even went as far as to say they have become 'sisters'.

Husband and children

Is Thandiwe married? Yes. Thandie Newton’s husband is Oliver 'Ol' Parker, a British film screenwriter, director, and producer. He is best known for his work in Loved UP, In Your Dreams, Imagine Me & You (2005) and Mamma Mia! Here We Go Again, amongst others.

Thandie and Parker met on the set of BBC’s TV show In Your Dreams – where he was a scriptwriter. They got married in 1998 and have been together since then (23 years), making theirs one of the longest celebrity marriages.

The couple has three children together – Nico Parker, Ripley Parker, and Booker Jombe Parker. All of Thandie Newton’s children have unique names. Her daughters, Ripley and Nico, are named after a movie character (Ellen Ripley from Alien Films) and a singer (Nico). Her son’s name (Jombe), on the other hand, is a tribute to her African roots.

One of Thandie Newton’s daughter – Nico – has also followed her parent’s footsteps in the film industry. She is a budding actress who got her debut role in the 2019 Walt Disney film Dumbo. She also landed a second role in the 2020 TV show The Third Day.

Net worth and earnings

What is Thandie Newton’s net worth? She is one of the most successful actresses with an estimated net worth of $14 million.

Thandie’s wealth comes from her long and successful acting career, which has seen her receive large paychecks. One of the most prosperous ventures is her role at Westworld, which sees her earn $250,000 per episode.

Awards and recognitions

Her long career and powerful and dynamic performances have seen Thandie land several awards and recognitions. The most notable ones are:

2018 Primetime Emmy Award for her role in Westworld

2017 and 2020 Black Reel awards for her role in Westworld

2006 BAFTA Film Award for her role in Crash

2005 ACCA award for her role in Crash

2019 Critics Choice Award for her role in Westworld

2006 Critics Choice Award for her role in Crash

2001 and 2006 Empire Awards for her roles in Mission Impossible 2 and Crash

2017 Golden Derby Award for her role in Westworld

Aside from these awards, Thandie Newton is also an Officer of the Order of the British Empire. She received recognition in 2019 for her work in the film and charity sector.

Thandie Newton is currently one of the most successful actresses. She has risen to a star from a challenging childhood where she was a victim of racial abuse and bigotry. Today, she is a recognized household name in the entertainment industry, with several roles and awards and recognition to her name.

Are you trying to find out more about Elizabeth Hanks? Tuko.co.ke featured an interesting piece about the American writer and actress who has composed several great editorials.

She is the only daughter of the famous actor Tom Hanks and his former wife, Samantha Lewes. Did you know that the actress was born on May 17, 1982, and is 38 years old? She also started acting at a very young age and has created a lucrative career in the industry.

Source: TUKO.co.ke