Thandie Newton Talks ‘Good Deeds’By Wilson Morales

February 20, 2012

Coming out this week in theaters is Tyler Perry’s latest film, ‘Good Deeds,’ his first non-Madea film where he’s the leading character.

Starring along with him are familiar faces from his previous films such as Thandie Newton, Gabrielle Union, Brian White and Phylicia Rashad. Also included in the film are Rebecca Romijn, Jamie Kennedy, Eddie Cibrian, Jordenn Thompson and Beverly Johnson.

Perry plays businessman Wesley Deeds is jolted out of his scripted life when he meets Lindsey (played by Thandie Newton), a single mother who works on the cleaning crew in his office building.

Known for her roles in ‘Flirting,’ Besieged,’ ‘Mission: Impossible II,’ ‘Crash,’ ‘The Pursuit of Happyness,’ and ‘W,’ this is Newton’s second outing in a Perry film after giving an incredible performance in ‘For Colored Girls,’ the film adaptation of Ntozake Shange’s 1975 stage play ‘For Colored Girls Who Have Considered Suicide When the Rainbow Is Enuf.’

Blackfilm.com caught up with Newton as she spoke about her character and working with Tyler Perry.

How would you describe Lindsey’s character?

Thandie Newton: Strung out, but I think she’s an educated hard-working person and she knew that her education would be her ticket to a better life and she was half way through her medical studies when her husband tragically died. She wasn’t able to continue her studies and money became an issue when taking care of her child. She had to give up her dream. She didn’t have any qualifications other than being a janitor. That’s the only thing that was available to her at the time. This is a story that is based to what’s happening now in 2012 in that it’s incredibly difficult for people to work, Unemployment is high and the economy is in trouble all around the world. It’s very hard for people to make end’s meat, so if one calamity happens in your life, it can snowball into homelessness. I don’t think it was something she ever expected as do you, and me.

Had you done any research on the homeless?

TN: I have. I’m a member of a community that has homeless people. There’s an organization in England called Shelter and I contribute to that. There are certain guidelines on how to contribute to the homeless rather than giving them money. I also worked on a film called ‘The Pursuit of Happyness,’ which is based on a true story based on Chris Gardner, who was living in shelters and was homeless with his son. I read Chris Gardner’s book and got some insight as to the life that they led even though my character didn’t have the same background or that story arc. If you are a member of any society, you are going to invest some time to what you can do to help people who are in this situation because we are all in this together.

What was the dram to taking on this film?

TN: To work with Tyler (Perry) again. He had told me that there was a movie that he had written for me and would love me to do it. I said yes before even reading the script because I really enjoyed the experience of working with him. He also wanted to make a departure from his other acting work and wanted to play a more dramatic leading man. He specifically said that he was looking for support in that and it was a big deal for him to try something new. He knew that our rapport and chemistry was going to help him achieve his goals. To strip himself down to a multidimensional character and that was exciting.

How was working with Tyler when he’s wearing so many hats in the film?

TN: Well, Tyler is a writer, actor, and director and he seamlessly floats between all of those roles at every moment. If I had an issue about a line, I would talk to him as the director. If I had a question about the logistics of the story line, I would talk to him because he’s the writer, and if I was feedback on a scene, I would talk to him because he was the actor in the film. He’s so calm and able and generous. I never felt that I couldn’t do that. He was absolutely available at any moment to satisfy whatever we needed. Tyler tends to attract people who don’t have an ego and who are not self-absorbed. I’ve worked with him twice now and there’s a real camaraderie and incredible support. With his films, all of the actors and crew are flying in formation like geese. He has that kind of unity because he’s working hard than anyone else and we see that. He’s a real captain and inspirational leader.

How was working with Jordenn Thompson?

TN: Jordenn is a honeybee. She’s adorable and completely delightful. She’s incredibly friendly and innocent and enthusiastic and loved being there. She’s a real professional. Her mom Lacey was always there. When my children were visiting Atlanta, we hung out with Lacey and Jordenn’s grandmother. She trusted me to play her mom on screen. There was never any concern of violating this little girl’s privacy. We all took great care of her.

Your character is also good at riding a motorcycle. Can you ride one?

TN: Honestly, even Tyler couldn’t ride a bike before the movie. He had to take lessons. It’s not my desire to ride a bike, and I don’t want to speed down a highway. That was fun though. The biggest acting for me on this film was to look enthusiastic riding a motorcycle.

Are you set to do ‘Half of a Yellow Sun’?

TN: I hope so. We’re still waiting to see if the lead actors who the producers are looking at can fit it in their schedule. It’s an amazing level and I would love to visit Nigeria. I’ve never been there and I’m always up for exploring another part of the world. I hope it does happen.

‘Good Deeds’ opens nationwide on Feb.24