Moji Afolayan is a Nigerian actress, filmmaker and producer who has made significant contributions to the Yoruba film industry, the so-called “Yoruba of Nigerian cinema”.

She comes from a family with a strong background in the Nigerian entertainment industry, her father being the renowned theatre and film director Adeyemi Afolayan.

You are watching: Moji Afolayan Biography: Movies, Net Worth, Husband, Siblings, Career, Age, Children, Pictures, Facebook

Mogi Afolayan has starred in many Yoruba movies and has also ventured into filmmaking. With her hard work and talent, she has built a brilliant career and has been recognized for her role in the film industry.

contour

Full name: Mosunmola Afolayan

Stage name: Moji Afolayan

Date of Birth: April 5, 1969

Age: 55

Birthplace: Kwara State, Nigeria

Nationality: Nigeria

Occupation: Actress and film producer

Height: Unknown

Parents: Adeyemi Afolayan

Siblings: Kunle Afolayan, Gabriel Afolayan

Spouse: Rasak Olayiwola Ochopagogo

Children: None

Relationship: Married

Net worth: N/A

early life

Mogie Afolayan was born into a Nigerian family with a strong background in the entertainment industry. She grew up in Kwara, Nigeria, the daughter of famous film producer Adeyemi Afolayan, also known as Ade Love.

See more : Jessica Serfaty Biography: Career, Net Worth, Wiki, Husband, Children, Parents, Family, Age, Movies, Height

Growing up in such an environment, Moji’s passion for acting and filmmaking was likely sparked, laying the foundation for her glorious journey in the Nigerian film industry.

educate

There is limited public information about Mogi Afolayan’s educational background.

Profession

Moji Afolayan is a well-known figure in the Nigerian movie industry, especially in Yoruba movies, the so-called “Yoruba man of Nigerian cinema”.

She started out as an actress and has appeared in many Yoruba movies and showcased her talent in several genres including drama and comedy.

Apart from his acting career, Mogi Afolayan also ventured into film production and played a vital role in the development of the film industry.

Her dual roles as an actress and producer have elevated her to a well-respected position in the Yoruba community in the Nigerian film industry.

See more : Karen Fukuhara Biography: Age, Net Worth, Parents, Siblings, Height, Instagram, Movies, Wiki, Awards

Mogie Afolayan has become a prominent figure in the Yoruba film industry having received accolades for his acting skills and work in the Nigerian film industry.

social media

Instagram account: N/A

Facebook account: Moji Afolayan

Twitter account: N/A

personal life

Moji Afolayan is known for keeping her personal life private but it is known that she is married to fellow actor and film producer Rasaq Olayiwola Ojopagogo.

They prefer to keep their personal lives away from the public and focus on their family and successful careers in the Nigerian entertainment industry.

Filmography

Anikulapo (2022)

Yemoja (year 2011)

Forbidden Love (2023)

Arinjo (2016)

Kadara Mi (year 2004)

net worth

There is limited information about Mogie Afolayan’s net worth. She is a successful actress and film producer who is well known in Nigeria and abroad.