The Afolayans, who are one of the popular families in Nollywood, recently linked up to celebrate their mum's 80th birthday

Pictures from the event showed Moji, Kunle, Gabriel and their aunty Lola Idije, a veteran actress in lovely attires

Some of the pictures left their fans gushing, while others penned messages to the Afolayan's matriarch

Popular Yoruba actress, Moji Afolayan, recently flooded her social media timeline with lovely pictures of her and her siblings and colleagues, Kunle and Gabriel Afolayan, celebrating their mother, Omoladun Afolayan's birthday over the weekend.

Recall that their mum clocked 80 this year, and they chose to mark it in style.

Also spotted at the event was their aunt and veteran actress, Toyin Afolayan, also known as Lola Idije.

Below are some of the pictures Moji shared on her page:

Moji shared another picture of her, her brother, Gabriel, and their aunt, Lola Idije, posing for the camera with smiles.

See pictures of Kunle, Moji and some family members below:

Sharing photos on her page, Lola Idije wrote:

"At celebration of MAMA OMOLADUN AFOLAYAN 80years Happy birthday mama longlife and prosperity."

See her post below:

The Afolayans are one of the popular families in Nollywood as their late patriarch Adeyemi Afolayan, also known as Ade Love, was one of the pioneers in the Yoruba movie industry.

Internet users react

Legit.ng captured some of the reactions; see them below:

prophetessidowuolaoluwa:

"Happy birthday to mama long life and prosperity in Jesus mighty Name."

comedian_enu_osecfr:

"You’re forever loved ❤️."

ronniebabe_tossy44:

"Our wonderful daddy "Ade love" family."

funke_glayds:

"When Jesus is in the family, happy happy home, God bless you all."

Kunle Afolayan celebrates mum in style

Meanwhile, Legit.ng reported how Kunle Afolayan sweetly celebrated his mother, Omoladun Afolayan, as she clocked the milestone age of 80.

On April 3, 2023, the filmmaker took to his official Instagram page to announce his mother’s new age, to the joy of many fans.

Kunle Afolayan posted a series of photos of his mother, some showing her as a young girl and others showing her surrounded by family.

In the caption of the post, the filmmaker revealed that a big party would be thrown to celebrate his mother.

Source: Legit.ng