DIRECTOR Norman Jewison, who will soon start jumping with Universal's ver sion of “Jesus Christ Super star” in Israel, has decided to settle down there long enough to produce a movie set in the Old West. The American West. It will be called “Billy Two Hats,” and will star Gregory Peck and Desi Arnaz Jr. under the di rection of Ted Kotcheff. Alan Sharp wrote the screenplay, and Jewison will co‐produce the film with Patrick Palmer for United Artists release.

“Billy Two Hats” is, ac cording to Jewison, “a strik ingly realistic character study, as well as an action and suspense job. The story concerns an aging outlaw and a young half‐breed who are on the run from the law after holding up a bank. What is most important is that Sharp develops a touching father‐son sort of kinship be tween the two men.”

But isn't it a bit unusual to make a Western in Is rael: “The Israeli Govern ment is very eager to get film production going there and they're subsidizing about 20 per cent of ‘Billy Two Hats,’” says Jewison. “Be sides, they've built a West ern set in Tel Aviv that's as good as anything that could he done in a Holly wood studio, and they've got all those locations that look just like Arizona.”

It sounds like the perfect way to go thataway.

VAMPIRES ARE FUN?

Bill Wilson, the big boss at CTF Productions, feels he has a red‐hot movie prospect in “The Purple Tour.” The film, a comedy dealing with vampires, has been written by Lee Minoff and will be directed by Alain Jessua, with location work sched uled for Washington, D. C., Bucharest and Transylvania. “There'll be plenty of bats In our movie, but definitely no pigeons,” says Wilson with a backward laugh at his first, low‐flying flick, “Sidelong Glances of Pigeon Kicker.”

WHAT A WOMAN!

Remember “Woman of the Year,” that 1942 gem in which Katharine Hepburn was taught by Spencer Tracy that a woman's place was in the kitchen? Well, before long you'll be remembering “The Year of the Women,” a film which may teach us that a woman's place is in politics. The first movie to be made by poet‐novelist Sandra Hochman, “The Year of the Women” was shot at the Democratic National Con vention in Miami and it fea tures such superstars as Shir ley MacLaine, Shirley Chis holm and Bella Abzug. Ms. Hochman's co‐producer is Porter Bibb and the camera women were Claudia Weili and Juliane Wang.

“There will be many in terviews in the film,” says director Hochman, “as well as some fantasy scenes. The vast amount of footage is now being edited down to about two hours and we hope to have the film ready for release in time for the No vember elections.”

May the best Ms. win!

PASOLINI'S ‘NIGHTS’

Pier Paolo Pasolini, the Italian director who brought naughtily new life to a film version of “Decameron” last year and whose “Canterbury Tales” won the top award at the recent Berlin Festival, has not finished frolicking with the classics. He will next direct “1001 Nights,” which will be produced by Alberto Grimaldi for distri bution by United Artists. Shooting—to begin in Octo ber — is to take place in Yemen, Tunisia and India.

SELECTED SHORTS

Hope Clarke, one of the delights of Off Broadway's “Don't Bother Me, I Can't Cope,” will co‐star with Ray mond St. Jacques in “Book of Numbers.”. . . Roman Polanski will direct Marcello Mastroianni and Lotte Len ya in “What?”. . . Gene Kelly will co‐star with Liv Ullmann in “Forty Carats.”