Sequel time!!

Derick & I had a blast revisiting the first HSM movie in season 1 of High School Musical: The Musical: The Series so we're excited to dive into season 2, but I'm especially excited because my favorite HSM movie is the second one! I can't wait for the summer vibes and to hear them sing all my favorite songs like Bet On It, Work This Out, and I Don't Dance!!!!!

I mean they did High School Musical in the first season, so they'll do High School Musical 2 in the second... right?

All weird things must come to an end...

Well The Boys and girls, it's time for the fourth and final season of M. Night Shyamalan's grand vision Servant. 100 episodes really felt like only 40, huh? I guess time flies when you have no fucking clue what's going on!

Just want to thank Jared for making these some of the most fun tracks to record, you for watching along with us, and Tim Cook for making it all possible.

Another year, another post-apocalyptic HBO series about a man forced to look after a young girl...

I'm not a gamer, but even I know that The Last of Us is regarded as one of the best games of all time. Now that it's been adapted into a television series, I figured this was my chance to discover what all the hype was about!

Having watched it... I'm still not sure.

I'm sure it's a great game, but this series feels a bit too similar to other movies, shows, and even games that I kiiinda liked more. Station Eleven, anyone?!

That said, one episode in particular absolutely destroyed me. You may or may not be able to guess which.

Hats and solo cups at the ready!

Daddy's home in season 3 of Outer Banks! That's right, it turns out that John B's missing dad is not only alive and well, but still hunting treasure. Like father, like pogue!

My sister Jill is back for one of our absolute favorite series, and the best part?? This is the first season of Outer Banks that we can watch comfortably knowing it isn't the last! You can't kill a pogue!!!

Bring on the Bartha!

I can't believe we've got more mysteries to solve in the new Disney+ series National Treasure: Edge of History! Micah is back to find out if Nic Cage shows up for even a second, but it's not looking good...

Wait... where the hell is Bartha?