What is he best known for?

The fields of study he is best known for:

Gene

DNA

Gene expression

His main research concerns Molecular biology, Gene, Enhancer, Cell biology and Transcription. His research integrates issues of DNA, Transcription factor, Cellular differentiation and T-cell receptor in his study of Molecular biology. His Gene product, Polymerase, Transcriptional regulation and RNA polymerase II holoenzyme study in the realm of Gene connects with subjects such as Consensus sequence.

While the research belongs to areas of Enhancer, Pierre Ferrier spends his time largely on the problem of Chromatin, intersecting his research to questions surrounding Cell nucleus, Epigenetics, Histone and H3K4me3. The Cell biology study combines topics in areas such as Promoter and Genetics. His Promoter study incorporates themes from Chromatin conformation, Directionality, Nucleosome, CpG site and GC-content.

His most cited work include:

The lack of chromosomal protein Hmg1 does not disrupt cell growth but causes lethal hypoglycaemia in newborn mice. (451 citations)

Altered T cell development in mice with a targeted mutation of the CD3-epsilon gene. (347 citations)

H3K4 tri-methylation provides an epigenetic signature of active enhancers. (233 citations)

What are the main themes of his work throughout his whole career to date?

Molecular biology, Genetics, Gene, T-cell receptor and Enhancer are his primary areas of study. He has researched Molecular biology in several fields, including Cellular differentiation, T cell, Transcription factor, DNA and Regulation of gene expression. Pierre Ferrier interconnects Signal transduction and Immunology in the investigation of issues within Transcription factor.

His study in T-cell receptor is interdisciplinary in nature, drawing from both Gene rearrangement, Cell biology and Recombination, VJ recombination. His Enhancer research is multidisciplinary, incorporating elements of Chromatin, Chromatin remodeling, Transgene and Regulatory sequence. He studied Promoter and CpG site that intersect with Directionality, Chromatin conformation, GC-content and Nucleosome.

He most often published in these fields:

Molecular biology (59.50%)

Genetics (47.11%)

Gene (42.98%)

What were the highlights of his more recent work (between 2011-2020)?

Cell biology (46.28%)

Gene (42.98%)

Chromatin (41.32%)

In recent papers he was focusing on the following fields of study:

His primary areas of study are Cell biology, Gene, Chromatin, Enhancer and Genetics. His research in Cell biology intersects with topics in Central tolerance, Epigenetics, Antigen and Autoimmune regulator. His research in Gene is mostly focused on Transcription.

The concepts of his Transcription study are interwoven with issues in Promoter, Directionality, CpG site and GC-content. He studies Enhancer RNAs which is a part of Enhancer. His Enhancer RNAs research includes elements of Molecular biology, RNA polymerase II and Cellular differentiation.

Between 2011 and 2020, his most popular works were:

CpG islands and GC content dictate nucleosome depletion in a transcription-independent manner at mammalian promoters (167 citations)

CpG islands and GC content dictate nucleosome depletion in a transcription-independent manner at mammalian promoters (167 citations)

CpG islands and GC content dictate nucleosome depletion in a transcription-independent manner at mammalian promoters (167 citations)

In his most recent research, the most cited papers focused on:

Gene

DNA

Gene expression

His primary areas of investigation include Cell biology, Transcription factor, Immunology, Immune system and Transcription. His Cell biology research includes themes of MAFB, Enhancer, Molecular biology, Medulla and T-cell tolerance induction. His studies deal with areas such as RNA polymerase II, Transcriptional regulation and Polymerase as well as Molecular biology.

The various areas that Pierre Ferrier examines in his Transcription factor study include Embryonic stem cell and Cellular differentiation. His biological study spans a wide range of topics, including Interferon, Signal transduction and STAT1. As part of his inquiry into Gene and Genetics, he is doing Transcription research.