Katy Perry arrived at a recording studio in Los Angeles on Thursday in her first public sighting since the day after her non-jury real estate trial began against dying Army veteran Carl Wescott over a $14.2M mansion in Montecito.

The American Idol judge - turning 39 next month - was retrieving items from the trunk of her hatchback including a clipboard, two bottles of water, and papers.

Katy (born Katheryn Hudson) sported a white halter tank tucked into beige sweatpants, a matching hoodie, baseball cap, and light-pink Birkenstock sandals.

Perry - who joined by her teacup poodle Nugget - was noticeably toting a small brown Hermès Birkin bag, which was created 1984 in honor of the late Jane Birkin and can cost anywhere between $5K-$500K.

Back in 2020, the 13-time Grammy nominee and her fiancée of four years - The Lord of the Rings alum Orlando Bloom - put their business manager Bernie Gudvi in charge of purchasing an eight-bedroom, 11-bathroom marital mansion in Montecito.

But the 84-year-old home owner - who had only bought the 9,285sqft property two months earlier - said he signed Gudvi's contract while under the influence of painkillers for back surgery, which makes the deal 'voidable' according to his lawyers.

Carl - who suffers from Huntington's disease - was 'unable to understand the nature and probable consequences of his actions' and plans on living there 'for the rest of his life.'

Wescott physically cannot attend this week's trial in California Superior Court because his disease has left him permanently mentally incapacitated and bedridden, but Katy - who's after $2,669,682 in damages - has been asked to take the stand.

'Okay, so we're on trial day two,' Carl's daughter-in-law Kameron Westcott said Thursday via Instastory.

'The other side is basically saying that he was in the right state of mind to sign the doc he signed. And, again, he is 84 years old. At the time, he still had Huntington's disease. He had dementia within that you have impulsivity. You have a lot of impulsive behavior.'

The Real Housewives of Dallas alum continued: 'And that's just part of the disease you go through. So after he signed it he realized, "Oh my god! I didn't mean to sign that!" Again, we're just here fighting for his justice.

'I just hope in the future this doesn't happen to anyone else's parents. It's just horrible to have to go though all this. We have to protect our elders. We have to be a little bit more kind to our elders. They might look like they're in the right state of mind, but it doesn't mean they are.'

Perry's latest Instagram post received comments pleading with her to 'leave the sick veteran and his home alone' and another warning: 'Disgusting how you like to battle the elderly in court as a hobby. One day it will be you on the other end.'

The Instagram user was referring to the last time the Santa Barbara-born pop diva - who's worth an estimated $400M fortune - battled it out in court with senior citizens as she won a $15M trial against Catholic nuns over the sale of their convent in 2018.

Sister Holzman collapsed and died, at age 89, during a court appearance and fellow Sister Callanan stated that Katy 'has blood on her hands.'

In other news, Hasbro just announced that Perry has a voiceover role as dressmaker Ms. Leopard in its three-part Peppa Pig Wedding Party Special, which premieres next spring on Channel 5/Nick Jr.

But first, the Coronation crooner - who gets 51.3M monthly listeners on Spotify - is next scheduled to kick off the fifth leg of her 80-date, $46M-grossing Play residency at The Theatre at Resorts World Las Vegas on October 4.