octopush in English dictionary

octopush

Meanings and definitions of "octopush"

noun

(Britain)

The sport of underwater hockey.

more

Grammar and declension of octopush

octopush (uncountable)

more

Sample sentences with "octopush"

Declension Stem

Originally called "Octopush" (and still known locally by that name in the United Kingdom today) the original rules called for teams of eight players (hence "octo-"), a bat reminiscent of a tiny shuffleboard stick called a "pusher" (hence the "-push"), an uncoated lead puck called a "squid", and a goal known at first as a "cuttle" but soon thereafter a "gulley".

Those sports includes ones that I have never heard of previously, such as Octopush, which is a form of underwater hockey, as well as water polo, snorkelling, kayaking, and even pool disco nights—that is more for your age group than mine, but I am sure that we would want to encourage that, would we not?

Apart from 'pusher' and to a lesser extent 'Octopush' much of this original terminology is now consigned to history.

The first Octopush competition between clubs was a three-way tournament between teams from Southsea, Bournemouth and Brighton in early 1955.

The UK's Octopush used a small paddle to push the puck whilst the South Africans used a mini hockey stick.

It originated in England in 1954 when Alan Blake, the founder of the newly formed Southsea Sub-Aqua Club, invented the game he called Octopush as a means of keeping the club's members interested and active over the cold winter months when open-water diving lost its appeal.

In Asia, the game first came to the Philippines in the late 1970s through the scuba diving community that became aware of Octopush.

Underwater Hockey (UWH), also known as Octopush (mainly in the United Kingdom) is a globally played limited-contact sport in which two teams compete to manoeuvre a puck across the bottom of a swimming pool into the opposing team's goal by propelling it with a hockey stick (pusher).

It’s called Octopush.

Authors