During campaign and election cycles, many politicians say they are “Pro-Life,” “pro-Second Amendment,” and “pro-Liberty” in an effort to win the hearts of primary voters.

As the largest full-time Pro-Life lobbying team in Texas, Texas Right to Life is in a unique position to call bluff on those wolves in sheep’s clothing who are trying to use the lives of the most innocent to win elections.

The number one obstructionist to Pro-Life policies in the entire Texas Legislature is Representative Byron Cook, current chairman of the powerful House Committee on State Affairs. Unfortunately, Cook plans to announce his re-election this Friday, Oct. 30th.

Texas Right to Life is not alone in shuddering at the thought of what another term of Cook's anti-Life power play will do to the preborn, the disabled, and the elderly in Texas. In Cook’s home county of Navarro, activist Jackie King recently penned a letter asking for help in rallying against Cook's re-election efforts. Join us, Jackie, and concerned Texans in telling Byron Cook that since he has betrayed the Pro-Life movement for political games, his time in the Texas House of Representatives has come to a close.

Cook's re-election is not just an issue for Navarro County. His re-election is a threat to many life-saving policies important to Texas voters across the state — which includes protecting innocent human Life.

Cook publicly advocated for keeping a loophole in Texas law that allows preborn children who may have a disability to be the victims of late abortions. He personally penned and circulated a letter against Pro-Life efforts and legislation that would have protected these preborn children. He used the power of his committee chairmanship to pull a bill out of an actual Pro-Life committee and into his own committee, killing the legislation that would have prevented our insurance premiums from funding abortions.

He even refused to hold a hearing on a Priority Pro-Life measure that would prevent hospitals from issuing Do-Not-Resuscitate orders without patient or family consent.

Jackie will not stand alone. Our entire office will be coming to heed the call in Corsicana – the lives of preborn babies, pregnant moms, and ailing patients demand nothing less. Will you join us in standing with her?

When: Friday, October 30, 4:00 – 6:30 p.m.

Where: Meet at the The Remington in Corsicana

122 West 3rd Street

Corsicana, Texas 75110

Read Jackie’s letter below and let us know if you can make it: prolife@texasrighttolife.com

A little more information:

There is free parking all around the building. Sandwiches and drinks will be provided to all participants, so let us know if you’re coming. Vans will transport participants from The Remington to the outskirts of the Corsicana Country Club where Cook’s kickoff will be held and will bring you back.

Dress accordingly: There is a 60% chance of rain. Winds 20mph are expected and the temperature will be in the 70s. Bring umbrellas, rain coats, and rubber boots.

——————————————————————————————————————————————

Political Advertising Paid for by Texas Right to Life Political Action Committee