Empire of the Ants, Dir. Bert I Gordon, 89 mins, Talking Pictures TV

Back in the late ‘seventies, I was fascinated by the posters advertising this film; it was like forbidden fruit. I was deemed too young to go see it, but it looked so impossibly cool. How could a modern-day film (this was the age of Star Wars, after all) fail to be utterly fantastic with a premise so close to that of the 1950s b-movie classic Them! (1954), a film that scared me shitless on late-night TV? Well, it has taken me almost fifty years but I have finally found out: its more rotten fruit than forbidden fruit, in all honesty (with the irony that here in the UK it was heavily cut on release to get an ‘A’ certificate anyway).

Marilyn Fraser (Joan Collins, perfectly cast here as another uber-bitch) is staging an elaborate con selling bogus real estate lots for a ‘luxury beachfront complex’ called Dreamland Shores, in the Florida everglades. Its really worthless swampland but she’s trying to convince her prospective buyers that its the opportunity of a lifetime. Unfortunately for Marilyn and her nine gullible guests, some unscrupulous buggers have been dumping radioactive waste into the sea nearby, and one of the barrels has washed up on the beach at Dreamland Shore, infecting a local ant colony. Marylin and her marks are soon attacked by giant ants and they are picked off, one by one as they flee across the swampland, until a few survivors finally reach the safety of a town- but is the town as safe as it looks? Is it instead Ground Zero of… the Empire of the Ants?

Well, its pretty bad. But there is a charm about it, mostly from seeing so many actors who I remembered seeing on TV during the ‘seventies and ‘eighties – people like Robert Pine, Albert Salmi, Pamela Susan Hoop, John David Carson, and of course, Joan Collins. These were wooden professionals who had no pretensions of superstardom (well, except for Collins, anyway), or illusions that they were in some Great Movie – I certainly doubt they thought they had been cast in the next Jaws-monster hit. No, these guys were hardboiled thespians who didn’t blink at terrible dialogue or cheap sets, they’d sell it and sell it hard to the audience and you rather have to love them for it, especially as they are here selling horrible ant puppets and alternatively reacting to ghastly-quality process photography of real-life ants blown-up and dubbed into on-set footage with all the technical quality of Ray Harryhausen’s worst front-projection nightmares. My goodness, you really have to feel sorry for every one of them; the things some actors have to do to make a buck. Its almost a shame that thanks to VHS, DVD and all these television channels airing any old junk that films like this can’t fade into obscurity.