Star Soldier (スターソルジャー Sutā Sorujā) is a shoot 'em up video game developed and published by Hudson Soft for the Family Computer and the MSX. The player pilots the starship "Caesar", travelling through space stations occupied by powerful supercomputers known as "Starbrains" who threaten the galactic empire. Star Soldier greatly resembles the earlier arcade game Star Force.

Mobile versions were released on January 26, 2001, in Japan as Star Soldier Special+ in 2004, Star Soldier SP Arcade in 2005 and Star Soldier Fukkoku-Ban (スターソルジャー 復刻版 Sutāsorujā fukkoku-ban) in 2008, they were also released for Palm OS on November 2001 in Japan and iOS on January 4, 2012 in United States.

Star Soldier has spawned numerous sequels, starting with Super Star Soldier on the PC Engine. It was ported to the Game Boy Advance in 2004 in Japan as part of the Famicom Mini series, and to the Wii's Virtual Console in the Japanese and North American regions in July 2007. An enhanced remake of the game was released on PlayStation Portable only in Japan in 2005.

The game was re-released by Konami on 3DS Virtual Console on November 14, 2012 in Japan, August 15, 2013 in PAL Version and September 24, 2013 in North America, and the iOS Version, titled Star Soldier for GREE (スターソルジャー for GREE Sutāsorujā for GREE) on June 20, 2013 in Japan. A NES version was released for Nintendo Switch Online on April 10, 2019 in Japan and North America.

Story[]

A strange and evil presence is lurking in space. Crushing Everything in its path, destroying spaceships full of innocent people, the fearsome Starbrain is threatening the entire Galactic Empire. Starbrain, a giant computer programmed only for destruction, inhabits an enormous space station, guarded by enemy ships and robot creatures. To penetrate the station is a job for the most skillful and experienced Star Soldier: you! You'll be piloting Caesar, the fastest fighter ship in the Galactic Fleet, with an awesome arsenal of weapons at your fingertips. Only you can end the brutal Starbrain's spree of destruction, and restore peace to the galaxy!

Gameplay[]

Star Soldier's game play is very similar to its predecessor Star Force, with the player having to to fend off flying enemies and hit ground targets for extra points. Players control the Caesar, which can be upgraded to fire in five directions simultaneously.

Stages have features known as "Trap Zones", where the player can dive in the background and become protected against enemy bullets and collisions but be unable to shoot as well. The game consists of 16 stages, with a boss at the end of each. If the player fails to defeat the boss in time, it will be taken back to the midway checkpoint in the stage and be forced to play the second half of the stage again.

Enemies[]

Flying enemies[]

Ground objects[]

Bosses[]

Star Brain

Big Star Brain

Gallery[]