David Nalbandian

Argentinean Tennis Player

42 years old

Single

Full Name

David Pablo Nalbandian

Age

42

Birth date

January 1, 1982

Horoscope

Capricorn

Birth Place

Unquillo, Córdoba,Argentína

Profession

Tennis Player

Net Worth

100,000 - $1M

Marital Status

Single

Height

5' 11"

Ethnicity

White

Nationality

Argentinean

Weight

174 lb (79 kg)

Hair Color

Blonde

Eye Color

Green

Ahead, we take a look at who is David Nalbandian dating now, who has he dated, David Nalbandian’s girlfriend, past relationships and dating history. We will also examine David’s biography, facts, net worth, and much more.

Who is David Nalbandian dating?

David Nalbandian is currently single, according to our records.

The Argentinean Tennis Player was born in Unquillo, Córdoba,Argentína on January 1, 1982. Argentine tennis pro who was an 11-time ATP career-finals singles winner and a former World No. 3.

❤️ Stay updated on celebrity romance Get the latest celebrity dating news delivered straight to your inbox.

Relationship status

As of 2024, David Nalbandian’s is not dating anyone. David is 42 years old. According to CelebsCouples, David Nalbandian had at least a few relationships previously. He has not been previously engaged.

Fact: David Nalbandian is turning 43 years old in . Be sure to check out top 10 facts about David Nalbandian at FamousDetails.

About David Nalbandian’s girlfriend

David Nalbandian doesn’t have a girlfriend right now.

We strive to fact-check all dating histories and have them confirmed by our users. We use publicly available data and resources to ensure our dating stats and biographies are accurate.

Who has David Nalbandian dated?

Like most celebrities, David Nalbandian tries to keep his personal and love life private, so check back often. We will continue to update this page with new dating news and rumors.

David Nalbandian girlfriends: He had at least a few relationships previously. David Nalbandian has not been previously engaged. Information on past dates and hookups is regularly updated.

Online rumors of David Nalbandians’s dating past may vary. While it’s relatively simple to find out who’s dating David Nalbandian, it’s harder to keep track of all his flings, hookups, and breakups. It’s even harder to keep every celebrity dating page and relationship timeline up to date. If you know any new information about who has David Nalbandian dated or is dating now, please let us know.

Relationship Statistics of David Nalbandian

What is David Nalbandian marital status?

David Nalbandian is single.

How many relationships did David Nalbandian have?

David Nalbandian had at least a few relationships in the past.

How many children does David Nalbandian have?

He has no children.

Is David Nalbandian having any relationship affair?

The information is currently unavailable, but we are actively looking into it.

David Nalbandian Biography

David Nalbandian was born on a Friday, January 1, 1982 in Unquillo, Córdoba,Argentína. His birth name is David Pablo Nalbandian and he is currently 42 years old. People born on January 1 fall under the zodiac sign of Capricorn. His zodiac animal is Dog. In the Chinese zodiac, the Dog symbolizes loyalty and honesty. People born in the Year of the Dog are considered to be kind, friendly, and trustworthy.

If you believe in numerology, David’s spirit animal is Goose, his lucky day is Saturday, and his power color is Grey ⬤.

David Pablo Nalbandian is an Argentine retired professional tennis player and former World No. 3. He was runner-up at the 2002 Wimbledon Championships and the winner of the Tennis Masters Cup in 2005. He has also won two Masters 1000 events. He is the only Argentine player in history who ever reached the semi-finals or better at all four Grand Slam tournaments and reached the men’s singles final in Wimbledon.

He enjoyed sporting activities when he was young, joining his brothers in activities such as karate, horseback riding, and swimming.

Continue to the next page to see David Nalbandian net worth, popularity trend, new videos and more.

Last update: March 2024

ncG1vNJzZmivp6x7pa3ToqWgm5WhsqO%2FjZympmennbxutdJmm5qumZl6r63Lm5innJmWu26wwK2gp59f