TIME OUT EXTRA who what where when? | WHO resigned as Britain's Deputy Prime Minister in 1990? | WHAT was the name of the group that was awarded the George Cross in 1999? | WHERE was the tennis player David Nalbandian born? | WHEN did PJ Patterson become Prime Minister of Jamaica? remember when...

The following events all occurred in a year in living memory. Can you guess the year? 1 Film star Lillian Gish died 2 Toni Morrison won the Nobel Prize for Literature 3 A bill to privatise British Rail came into law 4 Suede released their self-titled debut album impossipuzzles My age plus my son's age is equal to my father's age, which is 78 years old.

When I was my son's age he was just a quarter as old as I am now.

How old am I? wordwise The word may sound familiar, but what does it mean? SAVANNA A African dance B Open grassland C Type of boxing who am I? A singer, I was born in North Carolina in 1963. My real first name is Myra. My hit singles include Professional Widow and Cornflake Girl, and my latest album was entitled Unrepentant Geraldines.

10 Questions 2019. How many films have there been in the series so far? 1 Plans for a tented pop-up bar have been unveiled for the site of which now-demolished North East landmark? 7 A derailment near which London railway station caused chaos for passengers earlier this week? 2 Who wrote the North East classic Keep Your Feet Still Geordie Hinny? 8 A childhood friend of Pink Floyd legend Syd Barrett is developing a hospital garden in his honour in which city? 3 Which famed playwright and author was murdered by his lover at their Islington flat 50 years ago this month? 9 Who replaced Sir Winston Churchill as Prime Minister in 1955? 4 "Smart career move" remarked a cynical music executive about what event 40 years ago yesterday? 10 Currer Bell was the pen-name of which classic British author? 5 Which American player won the US PGA golf tournament on Sunday? 6 Daniel Craig has confirmed he will play James Bond in a film due out in answers Bronte.

Charlotte 10 Eden; Anthony Sir 9 Cambridge; 8 Waterloo; 7 24; 6 Thomas; Justin 5 Presley; Elvis of death The 4 Orton; Joe 3 Wilson; Joe 2 Newcastle; in Cinema Odeon The 1 questions: 10 I: AM WHO Amos.

Tori Bwordwise: impossipuzzles: old.

years 48 WHEN: REMEMBER 1993 1992.

Argentina; Cordoba, Unquillo, WHEN: WHERE WHAT WHO Constabulary; Ulster Royal Howe; Geoffrey