Sandra Goldbacher's small, psychologically savvy film ''Me Without You'' is the story of a toxic friendship, established in early childhood, whose poisons continue to circulate and infect both partners well into their adult lives.

Every close friendship, of course, has its shadow side of lurking jealousy and competition, even if that shadow is just an occasional twinge of resentment. But from the time they are little girls, Marina (Anna Friel) and her best friend and next-door neighbor, Holly (Michelle Williams), find themselves locked in a power struggle that only Marina is fully aware of for much of that time. If I didn't detest the term codependent because it shrink-wraps human feeling into a vague, pseudoclinical symptom, I would use it to describe this destructive bond.

The story, set in suburban England, spans more than two decades, beginning in 1973. And as the years pass, the soundtrack, costumes and interior design pay unusually close attention to changing pop fashion. As teenagers in the punk-rock craze, both girls deck themselves out in leather and spiky accessories and swoon at the possibility of crashing a party rumored to be attended by the Clash. Later in the story, Marina, whose hair regularly changes color and style, affects a blowzy, big-hair look inspired by ''Dynasty.'' Throughout the movie she aggressively wields her sexuality to reinforce a self-esteem that is much shakier than her hard-edged bravado might indicate.

The movie's focus on fashion is so intense that the details can become distracting. But whether gazing at clothes or tacky home furnishings, the film's unflattering eye portrays it all as kitsch. Except for fragments of Nick Drake and Tim Buckley, the period soundtrack is alternately abrasive and banal, and you're left with a sense that British popular culture over the last quarter century is a soul-deadening wasteland.

The soundtrack at least underlines the movie's nasty Darwinian vision of the sexual hunt as defined by Marina, in which it's not enough that you succeed; your friends must fail. The attitudes both women have toward their bodies seem instilled by parents who represent opposite poles of negativity. Marina's mother, Linda (Trudie Styler), an alcoholic, pill-popping glamour girl who cakes on more and more makeup as she ages and wears lower- and lower-cut dresses, is obsessed with staying young. And as Marina swaggers through life flagrantly using her good looks as a lure, her conquests (including her husband, whom she doesn't love) become critical badges of self-worth.

Holly, who is self-conscious about her Jewishness, is brought up by a fastidiously mousy mother who advises her not to expect too much in the way of love and to doubt her own sex appeal. Intellectually curious and socially conscious, she is always a little surprised when men find her attractive.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.