Saif Ali Khan, who made his Bollywood debut with Parampara in 1993, has come a long way in his career and is one of the most loved actors in the industry. Personally too, the actor went through several ups and downs and is in a happy space now. Before Kareena Kapoor, he was married to actress Amrita Singh despite a huge age gap.

In 1991, Saif tied the knot with Amrita who was 12 years older than him. After being together for around 14 years, the duo ended their marriage and had a messy divorce in 2004. They have two kids together, Sara Ali Khan Pataudi and Ibrahim Ali Khan Pataudi.

Saif had always been outspoken about his opinions and didn't believe in being diplomatic. He's a very vocal person who has never been afraid to say what he thinks, even if someone gets hurt. After the divorce, he took digs at Amrita in several interviews.

In a shockingly candid interview with a leading magazine before his marriage to Kareena, the Hum Tum star had confessed that it's better to be married to a hot and sexy woman.

On being asked if he'll prefer to marry a younger woman after his divorce from Amrita, he said, "Yeah, I definitely recommend it. It's also nice to be married to someone who's fun, beautiful and non-judgemental. All three things".

Sharing his take on 'ideal wife', he added, "It's better to have a hot and sexy wife. Never have room for regret and never say, 'Oh, I wish I was married to a beautiful girl'."

Years later, Saif fell in love with Kareena while shooting for Tashan. After dating each other for several years, the couple got hitched in 2012 and are happy together. They are parents to two sons - Taimur Ali Khan Pataudi and Jehangir Ali Khan Pataudi.

On the film front, Saif was last seen in Bunty Aur Babli 2 alongside Rani Mukerji. The film was released last year and turned out to be a disappointment at the box office. He currently has projects like Vikram Vedha Hindi remake and Adipurush in his kitty.

A remake of the Tamil hit of the same name, Vikram Vedha also stars Hrithik Roshan with Saif. While the Omkara actor plays the role of a police officer named Vikram, Hrithik is essaying a rowdy gangster Vedha. The fans are eagerly waiting to see both the stars locking horns on screen.