Amrita Singh was married to Saif Ali Khan for 13 years before they decided to part ways in 2004. An old interview of Amrita Singh has recently surfaced, shedding light on her life after her divorce from Saif. During the interview, Amrita admitted to letting herself go after her marriage with Saif, becoming lazy, and gaining a significant amount of weight. She also spoke about how the insecurities of being a star-wife affected her mental well-being.

When Amrita Singh revealed she let herself go after marrying Saif Ali Khan: ‘I became lazy and complacent after marriage’

In a conversation with Zoom, she said, “I became lazy and complacent after marriage. Someone told me that women have this great urge to nest and I started looking like a fat ostrich in a nest. I was just happy and living in my la la land.” “This must be true for a conventional star wife, but I was a star before I became a star wife. So, I didn’t have the insecurity to keep up with the Joneses in any way. You get complacent and lazy, you can make it sound romantic and say that it was love and trust but the bottom line is that you get lazy and since you have done it all, you don’t get excited. For instance, I don’t get excited when I have to sit in a beauty parlor for 5 hours. I did it because it was my job.” Amrita said, when asked if she felt pressure to look good being the wife of a star who is always surrounded by beautiful women.

Amrita further added “I am the kind of person who has to feel it herself. Nobody can make me do anything,” she said as she admitted that while Saif didn’t put any pressure on her, he did ask her to join the gym and look good for him if not for herself.

“The insecurity of being an actor is healthier because it pushes you to be creative but being a star wife, the insecurities are unhealthy. They can damage your mind. If you are an insecure person, you aren’t going to be happy being a star wife.” The Betaab actor shared why she thinks having insecurities as an actor is better than being insecure as a star wife. “Not a large time but time enough to damage my mind,” she responded, when asked if a large portion of her time was spent being insecure.

Amrita was last seen on the big screen in 2022’s Heropanti 2. The film starred Tiger Shroff, Nawazuddin Siddiqui and Tara Sutaria in lead roles.

Also Read: EXCLUSIVE: Deepak Tijori reveals that his Saif Ali Khan-Amrita Singh quote has been misconstrued: “I NEVER said that. Itna GHATIYA quote bana diya hai”

BOLLYWOOD NEWS - LIVE UPDATES