FOLLOWING her divorce from J. Steven White, Annette Bening tied the knot with Warren Beatty.

The Oscar-nominated husband and wife have collaborated on three films together.

Who is Annette Bening married to?

On March 3, 1992, Annette Bening and Warren Beatty tied the knot after almost a year and a half of dating.

The couple has four children together; Ella, Isabel, Benjamin, and Stephen.

Similar to Annette, Warren is also an actor and filmmaker.

Some of his most memorable movies include Bonnie and Clyde, Heaven Can Wait, and Dick Tracy.

Annette and Warren have co-starred in Bugsy, Love Affair, and Rules Don't Apply.

While the former has been nominated for five Oscars, the latter is a 14-time nominee; he won Best Director for the 1981 film Reds.

Regarding her marriage to Warren, the Captain Marvel star told Drew Barrymore: "I think marriage is like the greatest thing and the greatest challenge is to really make it all work and to stay together.

"And that is the thing that I am so, so proud of with us."

How did Annette meet Warren Beatty?

In November 1990, Annette first encountered Warren when the latter approached the former about co-starring in Bugsy.

Warren later revealed that they were supposed to meet much earlier to discuss a potential role for Annette in Dick Tracy.

However, she had to reschedule because of an emergency.

Ultimately, the part of the titular character's girlfriend went to Glenne Headly.

"He was making this movie. So, they hired me to play the woman in the movie, and, yeah, we fell in love," she recalled.

"So, for me, I have to be honest. I was going to meet him, and he was incredibly intelligent.

"That was honestly the biggest aphrodisiac. Funny and super smart. Now, he’s also very handsome.

"I thought, ‘Wow, this is quite a guy.' But I really thought about it professionally, to be honest.

"I really did when I first met him. I never thought there would be a thing between us."

Meanwhile, Warren recalled to Entertainment Weekly: "When I met Annette over lunch for Bugsy, I felt immediately that this was going to change my life.

"So after lunch, I said, 'I want you to know that I will not be hitting on you during the movie.' And she said, 'I didn't ask…'

"Towards the end of the movie, I said, 'Should we have dinner together?'

"I think there was a moment of hesitation on her part. The rule was broken."

When did Annette divorce her first husband?

By 1991, Annette and her first husband J. Steven White divorced.

Their split happened after seven years of marriage, the former couple wed on May 26, 1984.