On the morning of June 14, the University of Finance - Marketing (Ministry of Finance) coordinated with the Finance College of Southern Laos to organize an international scientific conference: Ho Chi Minh's thought and Kaysone Phomvihane's thought on economic and financial development.

Associate Professor, Dr. Pham Tien Dat, Rector of University of Finance - Marketing and Mr. Inthapattha Somboun, Chief of Office of the Lao Ministry of Finance co-chaired the workshop.

The presentations at the conference affirmed that, 61 years since the two countries established friendly relations (September 9, 1962) and 9 years of signing the Treaty of Friendship and Cooperation (July 2023, 46, July 18, 7), the two countries of Vietnam and Laos have created a long history and great achievements. The presentations highlighted the role of President Ho Chi Minh and President Kaysone Phomvihane in the friendly relationship between the two countries, the profound influences of Ho Chi Minh's thought and Kaysone Phomvihane's thought when used to build and develop the Vietnam - Laos friendship relationship more and more sustainable.

Associate Professor, Dr. Pham Tien Dat, Rector of University of Finance - Marketing spoke at the seminar.

Dr. Lai Van Nam, Dean of the Faculty of Political Theory, University of Finance and Marketing, said: "President Ho Chi Minh attaches great importance to the long-term and sustainable friendship and solidarity between the two countries, considering it a vital issue for the upward development process of each country. At the same time, it is an issue that is both international and national, showing the profound human value of "helping you is helping yourself". The Vietnam-Laos friendship relationship will forever be an invaluable asset and an indispensable luggage of the two nations on the road to national construction and construction.

At the workshop, the presentations also outlined great achievements in many fields: political relations, defense cooperation, security, investment, trade, cooperation in the fields of transportation, agriculture, forestry and rural development, education and training, human resource development, multilateral cooperation... that the two countries have achieved from the Vietnam - Laos friendship relationship. In the current context, Ho Chi Minh's thought and Kaysone Phomvihane's thought have great theoretical and practical significance for each country of Vietnam and Laos, as well as for the friendly relationship of the two countries.

Delegates presented their presentations at the conference.

Presenting the presentation "Kaysone Phomvihane Thoughts on Innovation in the Current Economic Field", Master Doansouvanh Lamphoun, Director of the Kaysone Phomvihane Thought Research Center, National Academy of Politics and Administration, emphasized that: Kaysone Phomvihane's thought continues to be creatively applied in current practice. In which, focusing on solutions to economic structural reform, wage strategy reform, continuing to orient sustainable trade development, well implementing the monetary strategy, strengthening human resource training in economic management, opening up and international cooperation... International cooperation plays a very important role in current practice, including the Vietnam-Laos friendship relationship.

Associate Professor, Dr. Nguyen Thi My Linh, Deputy Dean, in charge of the Faculty of Finance and Banking, University of Finance and Marketing, also proposed many solutions to creatively apply Ho Chi Minh's thought in accordance with the current economic development context. In particular, it is necessary to focus on perfecting and improving the quality of the socialist-oriented market economy institution, better resolving the relationship between the State, the market and society, developing science, technology and innovation in order to create breakthroughs to improve the productivity, quality, efficiency and competitiveness of the economy. Along with that, speeding up industrialization, modernization and economic restructuring in association with innovating the growth model, ensuring the substance and efficiency, combined with the development of the digital economy to promote fast and sustainable growth.

University of Finance - Marketing presented souvenirs to the delegation attending the seminar of Laos.

Speaking at the seminar, Associate Professor, Dr. Pham Tien Dat, Rector of the University of Finance - Marketing affirmed: President Ho Chi Minh and President Kaysone Phomvihane are the two leaders who laid the first bricks for the two countries to officially establish diplomatic relations later. The conference organizers were very pleased when the panelists shared their views, comments, and proposed solutions with high theoretical and practical value, closely following the topic of the seminar. At the same time, the seminar also received many presentations from scientists, researchers, teachers, students from a number of universities and colleges in Vietnam and Laos. The issues and lessons learned at the seminar will be applied to the practical implementation of the educational and training tasks of the two universities, especially contributing to the training of financial and economic human resources to continue to foster the close relationship between the two countries.

News, photos: HONG GIANG

Nguon

Same author

Acting President Vo Thi Anh Xuan: Recommend that the WB continue to support Vietnam in its development process

On the afternoon of March 27, at the Presidential Palace, Acting President Vo Thi Anh Xuan received Ms. Carolyn Turk, Country Director of the World Bank (WB) in Vietnam, to say goodbye and end her working term. At the meeting, Acting President Vo Thi Anh Xuan congratulated Ms. Carolyn Turk on a successful working term in Vietnam. The Acting President highly appreciated the WB in recent times...

Tearing down the "steel door" Him Lam in the opening battle of the Dien Bien Phu Campaign

On this day 70 years ago (March 13, 3/March 1954, 13), the Vietnam People's Army officially opened the Dien Bien Phu Campaign with thunderous series of bullets and artillery, completely destroying the Dien Bien Phu Campaign. Him Lam base, known by the French as the inviolable "steel door" in the Dien Bien Phu base group system. Pouring firestorms down the "steel door" Him Lam In the special national monument complex...

Truong Sa green sprouts

Nowhere in our country has as much sun, wind, and storms as the islands of the Truong Sa archipelago. White sand, salty coral, wind and storms all year round seem to make it impossible for plants to grow. However, under the diligent hands of countless generations of officers, soldiers, and people... green shoots in Truong Sa still grow every day. The islands are green...

BIDV accompanies FDI enterprises

Recognizing the increasing role of foreign investment in our country's development, the Joint Stock Commercial Bank for Investment and Development of Vietnam (BIDV) identifies corporate customers with foreign investment capital ( FDI) is an important customer segment. From there, we propose policies and financial packages suitable to the needs of this customer group. Since 2016,...

Opening the showroom helps distinguish between real and fake products of more than 600 products

On the afternoon of November 24, at 11 Trang Tien, Hoan Kiem, Hanoi, the General Department of Market Management, Ministry of Industry and Trade held a showroom opening with the theme "Understanding real goods - Avoiding fake goods". The showroom will last until November 62. This is an event in response to Counterfeit and Counterfeit Goods Prevention Day (November 30). At this showroom, there are more than 11 products in 29 fields and industries including: Chemicals and cosmetics; fashion; shoe...

Much read

100 best places to work in Vietnam 2023

In addition to Nestlé Vietnam and Abbott, the top 5 large-scale workplaces rated 'best in Vietnam' include new factors Acecook, Coca-Cola, and FPT. On the evening of November 23 in Ho Chi Minh City, Anphabe Joint Stock Company combined with Intage market research company to announce a list of the best places to work in Vietnam in 11. This is the 2023th year this unit has published the list. hey. Leading the list...

55% of sellers sell both directly and online

January 29, 01 2024:12 Van Hang Print article ANTD.VN - Survey results of 45 customers of Sapo - a multi-channel sales and management platform show that 15.000% of current sellers choose this model. both directly and through e-commerce. Retail sales decline in 55,4 Sapo said,...

Mr. Trinh Xuan An: Need to be transparent in input costs for air tickets

Delegate Trinh Xuan An said that air ticket prices are too high not necessarily because of fuel or the gap between supply and demand, but because the calculation of input costs of businesses is not reasonable. At the questioning session on March 18, Mr. Trinh Xuan An, full-time member of the National Defense and Security Committee, acknowledged that price management for some items such as air tickets and electricity is "having many problems". According to sir, manager...

PJICO Insurance is ranked the highest "aaa.VN" financial capacity in Vietnam by AM Best

A.M.Best continues to rank PJICO's financial capacity at "B++" (good), ranking the issuer's capacity at "bbb" (good). In particular, in 2023, A.M Best adds a national credit rating (National Scale Rating - NSR) to apply...

VinFast $ 160 billion, billionaire Pham Nhat Vuong is super rich, the ranking organization is confused

Every day VinFast has an additional 24 billion USD. In the weekend trading session of August 25 (US time), billionaire Pham Nhat Vuong's VinFast (VFS) shares continued to shock by closing at a new record high price. : 8 USD/share (equivalent to capitalization of nearly 68,77 billion USD), with more than 160 million units traded. During the session, at one point VFS went up to 12,9 USD/share, corresponding to a company value of 72,5...

Same category

Interest rate fluctuations on March 31.3, which bank leads the interest rate table?

VietBank and Nam A Bank lead the interest rate table. VietBank and Nam A Bank are two rare banks that do not adjust interest rates in March 3.2024. Stable interest rates have brought these two banks to the top position in the market, with the highest interest rates at most terms. Vietnam Thuong Tin Commercial Joint Stock Bank (VietBank) currently lists deposit interest rates online as follows:Interest rates for online deposits...

Mumbai is the city with the most billionaires in Asia

According to the Hurun Global Rich List 2024 report, Mumbai has surpassed Beijing as the city with the most billionaires in Asia. As India's financial center, Mumbai currently has 92 billionaires, more than Beijing (91) and Shanghai (87). As the city with the most billionaires in Asia this year, Mumbai also entered the top 3 cities with the most billionaires in the world for the first time. Possessing a fortune of 115...

China's real estate crisis threatens to spread to banks

The nearly 3-year-long crisis in the Chinese real estate market is causing bad debts of the country's largest banks to skyrocket. This week, China's top four state-owned banks, including Industrial and Commercial Bank of China (ICBC), China Construction Bank (CCB), Agricultural Bank of China (ABC) and Bank of China (BOC) One after another, bad debts in 4 were announced to skyrocket. Total...

Temporarily postpone the exit of 5 business owners in Quang Binh

On March 30.3, Quang Binh Tax Department said that from the end of 2023 to early 2024, the tax debt situation tends to increase. The Tax Department has applied many debt enforcement measures such as freezing accounts, stopping using Invoice application. In addition to the above enforcement measures, from the beginning of 2024, the Tax Department directs its affiliated units to consider applying additional measures to postpone exit...

Without changing the family allowance deduction, people are disappointed

People are disappointed. At the regular press conference on the afternoon of March 29.3 held at the Ministry of Finance, Mr. Truong Ba Tuan - Deputy Director of the Department of Management and Supervision of tax, fee and sharing fee policies, due to CPI fluctuations less than 20 % as well as waiting for amendments to the Personal Income Tax Law, the Ministry of Finance said that it has not yet proposed to adjust the family deduction level. After this opinion, public opinion has...

New Posts

Teaching life skills to students is not far away!

Love your homeland more through experiential activitiesIn the 2018 general education program, experiential activities and local educational materials are new subjects/activities to help students supplement their knowledge and clarify the content. according to each topic. Through hands-on experiential activities...

Domestic coffee prices increased to a record because of 'price stimulation' like real estate

'Criticizing' businesses, farmers prefer to sell to traders. At the workshop "Solutions to export coffee to reach 5 billion USD", organized by Nguoi Lao Dong Newspaper on the afternoon of March 30 within the framework of the festival "Honoring coffee". "Vietnamese Coffee - Tea" for the second time in 3 takes place in the city. Thu Duc (HCMC), representatives of...

Unleash your creativity with the painting contest 'Hooray for soldiers of Dien Bien'

On the morning of March 30, in Hanoi, a press conference took place to launch a painting competition commemorating the 3th anniversary of the Dien Bien Phu Victory called "Hooray for Dien Bien Soldiers".

The image of Lee Do Hyun working in the Korean Air Force band caused a fever

Lee Do Hyun is currently a hot name in the film world, when the work "Exhuma" in which he participated set a box office record. "Exhuma" (Vietnamese title: Unearthing the Ghostly Tomb) is the first movie exceeded 10 million ticket sales in Korea this year, and also became the...

The National Assembly Standing Committee gives opinions on the Trade Union Law project (amended)

According to the expected program, the legal session will take place in 2 days, from April 1 to 2, 4 at the National Assembly House. Chairman of the National Assembly Vuong Dinh Hue attended, delivered the opening speech and together with the Vice Chairmen of the National Assembly moderated the discussion content. In 2024 working days...