As with most Id-related games, the Texas-based company team is working with an outside developer to bring its first-person shooters to console. Activision and Id are working with UK-based Hammerhead to bring Quake II to life on PlayStation, and from what we can tell, the project is going well.

IGNPSX interrogated Hammerhead's technical team with questions about new and multiplayer levels, the game's engine, and how in general the phenomenal PC title will appear on PlayStation.

IGNPSX: What development team is working on Id's original PC title Quake II?

Hammerhead is the software developer given the enormous responsibility of converting Quake II to the PlayStation. We're a relatively young company and are based in Southport, a small town on the Northwest coast of England. There are 21 staff members in total, split fairly evenly between industry veterans and talented newcomers. Our last project was ShadowMaster, an intense 3D shoot-em-up which was released by Psygnosis in January 1998.

IGNPSX: What games has HammerHead worked on before?

HammerHead was originally founded as a breakaway group from respected UK developer Travellers Tales. Originally known as Tales2, the name HammerHead was adopted in order to stress our independence and individuality. During their time at Travellers Tales, HammerHead staff made key contributions to every key title released on both Genesis and SNES up to and including Disney's Toy Story.

IGNPSX: What did you think of the prospect of doing Quake II for the PlayStation? Were you excited? Intimidated? And what made you think you could pull off Quake II on the RAM-tight PlayStation?

Excited definitely. When we were finishing off the ShadowMaster project in late summer '97, we realized that doing a faithful conversion of Quake for the PS was entirely possible. Now at this time there was a lot of speculation in the computer press (in the UK anyway), that this just couldn't be done. We were confident that we could prove them wrong, but with the huge buzz leading up to Quake II's launch we decided to wait and see if we could go one better. The plain truth is that while it is a difficult, daunting, project, we're here because we really want to do it, and do it right.

IGNPSX: Seeing how the PC version has some stiff requirements to run smoothly, at first did you think Quake II was possible on the PlayStation? And is this a straight port of the PC version?

No, we never doubted that it could be done. The PS is a surprisingly powerful piece of hardware given its age, far more so than its technical specs would lead you to believe. Problems arise though when developers don't bear in mind its particular strengths and weaknesses, especially converting from the PC, which has vastly superior processor and memory resources.

Rather than simply converting the code, we looked at Quake2 in terms of function and figured out ways to replicate that on the PS. This is no criticism of Id's (superb) approach, just an illustration of the fact that for the best possible result you must work with, and never against the hardware.

IGNPSX: What resolution and frame rate will QII on PlayStation be?

PlayStation Quake II runs in 512 by 240, at a smooth 30fps regardless of the number of players. There will be a minor loss of detail for the four-player mode, but given the relatively small display area it shouldn't be at all obtrusive.

IGNPSX: How hard is coding Quake II for the PlayStation? What are the most difficult parts of the conversion? For instance, how are you able to handle the lack of a floating-point processor on PS?

The most difficult thing is ensuring that the game is Quake2 on a PlayStation, and not just another clone with decent graphics. It is a challenging project technically, but the real issue is making it feel as great as the original to play. Keeping the levels as close to the original as possible was problematic, not only due to their size but also the way in which they were designed.

Most PS games use visual tricks in order to depict a free-roaming 3D world at a reasonable frame rate. Techniques like fogging or strategically placing walls are used to keep the draw-distance, and memory requirements down. Keeping QII faithful meant that we couldn't resort to these tactics and in the process posed quite a few problems for us. Most players probably won't consciously recognize these short-cuts, or their absence in QII, but there is a subtle sense of space and freedom gained that is truly authentic, which makes the effort worthwhile.

IGNPSX: How are you managing to maximize the PlayStation's technical assets?

Experience is a great teacher! We learned a great deal during the ShadowMaster project, although much of that knowledge was gained too late or was inappropriate for use at that time. For Quake II we started again from scratch with a redesigned 3D engine taking full advantage of what we'd learned over the last year. We use a few clever tricks to optimize object clipping, machine-code cores for the most frequently used drawing and math functions, but primarily it's the way the engine works as a whole that provides the speed.

IGNPSX: Many people believe the PlayStation hardware is maxxed out by current software -- what do you think?

There is unquestionably a lot more that the PlayStation can do. The plain truth is that regardless of the abilities of the hardware, developers need time to find their feet on any format, no one gets the maximum out on the first attempt. It seems a shame that people are already getting hyped-up about the next generation of consoles before we've seen the best that the current has to offer. The longer development cycles coupled with the increasingly rapid technology advances leave less time for developers to hone their skills over successive projects. Increased technical competence liberates imagination and ambition allowing radical new ideas to flourish, something which is the life-blood of the industry.

IGNPSX: What sacrifices will have to be made from the PC version?

Some of the larger levels will be split over two loads in the PS version, simply because of memory considerations. The ability to crouch may be removed, simply to clean up the control interface, which is rather cluttered given the restrictions of the PlayStation pad.

IGNPSX: What other changes will we see from the PC version?

One to four players may compete simultaneously using a split-screen display. There will be a number of additional multiplayer modes over the standard deathmatch. These will include a variety of tournament-style contests and other special levels. Visually the game will benefit from using many PlayStation specific special effects, dynamic lighting, and more.

IGNPSX: What do you think of Id? of Quake II? Of John Carmack?

Short answer: Brilliant, brilliant, brilliant.

There are very few companies that have been as influential as Id has been in recent years. Before Wolfenstein and Doom the only real 3D games were flight simulations, and not only did these games create single-handedly an entirely new gaming genre, they dropped a bomb on many people's perceptions of what a videogame could be. In our opinion Quake2 is the best game of its type around and offers clear proof that Id hasn't lost its cutting edge. Unlike many titles, it isn't just a technical showcase, and that is what makes it so special, it's just a great game. As for John Carmack, the much-abused term, genius, for once is entirely appropriate.

IGNPSX: What role is Id playing in the development of QII PS? What's it like t be work with them?

Basically, they are keeping an eye on every aspect of development, but have given us a fair amount of freedom. If we have any doubts or questions as to whether something is wrong, or should be added, removed, or changed, we know where to ask. It's an ideal situation in that we get the benefits of both support and independence, and most importantly we know that if we can satisfy Id, we can produce a game that will satisfy every player.

Interview by Douglass Perry