Abel Gance (Paris, October 25, 1889 - ibid., November 10, 1981) was a French filmmaker, pioneer of silent cinema, author of emblematic works such as Napoleon. His career spanned sixty years.

Biography

Gance was the illegitimate son of Abel Flamant, a wealthy Jewish doctor, and the worker Françoise Pèrethon. He was raised by his maternal grandparents in the town of Commentry until, when he was eight years old, his mother married the chauffeur Adolphe Gance, and Abel moved to Paris to live with them. Although he took his stepfather's last name, he continued to receive financial help from his father, which allowed him to receive an excellent education.

Beginnings in the cinema

In 1909 he began working as an actor and film scriptwriter. Two years later, in 1911, he founded, with the help of some friends, his own company, and directed his first film, La Digue, a drama of manners. His second film, Le Nègre blanc (1912), addresses the issue of racial prejudice, developing the story of a black child mistreated by whites. An incipient career as a playwright was interrupted by the outbreak of the First World War, during which Gance returned to film, with films such as the short film La Folie du Docteur Tube, a very strange comedy about a Mad scientist who invents powders that transform people's appearance. To film it, Gance resorted to the use of distorting mirrors. In his films in the following years he introduced the editing techniques already used in the United States by David Wark Griffith, the use of close-ups and other innovative procedures for the time.

From 1917 onwards, Gance's interest focused on social dramas, with films such as Le Droit à la vie and Mater Dolorosa, both from 1917. His most interesting work at this stage is La Dixième symphonie (1918), in which a composer sublimates his personal sufferings into a transcendental work of art. After the end of the war, Gance released J'accuse (I accuse) in (1919), a very harsh plea against the organized carnage that represented World War I. The film was a great success, both in France and abroad. Gance traveled to the United States to screen the film before an audience that included Griffith himself and sisters Lillian and Dorothy Gish.

Gance's next work, The Wheel (La Roue), was filmed between 1919 and 1920, but was not premiered until 1923. It is a monumental production, of 32 reels, which had to be released in three successive sessions, and which develops the melodramatic story of a train driver in love with his adopted daughter. The interest of the film lies above all in the poetic treatment given to it by its director, developing metaphors such as life as an endless wheel. The Wheel was a film greatly admired by great filmmakers, such as Jean Cocteau and Akira Kurosawa.

Napoleon

After a strange horror comedy in collaboration with the French comedian Max Linder, Au secaurs! (1924), Gance filmed his most important work, the monumental Napoléon (1927), one of the great silent film classics. Gance spent two years making this film, which recreates the first part of Napoleon Bonaparte's biography, from his childhood to the Italian campaign in 1796, and which was intended to be the beginning of a project of six feature films about his life. of Napoleon, never made. Gance does not hide in the film his admiration for the character, whom he portrays as an idealistic and visionary leader, in the line of the great romantic writers (Byron, Victor Hugo or Heine), who had seen in Bonaparte the incarnation of the revolutionary spirit.

In Napoleon, Gance made a real display of technical innovations: a chase scene, for example, is shot with a camera placed on the back of a galloping horse; The opening scene of the film, the snowball fight, was shot by a handheld camera operator, something completely unusual at the time. For the sequences of the storm on the high seas and the dispute at the Convention, he had her hang like a pendulum, swinging back and forth.

In addition to directing this film, Abel Gance participated as an actor, giving a sober and acclaimed interpretation of the famous revolutionary Louis de Saint-Just, one of the leading representatives of the Reign of Terror of the French Revolution.

For the final climax of the film, the Italian campaign of 1796, Gance used a special panoramic system, with three screens and three projectors, which he called Polyvision, and which also allowed him to show three simultaneous actions, in the form of triptych.

The excessive length of the film (around six hours) meant that it was generally shown in mutilated versions (in the United States, for example, a version of only 72 minutes was shown, that is, just over a fifth of the footage. original). In Puerto Rico, the University of the Sacred Heart exhibited its version of only four hours.

The sound cinema

Gance's career did not stop with the arrival of talkies. In 1931, Gance released his first talking film, La Fin du monde , a science fiction film in which an astronomer, played by Gance himself, discovers that a comet is about to crash into the Earth. Land. It wasn't too successful. In 1934, he added dialogue to a new staging of Napoleon. An important work from this period is Lucrèce Borgia (1935), set in Renaissance Italy, and inspired by the lives of Lucretia and César Borgia. The latter is the counterpart to Gance's Napoleon, as he only feels an insatiable desire for power, and lacks the high revolutionary ideals that Gance lent to the Corsican.

Also relevant is the film Beethoven's Great Love (1936), a new foray into the biographical genre, inspired by the life of the composer Ludwig van Beethoven, where, once again, Gance addresses the romantic genius theme. In 1938 he filmed a new version of his 1919 anti-war classic, J' accuse. Although it uses some of the footage from the previous film, it is essentially a new film, appropriately released on the eve of World War II.

In Gance's later career, his ambitious and underrated productions Austerlitz (1960), about the battle of the same name, and Cyrano et d'Artagnan stand out above all. (1963). Gance then directed two historical films for French television, Marie Tudor (1966) and Valmy (1967). Several of his projects remained unrealized: in addition to his unfinished saga on the biography of Napoleon, he had proposed filming an epic production on the life of Christ that would have been called La Divine Tragédie (The Divine Tragedy), for which he did not find financing. Another project on the life of Christopher Columbus could not be carried out due to the outbreak of World War II.

Abel Gance was a giant of cinematographic art, a genius creator of masterpieces that inspired several filmmakers of later generations.

Partial filmography

1916: La folie du docteur Tube

1917: Barberousse

1917: The Zone of the Mort (lost row)

1918: La Dixième symphonie

1918: Mater Dolorosa

1919: J'accuse

1923: La Roue

1927: Naples

1929: Napoleon auf St. Helena (colaboration in the script)

1931: The end of the monde

1934: La Dame aux camelias

1935: Le Roman d'un jeune homme pauvre

1935: Lucrèce Borgia

1935: Jérôme Perreau, heroes des barricades

1935: Naples (version of 1927)

1936: Le Voleur de femmes

1936: A grand amour of Beethoven (A great love of Beethoven)

1938: J'accuse

1939: Louise

1940: Paradis perdu

1941: Vénus aveugle

1943: Le Capitaine Fracasse

1953: Quatorze juillet (short)

1953: Lumière et l'invention du cinématographe

1954: The Tour de Nesle

1956: Magirama (co-led with Nelly Kaplan)

1960: Austerlitz

1963: Cyrano et d'Artagnan

1966: Marie Tudor (telefilm)

Prizes and distinctions

San Sebastian International Film Festival