If you own a work by or about the artist Naoum Aronson, and would like to know its value, our state-approved experts and auctioneers will offer you their appraisal services. Our specialists will carry out a free appraisal of your work, and provide you with a precise estimate of its current market value. Then, if you wish to sell your work, we'll guide you towards the best possible arrangement to obtain the optimum price.

Artist's rating and value Naoum Aronson

Considered an important artist of naturalistic sculpture, Aronson leaves behind a unique artistic repertoire, in which bronze works occupy a prominent place. Today, prices for his works are rising dramatically under auctioneers' gavels. His creations are particularly sought-after, and the price at which they sell on the art market ranges from €140 to €77,380 - a considerable difference, but one that speaks volumes about the value that can be attributed to Aronson's works. In 2010, a bronze statue, Salome, sold for €77,380, whereas it was estimated at between €59,530 and €83,330.

Order of value from a simple work to the most prestigious

Technique used

Results

Marble

From €5,200 to €42,640

Bronze

From €140 to €77,380

Naoum Aronson, his life, his work

Naoum Aronson (1872-1943), a Russian artist, became an important figure in 20th-century sculpture, particularly symbolist sculpture.

Originally from Kreslau (Russian Empire, now Latvia), he began his training at the Vilnius Academy of Fine Arts. In 1891, he moved to Paris, where he met Rodin. He then studied with Hector Lemaire at the Ecole Supérieure des Arts Décoratifs.

Taking a break from his career and training to honor his military service, he returned to France shortly afterwards and began creating busts of famous personalities (Tolstoi, Rasputin...).

He made a name for himself with these works, and presented some of them at the 1937 World's Fair.

Aronson was then forced to flee the Occupation, and settled in New York, where he died a few years later.

Naoum Aronson's imprint on his period

Naoum Aronson is a well-known artist among sculpture enthusiasts, with a substantial artistic output. Today, most of his works are held by private collectors, increasing their value and success on the auction market.

His marble sculptures are particularly prized, as they are absolutely unique pieces that reveal the artist's inspiration and way of working, but his bronzes are indisputably his most famous and prized works, which continue to break records on the auction market.

Recognizing Naoum Aronson's signature

It's not always easy to decipher, or even to be lucky enough to come across a work signed by Aronson, which is why expertise is so important.

Knowing the value of a work

If you happen to own a work by Naoum Aronson, ask for a free appraisal without delay, using the form on our website. A member of our team will contact you promptly to provide you with an estimate of the value of your work, as well as any relevant information about it. If you're thinking of selling your work, our specialists will also be on hand to help you find alternatives for selling it at the best possible price.