The song was originally called "55 Love Affair" but the record company made him change the title because they felt the whole 50s pastiche thing was dead by that point and it wouldn't connect with audiences. Of course, that meant that the song didn't really make sense anymore, but it was still a fairly big hit.

More details here: '65 Love Affair - Wikipedia

What you have to realize, though, is that for very large portions of America, "things that were going on in 1965" really weren't all that much different from what was "happening in the 50s."

Just as an example from personal experience…while all of my friends and I from the suburbs were delirious for The Beatles, folk rock and garage rock in 1965-66, if you visited kids in the city or some of the smaller towns surrounding it, it was like "the 60s" never happened. The only thing they wanted to know about, irrespective of race, was soul music. Not that there's anything wrong with that, but the lines were very clearly drawn.

And that paradigm persisted throughout the rest of the decade for many. My first wife graduated from high school the same year I did (1969), but was from a town about 15 miles from me. Same deal there; she was a cheerleader, and football and cars were pretty much the only thing that mattered to her and most of her classmates. She eventually was exposed to more, but in the end (as I discovered ruefully), that was still pretty much who she really was.

All of the other cultural artifacts that surrounded what we knew completely passed those other areas by as well. What's sometimes hard for some to grasp is that their reality isn't/wasn't necessarily everybody else's reality. But it's hard to see that when you're in the middle of it.

I liked the record in general when it was charting as it has some interesting changes and modulation.

What I really disliked was Paul's insistance in using a Linn on it. I was using two Linns that year, but never for a track like that. If he (and whats-his-name the engineer) would've opted for real drums on the track, I think it would've had a much nicer foundation.

The Lm1 is sort of innocuous on Cool Night, but even that one would've been better served with real drums.

So much of his 81-83 stuff is so comped and layered with those kbd parts he overdubbed on the 24-trk, that it imo sets up a cardboardy sound. The Linns just intensify that.

At least I Go Crazy...as massively keyboard comped as that was, had real drums. Probably only because Roger was still 18 months from releasing the first Linn.

Kyle Lehning was the producer of the Cool Night album.

The "Cool Night" album was produced by Paul Davis & Ed Seay. That's what the LP says. Further, "'65 Love Affair"'s title was changed mostly because it made no sense for Paul. Paul was born in 1948. He would have been 7 years old in 1955 so the situation made no sense for him to sing about. It kinda threw off the lyric, of course, but I guess they figured no one would care. Turns out they didn't. It was a big hit for him.

'Course, Paul is said to have completely hated the album and left Arista as fast as he could after it was released too. Shame, too, as it was his most commercially successful. That had to annoy him big time.

Ed