Nancy Reagan’s marriage to Ronald Reagan wasn’t just a love affair for the ages, it was a union that propelled her husband into the White House. Without Nancy by his side to help sculpt his political rise and shape his policies, many believe Ronald may never have made the leap from Hollywood actor to American president.

To celebrate the former first lady’s legacy and mark the 100th anniversary of her birth, the Reagan Library in Simi Valley is launching the Nancy Reagan Centennial Celebration on July 6, her birthday. It will continue through July 6, 2022.

The kickoff event from 3 to 4:30 p.m. July 6 will feature live 1940s and ’50s music by Liberty City and a book signing featuring Karen Tumulty, author of the new biography “The Triumph of Nancy Reagan.” Petite chocolate chip cookies, Nancy’s favorite dessert, will be handed out in lieu of birthday cake.

In her 672-page book, published in April by Simon & Schuster, Tumulty makes the case that Nancy Reagan was one of the most influential first ladies of the 20th century. Among the people the author interviewed is Jim Kuhn, a former personal aide to the president, who said, “(Nancy) knew how to lay the groundwork. She knew how to put things together. She knew how far she could go with ‘Ronnie.’ She knew what she could get away with.”

Nancy Reagan died of congestive heart failure March 6, 2018 at the age of 94 and was laid to rest beside her husband at the Reagan Library.

Marking the 100th anniversary of her birth with a yearlong celebration seemed a fitting way to honor her impact as a wife, mother and actress, said library spokesperson Melissa Giller. Ten years ago, the library held a similar celebration to mark the centenary of Ronald Reagan’s birth, she said.

“It is just as important for us to honor Mrs. Reagan in this way, as we did the president, because she gave so much of herself to the state of California, to our nation and to the world,” Giller said. “Mrs. Reagan truly made an impact.”

During her time as first lady, Nancy Reagan launched the “Just Say No” campaign to curb drug addiction, established a foster grandparents program and brought attention to Vietnam veterans, prisoners of war and those missing in action.

“Some have called Nancy Reagan a diplomat for her time as first lady of the United States. Others see her as a bridge builder,” said Fred Ryan, board chairman of the Ronald Reagan Presidential Foundation and Institute. “But without question, many people called Nancy Reagan one of the strongest partners ever to serve as first lady to a president of the United States, with a deep passion for her country and even deeper devotion to her husband.”

Over the next year, the library will open a Nancy Reagan exhibit and launch an essay/video contest for children, with scholarships as the prizes. Officials also hope to raise $5 million to establish the Nancy Reagan Youth Fund, which will help the foundation’s youth programs grow and flourish, and create a forum in Washington, D.C., dedicated to the role of first ladies.

A statue of Nancy Reagan is also being commissioned. Once completed, it will be placed in the library’s rose garden, which is the outdoor terrace that connects the main museum to the Air Force One pavilion, Giller said.

The centennial’s July 6 kickoff event is free and will take place in the Reagan Library’s main courtyard at 40 Presidential Drive, Simi Valley.