KindSoftware: Jobs in Secure and

Predictable Pervasive Computing

Research Positions

Ph.D./M.Sc. Student Positions in Autonomic and Pervasive Computing

School of Computer Science and Informatics, University College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin 4, Ireland.

Autonomic and pervasive computing encompasses tools and techniques for building highly responsive and self-adaptive systems that will be used in areas as diverse as consumer applications, smart buildings, gaming, healthcare, and environmental monitoring. This cutting-edge research domain provides a unique opportunity to work with a combination of state-of-the-art software systems, reasoning systems, user interfaces, content management, embedded sensors and communications systems, in close collaboration with users and researchers in other disciplines.

We are seeking candidates who want to be part of the formation of a world-class Systems Research Laboratory. The laboratory is funded by a 2.5 Million Euro award by Science Foundation Ireland to Professor Paddy Nixon in Secure and Predictable Pervasive Computing.

Ph.D. students:

We are seeking well qualified graduates, or students expecting to graduate in the near future, to undertake selected projects in the broad area of Autonomic and Pervasive Computing. These students will play a pivotal role in developing our research profile and will be involved in every aspect of the foundation of the research group.

Our ideal candidates will be able to demonstrate an ability to both undertake basic research and be able to build prototype systems to demonstrate their research.

The candidates will be expected to work in collaboration with a number of existing groups. In particular, a strong collaboration with the Adaptive Information Centre is expected.

Applicants for PhD should have achieved at least a 2.1 (or equivalent) in Computer Science and have a keen interest in research.

Applicants should return a completed application form with referee reports CV to Paddy Nixon at the address below. Informal inquiries prior a full application are welcomed and should be made to either Simon Dobson or Paddy Nixon.

The application form is available here: Application Form

The referee form is available here: Referee Form

About the department: The Irish Government (SFI/Forfas) Baseline Study that ranked Irish research groups identified the School of Computer Science and Informatics at University College Dublin as the best Computer Science department in the country, having "a very strong impact internationally in their research." This research excellence is further reflected in the large number of prestigious Science Foundation Ireland (SFI) funded projects won by members of the School.