Grad. Dip. Sci. (1997) Australian National University, Canberra.

Work in the Herbarium

My work in the herbarium can be split into four broad areas:

1. Curation

This involves the curation of a number of families including Myrtaceae, Rutaceae, Casuarinaceae, Goodeniaceae, Campanulaceae, Stylidiaceae and Thymelaeaceae, conveying name changes to ANBG Living Collections, the identification of plant specimens for the ANBG, other scientific institutions and the public, and finally, training and overseeing herbarium student interns, work experience students, volunteers and other herbarium users.

2. Field Work

Planning and preparing field trips involving the collection of herbarium specimens and live material.

3. Research

Research centres upon the family Myrtaceae with particular interest in the genus Leptospermum.

I am also involved in the Flora of Australia project as a contributor for the genera Choricarpia, Lindsayomyrtus and Osbornia.

4. Miscellaneous

There are a number of other tasks that come along with varying frequency involving OH&S (Occupational Health and Safety) and EEO (Equal Employment Opportunity). One major miscellaneous task involves the -

World Wide Web - Maintenance of files associated with the Centre for Plant Biodiversity Research and Australian Systematic Botany Society (ASBS) WWW sites.

Publications

Lyne, A.M. et. al. (1993). The Council of Heads of Australian Herbaria Herbarium Technicians Workshop. Austral. Syst. Bot. Soc. Newsletter 74: 18

Lyne, A.M. (1993). Leptospermum namadgiensis (Myrtaceae), a new species from the Australian Capital Territory-New South Wales border area. Telopea (5)2: 319-324.

Lyne, A.M. (1993). New species of Tea-tree from the southern ACT. Friends of the Australian National Botanic Gardens Newsletter Winter Number 10: 8-9.

Lyne, A.M. & Crisp, M.D. (1996). Leptospermum jingera (Myrtaceae - Leptospermoidae): A New Species From North-eastern Victoria. Aust. Syst. Bot 9(3): 301-306.

Lyne, A.M. (1996). What's a Corymbia - the new name for the bloodwood eucalpyts. Friends of the Australian National Botanic Gardens Newsletter Spring, Number 23: 3 and 6.

Lyne, A.M. (1996). Leptospermum. In Walsh, N.G. and Entwisle, T.J. eds, Flora of Victoria, Volume 3, Dicotyledons, Winteraceae to Myrtaceae. Inkata Press, Melbourne. 1091pp.

Lyne, A. (1997). Analysis of the Geographic Variation Exhibited by Leptospermum brevipes F.Muell. Australian National University, Division of Botany and Zoology, Canberra. (Unpublished Graduate Diploma in Science thesis).

Other Activities