Mission

To support a variety of charitable causes, primarily education and programs supporting at risk youth and their families in the San Francisco Bay Area.

Annual application deadlines

March 31 and September 30

Program areas

Education

Human services

Program limitations

There are no program restrictions; however, the foundation has a practice of primarily supporting education and programs for at-risk youth and their families.

States served

California

Geographic limitations

The foundation primarily supports organizations in the San Francisco Bay Area.

Trustees

Wells Fargo Bank, N.A.

The Fund supports a variety of charitable causes, primarily education and programs supporting at risk youth and their families in the San Francisco Bay Area.

Requirements

To be eligible, organizations must qualify as exempt organizations under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code.

Applications must be submitted through the online grant application form or alternative accessible application designed for assistive technology users.

Average giving

Average grant size: $10,000 to $25,000

Average number of grants per year: 50

Average total giving per year: $1,500,000

Annual application period and deadlines

Applications are accepted year-round. Applications must be submitted by March 31 or September 30 to be reviewed at the grant meetings generally held in late April to early May for the March deadline, and late October to early November for the September deadline.

Communications

Applicants will receive an automated email confirming their submission. Grant decisions are generally communicated by May for applications received from the March deadline, and November for applications received from the September deadline.

Required agreements and reports

Periodic progress reports and final reports may be required for funded projects 6 months after distribution.

About the Foundation

The Robert Stewart Odell and Helen Pfeiffer Odell Fund was established in 1967 by Mr. and Mrs. Odell. Robert Odell was President of Allied Properties, which owned the Santa Barbara Biltmore and the Clift Hotel in San Francisco. In the late 1960’s, Mr. Odell served on the board of directors of Wells Fargo Bank. Robert Odell passed away in March of 1973. Due to the generosity of the Odell’s, many worthy charities will benefit for years to come.