In his career, Aurelio De Laurentiis produced and distributed more than 400 films directed by such filmmakers as Mario Monicelli, Carlo Verdone, Ettore Scola, Ridley Scott, David Cronenberg, Luc Besson, Paul Haggis, Joel and Ethan Coen, David Lynch, Roberto Benigni.

Aurelio De Laurentiis won 50 Golden Movie Theatre Tickets (the awards given to the most successful movies at the Italian box office), 15 David di Donatello (the Italian Academy Award), 7 Italian Golden Globes assigned by the Foreign Press, and 7 Nastri d’Argento, given by the Italian Film Journalists Association.

2010, he was awarded with the “Variety Profile in Excellence”, given by the prestigious magazine Variety with the following motivation: “Aurelio De Laurentiis has always been able to stay in touch with the taste of the audience. He is really the only Italian producer with an authentic grandeur that results from his symbiotic relationship with a wide audience. Aurelio has an innate radar for pop culture, he has business acumen and a real willingness to take risks”.

In the United States, the Guinness World Records introduced the Christmas comedies (a movie franchise invented by De Laurentiis) in the category of longest-running movie franchise.

1995 “Commander of the Order of Merit of the Italian Republic”, given by the Presidency of the Council of Ministers.

2002 “Officier de l’Ordre des Arts et des Lettres”, because of his important relationship with the French film industry.

2004 “Grand Officer of the Italian Republic” given by the President of italian Republic.

2008 “Knight of Labor” (Cavaliere del Lavoro) given by the President of italian Republic.

2008 “Premio Leonardo Qualità Italia” given by the President of italian Republic.

2010 he received the prestigious “United States-Italy Friendship Award” in Washington.

2012 in the United Kingdom, the British Minister of Commerce and Investments, gave him the “Career recognition Award”.

1993 - 2003: President of the International Federation of Film Producers Associations.

2001 - 2006: President of the Italian Film Producers Association.

2008: he became a shareholder of Italian Entertainment Group a holding company that includes the best companies of the advertising, cultural entertainment, creative and events industries: Filmaster, Civita, Cinecittà World.

In May 2014, Aurelio De Laurentiis set up a new working team in Los Angeles, to develop and produce series for International TV and Digital Platforms.

Besides the movie business, he has another love: in 2004, he began a new career as sports entrepreneur. He won the auction to buy the Naples Football Club directly from a bankruptcy sale at the Naples Court, and set the goal for himself of getting the team back to success.

Now the team is one of the most important Club in the First Division (Serie A).