"FOR DEAR COUSIN FLORENCE, WITH LOVE ": FIRST EDITION OF WOODROW WILSON'S 1896 COLLECTION OF ESSAYS, ON EDMUND BURKE AND OTHER SUBJECTS, WONDERFULLY INSCRIBED IN THE YEAR OF PUBLICATION TO THE BELOVED COUSIN OF HIS FIRST WIFE

WILSON, Woodrow. Mere Literature and other Essays. Boston and New York: Houghton, Mifflin, 1896. Octavo, original brown cloth rebacked, top edge gilt. Housed in a custom clamshell box.

First edition of a collection of eight essays by Woodrow Wilson that “forecast new directions for his life," inscribed by him in the year of publication to Florence Hoyt, the cousin of his first wife, "For dear Cousin Florence, with love from Woodrow Wilson, 1896,” featuring the first publication of his important essay on Edmund Burke, along with his essay “Great Americans."

While at Princeton in the 1890s, Wilson began "to take a new direction in his political thought," illuminated by the eight articles featured in this scarce first edition, which features the important first publication of his essay on Edmund Burke, "The Interpreter of English Liberty." As "the foremost political scientist of his generation," Wilson particularly shared Burke's conservatism in government (Maciag, Edmund Burke, 145). Wilson's own "political writings and his leadership reflected, as Burke advised, practical solutions aimed at conciliation rather than conflict." The eight essays in this collection, praised on publication as "the best work that Mr. Wilson has yet done" (Atlantic Monthly), distinctly "offer clues about the man and his future as a leader." In 1896, the same year this was published, Wilson "suffered what in hindsight years later was diagnosed as a small stroke… His productivity in that decade was impressive. Publications, public lectures, and growing contacts made Wilson one of the most respected scholars in the American academy and forecast new directions for his life" (DiNunzio, Essential Writings, 83, 6). In "A Literary Politician," he coins "the term 'literary politician' to describe Walter Bagehot… Wilson's definition means a person with practical attributes in scholarship… This persona of the ideal literary politician colored Wilson's revised ambitions for his own career" (Kraig, Woodrow Wilson, 67). Also key are "The Course of American History," "one of his more important interpretative works," and "Calendar of Great Americans," where "he praised Alexander Hamilton, Andrew Jackson and Abraham Lincoln but dismissed Jefferson as 'a great man, but not a great American' because his political thought was un-American in being 'abstract, sentimental, rationalistic, rather than practical'" (Cooper, Woodrow Wilson, 74). In "The Truth of the Matter" he "makes the case for the writing of history as both art and science" and in the title essay reveals "an appreciation of the importance of literature to human understanding" (DiNunzio, 147, 112). His essays "The Author Himself" and "On an Author's Choice of Company" additionally highlight the value of literary influences and make "an eloquent plea for individuality in literary creation" (Review of Reviews). Containing the first publication of "The Interpreter of English Liberty." With the title essay, "Mere Literature," along with "The Author Himself" and "A Literary Politician" serialized in Atlantic Monthly (1893, 1891 and 1895 respectively); "On an Author's Choice of Company" and "The Truth of the Matter" (as "On the Writing of History") in Century Magazine (1896 and 1895 respectively); "A Calendar of Great Americans" in Forum in 1894, with "The Course of American History" in Forum in 1895 in a shorter version titled, "The Proper Perspective of Human History." The recipient is Florence Hoyt, the cousin of his first wife, Ellen Axson Wilson, who died in 1914. Woodrow Wilson and Florence Hoyt, who occasionally lived with the Wilson family in the 1890s, also corresponded frequently. With faint occasional penciled marginalia in an unidentified hand.

Expert restoration to cloth boards. A highly desirable inscribed presidential volume.