Our July 2024 Stage Left Open Mic features Cover Girls, Friday, July 12, 2024, 7:00 pm / CDT (doors open at 6:30 pm).

Save the date, Friday, July 12! Please join us at Stage Left Cafe, 125 Van Buren St., Woodstock, on the historic Woodstock Square. Returning to Friday evenings brought back our great crowds along with wonderful music.

These monthly events offer a delightful evening of music and friendship. We hope to see you — performing or enjoying the performances.

July 2024 Stage Left Open Mic Features the Cover Girls

Our July featured performance is the Cover Girls. Here’s a little about each performer in this newest “Girl Band,” — Woodstock’s own Cover Girls!

Kate Moretti

Kate, like so many of us, grew up playing guitar and singing folk songs in the ‘60s and ‘70s. She was also fond of the American songbook classics her father played on the car radio. So, after a long side trip into corporate life, (and having two amazing daughters), she returned to her roots, performing with the estimable Dan Zahn as a duo, a swing group, and, most recently as Briar Road. Kate was also co-founder and co-director of the Lake County Folk Festival. After a brief break from music, she is delighted to be returning as one of the Cover Girls.

Mary Furlong

Mary, a former elementary music teacher, has performed as a singer and instrumentalist throughout the United States and Europe covering all kinds of music – from standards and pop to country and bluegrass. She has authored four children’s books incorporating music to tell the stories. She lives in the Chicago area with various animals including two sons and her husband, T.C.

Amy Dixon-Kolar

Singer-songwriter Amy Dixon-Kolar has performed throughout the United States in solo appearances as well as with her trio SongSisters (with Sue Fink and Patti Shaffner). She has recorded two solo CDs, a SongSisters Live! CD and a number of singles including the award-winning Rosa Sat, which has received more than 350,000 views on You/tube. Amy is also an American Sign Language-English interpreter and a proud wife and mother. She is thrilled to be starting this new musical adventure with Cover Girls! www.amydixon-kolar.bandcamp.com

Laurel Palma

Laurel was trained as a classical music soloist and performed until her early twenties. She then went on to study with a new teacher and joined two college jazz bands, one of which entered competitions with other colleges. She also tutored and accompanied middle school children in state music competitions. She went on to play at various clubs and restaurants either solo or with a combo. She currently plays with the LeftOvers who perform twice a year after a 13-year bi-weekly run at Stage Left Café. Recently retiring from a legal career of 34 years, she is eager to embark on this exciting journey with Cover Girls.

Don’t miss the Cover Girls debut at Stage Left Cafe, 125 Van Buren St., Woodstock, Friday, July 12, 2024, 7:00 pm / CDT (doors open at 6:30 pm).

Want to perform? Sign up now – here’s how:

Stage Left Open Mics get better and better since we came back to Friday evenings. Spots fill quickly, so sign up early — two songs or ten minutes, whichever comes first.

If you’d like to perform and haven’t already completed your one-time informational form, please visit this page (or use the button below). Once you submit the form, then return to that page any time to request a performance spot in any of our venues.

You can also contact the event organizer directly, for Stage Left Open Mics, Keith Johnson, keith@offsquaremusic.org.

What is the Stage Left Open Mic?

These Open Mics, brought to you by Off Square Music, are monthly events on 2nd Fridays in Woodstock. Performers — musicians, singers, poets, and others — come together to connect with a live audience in a wonderful, family-friendly environment.

Whether you’re just starting out as a performer or are a seasoned veteran, our audience provides a supportive atmosphere. Stage Left, part of the Woodstock Opera House, adds to that ambiance with an exceptional performance space and sound system.

Off Square Music requests a $5.00/pp suggested donation to support our many music activities, including these Stage Left Open Mic nights.

Important note to all performers and attendees

Masks are currently optional, and we do not require proof of vaccination. Please be thoughtful of your neighbors.

Want to Know More about Off Square Music?

The best way to know what’s going on in local music is to visit the Off Square Music website Calendar regularly. Here are other ways to keep up with us:

Visit our website frequently

Sign up for our mailing list, right column of every page of our site, and

Check out Off Square Music on Facebook (@offsquaremusic.org), Twitter (@OffSquareMusic) and Instagram (offsquaremusic).

Visit our growing music library on YouTube.

Related Images: