THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

OKLAHOMA CITY — Former first-round draft pick Shaun Livingston will get another chance to make a comeback in the NBA from his gruesome knee injury two years ago.

Livingston signed a multi-year contract with the Oklahoma City Thunder on Tuesday after spending three weeks with their NBA Development League team in Tulsa. The Thunder also recalled rookie D.J. White, who has been working his way back from two jaw surgeries, from the D-League for the second time in eight days.

Livingston has had an extended recovery since tearing three ligaments in his left knee and dislocating his kneecap after a layup attempt in February 2007 with the Los Angeles Clippers. He averaged 9.5 points and six assists in 11 games with Tulsa.

"I still feel like I have the same game and the same skills," Livingston told The Associated Press in an interview during his stint in Tulsa. "I feel like the skill set is there. It’s just the physical ability. Any time you pair athletic ability with a skill set, that’s where you get the combination of a good player or a great player.

"Being able to jump and run fast, that — in this sport — (is) an advantage. That’s what I’m trying to get back to."

Livingston joined the Thunder for shootaround Tuesday prior to their game at San Antonio.

Livingston came straight out of high school to be the No. 4 overall pick in the 2004 draft. He contributed to the Clippers’ 2006 playoff run, when they pushed Phoenix to seven games in a second-round series. The following season, though, brought a major injury.

Livingston had to be carted off the floor after his knee buckled and twisted awkwardly beneath him. An MRI exam the following day showed how seriously he was hurt.

After a year and a half of rehab, Livingston got a chance during training camp with the Miami Heat and made the roster for this season. But he played in only four games over the first two months of the season and was traded to Memphis, which immediately waived him.

"I didn’t know how long it was going to be. The doctors didn’t, either," Livingston told The Associated Press. "Just a day at a time. That’s how we got here."

Livingston, a six-foot-seven point guard, has averaged 7.3 points and 4.7 assists in 149 NBA games with the Clippers and Miami.

White, a first-round pick out of Indiana, missed the first five months of the season after surgery to remove a benign growth from his jaw and has yet to make his NBA debut.

He averaged 17.3 points and 9.7 rebounds in three games with the 66ers before being recalled last week, then returned to Tulsa for one more game Sunday, scoring six points with one rebound in 10 minutes.