LOS ANGELES - Back in 2003, after he finished directing and starring in a movie he'd written, called "I'll Be There," Craig Ferguson sat down in his hotel room and began scribbling on a notepad. The experience of making the film, he says, had entailed so much meddling from the big studio that produced it and so many artistic compromises that Mr. Ferguson, who was not yet the host of "The Late Late Show" on CBS, felt the need to embark on a creative odyssey entirely within his control: he began to write a book.

Those scraps of paper have yielded not a Hollywood tell-all, but a novel, "Between the Bridge and the River," which is to be published by Chronicle Books on Monday. It is a sprawling, often allegorical tale that ranges from Mr. Ferguson's native Scotland to Los Angeles, where he lives now, and includes a rambunctious, sometimes violent road trip through the American South. Its main characters include two old friends from Scotland, one of them a television evangelist whose program is derailed by a sex scandal; a femme fatale who has killed off six husbands; and a pair of half brothers sired by Frank Sinatra and Peter Lawford in their Rat Pack days. ("Ring-a-ding-ding," Mr. Ferguson writes, appropriating one of Sinatra's signature lines.)

Among the other figures who make cameos, as Mr. Ferguson sends up Las Vegas and Hollywood, to say nothing of Christianity, Scientology, television news and the escort industry, are Carl Jung (wearing a Cossack's uniform in one dream sequence), Larry King and Socrates.

The book, which tops off at 329 pages, is filled with many surprises. Chief among them is probably this: unlike other television stars who have moonlighted as authors, including Jay Leno (the children's book "If Roast Beef Could Fly" in 2004) and Drew Carey ("Dirty Jokes and Beer: Stories of the Unrefined," in 1997) Mr. Ferguson has written a work of literary fiction, one that periodically tips its cap to Mikhail Bulgakov, Kurt Vonnegut, Joseph Campbell, Jung, Mark Twain and Herman Melville, among many others.

In other words, it's a book that may not necessarily sit well with many of the two million viewers who, on a typical night, stay up after David Letterman's "Late Show" to hear Mr. Ferguson refer to them endearingly as "cheeky wee monkeys" or "naughty little donkeys," as he aims barbs from his monologue at favorite targets like President Bush and Starbucks. It may also jolt those who know him best from his previous job, playing the officious boss, Mr. Wick, on Mr. Carey's sitcom.

"This book could scare them," Mr. Ferguson said in a recent interview, at ease in sweatpants and a T-shirt behind the desk of his office here at CBS Television City. "The sex, the violence, the dream sequences and the iconoclasm. I think a lot of people are uncomfortable with that. I understand that. It was very uncomfortable to write some of it."

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.