Best photos ever,Stephania ! Fantastic coloration in all of them. I sure envy your growing conditions,your plants love it,and show it. Is this the year I put up a heated greenhouse ? hmmm,sure is tempting.

Great photography,now you've sparked an urge for me to get some dyckia plants on order.

Thanks for the neat posting,

Bob

Thanks friends :^)

Bob, it would be our tradition !

Last year, I had received a spiney inspiration from the post in this forum too,

especially those from our first spiney friend, Bihai, thank you too...to make me crazy!

Dyckia book, hmmmm good idea Philofan.

Hey Paul, don't scare Bob, instead a greenhouse, he will make a conservatory.

Lisa, you absolutely right ! those pics were taken in late evening,

so that the plants had been exposed to a whole day strong summer sun.

Some of them changed their color from the dehydration.

Well, some more pics...

Dyckia 'Arizona', from Tropiflora

{{gwi:451527}}

Dyckia 'Snaggle Tooth'

{{gwi:451528}}

Dyckia choristaminea x dawsonii, from Michael's Bromeliads

{{gwi:451529}}

Dyckia choristaminea 'small form', from Tropiflora

{{gwi:451530}}

The worlds smallest Dyckia, Dyckia remotiflora dwarf form, which mutated here.

{{gwi:451531}}

Ah... so you took the pictures during the "magic hour", Stephania. That's cheating! Not really, but everything always looks better right at dusk when the colors suddenly pop out at you. I love that time!

Between that and using the black backdrop you have created some fantastic photos, and I second the suggestion of putting them in a book, or at least a Journal article. I'll bet Dyckias will suddenly soar in popularity!

Hi Stephania,

I keep coming back to your photos,they are excellent.

I've noticed that pics taken at near sunset have a much better coloration to them. Eyesight seems better too,and the atmosphere filtered sun rays seem to produce more vivid colors than when the sun is at its brightest.

Regarding your dyckia 'Yellow Glow',it seems to have some leaf discoloration on the lower leaves,and I've noticed the same is happening to my YG,[tho its more of a 'Green Glow',being a young plant and lacking sun during the winter months].So I'm wondering what is the cause of this ? As it seems to be happening on your plant with such good growing conditions,and attentive care,I'm concerned. Its rather hard to acquire a mature plant,should I need to. Its one I'd like to always have on hand.

Heres a photo of mine,not looking too good.

bob

{{gwi:451532}}

Thanks Lisa :) yes I always love that time, and because, walking in my garden,

without any shade cloth protection, in the afternoon is "well done" cooked !

As HDD mentioned, I agree that this symptom would be caused of

a kind of fungal disease, because mine always occurs after a week of heavy rain.

I found that only Dyckia 'Yellow Glow' is prone to infect by the disease.

Rarely in another species, Dyckia 'Angelita' and Dyckia platyphylla

got some infection, but can heal theirself soon after that.

Anyway, I use a fungicide, hexaconazole, to cure with feeding some calcium-boron

for 'Yellow Glow' and it works.

Here, after a long waiting, my 'Yellow Glow' is blooming.

The big guy on the left is xPukia 'Sparkle' from Tropiflora.

{{gwi:451533}}