Seeds can be ordered

I always keep some stock of fresh collected seeds. Dyckia seeds do not last long unless under special care. If you want to aquire some we can deal it. Just let me know.

Send an email to:

constantinog@terra.com.br

Total Pageviews

Dyckia delicata

Dyckia fosteriana nivosa

Dyckia Fantasma

Dyckia Alegria

Dyckia fosteriana-fosteriana Star of Brazil

Dyckia delicata red form

Dyckia delicata gold form

The elves boil liquid silver here...

Dyckia sp, what does this mean? ...and what else?

Dyckia sp is the very same as Dyckia species, in fact short for Dyckia species. It refers to an unnamed Dyckia species.

A Dyckia sp can not be a hybrid Dyckia and never a Dyckia you do not know the name but a nameless Dyckia species. The fact that you do not know the plant it does not mean a nameless one.

A new Dyckia species must be published in order to have its name valid. This obligation doesn´t counted on Iternet publications as The World Wide Web didn´t exist and publication meant : journals, books, magazine, scientific report magazines.

Nowadays nothing is better published than in the WWW.

Publishing means getting public and there is nothing equal nor close to the WWW.

Public means everybody not just a bunch of selected guys.

These are mates, collegues, fellows not public. Here people publish new Plant species on very restricted magazine or very specialized magazines and assume as published. Publishing means everybody who is willing to know of it. Also the world doesn´speaks Portuguese, nor spanish and less than this doesn´t understand old Latim ( Not even those who publishes a new species. They rely on claves and many mistakes are made.) Today publishing means WWW!!! Today it means English!! If a new species is published here in Brazil it must be in Latim as in any other place on the Earth, Portuguese and for God´s sake also in English and entirely not a sinopsis only. Publications with a very restrictec and exclusive public is out of question. Publications with on purposal omitted data is also out of question and not valid. A bunch of readers is not public. A group of readers are collegues never public!!!Public is WWW and your reader may be in Reykjavick or Auckland, Rio or Tokyo and everywhere in between. Portuguese is a lovely sounding language. It makes feel home...but who is going to undertand me in ...in...everywhere else besides people which countries speak Camões´ language? English, English for Gods´sake.

Also there is no sense publising without precise data.

Preservation means showing, educating not hidding an less yet iluding.

What Light is for if it doesn´t Brighten up high above everything?Light is to iluminate or it is not Light and if it isn´t Light it isn´t Science!

Feedjit

Species and Hybrids understand their names

Understand Latim names. Latim names identify species. Usually they have two words. The first one begins with a Capital letter and the second doesn´t. The second identifies the species and the first tell the genus it belongs to.

e.g. Dyckia brevifolia

Dyckia is the genus and brevifolia the species (brevi = short folia = leaf)

e. g. Dyckia MammaMia

Hybrid plant , the second name also begins with a capital letter.

Do you want to know lots about this?

Are you willing to know what is in a Botanical name?

Hit:

http://www.plantapalm.com/wianame,htm

South , here in Brazil uphills can be very cold, deep cold.Dyckia gloriosa

Dyckia goehring X Dyckia pectinata hybrid

Brazil Map

Dyckia hebdingii

New Dyckia species from Rio Grande do Sul

Dyckia sichii

Dyckia fosteriana rubra

Dyckia hebdingii affinis

Dyckia goehringii

Dyckia gloriosa

Dyckia hebdingii affinis

Dyckia gloriosa

ALLURING, GORGEOUS! To say the least.

Dyckia Mother Africa

Dyckia goehringii

Neophytum Twilight on Fire

Dyckia beateae

Those magnific Dyckia Hybrids have a distintive role in preserving the species.

Dyckia eruca

Dyckia fosteriana

Dyckia gloriosa

Dyckia sp Bahia

Dykia Bleeding Hope

Dyckia pectinata

Dyckia gloriosa

Dyckia hebdingii

Dyckia hebdingii

Native to the End of the Rainbow

...and as you are there, at the End of The Rainbow...

Yes, I wished upon the stars

They were there, you know this...

The gem of the jewel...or...

Hummm... all man made here...

I like it this way..

Luv this one...

Dyckia sp (Yes, still a nameless one.)

Superb, fantastic a man made marvel.

Another Santa Catarina Dream Dyckia

Dyckia cabrerae red form

Dyckia hebdingii or the blue one

Dyckia sp Dona Francisca

Dyckia Picante

A Dream come true..

nature jock

Blog Archive

Dyckia julianae... or something in between Dyckia hebdingii and Dyckia choristaminea