I don't think Hugh Grant has ever played the role of a journalist in a film, but he made a nice go at it in real life. Grant's been the subject of many a tabloid story over the past decade, but this week, he's the author of one. Grant sported a hidden tape recorder during drinks with a former celebrity-beat journalist and published the most scandalous and interesting parts of their conversation in the New Statesman, including whether or not Rupert Murdoch had any idea about the phone hacking that journalists were doing at News of the World, one of the newspapers owned by News Corp.

Grant had met Paul McMullan, an ex-News of the World journalist, in December, when Grant's Ferrari broke down on a Kent highway and McMullan gave him a lift (after snapping some photos to sell to the Daily Mail for 3,000 pounds). McMullan is one of the journalists who has provided evidence of the illegal lengths NotW journalists were going to in order to break news stories about celebrities and royals -- including allegedly breaking into their voice mailboxes. A former editor and current reporter for the paper were arrested and charged with "unlawful interception of voicemail messages" earlier this month.

Meanwhile news subjects -- such as actress Sienna Miller -- have filed lawsuits against the paper for violating their privacy. (Ironically, those civil suits against the paper had been delayed for privacy reasons -- Miller's phone company, Vodafone, refused to provide her with data about which numbers had accessed her voice mail, until she got a court order.) News of the World issued a "whoops, we're sorry" statement about the phone hacking on Sunday.

In the transcript of Grant's convo with the former paparazzo, titled The Bugger, Bugged, McMullan's candid with Grant about practices among the UK press, in part because he didn't realize he was being recorded:

McMullan: Good question. You're not taping, are you?

Grant: [slightly shrill voice] No.

McMullan and Grant have a fairly long back-and-forth about whether it's unethical to listen in on the conversations of celebrities. McMullan argues that they are public figures and not entitled to privacy. Grant, obviously, disagrees with that point of view.

McMullan also argues that phone hacking should be permissible because it's so easy to do. I'd like to think that he was befuddled by beer, but he makes the argument that hacking a landline should be illegal but hacking a mobile phone shouldn't be, because of the difficulty of doing the former. Have I mentioned that McMullan is a journalist and not a lawyer?

Grant went beyond philosophical discussions and interrogated McMullan about the extent to which higher-ups knew about the phone hacking going on, asking, for example, about whether Rupert Murdoch might have known:

Grant: Do you think Murdoch knew about phone-hacking?

McMullan: Errr, possibly not. He's a funny bloke given that he owns the Sun and the Screws . . . quite puritanical. Sorry to talk about Divine Brown [Ed note: the sex worker with whom Grant was found to be friendly], but when that came out . . . Murdoch was furious: "What are you putting that on our front page for? You're bringing down the tone of our papers." [Indicating himself] That's what we do over here.

Grant: Well, it's also because it was his film I was about to come out in.

McMullan: Oh. I see.

Grant: Yeah. It was a Fox film.

There'll certainly be more interesting testimony to come as the criminal and civil cases around the phone-hacking proceed in London. But this an interesting start, and a fascinating reversal of the roles of privacy invader and invaded.