Governance and funding

The Foundation Board of the Basel Institute on Governance is responsible for guiding the organisation's overall strategy.

The Board supervises and monitors the activities of the Management Group, advises the Management Group on all organisational matters and takes fundamental decisions concerning the Basel Institute's operations and strategies.

Current Members of the Board are:

Funding

The Basel Institute on Governance is a Swiss not-for-profit foundation ("Stiftung") with an annual budget of approximately CHF 15 million.

We receive core funding from bilateral governmental (development aid) agencies including:

Government of Jersey

Principality of Liechtenstein

Norwegian Agency for Development Cooperation (Norad)

Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation (SDC)

UK Foreign, Commonwealth & Development Office (FCDO)

UK Home Office

These core contributions support the operations of our International Centre for Asset Recovery (ICAR). In addition, the Principality of Liechtenstein provides core funding to our Green Corruption programme.

Several dedicated country programmes received additional earmarked support from our core donors' country offices. Our Public Finance Management programme in Peru is funded by the Swiss State Secretariat for Economic Affairs. The Basel Institute also benefits from multiple project-specific grants, including from the US Department of State, USAID and GIZ (Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit).

The Siemens Integrity Initiative has funded a significant part of our Collective Action work since 2010, including the development of the B20 Collective Action Hub resource centre.

Other direct income comes from a variety of corporate foundations and initiatives, development agencies and research grant facilities.

If any surplus is generated from advisory services or subscriptions to our Basel AML Index or Basel Open Intelligence tools, we reinvest this to fund research and technical assistance programmes in developing countries.

Audited financial accounts

The Basel Institute’s annual financial accounts are prepared according to Swiss law, GAAP FER principles and the Basel Institute’s bylaws. They are audited independently each year by BDO.

Financial Statement 2023

Financial Statement 2022

Financial Statement 2021

Financial Statement 2020

Financial Statement 2019

Financial Statement 2018

Financial Statement 2017

Financial Statement 2016

Financial Statement 2015

Financial Statement 2014

Financial Statement 2013

Financial Statement 2012