Dell Children’s Medical Center, the only dedicated freestanding pediatric facility in the region, serves a 46-county area providing the only Level I trauma center and most specialized care for our children and adolescents.

The Dell Children’s Foundation works with our generous philanthropic community and their passion to invest in the future of our children’s health in Central Texas. For over a decade, we have changed how our children are cared for in our community.

Each year, thousands of families in Central Texas receive the news no parent wants to hear—your child has a serious, life-threatening disease. For these families, the words that often follow are difficult: Your child’s best chance of survival lies elsewhere. Right now, care for patients in need of advanced, specialty care often means families have to juggle impractical and expensive long-distance travel or bi-city living for long periods of time. And these are the fortunate ones. For the 70% of Dell Children’s Medical Center patients who are un- or under-insured, life-saving care may be out of their reach. To us, this is simply unacceptable.

Dell Children’s Medical Center is a proud member of Children’s Miracle Network Hospitals. Donations to CMNH create miracles by funding medical care, research and education that saves and improves the lives of 17 million children each year. Currently, Dell Children’s CMNH program funding supports our HERE campaign to ensure no child has to leave Austin to get the care they need.

Joining us for one of our events is a great way to learn more about our mission, hear stories from our caregivers, and take part in vital fundraising campaigns for Dell Children’s. Find out more about attending one of our upcoming events by visiting our events page.

We would not be able to serve our communities without the generous support from our donors and volunteers. Whether you are a patient, family member or friend, your gifts of time and treasure change the lives of children in Central Texas.