Swedish authors (and de facto couple) Maj Sjöwall and Per Wahlöö are pivotal figures in the development of Scandinavian crime fiction as a distinct subgenre, with their critically-acclaimed ten-volume series of ‘Martin Beck’ police procedurals mapping out a then-contemporary panorama of Swedish society from the mid sixties to the mid seventies.

The Laughing Policeman (Den skrattande polisen, 1968, translated by Alan Blair), the fourth in the ‘Martin Beck’ sequence, won the Edgar Allan Poe award for Best Novel in 1971. Set in Stockholm’s miserable winter slush at the end of 1967, it concerns the mass murder of a busload of passengers, late at night, by an unknown assailant armed with a submachine gun. The police investigation has its hands full merely determining the identities of the driver and eight passengers slain in the attack; the crime scene was left badly messed up by the well-meaning first responders to the incident, so the hopes of Beck and his team for clues to the killer’s identity rest with the critically-wounded sole survivor, and with the discovery that one of the bodies on the bus is that of Åke Stenström, a young policeman known to Beck and his associates. But, since it seems that Stenström was off duty at the time of the attack, it’s not clear whether his presence at the scene was intended or merely due to random chance…

As with all of the books in the sequence, this is presented as a ‘Martin Beck’ novel, though it could more justifiably be described as a novel of Lennart Kollberg, Beck’s closest associate and a distinctly more sympathetic character. Unlike Beck, Kollberg does not merely run the gamut of emotions from ‘gruff’ to ‘taciturn’: his personality displays genuine growth within the book’s pages and his interactions with others, particularly Stenström’s bereaved partner Åsa Torell, are moving and memorable.

The writing is detached, distant, consistently downplaying, the setting a half-century past (with its student unrest and massed Vietnam War demonstrations), yet the scenes described are vivid and the sense of involvement immediate. There are aspects to the text which now appear somewhat dated (its examination of sexuality, for example); it’s also interesting to contrast the police response to the atrocity with what the present-day response would most likely entail. In these respects, it’s unavoidable that the book is seen as a document of its times. (I was intrigued to note that the book contains what might be the earliest pop-culture reference to Ronald Reagan, politician—as opposed to Ronald Reagan, actor—beating out Creedence Clearawater Revival’s ‘It Came Out Of The Sky’ by a year or more.) Also as with all of the Beck books, it’s highly class-conscious and—more through Kollberg’s perspective than that of the consistently sour Beck—does not hide its authors’ openly-declared socialist sympathies, with commentary on wealth inequality, police brutality, corruption, journalistic sensationalism, and the prevalence of gun crime in the USA. (Perhaps this contributes to the books’ air of continuing relevance?) At its heart, however, it remains an expertly-told police procedural, with a well-constructed crime and a realistically-frustrated investigation progressing not-quite-blindly towards the revelation of a concealed truth.