Frank Scully

Politician

20-1-1920 – 12-8-2105

If you asked Frank Scully how he was, he would always reply: "All the better for seeing you." And you knew he meant it. The former ALP politician, and champion of many causes, was a well-loved resident of the Sandringham area. He was also an avid Richmond Tigers man - and the club song rang out as Scully's coffin left Sandringham's Sacred Heart Catholic Church after his funeral. The large congregation of family, friends and business associates included former Richmond players Francis Burke and John Nix.

The 95-year-old former Sandringham newsagent had been a Richmond fan since his family moved to Burnley in 1929 and this devotion to the team continued with fervour when, in 1949, he was preselected as the Australian Labor Party candidate for the state seat of Richmond, which he won and held for the party until 1954.

Secretary to cabinet in the Cain senior Labor government, Scully was one of the "Grouper" MPs, conservative Catholics who broke with the ALP in the infamous split of 1955 and joined the anti-communist movement, which eventually became the Democratic Labour Party.

Dr Herbert Vere Evatt, then the federal opposition leader trying to defeat Robert Menzies' conservative government, attacked the Groupers in the Victorian Labor Party and after the split many left or were expelled, including Frank Scully.

At the 1955 election, Scully was only one of the 17 expelled members to hold their seats, which he lost in 1958 to an Evatt Labor candidate, but he made political history as the last lower house DLP member in the state of Victoria.

Condolences were read out for Scully in the Victorian Parliament's lower house by Premier Daniel Andrews and in the upper house by the member for Western Metropolitan, Dr Rachel Carling-Jenkins, the only DLP member in the present Victorian Parliament.

During his time in Spring Street, Scully championed causes including the Co-Operation Act 1953, which paved the way for housing societies and credit unions, enabling Victorians to purchase homes at low interest rates. He also intervened to stop the discriminatory practice of Catholic school children not being able to travel to school on government buses during the height of sectarianism in the 1950s.

Scully's political career started after joining the Victorian Railways in 1935, aged only 15, to become a leading shunter in the Melbourne yard, and acting foreman. In the 1940s he became involved with the ALP industrial groups fighting the Communists who dominated the Australian Railways' Union, of which he was a member.

Scully was an active member of the National Civic Council, often seeking advice from B. A. Santamaria – the guiding influence in the founding of the DLP – and he was also involved in the Catholic Young Men's Society, where he learned to debate. He was secretary of the Young Labor Association for many years, as well as secretary of the South Richmond branch of the ALP.

Born in Bendigo, Scully was one of six children. The family moved to Burnley in 1929, where he attended St Louis School and later St Ignatius Boys' School in Richmond. Scully married wife Moira on November 23 1957.

After losing his parliamentary seat, Scully bought a newsagency business in Yea in 1959, which he ran for six years, before moving to Sandringham and buying a newsagency in Station Street. It was something of a homecoming for Moira as her family had lived in the bayside suburb many years earlier.

Both of them were involved with myriad local organisations, including the Sandringham Traders' Association and the St Vincent de Paul Society, with Scully a member of the Knights of the Southern Cross, Rotary and Probus Clubs.

He was a justice of the peace and shortly before his retirement in 1992 received an award from the Victoria Police for his services as a JP.

The Scullys were people of deep faith and members of Sandringham's Sacred Heart parish. They often visited Lourdes in France. After the September 11 terrorist attacks in New York, an international Mass was held there and the Scullys were present with Frank asked to do a reading on behalf of Australia.

In retirement, the Scullys followed their grandchildren's sporting activities, especially cricket. Frank had played for the Victorian Railways in interstate matches and the Richmond Cricket Club. He continued to play at Yea until his mid-40s.

In September 2008, Scully was diagnosed with chronic kidney failure and had to undergo dialysis three times a week until shortly before his death. He is survived by wife Moira, children Michael and Kath, nine grandchildren and two great grandchildren.