FRANK SCULLY 1920–2015

If you asked Frank Scully how he was, he would always reply: "All the better for seeing you". And he meant it. The former ALP politician, and champion of many causes, was also an avid Richmond Tigers man – and the club song rang out as Scully's coffin left the church after his funeral.

Francis Raymond Scully was born in Bendigo on January 27, 1920. The family moved to Burnley in 1929, and Frank went to St Ignatius Boys' School in Richmond.

His political career started after he joined the Victorian Railways in 1935, aged 15. He became a leading shunter in the Melbourne yard, and acting foreman, and the 1940s became involved with the ALP industrial groups fighting the Communists who dominated the Australian Railways' Union.

In 1949, Scully was preselected as the Australian Labor Party candidate for the state seat of Richmond, which he won and held for the party until 1954. In 1957, he married Moira Grant.

He was secretary to cabinet in the Cain Labor government, and was one of the "Grouper" MPs, conservative Catholics who broke with the ALP in 1955 and joined the anti-communist movement, which eventually became the Democratic Labour Party.

Dr Herbert Vere Evatt​, then the federal opposition leader trying to defeat Robert Menzies' conservative government, attacked the Groupers and many left or were expelled, including Scully.

At the 1955 election, Scully was only one of the 17 expelled members to hold their seats, which he lost in 1958 to an Evatt Labor candidate, but he made political history as the last lower house DLP member in the state of Victoria.

Scully championed causes including the Co-Operation Act 1953, which paved the way for housing societies and credit unions. He also intervened to stop the practice of Catholic school children not being able to travel to school on government buses during the height of sectarianism in the 1950s.

Scully was an active member of the National Civic Council and involved in the Catholic Young Men's Society. He was secretary of the Young Labor Association for many years, as well as secretary of the South Richmond branch of the ALP.

After losing his parliamentary seat, Scully first bought a newsagency business in Yea then moved to Sandringham and bought another newsagency.

Frank and Moira were involved with local organisations, and Frank was a member of the Knights of the Southern Cross, Rotary and Probus Clubs. He was a justice of the peace and shortly before his retirement in 1992 received an award from the Victoria Police for his services as a JP.

The Scullys often visited Lourdes in France. After the 2001 terrorist attacks in New York, an international Mass was held there and Frank was asked to do a reading on behalf of Australia.

Frank Scully is survived by Moira, children Michael and Kath, nine grandchildren and two great-grandchildren.