World class technology and attention to the small details will make the big difference to the lives of children across Wales.

That’s the verdict of doctors working at the Noah’s Ark Children’s Hospital for Wales and of the Royal College of Paediatricians and Child Health who have both welcomed the opening of phase two.

The hospital boasts brand new hydrotherapy and radiography facilities designed specifically for children, alongside purpose-built ward areas catering for children’s needs. Added to that are specialist surgical theatres, close to the children’s wards, decorated to help put their young patients at ease and an abundance of opportunities for them to play and get better.

It is this mixing of big science and attention to details, designing services around children, which is winning such acclaim.

Settling into the new phase of the Noah's Ark Children's Hospital for Wales:

Jennifer Evans, a consultant paediatrician at the Children’s Hospital, said: “When I first looked around the new phase two of the Children’s Hospital I noticed a small detail: the staircases had two handrails, one for the adults like any other staircase and one at a lower level for the children. That says to me, ‘This place was designed with the right people in mind – the children’.

'They move from one child-friendly environment to another'

“When training as a paediatrician you often hear the phrase, ‘Children are not simply small adults’. They are individuals in their own right, their bodies react differently to disease – they need professionals trained specifically to look after them and the environment in which they are cared for has to be designed to suit them and their needs.

“In phase two we have ‘purpose-built-for-children’ operating theatres and a dedicated X-ray department. As children make their journey through the hospital they move from one child-friendly environment to another.

“One thing I noticed early in my career is that unwell children, as soon as they feel just a little bit better, want to get up and go, and this environment encourages them to do just that.

“The new building is light, bright and airy and thereby adds just that little bit of something to your mood, whether you’re there as a patient or part of the team who cares for them.

“The children of Wales deserve these facilities and the best care that we, as professionals, can give them.

“The team I work in is determined to do the best by the children under our care and to offer the best training to young medical professionals working alongside us – we now have state-ofthe-art facilities in which to pursue that and I am proud to walk into that building to play my part.”

RELATED:Wales' children's hospital at 10: 'The new building gives us inspiration to show what we can do, and to be the best that we can, here in Wales'

Dr Mair Parry, officer for Wales, the Royal College of Paediatrics and Child Health, welcomed the arrival of the £63.8m Welsh Government-funded second phase.

She said: “The opening of the second phase of the Children’s Hospital of Wales will improve the care delivered to children, not only with complex and rare conditions, but will also provide tertiary services for young people in south and mid Wales, keeping all children’s services under one roof in a child-friendly environment and acting as a centrepiece for paediatrics in Wales.

Hospital's second phase is due to open today

“The opening of this world class centre of excellence is a sign of Welsh Government’s commitment to improving children’s health, and means Wales is no longer the only country in the UK without a children’s hospital.”

Geoff Walsh, assistant director for planning, capital, estates and operational services at the health board, said great care had been taken to make sure the hospital was tailored to the needs of its young patients.

He said: “There was also a major role for young patients and parents too. We involved children, mums and dads, carers, school kids and others in reviewing the options and in some elements of the design process – particularly in naming the wards, choosing the colours and the design of the courtyard area. I think that’s really helped to make it such a good fit for the needs of young patients and families.”

Staff and patients have been telling their stories on the health board’s website and social media accounts in the build up to the big day using the #NACHFW hashtag to promote their work and thank everyone involved.

The official opening of the second phase of the Children’s Hospital is due today with a host of staff, patients, dignitaries and celebrities in attendance.

The Noah’s Ark Angels, the hospital’s staff choir, will be performing a song they wrote for the occasion to reflect their pride and passion at being able to help young patients and families.

Swansea cake company, Debbie’s Sweet Indulgences, has provided a cake for the occasion – shaped like the Children’s Hospital.

The event will also recognise the support offered by fundraising patients, families and charities from across Wales who have raised millions of pounds for the Children’s Hospital.

New facilities move staff to tears

Maria Battle, chair of Cardiff and Vale University Health Board, said it really was the Children’s Hospital for Wales, not only caring for young patients from across the country but having the support of the people of Wales too.

READ MORE:How the Noah's Ark Children's Hospital inspired the nation

She said: “I am very grateful to the Welsh Government, Noah’s Ark and the many generous benefactors who have helped to get us where we are today making phase one and now phase two such a success. Everyone involved has contributed to making sure that the children of Wales have a world class facility delivering the best care to them and their families.

“Since the hospital opened we have had staff in tears, moved by the lovely facilities where they can now provide their excellent care to children. I have seen the difference this hospital is making by being designed specifically for children.

“We know that hospital can be a frightening place for everyone, so every little thing we can do to make that easier can make a big difference and helps to make the children’s time with us that much easier.”

CATY'S STORY:

Rosemary Martin, from Cwmbran, is mum to 15-year-old Catriona (Caty) Martin’s and talks about Caty’s experience at Noah’s Ark Children’s Hospital for Wales and the difference the new facilities have made to her care.

“A the end of February, beginning of March Caty started feeling ill, she wasn’t eating well, losing her ability to speak and she was getting anxious and upset about things and just bursting in tears. This behaviour was very out of character. Caty’s symptoms persisted with her being in and out of school for a few weeks feeling ill.

'The right words wouldn't come out'

"On the 10 March, I took her to school to meet with head of year to talk about things as her GCSE’s were fast approaching. She didn’t recognise her school environment or her head of year and her speech was jumbled up. The school nurse suggested taking her back to our GP she thought something was very wrong.

RELATED:'He's a little fighter': Toddler Romeo Hadley has both legs amputated after contracting extremely rare disease

“Caty’s speech deteriorated, we couldn’t understand her and the right words wouldn’t come out, she was confused disorientated. GP listened to her in private and Caty explained what had been happening. The GP rang the Royal Gwent hospital to talk to a paediatrician about Caty's symptoms.

“While waiting for her GP to call back with information from the Royal Gwent’s paediatricians, she rapidly declined, so we took her straight to A&E at the Gwent. Caty completely lost it, was kicking everyone, tried to run out of the hospital undressed, swearing, shouting and screaming. We had to call security to help calm her down.

“The doctors gave her something to calm her down. Psyche and medical were both involved. Caty managed to keep calm for the CT, she’d been given sedation. She was admitted on to the ward where she was slowly deteriorating, her speech was getting worse, her muscles stiffening up and she kept lashing out.

“Caty had episodes where her temperature would go up, heart rate go up, and the episodes were lasting longer and longer. Following a Lumber puncture they diagnosed auto-immune encephalitis.

'Taking her GCSEs one minute and the next she couldn't talk or walk'

“She was transferred to Paediatric Intensive Care Unit the Noah’s Ark Children’s Hospital for Wales at 2-3 weeks, then High Dependency Unit for a week, then on to Jungle Ward and then Island Ward. A total of nine weeks in hospital. It was a really tough journey, such a shock to the system. Caty was a normal 15 year old taking her GCSEs one minute and the next she couldn’t talk or walk.

“The difference in her now is amazing, she is now walking to go and get breakfast. She is going home this weekend for the first time in nine weeks. Hopefully home for good.

READ MORE:'They've become part of my journey and part of my family': Young patients praise staff at Noah's Ark Children's Hospital

“ The facilities have been great, I’ve had private accommodation here for the whole time, not having to sleep in the same room has meant I can get some rest and Caty has been getting the best care throughout the night without me being there. Caty has had a toilet and wet room in her large room, with plenty of space.

“The staff have been brilliant, play team have been bringing her things to do, Caty’s brought in her Xbox from home, she gets teaching help. Everyone has been great, not just the doctors and nurses –all the staff, physio’s, teaching staff, student docs have time to listen and take time to learn from Caty’s condition, and the play specialists. Even down to the nurse assistants, housekeepers and ward-based caterers are all so supportive and keen to know how’s she’s doing. It’s been a really good stay with excellent support.”

Keep clicked onto www.walesonline.co.uk for all the fantastic celebrations as the second phase of the Noah’s Ark Children’s Hospital for Wales is officially opened.