The Paediatric Rheumatology Tertiary Service is based in the Children’s Hospital for Wales. Our service covers South and Mid Wales providing outreach clinics within Swansea Bay University Health Board, Cwm Taf University Health Board and Hywel Dda University Health Board.

The Occupational Therapist within the Paediatric Rheumatology Tertiary Service team supports inpatient and outpatient occupational therapy services. We see children who have inflammatory conditions – such as Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis (JIA), SLE (Lupus), Scleroderma, Juvenile Dermatomyositis (JDM) – and non-inflammatory conditions such as joint pain and Ehlers-Danlos Syndromes (EDS).

We also support and liaise with local services, schools and therapy teams to ensure the continuity of care for the children and young people we see.

The Metabolic Bone Disease service is a tertiary service that sees children and teenagers from South and Mid Wales. The Occupational Therapist works as part of a multidisciplinary team consisting of a

Physiotherapist

Advanced Nurse Practitioner

Clinical Psychologist

Pharmacist

Dietician

Endocrine Consultants.

Children and young people are referred to Occupational Therapy by members of the multidisciplinary team to the service.

The role of the Occupational Therapist within the Metabolic Bone team involves assessment of children and young adults who might experience difficulties participating in their everyday occupations or who are experiencing a delay in their development because of their metabolic bone condition.

Many children and teenagers with a metabolic bone condition experience fatigue and sometimes pain. The Occupational Therapist can teach strategies to help with this, problem solving specific scenarios with the child or young person, and helping to minimise the impact pain and fatigue has on day to day occupations.

A lot of our work is preventative and involves educating those nearest to the child about the condition and on how best to manage potential risk factors to prevent pain and injury. This includes advice for play activities, development of independent self-care skills, participation in school life, and access to leisure activities at home or in the local community.

The Occupational Therapist can give advice regarding:

safe handling techniques for bathing, dressing, play positioning and feeding,

developmentally appropriate activities to encourage children to progress with their mobility, play and self-care skills.

modifying activities or the physical environment to enable independence

the use of adaptive devices if necessary including wheelchairs

Our treatment interventions use play or other activities that are tailored to the child or young person.

Cardiff and Vale University Health Board is home to the regional Major Trauma Centre for adults and children in South Wales, West Wales and South Powys.

Any child who experiences a serious injury will come to Noah’s Ark Children’s Hospital where they will be seen by members of the Major Trauma Team.

As Occupational Therapists we work alongside Physiotherapists, Speech and Language Therapists and Play Specialists within the Major Trauma Team to ensure that a child can be returned home safely.

We may identify pieces of equipment to help make daily tasks more manageable or we may work on specific skills to help increase a child or young person’s independence.

Frequently Asked Questions about the South Wales Trauma Network (Public Health Wales website) (opens a new window)

More information about the South Wales Trauma Network (Public Health Wales website) (opens a new window)