As part of our series this week celebrating the Noah’s Ark Children’s Hospital for Wales’ 10th birthday and the official opening of its £63.8m second phase this Friday, we today focus on how the specialist centre is more than steel and glass by focusing on the staff and the volunteers who add the real value

It takes a lot more than bricks, mortar, cabling, pipework and high-tech equipment to build a Children’s Hospital. The foundations of the building support the hundreds of outstanding staff at the new Noah’s Ark Children’s Hospital for Wales which exists because of its “amazing, caring and brilliant staff and volunteers”.

The hospital team don’t just nurse the young patients, they raise money for the wards they work on, treat patients and parents like family, often going the extra mile to ensure that people in their care feel “at home”.

Meet Kelly Enticott, a play assistant in the Children’s Hospital, based on Island Ward and also in the Oncology Clinic.

Her role involves using play to make children feel comfortable in hospital and continuing children’s development through normal play routines. If a child can’t leave their bed to visit a playroom to have some fun, the play assistant will visit the child at their bed and take toys and activities and play games to help them relax and become used to the hospital environment.

'Looking silly is a normal part of my job'

Kelly uses a variety of distraction techniques when a child needs a painful procedure, like having a cannula fitted or a long line put in, to take their mind off their current situation. She will go in and distract the child by blowing bubbles, making funny faces, playing with their favourite toy.

Kelly said: “Looking silly is a normal part of my job. When a child is difficult to distract, sometimes the only way to take their minds off the pain they might be going through is by pulling a funny face or making a funny noise. It helps to make their experience in hospital a little bit easier to cope with.”

RELATED:10 years of Noah's Ark Children's Hospital and the celebs who helped shape it

Kelly said she loves working in the Children’s Hospital: “Every day I go home smiling. Even when something really tragic has happened on the ward, something good always happens too – it’s like ying and yang.

“Great things happen on the ward. I’ve just taught one of the patients to use Makaton sign language, and sign the word for more, because of this he’s managed to sit upright unaided for the very first time. Helping the children do normal daily things that other people take for granted is really enriching.”

Louise Waughington is a staff nurse on Owl Ward. She’s been qualified as a nurse for seven years.

Louise works as part of a multi-disciplinary team providing the best care for patients, which includes doctors, hospital play staff, radiographers, healthcare support workers, psychologists and social workers.

As a children’s nurse, Louise is involved in everything from nursing newborns to adolescents. However, it is not all about the child. Care and support is also needed by the wider-family, including the parents.

Louise loves working in the new hospital and says the team has settled in really well.

RELATED: 'It is such a special place': Noah's Ark Children's Hospital for Wales' second phase set to officially open this week

Louise said: “It’s the realisation that parents are going through the most difficult times in their lives here and we support them through that. We are rewarded with such generosity and kindness from the patients and their families.

“They’ll buy us a small gift as a token of appreciation, the child will make a thank you card or give you a big cwtch at the end of their stay here and say ‘thank you for all your help’. That’s what makes the job so special for me. We become part of the family’s journey from sick to well. I’m so thankful for being a part of that, seeing them at their worst and then seeing them fit and well when they leave. It’s so rewarding.”

'We have the children's best interests at heart'

Dr Gillian Body, paediatric consultant, has been working at the Children’s Hospital for the past six years. She sees children of all ages, from birth to 16 years old, with acute conditions and chronic conditions, as outpatients in clinic or as inpatients when the patient is brought in unwell.

Dr Body said: “If you are unwell and come to the Children’s Hospital, maybe referred by your GP or through the Emergency Unit, you might see me in the Assessment Unit or on the Children’s Ward during the day.

“Junior doctors and nurses will come to your bed and assess you, do some investigations and plan your treatment so that we can get you home well as soon as possible.”

Dr Body really enjoys working at the new hospital and said: “What I really like about working here is the team. I think particularly in children’s medicine we are all very focused around children and everyone from consultants to junior doctors, nurses to students feel that this is really important.

“We all have something special to add to what we do for children. Here in Cardiff, it’s a really friendly place to work and we always have the children’s best interests at heart. The new building gives us inspiration to show what we can do, and to be the best that we can, here in Wales.”

It’s not just health board staff making a difference to young lives, volunteers play an important part too. Mair Bevan is a meet and greet volunteer in the Children’s Hospital. She is often one of the first faces visitors to the hospital see. Mair has volunteered for many years, starting off in the main hospital and then moving over to the Children’s Hospital when it opened.

She has a great knowledge of the hospital. Mair helps visitors and patients find their way around the Children’s Hospital. She tries to help make them feel relaxed and less anxious when they arrive with her warm welcoming manner.

Mair is an ex school teacher and prides herself on getting the children involved in their journey through the hospital, by explaining about the artwork on the Children’s Hospital walls and telling them a story until they get to their destination.

'Checking in' for appointments

Mair said: “I really enjoy volunteering. It’s a role that is really needed in the hospital. It helps a lot of people to find their way around and helps them feel a lot less anxious and reassured before they attend their appointment.

“I try to engage with children as much as possible, explaining to them how to use the computerised booking in system, which can be lowered to the child’s height for them to check themselves in for their appointment. I find the whole experience of volunteering here very rewarding.”

Mair said it was great to be a part of something helping children from across Wales.

She said: “A couple came from mid-Wales to visit their granddaughter and were lost in the main hospital building. I was able to help them find their way. I had my Cymraeg lanyard around my neck, which shows that I speak Welsh, and they immediately felt more comfortable and started communicating with me in their first language.

“This made their experience at the hospital much better as I was able to give them directions in Welsh and hand them over to a Welsh speaking nurse on the ward. I think the family really appreciated being able to talk to someone who understood.”

'We have to plan for the future'

Claire Birchall, head of operations and delivery for the Children and Women’s Clinical Board, said the Children’s Hospital works because of everyone working together in the interests of the children of Wales.

She said: “My job means that I am ultimately accountable for all the services within the new hospital, including safety and efficiency of day-to-day running – from outpatient access to ensuring patients are treated in a timely way and making sure that there are sufficient beds and resources available to manage emergencies.

“It’s about making sure that all services are delivered in a safe way, with a high quality of care that is in line with national standards and are good value for money. Sometimes I have to make difficult decisions about how we allocate the resources.

“We have to plan for the future, ensuring that we continually strive to improve and redesign our services so that we are the best in our class by providing a centre of excellence for training, research and care to the children and their families.

Noah's Ark fundraising picnic in images:

“None of this would be possible without the help of a wonderfully committed and talented multidisciplinary team within the Children and Women’s Clinical Board, and the support of other services and Clinical Boards across the UHB.

“I am so proud of the team I lead and the wonderful services we provide in this fantastic new facility. This is not something that you get the opportunity to do very often in your NHS career – open a fantastic state of the art facility designed specifically for the care of children.

“The team have worked wonders in designing and planning this hospital and bringing it alive from a dream into reality. The last six months have been tough, but people have worked above and beyond all expectations to get us where we are today. On behalf of the Children and Women’s Clinical Board, I want to formally thank each and every one of our staff for their dedication, commitment and affection in getting this wonderful new hospital open.”

* To become a volunteer in one of Cardiff and Vale University Health Board’s hospitals please contact Michelle Fowler on 02920 335467.