Arnold Schwarzenegger turns 73 today. The action legend and former California governor’s films have earned more than $4 billion worldwide.

To wish the film icon a happy birthday, we’ll share our 10 favorite films of his.

We’ll cover plenty of the hits you know and love, but also include some lesser celebrated titles that deserve the love. Read our picks (and honorable mentions) below:

10. Twins (1988)

Schwarzenegger’s sense of humor was never in question even in his action flicks, so it didn’t surprise anyone he could carry a broad comedy. Pairing him with a gifted comic actor like Danny DeVito also paid dividends, creating a chemistry as unlikely as their on-screen brotherly relationship.

9. Commando (1985)

Arnold stars as John Matrix (what a name), a retired elite Black Ops Commando who launches a one-man war against a group of South American criminals who kidnapped his daughter. It doesn’t take long for the bullets to star flying at an alarming rate. Famous for its astronomical body count (don’t worry, they’re mostly bad guys) as well as Arnold’s ridiculous one-liners, including the climactic “Let off some steam!”after he dispatches the most over-matched villain in movie history.

8. Last Action Hero (1993)

Largely forgotten perhaps because it came out one week after 1993 box office behemoth “Jurassic Park” opened (against Arnie’s wishes), this meta flick sending up the action genre and Schwarzenegger’s own career was also just ahead of its time. He re-teamed with “Predator” director John McTiernan for this odd blockbuster about a young movie fan who is transported into the fictional world of his favorite action movie character. The movie-within-a-movie concept rarely clicks with mass audiences, but props to Arnold for trying something brand new during his apex.

7. Kindergarten Cop (1990)

Arnold’s best comedy finds him as a tough cop who poses as a kindergarten teacher (you know, a kindergarten cop) to locate a dangerous criminal’s ex-wife, who may hold the key to putting him behind bars. Pairing him with kids between “Total Recall” and “Terminator 2″ proved a wise move and another welcome departure. Full of quotable lines (”It’s not a tumor!”) and a gripping story (if a little disturbing for a family flick), it only reinforced Arnie’s range and crossover appeal.

6. Total Recall (1990)

Probably Schwarzenegger’s weirdest movie to date, “RoboCop” director Paul Verhoeven’s space espionage adventure about vacations to Mars, memory wipes and alternate realities kept the actor’s sci-fi action hot streak alive thanks to eye-popping special effects and a terrific supporting cast featuring Rachel Ticotin, Sharon Stone, Ronny Cox and Michael Ironside.

5. Pumping Iron (1977)

George Butler and Robert Fiore’s documentary about bodybuilding gave American audiences an entertaining introduction to Schwarzenegger’s charming personality and competitive killer instinct. It focuses on the one-sided rivalry between Arnold Schwarzenegger and Lou Ferrigno, his toughest competition for the title of Mr. Olympia, with Arnold waxing philosophically about the industry and his own work ethic, with glimpses at his needling Ferrigno behind the scenes during competitions.

4. The Terminator (1984)

A deadly android is sent from 2029 to 1984 to assassinate a waitress, whose unborn son will lead humanity in a war against the machines, while a soldier from that war is sent to protect her at all costs. James Cameron’s sci-fi classic launched a franchise along with himself as one of Hollywood’s biggest directors. Above all, it launched Schwarzenegger into the stratosphere as one of Hollywood’s biggest new stars and box office draws, cementing his future as the world’s biggest action hero, even if he kicked things off as a villain.

3. True Lies (1994)

If Arnie played James Bond. Give James Cameron’s outstanding spy thriller “True Lies” another look if you haven’t in some time. A loose remake of the 1991 French comedy film “La Totale!,” it follows Arnold as a government agent who balances his life as a spy with his familial duties, with the final act focusing on fighting terrorists who have smuggled nuclear warheads into America, even detonating one on a remote island in the Florida Keys, with a mushroom cloud serving as the backdrop for a romantic kiss shared by Arnold and co-star Jamie Lee Curtis. If nothing else, enjoy fine acting from none other than one Tom Arnold.

2. Predator (1987)

Arnold leads a team of commandos on a mission in a Central American jungle, finding themselves hunted by an brutal extraterrestrial warrior. Following “The Terminator,” Schwarzenegger cranked out a few fun, if silly, action flicks that certainly whet the appetites of genre fans but offered nothing transcendent like his first film with “Die Hard” director John McTiernan did. What might feel like “Commando” with a few more brain cells during the opening act quickly transitions to one of the best sci-fi action flicks ever made thanks to amazing cast (Carl Weathers! Bill Duke! Jesse Ventura!), clever script and brilliant action sequences punctuated by Stan Winston’s unparalleled creature effects.

1. Terminator 2: Judgment Day (1991)

It all came together in James Cameron’s superb sequel to his celebrated 1984 sci-fi masterpiece, this time finding Schwarzenegger as a cyborg, identical to the one who failed to kill Sarah Connor, sent from the future to protect her teenage son from a more advanced and powerful cyborg. Cameron upped the ante with groundbreaking special effects and exciting action, but Arnold’s acting chops took a leap, conveying more emotional depth than expected from a robot who understands humanity through a punk kid who scams ATMs and rocks to Guns N’ Roses with Budnik from “Salute Your Shorts.” But Arnold’s deadpan delivery of Cameron’s airtight script only enhance his inherent believabilty as a bonafide action star, solidifying an actor-director combo for the ages. If only the franchise had stopped here.