Thiruvisaippa is a great master piece in the Shaivite Texts. This holy text is supposed to be composed during the 10th century, by the following great Shavite Saints who are also the staunch devotees of Lord Shiva: Thirumaligai Thevar, Senthanar, Karuvur Thevar, Ponnthuruthi Nambi Kata Nambi, Kandarathithar, Venattadigal, Thiruvaliyamuthanar, Purshottama Nambi, Sethiyar.

Out of the above nine Shavite saints, Sri Kandarathithar, was a Chola king, he and his pious consort Ma Sembian Mahadevi were sincere devotees of Shiva. Though he was interested to write few more texts on Lord Shiva during his period, but his dream was came true through his grandson Rajaraja I.

Some of the wonderful verses from the Holy Text, Thiruvisaippa are as follows:-

The great Lord Shiva is the one, who is the root cause of everything!

Lord Shiva is the one, who showers ocean like mercy towards his devotees!

Lord Shiva’s divine plays cannot be easily understood by others!

Lord Shiva dwells permanently on his devotees minds!

Lord Shiva is the one who has once burnt the three cities, who is also known as Tripurandaganeswara!

By visiting the temples of Lord Shiva, our mind would attain great peace!Lord Shiva is the one, who has brought ocean of milk when a son of a sage, the great Upamanyu has cried for milk!

Lord Shiva is the one, who has given the Holy Sudarsana chakra to Lord Vishnu himself!

Lord Shiva dwells in the form of Nataraja, the divine dancer in the holy temple Chidambaram and those who worship him at this holy temple would surely attain the eternal bliss!

Lord Shiva can also be visited by building a wonderful temple for him on our soul!

Lord Shiva cannot be neglected by us, since we are able to breathe only because of his mercy!

Lord Shiva would hug us during the times of our difficulties and would provide food and water even in the parched desert places!

Lord Shiva would be pleased very much, if we sanctify him by the way of performing holy bath to his Shiva Lingam!

Lord Shiva would never consider our status, whether we are rich or poor, but, he used to consider only our pure and selfless bhakti. He is very simple, and he is liked by everyone!

Let everybody of us pray that the Lord should live for several years!