July 14, 2008 - Canadian American League (Can-Am)

Sussex Skyhawks News Release

AUGUSTA, N.J. - *The Sussex Skyhawks started the second half of the Can Am league season with a 6-4 win over the Nashua Pride on Monday at Skylands Park.

Sussex starter Matt Salvato went seven innings to pick up the win for the Skyhawks. He gave up four runs on nine hits. Closer Matt Petrusek pitched two innings of relief to pick up his 11^th save of the season. German Melendez took the loss for Nashua, after giving up three runs in 1.1 innings of relief.

Sussex entered the bottom of the sixth trailing 4-3, but centerfielder Ron Perodin led off with a double and shortstop Kevin Rios drove him in with a single to knot the game 4-4. Then, with the score tied, Sussex loaded the bases for Alex Frazier who lofted a sacrifice fly to the warning track in left field scoring Rios. That gave the Skyhawks a 5-4 lead. With two outs, Jorge Moreno scored from third on a wild pitch to extend the Sussex lead to 6-4.

Nashua put two runners on with no out in the bottom of the eighth, but Petrusek was called on to save the day, and he came through. Petrusek got Can Am-home run leader Brian Duplissie to ground out to third and then picked up a pair of strikeouts to strand the runners. Petrusek then threw a one, two, three-ninth inning to close the game out.

Nashua and Sussex play the second game of the three game series at Skylands Park on Tuesday night at 7:05 p.m.

• Discuss this story on the Canadian American League message board...

Canadian American League Stories from July 14, 2008

Tornadoes outslug Rox - Worcester Tornadoes

Can-Am Leage recap July 14 - Can-Am

Rox fall just short in loss - Brockton Rox

Surf continue winning ways - Atlantic City Surf

Skyhawks top Pride - Sussex Skyhawks

Sussex Sneaks Past Pride; 6-4 - American Defenders of New Hampshire

Jackals fall to Surf - New Jersey Jackals

Rapdiz win in dramatic fashion - Ottawa Voyageurs

Duplissie Named Hitter of the Week - American Defenders of New Hampshire

Duplissie, Valdez - Can-Am League Players of the Week - Can-Am

Johnny Pesky to Attend Wednesday's Tornadoes Game - Worcester Tornadoes