If Worcester hopes to repeat as Can-Am League champions this season, the Tornadoes are going to have to travel a very different path to get there.

The league has two additions as the Nashua Pride moved over from the independent Atlantic League and the Sussex Skyhawks were formed to give the league two teams in New Jersey.

Those teams will take the place of the Elmira Pioneers and the Grays, who were formed at the start of last season when the Bangor franchise disbanded.

The Grays essentially lived on a bus for the summer, which was something the league — then called the Northeast League — did the year before with the Traveling Aces.

Elmira drew a league-low 1,207 fans per game last season while winning a paltry 28 games.

Meanwhile, the New York-Penn League’s New Jersey Cardinals were disbanded when St. Louis switched its short-season Class A affiliation to the State College (Pa.) Spikes. With Skylands Park vacant, the Can-Am League moved in. The Skyhawks hired Ben Wittkowski, the 2005 Can-Am League Executive of the Year with New Jersey, as general manager.

Nashua is the most intriguing of the new entries. The Pride, like the Tornadoes, have a former Red Sox star as their skipper in Butch Hobson. Nashua also has former Red Sox outfielder Glenn Murray patrolling the outfield and former Atlanta Braves hurler Terrell Wade, who pitched twice for the Braves in the 1996 World Series against the Yankees. The Pride have former Red Sox farmhand Josh Thigpen and former Tornadoes first baseman Jeremy Booth on their roster, as well.

Worcester’s new general manager, Todd Marlin, was named the Atlantic League General Manager of the Year last season for Nashua. He comes in to the streamlined Worcester front office, replacing Mike Lieberman.

The Tornadoes will also have to find a different way to qualify for the postseason. Last season, Worcester gained a playoff berth by winning the first-half championship in the South Division.

This season, the league will play a split season with only one division. The first- and second-half winners will meet the two other teams with the best overall winning percentages in best-of-five series.

The first-half winner will face the No. 4 seed while the second-half winner will play the No. 3 seed.

While the playoff format is different, the same teams — Quebec, Brockton, North Shore and Worcester — would have qualified if it was in place last year. They just would have faced different opponents. The league went to the new format to reward teams that put together two solid halves.

Although Worcester lost pitchers Steve Palazzolo and Eddie Pena, and infielders Omar Pena and Alex Nunez to affiliated baseball, all-star catcher/first baseman Yohanny Valera to Italy and pitcher Mike Cox and outfielder Andy Brown to retirement, the Tornadoes return 17 players from last year’s team.

For a team to keep nearly its entire roster intact is impressive, especially in independent baseball. By comparison, the Quebec Capitales, who changed owners in the offseason, return just 11 players.

Of course, the Capitales return their core, including Can-Am MVP Eddie Lantigua (.324, 31 HRs, 112 RBIs), all-star outfielder Goef Tomlinson (.322 average) and league saves leader Cristian Mendoza (21 saves).

North Shore is another team that got a bit of a makeover in the offseason.

The Spirit lost their two local ties when outfielder Brian Macchi (.313, 8 HRs, 37 RBIs) of Milford retired (he’s coaching softball at Milford High) and Leominster’s John Kelly (12-4, 3.49 ERA) was dealt to New Jersey. Power hitters Vic Davilla (23 HRs) and Travis Oglesby (19) were released, but North Shore did pick up Jeff Brooks (.313, 11 HRs, 64 RBIs) from New Haven.

With Kelly on the New Jersey staff, the Jackals can better deal with the loss of Joel Bennett (11-2, 2.68). Zach Smithlin (.358) and Ricardo Cordova (.352), the league’s top hitters last year, also return.

Brockton released outfielder Matt Cucurullo (.326), but picked up New Jersey’s Steve Checksfield (.291, 10 HRs, 46 RBIs) to replace his bat. Pitcher John Koch (5-5, 3.45) is back, but closer Joey Cole (14 saves) is not.

With Elmira and the Grays folding, some of their players were transferred over to Sussex.

Infielder Alex Garcia hit .296 for the Grays last season, while the Skyhawks also picked up Elvis Corporan (.306) from New Jersey and Marcos Agramonte (.290) from North Shore.

Nashua, finished 78-62 in the Atlantic League last season, but the only holdovers of note are Hobson and Murray (.265, 31 HRs, 98 RBIs).