By ADAM REGAN

aregan@njherald.com

Returning home after a three-game sweep at the hands of New Jersey, the Skyhawks had only the hope that history would repeat itself.

Manager Hal Lanier, who was unavailable for comment Monday, has learned to dismiss trends over his 44-year professional playing and managerial career. But when he considers his team's recent success following being swept on the road, surely he is looking forward to where the trend takes his club.

The Skyhawks, who sit at 10-13 in seventh place in the Can-Am League, need only look back to June 1. Worcester finished off a three-game sweep with a Sunday doubleheader thrashing in which Sussex hit a lowly .172.

Whether it was a disappointed Lanier's post-game address, the comfort of returning home or the disastrous 3-8 start, something got the Skyhawks going.

During a stretch when it won seven of nine, Sussex hit at a 95-for-325 clip (.292) and slugged through Brockton, Atlantic City and its first series with the Jackals.

The offensive resurgence was led by left fielder Alex Frazier, who had problems getting out of the gate over the first 11 games. Frazier compiled 13 hits in 27 plate appearances, with three homers and three doubles on his way to Player of the Week honors.

Hitting behind Frazier paid dividends for designated hitter Walter Young, who was pitched around to start the season. Young, the league's RBI leader, capped the week with the organization's first-ever grand slam.

The defending champion Nashua Pride will look to buck the trend before it hits full swing when they travel to Skylands Park tonight at 7 p.m. for a three-game series.

Having hit .258 against the Jackals last weekend, Lanier's club may never again reach rock bottom like it did against Worcester. But as it trails first place Quebec by six games, with five other teams sandwiched in between, the Skyhawks need a similar run to the one that ended Friday.

A quick turnaround of success may be too much to ask, but the consequences are heavy.

If the bats stay on hiatus against Nashua starter Jarrett Stawarz (1-1, 2.45 ERA) and the rest of the series, the first-half crown may be out of reach.

Any help from the league's worst pitching staff, which sports a combined 5.53 ERA and a league-high 84 walks, would be an added bonus.

However, Sussex's hot streak wasn't aided by a staff that had a .287 batting average against during the run. The Jackals' eye-popping .302 average this weekend against the staff showed little sign of improvement.

A not-so welcome growing trend.