What Is Kwame Brown's Net Worth?

Kwame Brown is an American former basketball player who has a net worth of $4 million. Kwame Brown is perhaps best known for his contributions as a role player on the Los Angeles Lakers, playing alongside Kobe Bryant, but he has also played on several additional NBA teams, including the Detroit Pistons, Golden State Warriors, and the Philadelphia 76ers.

Between salary and endorsements, Kwame earned around $100 million during his career. Unfortunately, later in his career, he experienced some financial troubles. At one point, he even sued his financial advisors at Merrill Lynch, claiming they stole $17.4 million from his accounts. More on this later in the article.

Early Life/High School Career

Kwame Brown was born in Charleston, South Carolina, on March 10, 1982. For high school, he attended Glynn Academy in Georgia. While there, he set the school record for rebounds (1,235) and blocked shots (605).

Brown was often rated "best high school player" in his class among stiff competition from high school standouts Tyson Chandler and Eddy Curry. Brown was named "High School Player of the Year" his senior year in Georgia. Brown would complete his high school career at historic Glynn Academy (located in Brunswick, Georgia). He earned further accolades as the famed school's all-time leading rebounder, earning 1,235 total rebounds, not to mention 605 total blocked shots. Brown also finished second in the all-time scoring category with 1,539 points.

Brown would go on to be selected for the 2001 McDonald's All-American Team.

NBA Career

Brown's unprecedented work as a high schooler perhaps contributed to what some would call an "underachieving" career in the NBA. The Washington Wizards, under owner/iconic hoopster Michael Jordan, named Brown their first overall pick in the 2001 NBA Draft. Brown told Wizards acting coach Doug Collins (who actually coached Jordan earlier in his career and maintained a strong relationship with him), "If you draft me, you'll never regret it." Brown would be the first player to be selected at the #1 spot right after his high school career.

During his initial year, Brown experienced a huge amount of hype, which came with sky-high expectations. Brown's rookie season would be marred by what some might consider a lack of maturity, not to mention a serious lack of production on the court. During Brown's rookie season, he was only able to manage averaging 4.5 points and 3.5 rebounds per game.

It's no secret that Brown would be moved around during his years in the league as many teams struggled to find a place for him on the court and on their rosters. Brown has played for teams like the Washington Wizards, the LA Lakers, the Memphis Grizzlies, the Detroit Pistons, the Charlotte Bobcats, the Golden State Warriors, and the Philadelphia 76ers.

His third year was perhaps Brown's best. He recorded career highs in both points (10.9) and rebounds (7.4). For his career, Brown has averaged 6.6 points and 5.5 rebounds. After being waived by the 76ers in November 2013, he became a free agent.

Post-NBA Career

After leaving the NBA, Kwame would go on to sign with Interperformances player agency (August 22, 2016) in an attempt to make a comeback to the game he loved and excelled at in prior years.

Brown would be named the fifth overall pick for the BIG3 basketball league inaugural draft in 2017. Brown played on the 3 Headed Monsters team, which made it to the alternative league's finals. The Monsters lost to Trilogy with a final score of 51–46.

Legal/Financial Troubles

Brown has faced a significant amount of legal and financial troubles, which includes a 2007 arrest for interfering with an investigation. Brown was additionally accused of allegedly throwing a cake at a man in Hermosa Beach during this same year. In this case, however, the charges would eventually be dropped.

During his career, Kwame Brown earned $64 million in salary before taxes and fees. Between endorsements and salary (and after taxes), Brown earned an additional $35 million.

Unfortunately, as revealed in a 2018 lawsuit, Kwame claimed that his financial advisors at Merrill Lynch stole $17.4 million from his investment portfolio. Brown claims his signature was forged in various forms, allowing advisors to make investments and stock trades that he did not consent to.

Brown was arrested on March 31, 2019, by Georgia state police. He was charged with felony possession of edible marijuana products as well as misdemeanor possession of less than one ounce of marijuana.