LOS ANGELES – Nearly halfway through his first season with the Lakers, Kwame Brown is facing a challenge this week, facing three of the NBA’s biggest and best power forwards in four games.

So far, the results have been mixed, although Lakers coach Phil Jackson continues to speak in positive terms about what Brown can bring on the defensive end.

Matched up against the Clippers’ Elton Brand on Saturday night, Brown had seven points and grabbed seven rebounds in 19 first-half minutes.

There were some highlights even, with Brown line-driving a 17-foot jumper and converting a 3-point play off a pass from rookie guard Von Wafer.

Brown returned to the starting lineup Friday against Philadelphia for the first time since Nov. 8, with Jackson saying he wanted to use the 6-foot-11, 277-pound Brown against Chris Webber, Brand and Jermaine O’Neal in games this week.

“We obviously need his defense at some level,” Jackson said after Friday’s victory. “It’s good to have him back in the offense, but we weren’t smooth with him in there offensively, though.”

Although he finished with four points and five rebounds in 21 minutes, Brown exasperated Jackson in the third quarter. After Brown blew a basket at one end and committed a foul back on defense, Jackson yelled at him, “It’s over. Forget about it.”

When Kobe Bryant later dove after a loose ball and Brown didn’t even bend to pick it up, Jackson almost fell out of his seat. And the coach yanked Brown after Webber got behind him and Brown fouled him on defense.

Jackson has asked Brown to focus his game on defense or rebounding, although Brown at times seems to get down if he has a mishap on the offensive end.

“That’s not unusual for a player to lose concentration if certain phases of the game go wrong for him,” Jackson said. “He put some pressure on himself to score. All players want to score as a part of their game.”

Jackson also was asked where Brown’s confidence was nearly halfway through his first season with the Lakers. Brown entered Saturday’s game averaging 5.6 points, 5.5 rebounds and 1.9 turnovers, having lost 10 games to a hamstring injury.

“I don’t know where his confidence is,” Jackson said. “You either have it or you don’t have it. It doesn’t reside in your jock strap or your brain. His confidence should be in his defense. That’s where he plays and rebounds and hustles for us.”

Brown’s return additionally puts him back on the floor with center Chris Mihm, who had 13 points and seven rebounds Friday against Philadelphia. Jackson has said on occasion this season that Mihm and Brown for some reason do not play well together.

“I think we’re still learning,” Mihm said. “Not just Kwame and myself, but a lot of our positions we can get caught with too many guys too close to each other in the paint. It allows teams to guard two or three guys without even moving.”

ross.siler@dailynews.com

(818) 713-3607