After a five-year absence from postseason play, Mike Miller is back in the NBA Playoffs.

The 31-year-old Mitchell native and his Miami Heat teammates will begin the Eastern Conference Playoffs against the Philadelphia 76ers today at AmericanAirlines Arena in Miami. Game 1 is scheduled for 2:30 p.m. Central Standard Time and will be shown on ABC.

Miller, who signed a five-year, $25 million contract with the Heat this past summer, has not been to the postseason since the 2005-06 season when he played for the Memphis Grizzlies.

"He had a few years in the playoffs early in his career, but this year they even have a legitimate chance to win it," said Miller's uncle Alan Miller, who was in Miami for the team's final two home games of the regular season. "I think Mike will be ready to go just based on adrenaline alone."

In his 11-year NBA career, Miller has played in the postseason five times. He has started 14 of 20 career postseason games and has never been out of the first round.

He and the Grizzlies were swept from the playoffs in 2003-04, '04-05 and '05-06. Miller and the Orlando Magic were eliminated in four games in 2000-01 and '01-02. Miller has two career playoff wins -- the last of which came in 2002.

Miller's high school coach, Gary Munsen, remembers going to some of Miller's past playoff games with the Grizzlies.

"That was the first round and it didn't last very long," said Munsen, who will be watching Game 1 from Brandon today prior coaching Mitchell in a basketball tournament, which runs today and Sunday. "One year, I watched them play the Phoenix Suns and one year I watched them play the San Antonio Spurs; those teams were just too good for the Memphis Grizzlies those years.

"This team Mike's on now has some more firepower, I think."

Miller, who led the Kernels to back-to-back state titles in 1996 and '97, battled injuries throughout the regular season for Miami, which finished with the Eastern Conference's second-best record at 58-24. The 6-foot-8 shooting guard played in 41 games while battling injuries to his thumb, shoulder, knee and ankle at various times this season.

Miller averaged a career-low 5.6 points per game and played a career-low 20.4 minutes per game. He also averaged 4.5 rebounds per contest while shooting 40 percent from the floor and 36 percent from 3-point range.

"For Mike, he's just got to be ready to shoot the ball," said Alan Miller, who added that Mike's father, Tom, will be in Miami for today's game. "It's disappointing with the injuries he's had; I'm just hoping that he'll be as healthy as possible for the next few weeks."

Miller, who won the NBA's Rookie of the Year award in 2001 after being selected by the Magic with the fifth pick in the first round of the draft, never has been on a team with playoff aspirations like this year's Heat squad. The Grizzlies never were seeded higher than fifth in the Western Conference in Miller's three playoff appearances in Memphis, while the Magic were seeded fifth once and seventh once in the Eastern Conference.

Now, Miller -- who was the 2006 Sixth Man of the Year award winner -- finds himself on a team that has been the talk of the league since the offseason, when LeBron James and Chris Bosh signed free-agent contracts to join Dwyane Wade on South Beach.

"This is the first team that he's ever been with that has one of the better records in the NBA," Munsen said. "I'm happy for Mike, I just hope he's healthy enough to play and contribute. He doesn't have that many years left to make the playoffs."

Each round of the playoffs is a best-of-seven series with the higher seed holding home-court advantage. If the favored Heat get past Philadelphia, they could be matched up with the third-seeded Boston Celtics, who play the New York Knicks in the first round. Munsen said that would be a series he would be interested in seeing up close.

"If that happens, I might have to get down to Miami and see what's going on," Munsen said.

Here is a look at the schedule for Miller and Heat's series against the 76ers. All times are CDT with television broadcast station in parentheses.

* if necessary

Game 1: 2:30 p.m. today in Miami (ABC).

Game 2: 6 p.m. Monday in Miami (TNT).

Game 3: 7 p.m. Thursday in Philadelphia (TNT).

Game 4: Noon April 24 in Philadelphia (ABC).

*Game 5: TBA April 27 in Miami.

*Game 6: TBA April 29 in Philadelphia.

*Game 7: TBA May 1 in Miami.