To the world this amazing athlete is known for not only his 2 NBA Finals won with arguably the best basketball team of all time the Golden State Warriors. He is also known for his extreme athleticism and role play off the bench on both the offensive and defensive end of the floor. What most people don't know is that Shaun Livingston never even imagined he would touch the floor again after what was said to be a "career ending" injury.

On February 26, 2007 against the Charlotte Bobcats Livingston suffered a gruesome knee injury while driving to the basket and landing awkwardly by practically blowing out his entire knee. Livingston dislocated his patella and tibia-fibular joint, tore his ACL, PCL, MCL and lateral meniscus. At the time of the injury Shaun Livingston was 21 years old and Doctors worried that an artery may have burst in his leg causing gangreen that may require amputation which put his career in serious doubt. After the injury Livingston said "My leg was deformed. It was only 10-15 seconds, but until they put my knee back in it was excruciating for sure."

The average timeline for a PCL and ACL injury full recovery is about 9-12 months. It takes an MCL injury about 6 weeks to heal depending on the severity of it. It also takes a dislocated patella about 6 weeks to heal as well. Despite the severity of Shaun Livingston injuries on March 13, 2007 he was able to have a successful surgery on his left knee performed by Dr. James Andrew and Dr. William Clancy. The two surgeons repaired his ACL, MCL, and PCL. They used a patella tendon graft to replace Livingston's torn ACL. After a successful surgery Livingston spent about 3 weeks with physical therapist Kevin Wilks at the site of the surgery before returning home to LA.

Once Livingston returned back home he then finished up he rehabilitation with Judy Seto, head of Physical Therapy for the Los Angelos Lakers. Livingston spent the first 6 weeks of therapy on crutches 5 days a weeks where he slowly progressed to learn how to walk all over again. The dislocation of the patella and tibio-fibula joint kept Livingston in physical therapy for an extended period of time due to joint problems. After weeks of therapy on crutches Livingston then began riding a bike, and walking without assistance in the pool. His final stages of therapy consisted of running the treadmill, and some sport specific drills and exercises.

Livingston faced a variety of issues upon surgery during rehabilitation. He dealt with an infection of his left knee which caused lots of pain, and loss of knee flexion. Scar tissue adhesion inside the joint was also an issue. Which are bands of scar tissue that causes internal organs to be stuck together when they are not supposed to be. Livingston also had a limited range of motion within his knee, and he faced muscle atrophy due to him not using those muscles for a long period of time. Shaun Livingston said "The knee was all deformed bloodied up and leaking puss." He also mentioned that the knee was "stiff" and that he "couldn't move it". He compared his leg to "a pole with a pineapple in the middle" because of how skinny his leg had become from muscle atrophy.

Shaun Livingston returned to basketball activities 16 months later in June of 2008 after missing the entire 2007-2008 NBA season. He returned back as healthy as ever without experiencing any issues with his knee for the remainder of his time in the league. With emphasis on flexibility, resistance training, and dieting, staying healthy and in shape at this high level of competition was extremely important for Shaun if he wanted to be able to stay healthy in the NBA. Although Shaun Livingston returned back into the NBA healthy he had to completely adjust his style of play after losing swiftness in his athleticism. Because he already had magnificent size for a guard at 6 foot 7 inches he had to adjust his game through his IQ by slowing down and changing his style of play.

Many wonder how Shaun Livingston was able to recover so quickly. Physical Therapist used the Alter G device which is an anti gravity treadmill to help with Livingston's rehabilitation process. This technology allows for a patient or athlete to decrease their body weight while on the treadmill so they can run with less pressure on any lower body extremity. Isokinetic training and knee stability training also helped results come about faster during rehabilitation causing the knee to be isolated and get stronger much faster.

Shaun Livingston bounced around from team to team in the NBA for the next 9 years after his injury until finally finding his peak potiential with the Brooklyn Nets. After leaving the Brooklyn Nets he was signed by the Golden State Warriors in 2014 where he then began being known for his outstanding role with the 2 time NBA champions. Shaun Livingston is now retired and will go down in history as one of the toughest players in the NBA.