By of the

New York - Shaun Livingston has a quiet confidence.

The Milwaukee Bucks guard showed it on a big stage Friday as he helped his team win its first road game, a 14-point victory over the New York Knicks at Madison Square Garden.

Now Livingston hopes for more chances to make an impact as the Bucks meet the powerful Heat in Miami on Sunday night.

Bucks coach Scott Skiles inserted Livingston as the starting shooting guard when Stephen Jackson did not play against the Knicks after missing the morning shoot-around.

And it couldn't have worked out better as the 6-foot-7 veteran contributed a season-high 18 points, five rebounds and three assists in 34 minutes.

"The biggest thing is getting the monkey off our back, or really King Kong," Livingston said of ending the Bucks' eight-game road losing streak.

"It's easier to be aggressive when you come into the flow of it, kind of pick and choose your spots," Livingston said of his starting assignment.

Livingston was a valuable piece in the 2011 draft-day trade that also brought Jackson from Charlotte and Beno Udrih from Sacramento.

He has the size to play both guard positions and small forward, a versatility that allowed him to start in the backcourt with point guard Brandon Jennings.

It was the first starting assignment for Livingston in the last two years, after he played in 73 games off the bench for the Bobcats last season.

Livingston was the fourth overall pick in the 2004 draft, a high school phenom and McDonald's All-American from Peoria Central (Ill.).

But a gruesome knee injury he suffered while playing with the Clippers in 2007 sidetracked him and nearly ended his career.

He missed the entire 2007-'08 season and played in only 12 games the following season with Miami and Oklahoma City.

But Livingston kept working and never lost his passion for the game or his ability to spot teammates and deliver pinpoint passes.

"I think he's one of the best passers I ever played with," said Bucks center Andrew Bogut, who converted a lob from Livingston as the Bucks began to pull away in the third quarter against the Knicks.

"He can put the ball on a tee, and that's why we work well together. He can shoot the ball from 8 (feet) in over every point guard in the league because he's so long and tall. I feel bad for the guy after the injuries he had, what could have been.

"He lost a lot of mobility and quickness with that knee injury. But he's done a great job for us."

Skiles said he decided to start Livingston against the Knicks because he wanted to keep Udrih in the role as backup point guard to Jennings.

"Shaun brings another ball handler and passer and playmaker out there for us," Skiles said. "He can also knock down shots.

"With Carlos (Delfino) and Jack (Jackson) in there, both guys are more 3s (small forwards) than 2s (shooting guards). And Shaun is more of a 1-2 (point-shooting guard)."

Livingston's playing time has fluctuated greatly. He played a season-high 35 minutes in the opener at Charlotte, when he had a productive first half against his former team.

In the five games before Friday, he had three games of 15 minutes or fewer, including a six-minute stint in a loss to Philadelphia on Monday. He played 33 minutes in a blowout loss to Dallas (and scored 15 points) and 20 minutes against Denver on Tuesday (eight points).

"We've got the three point guards, and I'm sure he's not playing yet as much as he would like to play," Skiles said. "But this is an opportunity.

"It gives us an extra guy with vision out there. He's got the good size and good vision and generally makes really heady plays."

Jennings said the Knicks did a lot of switching on defense Friday, which gave the Bucks guards chances to get past bigger defenders and make plays in the lane.

"Shaun played big for us," Jennings said.