Tamara is a 2005 fantasy horror film directed by Jeremy Haft. It follows a high school girl whose classmates often bully her. When they accidentally kill her in a prank gone wrong, she comes back from the dead as a seductive woman to take revenge.

Here’s how you can watch and stream Tamara via streaming services such as Amazon Prime Video.

Is Tamara (2005) available to watch via streaming?

Yes, Tamara is available to watch via streaming on Amazon Prime Video.

A teenage girl, Tamara, doesn’t quite mix up with everyone. She loves witchcraft, and also her English teacher, Bill Natolly. Soon, when two of her school’s star athletes, Shawn and Patrick dislike an article she published, they try to take revenge by playing a prank on her.

However, the prank goes wrong and results in her death. They bury her, but to their surprise she returns to class, looking prettier than ever. Tamara is back from the dead to take revenge as a very powerful and dangerous person. The group responsible for her death has to now face the consequences of their actions.

The film stars Jenna Dewan as Tamara Riley, the girl obsessed with witchcraft. We also see Matthew Marsden as Bill Natolly and Claudette Mink as Alison Natolly. Additionally, Marc Devigne plays Roger, and Chad Faust plays Jesse.

Watch Tamara (2005) streaming via Amazon Prime Video

Tamara is available to watch on Amazon Prime Video.

It is a very popular streaming service that has a vast catalog of on-demand content, including hit original productions.

You can watch via Amazon Prime Video by following these steps:

Go to Amazon Prime Video

Select ‘Sign in’ and ‘Create your Amazon account’

Sign up for a Prime Video membership:

$14.99 per month or $139 per year with an Amazon Prime membership

$8.99 per month for a standalone Prime Video membership

Amazon Prime is the online retailer’s paid service that provides fast shipping and exclusive sales on products, so the membership that includes both this service and Prime Video is the company’s most popular offering. However, you can also opt to subscribe to Prime Video separately.

Tamara’s synopsis is as follows:

“Tamara, an unattractive girl who is picked on by her peers, returns after her death as a sexy seductress to enact revenge.”

NOTE: The streaming services listed above are subject to change. The information provided was correct at the time of writing.

Only Murders in the Building Season 4 Teaser Trailer Sets Hulu Release Date

The Only Murders in the Building Season 4 teaser trailer has been released, setting the Hulu release date for later… TV Tyler Treese 11 hours ago

Daredevil: Born Again & Ironheart Get Official Release Date Windows

Marvel announced new Disney+ release date windows for Daredevil: Born Again and Ironheart. As announced at Disney’s upfront presentation, Daredevil:… TV Tyler Treese 11 hours ago

The Ministry of Ungentlemanly Warfare 4K, Blu-ray, and DVD Release Date Set

The Ministry of Ungentlemanly Warfare 4K, Blu-ray, and DVD release date has been set, with the new Guy Ritchie movie… Movies Anthony Nash 11 hours ago

Reunion Trailer Sets Release Date for Comedy Starring Lil Rel Howery

Republic Pictures has released a Reunion trailer, previewing the upcoming comedy mystery movie starring Lil Rel Howery and more. Reunion… Movies Anthony Nash 11 hours ago