Whitecraigs to Glasgow Central Train Travel Guide

Travelling by train from Whitecraigs to Glasgow Central provides passengers with a convenient and efficient way to commute or explore, ensuring that they arrive on time. For a smooth travel experience, please check out our Train Journey Planner.

Plan Your Train Journey

The train from Whitecraigs to Glasgow Central takes approximately 20m. The first train departs at 06:36 and the last train leaves at 23:06. 33 trains run daily from Whitecraigs to Glasgow Central. Use our Train Journey Planner and Timetable for more details.

Book Cheap Train Tickets

Train from Whitecraigs to Glasgow Central Split Ticket and Advance tickets are available. The average fare is approx £4.30 and the cheapest fare is £4.30*. Besides, you can book cheap tickets on off-peak time, which usually begin at 09:30.(Intercity Off-Peak times: Monday to Friday from 09:30 to 16:00, and after 19:00) Accurate ticket prices vary based on time of day, route, and class.

Train Stations

You can explore your Glasgow Central train journey from Paisley Gilmour Street,Mount Florida,Johnstone (Strathclyde),East Kilbride,Crossmyloof,Uddingston,Bishopton (Renfrewshire),or Cambuslang Station.

Why is TrainPal Cheaper?

TrainPal offers competitive rail prices and collaborates with different rail operators to secure improved deals and pass on savings to customers. This ensures that you enjoy the same quality service at a reduced cost on your train journeys.

Season Tickets Save More

Frequently commute between two stations? Season tickets help you save up to 1/3! Come to the TrainPal App and enjoy the flexibility of commuting!

Split Tickets, Save an average of 30% extra

By splitting your journey into segments, TrainPal can locate the best prices for each segment, resulting in significant savings for you.

Plenty of Voucher Options

TrainPal provides plenty of vouchers, enabling you to enjoy significant savings. Additionally, you can use the invite code to obtain additional discounts.