What is a PNR Number and What Does it Explain?

A PNR number is a 10-digit number which stands for ‘Passenger Name Record’. It is a unique number that is assigned to every booked train ticket on the Indian Railways. This 10-digit number contains passenger records such as the passenger's name, age, sex, and berth preference. It also encapsulates ticket details, including the train number, date of journey, origin/source station, destination station, boarding station, class, berth, quota, as well as fare, transaction type, and payment details. Decoding it may seem a bit complex, but it follows a logical structure that can be easily understood.

Structure of the PNR Number

First Digit: This digit indicates the railway zone where the train starts. The following are the zonal codes:

1: SCR (Secunderabad PRS)

2, 3: NR, NCR, NWR, NER (New Delhi PRS)

4, 5: SR, SWR, SCR (Chennai PRS)

6, 7: NFR, ECR, ER, ECoR, SER, SECR (Kolkata PRS)

8, 9: CR, WCR, WR (Mumbai PRS)

For example, if the PNR number starts with '1', the ticket is issued from the SCR zone, specifically the Secunderabad PRS. A PNR starting with '2' or '3' indicates it was issued in the NR, NCR, NWR, or NER zones, from the New Delhi PRS. Similarly, digits '4' or '5' suggest a Southern zone, originating from the Chennai PRS. Numbers beginning with '6' or '7' are linked to the Eastern zones, including NFR, ECR, ER, ECoR, SER, or SECR, all managed by the Kolkata PRS. Finally, PNRs starting with '8' or '9' are issued from the CR, WCR, or WR zones, managed by the Mumbai PRS.

Second and Third Digits: These digits are linked to the Passenger Reservation System and indicate the specific center where the ticket was booked.

Last Seven Digits: The meaning of the last 7 digits of your PNR is not specific. These digits do not hold any special information but ensure that each PNR number is unique. They are generated randomly.

The length of the PNR number is 10 digits. The meaning of the first 3 digits is related to the Passenger Reservation System whereas the last 7 digits are randomly generated. This structure helps passengers identify where their ticket was booked and the railway zone where their journey begins. The last seven digits, although random, ensure the uniqueness of each ticket issued.

PNR Status Enquiry on the Mobile App

Trusted by millions of Indians, PNR check on the ixigo trains mobile app is easy & real-time.

Use the PNR Status Live Check Mobile feature and get notified as soon as your waitlisted train ticket status gets confirmed. We will provide the current 10 digit PNR status check for railway tickets along with passenger and train details – Your reservation booking status, platform number, coach position, and more.

On ixigo, you can also check PNR status in Hindi (पीएनआर स्टेटस पूछताछ).

The IRCTC train ticket booking system provides CNF (Confirmed) and RAC (Reservation Against Cancellation) status when tickets are available, and the bookings made after that are provided waitlisted status. Waitlisted tickets get confirmed in order only if any of the CNF/RAC tickets gets cancelled.

Especially when you have a waitlisted ticket, tracking IRCTC PNR status live becomes necessary. Other travel details, such as coach number, berth number and berth type are provided only if the booked ticket status is Confirmed (CNF). Check the PNR number to get your platform number. Know more in detail about how to check train PNR status online.