Conflict Minerals

On August 22, 2012, the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) approved the final rule regarding the sourcing of conflict minerals (tin, tungsten, tantalum, and gold (3TG)) under Section 1502 of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protections ACT. Under the rule, publicly traded companies must report to the SEC the presence of conflict minerals originating in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) or adjoining countries in the products they manufacture or contract to manufacture if the conflict minerals are necessary to the functionality or production of a product.

For documentation concerning Epoxies, Etc.’s products please click on the below links.

Conflict Minerals Compliant Letter

Conflict-Free Sourcing Initiative Template

RoHS

The European Union Directive 2011/65EU/RoHS (Restriction on Hazardous Substances in Electronic and Electrical Equipment) was implemented on July 21, 2011 to limit the use of substances in electrical and electronic equipment.

For documentation concerning Epoxies, Etc.’s products click on the link below.

RoHS Compliant Letter

Mercury (Hg)

Mercury is a naturally occurring chemical element (Hg) found in the rock inside the earth’s core. The United States Environmental Protection Agency considers mercury to be a persistent bioaccumulative and toxic (PBT) pollutant.

For documentation concerning Epoxies, Etc.’s products click on the link below.

Mercury Free Statement

Bisphenol A (BPA)

Bisphenol A is an organic compound that chemically performs as the fundamental building block for many epoxy resins as well as polycarbonate plastic.

For documentation concerning Epoxies, Etc.’s products click on the link below.

BPA Compliant Letter

REACH

California Proposition 65

In 1986, California voters approved Proposition 65, an initiative to address their growing concerns about exposure to toxic chemicals. That initiative is officially known as the Safe Drinking Water and Toxic Enforcement Act of 1986. The law requires California to publish a list of chemicals known to cause cancer or reproductive toxicity, and for businesses with 10 or more employees to provide warnings when they knowingly and intentionally cause significant exposures to listed chemicals.

For documentation concerning Epoxies, Etc.’s products click on the link below.