Whether it is warehouse or, school, shops, offices, homes, etc. Durability, flexibility, hygienic and attractiveness plays a significant role. These are properties which UKRESIN possess. UKRESIN creates suitable options for each wish and for each style. This allows you to easily determine your direction and chose the floor that suits you. In this article we discussed one of the methods of resin flooring that is known for epoxy resin floor, keep reading for more information and having the right choice:

Epoxy also known as polyepoxides is the family of basic components or cured end products, a high-performance thermosetting polymer which is a class of reactive prepolymers and polymers which contain epoxide groups. By reacting Bisphenol-A (BPA) and Epichlorohydrin (ECH), at room temperature a molecule with an unparalleled combination of properties formed that described as a “syrupy liquid” that today is used to make coatings and flooring as durable as a rock.

Though Epichlorohydrin (ECH), may be replaced by other raw materials (such as aliphatic glycols, phenol and o-cresol novolacs) to produce special resins. The discovery of Epoxies originated from two main scientists include Pierre Castan who was initially a chemist in the dye industry and at the Swiss Federal Institute of Viticulture in Lausanne and Dr. Sylvan Greenlee in the United States. While Dr. Pierre Castan made progress with the first cured epoxy polymer, Dr. Sylvan Greenlee in the United States was working on the same research simultaneously. Castan’s work became one of the major epoxy resin worldwide and became the advanced material in business unit.

The epoxy resins can be obtained in either liquid or solid states. Epoxies are highly modifiable, can be produced with a high or low molecular weight and can be reacted with various substances (such as hardeners) to achieve different chemical and physical properties. In order to convert epoxy resins into a hard, infusible, and rigid material, it is necessary to cure the resin with hardener. Epoxy resins can cure at any temperature from 5-150oC depending on the choice of curing agent. Primary and secondary amines are widely used to cure epoxy resins. Epoxy originally used for dental fixtures. Today, more than 50 different substances known as epoxy resins are available and used in a wide range of different applications.

What is epoxy resin used for?

Epoxy can combine with various raw material and produce special resins. Epoxy aren’t limited to only structural applications. In fact, they can be used in virtually any application. Today, the myriad uses for epoxy continue to expand and variant of epoxied are being developed to fit the industries and products they used in. below are some of the ways you can use epoxy resin:

Using epoxy resin as Adhesive

One of the most common uses of epoxy resin is for adhesive purposes. Epoxy resin is one of the strongest adhesive options available. It has high resistance to chemicals elements and can resist under sustained load, making it one of the best material for many different applications.

Using epoxy resin as coating

Epoxy resin is also used as a coating. Having corrosion prevention properties, making it an ideal solution to many objects which normally rust with time. It hardens when applied to surface creates a protective layer on top of the material and protect the materials from corrosion. One of the massive usages of epoxy resin is coating floors and make a seamless, durable, shining, unique and eye-catching surface. It has strong insulating properties so it used for boat coating to create waterproof barriers. It also used in household items such as kitchen countertops, shelves, and bathroom vanities.

In Electronics and Electrical Systems

Epoxy resin have found wide use in the electronics industry due to the low cost and ease of application. It is provide excellent electrical insulation, resistance to heat, chemicals, solvents, saltwater, and other physical stress factors.

Creating Custom Art with Epoxy resin

You can use epoxy resin in art and make fantastic masterpieces. Simply mixing the epoxy resin with paint, glitter, and other fun bits and pieces in the molds with the resin to create beautiful rings, earrings, and pendants. It can be poured into a mold and allowed to harden, resulting in a solid piece of art and even achieve crystal like formations of sculpture. Some of the uses of epoxy rein in artistic way are mentioned below:

Making jewellery

Making Sculptures

Small cabinet handles

Decorative napkin holders

Create a personalized coffee table top full of memories

Using epoxy resin to make parts

Epoxy is used to make various practical parts such as bicycle parts, some airplane parts, skateboards, snowboards and many other devices. The reason for using epoxy resin in making these parts is the high adhesion and flexibility and at the same time the high resistance of these materials, which makes the special parts of these devices to be used for a long time.

Using epoxy resin to make buttons

Have you ever looked at the variety of buttons? Have you ever asked yourself what these beautiful, shining and colorful buttons with various designs are made of? The Answer is epoxy resin. You can simply use epoxy resin and polyamine hardener into button molds. To make the work more beautiful, add epoxy color tints, glitter, or other items such as flowers or gold-colored beads and what else you desire in the buttons.

Using Epoxy Resin for Painting

Epoxy paint in general is a very special type of paint that has many potential applications. In fact, epoxy paints are considered one of the hardest and the most durable colored materials, epoxy colors are obtained from the combination of epoxy resin with polyamine or polyamide hardeners, which are used in different fields.Epoxy paints are mostly designed and manufactured for industrial usages.

In fact, these paints are an acrylic latex product with a small amount of epoxy added to them, and are usually used for floor covering to increase the quality and the protection of the floor you can add a layer of polyurethane resin on it.Epoxy paints has the ability to protect the floor from serious damages such as heat, cold and chemicals materials. Although Epoxy paint is found on many household goods like dryers, washers, stoves and similar white goods with a water clean-up and tough, protective coating, epoxy paint is an excellent option for appliances.

What are the advantages of epoxy resin?

Before deciding if epoxy resin floors are match to your desires consider the advantages and disadvantages of it to have a right choice. Check some of its advantages as below:

Durability of epoxy flooring

Epoxy flooring is very resistant to pressure and improves the compressive strength of concrete even up to 7 times. This type of flooring has the best adhesion to concrete and is more durable and long-lasting than other colors and floorings. The structure and chemical compounds of the epoxy resin provides a significant amount of stability against shock, heat, heavy machinery without worrying about cracks and wear, making it reliable and durable.

Reasonable price of epoxy flooring and low maintenance cost

In contrast to other similar flooring epoxy resin flooring cost lower and more affordable that the other types of flooring. With lower price you will have an attractive, seamless and durable surface Also, due to the fact that it is much less susceptible to staining than concrete, stone, ceramic and mosaic the real deal comes in knowing that the flooring will not have to be replaced for many years and requires low maintenance as a result, the need to repair it is much less and can be easily done if needed.

Seamless, easy to clean

An epoxy product applied to a concrete floor creates a non-porous surface that is completely integrated, seamless and impervious to stains such as oil and is more resistant to damage and pitting than concrete. This makes epoxy a more sanitary flooring option. This type of flooring is easy to clean because it has a completely smooth and seamless surface. This feature makes it possible to create a completely clean surface with the minimum amount of water consumed. Being resistant to growth and germs Epoxy resin floors are ideal for hospital and health centers that needs to keep clean constantly.

Appearance

One of the advantages of epoxy flooring is highly versatility of colors and designs with a smooth, shiny, and seamless appearance, epoxy flooring is an attractive option for different places. There is no lack of color restrictions, by using some materials in the top layer, acrylic designs can also be created on the surface. It can also be applied in a checkerboard or any other pattern that gives a very good effect to the surface. UKRESIN offers you many different patterns and colors that are suitable for your environment. That’s why it’s known as one of the most pleasant construction chemicals.

Chemical and thermal resistance

Epoxy resin floors are resistant to a large number of chemicals such as solvents and acids it is usually resistant to oils and weak acids but In case of strong acids or bases are consumed in the environment, the surface will be damaged and you need to recoat it with new materials. Epoxy resin floors are resistant to a temperature of about 80 degrees Celsius it doesn’t melt regardless of whatever temperature condition.

Easy to apply

Epoxy resin flooring is very fast to apply and can get applied over various surfaces if it’s be done by experts so we recommend you to avoid wasting time, additional costs and energy. For more information and needing consultation feel free to contact our UKRESIN expert’s team.

Environmentally-friendly

Epoxy coating is produces from organic trees and plants in the environment so it is one of the most environmentally-friendly methods of protective coating, it releases no bio-hazards to the environment it has no contaminants that could endanger the safety of humans. Additionally, because it isn’t porous, harsh cleaning chemicals aren’t needed.

Comparing epoxy resin floors Vs tiles

Are you going to coating your floor or want to updating your floor and you’re doubtful about the type of material you should get? If you can’t make your mind, you have to consider the features of the facility where we are going to apply. The flooring of the surface can have a significant impact on one’s initial impression of the environment. When choosing epoxy or tile, you should choose according to the needs of your business. For example, if you are going to make a food processing facility floor, you will prefer epoxy, which is natural materials and durable and easy to clean because of being seamless.

Tile flooring has its merits when it comes to aesthetics, particularly the ability to give the appearance of a durable yet stylish and modern floor. However, epoxy floors are smooth and shiny, making it a better choice for surfaces. Before choosing epoxy or tile, its properties should be examined in detail for making a good decision according to your requirements. Keep reading as there is a quick comparison between epoxy and tile flooring below:

Appearance

We don’t underestimate how beautiful tiles can look, but epoxy with wide range of colors and patterns that are easy to customize can be a better choice. While tiles have grout lines that break up a floor and can make an area look smaller, epoxy resin floor as it is a seamless option makes a space looks bigger.

Durability

When it comes to durability there is no doubt that that tiles are not as strong as epoxy. Even epoxy floors are actually stronger that concert. Epoxy is more durable when tool boxes dragged over it or heavy materials being dropped on it. So if you are going to coat the surface of your garages or factories this is a significant factor that should be considered.

Stains, dirt and maintenance

Epoxy resin floorings are resistant to oil, gas, bleach and most other chemicals and materials, while tile flooring may looks sparkling at the first installation but over time dirt accumulates in the grout lines, becoming a breeding ground for bacterial growth and making them hard to clean. Epoxy floors are seamless and easily cleaned while to eliminate the dirt on the grouts you need to use strong chemicals that can damage the floor over time.

Cost

The price of each factor depends on the quality of material you choose and the dimension of the surface. But generally epoxy resin floors are cheaper and cost-effective if you are going to coat a large area.

Ease of Installation, repairs and removal

Preparation of the existing floors for applying epoxy requires patient as is takes several days to get ready in addition drying time although should be determined because it takes several days to get dry well. Repair of a damaged area of epoxy floor can be labor-intensive and costly. Tile becomes a slippery surface when in contact with water or other liquids epoxy floors are also slippery when it’s wet, so anti-slip additives need to be used when the epoxy is still wet ensuring the floors have traction.

Compatibility with heat, weather

In the winter tile flooring becomes cold, while epoxy resin floorings are flexible with all weather conditions. Sunlight and heat can damage tile floors while epoxy resin floors uphold against high heat and severe weather conditions. When the benefits of a seamless, durable, low maintenance, safe, attractive of an epoxy floor are compared to a tile floor, more often than not, epoxy comes out on top. Sure now by considering the cons and pros of the two factors you can make your mind more easily.