George's involvement in Paths of Possession seems to have worked both in favour and against the band's best interest, seeing as his obligations towards Cannibal Corpse occupy most of his free time. Are you happy moving in such slow rhythms? I really hope that it will not take another five years before we get to listen to the band's next release.

Randy: Well one things for certain, it won’t take that long. We hope to be recording near the end of next year. Its a lot better now that we have things on track, but when you are in a band and having to work all week, pay rent, pay bills, and try to save a few thousand to record.... It’s tough. Now that we have some backing its taken a huge amount of pressure off us and we can focus more on what we are doing rather than "how the hell are we gonna do this?". We all knew that we would have to work around the Cannibal schedule, but so far it hasn’t been an issue. While he is touring in support of their new album we will be writing our next one. We are also going to try to squeeze in a few tours along the way. George is into this band too and he wants to take it on the road as well.

I remember reading an old interview with Richard, where he referred to the importance of the word "Paths" as part of the band's name. He interpreted it's meaning as the band's need to add many different elements to their music - something that will become obvious to anyone who decides to invest in "Promises in Blood". Which were the main sources of inspiration in the creation of this album?

Randy: I cant really speak for the other guys, but I have always been a huge Maiden fan, that’s the reason I started playing bass in the first place, I have also been really into Dark Tranquillity and Amon Amarth. But I wouldn’t say that they really influenced my writing but they definitely inspire me. Obituary as well. I have always thought that John Tardy has the sickest voice in metal.

Many people expected Paths of Possession to have many similarities with Cannibal Corpse, which is not quite the case - especially in the vocals department. Was that a conscious decision on your part? How would you describe the style and sound of the band on "Promises in Blood".

Randy: I always have trouble describing what we sound like...so I always say that we are part thrash, part melodic, part death, with a little grind. As for the vocals, that was mostly George. He wanted to sing different than he does in Cannibal, I think that he wanted to show people that he has versatility in his voice, he sings a lot more mids on this disc than he’s ever really done before. I think it sounds great, he sings low a lot too. But why would he even want to do something else if it sounded just like Cannibal. I keep trying to stress to everyone that we don’t sound alike at all. If someone goes out to get our disc expecting that, then they will be disappointed.

When you are composing your songs, are you consciously aware of the fact that you will one day have to present them in a live environment? Do you feel that these twelve new compositions of yours are easily translated into such an environment?

Randy: We have played all these songs live with the exception of Erzsebet, that one I don’t think would go over good live. But I do think about that when we are writing. That is very important to me. If its not going to be good live or translate well live then why should we do it? I don’t know about the other guys...but I am constantly analysing the new material thinking about that.

I know that your current plans for live performances involve only a few gigs in the States. What about Europe and the rest of the world? Are we going to be lucky enough to enjoy such an experience, or is the Cannibal Corpse "beast" going to devour this desire of ours?

Randy: Right now, our plans are to do a full US tour in February, hopefully we can do some gigs in Canada as well. We also hope to come to Europe for some festivals next summer, we have talked about this with Metal Blade and I guess it all depends on how well we do over there. We all really want to do it though, but we will definitely do a European tour later in 06. As for the rest of the world.... I’m not sure, we want to tour as much as possible but we do have to work around their schedule. We will be out there though.

My "spies" also informed me that you have already started preparing material for the band's next album. Have you already decided as to the musical direction that you need to follow, or are you simply collecting ideas at the moment?

Randy: We are collecting new ideas, we have a few things but nothing even near completion yet. We really busted our asses preparing for the studio and we took a small break. But now we are into full swing again, starting to write and gearing up for Febuary's tour. We aren’t going to write in a particular style though, we will do things as we’ve always done them, and that is just work with whatever anyone writes. We don’t really have a method other than that. I know that Jack and Jay both have some new things that they are doing, and I am working on one as well.

There are quite a few people out there who think that Paths of Possession is a side project. What is your answer to that, and what are we to expect from the band in the near future?

Randy: I answer that with a “Hell No, this isn’t a side project”!! I wouldn’t put so much effort towards a side project. This is the perfect band for me, we have built it up very slowly but I am very into this band and am ver proud of the new album and the response its been getting. George is very into this band as well, he has liked what we were doing back in 2000 and he is definitely into it. You will see more Paths albums and more and more Paths tours.

Randy, thank you for taking the time to answer these questions. The last words are yours!

Randy: Thank you for the interview, if you guys decide to pick up this disc, let us know what you think on the forum at pathsofpossession.com, also there is a free download for Bleed the Meek at metalblade.com, it doesn’t fully represent the whole of the disc, but its there. Thanks again!

Interview © 2005 John Stefanis

Album review