Analysts have applauded the decision by The Santa Cruz Operation Inc. (SCO) last week to divide itself up into three divisions. They said the move will help the company’s Tarantella middleware product and the company’s attempts to break into Linux services.

But some voiced doubts about the long-term viability of SCO’s UnixWare operating system.

The Santa Cruz, Calif.-based company warned investors that sales will be below analysts’ estimates for its second quarter, which ends March 31. SCO will be restructured into the following divisions: Server, Tarantella and Professional Services. It expects to report “significant losses” after reorganization costs.

In a statement, Doug Michels, SCO’s president and CEO, blamed Y2k-related delays “and other effects” for the shortfall. But analysts said SCO’s operating systems are under fire from Linux.

“Linux can give you the same value proposition (as SCO) – a Unix on cheap hardware – for less money,” said Tony Iams, an analyst at D. H. Brown Associates Inc. in Port Chester, N.Y.

At the same time, said Iams, SCO’s attempts to compete at the high end with Hewlett-Packard Co. and Sun Microsystems Inc. haven’t been entirely successful.

Benefits

Iams said the reorganization de-emphasizes the UnixWare operating system and will benefit other products, especially Tarantella.

Tarantella is a middleware product that allows browser-based clients to access applications that run on Unix servers, Windows NT servers and mainframes. It competes with MetaFrame, from Citrix Systems Inc. in Fort Lauderdale, Fla. The new corporate structure will allow the product to be marketed and sold more effectively, said Mike Orr, who will serve as president of the Tarantella division.

Chris Clabaugh, CEO of Allegrix Inc., a Santa Clara, Calif.-based application service provider and Tarantella user, said he believes that the reorganization will benefit Tarantella. “It helps remove the impression that Tarantella is SCO Unix only,” said Clabaugh.

Company Plans

The new structure will also make it easier for each division to pursue the Linux market, said Orr. The company has already announced significant steps there, including professional services and a version of Tarantella for Linux.

Orr said the company now intends to take portions of its UnixWare operating system and market them as layered products on top of other Unix versions and Linux.

“That way, we get a bigger market for each product individually,” said Orr. Programming interfaces for SCO UnixWare and Linux will be “virtually identical,” he said, and “increasingly, we will not care which one you use.”

Orr didn’t say how these changes will affect Project Monterey, the company’s joint effort with IBM to develop a 64-bit Unix system for Intel Corp.’s IA-64 architecture.