DATELINE September 17, 2018

FODDER FROM THE FORUMS. The Newest news is that both City Council member Martine Watkins and former mayor Celia Scott endorsed Justin Cummings. One (or many more) must wonder since Richelle Noroyan who was the Developer Relations Manager for Apple Computer,Inc and the long defunct SCO, Inc and is now an official employee with UCSC ie “Community Relations Representative” why she doesn’t recuse herself from voting on any item involving our shrinking campus and the city? Especially since she’s so happy supporting any and all the new buildings being built. NO on rent control folks and the millions of dollars behind their negative crusade have already placed more than 1200 No On M lawn signs. Donna Myers keeps parading around and about as an environmentalist. Ask her at the next forum if she wasn’t a strong supporter of De-Sal. Have you noticed how the NO On Measure M group mostly landlords and realtors keep repeating “it’s too expensive”. How can they ignore the increasing pleas from our renters who genuinely have larger problems with rentals being expensive? (from an avid reader…” Why would an environmentalist have supported desal for Santa Cruz? I was told that Donna Meyers supported it and I’m not sure that it makes sense. She also gave the thumbs up for support of the library/parking garage at the Elston forum. A good friend made an important point before that vote at the council, which is how can they be working toward a library/garage when the word garage was never included in measure S that was presented to the voters and we generously approved it .The word parking and the word garage did not appear in the text. How can an element that was not voted on become the major part of the plan ? I know Rick L. said a lawsuit is not out of the question, and I will contribute to that one”.

SQUARING THE CIRCLE (CHURCH). A long time and trusted friend sent this…“Circular rumors have it that no permits have been issued, or even applied for, for development of the “Circle Church”. As of this week one of the owners Chris Dreary the former pastor of the Circle Church is living in a mobile home on the premises. I believe London Nelson is so heavily booked that it’s almost impossible to rent space there. I’m wondering if there is any interest amongst the city council to purchase this property as a rented community center? Can this subject be up for public hearing/vote? I’m hearing that the entire structure may be demolished for so called co-housing. Very disturbing. Think we can start some movement in the city to have council purchase? I know it’s probably a long shot, but may be worth some effort Of course you’ve heard about the same Chris Dreary, now with a name change…hmmmmm, is leasing the former Logo’s to open another alcohol outlet called “faith on tap”. Another scam by this scumbag”.

STOP OVERBUILDING SANTA CRUZ. Ellen Aldridge who is a member of the Steering Committee of the Ocean Street Extension Neighborhood Association, and a native Santa Cruzian wrote this excellent plea to got our City Council to protect the Ocean Street Extension neighborhood. (OSX). It’s well worth reading ….and acting on it!

“Are you concerned about the development and overbuilding that is occurring in the City of Santa Cruz? The Ocean Street Extension (OSX) neighborhood on the City’s northerly boundary is experiencing it firsthand.

Developers Moe and Rowell are proposing a 40-unit apartment project, comprised of ten three story buildings on the steep 2.4-acre wooded parcel adjacent to the Santa Cruz Memorial Park located on OSX below Graham Hill Road. Many of you know OSX — it’s a rural, dead end road without streetlights or sidewalks that includes the cemetery, commercial and horse farms, and single family homes on large rural lots. The City Planning Staff have decided, despite uniform opposition from all surrounding neighborhoods, the Memorial Park, the Sierra Club, and other constituents, that it can disregard the City’s General Plan, and rezone this parcel which would allow 9 single family homes and quadruple the density to put in 40 units of San Francisco style apartments which will loom over the cemetery 26 feet from its hillside chapel where families go to pay last respects to their loved ones.

The City Planning Department is clearly determined to build more Google housing, as these two bed-room apartments will rent for $2800 or more per month if rented – although there will be a few affordable units. We all know that housing is a major concern to many — but building more commuter housing in rural neighborhoods would just feed the endless Silicon Valley need for housing and not solve the housing needs of local low income and working families. The City has repeatedly said that its development will be focused on transit corridors or in the downtown — but they are pushing this rezoning for a parcel at the City’s limits without regard to the neighborhood character, parking or traffic gridlock. Commuters from the San Lorenzo Valley will also be impacted as the turn lane onto OSX will have at least 266 more car trips a day turning at this unsafe intersection.

If you’re concerned that this trend will come to your neighborhood, there is still time to voice your opinion to the City Council. Check out www.osenasc.org for detailed information about the neighborhood’s concerns and sign our petition opposing the rezoning of this parcel. The development is scheduled to be considered by the City Council at its September 25th meeting, at a time to be determined. Please write to the Council or better yet — show up at the meeting and voice your concern about this development. Developers should follow existing zoning to keep neighborhood integrity”.

THOMAS PYNCHON & REAL FANS. I’ve written a few times about meeting Thomas Pynchon when he lived here. Here’s a new clue, or hint about his house in Aptos in the 1980’s. He was writing “Vineland” as I remember. If you do go to that site you can also scroll up and down and see the unbelievable search some folks have done just to track down the nearly invisible and illusive Pynchon.

EAGAN’S SUBCONSCIOUS COMICS. Enjoy the weekly trip through only you know where when you see his classic inner trips.

EAGAN’S DEEP COVER. See Eagan’s “The Adults In The Room” down a few pages. As always, at TimEagan.com you will find his most recent Deep Cover, the latest installment from the archives of Subconscious Comics, and the ever entertaining Eaganblog.

MUNCHING WITH MOZART. Every third Thursday there’s a FREE concert up stairs at the threatened Santa Cruz Main Library. This month its.. Thursday, September 20, 2018 from 12:10 – 12:50 The performers will be Jeff Gallagher, clarinet , Carol Panofsky, piano. Laureen Herr, piano, Nicki Kerns, mezzo-soprano and Lynn Kidder, piano Robin Murray Charlotte McManus-Guthrie, clarinet and Lynn Kidder, piano.

LISA JENSEN LINKS. Lisa writes: “A boy on the brink of manhood tries to piece together his own identity in the lyrical We The Animals, this week at Lisa Jensen Online Express (http://ljo-express.blogspot.com ). Meanwhile, my Art Boy is entered into the Congressional Record by Congressman Jimmy Panetta!” Lisa has been writing film reviews and columns for Good Times since 1975.

UNIVERSAL GRAPEVINE. Each and every Tuesday from 7:00-8:00 p.m. I host Universal Grapevine on KZSC 88.1 fm. or on your computer, (live only or archived for two weeks… (See next paragraph) and go to WWW.KZSC.ORG. Sept. 18 has Don Stump pres. and CEO of CCH housing returning to discuss HUD, affordable housing and senior issues for the full hour. Stacey Falls and Tom Donahue are guests on September 25 to talk about rent control and Housing Justice. Then Sarah Mason and Julian Parayno from Democratic Socialists of Santa Cruz talk about their political views. “Landscapes” the new book about historical & local land use battles will be talked about by Elizabeth Schilling and Heather Stiles on October 2nd. Then Julie Phillips and George Lewis discuss the proposed Dream Inn development at West Cliff and Bay. On October 9 Hina Pendle discusses her “Power of the Heart” workshop. October 22 has Ken Koenig and friend talking about communicating with your friends and relatives who like Trump. City Councilmember Chris Krohn talks about voting and local issues on October 30.

OR…if you just happen to miss either of the last two weeks of Universal Grapevine broadcasts go here… http://www.radiofreeamerica.com/dj/bruce-bratton You have to listen to about 4 minutes of that week’s KPFA news first, then Grapevine happens. Do remember, any and all suggestions for future programs are more than welcome so tune in, and keep listening. Email me always and only at bratton@cruzio.com

UNIVERSAL GRAPEVINE ARCHIVES. In case you missed some of the great people I’ve interviewed in the last 9 years here’s a chronological list of some past broadcasts. Such a wide range of folks such as Nikki Silva, Michael Warren, Tom Noddy, UCSC Chancellor George Blumenthal, Anita Monga, Mark Wainer, Judy Johnson, Wendy Mayer-Lochtefeld, Rachel Goodman, George Newell, Tubten Pende, Gina Marie Hayes, Rebecca Ronay-Hazleton, Miriam Ellis, Deb Mc Arthur, The Great Morgani on Street performing, and Paul Whitworth on Krapps Last Tape. Jodi McGraw on Sandhills, Bruce Daniels on area water problems. Mike Pappas on the Olive Connection, Sandy Lydon on County History. Paul Johnston on political organizing, Rick Longinotti on De-Sal. Dan Haifley on Monterey Bay Sanctuary, Dan Harder on Santa Cruz City Museum. Sara Wilbourne on Santa Cruz Ballet Theatre. Brian Spencer on SEE Theatre Co. Paula Kenyon and Karen Massaro on MAH and Big Creek Pottery. Carolyn Burke on Edith Piaf. Peggy Dolgenos on Cruzio. Julie James on Jewel Theatre Company. Then there’s Pat Matejcek on environment, Nancy Abrams and Joel Primack on the Universe plus Nina Simon from MAH, Rob Slawinski, Gary Bascou, Judge Paul Burdick, John Brown Childs, Ellen Kimmel, Don Williams, Kinan Valdez, Ellen Murtha, John Leopold, Karen Kefauver, Chip Lord, Judy Bouley, Rob Sean Wilson, Ann Simonton, Lori Rivera, Sayaka Yabuki, Chris Kinney, Celia and Peter Scott, Chris Krohn, David Swanger, Chelsea Juarez…and that’s just since January 2011.

QUOTES. “HURRICANES”

“I’d always thought hurricanes were romantic, with pretty feminine names like Celestine“. Mark Shand

“Everyone except the far right wing of the Republican Party realizes that oil, gas and coal burning are the main activities that have sent the climate into bigger floods, droughts, hurricanes, and El Niños”. Donella Meadows

“You can dance in a hurricane, but only if you’re standing in the eye”. Brandi Carlile