Lincoln International (“Lincoln”), a leading independent mid-market investment bank, has acted as the exclusive M&A adviser to Motion Equity Partners on the sale of Fairbanks Environmental Ltd (“Fairbanks”), a subsidiary of its portfolio company Tokheim Service Group.

Fairbanks is the leading provider of software and services for the management and monitoring of fuel for major oil companies, supermarkets and independent retailers. In 20 years, the company has grown from startup concept to c.200 highly trained staff providing 24/7 coverage of more than 13,000 fuel stations in some 35 countries. Today, Fairbanks is widely acknowledged as the leading name in the market, thanks to its powerful combination of service quality with real-time data analysis which reduces fuel loss, lowers operational costs, improves margins and supports the compliance needs of fuel retailers.

The business has been sold to OPW, a division of Dover Corporation, a global leader in fluid handling, management, monitoring and control solutions for the handling and distribution of fuels and critical fluids. OPW has nearly 4,000 employees with global manufacturing operations and sales offices.

Cedric Rays, Partner at Motion Equity Partners, commented, “We believe we have found an outstanding owner for the business in a process which satisfied all the shareholders’ objectives. Our thanks to an organized and fully integrated team from Lincoln International for enabling us to achieve this result.”

Baudouin de la Tour, Chief Executive of Tokheim Service Group, added, “The Lincoln team provided hands-on support throughout this strategically important project and ran a focused and efficient process.”

Edward Lethbridge, Managing Director at Lincoln, commented, “We knew from the outset Fairbanks was a high-quality company likely to attract a large number of parties interested in its market-leading technology. Completing the transaction at a premium valuation within three weeks of first-round offers demonstrates the demand for strategically valuable assets of this nature in the current market.”