Transaction will create a leading global provider of solutions for the Fuel Retail Industry, while opening new opportunities for Tokheim’s Sales and Service businesses

PARIS, France, 7th September, 2015 – Tokheim announced today that it has entered into an agreement with Dover Corporation, pursuant to which Dover has made a binding offer to acquire Tokheim’s Dispenser and System businesses. The Tokheim Sales and Service Divisions are not a part of this transaction and will become a stand-alone company remaining with its current owners. The transaction is subject to completion of information and consultation with certain of Tokheim’s employee representatives, certain regulatory filings and other customary conditions, and is expected to close in early 2016.

Headquartered in Paris, France, Tokheim is a global manufacturer of fuel dispensing and automation equipment, including a complete range of fuel dispensers and pumps, retail automation systems, payment terminals, media devices, as well as the leading Sales and Service organization in the fuel retail industry. Tokheim's majority shareholder is Motion Equity Partners, a European mid-market private equity firm.

Dover is a diversified global manufacturer delivering innovative equipment and components, specialty systems and support services through four major operating segments: Energy, Engineered Systems, Fluids, and Refrigeration & Food Equipment. The Tokheim Businesses would become part of OPW, a business unit within Dover’s Fluids segment, making it the premier global retail fueling systems provider, with unrivalled product breadth.

“We are excited about the strategic fit of Tokheim’s Dispenser and System businesses within Dover’s OPW business, as well as how a strong partnership with the merged entity will enhance the growth of our remaining Sales and Service businesses” said Baudouin de la Tour, CEO of Tokheim. “We strongly believe both our customers and employees will greatly benefit from this unique ability to provide full solutions on a global scale”.

"After years of sustained organic growth and geographical expansion, we found in Dover a great company to successfully pursue the global strategy of the Dispenser and System businesses" added Patrick Eisenchteter, Managing Partner of Motion Equity Partner.