RICHMOND, Va. -- Richard Boggs was put to death late Thursday in Virginia's electric chair for beating and stabbing an elderly woman to death six years ago after she invited him in for tea.

Boggs, 27, declared dead at 11:07 p.m. EDT, was the 135th person executed in the United States and the ninth in Virginia since the Supreme court reinstated the death penalty in 1976.

He was electrocuted at the State Penitentiary after the Supreme Court, the 4th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals and a U.S. district judge refused to stay his execution. Gov. L. Douglas Wilder also refused to commute his death sentence to life in prison.

Boggs was sentenced to die for the Jan. 25, 1984, robbery and murder of Treeby Shaw, 87, of Portsmouth, a neighbor. She was beaten and stabbed. Boggs robbed her to support a drug habit.

Boggs requested raisin bagels and coffee for his last meal, said Deborah Groome, acting operations officer at the State Penitentiary in Richmond.

Groome said Boggs's parents, Bill and Sybil, and his brother and sister, Michael and Julie, were among those visiting him Thursday. Also visiting were the Revs. Bill Jones and Russ Ford, who are associated with the Virginia Department of Corrections.

In seeking a stay of execution, defense lawyer David Bruck said Boggs is a victim of fetal alcohol syndrome and suffers from organic brain damage.

But the state said it was too late to raise such an issue, and Assistant Attorney General Robert Anderson III noted that three medical experts had found Boggs competent to stand trial.

Bruck said Boggs was brain damaged, but Anderson said Boggs has registered an IQ of 100 and 118 in two tests.

Boggs's lawyer also said the execution should be stayed pending a hearing to determine whether the electric chair functions properly, saying a malfunctioning electric chair would constitute cruel and unusual punishment.

Bruck based his argument on the claim that Virginia's electric chair is similar to the electric chair in Florida, which malfunctioned during an execution on May 9. Flames and smoke spewed around the head of the condemned, who took several minutes longer to die than usual.

Anderson presented affidavits from penitentiary officials, who said they do not foresee such a malfunction in the Virginia electric chair. 'As a matter of law,' Anderson told Williams, 'they have not demonstrated that the chair will malfunction ...'