Lodestar Consulting is currently seeking multiple full-time Oracle DBAs at all levels to join our team in support of the Air Force. We are a fast-growing small business (named to Inc5000's list of fast growing private companies in America two years in a row and Best Places to Work in 2022 and 2023), seeking dynamic thinkers and outstanding communicators who want to thrive in an entrepreneurial environment and grow with Lodestar Consulting Inc.

We focus on hiring and developing top talent to provide superior support to our clients, and to grow and develop our team for long-term repeatable success. Our team members are experienced, professional, enthusiastic, and able to quickly apply their skills to diverse situations to ensure our client’s needs are met. If you love to solve problems, assist clients in emerging technologies, or simply drive meaningful change for clients, there’s a place for you at Lodestar Consulting!

This role will support many related database functions across one or more teams or clients, including designing, implementing and maintaining new databases, backup/recovery and configuration managements. This shall involve, but is not limited to:

Responsibilities:

Duties include disaster recovery, performance analysis and tuning, index maintenance, and monitoring of data

Administers, maintains, develops and implements policies and procedures for ensuring the security and integrity of the database

Install database management systems (DBMS) and provide input for modification of procedures and documentation used for problem resolution and day-to-day maintenance

Performs database and software lifecycle activities to ensure highest level of system performance and availability and compliance with business requirements

Organizes and formats data for efficient query and storage processes.

Requirements:

2+ years of experience as a Database Administrator (DBA) with working knowledge of security patching, strong tuning, and optimization skills.

Must have technical experience working with databases, build out tables, and grant permissions.

Understanding of the E-Business Suite R12 & R12.2 with its architecture

Install and maintain E-Business R12 & R12.2 application and database

Participate in database capacity planning related to database growth and system utilization, trend analysis, and predicting future database resources

Provide pro-active and reactive performance analysis, troubleshooting, monitoring, performance tuning of EBS, SOA application servers in a mission critical environment

Support Oracle RAC/Multitenant architecture

Support Oracle Identity Management product suite

Support OEM

Cloning of EBS systems and automation procedures

Desired Skills:

Current Comptia Security+

Working knowledge of SOA and other Oracle enterprise applications based on Oracle Middleware

Hands on experience with implementation, upgrade and tuning of large Oracle EBS environments

EBS HA and DR concepts and options, including RAC, PCP, Shared Files Systems, ASM, Data Guard, and other replication strategies

Patch assessment and application in an EBS environment

Performance problem identification and remediation

Systems Administration experience with Linux operating systems

OE Linux experience a plus

DBaaS in OCI environment a plus

ExaCS in OCI environment a plus

Education:

Bachelor's Degree in Computer Science, Information Technology, Computer Engineering or related IT discipline; or equivalent experience

Security Clearance:

Must have or the ability to obtain DoD Top Secret Security Clearance (requires U.S. Citizenship)

Salary commensurate with experience. Travel and relocation expenses may be considered based on the appropriate candidate. If you are looking to learn and contribute to a rapidly growing consulting and financial management business, we'd love to hear from you. Please No Sponsors or Agencies!

Equal Employment Opportunity

All employment decisions shall be made without regard to age, race, creed, color, religion, sex, national origin, ancestry, disability status, veteran status, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, genetic information, marital status, citizenship status or any other basis as protected by federal, state, or local law.