Forty-five years spent as an officer in

the British Army have provided ample

material for Sir Charles Harington

book of reminiscences. Although he occupied

several important military posts,

he only once occupied a conspicuous

place in the world's news. This was

in 1922. when as commander-in-chief

of the Allied forces in Turkey, he succeeded

in staving off war over the Chanak

crisis by a narrow margin of 75 minutes.

Writing from his retirement, Sir

Charles reviews the incident at length,

and claims, not without justification, that

Britain is gathering the fruits of his

policy to-day in Turkey's friendship. He

tells a dramatic story of how, with

three orders In his pocket from the

Cabinet to open hostilities, he succeeded

in coming to terms with the Turks. He

reveals that Lloyd George and a section

of the Cabinet were determined on war.

When the news of the settlement he had

arranged reached London, only the Inter-

vention of Lord Curzon prevented puni-

tive action against him. Lloyd George's

personal displeasure cost Sir Charles the

rank of field-marshal.

One feature of Sir Charles Harding-

ton's military life that will surprise the

lay reader is his intense preoccupation

with games. To him cricket was almost

a religion, and cricket runs through

his book from cover to cover. In the

story of his life as a regimental officer

it is difficult to see how he found time

to allow his military duties Co interfere

with cricket and other games. On at

least one occasion he relates that he received

a broad hint from above to the

effect that the Army also had some right

to his attention.

But Sir Charles is not alone. Almost

all of the officers he mentions suffered

from the same obsession for sport and

games. One incident he relates justifies

the Continental impression that the

British, as a race, are mad. At one

Eton v. Harrow match at Lord's Sir

Charles saw the then Secretary' of State

for War Lord Hailsham, looking for a

seat. Sir Charles drew Lord Hailsham

attention to Mr. Baldwin, who was sitting

in the second row. The only answer

he got away, "I don't care where Mr. Baldwin

is sitting. I don't speak to him on

this occasion." The Prime Minister and

the War Minister did not wear the same

school tie!

On another occasion Field-Marshal

Lord Plumer became, to use an appropriate

schoolboy term, quite "shirty"

when Sir Charles expressed the hope that

Harrow would win. He snapped. "I don't:

I hope they are beaten by on innings at

lunch time on the first day. For his

own part Sir Charles Harington seems to

infer that his term as president of the

M.C.C. was the highest honour he received

in his life, and the apex of his career.

Although he was much in the thick

of things and was behind the scenes

with those in high authority. Sir Charles's

account of the Great War years is a

meagre and lacking in dramatic Interest, i

Here and there the curtain is drawn back

an inch or two. One day Sir Henry,

Wilson burst in on Sir Charles demand-

ing to know if there was a man named

Rolls or a man named Royce in England.

"The" procured someone connected

with the mystic: names. The upshot was

that Sir Henry ordered, straight off, 1,000

Rolls-Royce cars for immediate delivery,

to be used as armoured cars in Mesopo-

tamia blessed word. Sir Charles con-

tinues:-"So we got the cars, but they

were to cost. I think, £2,000 each, with

another £1,000 for strengthening them

for service, so there was a sequel when

Sir Charles Harris, the financial head,

heard of the deal that afternoon, but he

took is very well."

No wonder Sir Charles remarks that,

we dealt with some big problems in

those days when money was forthcoming."

A £3 000,000 deal In motor-cars made in

half an hour testifies to the truth of the

statement.