ROCHESTER - Roger D. Lemelin, 68, died on Friday, March 30, 2018. He was born April 10, 1949 in Rochester. One of six children, he was the son of Grace and Joseph Lemelin and grew up in Somersworth in a French-speaking home.

He went to St. Martins School and graduated from Saint Thomas Aquinas High School in 1967. He went onto the University of New Hampshire, graduating with a bachelor of science in 1974. While at UNH he enjoyed many activities such as math club, hiking, skiing and obtaining his private pilot's license.

Roger was an HVAC engineer working for Goulet Supply and Colonial Supply and most recently he worked in IT for DXC Technologies at the Portsmouth Naval Shipyard.

Roger's true passion in life was his family, his beloved wife and two children. Always wanting them to have a lake house, he purchased and renovated a cottage on Lake Winnipesaukee, which continues to be a source of joy for the family today.

A dedicated husband, he was married to his wife, Sally, for 40 years. She was, by far, the most important person in his life. Together they lovingly restored an 1849 colonial home and barn in Barrington, over the course of 35 years.

His children, Christopher and Sarah, were his pride and joy and Roger supported them daily as they worked towards their dreams. Following in his father's footsteps, Chris earned his private pilot's license, and Roger was proud (brave enough) to become his first passenger. He often remarked that one of his proudest moments was walking Sarah down the aisle to marry his son-in-law, who he loved, Edward MacDonald III. Roger supported the couple when they moved to London and proudly visited them with his wife and son for Christmas in 2016.

He will be remembered for his decency, positive outlook on life and quirky sense of humor.

Roger was predeceased by his grandmother, Eva Deschenes, parents, aunt Lillian Roberge; brother Jerome and sister-in-law Louisette, sister Pauline, and is survived by his wife Sally, son Christopher, daughter Sarah and her husband Edward J. MacDonald III, Godmother and Aunt Lucille Cater, Aunt Jeanne Lemelin, Brothers, Normand and his wife Rachel, Raymond and his wife Carol and Robert and his wife Linda. He also has many cousins, nieces and nephews.