8) Village of the Damned (1995)

★★

Village of the Damned has two things going for it: John Carpenter and creepy children. The movie does quite well with the latter; the kids' inhuman emotionless "It's A Good Life" act is effective, although they're never exactly a scary threat.

But overall, the movie just feels aimless and repetitive. Between the actually eerie opening reminiscent of Under The Dome and the chaos at the end, Village of the Damned is never scary or tense, never giving us characters to care about, and feels locked in a cycle of "people express concern, someone annoys kids, that someone dies a gruesome death" for most of its runtime. Any themes or questions are expressed in the most blunt and shallow way possible. A surprisingly weak entry from Carpenter

9) Scream (1996) [Rewatch]

★★½

Unfortunately Scream doesn't hold up for me. I kept thinking of Black Christmas while watching, partially because of how the MOs of both killers involve scary phone calls.

What probably seemed really clever - the characters actually know about the genre and the horror movies like we do - now just comes across as ham-fisted references and shoutouts bluntly jammed into dialogue. The characters aren't particularly interesting or likable, and the string of red herrings feels more Scooby Doo-adjacent than like smart subversions.

What does still work through are the stalking scenes. Making Ghostface act like a regular guy in a costume, someone who's playful and cocky, who stumbles and makes mistakes and grunts with exertion, makes him feel distinct from other slashers. Along with the kinetic camera and pacing of the scenes, it keeps the chases exciting and suspenseful, not just someone trying to escape an unstoppable monster as we wait for the kill.

10) Mimic (1997)

★★½

Mimic is most interesting when its titular mimics are well...mimicking rather than when it's a creature feature with stock characters and everyone conveniently getting separated or coming together. At its best moments, Mimic is really effective, from the dim dank subway and sewer tunnels of Manhattan making for a perfect horror setting, to the creepy "uncanny valley" nature of the mimics. When the things are watching from the shadows, their not-quite-face peeking out of the darkness, it's like seeing the Del Toro we know poking through the mediocrity, the kind of weird inventive visuals and monster design that he has mastered.

Because when they're not mimicking, the mimics just feel like low-rent xenomorphs and lose any of the unsettling elements that make Mimic different. The late 90s CGI doesn't help either

===

1) The Blob (1988)

★★★★

2) Dead Calm (1989)

★★★

3) Hardware (1990)

★

4) The People Under The Stairs (1991)

★★★½

5) Braindead (1992)

★★★★★

6) Cronos (1993)

★★★

7) In The Mouth of Madness (1994)

★★★★½

DAY 11

The Curse of the Werewolf: Hammer makes its first and only werewolf movie! Though Terence Fisher is behind the camera, the lack of Cushing and/or Lee would certainly be enough to keep most folks away, especially with some new guy named Oliver Reed that no one had heard about before this film as the star. But despite the setting changing to Spain (the Bray Studios version of Spain, at least) and the lack of familiar faces, this is undoubtedly a Hammer production in texture and detail, filled with the same handsome appearance and a dignified tone for normally lurid subject matter, along with a gorgeous score. The tone is an especially important detail for this production in particular, as Hammer decided to throw out the rule book for this film and crafted themselves a nicely literary film. Starting with a long windup to describe the social situation that brought major players to begin with, the function here is not only effective in driving home the large scope of the tale but also instilling a sense of how important the social hierarchy of this era of Spain was for how it can twist even the purest at heart into acts of unspeakable evil. There's also a strong flavor to having this werewolf be of spiritual origins, an unusual take by any metric, but one that puts much more emphasis on the impending tragedy than the grislier aspects. There is blood, but it's never the focus of the story and all the better for it. The story is so interesting because it's not a conventional werewolf tale that it should come as little surprise that the weakest parts of the films are when there is substantial werewolf action. Backloaded as it is, it doesn't amount to much more than watching a werewolf climb buildings as angry villagers seem somewhat confused by his antics. That was never the aim of the film, though; not with a story this laden with interesting themes, not with the largely good acting across the board, and not with a great lead performance from a future titan of acting who amazingly doesn't appear for more than half of the film. It's such an engaging film because it is so atypical for a genre that can't wait to show you how they pulled off the transformation sequences, how good the makeup looks on werewolf and victims alike and can often forget the tragedy that powers these tales. The ending here is especially effective in that regard, not because we lose the connective tissue between all the leads in the cast with the death of our tragic hero, but with all the various subplots coming together at that moment, we also know that their suffering will last long past the end titles. In other words, this may just be the saddest howler of them all, and all the better for it.

71 films are coming on up!

This sounds right up my alley. I just got the blu-ray set that includes it recently, so it's in my pile to get to... eventually. I have to finish Hammer's Dracula and Frankenstein series first, so it's gonna be a while. Thank god it isn't another long-ass series.

03) Piranha Part Two: The Spawning (1981) (Oct 3)

So here we have James Cameron's directorial debut, though he was fired from the production after filming and was not allowed to see his footage. Allegedly, Cameron went as far as breaking into the editing room to cut his own version (what he had planned to do with it after completion, I have no idea) but was caught by producer Ovidio G. Assonitis who re-cut it again. Various versions have seemingly been released on video, so I'm not sure how of Cameron's film remains and how much of it is reshoots by Assonitis, but I can take some educated guesses about who did what.

If only the film itself were as interesting as its story...

The film is as much of a mess as you'd expect. I have a theory that Cameron himself is actually a robot encased in flesh. While he excels at the technical aspects of movies and makes incredible action films, whenever he has to have human characters act... human, it always feels like they're some artificial facsimile as if a computer program was attempting to explain human emotion. It's very odd and on full display in Piranha Part Two: The Spawning. Baby Lance Henriksen is as robotic and cold as ever, and the lead character (his estranged wife) has a relationship with her son that's so uncomfortable it would make Norman Bates blush.

And then you have the "comedic" scenes that take place in the soon-to-be piranha chow resort. These are some of the most awkward and bizarre scenes I've ever seen and most certainly the work of Assonitis. They have that unmistakable stink of a non-native English speaker trying to make a film for American audiences, right down to the obvious dubbing. These scenes don't even connect with the rest of the movie and could be cut without effecting a damn thing... well, other than making the movie less awful, I suppose.

And as for the technical aspects of the film, well, you get a few shots here and there that have that classic Cameron look to them so you can see the seeds of what would later become Terminator, but he clearly didn't have the time and money to do anything satisfying with the piranha attacks as they're all pretty awful and as bad as the rest of the movie is. It just falls apart during the final set piece with a very unsatisfying finale.

Piranha Part Two: The Spawning doesn't even come close to matching the charm or fun of Joe Dante's original, and in all honestly, isn't even worth watching as a Cameron curiosity. It actually makes me think I was a little too hard on Frogs. Oh well, at least it's better than Avatar.

It's too late for me. Save yourself. Skip it. 1.5 / 5

OP

---

Well, I can't say I feel misled. That poster looked pretty messy and I got a messy film. Having seen some of the people involved both behind and in front of the camera, I wondered if maybe this would just be an example of bad advertising but sadly it's not.

Can't help but wish this was a bit less sleazy/gross. Could've seen this landing a bit better for me if that were the case. It isn't though and that's okay. There's always other films.

I really tried to be open minded with this but wow this was pretty bad. I don't want to say it's the worst of the US remakes of asian horror films I've seen but the only one I might say this is better than is One Missed Call.

I wasn't particularly enthused with the original to begin with but this was just completely off the mark on most levels.

Only for completionists who lack self love.

This was a pretty big improvement on the first film. It wasn't great by any means but after the experience I had watching the original earlier this season, I'll take what I can get.

I think the pacing had the biggest impact on the quality increase. There wasn't as much random jumping around and the exposition mostly felt trimmed back except for a few bits. The death sequences are able to build up a bit of mystery and tension when it isn't constantly cutting to other things, who would've thought? Behind the pacing, the cast was also better with less annoying characters.

Hopefully my enjoyment of the series continues to increase or at least stay on this level.

While most of the films in this series are continuing to grow on me, this is the one exception. In fact, it might be the only one that has fallen in my favor over time.

The A Nightmare on Elm Street series stands out to me since each film is unique and doing its own thing (whether that works or not for each film is debatable) but this one doesn't have a lot going for it. This feels like a few standout moments (which aren't even that good to begin with) stringed together with little or no thought put into the rest. I feel like getting distracted/caught up in something else for 15-20 minutes would result in a similar viewing experience. This is just all over the place.

It isn't helped that this goes through the effort of bringing back the survivors from 3 only to kill them off unceremoniously. I understand wanting to move on with a new cast but at this point they might as well have just did that in full. The casting for Kristen was especially disappointing.

I don't want to go on all night so I'm gonna cut myself off and go watch a movie/do something else. I wish I liked this more than I do. I've never been huge on The Dream Child but I remember that having a pretty unique gothic aesthetic in context of the series so maybe that will appeal to me when I get to it.

Okay this is where things fall apart with the US films for me. I had hopes that this would grow on me after the first film surprised me like it did but all of my previous issues remain.

There's a pretty severe lack of moderation to be found here. Things that worked in the case of the first film are pushed to their breaking point. I mentioned that the original had a lot of jump scares (which I'm not crazy about usually) but they were at least effective. This one doubles down on those and they don't work as well as they want to. There's only so many times they can attempt to execute almost the same exact scare without any major variation. It almost feels like this was an attempted "greatest hits" of moments of the Ju-On/The Grudgeseries at large just with all of the impact sucked out.

This wouldn't have been so bad by itself if the rest of the film wasn't like it is. The non-linear chronology I praised the original for is stretched even further here. The issue is that for a film with so many characters and branching story lines, there's really not much of anything happening in any of them. I can understand that the curse being tied to one location (the house) could be a bit troubling as far as storytelling but the way things were developed here felt really half baked.

Despite all of this, the film is competent and not a complete disaster. The variety of settings is nice and it's great to see Sarah Michelle Gellar back as Karen even if it's for a mostly short period. It's just without the things that worked so well for the other ones there isn't much to draw me in personally.

Very curious to see how the next reboot of this series goes.

7) In The Mouth of Madness (1994) [Rewatch]

★★★★½

As a fan of Lovecraftian horror, it's impossible to not love this movie. Not only is it a pitch-perfect genre story, hitting all the tropes and conventions and bringing them to unabashed life onscreen, In The Mouth of Madness is such a wonderful homage to the genre, to Lovecraft and King and the rest. It's as reality-twisting and mind-bending for the audience as it is for the characters. It's kind of cheesy and over-the-top but also goes all in on the imagery and is brimming with existential dread; that's not just the movie's style of horror but the very thing the characters are grappling with in the story itself. There are numerous Lovecraftian horror movies - some merely adjacent, others blatant - but none are as deeply entrenched in the genre as Mouth of Madness.

Yeah baby. I should watch that again sometime this month.

The Thing for the first time.

Holy shit are you in for a treat.

3. Bone Tomahawk: Went in knowing mostly nothing about this one. I had thought it was going to be another meditative piece similar to The Revenant. Had heard about this one for a few years, mainly due to a violent scene that seems to have stuck with people for a long time. That scene didn't really do much for me tho. I was pleased to see some familiar actors like Russel, Fox, and WIlson. Through the whole movie, I thought something involving Patrick Wilson's broken leg was gonna pop up. Slowly pulling that apart would have made me more squeamish than the "wishbone" scene. This movie rocked anyway.

I rewatched this because it was on Netflix. Still fucking love this film. Matthew Fox is great in it, as is the rest of the cast. Love how matter of fact though brutal the action scenes are.

Day 3:

Warm Bodies

This modern take on the classic zombie movie mixed with the love story of Romeo and Juliet really was a strange one. Opening up with narration from the antagonist turned protag R, we follow his day in the life as an already turned zombie. We take some time to go through his routine, and even show the hierarchy of zombie types. In this film there are two; zombies and boney. The regs have most of their motor functions and have their normal color and human shape. The bones look like the redeads from The Legend of Zelda and don't like anything with a heartbeat.

So very on brand for your horror movie. We then follow R to the end of his day at this airport where he he goes to rest at an abandoned airplane. Here we see just how bad of a hoarder he must have been before he became the undead. Dude has everything a zombie would never need. We are then treated to the wonderful majesty of vinyl. He puts this record on and zones out. It is made pretty clear upfront that zombies don't dream. So remember that key fact. Our next day take R out on an adventure w/ his one friend zombie, and a small pack of walkers. Well I guess not walkers, because these bad boys can run when they need to. Anyway. We are then shown a brief aside of the humans that are going out to forage for supplies. And our other main protag Julie! We get some movement from the walkers, and their distaste for the boney. The living make it to a medical facility (??) and then they are attacked by the zombies. R see's Julie and it's just star crossed lovers at this point. He see's Julies BF and decides he looks like a legit snack. Sweeps the leg and is in chow town. There's some inner monologue about how he hates to do it. But eating brains shows memories of the people they eat. So you gotta do it to still feel alive. He see's some of the goon BF's memories, and decides it would be a good idea to not eat Julie b/c he's in love. He smears some dodo(??) on her so the other zombies don't notice her and shuffles her out. We get back to the airport and he's in full on creeper mode. Talking bout' how much he really likes her. And wants to see if she could come to like him. Like dawg. You are a whole ZOMBIE!!! Like please cool your jets. Anyway he's like learning speech again. And grunts out that he needs her to stay. So she's a prisoner now. She tries to get away and realizes she's too deep into zed country to get away without help. There's some montage of them having fun and getting closer. All the while R is snacking on the old BF's brains and getting his memories. He is still trying to find a way to stay w/ Julie when they decide it's time to make a break for it. R's old friend helps them escape and they do some Benny Hill running from the boney. Also s/n R looks like the younger Skarsgard from Castle Rock when he runs. Like his whole shit is at a slant. Just funny to watch. Anyway, this dude get's away w/ Julie and they make it to a housing development. Here Julie finally learns that R killed her old dude who's name I cannot remember. But it's the younger Franco. She get's upset and leaves without him while he's dreaming. BTW this dude is becoming human now. Somehow his connection to Julie is bringing him back to life. He wakes up from his dream and chases after Julie. We get some stuff back at the human encampment. The father is a strung out John Malkovich which answers all the questions I had about how the humans left survived. R gets a motivational grunt speech from his zombie buddy and then goes after her. We get the R&J balcony scene, and then a montage of them trying to pretty up this dead dude to prove to Julies dad that the zombies are turning back. R looks worse as a person. Ol' John boy aint having it and pulls the strap on R. They escape. And then the zombie boney war happens. This ends with R sacrificing himself to save Julie. At which point he becomes human again. I dunno how I feel about it. But they reintegrate all the zombies back into human society. While killing off all the boney's. All in all I was surprised by how well this held up.

See my older posts here.

2. The Strangers (2008) [October 3]

Hmm, I think I walked away from this a bit disappointed. Home invasions are a very real, and very scary thing in real life, yet so many movies fail to translate that into cinema. The Strangers made a decent attempt, but I don't think it stuck the landing if I'm being honest. I made sure not to compare the movie to my favorite Home Invasion film (and one of my GOAT films ever), You're Next, seeing as the tone of this was dead serious, while You're Next clearly wanted to be funny in various parts. One thing that bothers me about the ending/reveal of the movie is that while I understand that sometime violent crimes happen "just because", it was so damn lame when one of the villains explained their motive as

"Just because you were home"

Like, yeah, sometimes that is the case, but that doesn't mean that it makes for an interesting movie. You can't expect the audience to ignore the intruders's motivations like you would forces of nature such as Jason or Michael Myers. The intruders weren't presented as much; they made mistakes, and they displayed realistic human qualities. The movie also takes forever to get started yeesh, I was super uninterested in the relationship drama.

Now, one of the things this movie has going for it is that it is very well-shot a various points. Almost all of the shots are deliberate, and are often hiding visages of the intruders watching the main characters. This was effective in unnerving me because I spent time looking at the characters, and actually startled myself when I made out an intruder's mask. Very cool shots.

Ultimately I feel like this is a movie that would've been more effective to watch when it first came out because apparently, this was meant to subvert the expectations that violent crimes are way less likely to happen in rural areas as opposed to urban. I've never felt that was the case before, but YMMV. I wonder if the sequel is better...

Also, Glenn Howerton is in this, and I found it funny that I immediately expected him to be one of the killers because of his character on It's Always Sunny, haha.

Pros:

Cool shots

Mask designs

Some mannerisms of the intruders were disturbing

Cons:

Boilerplate jump scares

Killers's motivations are disappointing in the context of the film

Takes too long to get to the good stuff

Glenn Howerton not acting like a psychopath

Conditionally Recommended (if you're a fan of Home Invasion stories, it's worth a look)

_________________________________

So Far...

As Above, So Below (2014) Recommended [October 1]

The Strangers (2008) Conditionally Recommended [October 3]