John Carpenter's Village Of The Damned is a lonely, isolated and melancholic affair, awash in New Age tones and shivery disharmonies. The original book by John Wyndham and the initial film adaptation made sense in a culture steeped in anticommunist/anti-'youth movement' Baby Boom apocalyptics, wherein one culture is growing and harboring within itself a counterculture founded upon alien aesthetics, alien values, alien consciousness, which will overthrow and displace the host. This film could be perhaps be remade today, too, as an allegory of social media - as - hive mind. In 1995, however, what concerned parents was the fear that their kids would grow up as sociopathic murderers, 'superpredators', anesthetized by potent marijuana and crack cocaine and tv programs featuring…

Why are John Carpenter's women's pictures so undervalued? Village of the Damned and Ghosts of Mars are almost always written off as lesser works in the director's oeuvre and yet I find myself endlessly fascinated by the stories they tell. Maybe even more importantly Ghosts of Mars and Village of the Damned are films that are so distinctly John Carpenter that I'm surprised auteurists haven't embraced these works more fully. Their dismissal is completely baffling to me.

I think one of the biggest reasons why I enjoy Village of the Damned (and horror in general really) is because it's never afraid to tell a narrative from a woman's viewpoint. While other genres of film have often shied away from female…

Village of the Damned feels like a 2000's M. Night Shyamalan film in some ways. It's like an amalgamation between Signs and The Happening. They are two films I really like (for very different reasons) and so I enjoyed Carpenter's take on Village of the Damned quite a bit.

The first 40 minutes were absolutely awesome. I positively loved the setup and the psychological nature of the way things were progressing. It really hooked me in. After that when the proper child actors come in, things do get a bit silly and the second act does move pretty slow but I was still very much onboard and engaged because of how good and chilling the first act was. We've seen…

John Carpenter's remake of the classic British chiller tells mostly the same story and doesn't go anywhere new with it. Village of the Damned, based on a novel by John Wyndham, begins with a small town falling asleep in unison. The residents awaken to find that every woman of child bearing age is now pregnant - each of them agreeing to carry the child to term after a promise of $3k per month a piece from the government, who want to study the children. The first half of the film is much more effective than the second. It offers a lot of promise early on, before morphing into what is basically a child lead slasher with a focus on set…