Having celebrated his 42nd birthday on Sunday, Crawford joined a select group of players who played past their 40th birthday, but that's not the only surprising thing about the veteran.

Jamal Crawford announces his retirement

It's been quite a few years that the name Jamal Crawford has been considered perhaps the best in the business when it came to NBA reserves. Indeed having been voted 6th Man of the Year on three occassions, Crawford was the bar setter for those who come off the bench for the purpose of impact. Now it seems the curtain is set to come down on what has been a long and consistant career. Indeed on Sunday night Crawford announced his retirement from the professional game after a career that started more than two decades ago. "Goodbye to the game, all the spoils the adrenaline rush. Thank you basketball, I owe you everything," he said in a tweet.

Who is Jamal Crawford?

Drafted back in 2000 by the Chicago Bulls, Crawford has enjoyed a career that has seen him wear the jerseys of a wide variety of teams, which in turn has allowed him to play alongside a plethora of players. Indeed, from the Bulls he would go on to play for the Knicks, Warriors, Hawks, Blazers, Clippers, Timberwolves, Suns and the Nets. Across those two decades he managed to establish himself as the #1 scorer off the bench in the NBA with an average of 14.6 points per game. As far as awards go, those three 6th Man awards - once with the Hawks and twice with the Clippers - weren't the only accolades that he picked up, in fact the Seattle native was even voted the and was even named NBA's Twyman-Stokes Teammate of the Year in 2018. With that specific 'team player' mentality in mind, its not hard to see how Crawford was able to extend his career far past the point that many others normally would.

For more from the NBA

At 42 years of age Crawford brings to a close one of the longest running NBA careers on record. Just three years ago, when playing with the Phoenix Suns he became the oldest player in NBA history to score 50 or more points - he was 39 years and 20 days at the time. It would actually be his final game for the Suns and at the time it was expected to be his final game in the league, however, he still believed there was fight left in him and in turn managed to secure a stint with the Brooklyn Nets just after his 40th birthday. Here now at the end Crawford will surely hang up his jersey with head held high, as few can claim to have been more consistent or beloved by their team mates than the man they called 'Crawssover Crawford.'

Other notable NBA players to play past 40

As one can imagine playing any professional sport can take a toll on the body, but to do so past the age of 40 is most definitely a feat that deserves recognition. Indeed there haven't been many players to do so but we collected a few names worth mentioning.