Jamal Crawford Biography

Jamal Crawford, standing 6’5”, is a shooting guard and point guard in the National Basketball Association. Crawford was selected by the Cleveland Cavaliers as the eighth overall pick in the 2000 NBA Draft and has since played for six other NBA teams. He was born in Seattle, Washington in 1980 and led his high school team to success before attending the University of Michigan. As a starter and standout player for the Wolverines, it was no surprise that Crawford was a first-round NBA pick out of college. Although drafted by the Cavaliers, he was immediately traded to the Chicago Bulls, whom he played with for his first five professional seasons. Later, he became a New York Knick, Golden State Warrior, Atlanta Hawk, Portland Trail Blazer and a Los Angeles Clipper, Crawford has achieved many notable accomplishments of the year. He was a two-time NBA Sixth Man of the Year in 2010 and again in 2014, along with the NBA all-time leader in four-point plays.

Book Jamal Crawford for your Next Event

Disclaimer: AthleteSpeakers assists companies seeking to hire talent like Jamal Crawford for speaking engagements, virtual meetings, appearances, product endorsements, and business sanctions. Our speakers bureau does not claim to exclusively represent Jamal Crawford. Our booking agency can help with finding an athlete or sports celebrity that aligns with your upcoming events date, location, and budget. When an organization request booking details for a celebrity like Jamal Crawford, we work closely with the client to make sure the proposed dates does not interfere with the requested athletes schedule. We then confirm the sports celebrity fee based on the details of the request. The fees listed on the speaker profile are rough estimates based on the previous market rate for the talent. Our team then works with Jamal Crawford's agent, manager or assistant on the booking request. For parties interested in hiring Jamal Crawford, we recommend filling out the booking request form so our booking agents can help with making your next event a success.

Interested in booking Jamal Crawford for a virtual meeting?

Contact Athlete Speakers today at 800-916-6008 to book Jamal Crawford for a virtual event, virtual meeting, virtual appearance, virtual keynote speaking engagement, webinar, video conference or Zoom meeting. The booking agents at Athlete Speakers work to get you the best price for your desired sports personality.

Athlete Speakers is a leader when it comes to booking virtual events in the sports world. Since 1999, we have built close relationships with top athletes, agents, publicists and managers. We assist all types of companies as well as event planners with booking athletes like Jamal Crawford for these virtual engagements. Companies continue to turn to Athlete Speakers to get Jamal Crawford’s latest virtual speaking fee, appearance cost and schedule availability.

Book Jamal Crawford for your Virtual Meeting