The defending-champion Golden State Warriors could be looking to add yet another sharp-shooter, per Zach Lowe of ESPN.com.

In an article breaking down various developments as NBA free agency approaches, Lowe writes that Golden State is interested in signing with Jamal Crawford, and that the feeling is mutual.

There is some mutual interest between the Warriors and Jamal Crawford in a potential minimum deal, sources say. He might want more than the minimum. It’s unclear if the Warriors will use their mini-midlevel exception, but if they do, it likely will not be on Crawford.

Crawford, a three-time Kia Sixth Man of the Year, is coming off his lowest-scoring season (10.3 ppg) since the 2002-03 campaign. He upped his production, however, in the 2018 postseason by averaging 11.8 points per game while shooting 41.2 percent from 3-point range.

In addition, Marcus Thompson of TheAthletic.com reports that Warriors stars Kevin Durant and Draymond Green are lobbying GM Bob Myers to pursue Crawford.

Bob Myers is back in the same spot. The Warriors president of basketball operations is once again under pressure to sign someone his star players want even if the front office might not think he’s the answer they need.

But how do you say no to players who have won three titles in four years?

Last year, a vouching from stars Draymond Green and Kevin Durant, and coach Steve Kerr, led to the Warriors taking a flyer on Nick Young. This year, an even stronger push is being made for Jamal Crawford.

Green and Durant are already lobbying. Stephen Curry is on board. Some of the assistant coaches want him, too. It will be enough to get Myers on the phone with Crawford’s agent, Aaron Goodwin, when the free agency period begins at 9 p.m. on Saturday.

The Warriors, who could face the prospect of signing star forward Durant to a lucrative new contract, will be looking for efficient ways to fill out their roster for next season. Crawford could potentially reinforce a backcourt that will see Nick Young and Patrick McCaw hit free agency this weekend.

Crawford played 54 games for the Warriors during the 2008-09 season after being traded from the New York Knicks in exchange for Al Harrington. Golden State then traded him during the 2009 offseason for Speedy Claxton and Acie Law.

* * *