Tanith Lee, who has died aged 67, was a British author of fantasy, horror and speculative fiction whose books revelled in the gothic and grotesque; she also wrote for the BBC’s cult sci-fi drama Blake’s 7.

With more than 90 novels and more than 300 short stories to her name, Tanith Lee was one of the most prolific writers in the genre. At 33 she became the first woman to win the British Fantasy Award for Death’s Master, the second in her “Tales from the Flat Earth” cycle. Structured as a series of interconnected stories in a manner similar to the fables of One Thousand and One Nights, the work takes place in a universe divided into separate spheres. The Flat Earth, where humans dwell, lies between an Upperearth that belongs to indifferent gods and an Underearth ruled by demons.

To her fans, the series placed Lee on an equal footing with such fantasy world-builders as Ursula Le Guin and Terry Pratchett. Her style was highly descriptive – some critics said verbose – and drew heavily on folk tale, often inverting the well-known outcome to produce something altogether more disturbing. Hence, in her short story collection Red as Blood (1983), the grandmother of Red Riding Hood becomes a werewolf in order to kill her abusive husband. “When I am fascinated by something, I like to play with it,” Lee explained. The title story in the collection, a retelling of Snow White which cast the stepmother as a good witch and her daughter as a vampire, was nominated for both the Nebula and World Fantasy Awards.

Tanith Lee was born in North London on September 19 1947 to Bernard and Hylda Lee, both ballroom dancers. Struggling with then undiagnosed dyslexia, she did not learn to read until she was almost eight, when her father stepped in to teach her himself. Aged 21 she had her first sale with Eustace, a 90-word vignette on a dark and unlikely romance, which appeared in print in 1968.

By 1975 she had a publisher, Daw Books, and gave up work in a library to become a full-time author. “It felt like a rescue from damnation”, she recalled twenty years down the line, “and still does”. She was nominated for a Nebula Award for her first adult novel, The Birthgrave (1975), a fantasy epic whose heroine awakes alone in a cave beneath a volcano and spends most of the book in search of her own identity. Though critical reception was mixed, the book performed well as a mass-market paperback and two sequels followed in 1978.

Tanith Lee: becoming an author 'felt like a rescue from damnation'

The receipt of the British Fantasy Award, in 1980, put her on a firm professional footing. That same year she wrote two episodes for Blake’s 7, the science fiction series created by Terry Nation, best-known to Doctor Who fans as the brains behind the villainous Daleks. A subsequent request for Lee to write a Doctor Who script ultimately came to nothing, and film rights for several of her novels were discussed but never realised.

Although her books sold steadily throughout the rest of the decade, Tanith Lee never quite gained the mainstream audience of Le Guin or Pratchett. She disliked genre categories, preferring to distinguish only between fiction and non-fiction, and dismissed the idea that children should be viewed as a distinct audience in need of a different style of writing: “the only limits are sex, for reasons of censorship, and violence, for reasons of common sense”. Many of her books for adults explored themes of gender, sexuality and eroticism. Sex featured heavily, if not often explicitly, in her vampire novels, such as Sabella, or the Bloodstone (1980), whose protagonist lives on an alien planet and slakes her desire by draining her partners’ blood. As Esther Garber, a pseudonym to whom Lee granted a fictional potted biography (“a European Jewess, very orientated towards Paris”), she wrote several short novels of lesbian romance and obsession.

In later years, however, her work fell out of favour with the larger publishers, something she attributed to a dearth of imagination on their part. “Where any slight interest in my turning in a book exists, I find I must work inside certain defined formulae,” she complained in a 2008 interview. “And to me that’s one of the arch inspiration-stranglers.” She continued to write and appear in print nonetheless, with half a dozen short stories published in 2014 alone. Last February she was awarded the Bram Stoker lifetime achievement award from the Horror Writers Association.

Tanith Lee, who had twice undergone treatment for breast cancer, is survived by her husband, the author and artist John Kaiine. They were married in 1992.