Publication of The Birthgrave in 1975 heralded a new and brilliant luminary in the firmament of modem fantasy. Ostensibly a sword-and-sorcery epic in the tradition of Robert E. Howard, this novel about a youthful heroine with incipient psychic powers astounded readers with its striking originality and intense emotional impact. Tanith Lee today is one of the most versatile and respected writers of fantasy, horror, and science fiction, and DREAMS OF DARK AND LIGHT represents a massive midcareer retrospective of her achievements over the previous decade.

Here are unforgettable tales of werewolves that prowl chateaux, an Earthwoman in exile on a distant planet, demons that inhabit bodies of the living dead, a race of vampiric creatures who prey upon a cursed castle, and many other works of exotic vision, mythic science fiction, and contemporary horror. Also included are two stories that have received the World Fantasy Award, "Elle est Trois, (La Mort)" and "The Gorgon," making DREAMS OF DARK AND LIGHT a distinguished one volume library of myth-weaving at its most eloquent and evocative.

Although acclaimed as the "Princess Royal of Heroic Fantasy," Tanith Lee has long since transcended genre conventions to create a body of work of remarkable psychological depth and artistic distinction. In her imaginative sympathy with characters, human or otherwise, Lee remains unexcelled in the portrayal of deeply felt emotions. Her stories explore many of the most significant themes in twentieth-century literature - life and death, coming of age, the nature of good and evil, love in all its manifestations. And she remains, above all, one of the great natural storytellers working in the English language ... Tanith Lee truly has become the Scheherazade of our time. (dustwrapper copy) Four-BEE was an utopian city. If you didn't mind being taken care of all your long long life, having a wild time as a "jang" teenagers able to do anything you wanted from killing yourself innumerable times, changing bodies, changing sex, and raising perpetual hell, it could be heaven.

But for one inhabitant there was always something askew. He/she had tried everything and yet the taste always soured. And then he/she succeeded in committing the one illegal act-and was thrown out of heaven forever.

But forever is not a term any native of that robotic utopia understood. And so he/she challenged the rules, declared independence, and set out to prove that a human was still smarter than the cleverest and most protective robot.

You don't need to have read Tanith Lee's DON'T BITE THE SUN, which set the original scene, to find this new one of the same high merit that distinguished this author's THE BIRTHGRAVE. (back cover copy) It's jang to be wild and sexy and reckless.

It's jang to change your body, or your gender.

It's jang to do daredevil tricks and even get killed a few times you could always come alive again.

And it's jang to try to sabotage your robot-run world.

But when the madcap chase for pleasure begins to drag and you start looking for a real life to live, you find the robots have left nothing worthwhile for you to do.

Searching for a way out of this pointless existence you make a lot of painful and stupid mistakes. But you fight your way free and you start a new life - in exile.

... and find you have to cope with sightseers and hangers-on, all uninvited and now exiled with you - and finally come face to face with the greatest and most deadly threat of all ...(back cover copy) In those days the Earth was flat. In the 1970s and '80s, Tanith Lee composed five books' worth of Tales of the Flat Earth, a fantasy series compared to both Clark Ashton Smith's Zothique and the Arabian Nights. In later years she would return to the seting for five more stories. All five are included here, along with many others that showcase Lee's talent for crafting spellbinding tales of heroic warriors, enigmatic magicians, and strange deities. (back cover copy) The last thing he remembered was the darkness in the hollow below the stone, and the dogs belting overhead, cheated of their quarry - Dekteon, sometimes called Red, the rebellious runaway slave. Why was he lying now, here, in this wood of burning red leaves, with a cold red sunrise in the sky? What sky? And when the cart came so suddenly out of the wood there was something strange about it, too. The horse that drew it had the feet of a bear, and the man who drove it had phosphorescent eyes, or so it seemed to Dekteon. Yet it appeared he was expected. 'Come,' the man called. 'Come, hurry and get in.' Dekteon was afraid. Where would the cart take him? 'You have no other place to go to,' the pale man said. And that was true enough. 'I've nothing to lose,' said Dekteon, and the words seemed ominous. Yet how could he know what worlds there might be to lose - or win? (dustwrapper copy) The world called Indigo turned upside down for Magdala Cled one unexpected morning. From being that world's only genetic misfit, the shunned outcast of an otherwise ideal society, she became the focus of attention for mighty forces.

Once they had installed her in the midst of the Electric Forest, with its weird trees and its super-luxurious private home, Magdala awoke to the potentials which were opening up all about her. And to realize also the peril that now seemed poised above Indigo ... which only she, the hated one, could possibly circumvent.

An extraordinary incursion into hard-core science fiction by the same brilliant and colorful talent that produced THE BIRTHGRAVE and DEATH'S MASTER.

A selection of the Science Fiction Book Club. (back cover copy) Annie Ember lives in hopeless poverty with her sister Rose and her wicked brother-in-law ... until the day that Annie discovers the mysterious, exotic shop where she buys, for one penny, a tiny and ancient ivory elephant. Soon afterwards a grisly murder leaves Annie without home or family, but employment is found for her in a country house far away.

Sir Hampton Smolte made his fortune out in India, and has brought back not only his wealth but also an obsessive hatred towards that conquered land where he once commanded a mercenary army. His mansion is fanciful and extraordinary, all scarlet and gold, like a fairy-tale raja's palace set down in green English parkland.

There Annie is to become a drudge - a scullery maid in this house full of stuffed animals, eccentric servants, and the even more peculiar Smolte family. But soon she catches the eye of the handsome Rupert who, like his father, retains a fascination with India. Entranced, she succumbs to his attentions - till one night she learns in disgust and terror just what his lovemaking entails ...

Annie's fear and helpless fury provide the catalyst which will turn this dream-house into a place of panic and the impossible - letting in all the power of the jungle, and unlocking the darkest secrets of Hampton Smolte's beginnings. (dustwrapper copy) Throughout her forty-year career, Tanith Lee proved herself adept at numerous genres, including high fantasy, horror, science fiction, and combinations thereof. One of her specialties was the variety of herois fantasy known as sword-and-sorcery. Novels such as The Birthgrave, Night's Master, and The Storm Lord are highly regarded by both fans and critics, but she has a wealth of short stories to her credit as well. Sixteen of Tanith's tales of swords and sorcery appear in this collection. When you read them, you will discover why she deserves such exalted titles as "Princess Royal of Heroic Fantasy" and "The Empress of Dreams". (back cover copy) The white-haired girl from the marsh settlement was running for her life down the derelict highway.

Uncountable years before, things with spinning wheels and ice-green eyes had roared and smoked up and down this road. Now it was wide open and empty of everything except the girl. Eva - Belmort's daughter - the one who had grown up slight and pale out of the dark, dun, heavy men and women who toiled their hearts out by Foulmarsh.

Today, tomorrow, always ...

In a future world polluted to the point of anarchy and dissolution, the trees are dead, the sky is yellow, and no birds sing. Everything and everyone is tinged with madness. For Eva, in such a debased society, there seems no role but that of some man's object and possession ...

But then, one day, arrives the stranger with the gun - the man with blue eyes and hair as white as her own. Roaming the tortured landscape with his wagon, Steel is a seller of death ... but for Eva he provides hope of escape from Foulmarsh and her degradation.

Urged on by a power of love and hate impossible to fathom, Eva's travels take her to distant towns and villages full of danger and surprises - and arouse in her strong passions and dark emotions she cannot harness ...

Filled with unforgettable characters and disturbing premonitions, Eva Fairdeath is a powerful fantasy enshrouding a reality that may not be ignored. (dustwrapper copy) From the world-renowned fantasy author of The Secret Books of Paradys comes a chilling new fantasy series of alchemy and horror. In this new series, Tanith Lee weaves intricate plots around the elements of water, fire, earth, and air. The first in this new series, Faces Under Water immerses readers in the timeless beauty of Venice and the secret terror that lies beneath.

In the hedonistic atmosphere of an eighteenth-century Venice Carnival, gaiety turns deadly when Furian Furiano happens upon a mask of Apollo floating in the murky waters of the canals. The mask hides a sinister art, and Furian finds himself trapped in a bizarre tangle of love, obsession, and evil, stumbling upon a macabre society of murderers. The beautiful but elusive Eurydiche holds the key to these murders and leads him further into a labyrinth of black magic and ancient alchemy. For all readers who fell in love with Lee's Paradys series and for all those enchanted and terrified by the fantastical, Faces Under Water will be sure to thrill. (dustwrapper copy) In the Paris of 1900, Phèdre is an assasin. She assists female acquaintances suffering from specific male abuse - by 'removing' the abuser. Phèdre is sexually predatory but emotionally cool. Until she meets Rherlotte de Gillan in the cemetery of St. Luc. Rherlotte's red-haired beauty and enigmatic, dignified sweetness soak relentlessly through Phèdre'a shell, like honey. And soon the two women are joined in a dangerous game that is both courtship and duel.

Elsewhere, in the late 1800s, the provincial town of Bois-la-Diane begins to be haunted by the dark, phantasmal creature - Virgile, the professional widow.

Laure, bored with rural life, her childhood girlfriend and the disappointing 'ladies club' that holds its scandalous sessions in an old chateau, is instantly hynotised by Virgile. Virgile's fee is always death, and not only Laure's, but that of another.

Each of the eponymous heroines who people Fatal Women has her own secret - one poisonous and potentially lethal, one bittersweet, and one that concerns perhaps the most priceless painting on earth. (back cover copy) World Fantasy Award winner Tanith Lee channels the allusive Esther Garber to tell these dark, erotic tales of lesbian ardor and obsession. The "fatal women" found within these pages lead exotic lives and adventures and have grim secrets. From fin de siècle Paris to Egypt of the 1930s and contemporary England, the Garber novellas create feverish dreams of danger, scandal, and sensuality.

THis new edition includes the new novella "Femme Fatale," never before in print, as well as an essay by Mavis Haut, author of The Hidden Library of Tanith Lee, about the eminence of this collection within Lee's body of work. (back cover copy)