Tanith Lee today is one of the most versatile and respected writers of fantasy, horror, and science fiction, and DREAMS OF DARK AND LIGHT represents…

The exciting sequel to Black Unicorn and Gold Unicorn! The young wanderer Tanaquil can mend anything that is broken - except her own heart. With…

HE WHITE WITCH - She is Aztira, one of the magical Amanackire race, a pure white albino with powers both mysterious and terrifying. She can…

The 20 short stories in this collection explore the forests of the imagination and the creatures that dwell there - the wolves and vampires; tigers…

In this rich and varied collection of fantasy, science fiction and horror stories, Tanith Lee brings her power to bear on the nature of relationships…

He came to the Honey Garden looking for Cyrion. He was a man in grave danger, convinced only one man alive could help him. A…

Arpazia is the aging queen who paces the halls of a warlord's palace. Cold as winter, she has only one passion-for the mysterious hunter who…

Sixteen-year-old Annie Ember lives in grinding poverty in the city...until one day in a mysterious shop she discovers a tiny and ancient ivory elephant. The…

Rachaela worked in a bookstore, a conventional young woman, living a conventional life. Then they beckoned, using a variety of ruses to lure her to…

As an orphan growing up in the slums, Loren read her clandestine copy of Jane's Story over and over, relishing every word. But Loren is…

Four-BEE was an utopian city. If you didn't mind being taken care of all your long long life, having a wild time as a "jang"…

The house... always growing, adding to itself, blooming, decaying, becoming reborn... But Susan doesn't live in the house of Catherine, her grandmother. Instead, she grows…

As she says of herself, Jay is a 'chancer'. But she finds she is out of her depth when she meets the beautiful artist, Jilaine…

Grace is green-eyed, beautiful, a psychic healer - and also a whore. She walks the streets of Black Church to make a living. After years…

Hesta Web, with her hot red hair and her tough, guarded coldness, is trapped with a mother who hates her and a father who is…

Love, history or blood...which is the strongest? In childhood something black settled on Mechail Korhlen and drank from his throat. And later somebody pitied him…

Searching for the beautiful witch Jemhara, the magician Thryfe at last finds her in the reinvented town of Kandexa, where a strange and passionate wooing…

Killed by the power of the god Zezeth, his true father, Lionwolf has been cast into a bleak and icy hell lit just by a…

White-skinned, black-haired Sovaz is beautiful and wayward, yet seemingly soulless - as if vampirised by some unknown force. Wife of a very wealthy but older…

All the magic and mystery of fabled India is woven into these marvel tales of seven strange nights. For that vast land which many have…

I saw her, hanging in the sky like a flake of the moon. A woman, her face masked by a black shireen, her body by…

She woke from a sleep of countless years, reborn from the heart of a raging volcano. Her body was a masterpiece all men desired, her…

Vivia, a paragon of youth and beauty, daughter of Lord Vaddix, is alienated from his brutal campaign of violence and fear. Her only solace lies…

Emerging from the burned remains of their old home, the ancient, elegant Scarabae ready themselves for a new life of seduction and feasting, until little…

He called himself by the name of the father he had never known, Vazkor, king of a forgotten land. In his veins were mingled the…

Nobody knew where it had come from, or what it wanted. Not even Jaive, the sorceress, could fathom the mystery of the fabled beast. But…

Anna, white-haired and grey-eyed, is born into the luxurious and mysterious family of Scarabae, a family of inhuman age and consuming passions. As she matures,…

Tanaquil, a young mender, and her familiar come face to face with her half-sister, Lizra, who forces Tanaquil to make a perilous choice between siding…

Orphan-slave Claidi has fought for freedom and won. Now she looks forward to a life of happiness with the wandering Hulta people. But once again…

THE GORGON, a brilliant shocker that leads off this scintillating collection of Tanith Lee's tales, was the winner of the World Fantasy Award for best…

In a parallel world, in a Renaissance Italy just a little bit different from that we know, a dashing young man named Romulan met a…

THE STORM LORD is a big novel of an unknown planet and of the conflict of empires and peoples on that world. It is a…

The siege was over. The citadel of Avillis had burned, burned through the night, with its terrible Lord and his monstrous children in it. Nothing…

Artemesia is the daughter of a pirate queen, and she's sick of practising deportment at the Angels Academy for Young Maidens. Escaping from the school,…

Leaving the Rise, Claidi anticipates a joyful reunion with her beloved Argul. Instead, her return to the Hulta people meets only mistrust, fury and betrayal.…

Nick Lewis certainly has no liking for his TV historian brother, Laurence. Aside from anything else Nick blames him for the death of their mother,…

Art Blastside in her third daring adventure upon the high seas. It's been eighteen months since Art's baby was born: a pretty child called Africa,…

Don't talk to strangers. Don't even look at them. The life of Roy Phipps can be summed up in a paragraph: He's fifty, leads an…

DRACULA? A mere figment of superstition, a thing that could not exist. SABELLA? A very real person, an enticing girl of flesh and warmth -…

At last, Claidi and her beloved Argul are free to get married. But before they can start their life together, Claidi must face her past.…

Dekteon is a slave on the run, exhausted, beaten, pursued by his master's dogs. When the eerie horse and cart appear through the trees, and…

She distrusted him at first, not least because she knew his words were lies. "Call me Grey," he said, but that was not his name.…

Emenie lives alone. Her vocation is that of a serial killer. She can read the omens and always knows exactly who is her legitimate prey.…

1934... Starving to death somewhere in Europe, Anna meets Raoul. She is ready to sell herself for a meal, but he has other plans. He…

Orphan-slave Claidi knows only the mindless rituals and cruelties of the House and the Garden, where the ruling families wallow in lavish extravagance. Then a…

Shon knew that the Taken must die. Death had touched them, and the evil spirits which issued from Death's Place to the east beyond the…

Although she leads an overprotected life with the two old hags, Lilune knows she possesses a special gift. When she 'calls' the musician, Lir, to…

The free humans lived underground, secretive, like rats. Above, the world was a fearsome place for them - the open sky a terror, the night…

The planet did not rotate. On one side eternal day, the sun shining down hotly from the centre of the heavens. On the opposite side…

VOLKHAVAAR is a novel of witchcraft and wonders on a world far removed from those we know. Here the gods contend for power - the…

For sixteen-year-old Jane, life is a mystery she despairs of ever mastering. She and her friends are the idle, pampered children of the privileged class,…

Today, tomorrow, always...the white-haired girl from the marsh is running for her life down a derelict highway In a future world polluted to the point…

It's jang to be wild and sexy and reckless and teen-age. It's jang to do daredevil tricks and even get killed a few times...you could…

Where the moon washed the deck, something sat, its huge head raised, more like the visage of a bear than a wolf, yet long-snouted, the…

The world called Indigo turned upside down for Magdala Cled one unexpected morning. From being that world's only genetic misfit, the shunned outcast of an…