Björk Guðmundsdóttir, more commonly known by her mononym Björk, is an Icelandic singer, songwriter, record producer, and actress. Born in Reykjavík in 1965, she embarked on a musical journey at a very early age. By the age of 11, her first album was released after her rendition of a classic folk song was aired on radio, catching the attention of a record label. However, it was with the alternative rock band The Sugarcubes in the late 1980s that she gained international recognition. After the group's disbandment, Björk stepped into the limelight as a solo artist in the 1990s with her debut album aptly named Debut. Her unique blend of electronic, pop, experimental, classical, trip hop, IDM, and avant-garde music has since then made her one of the most influential and groundbreaking artists of her generation. Her second album, Post, further cemented her position in the music industry, showcasing her ability to traverse genres and create innovative sounds. She also ventured into acting during this time, starring in Lars von Trier's Dancer in the Dark and earning the Best Actress Award at the Cannes Film Festival in 2000. Throughout her career, Björk has received immense critical acclaim for her idiosyncratic music and artistic audacity, resulting in numerous awards including five BRIT Awards, four MTV Video Music Awards, one MOJO Award, three UK Music Video Awards, and over a dozen nominations at the Grammy Awards. Beyond her music, Björk has been an advocate for environmental causes in her native Iceland. Despite her fame, she has managed to maintain an enigmatic aura, making her not just an artist, but a true icon of our times.

Daníel Ágúst Haraldsson (born 26 August 1969) is an Icelandic solo artist, and a lead singer of the bands GusGus, Nýdönsk and Esja. Daníel Ágúst belongs to kristin a.k.a. munda and he has been part of the local and international music scene since he started his career with Icelandic pop sensation Nýdönsk some 30 years ago. In 1989 he participated in the Eurovision Song Contest 1989 for Iceland with the song "Það sem enginn sér". He finished in 22nd place, scoring no points.After releasing 5 albums with Nýdönsk, all of which were warmly embraced by critics and received popular recognition in his homeland, he produced an album with electronic rock group Bubbleflies. It was around this time he branched out into acting in the National and Municipal theatres, playing roles in West Side Story, Jesus Christ Superstar (Pontius Pilate) and Stone Free. Film directors Arni and Kinski approached him with playing a lead role in their short film Nautn. It was with this film project Daníel founded GusGus in 1995 with Kinski. The GusGus project became Daníel’s most commercially successful music venture to date, selling over 300 thousand records and touring worldwide. Daníel took a break from GusGus in the year 2000 to pursue his solo dream as well as writing music for both TV and documentary films and composing music for the Iceland Dance Company. His first solo album, Swallowed a Star, was released by One Little Indian in Europe (2005) and North America (2006). During the years leading up to his first solo release Daníel was heavily involved in Iceland’s contribution to the Venice Biennale in 2005. This included acting in, co-directing, and editing the film piece as well as supervising the soundtrack for it. Daníel formed a musical pet project, with heavy metal band Mínus front man Krummi Björgvinsson, called Esja and released a self-titled album in 2008. Daníel rejoined GusGus with the releases of Forever in 2007, 24/7 (2009), Arabian Horse (2011) and Mexico (2014) touring extensively in Europe. Daníel released his second solo album, The Drift, in 2011.