Larry Miller Biographical Information Full Name Lawrence John Miller Born 15 October, 1953 Died Height 5'11'' First Role Fame: But Seriously Folks (1982) Link(s)

IMDb

Wikipedia

Larry Miller is an American actor, voice artist, comedian, and columnist.

Biography[]

Miller was born in Valley Stream, New York, and he is of Jewish descent. He attended Valley Stream South High School, graduating in 1971, and later on attended Amherst College. His roles include the vindictive doorman on Seinfeld, as well as several characters in Christopher Guest's mockumentary movies. He has also appeared in Carry On Columbus, The Nutty Professor, Nutty Professor II: The Klumps, Max Keeble's Big Move, and Pretty Woman. He also played Edwin Poole in the ABC dramedy Boston Legal.

He played Michael Dobson in two different Law and Order episodes, first in the episode Coma and then later in Encore. His performance in these episodes remain two of the most popular Law and Order episodes of all time. He was also in 8 Simple Rules for Dating My Teenage Daughter, where he played Tommy, Kyle's obnoxious father and Paul's colleague. He also played himself in a later episode of the same series.

Additionally, he was the writer for the television shows Uncommon Sense, Just Words, and Pros and Cons. He was also voice acted in several other television shows, such as Dilbert, Aqua Teen Hunger Force and The Penguins of Madagascar.

He currently has a weekly podcast on the ACE Broadcasting Network called This Week with Larry Miller which can be found on iTunes and Zune.

Miller is married to television writer and producer, Eileen Conn, whom he married in March 1993 and has two children with.

In Buzz Lightyear of Star Command[]

XR, for a total of 39 episodes:

The Adventure Begins

The Torque Armada

Gravitina

XL

Little Secrets

Inside Job

NOS-4-A2

The Planet Destroyer

The Beasts of Karn

Tag Team

The Main Event

The Return of XL

Strange Invasion

The Taking of PC-7

Mindwarp

Mira's Wedding

Panic on Bathyos

Shiv Katall

Root of Evil

The Plasma Monster

Dirty Work

The Slayer

Head Case

The Shape Stealer

Eye of the Tempest

Planet of the Lost

Revenge of the Monsters

The Starthought

Millennial Bugs

Conspiracy

War and Peace and War

Lost in Time

Wirewolf

Rescue Mission

Star Smasher

Enemy Without a Face

Good Ol' Buzz

Speed Trap

Holiday Time

42

References[]