MACON, Ga. -- The King of Soul is being remembered for his artistic legacy on Thursday.

September 9 marks what would have been Otis Redding's 80th birthday. He died at 26-years-old in a plane crash in 1967.

Otis Redding III was only 4 years old when his father died in that plane crash.

"I've gotten all kinds of stories from all over the world. When I travel people tell me how sad they were," says Otis Redding III.

Governor Brian Kemp also declared September 9, 2021, as Otis Redding Day in Georgia. "Let’s celebrate the King of Soul and his impact on our state & culture and honor his legacy of giving back," the governor tweeted Thursday morning.

Redding III says his father's legacy runs deep.

"The legacy that my father has as a musician goes very deep to Memphis, Tennessee," says Redding III

Redding was born in 1941 in Dawson. When he was a teen, Redding competed in talent shows at the Douglass Theatre for the $5 prize -- and wasn't allowed to compete anymore after winning 15 consecutive shows.

He joined Johnny Jenkins and the Pinetoppers in 1958 and in 1962 cut "These Arms of Mine" after the pair drove to Memphis for a recording session at Stax Records. The song became one of Redding's best-sellers.

Redding was musically active until his death in 1967 and wrote "Respect" in 1965 -- which Aretha Franklin covered and took to #1 on the pop and R&B charts two years later.

Also in 1967, Redding recorded "(Sittin' On) The Dock Of The Bay," the last song he recorded before the fatal plane crash that December. "(Sittin' On) The Dock Of The Baby" topped the US charts in 1968, becoming the first posthumous #1 single.

Three of Redding's songs were also inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame posthumously -- "Respect" in 1998, "I've Been Loving You Too Long" in 2011, and "Try A Little Tenderness" in 2015.

Redding got his first start right here in Macon.

"He started at the Phi Delta Theta Mercer playing in the fraternity shows," says Redding III

On Thursday, the Otis Redding Museum in downtown Macon also revealed new items from Redding's life including handwritten notes and previously unseen photographs.

Rhino Records is also releasing new mixes for some of Redding's tracks, including "These Arms of Mine" and "Pain in My Heart," as well as holiday songs "White Christmas" and "Merry Christmas Baby."

Modern artists are also releasing Redding remixes this fall, starting with Australian electronic duo Korky Buchek's remix of "Tramp" on Thursday. The song, a duet with Redding and Carla Thomas, came out in 1967.

Also on Thursday, DJ D-Nice is hosting a starting at 8 p.m. to honor Redding. D-Nice is also receiving The Otis Redding Foundation's Award of RESPECT for his ongoing support of Redding.