Full text of "The Daily Colonist (1954-02-13)"

See other formats

Telephone — E41TI Forecast—Rain, mild; A Al Sunday outlook, showers | ] rer ; ‘ a Aas ha , . (Details on Page 2) = Vaneouver Island's Leading Ne wspaper Sines NO. 54—NINETY-SINTH YEAR > VICTORIA, BRITISH COLUMBIA, SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 13, 1954 sa eairee eel 24 PAGES School Costs To Rise $140,000 Wreckage I Ou nd Mill Rate ‘Give Your’ Valentine in Finn of Donation ” Danger To Mothers’ March for Funds To Fight Polio’ S Hun lor Jet Points to Sooke Identity Assumed Wright Joins Wrephage of am aircraft | BR. C. Ser By 1¢ e has been found near Grouse Mountain Chalet \. MYERS north of here, the RCAT said earty today. It had not been Whentified, a spokesman said, but the RCAF “assumed” it was wreckage of a United States FR6D jet that dis appeared at noon while over this city The wreckage was found at the 2,800-foot level al the popular ski site The air foree said de tails were skimpy, but of cor that se unidentified man The Civil Service Commission was careful: to found the wreckage point out that Mr. Wright was “selected in accordance RCAF and RCMP search with usual procedure, by open competition after parties immediately left public and in-service advertisement.” the city for the scene Mr. Wy r ~ Colonist Featila tive Reporter CUTS LIKELY’ le 1 ighteen or nm RAD which ed = might ound or in teacl and supr 5 \ i iB 2 Tregor Last year’s total was $2 14 3) a , F x halted geese; FT ATE he whole Gunde while this year 38S FE y CM ‘ . Pete, . x xo apie juested f SiO ‘Wy Monday when Mr, Gunde a boost of about 3260.00" A . ; ; é 4 i esien catia Snpereint The minister will have had a_ politi caree other large increase j ’ XS) a , . (x / ant / on™" months, Of that time he has been an elected charges, whict 2 {ro P / f lot reported he was at tative of the people for only six month For the other $196,057 in 19 i 30:3,8 ‘ - ‘ ; 1),00) vot r 1 12 year é . / eaten oul sal FF Perises Bre SO) UR Be 4 ‘ ‘ ‘ liams, reported to the Colonist have heen made in capital ex ¢ in months he has been a ranking cabinet minister who as not allowed to sit in the legislature On Monday Mr. Gunderson will leave his office in the Legislative Buildings and go back to his own ? ers Seales Paap aes business in Vancouver. niture, new equipment and . terday..while working .on the On Monday, too, Premier Bennett will be sworn in Dae eey aed t peealeeees TOI : A Fast Sooke Road ~ as minister of finance. He will carry this portfolio at last vear's $83.50 10 $47,810 ; a ol nae ace haaae Ni ide my least until the coming session is over, so that he can A cut has also been made in ‘t sie Hin” male of Williame, answer to the House for the government's financial the cost of “auxiliary ae ie Ss don't think have Policie -which include cafeteria t night that he Was sure he penditures—ineluding new fur sports, transportation of pupi eic.—from $55,093 to $21,105 = Queen, Duke Repor ted ene ee eee nce Saad Ae de hirano KOT a ate Es larnine Visit to U.S. To Increase tonight. And give ilentine in the f¢ of a he fight against polio, dr disease which struct fact, T es topped what ANS c — jonation to the British Columb Pol Fur w area ruthles i m OTTAWA t These wet e words veste f N der this Mone is needed for equipment gpending w increase abo ( Mewhort, 23-ve old mother of 1 ear-old bo ospit like Mr Mewhort's iron lung as well ¢ Defense Costs per cent in the coming fise * erself \ cken h polio three mont for treatment and rehabilitation of the cripplec year despite the fact the ¢ ‘ reine ha, Tek red above in her ire ‘ Tonight's fund drive is being conducted by mates eall fo t t y wthers who wil in defense 0 and 7 thoritative da War with Russia Picture Restrictions All Ott eee Seen by Gouzenko At House Opening, Says Paper ASHID iniz er yenko wh » EVERYVRODY OUT MOVE CONDEMNED VIEW REITERATED Eastern Ale Inside Today « ; avres » . iT basi nto erat Lo Cost More. Fase Spe sak Your Mind ‘ vet al \ hisky Dow n a. = Americ ’ Union Seeks Moratorium in Unemployment Crisis 12 A Scandal in Bohemia i gy Party-Liner’s Confession Cate Highlight of b Letters Today Crossword eee Fditorials Financial News G. FE. Mortimore’s Column 2 Garden Notes 2 Life's Like That "” Oddity % Patterns if Radio Programs 16 Social 5 od at we are Sport Television Judge himself 8 “ +41 4 . t Theatres know better by thi e and 1 ° ery ha ' party lines with The dadge*) i] peaker a adoa H ‘ 107 er Seattle and cing one-point lead the par (How about swapping pset pis See ~~~~ alter reading all this mail, jdiali before 1 listen for the (Continued on Page 2.) Continued om Page 5 2 Baily Colonist Victoria, B.C., Sat., Feb: 13, 1954 Speak Your Mind . Satisfyi Crus : ered ‘ty-Liners “ALL ABOARD Y0@4 Satisfying Crusher Offered Party-Liners —__ a neat a Will \be for a doctor and two that went “crash” in their ran over ,to my house by a Re “ \have hung up—they'd have ‘ hite coats.) rar after, say, 15 minutes of ‘ men ‘in walle eye ' short-cut and we both missed loaned their telephone com: With G. E. Mortimore tener Dear Judee steady conversation *) ie ~* Dea ‘ each other pany happily, for the next _- Quite o when al ‘ or 1 ri ‘ I phone anid Dear Jue hour and a half. And now, be a 5 z 2 1“ 4 " . fore somebody calls The Judge KF ‘ } hall cupboard ‘ 1 : AKI a in t pboa ’ ' ld 3 mirart 1 x : z , up on the phone, he'll call it supply of z any bodk ASes e there w 7 tr | t 4 , it a t th if 1ited © \ \ a day. Start thinking about you running low on etuis? t t ! i \ vere a 5 te als ul I nest week's letter contest, You can stock p on thes tem at a Cairo AcViCe Dy i ir part yon y. and walk bie t er “ns . " the wrong You're just) lucky, Stan After all, 825 soothes a lot of auction of $3,000,000: worth odds and ends left Pp RIVE i can't s » have ¥ f nth t Some of the ladies on The embarrassment.) behind by King Farouk, it says in the news bs : H I “3 IZARI F ; Zarfs are “objects z-cup shape which hold eTinhaie s Ser ase Na dnc, het ' ene baer d i 4-Stre The Stars are on FS andleless smal be ne f Turkish coffee then Mac sa You ca t MR A {EF (Did that once myself, but What's the matter? Don't — Se T o hundred o ‘ de of gold and covered with up your receive ‘ f62 Niagara “when I got to my friend's you ever listen to their phone } aT @ jewels are for sale myself I'm talking ' He (Yes, and it would be nice house, found he'd come back conversations? Obviously, you = - An etui is a faney case for small article A |rung his own ring to know if some of them to the phone, couldn't raise don't know what your're miss <7 . 3 bodkin case is a case for holding bodkins. What did TILL A PARTY-LINER were ever going to get off the me and thought something Ins.) RECORDS ou think it was? nd now I suppos uy Want to ‘in : ‘ Ps erarakie e taka mt cheng al have ananswer, United Church Presbytery Censures Library Board GET YOURS at FLETCHER is 331,-rpm at $2.95 a bodkin is a sharp-pninted instm 78-rpm at $1.00 ee eg ct vs Handling - of Marshall Case Criticized py Imagine the look of dismay on a tourist's. face 1as bee ex Andrew's United ( hur . W I Lan of Victoria, the sessions that , \ Pre v- na 0 on ‘Tuesday aaa Kun tin besChi when he opens a newly-bou bodkin case and finds ery e United Church or and Thueedsy oft : coming et ua lal ; \ la who re the United Churc it filled, not with bodkins, but with French postcards , way the public library cp are ne ee Aes fot aes : 1 i Chur Nitan United Among other obj in this royal rummag f I i he Mar spss t eb ass : nite hurch, was in Victoria marine mission work |, > re {on the West t of Vancouver Island wi ated during ember in My Fraye youngest of 13 children Garden Notes Many Uses Found For Watering Can BY M. VY. CHESNUT, FRHS Here we go again with a few more notes on garden tools, mostly odds and ends, beginning with the w atering can Lots of gardeners seem to get along fine without a in which the noisemaker is a large ruby; sugar sifter shy ters eotlng is int 1 onary | € post of chaplain for Vic toria, I don't like the idea of wives hurrying , & view w roneern % ‘ e required in 1 A public missionaz little zarf today at the auction, for only $4,998.50." |)" : St deco presse ation. oN ' ‘ereeas fF Y cor VANCOUVER a headline in a Mainland newspaper hie wrongs . real est 3314-rpm magnet,” I remarked. ‘Nails and paper clips would dis } as bookmobile °° s 0 fete 1 B * C ee ouncil o United re oys Condition {c"" 22. un F ned anil’ a : - . u N tev, T. Gril Oye 1 rassed if he found himself clamped to a radiator and DANGERS CITED tit Viete “ Sti nchanved said, but four : yf r i reminded me of a small piece of fiction I once wrote be alert to dangers involved in delegate. T Straith of Vic. Von of six-year-old Billy Han- BIG FAMILY $1.10 compulsion to walk toward the magnetic north nuinitie Named to the chairmanship | °** Duncan almost a month) inery, was born in 1732 as the f the Victoria city council in Rev. W B kingham of Sidney a) Biaft Priced to Sell yrpm at $5.60 3 and 7 Strand ’ . . and asparagus servers week in Nat ved the on \ ou ii 1 t hospitals ( ‘ F . j H t ‘ r va? ardl riits and announcing to their hushand PLAN ACCEPTED ‘ ; i * * * “Maybe it was an audience of Poles,"’ commented aunch Melvin Swartout “It would be embarrassing, to be a walking y las ath foll : following were named : ne ae SHre thie 0 ove at 43.45 fly through the air and stick to vou.” rer alleged pro-Red “! unable to move, Brian suggested Minister and laymen were Bu me consuming about a man who drank the alcohol from a compass ‘stablishment of new liquor toria; F. T. C. Seed of Youbou; 5®% Unconscious in hospital Sir Rich Arkwright, in Salvation Army Favorites — 78-rpm at He fell in a river and drowned, if I remember By unanimous vote, the pres- of the Presbytery for the year | {& Temains unchanged ‘ 1. r ‘ . refusing 10 ask for a plebiscite, R S. V. H. Redman of Vi Car. [ 1re Truck Collide Sessions were held at St. toria was named secretary, and B A R 5B E D - W § R E 400 and 600-ft. Coils are diamond-encrusted snuff boxes, a jeweled rattle Case new inting 7 ’ I 1 by the Prebytery to Thank goodness the auction is in Cairo, ne - , 8 nd ta t te 16,000 MISSIONARY RALLY | Specul ng und a ‘ t °C “Good new dear I picked up the sweetest rah ploy eth Te gE r MI bor {the P : ‘ pice of the home and b pec u a or’ “Audience-Magnetized By British Pianist,” says eee Brian Loughnan Airinl MERALER Se a heated t : ad EPS Was also indic nissioner head A magnetized man might be even more embar- activities. | powers: o “True,"’ I said, and we left it at that. But it urged "diiring: it aatines idk, (Coliehuve 3 ican lay|.. YANCOU\ CP) —Condi and found that as a result he suffered from an odd outlets in their respective com A. J. Daniels of Victoria lere since a-sleighing accident yentor of cotton spinning mach 338—Shepherd, Nes ' 4 2—Harles rightly bytery “deplored” the attitude commencing next July "1 was See ae aaa aeaaa.,. f a The Ui cr tet ond 1 — Wartering 12'2 and 14 Gauge ? Priced to Sell Fiery Purrin 8035—Ethel Mera rt “ All Stare A tare FOR YOUR SHORTAGE—SEE OUR SURPLUS fw ff fae , ht ht he he ht he he le watering can, doing all their watering with the hose. I use mine not only for giving % CAPITAL IRON & METALS LTD. water to the odd plant which Bl added. when plants are : requires more than the routine moved or set in the ground — Free Customer Parking — 1824 - 1832 Store St, G 2434 - G 8441 E G 0561 DOUGLAS watering. but for feeding solu i couldn't vie fertilizers and applying other chemicals sti. 116 1G ev hateeiisiend toe Laaaeaaaataia get along with to plants requir I 1 us to always rinse ing special treat Peary Singh, 2804 Irma Street and Constable Brian ment. TI use the 3 Le Bids TERME © celui 5 Ferguson look over damage to coe Bhd ted obit de specially weed-killers ae i { ; MACDONALD’S ON FORT STREET was in collision with a fire truck ss ‘ T g 2 of po BOTTLE SPRAYE at Blanshard and Queens. The fire pumper engine ganate of potash T PRAYER 1 et ‘ Supplementing the watering was from Burnside station and was on an emergency += A + = ‘ I n .] v m” no yg vle is the be a - run to a chimney fire at 1015 Caledonia. Driver was fd g ni uy ea ok ve bottle ; 4é 99 ‘ . wn sive a ype sprayer, which screws o Thomas Crabbe, $20 Stannard, and firemen Joe feria ‘ ie ie Satin 1 serey a and uses Sutherland and Arthur Abbott were riding on the om ets. Fo oll some WeIhAERIe Insecticides. fmgicios, weed ; ¢ READ THIS AD CAREFULLY flants inte ar > growth after “ » fertilize » watering can after us pell of cool weather with a e so ir out In iall dose of saltpetre fine. mi without any 7 : \4 er "pes I have a great admiration for pumping up or back-hreakine —— CEE eather I OPEC the Enzlish type of watering fabor, and” ke a, wondectulle FOR YOUR OLD February 13, 1954 8 49 14701 12 10 its 3258 33 rans, with their long spouts and easy way to { alahies ana (Government Forecast) + : : cae need Enka; Dut Sheae Bre: eh Y their leaves CHESTERFIELD n 24 designed primarils wr green On a New 2-Pce. Intermittent eS ed eerie hes i A SR Capacity of Your sprayer, an CHESTERFIELD SUIT 3 030 713 43 feedir with SATURDAY Se p23 2 733 143 2078 122 house work, and ry don't weak fertilizer colut . a as . >) hold enough to suit me : southeast 20. ae _ fa T buy m.p.h. Sunshine ) minutes flo dedi 1 ralvanized Pee RT yesterday and ext! de 2 minutes. Preci COWICHAN BAY tation yesterday So. meter dee ini Cawiens. e n the spou i grease .. : aa wine i ri e so imy 1 ‘ SP 77 inch — my A a ae ol th a hes chemic { tle sprayer. hie ] IAI S | RECORDED TEMPERATURES 7" peseenarenes soe poms a rete dread vb pint of tion, de s Te 6.30 p.m High Friday is “ Low Friday talifax rae Tae . elim rat a “he ; Yy FLOOR FORECAST TEMPERATURES | A a \k f the th ge phe ‘ ; POLISHERS Puen: Roeay rhe f is tn - ie P ; yy COC’ for: 2) zall 6 applied “4 . z Reg. 64.50 49°° Low today $2 Re : SUNRISE AND SUNSET ee Albert ° - E SE FOUND Sunrise $2 altietned 1 whene t M { i inh , : i CE TN, : | the chemicals and. fertilizers, T discovered anew use fo BW} —— GPS pvromanic Hime He (Time He 17 r TREE ‘ the y bottle sprayer last year : ) IRONS Zs _ lM PLM Pe ay MPL. Kimnerie . is | ints. a fer thout «tt le sat ith ; , x Y Reg. 149 ; 10” LEGULAR PRICK 299 5 ft ) de LESS TRADE.ID 100.90 y , < fertilizer 8 mal jet ins rae Z - eavaes. welGbO Ch Rl ee ede CLEAR THE *199°° - qa TRI LIGHTs | -... 15,95 jrille before the seeds are upstairs win DECK PRICE : z sow and as transplanting ules without er ir : s = Col i % solutions, with a little Vitamin ground $10 DOWN DELIV EF CHENIT I E Tiirecifis Standard Tose” BEDSPREADs 8”° me Ht (Time Ht SAE" I GURNEY OIL-BURNING mane Hale ot ca Eight Men, Woman HOSTESS To Die for Murder KITCHEN R ANGES | 1953 TELEVISION SET Gams 18 ters)—Esther Kabi, an Africar @ GET UP TO 60.00 REGARDLESS woman, and eight African men SEE THE NEW GURNEY OIL-BURNING NGES, *299”° OF AGE, MAKE OR CONDITION Wednesday were sentenced tc TTH Ic ty —S—. SSeS $$$ —_____—_ 5 death for the ritual murder of “AY NOW! PRICED FROM 0 ~ the woman's husband to make o *359”° medicine from his flesh The * WE SELL * WE INSTALL * WE SERVICE 752-754-756 mutilated body of Tsehlo Kabj : | was found under a cliff Febr Prices Include . 1“ ‘ate . ‘ound ebru Complete o ee ary 21 last year. Evidence was s s C Installation . .. \ given that he had been throttled Positively No PLUMBING AND HEATING LTD. Extras—Easy or had his neck broken, and . vA Terms Available 1 Phone 117 flesh and certain organs re 19) DOUGLAS STREET - PHONE E.llil : Hd, — thi E 1 1 —— — i bs i) LS ere so bs moved, including his brain. = a ane sees cae oe ! i Victoria, B.C., Sat., Feb. 13, 1954 a Baily Colonist Viet Montreal Lawyer Arrested St. Laurent Visits Canadian Airmen Nelson on Subway International Baby Black Market Bared\ GROS FESQUIS, Fane England Grom Tonquin and Quibbled to Death wont Re, “ p Prime Ministe rent flew in thick weather | ene LONDON ’ ¢ e startied dav to \ t re Jighter wing ern Europe o ’ raumntn ta sone prime r ter heduled fly-past of 100 RCAF... ety Lif ete pe , s pood | ise o and Canadian Ambas a? J »v rT \ 1 Leigh 4 hers rir Davis flew to Gros Tene later . baci ean Wool blapria) Where three Canad - ' . 1 hero of r , \ . ; ore than 1.000 ier 86 Sabre je shiers tay ' . yi, (rattled along the rai aiet ; haste ‘ vat am the Montreal area of Momm nd-Gessjing. fully enough 1 » perc a P saaekagh | gal adoption in the tube traveler perk “or Ves ’ United States attention, Shiver my abers, th meath Ete suffered damag hortly after authorities had ad's admiral ha . s lef ‘ 2 PS d of their investigations they eve and left arm he clor joined the fray. took into custody Herman ! * four sai tulle RW. year-old Mo al n Were sup lawyer, at Montreal airport pe: * Distiller y's Art "oe a * secnianee es Gar eae their big arrested as he prepared to claim =e “" Draws Brickbats = 2%" fa Hcg weople, he said, do. this By Canadian Press tributed to the collection called moments of str and TWO CHARGES Belgian - born Canadian !t “ a fine ide and “a good R 4 1 a” 3 Zoot A : sir Xl ased him fo see that “on Bulle = aetna Gant war x and some Swedish art “4mple of an important phase well, Hata hes E r Was arraigned on two another R¢ nase f of Canadian painting." . have been a charges: having falsified the hruecken, | alirred a fuss 2 casion--an address entries inio a birth certificate shit tearranit hel $20,000 collection of The 22 paintings, urban pro- by Nelson—the sailors were giv- and giving counsel and advice Finm Gros Narn iis he ! | file anada from St. John's z proper indication of 1 n connection with an indictable " tid Victoria, were col. emotions.” ps es Hiouse of Seagrar wool officials who spon Rail was set at $2.000 and wilh co-operation of the R i the advertisement say it preliminary hearing fixed —for anadian Acaden vi scuttled shortl February Canadian jeader wen fire south ta avr } the Italian capital Pris ede ightl Canadian missions abroa He was me! here b Vice ‘O19 JOST CAT t 4id theusands had seen Marshal Hugh Campbel t ibed the ole collection paintings and criticism was mander of Canada's overseas ® “Whisky” monument generally favorable Sister Kenny wings vt iJ renng The Canadian artists who con After showing in Latin ea Gee. ; vpaspetly ar costae Mr Bea Y 9 y se | Smoking, Lung Cancer - 2nch in, Scam the Saint or Crank: poral Sy “SEXBIB: One newspaper suggested Victor Cohn spent months in painstaking re. MATTRESSE MATTRESSES . yr 1 that the House 2 .e | U K P : | ‘| | | PAL GAGE comalad Tiers aoe search to dig up the many heretofore unknown sturdy box springs at Linkec ® ye = cop e 0 ( might have created more gor facts which are revealed in this biography, He Reg. 79.00 Reg. 59.00 February Sale prices! filled mattresses and will for Canada by sen g talked to doctors, ta her former patients, and LONDON (Reuters) The with the amount smoked par first-rate whisky instead to her friends and enemies both here and in her Grou > inclt de: . ed, pa > s 00 terday tt > is a “relation rhe committee is composed of Then a Canadian painter, 47 samples — cancelled ship" between smoking and lung 20 doctors and technicians in- year-old Henri Masson, told This inspiring 12-instalment newspaper series numbers — some cancer cluding Britain's lop specialists Ottawa's Richelier . a k = Ita tic eu Club = that paints a striking picture of one of the outstand- . . +: Jan MarLeod, minister of on cancer and chest diseases. It the collection was “a major ing women of our time. Don't miss a single slightly soiled. Single health made the statement in was set up F the heal 7] f i ‘ " ster. * ‘ na © statem , up by the health min-| publicity. stunt chapter BOX SPRINGS and double sizes. ' House of mmons on be tr as the tanding advisor half of a government-appointed committee on cancer and radio. Be!gian-born Mr. Masson said i Sahat arnt which Has thera." only two or three good Cana Reg. Vatues to ' been studying smoking and lung! The startling effect of Mac- dian artists were asked to ex ANGR Y ANGE I ' 50.00 ON SALE 9 A.M.! car for the last three years. Leod’'s disclosure was modified hibit and they were “great - ; SPECIAL He said he accepted the com- somewhat when the health artists among a group of had mitter's report that “statistical minister in a later press con: buttons.” ‘The painters were | The Untold Story of the Real Sister Kenny evidence points to smoking as a ference said that “uninformed commercial artists rather than Sector Jn ning. concen.” and alarmiat conclusions ahould| artiste in the tye aense, he said : —_ SHOP AT EVERY FLOOR he health minister said the not be drawn from the com “They paid them $1,000 to Starts Sunday in the d osure of the expert's find- mittee’s advice." MacLeod paint valenc ic "oH Ings had been speeded up as an smoked three cigarettes during’ Masson SE ey Paes eae Magazine Section of the public And Sir Ernest Rock Carling, | py pee, ae z mH is desirable that young distinguished surgeon and chair. ©*PERT ON CHOPIN people should be warned of the man ofathe investigating com Moriz Rosenthal, Polish pian bd y 0 onist, risks apparentix—attondant—an-mittes,commented:— “1 have_ist who died in 1946. played all excessive smoking. It would smoked all my life and I have Chopin's compositions from TILE appear that the risk Inereases no intention of giving it up ' memory. Group 1... Black fire al . . | BIG SAVINGS HERE . . . 9x9 in Shi Denies | LINOLEUM TILES, all first quality, screens with solid brass 98 a : —— from the Old Country. In seven trim. SPECIAL FEB. SALE ONLY Y a ( e sparkling colors, SPECIAL WHILE _ acht Contaet MA At the Sign of Hi ES ee ce LONG BEACH. Calif. (AP) Cc type fire screens The Coast Guard Fepnied yes TD. with polished brass 49 < “- ea. finish, Reg. 19.95 terday that the Canadian vessel > Imperial Edmonton denies e FEB, SPECIAL having been in contact with the | missing Florida .racing yacht Dirigo IT | The yacht, with four men ahoard, has been missing since ' q Monday when she radioed she = was shipping water in a gale a e€ about 290 miles off the Mexican west coast - + Tt] A. ecath Both Akpan ON LOVELY SETS IN HOSTESS CHAIRS PLATEORM HOSTESS Mexico, said the ship messaged : The popular, always-in- co ELL ROCKERS ROCKERS the Mexican radio station there aaa SE aaa VARIOUS COMBINATIONS demand styles, upholstered Covered in long - wearing Combining the two most h day that she he e A cm, : <p "76 “ty wrt and anted features of styl a feat a brheriai in ion Paes ' New shipments are arriving and we must have room. seats and backs. SPECIAL iar ety eas “ pi and r conten E BRU We depart from our regular policy to offer you these me stantial chair ARY SPECIAI STARTING TODAY savings on dinner sets of traditional qviality, chosen from > r a TW our famous stock of over 100 patterns. 15 95 19 88 44 88 29 50 Oddity FOR ONE WEEK ONLY ‘ ‘ . ‘EST P 3EACI CLEARANCE PRICES WITH NO REDUCTION IN QUALITY H y =A moterat was a s - acc Al Meee’ SHOP THE WHOLE STORE (AP) . motorist was driving through the heart of town Fri Look over these wonderful sets, they're all in current production and ‘ continue to be carried in open stock. Those listed here give you an idea of t day when. a jaywalker darie y ; in frent of him values youll find. . All Prires Quoted for Betting of & C His car lurched to a siop a eon ea i é ‘ : ottage Model inches from the careless one Wedewoed “Pink Pimpernel . Tro services of AO pieces 28 \ £195.85 ‘ and the driver jumped out io SINGLE PIECES De Luxe and huntreds of spectators ne || JM-POOLE deca eae eon wm Hot BINGL 7 | slanted his foot. with) conside DESiy SEH: SRED A, “ne ASHTRAYS . Ste: ar Bere Sie ai aN POTTERY! nae ns oe ‘woes ORNAMENTS ig : ee r ELECTRIC RANGE walker's posterior M pe. buff The motorist re-entered his Reduced by " ; at ZS - = & EXTRA LARGE OVEN, Wedgwood “large Gold Ivy car. The policeman turned his Th ‘ 4 —— ‘ fone head, Pedestrians gaped. Trat 1 2 P » SALE @ full size de luxe fic hegan to flaw again. The 2 to i a . Ui tale “ ‘ “ ) \ [= ‘4 ro > ; PRICES : .G% . % MINUTE MINDER that per- jaywalker walked away, shak Wreewond ing his head It's a close-ot is famous ° line. A few irivectel pieces a swees Wedewond but look at the saving, Break now elie, " %& AUTOMATIC TIME CLOCK. One 4f-pe, eervic IN FARTHENWARE fast, coffee and tea sets in now cluded gie pieces too Wedewoed “Cathay Mua ee 210 . = k ’ serviema, & rsiar wenmer % SIGNA-LITE indicates when CUPS and top elements and oven is on. + % . SUPERB SYNCROCHIME SAUCERS — 4 oven-heat control and other GREAT features mits “absentee cooking ern) Wie 42 pe service, regutar $ A special table Reval. Praline, "Lowssietl Rouguet f z ved rT ‘ r ervice. regular § noe Radfor Pa Ss M/ rs ‘ ‘ = Rg tom hear) ea ar Fole Reg ) Reg. 307.95 siete “ . tn $3.50. Your choice ar ? Soom Se Sem[' soo | P| 269” Tes (O-or services regular now nine i Strange Orchid sins a0 MONTAGUE BRIDG MAN fi a YATES 10 VIEW This advertisement is not “The Wedg wood Shop” Phone B 5111 published or displayed by the Liquor Control Board 811 GOVERNMENT ST. E0821 or by the Government of Just across from the old Post Office British Columbia. FURNITURE 1358 @he Daily Colonist, 1954 AN INDEPENDENT NEWSPAPER, THE ORGAN OF NO CLIQUE OR PARTY Published at 263! Douglas Street, Victoria, B.C. SETH HAL Publisher TON Guneerintion Races’ Carriage delivers im rity £1 8) cartier ae Gna possessions ¥ Terciiney one ncn 8 per month, other #8 $2.00 per mor SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 15, SANDHAM GRAVES, Editor-in-Chief Mel na 87-90 “mall Post 104 In Aid of Children F there is a more distressing fate in the | world than that of a little child stricken know of it with with paralysis does not That is why the jis sudden one incidence of polio attack mainly on young people, has taken such gripping possession of the minds of those who have seen its effects The first effort of course is to save a life The next, however, must be to rehabili- late the sufferer; restore the use of the lost muscles, and bring back as full-a degree of normal living as the healing arts can achieve. That is a long and a costly process, calling for community participa- tion where the resources of the individual mav be exhausted It is for such reasons that men's campaign this evening in polio relief work in the province is of an exceptional nature, distinct from other appeals of the times. Polio relief funds turned into iron lungs at Victoria hospitals just in time last year to avert an ex- tremely critical situation. With a child gasping for life there can be neither excuses or delay The iron lung-may be the Kins aid of immediate rescuer, but there may be few iron lungs or other forms of special equipment available unless somebody takes the matter to heart, Here, then, is a community project. The joint efforts of man’ people are needed to stem the pres- ent threat of polio, and to help its unfortunate victims. The Kinsmen have dramatized the polio appeal with time-gun, porch lights, canvassing Mothers and other means of arousing public interest in the cause. Deeper by far than the externals; however, is the concern of this nation for its chil- dren, and the earnest sympathy of every warm-hearted Canadian for those who stiffer In three years past British Columbia has had a grim experience with the disease It lessened in the winter, but may come back in unpredictable fash- ion with the return of hot weather. If that happens, no can take the place of that which could have been done now in anticipation of a renewed attack There is every need for a united com- munity effort in the current campaign in this urgent cause the excuses Strange Happenings Victoria excuse T will be a sorry day if the | ery of “libel” becomes an for suppressing correspondence addressed to a public governing body, as was done at the last city council meeting Mayor Harrison states that the communications in question, four in number and all from reputable representative groups, reflected on certain persons Of course they re- flected on certain individuals, but only in respect to their public duties and without the slichtest imputation te their personal intecrity This is the distinction that. amazingly enotizh, seems not to be appreciated either hy the chief magistrate or City Solicitor Patton. Since when has it been an offense fo comment on the actions of public offi cials in carrying out public responsibili ties” If this thesis were to prevail then not word of criticism could ever be directed at anyone elected to public office —a preposterous view and one that denies for one the democratic system that puts such persons in powel Insofar as the letters in question were concerned one.of-them was as innocent of libel as a schoolgirl’s invitation to a party: twenty words from the Saanich Teachers’ Association supporting the stand taken bya specific member of the library board If this is libel then the community might as well retire into perpetual silepce and resion itself to fate. The conclusion that will be drawn from this council meeting is that communica- tions that are not liked because of the views they express are not welcomed. The tantamount inference is therefore that no heed will be paid to them. It is surpris- ing to find a council body endorsing censorship of legitimate public opinion, with but one lone alderman, Mr. Mac- millan, sensing the dangerous nature of stich procedure and uttering a protest that does him credit, Truth in Advertising DVERTISING of any kind, whether to sell goods or attract tourists, should be careful to avoid misrepresenta- more harm than the otherwise it does On that that the emblem now appearing on Brit- ish Columbia automobile license plates should he replaced by the word ‘'Totem- land” should be rejected Whatever it may have been in the past, B.C, certainly is not a totemland today Except in a very few places like Thunderbird Park (a modern creation, even though containing faithful replicas) a visitor might spend his entire vacation touring the highways of the province without finding a trace of evidence to support the license-plate slogan, The places where the few remain- ing genuine examples of Indian art do exist are not accessible to the average traveler Consequently any who came here on the inducement of the slogan would go away disappointed, and a disap- tion, good account suggestion pointed tourist is the worst kind of advertisement It dees not follow, however, that the province should retain the emblem now adorping B.C. plates. For much the same reason the thunderbird-in-a-maple-leaf device is largely meaningless and ineffec- tual. At a distance of more than a few paces it does not resemble anything recognizable; and even close up it conveys neither meaning nor message to anyone not already familiar with Canadian west It would be hard to believe that a single tourist has ever been per- suaded to come to B.C. as a result of beholding that, to the uninitiated, incom- prehensible design If tourist-wise B.C. must have a slogan or emblem on its license-plates, let it be understandable and, more important, bona fide, which “Totemland” is not. As some- one remarked the other day, it would be even less realistic than describing Victoria as a little bit of olde England coast legends Readers’ Forum tatters te the editor ne any vane oF Mo letter will he inserted MR. FREDERICK GREENSIDES sir, The Loyal Orange Association lost one of it most valued members in the Bro, Fred m Ontario ot Wor. Greensides Victoria fh years ago a imental in p Ha)l, ¢ taker for ir rehasing vurtney Street, of was care re than 20 years. He was a past the Royal Black member Knights of sae | was preceptor in Ireland Rlue for man) yesys of Mount Newton he was we. of He was a Lodge, AF Lodge which he sirer former member AM ROGEF Recording Secretar \ ANOTHER VIEW Si Once again the name of Igor Gr pages of true hat the is hlazened across the front world, It it about imilar defectior communist Wave of publicity this brave man stems from as Commu! mewhat anoth diplomat to the a ommunist camp but this is all the more reason for amave smear entitled ment at the appearance of a paper ivpe editorial in your jast Stinday have a ¢ Gouzenko and attacked: in objectionable wa far ne that he anadian citiven, Ip smeared ihe most apparent prefers to st reason other than particular broadcast alive and used on a (hiding the means he recent television his” identity by covering his face with a mask’, is suggested as being objectionable quote ecitorial “scarcely the Canadian way of doing things.” and to vour genuine interes are waicome it (ney are rial, accurate and fais, editorialist has reached the lowest le fatuity unless of course he is wood reason «9 to atlack a man whose con bution the anticommitnist cause is lived throughout the world s unbelievable that anyone ir ryest a legitimate criticism ows inclination to stay alive Communist past 3 and would-be tory of the eurs hat the number: of mer women have Jefi the Soviet and camp revealed and length of identity for any would-be assassins have remained alive for any is «mall indeed stline editorial continues in attacking the people of the referring to them ae a Money seems important of protecting that’ Gouzenke publ ing, with th himeelf is par city presume responsible fi e fina great interest in his activities rhe irritation rousing your ter is (he wight that perhaps’ Gouvenko zht benefit from the sale of his forth coming bao As thie book will undoubtedly be a further portrayal of Soviet intrigue and perfidy. in short-another piece of first rate anti-Soviet propaganda” I cannot what ghisction . F r va) } we publicity the author and the bo. HARTNELL, 0) Douglas > RO Editors files Note: The does fasciat. nazi, neo Daily Co the neo-pagan has for its snist, ae ite testify not follow communist nazi or any other ‘line of the free and God-given mind of man. whieh aim the subjugation Memories By FRANK KELDFY SANADA has never beer C ' particularly shouldering is sale interested in ways means fo the white man's burden.” Along the vears, the some of our folk either as a sincere gesture of loyalty Mothe a spirit of adventure as the occasion io their land or maybe just in presented, have fo owed the colors and we have read of their deeds of a Nova Sco fame in the There is the story tian who attained some during which he became Fenwick Wi Then there was the time Crimea War iams of during of unpleasantness with a Mad wn as Sir 4 pit Madhi in the Soudan when a volunteer group of Canadian hoatmen did some creditable work on the Nile in con nection with the occupation of Khar toum. One of that group, hailing from Ontario, was “Big Bill’ Galliher distinguished B.C This being the month of February who became a judge, and the anniversary of the greatest with the 1914-1918, recall their deeds avhievement of Canadians colors prior to the war of it is a fitting time to Africa Victoria was an Beach. We you might He, CONSTACTRN NIE COUITITY Wworttry of ary in South Among those who enlisted in English named were what man call pals while he his nevertheless the sacrifice on part appreciated other fellow’s view: point. The something else, a bit of verse, origin: appearing in a Capetown paper, sent it to other day, while looking for ally Beach had me Alriva been turned up from = South manuscript body of a Boer rifleman was “This is the other reprinting Rifleman The original had found on the Beach's com fellow's this ment worth Boer wail.” It is “Lament of the Lay my rifle here beside me, set Bible on my Fora cease my breast, moment let the wailing bugles As the century is closing 1 am going to my rest, Lord in peace leitest Thou Thy servant die As, clear above the bugles comes a cadence to my ear the winds my hopes of As on peace are stowed Those winds that wall the voices that already 1 can heat Of the road rool-batigie a Yes, the oats an hear their steady tramp After many years of Julled wailing sleep k and file at Potchefstroom hemmed thém in their camp them up at Bronkerspruit sheep but TngoR: we range They is at into British gur galloped the And shot they showed would knew elurn agate the times must change 1e roul-batigie asinging in © road come from snow swept Canata, Indias to {1 plains utp from ‘yom jone Australian sts hither zg their com heard nandoe as the bugle’s strains in brown ave in red come to find tt juiba and los They come pay us hear stra see strange Mid the rooihattgie asin road Ah, the old. old faiths w falter, the old, old creeds must fall I feel itain those distant murmurs low old, ald vain fo The order changeth and ‘tis must go And veldt and spruit ar will bélong 1 kopje to the stranger No more to trek before him we shall load well, too well I know it Too for I hear-it m the song Of the roorbattgie a-singing in road, the success of The conference will depend on whether there is the requisite de yree of flexibility in the Russian allilude — WORIZD EXPERT Reports from Ottawa FE men who guard the fountains of truth which ' democracy look a help keep close our strong look at said fountains the other day and found signs of seepage The managing ‘ditors of ta newspapers heard one of thetr American col agues denounce influence peddlers whe try often with success to suborn the of the United States of the Louisville, Ky authority press Norman Isaacs Times couldn't say with equal that the integrity of the press of Canada had been similarly undermined. But he knew that “Wherever men run news papers, there are other men who try to influence what is printed some for good reasons, others for reasons nol 30 Isaacs, who has a reputation as a crusader for higher journalistic e some US. examples: get promoters ethics, ga Sports writers whe retainers from who sports reporters have sideline jobs in public re lations or local government; news paper employees who accept costly gifts: newspaper editors who accept favers which reduce the cost of news gathering according to Isaars, Is The result the the public news ation of slanted stories, damage to the prestige of and and which de suppression of biased and news confidence in the newspaper public pends on the press to tell the truth * * * disservice fo the The Canadian editors scarcely had time io welgh their papers against these journalistic thou-shalt another American was equal! his Reuther when eritical of press Waller president of the accused | ship, antilabor pro vide balanced coverage of laber news and publicizing Sen, Joseph MeCarthy to sell Most flects areas en more newspapers labor reporting, he nflict agreement,” thu kind of reth nol areas constructive ing “a neval impression that is nota facts Reuther urged the editors to dig behind strikes and strike threats, and report the conditions responsible fc impartially oan labor-management differences Reuther also complained that man) U.S. papers deal with labor from ment, to problems the point of view of manage the exclusion of that of labor asserted rep todial group I say it g he “when a news acts as the resentative © 1 rather than as a free press Reuther acknowledged that Cana dian papers “are more restrained and objective in dealing with manage ment labor but problems than the press the editors lister his charges with = selfsearching gravity * * R.A ty editor NATO Managing 1947 Farquharson, one-time Toron official of Canadian who is now an organized the Editors along with D. B Leader-Post of the Conference in Rogers of the and R. J Free Press Regina Churehill It may well be their greatest London single journalism contribution to Canadiar democracy For both the no, to Canadian the and importance to journalism democracy of introspective examination of the press which the conference affords would be h over estimate Only by such selLeriticism lives as Well as actions can the 5 recognize its shortcomings reet them, to establish it as the fountain of truth Weeding Out Subversives (From The Toronto Telegram) Association of DDRESSING the Pia Bar in New York. Sir former Attorneys recently British civil Hartle Shaweross General Britain th a mill reparted that of 1S had been stispended jobs because of sus or Fascist lear Of these 28 were reinstated after ing proved them loyal, 69 ansferred te non-Secret work discharged, 19 resigned and ine were on leave pending decision their cases sir Hartle statement h the provertire from that in the igations are bei ascertal vhether 3 security Jobs, a red unfit are discharge transferred aving there was denial of the nmunist Pa arided we do claim the right hnnse whom splect empln positions ir ty That rig ‘ nyvolve safeiv c tale prope ercised ) democrati ments methods of ine 71 Is , | + wred their 1iffe he fact the ronstitutio processes others have nol affect Referring to edur at there were closer but 1 an matters hat while unrepent look, hott £ of mathematics is hardl to these would the Neither endang stale thelr teach Z b eacher might do mislead The question he es wher ae etok wml Pa con Commons filibuster he will necessary agal he measire to pa ament what o Parii worth, Says members of ale he will What is dignity Dignity m ink yor have ur What's the meanir * + This Connection! group that sence the FBI a list of townspeople it cons * pop nig and fis an Pxpensee amounted in £ * - revised the n't the Socrede grant suffrage on on children and doge. who £ never err in judging men? The Packsack Of GREGORY CLARK ne (o relieve Hlusions. For ms of 5 so We “just ringing e if we are not city people. In the country, they are used to ignoring all sounds and disturbances that do not directly © listener Daybreak being nig dogs barn is Start ited! The kind of barking ex being: opened. Same engine in thudthud Altle « harkir And e bright long day from there ihe rest engines snort tractors clatter, radio ye machines bovz, hum. twitter, tt gior r j farm tmp. in the and ation mechanizal Labor Court re, S-compensaltion claims pre OD sented by two stockyard workers ironed ¢ t poominent g were hefore an unusually athering when the Swer- ish Labor (¢ Januady 28. It 5th yurt met in Stockholm ona happened to be the anniversary of the founding of the court, and among those present were the King, t of the members government, headed by ta hur the prime minister, and abe dred other invited guest The Labor Court is made up three impartial members and tive workers employees. Its who represent employers and salaried juris diction is limited pp 7) olle ‘ ag reer lo disputes concern ing the ‘ation and interpretation already iders bind signed, which the lay g upon both partie Wage dis er hand, must pressure inion that great to 1 Sweden and oppr appealed t t more frequent s, “Twents df would president five have the the sbor We fune the negotiate themarlvee versed howe irom Beeden Picture Ban All Off For House Opening j CHILLING KEPLY Fly Fight Precedes Visit to Canberra Admiral Plans Inspection : : Baskets Set ve nie sions ns Rope Nanaimo poured over ris | Wineh Notes | Legal Angle One-Sided OTTAWA (CP) 4704 | SEATTLE $4.65 ne Beaciy n Stil A JUSTIN HARBORD'S os E INSURANCE ADVIC WHAT YOU SHOULD KNOW AROLT PERSONAL PROPERTY INSURANCE Ever { is different f HARBORD INSURANCE LTD. 009 YATES STRIE Molotov Quells | Austrian Hopes LAST DAY Ingledew's CLEARANCE SALE MEN'S SHOES Reg. $12.95 sa 95 Reg. $16.95 and $17.95 a | | Reg. 872.95 lo 821.98 od BS toes no Church's shoes on sale Insledew's 749 Yates St ey y ee PUAN YOUE HOME.. MATE PH FEYWOOTS... 9,9 T. HALL— your entrance hall should reflect warmth, dignity and classic beau character. PV. Etch Wood with its Striated Ply lovely raised-qrain surface is idea! for this purpose. It is oak-hard and scratch-proot—years from now it will be as beautiful as today ell as full pe 2. LIVINGROOM Here the th its soft, pencilled omes into its own. Note ard eHect. You can x or Etch We od in pre-cut — BEDR« } ae \ SHADOW Wood . 4 Ca. i BEDROOM Here is your chance at drama—build « feature wall of P. VY. Shadow Wood and watch it glow with soltly diffused light. The hard, pressurized surface builds extra years of life into your Weldtex qet walls Baily Colonist — Vietoria, B.C, Sat, Feb. 13,1954 B.C. Asked To Double $10 Bonus to \ged WOODWARD'S POLICY Woodward's do not adverti STORES (Vieteria) LTD. ~ DOUGLAS AND GOURTNEY — ~— PHONE BEACON 1231 ) A NEW ARRIVAL IN “ROYAL ALBERT" BONE CHINA The dainty “Greenwood Tree” pattern has pieces, Cup and Saucer 31.50 .,, arrived at Woc other pieces niward’s Open stock teaware and dinne priced accordingly SMART SPRING SUITS TOP WOODWARD VALUE 7 ht Easy Credit Terms “PURE WOOL” HOUSECOATS | Authentic tartar ip-around stvic with note "12.69 SPECIAL, WATERPROOF GLUE YOUR LUMBER DEALER HAS A FULL RANGE OF PV. PLYWOODS OW Distributed by. Valentine Nylons 1 -Gauge, 15-Denier New Spring Colors First Quality Orion Blouses WOODWARD'S ‘Frigidaire Trade Fair’ At Least _ . 49” FRIGIDAIRE REFRIGERATOR Model SS-86 323”° Trade-in 40°° Balance 283’ Price t ’ At Least *10" Your Range on a Frigidaire Electric Range Model ROAM 399”° Trade-in 70° Balance S29” No Down Payment, Price $16.00 per Month Nees/ PLYWOODS DOUGLAS FIR ; THE BEST KNOWN NAME IN PLYWOOD CO. LTD ( ANFOR Building Pr ducts Limited—Victoria and Nanaimo KE. L, SAUDER LUMBER —Vancouver, B.C. VICTORIA RETAIL LUMBER YARD 1901 Government St. B29 SIDNEY LUMBER LIMITED 1333 Government St. B S187 ISLAND BUILDING SUPPLIES 5725 Gorge Road BSLAT SAANICH LUMBER YARDS LIMITED YM Dougias St. F Wan ove clock ¢ and time igna I in unit even- heat over T tute th r } Entire inte Not exactly as illustrated No Down Payment and $30.00 Per Month Gives You Both Items , GETTING IT AT WOODWARD’S IS YOUR BEST GUARANTEE -~ N.B. Claim-Staking —2S#""""""* A. E. Ames & Co. Toranto Mines Closing Averages Rail Rival Record in Canada | = saee : . By HARRY YOUNG 1in yn pa “aT Atadia Dran wpe ee noha Ricnaine Ken i? DOW JONE Colonint Business Editor wh . t i Trost Building » Victoris, B 100 Aka > ve a i ™ industrials 293.99, up LM 1200 Amer Neph r > La > 20 rails 103,48, up 0.28 42500 Amero 5 . 15 utilities J... 4.58, up 0.06 65 stocks 112.32, up 0.42 Shares 1,750,000, yn 40.000 claims were 953 by pros to nh? oe 1 by prost fs in Nes TORONTO MONTREAL WINNIPE® VANCOUVER NEWYORK LONDON, EMO, 5000 Lenine ; : reap 4 is TORONTO; ; : 1 : ‘ K TO ‘S _ 1 t ice and . 4 by the repay t ) s and to pro nseetriats = =e apes buy the $2,600,000... 30,000,000-ton base metal ore dis: \ide additin ane chplial REAL ESTATE MANAGER x0lds -_____-__ 74.36, up 0.17 ogg Railroad covery in the Bathurst are * Base Metals __.140.70, off 0.12, :n pee ah ee pp oe e Fourteen new mining compan. MONTREAL TRUST WANTED Shares: 2,746,000. ae ies with combined capital of PROSPERS HE PREFER ABI APPLICA . $38,000,000 have * Assets under the administra MONTREAL Central alone made up 3 been incorporat tion of the Montreal Trust Com Industrials —____187.30, up 0.03 15 per cent of all the busines in New Bruns increased by _ $30,000,000 Utilities -.--- 97,70, up 0,01 ‘ ‘ Hves—KKO wick, and 50 dia iring 19 and net profit of \ ANI Golds 54.31, up 1.04 : aes sen =m ills are $44 or $1.36 a share com =NT ARIED PO Pulp, Papers — 831.79, up Leg 8" TS' spent ry erating in the pared with $488,170 in 1952 Shares: 600, hot area with 15 re tle ofl sical 9 BOX 666, VICTORIA PRESS VANCOUVER ge pene aa vere ue wern was making a a re = 2 Golds 27.06, 0ff 03 peen a ho \ ce 1895. A wag The latest ment The meeting 12600 New 1 Base Metals 115.80, Unchg. remarked > market Voted to pews from the terday ablished the val Olls 309.18, up 1.05. remain ‘ oln's birth:! a ihe company's capital i Maritime = prov- I < Sales: 84,033 day and remain closed on Valen: jfce is a reported titanium strike $21, same as last year h MORTGAGE L NS esa yield of 4.76 per cent OA tine’s day 35 miles south of Campbellton ®!* 7" 4 But the principa in the a manganese strike near An offer to purchase the Today's Dollar Gantral) batiie Robert R 4 shares of The Maritime Trust §1/4% MONTREAL— Glove Young’s group 1e- Central f aituerd Company of Saint John has ist of the Bathurst of bo ( 3 nianagement t right. down been made ar its acceptance iE TAGE ro REN NEW YORK- : malt nisin in tt forts to les are within 20 miles of th expected The Montreal Re Rea eee ee OUR BENE @ suotasuse=tuchecks ibollans eae ane eiteerseacoast and are in orneartem: 1 Sxpected. |= ne | Montreal LOW RATES FOR NEW HOMES Accumulate 1 . BS pera tt “pions ransaction, representing bunch- Perate, settled reg business and undertakings of a ° ° 1 orde f both bel * * The Northern “ompany Crain Prices amounted to 20,000 “shares al/FAR NORTH SEARCH WAKE conical Wak angen KER & STEPHENSON LIMITE om : 23's up“ J ch for oi! over a f 969 Government Street a WINNIPEG (CP)—Only fea Buying went ahead 4 sly " the Northwe . * * export interest in barley In con (on aoe ace atcek reached 25's \ritories owned by Consolidated) TALK ON BY-LAW , ; v qual to Mining & Smelting is being un — . n nection with trade reports that)price touched since 1951 lertaken by @ Canadian inde.|_ Real ExtateBoardp 1m Japan had purchased one cargo ¢ ) p.m. sales of New York Cen+| pand ompan NWT Petro. will be addressed b / J of Canadian harley tral amounted to 180,200 shares. } Saunders of the Victoria own Other trade was dull as out- against 103,600 shares in Planning Commission at side interest was at a minimum | Thursday's session nie adh are: General meeting on Wednesday, Febru due to the holiday in the United " and New Superio ary 17, at noon in the Em States Price Range Narrows 121,740-acre block of permit tote Mr, Saunders will Hata There was no information! TORONTO (CP)— Prices were "8's in the far north, NWT gy the new town planning available on export loadings mixed with little ranze in a 4s Staked its first wildcat well yy jay of Canadalan wheat overnight. listless se n. Industrials and NWT Heart Lake 1. lt \ * * * 2 well abandoned The profits of Chrysler ASO Dona 49750 822 (lass two A and domestic/stronger while mining groups wheat were unchanged from, were down Big Island 2 Thursday last year poration in 1953 were $74,788 a per. nels oords-—ane -) , x Papers stee for arid 617 or $8.59 a share. This w High Site is near Great Slave Lake 1 , rigs® manufacturers were the hasis of “ a - ‘ ; slightly lower than the $78,696 599 or $9.04 a share in 1952 | Federal taxes, however, were} considerably lower The com pany paid $125,000,000 in 1953 against $169,000,000 in 1952 and is 55 miles north of the Alberta boundary 4300 God's | 5 \ ¢ 4% e 1000 Golderest ‘ 11900 Silver-Milier 103 F- the sl t industrial gain. Refin 1420 8 Hoo Beeld Bh P st ; ing oils were mixed rein Me ¥ : Xe 10K 108%, 108s 4090 Bteep Rock 780 ! OTe * 106%, Most western oll changes were 1190 Hard Rock n 2 2 slight, Central Explorers’ 70. CM & S retains 50 per Boon Heactar Lakes 2 : } cent gain a late exception terest rade 3 : 22090 Teck-Huglies 5 7 oo petted Hi 2 3800 ‘Thomp-tona 18 ; t 34 Base metals were recovering * * * - - 2200 Mev ay . 13100 Tombill — - ae at the close, moving. up as Geco BOND RATE FIXED THE CALGARY & EOQMONTON | Highland-Re ' J 7 . fy af2? Hollinger ' mw D added 75 cents The new issue of $40,000,000 CORPORATION LIMITED Homer ¥ 2 4 Soa renee <a 26488 United Arb t 3 i Golds also recovered some of) Sinking Fund debentures by the xotuce is here 120 Hudson Bay t ae eee ene fF their early losses, with Teck-|- et ‘ rh On Upper ¢ ; hei . Kk of tive cents per isn nish itl 4 O \Venturee a} ’ 1 Hughes leading with a 30-cent the day of b a ent 1 50 Walke ami ‘ : pain Montreal Bonds aaa Petar: Sitie E. H, Tanner, President of Triad Oil Co. Lid, announces 09 Jacule y fon e arte 0 e ° . , ent 0 additiona 1 the Henor 8150 Joburke to countries 6 Uraniums were lower, w MONTREAL (CP) th the apr ointmen of two a idi ic : € r HINA Joliet-Que 218 3 r e " se RR) Ie : a BY ORDER OF THE BOARD able M. R. Bridgeman, C.B ‘ Down, O.BE the exception of a few like Gun-|term government o © ase ee M.C. Both were nominated to the Triad Board by D'Ar 900 Karrand ae mere ath 7 2400 Yk Bea nar which closed up 12'; cents.| were a little higher.” On the ¥ i Exploration Company Limited, a wholly-owned subsidiary ’ oh ae : anitone, 1 : : 3043 Yu corporate side prices were un- ¢ i of Anglo-Tranian, D'Arcy Exploration recently made a 200 Kirk Lake 1000 Yuk 0 ’ iB prow ae Paci i; Pacific Leads Oils canted substantial purchase of Triad share Toronto Oils MONTREAL (CP) — Stock! around the new B.C. Electric Meith sented aha Kc Mananiagonécias ot otk market prices closed on ai\and Canadian Breweries issues 3 Exploration, and Mr, Down were members of the Maire Cle - r Sas stronger note in moderate trad-| Trading w Slow if from Anglo-Iranian which visited Canada last Augus anon Aine va | B80 Jupiler : Dis idends ing Mutual Down will be Anglolranian’s resident represents 15800. Alberm stele 7 4 Dae $00 AP Cons : 3 17800 Landover oil ; Declared Miscellaneous industrials, pa F d Se Bridgeman’ joIned Avaloiranien in 2 During nt 000 Long fsian \ = utilities Cae aR y I de vined Anglo-Iranian ir f mn y pers.. utilities, senior metals, un the war he was Petroleum Adviser to the Ministry of 455 Anglo Melvar VALS Batley a ‘ Marigold Pe 2 ong 3 x mn steels and banks were stronger Economic Warfare in 1939 and was Jent in the same capa 400 Be tf ‘ Abitibi Power and Paper, 30 cents. pay I t i , 00 British pir Continent able April 1; record March | xa Peb. 26. While beverages, carriers anc OR Sh city to the Government of India in 1942. From 1941 to 800 Brit City 7 ) 20 cents, p J z ; Saiaite - : ee ae ~ — F ‘> ares 1946 he was Principal Assistant Secretary, Petroleum Genera! Petroleums drills and Mon. M BR. Bridgeman, CBE changed with interes ” . . } $00 Caigiry & Edm , " i Dom 223 Maren i; record Feb. 19: xd Peb. 18 senior oils were narrowly 4 2 Division, Ministry of Fuel and Power #! 1800. Salngcth 5 2 Walter M. Lowney, 25 cents, payable 3000 Caiven Cons : April 18; record March 18; xd March 12 mixed ste 1800 Can Ol Lands 7 1 jagara Wire Weaving, 50 Mining issues were lower In r. Down joined Anglo-[ranian in 1938 after qualifying ; bin April c + } , Je: taprown gens TCU aa CLNcE: peontID Ay slow trading. East Malartic lost Have your investments grown as a Chartered Accountant. He has worked in Haifa ch 30 20 cents and Canadian Collie : » in the last 20 years? Abadan, and in the Persian oilfields as well as at Anglo Sante, Pays <0 cenls and adian Collier: / ae Some Canadian Mutual Iranian’s London headquarters. During the war, after jes five cents WE NE Funds have serving in the Middle East and Italy, he was with the Enamel and Healing Products, \0-cents. Wocty a OAK BAY LISTINGS Canadian forces in Belgium. Holland and Germany. end 1700 Pe: . J ~ ‘ m ern oils were steady to y Is NGS re = < . n an gium nd an elt nd 135280 Petrol: © able, Apri 3; neeard Maren 31 xa - Consult Clyde ¢ ompton and wg his war services as a Colonel! on the staff f Canadian arch i 5 =) , $300 Ponder 3 March 30 irregularly higher. Pacific Pe Co's Representative Army Headquarters 800 Reel Pete et Washing Machine, 5 cents on #433 Rin Prado 7 «Scents, payable April 1: record March troleum gained 25 cents and B ORMAN 4000 Roxana bie eh ia ; Maren! Canada Southern moved up 20 2 135 \ 19 vecord Pee 27 xd Feh ae ee : ‘ INVESTMENT ©O, LTD, James George Guynanavien SO payable CeNts Calalta aspe and An #0 pares. © ti00 Retarans 2k 20 eee ee. 00S PRL ARN ORES le etna Maras Thee Good Advertising Attracts Customers Tra 1200 Feder et s 2 . ‘ Tete - 207 a 1800 Ges Bepirin ‘ae 1 | 1070 London Stock Prices Write Box 327 Tel. E0039 3 Explirin “ 200 Gener ion Gres - @ Unit i ues LONDON (Reuters)—London 1100 Cride stock markets gave a mixed 2000 Hith Ur 1 : ap Boe oe) Pipe 33% : i ‘ rh ia ce display today, The lower trend / e e Grade A amall - in industrial shares which be e o eee i : gan on Wednesday continued Now oh viow-the fret EE in 0 Grace A laree c-S3e today but losses were generally i & Pare es : Cade Aaa — Small. Hardest hit today were iA’. fon Paper 44%e 4 i i Jrace B tobacen shares following a F BEsERE M088 47a? 1 1 wy 4 statement in the House of Grain Markets Closed | commons that there is a link phe ah I NEW YORK (AP Grain between smoking and cancer markets throughout the United of the lung States were closed today in ob It-edged were quietly servance of Lincoln's birthday. With the exception of the New York cotton and New York wool futures markets, all other ommodity exchanges remained tm exchanges in the 78 States transacted b isual vusi Complete Vancouver Trading ons 2000 Giar 3400 High MORE FOR 'S4—Ser the brilliant new Hillman line for "54 today! There's # model here for you. & Convertible model that leads its field in heauty, performance and reoanmy, Ask your dealer about the twenty 4 f * one brand new features for “54... features that combine to make the new Minx a cer you'll be proud Wag Ges r Californian Inown ... a Car with more rize, more style, more safety, more smoothness! York Knit A 2 2 h Va 4 r v 4 reliee's 2 ‘s A Hard-Top A HARD-TOP TOO! All thie.and the sleek, jewel-like Californian, The first completely new minded Estate Gar - and the only hard-top in the entire held, thie exciting bemuty sete the feshion for Hi i ghannl at extra cant 4 MODELS FOR''S4—To complete the ‘54 line, there's the smart, glittering Convernhle and the roomy and practical Eatate Car too SER AND DRIVE THE SPARKLING NEW -HILLMAN AT YOUR DEALER'S TODAY! wwitewell Drews Cockshu 1 Maxwe os The above prices Include ROOTES MOTORS (CANADA) LIMITED * HALIFAX * MONTREAL © TORONTO © VANCOUVER 500 ] 7 peer Air Conditioning fieater HELLMAN * HUMBER * SUNBEAM-TALBOT © COMMER * KARMIER * ROVER ond LAMD-ROVER PROOUCTS yew ork Market 2 r $ 0 Poe 7 7 and Flashing ne a , . 3 Directional Signals. VANCOUVER ISLAND DISTRIBUTORS Allied Chemicals 18 Sze : American Ca f Procter Gamble srercss Sasi ) ae : JN IVC Atchison Topeka | . S u DEALERS Amerioan HW Prdcte ' CALE TORONTO | indie 7 CORONATION MOTORS LTD., COWAN'S MOTORS, Nanaimo Po | 3 1 ‘ ‘ od 2978 Douglas Street, Victoria PARTIE SERVE ae & O Railway t : 2 s : FI Pid EDWARD'S GARAGE LTD., Ladysmith Parkaville y Products roit Bdlson Bis & Ee. Bee) | Be. Ba Also featured at Jameson Motors a limited number of 1953 Hillmans The above stock quotations are supplied by James 1 i y ; os 8 Richardson & Sons, H Investments Ltd. ' ge ree tees iin beet a a P agecaee “: at special prices and a wide selection of used Hillmans 4 Ames & Co. and T. H. Burne & Co, 4 Be Tu riae ise Trane Cts C om Congregation Sets Goal At $13,500 The congre United Chures pledged i $14,500 over a period at the § { annua Monday ation of the First tself to ralxe three-year meeting of the A committee Rev. Moir, A Beere, D, Davidson J. Swan and L appointed n of tive set by the Presbytry OFFICERS NAMED Elected the board three-year Fred Ellis Ralph Cruick Howard Forrest Dr, Ale Henry Jk ( Cc and objec eans achievir j Van sland as new members of were Robert hank, E Robe Gunning hnsor Annett, was ¢ board. by the member of the A adopted congregation build $100, 000 fellowship hall and Sunday immediately honorary plan was to a School bullding east of the church on Balmoral Graham MeCall, retiring chairman of the board, pre al the Chureh Debt Reduced ided meeting Debt on the new to Luke's Church reduced extensior Cedar Hill by $2,000. the St Was ast Year it was ed at recent that AN NOUN congregational meeting chureh Rev. P app OFFICERS ELECTED The Raberts stant was Ww ited Ass priest following officers ©. R. Blandy Hudson Jone Capt. Cc. F S. Brooker -I.M Porter Lukey, Honper were elected rector warden warden people's Gibson, Frank Lovele Kennell. C. How! 1 R. Hayward, Cmdr. H ¥. Teffor Ww B Capt. J. D. Prentice A. G, Slocomb, R. Batey bers of the church committee; J. Wilson, E. G How land, A. G. Slaenmb, delegates tn synod; R. Batey, F. Jefford R. S. Twining. G. Buckland F Martin, I. M, Kennel! tutes; and S. Brooker and ¢ C. F. Gibson, deanery confer ence. R mem Burr, C substi Ferry Service Discussed A Vote of thanks was tendered Gavin C. Mouat after he had addressed the regular monthly meeting of the Gulf Islands Im provement Bureau recently at Port Washington, Pender Is land Mr. Mouat lescing from an still requires ¢rutches on arrangements being made for interisland ferry service During the meeting a motion to urge the minister of public works to carry out ferry rangements was passed, and was agreed to advise the CPR that It was the islands’ request that it go through the proposed summer ser was still conva accident and He spoke ar it with vive Mr the second of Canter appointed F. F. Fisher, of Archbishop bury, has been warden of St. Edwart Oxford, at the age of % at present a housemaster Repton, where father once headmaster. son School He } at his was only 6 DAYS to LONDON via the s.5S. “ATLANTIC” (22,000 tons) " “Everybody Has a Good Time Aboard Home Lines Ships!" Thousands of Canadians were delighted with their over this yeor, fy, superb cui spacious decks, and a wonderful in the famous wolned Cesulich marine tradition dotion of all types. SAILINGS FROM QUEBEC to Le Havre and Southampton: April 24—May 12—May 28—June 13—July 1} July 17—Aug. 8 to vA beh le Nov. 23 leuxhaved) , Council In the World Of Religion BY E. GWYNNE LIGHTBOURN The program for the Second Assembly of Churches - to held at Evanston, Illinois August 15-31, has been announced by the executive which met this month at Konigstein, Germany On Sunday evening, August 15 public service will be held at Soldier Field, Chicago, at which a congregation of 100,000 is expected will be conducted in the First Methodist Church, nston adie ee Ath of t Ortho« tine of be committee where his ordi and his two ervine in Dakota k pl brother North by to ace are Ar three Greek Bor nd Archbisho Rishop Metho bi { Brazil ther of the Ops with inistry gner few the he Cantert and Bromley Oxnam dist Churet bus between iness encefort} and assembly t matters of the the lation order, the consideration ult of Berdi doe refle of the et understood ; ( Christ in re ome Hope of the World ism, faith international affairs problems, aid refugee work. On the las afterna Bi rf Dr Re he Ofte to evang and race ence rch. and to and outside ¢ youth ome have da that the tated in part bs hange wa eonflict witt Vernment it the ( nhold = Niebuhr Dibelius of The t m tregat God ey p ymmun ant) many will Dependence of the on ans Men meeting be and ted located 7 Independence Throughout * * Barr Testament » offic The Rev. Jame lecturir tal wie Frenne! languages will Ger ig in New Presbyteriar ntreal, is an honor Edinburgh Univer Engii translatic at M 7 With e graduate sity nuianeous similar that used at the > in d of College who mintstry Scotland at New divinit the classies, ar Edinburgh was ordained wf the Church Tiberias, Israe and his father with distinction terian a The Ottawa Couneil of Chris in Education of works an erie Is conducting a for Sund under a committee headed by D. B. MacDonald of joro.)©6 United Chureh Among Lhe members are Mr Justice Ft. I Kellock of the irt of Canada of First carry and for” three Baptist } nemb hip of Presby hop 8 grandfather have both in ehool loader ance of the Rev uu Westt served the Presby ministry * * * The the Happy Handicap Cl Lakehead monthly ub Supreme Car been who of at superintentent Bap Rath ay meetings now has and 85 sehool the and unday laity of can, United Churehes and 115 an of It thtingale ped, met cripple something were barreei entertainment were held in of Trinity United Port Arthur, and St Paul's Anglican Church, Fort William. They are held in the auditorium of the Fair Board. Protestant and Roman Catholic Churches, — the St John Ambulance Association clubs, and the RCAMC are all co-operating in programs and transportation for the mem bers, some of whom come in wheel chairs and some even on stretchers * attendance Will handicap They decided ta others who normal meeti when . . * Bishops of the Church England are to receive Of £2.200 a year traveling ir vivy ¢ increase wife is Miss and for from Early the af stipends and under also a do and rent expenses orders council the approved by y This means of the Liver Salisbury of £200, a drop of £100. * ‘ouncil hal an for many Church bul Birmingham Linealn out to the bishops ponl and tune now lose and Exeter take 7 7 atholies warned German Raman ({ have been explicitly against participation International meetings held this year, most of have been called “peace” con ferences, but have been found by the church authorities to be | Communist-organized ~*~ + * Baptist World Alliance composed of 91,889 67,708 ordained mini and 18,157,238 members. ~*~ * * The Right Rev. Henry Knox Sherrill, presiding bishop of the Protestant Episcopal Church in the United States. had the privilege nrdaining a third an to the priesthood. The Rev G. Sherrill the vicar of St. James’ Church, Dickinson service in seven to be which * * The Springtield, Mass., Coun cil of Churches has arranged a new service to the commun ity, known as “Minister Until Midnight From 11.15 p.m. to midnight a counsellor, the Rev. Otis A. Maxfield on the air on a local radio station, Listen ers are invited to telephone him and discuss their problems, and the conversations are “aired as actually take place. The program has been in operation since October said to rival the favorite jockey The is now churches, sters af thes is and is disc Parent-Teacher News Pupils Plan To Discuss Extra-Curricular Work H School Parent ‘Tea ociation meeting Wed at 815 pm E. T Ba A nesday Student's exira the Oak Members of the her Council will speak ular activities at or next curr Mrs teker ill preside and refreshments * * will be served * The Metchosin PTA will meet on Wednesday next in the 8 school member a friend and a will he held at Each is invited p.m to bring evenir * © met * PTA meeting * hold Monday at 8 p.m of vis will show M February at the Denis val nteres w its on school, starting Brown, director for s¢ address and series of film strips John talent the education hools give an chairman of mpett the show being planned for children in March brief will school will out be give members a line how the show presented * Valley on and PARIS popular * + PTA next will meet the school Monday at 8 pm. A candle lighting cere mony will commemorate F ound: | ers Day and the guest speaker! will be Mrs. A. B. Thompson of the Victoria council of the PTA * * * PTA monthly Happy ason inthis luxurious why not anjoy its ne, air-conditioned \ re oria West wil century-old gular meetin First and Touris! oecomme- rg n e school on Tuesdas n. Talks on the work and the ( will * ree pupils ance Clinic he i 7 North Mor neeting of the A will be held on Hovre, Rotterdam in the school honor of- Founders Day, A large SEE YOUR TRAVEL AGENT! attendance is requested ENTERING HOME LINES CANADIAN SERVICE SPRING OF 1955 Our New Flog Ship 5.5. HOMERIC 26,000 tons—22 knots ‘ Vivien Leigh Back in Play LONDON (Reuters 5 Vivien Leigh, 40 Actress who fell and broke her wrist on stage Mon day. resumed her part in Ter ence Rattipan’s ‘The Sleeping Prince” here Thursday night Earlier that day the opening service ; Sunday Services in V ictoria Churches Victoria, B.C., Sat., Feb. 13, 1954 7 Batixy Colonist Missionary To Give, Lecture on Holy Land World ! highe f hig [ ison Ww educatec and given h edical missi di work he dread of rosy ease AFTERNOON MEETING He is also to address an noon meetii® MN “firs: Barz hurch next Tt 1 in early March rhe swill Romar Cath and t da hes of members ollie oar group Protestant will church tha et to ted city ch The creed at ‘faith in Stat reasi pose to life )I mectir Society on Sunt Speaker held at 94 Governme p. at the meetir tn the Frank . Anglican CATHEDRAL sident CHRIST CHURCH + c © MARY'S, OAK BAY fundas primar St Al Commurt 950 w at © Releskine Road Vietnria West meth 1g and Kende st on. & a Ta pm St Lui inn, even: Rt commur 10 ar 8 J W St. George the Martyr Moly communtan, # 1 acm. mating ans rector’s) Bible class tiem. Di n Wilitam” Mile All Saints ho is s chureh Paul's m a E Inthe -Fletds am: chu 7 Re Sundar xc sermon, It View Royal Wicker St. John's Calenod Aum. Sunda me 7pm, Rey St, Matthew's m lam s Rev WJ. Jones St. Miehael's, Royal Oak munion Am. matins 31 a " Langford. Holy ¢ nday seheol. tt He hey St. Cotumba's 907 am, eve Mrawherry neonE. Vale ds Rey " eh 7pm Good Shepherd ‘ 10.08 Prospect Lake am evensong. 4 x Godk Stephen's, Mount Newton He f H Hely Trinit variant, 1 am Andrew's sam Ray Mr Pam Augustine's Rev R rmabas’ Deep Cove Melville Belmont fam 1 pm Rr Wh Evens and Beghi aune meas Rey EF ehead communian rvensong n and CHURCH NOTICES CURISTADELP RIAN TADELPHIA (Centr d Bianshard 6 Morning me re, 7.20 pm Oranke | Sur G a203 am 7 " SOCIETY OF FRIENDS BOC OF FIUENDS ‘QUAKER err rt c 4 TETY GOSPEL HALLS RETHESDA CHAPEL Avrove and Darie Str Breaking 4 Bible Lite of E FALL Road OAKLANDS GORPRI ite and Cedar Hil Challenge mee VICTORIA GORPEL HALL hold, CHURCH OF Road, fu NITED Sunday SPIRITUALIAT CHURE « ong REFORMED CHURCH CHRISTIAN Service REPC Service at Be CKWX 120 am Rew P Elcersvela afte split into two be seler Dice m Cane Cadbers Bay am 10 corner Ai SPIRITUALIST ED CHURCH terian Churen s¢ Si. Peters Lake Win At, Matthias SHADY CREEK St, Marrs, Meteh b Triniis, Sooke F Lnited 48 1S CENTENNIAL Ker oF Ts Baptist Luthe urch preach Pasrant METHOPOLETAN Metropolitan niversare ls Bu Anglican Services Christ Church Cathedral Rockland and Quadra CENTENARY YEAR The Very Rev. P, R. Beatle D.D. -Dean Rector 8.00 a.m. -Holy ¢ 9.30 aur Holy ¢ 11.00 aur METROPOLITAN UNITED CHURCH Pandare 8) Quadra Miniate fame Rey PER BA BD. DD or of Muste ARCM AnCE STM ANNIVERSARY SUNDAY “First Tne First” “The Body of Christ” Adame Anniversary Guest Preacher Rev. W. S. TAYLOR Pr and mmunion ymmunion es r and SERMON Archbishop JVI} Lord oudcast iT EVENSONG and SERMON Preacher: The Dean 1m. Evensong, | Hall Preacher Rev. RK. E. F, Berry Holy Communion Pues 11.00 ar Thursday, 7,30 a.m ensong each weekday 5.00 p.m if il 1) Ba nis mes be A Niagara 4 The om 5 a a Monday,-6.15 p.m. Anniversary Banquet & Tn , f EA I \ wr at ST. JOHN’S Quadra a} Mason ve First United Church na Cor, Quadra and Balmoral 830 am —Holy Communion “In the \Resniwina” A ty in the Rook of Cenests) “IF | HAD ONLY ONE SERMON TO PREACH” J. Waters BROAD AST OVER CKDA (1510) 790 pa “The Book of Genesis” Combined Service in eo itAnae uted Metropolitan United Church Preacher, Canon Biddle ijter 5.20 TRANSITION the Evening ST. MARY'S CHURCH Kizin Koad, Oxk Bay WELCOME Oak Bay United Church Mitehell and Granite er WoW MePherson, MA f recto Vera Barclay “ Th Holy Communion, £90 1m Sermon. 13.00 em 4. 8. PL Snowcer d Bermon, 7.0 p.m Mini D of Must bon a He Did No Miracte, But God's Road Menders* 1 P: ea) te Church u i) Crosaread B imary er | St. Aidan’ 8 Unit Richmond and Cedar Holy Communion. 0.30 ar Clerthue argery M *G Paed' Minister S. George the Martyr Cadbere Bar SEFPTUAGESIMA SLNDAY Schoo! RAINBOW" ABOUT TRACING THE WHAT “INEQUALITY? Minister Preaching » Fairfield United Church Rev W Allan Nei ims MATTING and SERMON GOD YOKED ALLIANCES OF THOL Rect Ages 12 TT ren "Muphes EVENESONG and SRRMON Morning and Evening WILLIAM HILIs ST. MATTHIAS’ Richmend and Lillian Rowd Paster iam M Five Points FS Organiet W ple Claes care Aapiiem Pre Mus Ba 00 a Echoes of Preahytery 0 c Jone Rell > tea i 7 Al Vist * Centennial United Church Gorge Road near Government Street Cor no Dowsing B Carr, BA Organtet manies Mareare ‘A Table Set for Thiee ne no e— Pift a ARTH ond United Chures v iver BC ay & ST. BARNABAS’ Beimont and Reghie SEPTUAGESIMA CHURCH OF OUR LORD nen REFORMED EPISCOPAL Mombeldt and Blanshard Sireete MA Ail Are We ote Holy ¢ Rev J G. Brown DD. G. MUNN WHITEHEAD mevit nR A Man Sent Fram Gad Martin Luther et ST. ANDREW'S PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH a et ern, rey els Seiad UEaT PREACHER REV. JAMES W. BELL, B.A., B.D. of Seattle “THE WILL OF GOD" “LOST AND FOUND" LASM ATOM a 11.00 a.m i 7.30 p.m ne and Ch aster © C Warren ganist WE WELCOME VISITORS i Al(ain 4 em, _ Grace iaanee Church The Charch ef All Nations Bisushard Rev and Queens Paster Paul A. Hock Bervice 3 a Thrill wf The Aitainment™ CHRISTADELPHIAN CHAISTADELPHIAN MALL, Bisnsherd and Kings LECTURE 130 FM FREE METHODIST J Campbell, © 1535 Hour Bunle “WORLD WITHOUT END” 16M Cook — Ree 5 VS -on: ay Bohoe TWO MELFPUL SERVICES am. ond ne Meeting EMMANUEL BAPTIST CHURCH Fornweed a1 Giadstone mith, Minister Mr. DW. Philtipe ctor: Mre Alma T. Wittiek, AT.0.M. RM NO THACHER LIKX® HIM The Jesus Whe Lived THE CHURCH WITH THE BAD APPLE Reriee overing the Living Churrh James © Organist Chair Di . Take the Haultain fue Fmmanue Seeceeorcontocceeniiin FIRST BAPTIST CHURCH Quadra al Maven RA RT “ ana ¢ Re Raster Pasior Tunior m. Benior 7.0 pm “The Full Orbed Duet Mr and Mra ft Martin Luther Dhue Mesdames Jack 11.00 a.m an and Hilton CENTRAL BAPTIST We Preach Christ Crocifie?, Risen end Coming Again DR J BR ROWELL. lasses af 9.45 am 1 Pandora Avenve Paster and Bible ¢ “A Christian Warrior Talks Heart to Heart” Sunday School 730 am The Message Many Are Expecting These Davs MARTIN LUTHER. “THE MONK THAT SHOOK THE WORLD" Vital Experiences of God's Saving Grace and Power The Yo “FIRESIDE” at 9.00 0 ng People's Clock CHURCH «, NAZARENE T2t) Graham St, off Millede Ave AN DUNCE OF CHURCH 18 WORTH A POUND OF POLIOR count First Church of Christ, Scientist CHAMBLES ST end FANDURA AVE Mote: Churen t Christ ‘Scientia Marsachusetle A Branch ¢ ‘ The First Charen n Bs Ross Bay Gospel Hall Joseph and Ma ston Cor SERVICER and £00 pm SUNDAY am Subject “SOUL” AY BCHOOL 100 am NIAL MEFTING ay £00 on FREE PUBLIC READING ROOM end LENDING LIBRARY 68 View Street RETURN OF ELIJAH THE || ~~ PROPHET || o"!5 at 943 yam VELCOME Views the N every Tweed tr Sunday, Web 4 How Christian Science Heals “An Effective Remedy for Office Politics” a4 am. SEVENTH-DAY ADVENTIST CHURCH Pandora and Vanoouyer Welcome ckmMo Banday KIB tiie be O00 Ar. Sunday, 9.00 am _ Kingdom Ministry (British-Israel) Pianist’ Miss FE James, RMT MRS. ALICE CRESSALI Subject: “YE IN ME AND TIN YOU" Sunday, 7.30 p.m,, Newstead Hall, 734 Fort St Speaker EVANGELISTIC TEMPLE Sunday School and Bible Class Dean—7.30 p.m. 10,00 am 11.00 a.m.—Pastor R. L. Bring the Family to Chureh this Sundey—All Welcame Seep uepuepupeeeeueueeeaeuaenes Presented by The Christian Business Men's Committee A FASCINATING FILM “The Call of the Navajo” (hls measage Qu . ody invited lo sre and hea et Fox Theatre 9 °"*" C CLAD TIDINGS TABERNACLE at ef Mudewn’s May Ktere The Pentecostal Assemblies of Canada RCHOO!—CLASEPS FOR ALI THE PAETOR—7 0 PM 10 thee good Pveryh os NDAY C B M RIT North Park St, 1! Blocks Rev, C ® Smith, Minister ¥45 AM @aUNDAY M CIVI, Sunde . Victoria Truth Centre Affliate intl New Thought Alliance There ts @ solution to every problem Minister: Rev, Emma M. Smiley 11.00 ar “ST. VALENTINE” Children’s Church of the Golden Key p.m.—"“THE HEALER AND THE SCIENTIST” Tuesday. 3.00 p.m.—Special Healing Service Wednesday, 4.00 p.m.—"The Truth Student's Viewpoint on ‘Desire’ ’ Th FORT STREET wa 7.30 British- Israel World Federation R in Pe Phone G 703) of VANCOUVER addresses 734 Fort Victoria Office aoe Rook Roor MISS JANET LANSDOWNE will give TWO NEWSTEAD HALL, Feb. Tuesday, om in Street 15—Title Feb. 16—Title: “Intermarriage .., A Nail In The Coffin” Mer ey Monday, “Questions and Answers” nee at pr YOUTH CHALLENGE RALLY Victoria Gospel Hall P45 PANDORA AVE, TAS pm, Tonight Music Outstanding mith Barite Ken Vancouver TORFRen-. “Sek -auee OCDE MLAS. iP AUNDAY BCHOOL~* 4 WORSH EVANGELISTIC #PRVICE REV. C. R. ALTON WILL COMMENCE HIS MINISTRY AT THE TABERNACLE THIS SUNDAY A HEARTY MORNING 1 om EVENING wpe WELCOME IS EXTENDED TO ALL Daily Colonist Victoria, B.C., Sat., Feb. 13, 1954 { = ; YN J ° Ae i0 : Sily Glev es Elmer’s Down but Not Out d Takes Car, Sc orine Lead ati As Cougars Beat Out Seattle HOW THEY STAND VICTORIA Be VICTORIA © 5 VECTORIA » BY JIM TANG = Canue sExtend Lead: -. Flyers Edge Quakers ‘ up the Th out his t EIGHT-POINT LEAD Victory’ badsted non thi s Victoria playing-coach E:lmet Spiedel (11) who he [ id teammate Doug Brinham (15) I k ‘ a ing to court and is got the jump on up-Island squad bs {s “ } b { VANCOUVER 4. NEW WESTMINSTER et of Atberni’s king opening game of best-of f et t ' P ‘ ae e ae. Williamson i play ve mame seri for Vancotwe I t ball are Kins” Gerry cer (1 senior “ys men's champions! George Denison, an Alberni 65-60 count daker Stars as Kins Beat Jinx » = SL an ree Spirited English Rally dditional port To Take Lead in Island. Finals es:220-°". EE sess iaeontosprome oer Pages 9 and 10 Baker, vated ( da's held an elghtpoint in the |———— = he g r m , the sease i t « aa c t t epa : Plays. Today cas the tduehi aie wai in ° half-century brought with the score 6154 and for \, 1s , b f 2 : . , ‘4 0 2 baskethall er final frame but Baker v ! memories his old-time several agonizing minutes [OF | gem : en ne MUS third — perioe imalt High) Victoria fans, it looked \ as ‘ season., Both were from the 544 parking! berni would pull this ene out or edge of the crease in scrambles, OG akers protes where Kuzma is at his best. * M negame > <A free shot and quick baskets § " had reached over i} or) 4 f : fa | DSrohoy helped set up the se ; or ; >» FAN FARE , Walt a Ke ah é 4 . £ ' a / ‘ Alberni he Van-'by A! Brinham and playing bat 2 \ } ¥ ¥ va 1 puck ahead iver Island senior men's coach Elmer Spiedel pulled the ond and with Enio Sclisizzi kerball final Up-Island squad to within two pointless at Edmontan, once ith and ie fasiileta sak who points at 61-59. But Tooby rallied again took the scoring ad: |/PIBST ‘SCORELESS oe fest olla dace Ke - ad i ( mL OW er "Iland rred for the Canadian cham-the club together and scored Dorohoy has 60 points, Sclis After.a score st period icf and Saskatoon playing-coach Jim Uniae put Flyers ahgad but > hod Yeni Victoria Dominoes two free shots and Clark added S avanen Lil bil profes: a basket as Kine stalled effes : Alex Kaleta 59 Quakers tied it up and came } . By int F me Cr potted 17 point afier tively for the final two minutes ar : With so much at stake both back with two more goals after C seisinin eal = rd I OW o showr teams played it close to the Len Haley had again given F v Overnigh tsma vest The steady checking Flyers the lead to take a 32 t \ caused a lot of scrambly hockey lead into the third period and neither club was able to o Rav H gan tied the score t ame at the Brinham, wh has = Compton and econd quarler and tremendous impravement over npton a 60 vic-\last season, was the pick of the bat he t put up an impress til Compton was out But ¢ Jim Laker, 'T earried the ih to a 6 tor) 1 brilliant fourtt ers and score 17 points fanize anything resembling an z r und then came the ¢ attack, particularly in the first ited winner Jackie MeLeod 2X past period But there were plenty do once and assisted in th MY EYES ARE Bum tatham v ) Ot ’ 1 . HEY GLINK AND WATER = , 4 of exciting moments i . two Saskatoon poals to eee eee Aces dropped the first game second period and in the continue is steady climb up YOu DONT, BUT Ov OugnTeR! mpton was in { wwas onl ’ wo 7 Brent- quarter display Spiedet, former Seattle Univer It was Kins’ first victory over sity ace picked up ,13 points bern’ in seven meetings this but wa well covered by Baker. } ave them the jump injGerry Parker turned in a solid the allimportant first rame, eff for Victoria coring all fang wondering ¢ s 10 points in the opening " Duncea L week e1 19-50 minutes of the third-—as—the+ypye—-<coring vider Playifig coach Alex n 100 wh t ‘dl n ort Al tying it up with an all-out jccjct to stay one point behind 2 We it leg before wicket t r 1 for the CLICK CLARK attack Victoria's Ed Dorohos A tN THE SCORECARD ¢ ar forward of Civil Service, COUGARS B T took over the scoring | erl 1 nh borrib . 5 los 1 ame painfully V Kaleta drew ’ they can score a re two quarters & F : peut performance over last yea First United biddy when they took the Island tide drubbed Cordova Bay, 49-15, ihe opener Lineups WEST INDIES tonnie Benn s A8t and Yt for two declared io held a edge at ENGLAND fitime. ‘bi , 2 12 points in four game Speedy | follow Click Clark is expected to be Cougars, although they gave KINS FAVORED t Cordova Bn schmelis MW Winter/in action today when Victoria up the first goal, were the bet ‘ >! Sevond game of the hest-o 4 : Pee and District Football Associa-\ter club, They had ar H | S O ° ; tot Innings, IAI; Second Inalnge : zs Per E vidi een, Aare « t ¢ ad an e¢ ‘7 a : i pAg eri ta nd Jim Robertson ac 10. Be 2 Secon ne oth eat fuking ee cha, "Seoh and District Foote ee inlie the ust petod s wronpiee| AAOCKEY SCOLES > i aberaoy £808 388 Victoria High School gym to ee - sntth, 2 Lower Island zone semi-final margin in the second, and were ‘wesTi Rs peas se : ge Pe nine points for osers night at 9 pam. and because Of 2 Gs , r1, Mc- match of Province Cup competi- safe in the third until the last ja nigh performance, ins a Kine—Cla ; . tion at Royal Athletic Park at two minutes Sask | favorites to tad, Bake Winner of today’s, Victoria goalie Ralph Almas, }ox pdf A Slate Vint ete goalie Ralph Almas, }OKANAGAN SENIOR CART vame lead when 7 f hi wil! advance to final who saved the day with two! ** sok: s Aa el 4 0 MY, PARTNERS ies shifts to Alberni hy 7 rn sainat Vieto ‘ 08 sril saves in the last r ae “ae tceenl A) kowe AX 900 SAY ~ i ! prea’ built Naya 1 c age { Victoria United of Coast brilliant saves in the last min Wir is SSN MONEY = hadowed by ite d - League ile of play, stopped only 13 ene Y But WERE NEVER PAIRED AGAIN Almost overst uriving display were ~ iots—=three in the first period,| NORTHERN ONTARIO SENIOR A NOW AINT THAT FUNNY Pe Howie ‘Tooby and Johr four in the second, and six ir ONTARIO AUNTOR A me action hs ae Fee a BEE [ie airs Tes Comears kent IE a as : ) : ; rome ae eedmen i Beg) pe Quest RUSTE SCNT Te HOLS Sk mi TAR 50m J se!) ZA . Bruce MeLay Selected yressed Into service when gu J y I : QUPBEC-ONTARIO AUNIOR A in the first period aye eg ey n Tonight ser ange enh ee de be eg || Bae ¢ ee to sia ces For Hoop Crow | Sarai “&~Z-\| For ‘Silver Boy’ Award artist turned in a bang-up de the post twice and there were * ARITIME MAJOR eight valu Howie Toobs k Seott & Saanich, The club ha MARITIME MAJOR won 11 a dozen near misses Halitmx 3 a the club Ped oe Lake me and e only defeat came One of the big reasons for the WESTERN JUNIOR ede ; il take ga t Letnerta Rey Cougar win was the tying u ‘ ; ctoria wed signs I joined the vn? f the dangerous eattile trio EXHIBITION on ith which they ead to the 1 ‘ \ ' tonight when they't 1§ fee 3 Dominior : aH » ae Se A) es d- P ACTING NUTS ie ; Twat ¥ , ys a marke ' u bes aewl iad bee Se at h will. he Sports Fixtures 4 leased by Edmonton “ any Cost t cot sla y | land Rinks , ; Q ' wnada th Scheduled Today u he ‘can: join forme! “in Sone oe Be te fee Sa Eh taned bas ‘ KOCCER ' r : mate nei nin an or Se Det) eS ie eae a SS a omed Almost Out Former Teammates Join: 0°" Tn B.C. Final eee nr get ea =. | Berne * In Honoring Ed Dorohoy wcrc e's ny and one” eo Sen aunier wowed «taal of yen Y Giambra Gains 2 sci One ofthe finest things aboot rf eg rag ip bo mame «TO GUTTER GUS poi downs after the fourth draw Ki y 8 ore , ad f here Friday night dendiler « nye s : hub in Vi . ma pee a ar , M : t ant tedic i er ted t Leading — in Reetion. “A” Peal wat kept cut of whe eden have et Unpopular Win , wna ast RM WAS ites Clubs brother Ollie of Show, with 14 Avision ANT wag Vaneguver's Marry Me bur for a font ep ayart xhibitio ; . t s ‘ er : the New Westminster Royals, 5 g named Conachie, who downed Reg tas the “~ were f ' NEW YORK (UP)—A close L a Ahiies . Lag yf ong others Pa ‘ ‘ | Stone and W. S. Ross, both of NUMEROUS GIFTS nent Paul mar Trail, Friday for a 40 record, sparkling ber ipned Closest to MeConachie was outside with Alberni havin contender the Trail rink skipped, by Signor in nae veormest CaMadian Club siinaia' se: ai saint Gt EE | ht thtses aes oases RE Tae ae hes Tat Econ ber etree ore) O° RGM, we we bansd ug some accu » j split 1O-re 7 n ove Dorohoy’s ; through me rate ji 1f-rot T BASKETBALL sor § nging fro p- tha ‘ tle e out of the unbeaten ranks In covered As result both a rom hooking attack teams were hitt on 1 rounds ied for two of ‘ < > of boxers 1 the part the fourth draw by Nanaimo's 4 shot , : » Secor Fri AT VICTORIA HIGH SCROOL G Until late inthe ir Than Gets: re in : t diso quare ite pn : f 40 ut 4 ‘ e Bane corr mer rm rized ment ¢ n tit F George Lunn Hl ' rt { VL : te r ch frorr : r Lunn won both his games there was never more t Hands xeveral times before the!hurats. ‘war Sane { favored by two officials. Re 2 : Montr sriadlen. AYR anaes B ‘ “Fri n Prizes niedlcneed tislagg Mah pear adhine: ! ‘ee Beat teh AN | 1 é r i : yo tw Hicials. Re m han H “ pall! i ; of learnt his section, He counted twice ey é eae Re eis : 4 ere I ‘ Sanuns f ai . ’ yin the presen aa t Wiark In an extra end In the third ; y . i wk } ’ r r ; C . « ‘ ; Y yuety t , ' t at-ceremonie P r draw to get past Kimbertey's Pere ? ! Siig Ky I st Kh leleate P r vis A . . Ci f ‘ s : 1s d } ‘ nds ? A. R. Caldwell, 10-8, and then \ \ 1 3 rt TELEVISION TONIGHT / edged out GH, 109 In Section “BR Vancouver's B. Cartmell and Nelson's M. B. Kyalia were out In front eer t a Y : g t WV 2 with 40 rds. W. Hobbs of hor r ; mayo Mec a 4 4 Pour , Kelowna was close behind with St while Ollie Panter's Dunean rink dropped three in a row after a firstdraw win Se oad Agile Alibis Proving Faster than Landy’s Legs Says Fearless Fraley _ | i'sucticsmmiwc third-quarter assat € OSCAR FRALEY broke a 44 44 deadlock by_cloS/man named John Landy st 7 sess bhai ing out th eal five UN: looking for the four-minute mile hasilivve on answered points. Kins twice foday and it beg aS capiea davzling 4.02. They pre a great 4 : : at he would be t ' If t ole mili i nat . { ‘ my id % PEDEN GUEST CELEBRITY , th she wind behii afte: Yo Gr. that onitacte: faur ‘ : aera. unent 4 ; : alts roe Senior “A” Men's V.1 P ’ Championship TORONTO (CP t “« fore a paller , j minute mi clr t vind { : Fe " ot r was si edhe. mur t something ys se ; A e one I r Alberni Athletics vs. Teden or cvelist of ryeay > ot es i partie it nae. : Me hel ‘ \ } \ y : : ‘ : of Canada’s most pop r : t r m, 1 t that 1 haviye ¥ ' battered I , Victoria Kins Jetes of all time, will be t rove r te ‘ ‘ a, { A t \ ° a “ie " oa , ‘ table p at the “celét mes 40 SOrt ree tr . Z cond: hat . ha te : —h nee : " - Tonight, Victoria High dinner the Ontario spor t ] nt tort the track ant 56 ‘ have . 9 That . She 4 Sehool, at & o'Clock sportscasters- here \ ' ; : me —s i : ‘ neh hae aren : € hn, you don’t ne £ (onde writers February 18 iked fanatios were Shore Milder Player ” Alter Bailey Incident BY WALTER GRAY eve Tnter-City Match Features Today's Rugby Schedule THKER PLAYERS DIED hight Teams To Seek High Scho Baily Colonist Victoria ol Basketball Honors B.C., Sat., Feb. 13, 1954 TOTES STRONG THREAT mea seven came Pip Champions rarance «Ty Defend le GAME AT BOSTON TICKET SALES OPEN th be ia { Br ig eir Golf--- Here’s How BY SAM SNEAD mone Ritchie how TOO MANY HEADACHES pa RCA VICTOR TELEVISION AT itr er Airc Speed Tropt Tt = STULL LULL RELL Men! Remember Your VALENTIN gatnre LINTON there PLL a he TUUUEELEEEOEOURCDEREERCOEOEEAERAG DORE EERORCRCOOEANORERGHOOOED In gleaming walnut *969”° EASY TERMS AVAILABLE IS 2.50 4.50 6.00 GLOVES A tine etme Titles Sunday °° LAST WEEK tee Se le «: se MEN’S and BOYS’ SHOES y $795 $Q50 $125 Various Styles in Grain and Calf Leathers A SMALI DEPOSIT WILT, HOLD YOUR CHOICE SEE OUR GOVERNMENT STREET WINDOW There's a Shoe “K” BOOT SHO Fort at Government to Fit You! Phone E 6215 RUGGED, HEAVY-DUTY ORL =A HORSEPOWER “© MOTOR "°<_—= POWERFUL LEVER-ACTION aa STEEL POST = —— A DRILL | Ug PRESS USE IT FOR ROUTING, GRINDING, DRILLING ~] STEEL SAW TABLE WITH 90 SQ. IN. TOP j aa pwctuveo| |g NO INTEREST! NO CARRYING CHARGES! AT SHORES, THE STORE WHERE THERE IS NEVER A CHARGE PO eT —_— DRILL PRESS _ INSTANT | TRIGGER SWITCH RELEASE ajncons ean couct\ ~ SS DME WORKSHOT HOME WORKSHOP POWERED WITH 1/4 H.P. MOTOR NO GREATER VALUE .., NO BETTER HOME POWER WORK. SHOP EVER OFFERED! It's the POWER TOOL OF 1.00] USES! a DURING THIS GREAT SALE/ IDEAL FOR CARPENTERS, MECHANICS, FACTORIES, _-@ AND WOME OWNERS! "BLADE RAISES AND LOWERS (> crosscuT Vy 1) 8. RP BLApt > n 4 MAIL THIS COUPON -JopAy/ “3.99 aiso fine r tron of MITT, ILSOn WeJ W ML TE 207 W. HASTINGS ST. VANCOUVER 3, B.C, \ Fc j ' / ove * } S ove caabd Se Titi ad | d H ee To SHORES MAIL ORDER LTD 3 % 207 W. Hastings St. rien. ‘ : 6 Vancouver 3, B.C. i therges conect. & TT ¢ D Open am account Add te my account : _¥ sunen me pagent and : ; 2) rot Oo): wena) GF ye FY st TRINT NAME IN BLOCK LETTERS Racing Results and Overnights Fair Grounds » OVERNIGHT ENTRIES CAME TREVOR © THOMAS mITCONIRL ANDED LALGHS LEO GORCEY AND THE BOWERY BOYS In “MASTER MINDS” TODAY movie club Saturday, 10 a.m. Doors 9.30 aum PLAZA: simraoaey Prizes from Hud Company, plus and Trophies ENDS Chapter 5 “LOST PLANET" t CARTOONS PETER PAN IN LAPLAND FIRST B.C. SHOWING! ROYAL New Zealand 2.36, 5.28, 8.20 ALSO =———- Diltension Glories Color by the g e Producers of Sass a ‘A Queen Is Crowned" Out oF THES WONDER AND PLUNDER OF A MATIONS wost DANGEROUS we present “ROYAL NEW ZEALAND JOURNEY” 3-DIMENSION JULIA ADAMS sn AV HEFLIN-ADAMS “WINGS OF THE HAWK" A UNIVERSAL INTERNATIONAL PICTURE = SHORE DOLIMT sae ereerne age LAME | Ui Racing Selections | 0 Baily Colonist B.C. Rugger Star Finds Vietoriny-BC.Sat. Feh 13.1954 * Game Harder in England Santa Anita OVERNIGHT ENTRIES ACE ‘ Kansas Coach 3 Turns Down Sco Eskimo Offer 1ANHATTAN, kK ACE USED CAR? oe t S GEM THEATRE |»: © SIDNEY Teday, M m. and I at “MONTANA BELLE” In COLOR JANE RUSSELL ~- GEOBGE RRENT IN COLOR WALT DISNSEY'S “WATER BIRDS” KNOTTY | re Phone SATURDAY, FER. 1% PINE@ | We Serve Lunches and Dinners from 12 Noon to 10 p.m. 0-10-00 SUNDAY, PEB. 1 Specialties Roast Duckling, Chicken and Steaks g DANCE ENDS TODAY! “The Model and the Marriage Broker” A Hilarious JEAN CRAIN SCOT BRADY On Stace!—Ends Tonight! “The Happy Time” Starring BARRY SMITH Tickets frem $1 at theatre the FUN! ig ceit \ Getting there is half SAD? tha FUN of (loing. at “THRIFT-SEASON” Rates! ia Continent, vour days aboard Cunard’s world-famed This season is “ Thrift-Season™... a0 whe not naw experience the jos of going Cunard? W hetheryou go to Britainorthe luxury liners will be days of absolute pleasure... filled with the laughter, music, superb food, gracious comfort and enchanted relaxation that have made SUPPER CLUB i and Bin PIPER LAURIE ROCK HUDSON IN ‘The Golden Biade’ TN TECHNICOLOR Wall Disney's Meal Life Adventure “BEAR COUNTRY" NEWS and CARTOON si OCS EVERY SAT. NITE BY POPULAR REQUEST REAPPEARANCE OF REG WOOD AND HIS NEW BAND PLENTY OF FARKING AREA HILLSIDE AND QUADRA STARTS MONDAY HRADLINE USA Pios “LLOPEMENT RY ARCH MackKhNZIE TRIAL WITH IRist @ ENDS TODAY! Vt ha JANE Wyman =} SHIRIING HAYDEN own Fi mB R's PULLER PRICE worl} Big i oribi Vor MOKE INPRAC TIO ‘ Ti) Sclovted Shorts GLENN GLORIA RD IMAM BANOO THE BIG HEAT CAPITOL NEWS COLWOOD P-TA ANNUAL VALENTINE DANCE SATURDAY, FEB. 13 CARTOON DOMINION DRAMA FESTIVAL REGIONAL FINALS St, Luke's Players Present ‘HIGH GROUND’ EN DS TODAY JACK PALANCE KILLER OF “SHANE” JOAN FONTAINE CORINNE CALVET ark MAHGARED LOOKIN EVERY FRIDAY, ORSON WELLES SATURDAY “TRENT'S LAST LEGION HALL ARENA WAY nd Yeatnre WILDING Smooth © Ted Spencers Orchastra GERRY ARMOUR, ENDS TODAY! Vocalist AS, om, ote ne | ERIS ater JORDAN FEVE Sime UNIT-IZED TV ty In THE BEST TV SEE IT NOW AT “THE HOUSE OF TELEVISION" 1964 Oak Bay Avenue OPEN TILL 10 PM Phone B 0221 ON STAGE Feb VICTORIA THEATRE GUILD PRESENTS “Pink String and Sealing Wax" IS to 20... 815 pm ENDS “FATHER MAKES GOOD" Marrine RAYMOND WALLAURN and MARY STUART and 1000 pm GATES OPEN TONIGHT “ALLEGHENY UPRISING” 5 JOHN WAYNE. CLAIRE TREVOR, BRIAN PONTLIVY AC RAL om As PLUS THREE CARTOONS B-753! ihe name "CUNANT fe eon iit trea Prater. Next Sailings te Britain and the Continent From Molter Feb. 71; Mer. 7, 14,19, 28) Ape tt Fram Mew York : Feb. 17, 19. 26: Mor. 5,12, 13,19 See Your Loco! Travel Agent — Ne One Con Serve You Better Cunard Line Heed Office: 230 Hospital Street, Montreal Hon. Ralph Campney SUNDAY CUVI -- 12.45 p.m. Starts MONDAY Xe) “:\ i af) popPInG ALL MG-Ay 3 iF Gongs: Spectacle, USICALS [ Romant ic Thrills in h FLORIDAS LOVERS PARADISE si | TecHMIcoLoR — \’s LOVE FILMED IN FAMEO CYPRESS GaROtNS! ” ESTHER «. WILLIAMS VAN JOHNSON “10 sas AN Mam PiCr toot ni * ov MONDAY THE ,HAMMER, STARTS FOREVER! Martin Luther was scarcely noticed, that October morning in 1517, as he nailed his 95 Theses to the church door. But his words roared across the face of the earth, to break the shackles } } sl Dimas UIE COMS nce “I will tell you what I think. I have the right to believe freely, to be a slave to no man’s authority. “If this be heresy, so be it, It is still the truth. To go against con- science is neither right,qnor safe. 1 CANNOT...1I WILL NOT ...RECANT! HERE I STAND...” jo Louis de Rachemont presents NMMAartin uther A Magnificent Motion Picture for our Time! with MLALL MacGIMPHS ae MARTIN LUTHER > Directed bby HRVING PICHEL » Pre decnd bry LOTHAR WOLFF Serpengley ry ALLAN SLOANE ond LOTHAR WOLPF EMPIRE ov2vI2- Good Advertising Attracts Customers : In Police Court Yesterday Baily Colonist Victoria, B.C., Sat, Feb. 13, 1954 gy hen A SHERLOCK HOLMES STORY vay es . We A Stand ir Bohemia Accused Pleads Guilty to Theft Charges ail bbe tone sn al if the an agent it wou pre Alan Bi jus Police Chase k dangerous driving °° nays tor his se Dud Explosive & Golf Orcmes ON ils ata Bl i et ; | a ‘ ' set aa . nA i ee of ° saeatie , : ALLOWE D ro DRIVE f ; ay Rock \ount gistr M treet, part SPECIAL OLD GUILTY PLEA “ALG , sts c ' és CANADIAN RYE a ees rane a ied permisso @ hase of a flo - WHISKY Club Elects New Officers spe Speaks fs : Ande Mr ie of : i S| {OP At te Banguer- ‘of t _ DISMISSAL WON SATURDAY AT THE... 7 THE END BELLE GOLDEN ARROW - ROYAL SCOT: © iture ‘hich he might care to pas vl Tore steer k Holmes tas Ship rene orton wee dler | ( alendar 1) FOR YOUR V4 VICTORIA ‘ PROTECTION | 7 BUY FROM MEMBERS of the ‘CANADIAN ASSOCIATION OF NURSERYMEN va Heod Office a COWICHAN BAY G) 219 queen 1, orrawa A “THRIFT TOUR TICKETS” Book ARRIVAL & “Plant More m 54)" G :) at real savings. 1000 miles Pleatoat TRAVEL IN BRITAIN MEANS BRITISH RAILWAYS! Fast. frequent and comfortable { VaaIAly HSIN® SRECCEE! WE GUARANTEE THE LARGEST SELECTION OF CHESTERFIELD AND BED-CHESTER- FIELD SUITES AT THE LOWEST PRICES IN VICTORIA! FLYING SCOTSMAN - DEVON “Mr, Sherlock Holmes ‘ Mend 4, believe?” CROFTON VSR A o_o” Ras Tam Mr, Holmes,” an alak < he Victoria Member ree hen caer oning Bo: al house vA NSNAIMO LAYRITZ and rather startled gaze “ Lraiber slates gases. P Hisenal RF TSAR? satotee Ane indeed? oy mises ott Purchaser pour Airis” — | NURSERIES LTD. call. She left: this) rorning mina Gath olde 5| | Pacific x - STORE: 772 FORT ST. BRITISH ith her hushand by the 515° Gorges Road West, has been D ber | NURSERY: WILKINSON ROAD 3 , RAILWAYS with ; train from Charing Cross for), it t "ar arold, Port) "2 ——_g ss : Me pei ead —— fe, FURNITURE Co. the Continent.” berni sh it was plete : “What!” Holmes exclaimed). sat’ Aight Pilea was Ot bony PORT TAHSIS YOR WEEK-END SPECIALS — ee hen ave r jumber Conducted day tour — 860 YATES ST. with chargin and surprise. i be $25,000 F sading lumbe “Do you mean that she has Th es eones = n og x iow wne 4 \ only $3 erature and informati rane write to elanc “ ub Never'to return Nahe ¢ oo gia AY Yc ey ol, F “And the yapers” asked ‘ All is » Winners Listed IRISH MAIL ~ $109 JO N3IINO ADMIRAL ee CONSOLE ten en Thon me] ONLY § 309° 5 Warlike Sect On Ram mige ’ JAKAR | ; YOU GET...Hand-Rubbed Wood Cabinet ...Cascode Chassis . Arco-Matic Picture Tube ALL FOR THE PRICE OF A TABLE MODEL ROUND 5 i EAK ACT NOW! PHONE £5821 FOR MORE INFORMATION Ask How You Can Own Admiral TV With eS ee CIE NO DOWN PAYMENT RECLU Red and Biue SEE IT TILL “™ 10 0’CLOCK TONIGHT FOR Stomach Sufferers! Do you suffer stomach distrpes C) TELEVISION STUDIOS—1011 BLANSHARD ST. VICTORIA’S ONLY EXCLUSIVE TV DEALER symptoms aes Satie ~-—— brewed. Seth aay ng ae ELEVISION ABC TELEVISION ABC TELEVISION ABC TELEVISION ST ‘JV NOSIN313L JGV NOISIAITZL 99 Vi NOISIAITIL 99 NOISIAITSL OAY 12 = Baily Colonist Victoria, B.C., Sat., Feb. 13, 1954 Business Flourishes in Recent Years Love Loses Ground in Valentines As Cards Provide for Every Whim NOT SIMPLE CHORE HUGE MARKET FONDEST TEEMS EVERY TYPE Singer, Pianist Charm Audience Talks Scheduled The lieder of Schabert, "pre: by Victoria Symphony con “Basi vom enim" On Flood Damage | | Denye Palmer Campaign Starts Monday (= For Liquor Plebiscite |: souseran A 1 of the peor nized to decide for ther Army at oa __iiitarrmaching swe” NERWOUS STOMACH? REACH FOR A RENNIE LIGHT UP i TONIGHT e HISTORIC ¥ 1 House 5 Mm CONSOLIDATED — Union Asks Moratorium In Unemployment Crisis | 1/> Usual Price! Feature! Station-Waggon Coats of Men’s Topcoats Men’s and Women’s Shoes 7 FORT STREET } e of the Royal Rn | Order Now for Spring and Easter Wear! Men’s Made-to-Measure Suits New New Colours! New Weay .. Gifts are Everywhere at EATON'S For the Dainty Nyl Blouse s Young Miss J tton 179. 2.98 198, 3.98 “VIYELLA" SKIRTS Give Comet Luggage to 5 Invourite Valentine 23.50 22.50 + Very Feminine! Very Welcome! Lovely Pearl Necklets “Phantom” Nylons Are Here In New Spring Colours! STORE HOURS: 9 a.m. to 5 p-m. Wednesdey, 9 o.m. to 1 p.m. — Phone B7141 “T. EATON CANADA Cores | LOCAL NEWS | Ghe Baily Colonist. CLASSIFIED ESTABLISHED 1858 NO. 54—NINETY-SIXNTH YEAR VICTORIA, BRITISH COLUMBIA, SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 13, 1954 SECOND NEWS SECTION erowers Hope for Five-Gent Reduction Young Scots Dance Highland Fling Pavment for Road > 1° A hl { ae c Plea for Cigarette Tax Cut : age BB Seon from Timber Approved by Local Retailers 3 : ( ollege Queen Knr ages Chief a orecast bn | Slur in Patiar “Wire Rain soos rows Hg Island cnt Batiste | s damp feelings follow more than threequarters of that fel J 1 that fell in 24 OTHER BENEITS egs, hands, fingers—and even expre land Fling should be performed ee irene from left, Elaine Dickinson shot yesterday at the Scottish Strugnell, and Gregor Und ree DEM atte Crystal Gar They were competing as novices unde nstrating how : = ect : Kilimal Setup Feudal’, {rc artin Cn took a = * Mine- Mill Union C harges “icons oe On Bulbs won Unig of ne Hi and “srpany oh th we the gue tno acca cold re eomined win « C/RCOMECEN k to he white ‘ini development CPR and Union Steamships do group of trade lion officia Nav y | anes Volunteer Transcribers Kept Busy had free access at. “aes - 2 * » Arrive Brig. F. N. Cabeldu, local Belgian consu see Canadian Blind Turn to Victoria ie Bee hee te For Tests seat For Books, Documents in Braille (000 2%.00) #60 marco | Se ool Costs Three Mills | Serious iCha rge Dropped Cheaper Homes Proposed BY ROY PARRETT Pre-Fab Housing Plan Watched with Interest Within | Ne Nt Week Two Youbou C camps To Resume Work FOLR DAY WEEK 14 Batlu Colontst, victorie, 6.¢ Seturdey, Februery 13, 1954 | Today’s Pattern 10-20 WEEK'S SEWING BUY Jiffy every is pattern piece at > main tops thing problems! cuffs a length § v into wrist Wear and three-quarter a suit it with with a skirt as all your spring ane summer dresses Choose a wool : 9295 spring so Patter 14, 16 yards sizes 10 18 if takes Minch fabric » pattern gives te, Ulustrated 20, Size 2 omp Chart shows you every step end thirty-five cents In coins (stamps cannot be accepted) for this pattern to the Marian Martin Pattern Department, The Daily Colonist, 60 Front Street West, Toronto, Ont. Print plainly size, name, address, style number. The pattern will be mailed from Toronto and should reach you in two weeks or less. Today’s Pattern q SS bay Laura 