South Sudan gained its self-rule on July 9, 2011 when it split off from Sudan, making it the newest country in the world. The nation was later admitted into the United Nations on July 13, 2011. The capital city of South Sudan is Juba. The city of Juba is located 87 miles south of Bor on the banks of the Mountain Nile (Bahr Al-Jabal). The city is the capital of South Sudan as well as the state of Jubek.

The city of Juba is also a major commercial center for agricultural commodities from the neighboring regions. Major highways from Kenya, the Democratic Republic of Congo, and Uganda intersect in the city making it the nation’s chief transportation hub. The status as a transport and commercial center is further enhanced by the river port which is the southern terminus for river traffic in the country.

History Of South Sudan

Juba was founded in the 1920’s when Anglo-Egyptian officials directed the relocation of residents of a small Bari Village that was home to the Nugent Intermediate School. The new town was named Juba and was to serve as the administrative seat of the Mongalla. The office of the Governor of Mongalla was officially moved to the town in 1930.Some of the city’s downtown architecture is a testament to deep historical inheritance from Greek merchants who began settling in the city in the 1920’s while supplying the British Army. Some of the buildings with Greek architectural ties include the Notos Lounge, Ivory Bank, and the Paradise Hotel. The city is renowned for hosting the Juba Conference in 1947 which led to the unification of the northern and Southern parts of Sudan.

Juba As The Capital Of South Sudan

Before the independence of unified Sudan in 1956 signs of unrest were beginning to manifest. A mutiny of soldiers in the south in1955 soon resulted in the country’s First Civil war that ended in 1972 leading to the formation of an Autonomous Region in the South. A Second Civil War ended after the “Comprehensive Peace Agreement” was signed. The agreement was signed in 2005 and resulted in the formation of the South-Sudanese Government. South Sudan gained independence in July 2011 after a referendum with 98.83% in favor of the separation and Juba became the Capital.

Demographics Of South Sudan

The city is home to an estimated 492,970 people which is more than eight times the population of the city in 1973 which stood at 56,740. The population of the city currently has a growth rate of 4.23% which is encouraged by the economic boom as a result of oil money from the resource-rich country and merchants from the neighboring East African nations.

Long-term Administrative Status

The South Sudanese government currently has a proposal to move the administrative capital to Ramciel. The proposal was initially tabled after the choice of Juba as the administrative Capital of the county came under severe criticism from some officials within the government as well as other interested parties. Ramicel was chosen partly due to its geographical centrality in the Country.