Kyle Korver News

Kyle Korver Scores 23 Points Off Bench

Milwaukee Bucks guard Kyle Korver provided 23 points, four rebounds, four assists, one block, and one steal across 24 minutes in the 109-95 loss to the Nuggets on Monday. The journeyman also went 5-for-11 from downtown. The veteran provided a great stat line with Eric Bledsoe (knee) and Giannis Antetokounmpo (knee) injured and guys like Khris Middleton and Brook Lopez simply not entering the game likely due to a coaching decision. The 38-year-old averages 6.4 points per game this season and Monday was the first time he scored in double digits since Jan. 20. Once the team is back at full strength, Korver will revert back to a smaller role. He doesn't merit fantasy consideration as a result.

Mar 10

Kyle Korver Won’t Travel With Team For Road Trip

Milwaukee Bucks shooting guard/small forward Kyle Korver (back) will miss at least the next three games as head coach Mike Budenholzer confirmed Saturday that the veteran would not join the team for the upcoming road trip. Korvers absence will stretch to at least five consecutive games, paving the way for Donte Divincenzo and Pat Connaughton to continue seeing an increased role off the bench. Aside from holding value in category formats due to his three-point marksmanship, Korver holds little season-long fantasy intrigue, with his next chance to return to action coming next Friday against Oklahoma City.

Feb 22

Kyle Korver To Miss Wednesday’s Contest

Milwaukee Bucks shooting guard/small forward Kyle Korver has been ruled out for Wednesdays game versus the Indiana Pacers due to back soreness. Korver joins Giannis Antetokounmpo (personal) and George Hill (hamstring) on the inactive list, with Donte Divincenzo and Pat Connaughton likely to take on a larger role with the second unit with Korver out of the mix. Aside from those owners desperate for made three-pointers in category leagues, Korver offers little season-long intrigue. His next chance at taking the floor comes Feb. 20 against Detroit, with ample time to heal up before his next outing.

Feb 12

Kyle Korver Has A Perfect Shooting Performance

On Monday afternoon, Milwaukee Bucks guard Kyle Korver had a perfect shooting performance against the Chicago Bulls. The 38-year-old made all five of his shots, including two deep balls, and it resulted in his best game in almost a month with 12 points, four rebounds, two assists and one steal. Korver has not averaged over 19 minutes per game in any month this season, but on Monday he was able to reach double figures in back-to-back games for the first time this season. Unfortunately, his lack of overall contribution makes Korver waiver wire fodder for any team unless they are in desperate need of three-pointers in a 16-team league or deeper.

Jan 21

Kyle Korver Ruled Out For Saturday’s Game

Milwaukee Bucks shooting guard Kyle Korver will be unavailable for Saturdays contest versus the Portland Trail Blazers due to back soreness. Korvers fantasy value has been intrinsically tied to the three-point shot this season, with 138 of his 170 field-goal attempts having come from behind the arc. At just 16.4 minutes per game -- which would be his lowest since his rookie year -- Korvers absence shouldnt present a significant difficulty for the Bucks to overcome in terms of their delegation of minutes. His next chance of suiting up comes Tuesday against the Knicks.

Jan 11

Kyle Korver Drills Season-High Five Triples In Defeat

Milwaukee Bucks shooting guard Kyle Korver caught fire from behind the arc during Mondays loss to the Dallas Mavericks, knocking down a season-high five threes during a 17-point evening. Of the 114 shots that Korver has taken this season, 96 have come from long range, which is a fair indicator of how three-point dependent of a fantasy option that Korver remains. But the 25 minutes that he saw off the bench Monday also set a season high, and with Eric Bledsoe out of the rotation due to injury for the time being, Korver presents himself as a streamable option for those owners in need of three-point assistance in the short term.

Dec 17

Kyle Korver, Raul Neto Out on Tuesday

Utah Jazz guards Kyle Korver (knee) and Raul Neto (ankle) have been ruled out for Tuesday's game against the Denver Nuggets. Ricky Rubio (quad) is sidelined as well, so Donovan Mitchell, Grayson Allen, and Royce O'Neale will pick up extra playing time. Mitchell is going to be the only guard here worth using in fantasy formats on Tuesday.

Apr 9

Kyle Korver Ruled Out on Monday

Utah Jazz guard/forward Kyle Korver (knee) has been ruled out for Monday's game against the Charlotte Hornets. That means Thabo Sefolosha and Royce O'Neale will split up Korver's minutes. O'Neale has been difficult to trust at times, but if given the start he's worth looking at for DFS contests on Monday.

Apr 1

Kyle Korver Drops In Five Triples Off The Bench

Utah Jazz shooting guard Kyle Korver went for 19 points in Monday's 100-94 victory against the Detroit Pistons, hitting 5-for-11 from long distance while adding two rebounds with an assist in 32 minutes off the bench. Korver was doing what he does best for fantasy owners, and that is help in the three-point category. The 15-year-veteran sharpshooter has at least two triples in four straight outings, averaging 3.5 treys during the span, and he has splashed in at least one three-point in 11 straight outings since being blanked Dec. 22 against Oklahoma City.

Jan 15