DETROIT -- With leading scorer Kevin Love sidelined by a foot injury, the Cleveland Cavaliers turned to veteran shooter Kyle Korver for offense in the fourth quarter Thursday. But it was Detroit's frontcourt tandem of Andre Drummond and Blake Griffin that took control as the Pistons held on for a 110-103 victory against the winless Cavs at Little Caesars Arena.

Cleveland cut a 12-point Pistons fourth-quarter lead to six with a minute left behind a four-point play by Korver, who was fouled by Detroit's Reggie Bullock as he drained a 3-pointer.

But with 30 seconds remaining and the Cavaliers trailing 108-101, rookie Collin Sexton battled three Pistons players to the floor chasing a loose ball in front of the Detroit bench. Cavaliers coach Tyronn Lue crossed the midcourt line to plead his case with officials, who ruled a jump ball between Sexton and Langston Galloway and assessed a technical foul to Lue for being out of the coaches box.

"They'd never see it," Lue said of the technical afterward. "(The officials) never look for the coach on the other end of the floor when guys are scrambling, tangled up. They never look. I don't know what you're supposed to do."

Free throws by Reggie Jackson and Galloway put the Pistons up by nine before Sexton finished the scoring with a jumper.

The Cavaliers dropped to 0-5 to start a season for the first time since 2003, LeBron James' rookie campaign. Detroit stayed unbeaten at 4-0, keeping pace with Milwaukee (4-0) atop the Central Division standings.

Detroit improved its record to 125-90 all-time against Cleveland, including a 75-33 mark at home.

Six Cavaliers scored in double figures, including Jordan Clarkson's 18 points and George Hill who had 15. It marked the fifth consecutive double-figure scoring game of the season for Clarkson, who has led the Cavs in points three times.

Korver led the way for Cleveland with 21 on 4-for-7 shooting from behind the arc, but Detroit had an answer for every Cavs scoring run in the second half. Griffin and Drummond each tallied 26 points to lead all scorers. Drummond added 22 rebounds and Griffin, who was coming off a career-high 50-point effort earlier in the week against Philadelphia, added 10 boards.

Drummond's second 20/20 game of the season is the 22nd of his career, the most of any player since 2012 when he entered the league. His 71 rebounds through four games is the second-highest total ever for a Pistons player.

Griffin posted his third straight double-double and became the first Pistons player to score more than 25 points and grab at least eight rebounds in the first four games of the season.

Despite Griffin's scoring outburst, Lue said he thought the Cavaliers did a good job of trying to take the NBA's leading scorer out of the game.

"He made some threes that you can live or die with," Lue said of Griffin. "But coming off 50 points last game and 30 shot attempts, tonight he only had 13 (attempts). We'll continue to keep getting better, but I like our fight."

The Cavaliers struggled again in the third period as Drummond and Jackson combined to score 15 straight points. The Cavaliers cut Detroit's lead to six at 61-55 on a Tristan Thompson layup, but Drummond and Co. led by as many as 16 in the quarter and held a 12-point edge at the start of the fourth.

Hill scored six points early on drives to the basket in the first six minutes of the game. Rodney Hood added 10 points on a variety of mid-range jump shots and a couple of bank shots on drives to the basket. Cavaliers guards clearly made an effort to be more aggressive in attacking the basket early, something that Lue emphasized prior to the game.

"I thought our fight was there and all our guys competed," Lue said. "The room for error is just so slim with us right now. Just the small things we've got to continue to get better at. It's going to come with time. Especially with young guys understanding what we're trying to do. For the most part, I was really pleased with our fight."

Get started

Veteran forward Channing Frye started in place of Love and scored five points in 21 minutes. It was Frye's first action of the season after being inactive for the team's first four games. Frye was 2-for-4 from the floor, including 1-for-2 from 3-point range.

Next

The Cavaliers return to Quicken Loans Arena on Saturday to host Indiana at 7:30 p.m. The Pacers (3-2) defeated San Antonio on Wednesday, 116-96.