May 24, 2021

Former Chairman Pakistan Atomic Energy Commission Dr Ansar Pervaiz says Pakistan’s nuclear program is for peaceful purposes and has played a major role in the socio-economic development of the country.

In an exclusive interview with Radio Pakistan’s News and Current Affairs Channel in Islamabad on Monday, he said Pakistan’s nuclear program has made significant contributions towards clean, reliable and cost-effective energy production, higher agricultural yield, better health care, advanced industrial research and higher education.

He said mastery over nuclear radiation has allowed humanity better diagnosis and cure for various critical diseases. Nuclear technology is also extensively used to develop insect and drought resistant crops and produce improved fruit and seed types.

Dr Ansar Pervaiz, who is also Chairman Board of Governors of the National Centre for Physics, said Pakistan is currently operating six nuclear reactors while the seventh one is nearing completion. He said once K3 starts energy production in near future, the total energy production from nuclear energy production will reach 3500 MW.

Former Chairman Pakistan Atomic Energy Commission said Pakistan’s nuclear program is internationally respected and Pakistan has thrice served as the Chair of the IAEA Board of Governors. We have a close and longstanding relationship with IAEA and we regularly cooperate in various aspects of our program. He also appreciated China for the close and longstanding civil nuclear cooperation under IAEA safeguards.

While comparing nuclear energy with other forms of power production, he described nuclear energy as environmentally safer and more reliable. He said higher initial expense of installing nuclear power reactors is compensated over time, due to lower energy production cost.

He said nuclear energy is more environment-friendly as compared to coal and other forms of fossil fuels used for energy production. He said that the availability of water and various other sources of energy vary with seasons, which is not the case with nuclear energy.

Dr Ansar Pervaiz said Pakistan’s nuclear programme is world class in terms of safety and security standards and this has been acknowledged by IAEA on several occasions. He said the entire nuclear infrastructure is designed according to the world’s best standards, in order to minimize any risk of nuclear accidents and radiation leakage. He said extensive and multi-layered security measures are also in place to ensure fool proof nuclear security.

Earlier, Dr Ansar Pervaiz gave a brief account of the history of Pakistan’s nuclear program and said capable leadership, recognition of talent, selection based on merit and selfless commitment represents its legacy and core values. Dr Ansar Pervaiz said our scientists and engineers undergo extensive training and detailed evaluation before they are entrusted with the sacred responsibility of running this program.

Dr Ansar Pervaiz did his Masters in Physics and Nuclear Technology from Pakistan and PhD in nuclear engineering and science from Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, USA. He served Pakistan Atomic Energy Commission in various capacities for more than four decades before retiring as its Chairman in 2015. He has also taught at Purdue University, USA and has been the Chairman of the Board of Governors of International Atomic Energy Agency. Currently, he is Advisor (Nuclear Power) to the National Command Authority and Chairman Board of Governors, National Centre for Physics.