Christina Milian is an American singer-songwriter, actress, dancer, and model born in Jersey City, New Jersey, to Cuban parents. At the age of 19 Milian signed a contract with Def Jam, which she then left to sign with Interscope. Milian is now signed to Young Money.

In 2001 Christina Milian released her self-titled debut album, which featured the singles “AM to PM” and “When You Look at Me.” “AM to PM” was a top 40 hit on the Billboard Hot 100 Singles chart and both peaked in the top 3 on the U.K. Singles chart.

In 2004, Milian released her second studio album, It's About Time, which provided her first major U.S. hit, “Dip It Low,” which charted within the top 5 of the Billboard Hot 100. “Whatever U Want” was released has the albums second single and both singles charted within the top 10 of the U.K. chart. The album reached No. 14 on the Billboard 200 Albums chart.

In 2006 Milian released her third studio album “So Amazin'.” The album produced the single “Say I,” which peaked in the top 30 of the Billboard Hot 100. On the Billboard 200 the album reached No. 11, her highest chart position to date.

A month after the release of “So Amazin',” Milian's representative confirmed that she had left Island Records due to creative differences.

Milian signed with Interscope Records in 2009. A single, the ballad “Us Against the World,” was released in October 2008. In 2012 Milian signed to Young Money through which she will release her fourth studio album.

Although Milian is best known for her singing career, she originally wanted to be an actress. Her first lead role was in the 2003 film "Love Don't Cost a Thing," and she subsequently had main roles in "Be Cool" and the horror film "Pulse." Milian had a minor role in "Ghosts of Girlfriends Past," and starred as the lead role in the straight-to-DVD film "Bring It On: Fight to the Finish." Milian has since been cast in the ABC Family Original Movie "Christmas Cupid," alongside Ashley Benson and Chad Michael Murray.

In September 2013, Milian was announced to be a contestant on the 17th season of "Dancing with the Stars." She is partnered with professional dancer Mark Ballas.

Christina stars in Season 3 of Hulu's original series "East Los High". The teen drama is Hulu's first and only series with an all- Latino Cast, and Christina stars in all 10 episodes. The series centers around romance, dance, and the struggle of a group of Latino teens living in East Los Angeles. Christina plays 'Liliana', who is a music producer at R&R Records.

Christina wrapped the first season of her E! Docu-Series CHRISTINA MILIAN TURNED UP this winter and the second season is set to premiere in Fall 2015.She will star in the FOX comedy series GRANDFATHERED, opposite John Stamos this Fall and will star this summer in the HULU series EAST LOS HIGH.

Christina Milian's clothing brand and online Boutique "We Are Pop Culture" is now a pop-up living on Melrose Ave in Los Angeles, CA. The brand which is a partnership with Christina is dedicated to providing the everyday woman with comfy-casual street-wear while still remaining trendy and edgy.