Singer Christina Milian knows how important it is for mothers to take time for themselves, and after three kids, she works hard to stay fit. Milian, 42, shared a video of herself wearing black leggings and a sports bra, walking on the treadmill with a big smile on her face. Milian has been working in the public eye as a performer since she was a teenager, and still has the ageless looks she had when launching her career over 20 years ago. Here's how the star stays fit and healthy.

1

Lots of Walking

Milian loves to walk as much as possible. "I like to work on fitness," she told BET in 2021. "I'm in Paris right now, and I just love to walk. I walk everywhere. When I'm walking by myself, I just have peace of mind and a lot of clarity. I can kind of work through anything that's happening in my life when I actually get to exercise. And then every now and then, I'll get my nails done. That is the moment I have peace."

2

Orangetheory and Dance

Milian loves dancing and group classes. "Lately I'm loving Orangetheory," she told Us Weekly. "It's a full-body [workout], different every time and I can go with friends. I love dancing merengue … to Latin music, of course."

3

Good Energy

Milian believes in spreading good energy and being kind to herself and others. "For me, everything I do as an actress, singer, entrepreneur, and mom, my main goal is making sure the energy I put into my work makes others feel good," she told Glamour. "I believe it's so important to feed your mind, body, and skin the good stuff. Life gets chaotic. Period. That's why you need to put time and energy into the things that make you happy and feel great—speak to yourself in the mirror with kindness, celebrate the real you."

4

Setting Small Goals

Milian has good advice for mothers trying to carve out time for exercise. "Set a goal. Just give yourself 30 minutes," she told The Bump. "It doesn't have to be an hour. I like to get away by going to a gym, but sometimes you don't have a choice. There have been times where I was like, "Okay, I can't get to the gym, it's cold and also, the kids are on me," so I've just flipped on YouTube and done old workout videos, like Tae Bo. I also love getting outside and walking with my daughter. We walked three miles the other day, just a mile and a half each way. You'll be surprised how fast you can get it done."

5

Positive Affirmations