Kofi Annan was born on April 8, 1938, in Ghana. As the grandchild and nephew of tribal chiefs, he was raised in an aristocrat family (“Kofi Annan Biography“). During his younger years, he attended an elite Methodist boarding school called Mfantsipim (“Kofi Annan Biography“). It was here that he learned the important idea that “suffering anywhere concerns everywhere” and this paved the trajectory for the rest of his life (“Kofi Annan Biography“). After high school, he pursued a number of degrees involved with international relations at different colleges including Kumasi College of Science and Technology, Macalester College (St. Paul, Minnesota), Graduate Institute of International Studies (Geneva, Switzerland), and the MIT Sloan School of Management (Cambridge, Massachusetts) (“Kofi Annan Biography“). During this time, he became fluent in various languages including English, French, the Kru languages, and other African languages (“Kofi Annan Biography“).

Annan’s early professional career began when he joined the UN in 1962 as a civil servant, specifically as a budget officer for the World Health Organization in Geneva (“Kofi Annan Biography“). Later on, he served nine years (1987-1996) as the assistant-secretary-general in various areas. These areas involved human resources management, budget and finance, and peacekeeping operations (“Kofi Annan – NobelPrize“). Additionally, he served as the under-secretary-general (1994-1995) with a brief five-month assignment as a representative of the secretary-general to Yugoslavia (“Kofi Annan Biography“).

Annan’s professional career is best known under the light of being the UN Secretary-General from 1997 to 2006. He was known for revitalizing the United Nations and creating an effective international system (“Biography – Kofi Annan Foundation”). He advocated heavily for human rights, the “Rule of law”, the Millennium Development Goals and Africa, and bringing the UN organization closer to the global society (“Biography – Kofi Annan Foundation”). Annan was also involved with many other activities. For example, he was a prominent figure in the creation of the Global Fund to fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, and counter-terrorism strategies (“Biography – Kofi Annan Foundation”). Additionally, he inaugurated the “Global Compact” initiative promoted corporate social responsibility in the international world (“Biography – Kofi Annan Foundation”).

There were also many achievements and assignments that Kofi Annan accomplished during his stint as the UN Secretary-General. In 1998, he helped Nigeria transition from military rule to civilian rule (“Kofi Annan – NobelPrize“). Additionally, he prevented a violent eruption by resolving the deadlock between Iraq and the Security Council in regard to weapons inspections. Later on, in 1999, Annan navigated the process of Timor-Leste gaining independence from Indonesia. Following that year in 2000, Annan recognized Israel’s withdrawal from Lebanon (“Kofi Annan – NobelPrize“). Finally, he peacefully interceded between Cameroon and Nigeria regarding the Bakassi peninsula (“Biography – Kofi Annan Foundation”).

Following his time with the UN, Kofi Annan created the Kofi Annan Foundation in the efforts to promote lasting peace and inclusive governance amongst the global community (“Biography – Kofi Annan Foundation”). The foundation was still active in the international community as it mediated a peaceful resolution in Kenya in the midst of post-election violence of 2008 (“Biography – Kofi Annan Foundation”). Later on in 2012, he was sent to settle the dispute in Syria as a UN-Arab League Joint Special Envoy in hopes of ending the violence, violations of human rights, and initiating inclusive political dialogue (“Biography – Kofi Annan Foundation”; “Kofi Annan resigns as UN-Arab League Joint Special Envoy for Syrian crisis“). Finally, Annan created AGRA in hopes of addressing issues on his own continent. The goal of AGRA is to “promote rapid, sustainable agricultural growth based on smallholder farmers” by investing in “soil regeneration and health, improved seeds, access to markets, and building capacity and investment throughout the agricultural value-chain” (“Biography – Kofi Annan Foundation“).

Through his work with the United Nations and Kofi Annan Foundation, Annan has established himself as a champion of peace, unity, and human rights. He has consistently fought for the betterment of not just his country but also that of the global community. Personally, I came to be interested in Kofi Annan because of his role in this society. I have always admired those who can navigate conflict and tension and bring out peace in the midst of it. It takes courage, intellect, relational competency, and a deep understanding of a nation’s narrative in order to effectively construct solutions that bridge and unite a global community.

Unfortunately, on August 18, 2019, Annan unexpectedly passed away at 80 years old due to a sudden illness. He ultimately left a legacy of social justice, sustainable reform, and initiatives for the welfare of humanity. If anyone is interested more about Kofi Annan’s vision and the world he was working to create, the following video has been attached:

Featured Image: Image courtesy of BBC

Works Cited

“Biography.” Kofi Annan Foundation, 30 Aug. 2018.

“Kofi Annan.” Biography.com, A&E Networks Television, 25 July 2019.

“Kofi Annan Resigns as UN-Arab League Joint Special Envoy for Syrian Crisis | UN News.” United Nations, United Nations.