- - - - - - - - - - -

Kofi Annan was born in the Gold Coast(now Ghana) on 8 April 1938.

His birth name was Kofi Atta Annan. The name'Kofi' literally means “a boy born on a Friday.

He had a twin sister, Eufa, who died in 1991.

Kofi Atta Annan was a Ghanaian diplomat who served as the seventh Secretary-General of the United Nations, from January 1997 to December 2006.

Annan was fluent in English, French, Akan, and some Kru languagesas well as other African languages.

Annan died on the morning of 18 August 2018 in Bern, Switzerland, at the age of 80.

Education

Annan attended the Mfantsipim School in Cape Coast from 1954 to 1957.

In 1957, the year Annan graduated from Mfantsipim, the Gold Coast gained independence from the UK and began using the name "Ghana".

After he graduated from Mfantsipim, Annan attended Kumasi College of Science and Technology, a local school.

He then received a Ford Foundation grant, which allowed him to complete his education at Macalester Collegein 1961.

He attended the Graduate Institute of International and Development Studies in Geneva, Switzerland, where he completed his DEA degree.

He attended the Massachusetts Institute of Technologywhere he earned his Master of Science degree.

Career

In 1962, Kofi Annan started working as a budget officer for the World Health Organization, an agency of the United Nations(UN).

From 1974 to 1976, he worked as a manager of the state-owned Ghana Tourist Development Company in Accra.

In 1980 he became the head of personnel for the office of the UN High Commission for Refugees(UNHCR) in Geneva.

In 1983 he became the director of administrative management services of the UN Secretariatin New York.

In 1987, Annan was appointed as an Assistant Secretary-Generalfor Human Resources Management and Security Coordinator for the UN system.

In 1990, he became Assistant Secretary-General for Program Planning, Budget and Finance, and Control.

When Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghaliestablished the Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) in 1992, Annan was appointed to the new department as Deputy to then Under-Secretary-General Marrack Goulding.

He was appointed a Special Representative of the Secretary-General to the former Yugoslavia, serving from November 1995 to March 1996.

Secretary-General of the United Nations FIRST TERM

The UN Security Council recommended Annan on 13 December 1996.

He started his first term as Secretary-General on 1 January 1997.

Soon after taking office in 1997, Annan released two reports on management reform.

Management and Organisational Measures (A/51/829)

Renewing the United Nations: A Programme for Reform (A/51/950)

SECOND TERM

The Security Council recommended Annan for a second term on 27 June 2001, and the General Assembly approved his reappointment on 29 June 2001.

ACHIEVEMENTS Millennium Development Goals

At the Millennium Summit in September 2000, national leaders adopted the Millennium Declaration, which was subsequently implemented by the United Nations Secretariat as the Millennium Development Goals in 2001.

United Nations Information Technology Service (UNITeS)

Annan suggested the establishment of a United Nations Information Technology Service (UNITeS), a consortium of high-tech volunteer The initiative was launched at the United Nations Volunteersand was active from February 2001 to February 2005.

The United Nations Global Compact

On 26 July 2000, the United Nations Global Compactwas officially launched at UN headquarters in New York.

The Compact established ten core principles in the areas of human rights, labour, the environment and anti-corruption, and under the Compact, companies commit to the ten principles and are brought together with UN agencies, labour groups and civil society to effectively implement them.

The Global Fund

Annan issued a five-point "Call to Action" to address the HIV/AIDS pandemic.

Annan proposed the establishment of a Global AIDS and Health Fund, dedicated to the battle against HIV/AIDS and other infectious diseases.

In June of that year, the General Assembly of the United Nations committed to the creation of such a fund during a special session on AIDS and the permanent secretariat of the Global Fund was subsequently established in January 2002.

NOBEL PEACE PRIZE

Kofi Annan was awarded the Peace Prize for having revitalized the UN and for having given priority to human rights.

The Nobel Committee also recognized his commitment to the struggle to contain the spreading of the HIV virus in Africa and his declared opposition to international terrorism.

Kofi Annan Foundation

Kofi Annan set up the Kofi Annan Foundation in 2007 to mobilise leaders from all sectors to provide leadership where it needed.

The Foundation works on the premise that there can be no long-term peace without development and no sustainable development without peace.

Rakhine Commission (Myanmar)

In September 2016, Annan was asked to lead the Advisory Commission on Rakhine State– an impoverished region in Myanmar.

The commission, widely known simply as the "Annan Commission", was opposed by many Myanmar Buddhists as unwelcome interference in their relations with the Rohingya.

BOOKS – KOFI ANNAN

Interventions: A Life in War and Peace

We the peoples: A UN for the twenty

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - -