Martine McCutcheon has shared the reason she never watches the Christmas classic Love Actually despite starring in it with the likes of Hugh Grant and Emma Thompson.

Martine, who also starred in 364 episodes of EastEnders as Tiffany Mitchell, appeared in the 2003 holiday staple as Natalie, a new junior member of the household staff at 10 Downing Street.

Natalie spends most of the film interacting with Prime Minister David, played by Hugh Grant, with the two characters later admitting their feelings and stealing a kiss backstage at a school Christmas show.

Despite much of the UK still tuning in for Love Actually over the festive period, the 46 year old actress has stayed clear of the film in her own house.

Speaking to The Sun, she explained: "I never watch it… I can’t watch myself, but my family adore it and are so proud that I’m a part of it - as am I!"

Regardless of her own feelings, Martine’s performance later earned her a 2004 Empire Award for Best Newcomer and a 2004 MTV Movie Award for Best Trans-Atlantic Breakthrough Performer.

Since the success of the film, Martine has gone on to star in shows like Agatha Christie's Marple, Midsomer Murders, Celebrity Gogglebox, and The Masked Singer UK.

From 2016 to 2017, Martine also acted as a panellist on ITV’s Loose Women alongside the likes of Stacey Solomon, Janet Street-Porter, Linda Robson and Kaye Adams.

Earlier this month, Martine spoke exclusively to OK! about her time in the film while admitting to feeling star-struck when she first met her co-star Hugh Grant.

She explained: “When I first saw Four Weddings And A Funeral it was my absolute dream to work with Hugh Grant and Richard Curtis – I fell in love with the writing and I fell in love with Hugh.

“The first scene we shot was the last scene at the airport. It’s when I run and jump on Hugh at the airport – I was shaking, I was so nervous. I was just petrified! He was like, ‘Just go for it, it’s fine!’”

Elsewhere in the interview, Martine defended the film after some fans dubbed it “sexist” because the script described Natalie as having a “sizeable a**e and huge thighs.”

“First of all, it’s another woman [Annie] that mentions Natalie’s weight and Natalie herself,” Martine hit back.

“I understand where Richard is coming from. Of course, it’s easy to say now, ‘We would have done this, we would have done that’, but I also think that the characters weren’t being PC."

“They weren’t perfect humans – they were talking about their insecurities, their affairs. Natalie, bless her, is so innocent in telling the Prime Minister about her insecurities. I think that’s part of what made it so charming and real," she added.

"There are a lot of things that you’re not allowed to say now, but I think that in a film that covers so much emotion and so much love, you need a little bit of reality in there – it’s not always about ticking all the boxes.”

READ NEXT: