Martine McCutcheon starred as Natalie, the young secretary to the Prime Minister, in the 2003 film Love Actually.

By Tianna Corbin

Link copied Bookmark

Love Actually cast reunite in teaser

With the popular Christmas rom-com celebrating its 20th anniversary this year, actress Martine McCutcheon spoke about the film's success. Although it’s become a much-loved festive classic to see each year, the 46-year-old confessed she doesn’t watch it.

Many Christmas movie buffs will remember Martine as the young and ditzy PA to fictional Prime Minister Hugh Grant in Love Actually.

The film, which followed many character storylines intertwined with one another, also featured their romantic journey starting with their first awkward encounter.

Although the movie was released two decades ago, it still remains popular as ever with fans each year the festive season rolls around.

However, Martine confessed that despite her loved ones enjoying Love Actually, she decides not to.

READ MORE:BBC Breakfast's Jon Kay mocks co-star after blunder

Speaking to GB News ahead of the movie celebrating its 20th anniversary, she said: "My family like to watch it. But I can't bear to see myself on camera.

“I can do it when I'm on set, and I'm looking at the monitor and being constructive - but then once it's done it is done.

“So yeah, my mum's like: ‘Oh, she’s on, she’s on! Come on Martine!’…But no I can't watch myself.”

Despite not being able to watch herself on screen, the former EastEnders star stated it was lovely that the movie has snowballed over the years.

Invalid email

We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. Read our Privacy Policy

Martine admitted that while the cast was filming they all felt as though they were part of something special but had no idea how massive the movie would become.

She added: £I don't think we realised it would just be this huge still 20 years later, for sure.

“I still pinch myself that I was even in the film. So yeah, it is amazing. Absolutely amazing.”

Speaking about her love interest in the movie, Hugh Grant, she was asked by Andrew Pierce and Isabel Webster if she found him sexy.

DON'T MISS...

Coronation Street love triangle as Ken Barlow grows closer to Martha [SOAP]

Mike Tindall apologises to Zara for having I’m A Celeb ‘camp wife' [I'M A CELEB]

Emmerdale viewers ‘work out’ murder plot as Leyla's affair 'sealed' [REACTION]

The actress replied: “Oh, yeah, of course, who doesn't? He's one of the biggest movie stars for a reason and he's very humble about that.

“I think he's lovely and I think that he definitely deserves his status as the rom-com king, and he's gone on to do some amazing dramas as well. It’s a great time for him.”

Martine’s interview comes ahead of some of the cast coming together 20 years later to reunite for a TV special.

Some of the main stars from the film, along with the film’s director and writer Richard Curtis will be sitting down with ABC anchor Diane Sawyer to speak about the Christmas Phenomenon.

People will see actors such as Hugh Grant, Dame Emma Thompson, Bill Nighy, Laura Linney and Thomas Brodie-Sangster reunite together on-screen.

They’ll all be speaking about some behind-the-scene secrets, reflecting on its cultural impact and recalling their time working on the film.

In a trailer for the special, fans can see Diane ask Emma if she remembers what she thought after seeing the film for the first time the whole way through.

She replied: “I do. Hugh came up behind me as we were walking out and said, ‘Is that the most psychotic thing we've ever been in?"

Unfortunately, it’s not yet known when fans in the UK will be able to watch The Laughter & Secrets of Love Actually: 20 Years Later.