Love Actually star Martine McCutcheon has recalled how intimidated she felt about starring in the rom-com, saying she was ‘embarrassed’ when she had to ‘straddle’ Hugh Grant on her first day of filming.

In 2003, Martine and Hugh won over audiences with their romance in Love Actually, as prime minister David (Hugh) and Number 10 Downing Street staff member Natalie (Martine) fall for each other in the Richard Curtis classic.

The final scene sees the pair embrace at Heathrow airport, with Natalie jumping up at David as she greets him following his return back to the UK.

On Friday’s edition of The One Show, Martine, 44, spoke to Alex Jones and Clara Amfo about how daunting it was to film that particular scene on her very first day of filming, with several stars including Emma Thompson present on set.

The former EastEnders actor explained that she felt initially unsure whether she would be able to ‘hold my own’ among the big names in the cast, before finding out that her character Natalie – who was originally called Martine – had been written especially with her in mind.

Martine recalled how helpful Hugh, 60, was during filming, describing her co-star as ‘so gracious’ as he advised her on things such as where the best lighting was for her and gave her positive feedback when she had done ‘an amazing take’.

But on her first day, Martine ‘had to go and jump on him’ – a task that she found fairly challenging.

‘It was like Dirty Dancing – you know when she runs and then she stops, and then she runs and then she stops,’ she said.

‘And the whole crew were there, and I had to do that, and I was like, “I’m going to kill him! I’m going to knock him over, I’m going to kill him.”’

Martine said that she was ‘getting so embarrassed’ while ‘everybody was watching’.

However, Hugh reassured her, telling her: ‘“Don’t be stupid, you’re not going to kill me.”’

‘And in the end we managed it. But what a thing, you’ve got to jump up at Hugh Grant and straddle him, first day,’ Martine added.

It was recently reported that Hugh may be being considered for a role in the upcoming Sex and the City reboot.

According to The Mirror, the actor is thought to be ‘at the top of HBO’s list’ to star in the show.

The One Show airs weekdays at 7pm on BBC One.

Got a story?

If you’ve got a celebrity story, video or pictures get in touch with the Metro.co.uk entertainment team by emailing us celebtips@metro.co.uk, calling 020 3615 2145 or by visiting our Submit Stuff page – we’d love to hear from you.

MORE : Jim Carrey ’embarrassed’ Hugh Grant and Colin Firth during secret visit to Bridget Jones set as they filmed that classic scrap