Love Actually actress Martine McCutcheon has made a tragic personal announcement on Instagram.

The star who played Natalie - the love interest of Hugh Grant’s Prime Minister in the beloved Christmas movie - told fans her “heart is forever broken” after the death of her brother, aged 31.

WATCH THE VIDEO ABOVE: Martine McCutcheon on Love Actually

Know the news with the 7NEWS app: Download today

He died unexpectedly just a month before he was due to be married.

“My baby brother, my gentle giant, sadly passed away, suddenly, 2 weeks ago. He was 31 years old,” a devastated McCutcheon wrote.

“There is no medical explanation as to why we lost him so soon and, whilst we investigate further, we are having to accept that nothing will bring our boy back to us.”

Laurence John - known as LJ - was born when McCutcheon was 15 and had a “mild form of special needs”, McCutcheon explained.

“From the moment I first held him in my arms, I felt so proud and fiercely protective of him,” the actress wrote.

“He was such a character! He made us all laugh and loved nothing more than making a plan, having a great play list, bringing people together and generally having a giggle.

“He hated the thought of a party ending and so was always on to the next thing!

“With unwavering love, support and a commitment to himself, he took hold of life with both hands and smashed through any expectation we had of him.

“He would genuinely blow us all away at times!”

McCutcheon described her brother as her “anchor” and “radar of what really mattered in life”.

“I always wanted to protect him from the limelight and the characters that could be drawn to him for the wrong reasons,” she wrote.

The actress said her brother had fallen in love and was due to marry next month.

“I was asked to be bridesmaid and the last time I saw him was a few days before he passed,” she wrote, adding that he had just tried on his wedding suit.

“He looked so tanned, tall and handsome. The best I’ve ever seen him… Ironic really…

“My heart aches for all who have lost him. But my heart breaks for our mum, his dad John & his step parents.

“You should never outlive your children.”

McCutcheon concluded by saying: “I’m scared to live without you LJ but I know you will want us to truly live, laugh and love in your memory. I will try I promise.”

For more engaging celebrity content, visit 7Life on Facebook.

Your cookie settings are preventing this third party content from displaying.

If you’d like to view this content, please adjust your .

To find out more about how we use cookies, please see our Cookie Guide.