The Love Actually star has had quite the career

Love Actually star Martine McCutcheon first shot to fame after joining EastEnders in 1994.

Martine played barmaid Tiffany Mitchell in the much-loved soap for four years, until her character was killed in a special episode screened on New Year's Eve. Prior to becoming a soap star, Martine played Mandy in Bluebirds in 1989, and she also had minor success as part of the pop group Milan in the early 1990s.

‌

Aged just 12, she also appeared in an American television commercial for the drink Kool-Aid.

READ MORE: ITV Lorraine fans 'switch off' as they make same complaint minutes into show

The 46-year-old is probably best known for her role as Hugh Grant's love interest Natalie in Love Actually. But here's a look back at some of her career highlights, as well as what she is up to now, and her family life.

‌

Liverpool Echo Icon

Sign up to FREE email alerts from ECHO Daily News

We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you’ve consented to and improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and third parties based on our knowledge of you. More info

A singer as well as an actress, Martine McCutcheon has released four albums in total, starting with 1999's You Me & Us. Her debut single 'Perfect Moment' was a number one hit in the UK in 1999, and she also had top 10 hits with 'I've Got You', 'Talking In Your Sleep', 'I'm Over You' and 'On the Radio'.

Martine's biggest roles have been in Love Actually and EastEnders, but she has also starred in a number of other shows and films, such as Spooks, Kiss Kiss (Bang Bang) and Echo Beach. More recently, she has appeared on This Morning, Loose Women and The Masked Singer.

‌

Martine also appeared on Celebrity Gogglebox and Loose Women last year, however she has since said she now rejects most job offers so she can spend more time with her husband, Jack McManus, and their son, Rafferty, according to the Daily Mail.

Martine married singer Jack in September 2012 after three years of dating. Rafferty is seven years old.

For more celeb news, videos and pictures follow our designated Facebook page HERE

‌

Receive newsletters with the biggest and breaking TV and showbiz news by signing up here

READ NEXT:

We compared biscuit boxes from Marks and Spencer and Aldi and it was a close call

‌

Dragons' Den reject with 'product that could kill someone' now a global success

DWP warning as Universal Credit claimants could be hit with fines

GMB fans thrilled as Mick Lynch 'embarrasses' Richard Madeley

‌