Origin

Goza : Origin undetermined.

Gozalez : Hispanic: altered form of Spanish González (see Gonzalez).

Gozzard : from Middle English gos(se)herd ‘one who tends a flock of geese’ (Old English gōs + hierde).

Gozzett : see Gosset.

Abanto : Spanish: habitational name from Abanto in Zaragoza or Abanto y Ciérvana in Biscay Basque Country or any of various other places called Abanto.

Anciso : Aragonese (Zaragoza): unexplained.

Ariza : 1: Spanish: habitational name from a place so called in Zaragoza province in Aragon.2: Basque: Castilianized form of a topographic name from (h)aritz ‘oak’ + the definite article -a.

Artiaga : Basque: variant of Arteaga. This surname is not found in the Basque Country; in Spain it is most common in Zaragoza and Alicante provinces.

Azuara : Spanish: habitational name from Azuara in Zaragoza province (Aragon). The placename is probably of Arabic origin.

Bayo : 1: Spanish: nickname from bayo ‘cream-colored’ (denoting a horse color).2: Spanish: habitational name from (El) Bayo the name of several places in A Coruña (Galicia) Oviedo (Asturias) Zaragoza (Aragon).3: Americanized form of Croatian Bajo.4: West African (mainly Guinea Senegal and Ivory Coast): from the name of the Bayo clan of the Mandinka people of unexplained etymology.5: East African (mainly Tanzania and Uganda): unexplained.

Borja : Spanish: habitational name from a place in Zaragoza province named from Arabic burj ‘tower’. See also Borgia.

Cetina : 1: Spanish: habitational name from a place called Cetina in Zaragoza (Aragon). Compare Zetina.2: Slovenian (Četina): nickname for a hairy or bearded man from a dialect form of ščetina ‘bristle’.3: Croatian: habitational name from the basin of the river Cetina in Dalmatia or from the village of the same name.

Cuen : Spanish (Zaragoza): possibly from an old proclitic variant of cuende ‘earl’.

De Pina : Portuguese: habitational name for someone from Pina in Zaragoza province Spain.

Demara : 2: Spanish: possibly a habitational name for someone from Mara in Zaragoza province Spain with fused preposition de ‘from’. This surname is apparently not found in Spain.1: Altered form of French Desmarais.

Fragoza : 1: Portuguese: variant of Fragosa.2: Hispanic: altered form of Galician Fragozo.

Gauci : Maltese and Italian (Sicily): from Maltese Arabic Għawdxi denoting a native of the island of Gozo.

Gaus : German:: 1: from Middle Low German gōs gūs Bavarian and Alemannic gaus ‘goose’ either a metonymic occupational name for a goose farmer or a nickname for someone thought to resemble a goose in behavior or appearance.2: from the ancient Germanic personal name Gozzo.

Gazzard : variant of Gozzard with typical 16th-century unrounding of o to a in Gloucs dialect. The family can be traced back to William le Gosherde 1298 in Berkeley Castle Muniments (Berkeley Gloucs).

Goessling : German: probably a variant of Gösling from the personal name Gozzelin or from a pet form of Gozzo a short form of Gozzelin. Alternatively it may be from a short form of the personal names Goswin Gossold or Gotfrid (see Gottfried) which belong to the southwestern part of the country.

Goos : Flemish Dutch and German:: 1: metonymic occupational name for a breeder or keeper of geese from Middle Low German gōs and Middle Dutch goes ‘goose’.2: from a short form of an ancient Germanic personal name based on Gote ‘Goth’ or got ‘god’ particularly the compound name Goswin or Gozewijn with the second element win ‘friend’.

Goshert : Possibly an altered form of German Gosshart from the ancient Germanic personal name Gozzo (see Gosse) + hart ‘hard brave strong’.

Gosman : 1: Jewish (eastern Ashkenazic): nickname from Yiddish goz ‘hare’ + man ‘man’.2: Americanized form of German Gossmann (see Gossman).

Goss : English German and French: from the ancient Germanic personal name Gozzo Gauz (Middle English Old French Gosse) short forms of compound names based on the element goz (from gaut an ethnic name meaning ‘Geat’ or ‘Goth’) rarely also on the element gōd ‘good’ or god got ‘god’. In Middle English Gosse was frequently used as a short form of the double diminutive Goscelin (see Joslin). Geats (Old English gēatas Old Scandinavian gautar) were the Scandinavian people formerly occupying modern Götaland in Sweden their name being closely related to that of the Goths (Old English gotan Old Scandinavian gotar). Both ethnic names are presumably derived from a Proto-Germanic word meaning ‘to pour’. The relationship between Geats and Goths is controversial and in the name elements the two ethnicities are not always distinguishable. This surname is rare in France where the common form is Gosse.

Gossard : 1: English (West Midlands): occupational name for a keeper of geese from Middle English goseherde from Old English gōs ‘goose’ + hierde ‘herdsman keeper’. The surname in this spelling is now extinct in Britain but it survives as Gozzard mainly recorded in Staffordshire in the 19th century.2: French: from the ancient Germanic personal name Gozhard composed of the elements goz (from gaut an ethnic name meaning ‘Goth’ or ‘Geat’; see Goss) + hard ‘hardy brave strong’.

Gosselin : French: from the Old French personal name Goscelin Gosselin Joscelin from ancient Germanic Goz(e)lin a diminutive of a short form of compound names based on the element goz (from gaut an ethnic name meaning ‘Geat’ or ‘Goth’; see Goss). Compare Gorsline and Goslin.

Gossman : Americanized form of German Gossmann or Gössmann: from a personal name composed of the ancient Germanic elements goz (from gaut an ethnic name meaning ‘Goth’ or ‘Geat’; see Goss) + man ‘man’.

Gott : 1: German: from a short form of the various ancient Germanic compound personal names with the first element gōd ‘good’ or god got ‘god’.2: South German and Swiss German (also Gött): relationship name or nickname from Middle High German got(t)e ‘godfather’. Compare Goett.3: English (Yorkshire and Lancashire): from the Middle English personal name Gotte. In some cases this was a pet form of Godfrey. It may also have been a pet form of other names beginning with God- such as Goddard and Godwin. Gotte was also a simplified pronunciation of the Anglo-Norman French personal name Goz Gots (ancient Germanic Gozzo) often used as a pet form of the Old French personal name Gocelin which was pronounced Gotselin; see Joslin.4: English: from the unrecorded Middle English personal name Gutte Gotte representing Old Norse Gutti a pet form of Guththormr (Guttormr) or perhaps of Old Swedish Gudhfast.5: English: nickname from Middle English gut(te) got(te) ‘gut intestine belly’ denoting a greedy or corpulent person. See Gut.6: Chinese: variant Romanization of the surname 葛 see Ge 1.

Gucwa : Polish: Polonized pet form of the German personal name Gozwin a derivative of an ancient Germanic personal name meaning ‘friend of the Goths’.

Guedea : Spanish (mainly Zaragoza): perhaps a variant of Gadea.

Joslin : English (of Norman origin):: 1: from the Old French personal name Goscelin Gosselin Joscelin from ancient Germanic Goz(e)lin a diminutive of a short form of compound names based on the element goz (from gaut an ethnic name meaning ‘Geat’ or ‘Goth’; see Goss).2: alternatively perhaps a diminutive of the Old French personal name Josse (Old Breton Judoc); see Joyce.

Joyce : 1: English: principally from the Middle English and Old French personal name Joce Josse Joice a Romance form of Old Breton Iuthoc a pet form of a name in Iuth- ‘lord’ with the hypocoristic suffix -oc. Joce became popular as a personal name especially in medieval Picardy Artois Normandy and Flanders through the cult of Saint Josse. According to legend he was the brother or son of the 7th-century Breton king Judhael (see Jewell) and gave up his inheritance to become a hermit in the place recorded in the 8th century as Sanctus Jodocus now Saint-Josse-sur-Mer near Étaples in Pas-de-Calais. The cult was promoted in the second half of the 8th century by the Frankish king Charlemagne and was brought to England (Winchester) in the early 10th century by refugees from Saint-Josse the centre of the cult but use of the personal name in England is not known until after the Norman Conquest. Middle English Joce also was sometimes used as a female name (as Joyce is in modern times) and this may have also given rise to a surname.2: English: sometimes a variant of Goss from the ancient Germanic personal name Gozzo Gauz which often became Joce Joice Joss(e) in Old French. It was frequently used as a short form of Goscelin or Joscelin (see Joslin).3: English (of Norman origin): habitational name from Jort in Calvados France. It is not certain that this surname has survived into the modern period.4: Irish: of Norman origin from Joce or Joice (see 1 above) Gaelicized as Seóigh or Seóigheach in Ireland where it has been established since the 12th century. The distribution of this name is concentrated in counties Galway and Mayo and gave rise to the eponymous district of Joyce Country (Dúiche Sheoigheach) located along the border between those two counties. Joy is another Anglicized form of this name usually confined to County Kerry Ireland.5: English (of French Huguenot origin): from French Josse identical in origin with 1 above.

Kausch : German:: 1: from a short form of the Old High German personal name Gozwin.2: from a medieval form of the Old High German personal name Chuzo.3: variant of Kaus.

Langa : 1: Spanish: habitational name from any of the places called Langa in Ávila Soria and in particular Zaragoza provinces.2: Polish adaptation and in some cases also an Americanized form of German Lange.

Lizalde : 1: Basque: shortened form of Elizalde.2: Spanish (mainly Zaragoza): possibly derived from the personal name Lizuarte found in Amadís de Gaula a chivalric romance from the 14th century. Compare Lizarde.

Luna : 1: Spanish and Jewish (Sephardic): habitational name from any of the places called Luna in Zaragoza Araba/Álava and León provinces. Compare De Luna.2: Jewish (Sephardic): from the female personal name Luna (Spanish luna ‘moon’).

Magallon : Spanish (Magallón): habitational name from a place called Magallón in Zaragoza province.

Mallen : 1: English: variant of Malin and Mayland.2: Irish: variant of Mallon.3: Spanish (Mallén): habitational name from Mallén in Zaragoza province.

Malon : 1: Polish (also Małoń) and Czech (Maloň): nickname from a derivative of Polish mały Czech malý ‘small’ (see Maly).2: Irish: variant of Mallon found mainly in Glasgow (Scotland) and Durham (England).3: French: from a shortened form of the oblique case of the ancient Germanic personal name Madalo a short form of compound names with the initial element madal ‘council’.4: French: variant of Malo.5: Spanish (Malón): habitational name from Malón in Zaragoza province Aragon.

Mangas : 1: Spanish and Portuguese: probably a nickname from the plural of manga ‘sleeve’.2: Spanish: habitational name from Mangas in Zaragoza province.3: Greek: nickname from mangas ‘smart clever cunning’ from Turkish manga and Albanian mangë ‘platoon group of irregular soldiers’ ultimately from Old Italian banca ‘bench (of rowers in a galley)’.

Miramon : 1: French (mainly Pyrénées-Atlantiques): variant of Miramont a habitational name from Miramont the name of several places in France.2: Spanish (Miramón): habitational name from a place called Miramont in Zaragoza (Aragon) a cognate of 1 above. In some cases the surname may also be of French origin.

Monreal : Spanish: habitational name from any of the places called Monreal for example in Cuenca Teruel and Zaragoza provinces.

Monton : 1: Spanish (Montón): habitational name from a place called Montón in Zaragoza province.2: English: variant of Monkton a habitational name from any of several places called Monkton (in Kent Devon Somerset Dorset Wiltshire Yorkshire Durham and elsewhere) named with Old English munuc ‘monk’ (genitive plural muneca) + tūn ‘farmstead estate’.

Moran : 1: Irish: Anglicized form of Gaelic Ó Móráin ‘descendant of Mórán’ a personal name meaning ‘great’ ‘large’; the stress is normally on the first syllable.2: Irish: Anglicized form of Gaelic Ó Moghráin earlier Ó Mughróin ‘descendant of Mughrón’ a personal name derived from mug ‘slave’ and rón ‘seal’. It may also be a shortened form of McMorran based on the same personal name.3: English (Lancashire and Yorkshire): variant of Morrin normally pronounced with the stress on the second syllable.4: Spanish (Morán): habitational name from any of the places called Morán in Asturias Galicia (Pontevedra) and Aragon (Zaragoza).5: Altered form of French Morin.

Moros : 1: Spanish: habitational name from Moros in Zaragoza province so named from the plural of moro ‘Moor’ i.e. ‘the place where the Moors live’.2: Greek: ethnic name or nickname from older Greek Moros ‘Moor’.3: Greek: possibly also a nickname by altering accent from classical Greek mōros ‘fool’.

Murillo : Spanish: habitational name from any of several places called Murillo notably in Navarre La Rioja and Zaragoza provinces so named from a diminutive of muro ‘wall’.

Nocito : 1: Italian: from Latin nucetum (Italian noceto) ‘walnut orchard’ applied as a topographic name for someone who lived by such a place or as a metonymic occupational name for someone who worked in one.2: Spanish (mainly Zaragoza): Castilianized form of a habitational name from a town called Nozito in Huesca province Aragon.

Pamplona : Spanish: habitational name from Pamplona (in Basque: Iruña) the historical capital city of the province of Navarre and of the former Kingdom of Navarre. In Spain it is most frequent in Teruel and Zaragoza provinces.

Paules : 1: Spanish: habitational name from any of several places called Paules in the provinces of Zaragoza and Huesca in Aragon and Albacete.2: Americanized form of Greek Pavlis.

Pilar : Spanish: from a short form of the Marian name María del Pilar or title Nuestra Señora del Pilar ‘Our Lady of the Pillar’ (from pilar ‘pillar column’) a title under which Virgin Mary is venerated in Zaragoza. The surname may also be a reference to a local church dedicated to the Virgin Mary bearing this title. Compare Del Pilar.

Pina : 1: Spanish: habitational name from one of the several places called Pina especially Pina de Ebro (Zaragoza) from Latin pinna ‘rock’.2: Spanish (Piña): perhaps a habitational name from a place called Piña (in Palencia and Valladolid provinces) possibly from piña ‘pinecone’.3: Portuguese: of Spanish origin; see 1 above.

Plasencia : Spanish: habitational name from Plasencia in Cáceres province and possibly also a Castilianized form of a habitational name from Plasenzia the name of towns in Zaragoza and Huesca (Aragon). Compare Placencia.

Portera : 1: Italian (Sicily): occupational name for a female concierge from Spanish portera.2: Spanish: habitational name from Portera in Valencia province so named from a derivative of porta ‘gate’. This surname is rare in Spain found mainly in Zaragoza province.

Quinto : 1: Spanish and Italian: from the personal name Quinto from Latin Quintus denoting the fifth-born son. This surname is most common in the Philippines.2: Spanish: possibly also a habitational name from a place called Quinto for example in Zaragoza province or a topographic name from quinto a derivative of quinta ‘small farm (having a tax liability of one fifth of the annual produce)’ or a nickname from quinto ‘conscript’.3: Italian: possibly also a habitational name from any of numerous places called Quinto as for example Quinto di Treviso (Treviso) Quinto Vicentino (Vicenza) Quinto Vercellese (Vercelli).

Raigosa : Hispanic (mainly Colombia and Mexico): variant of Raygoza.

Raigoza : Hispanic (mainly Colombia and Mexico): variant of Raygoza.

Raygoza : Hispanic (mainly Mexico): altered form of Galician Reigosa a habitational name from any of the places called Reigosa in Lugo from Latin radicosa ‘with a lot of roots’. Compare Raigosa and Raigoza.

Rogozinski : Polish and Jewish (from Poland) (Rogoziński): habitational name for someone from some place called with Polish rogoża ‘bulrush’ for example Rogoźnica Rogoźnik Rogoźno or Rogożno.

Saragosa : Hispanic: altered form of Spanish Zaragoza or of its Catalan variant Saragossa.

Saragoza : Hispanic: altered form of Spanish Zaragoza.

Talamantes : Spanish: habitational name from Talamantes in Zaragoza province.

Tarazona : Spanish: habitational name from a town called Tarazona in the province of Zaragoza (Aragon). The placename is of pre-Roman origin first recorded as Turiasso.

Urrea : Spanish: habitational name from Urrea de Gaén in Teruel province or Urrea de Jalón in Zaragoza of pre-Roman origin.

Valerio : Spanish and Italian: from the personal name Valerio from Latin Valerius a Roman surname ultimately derived from Latin valere ‘to flourish to be strong and healthy’. The name was borne by several early Christian saints among them 4th-century bishops of Trier and Zaragoza and 5th-century bishops of Sorrento and of Antibes. Compare Valery.

Verdejo : Spanish:: 1: variant of Berdejo a habitational name from Berdejo a town in Zaragoza.2: nickname from verdejo a diminutive of Verde ‘green’.

Zaragosa : Hispanic: altered form of Spanish Zaragoza.

Zaragoza : Spanish: habitational name from the city of Zaragoza in northeast Spain the ancient capital of the kingdom of Aragon. The name derives via Arabic from Latin Caesarea Augusta the name bestowed on it in the 1st century AD by the Emperor Augustus. Compare Saragosa Saragoza and Zaragosa.

More

Source : DAFN2 : Dictionary of American Family Names 2nd edition, ©2022 by Patrick Hanks and Oxford University Press

FANBI : The Oxford Dictionary if Family Names in Britain and Ireland, ©2016, University of the West of England