With a line-up that includes great international artists such as the jamicano Ky-Mani Marley (son of Bob Marley), The Toasters from USA and the Swiss O.B.F with Jr Roy and Mr Wilson from the organization do not want to neglect the programming of parallel activities that make Lagata Reggae Azuara a complete experience.

In the municipal park, surrounded by trees and shadows will be present again the Reggae Market, a market of crafts, clothing, accessories … with more than 15 stalls …. There will also be a foodtrucks area where you can find a wide range of restaurants (hamburgers, crepes, coffee, pizzas, vegetarian food). All this enlivened with the musical selection of Dr. Dubwiser that in addition to performing on Friday in the concert area in the dub corner dedicated to soundsystems will set up his handmade sound system generating a daytime space where music, market and restoration will coexist.

The parallel programming will be complemented by the “sound system” of La Ciclería, leading a parade that will tour Azuara to the rhythm of Reggae, music and dance workshops and games, activities and even a cycling gymkhana for the younger audience.

Also noteworthy is the large camping area 5 minutes from the concert area and to facilitate the movement of the public to the event there is a bus departing from Zaragoza on Friday June 30 and returning from Azuara on July 2.

The offer is complemented by the services offered by the town of Azuara itself: bars, stores, places of historical and cultural interest and a large municipal swimming pool with green areas.

A new feature this year is the organization of the festival’s own bus that leaves Zaragoza on Friday, June 30 and returns from Azuara on Sunday, July 2.

Currently, day tickets cost 25 euros, full festival pass 35 euros and pass with bus 45 euros. The box office ticket will be priced at 45 euros as well as 35 for the day ticket.

All information and ticket sales at www.lagatareggaefestival.com

LAGATA REGGAE FESTIVAL

Lagata Reggae Festival celebrates its 20th edition. Since 2004 it has been held uninterruptedly in different formats and locations. Its first 9 editions were held in Lagata, the hometown from which it takes its name. Due to its growth in 2013 it was forced to change location, moving to Zaragoza. After a time of study and search, in 2022 it finds in Azuara the ideal place to continue to evolve, returning to its “origins”: just 7 kilometers from Lagata, in a town that has all kinds of services and in the rural environment that saw its birth and that it claims so much.

The festival continues to maintain its roots and remains the only Reggae festival in Aragon, one of the oldest and most recognized in the Aragonese scene and a statewide reference within the music genre.

XX EDITION

To celebrate this XX edition has worked hard on two lines.

– On the one hand, to create a leading lineup and a national reference. For this we have followed two criteria: to combine local and Aragonese groups with great international groups, and to have reference groups that have marked an epoch in the genre along with new and current proposals that are emerging.

We will count with the local 4Bob and Kei B & Diamond Ex, demonstrating the musical richness of Azuara. Chata Flores, recently awarded at the Premios de la Música Aragonesa as the artist with the greatest projection and, of course, JahSta, the group with which it all began 20 years ago, accompanied by Conscious Vibes Band.

Internationally, from Switzerland, O.B.F., a European reference in the recent evolution of dub music and its approach to electronic music, who together with Junior Roy (France) and Mr. Wilson (Spain) will bring a show that is filling stages all over Europe and that has triumphed in its recent tour of South America. The Toasters, a band founded in New York in 1981 and without which the history of ska in the United States cannot be understood. More than 40 years of history and an extensive and successful discography make them one of the world references in their style.

The announcement of the headliner artist deserves special mention for several reasons: Ky-Mani Marley. With the announcement of the presence of the son of the jamacaina legend Bob Marley one of the wishes of the organization to celebrate the 20 years of history of the festival is fulfilled: to have the name Marley in its poster. Within the prolific career of the sons of the King of Reggae, Ky-Mani is the most representative of his father’s legacy in terms of musical style and live performance. It will be his only concert in Spain in 2023, a benchmark for the Lagata Reggae Azuara line-up and a luxury to have in an Aragonese festival with an artist of his stature and recognition.

The line-up is completed with a space for the soundsystem, a format that boosted Reggae in its beginnings, where an artisan sound system, a selector and several singers delighted the audience. With this format we will have the Dr Dubwiser team from Tarragona who will come with Neleh Vibes as selector and singers Sista Livity and Nupah and the Freedom Vibration team, from Zaragoza, which will have in its formation the Cantabrian Roberto Sanchez, producer of Roots Reggae more recognized at European level with its label Lone Ark, the voice of Ines Pardo and from Spanish Town (Jamaica) the duo formed by Muscle Voice and Purple D’lyte.

All this makes up a lineup to the height of the celebration of the 20th anniversary of Lagata Reggae.

– On the other hand create a festival that meets all the needs of the audience. Therefore there will be camping area for the nights of June 30 and July 1 as well as parking area for campers and parking for vehicles. Also to facilitate the displacement from Zaragoza, the organization will have its own bus (whose tickets will be on sale soon) with departure on Friday June 30 from Zaragoza and the return from Azuara will be on July 2. There will be a food truck area, with food and beverage stalls of various types and the traditional Reggae Martket, a street market with different stalls. The offer will be complemented by the services offered by the town of Azuara: swimming pools, restaurants, cafes and stores that will not miss anything to the attendees.

Tickets are currently at a promotional price of 30 euros.