Piedrahita locality of Loscos municipality Teruel. Aragon.

Locality

Aragon > Teruel > Loscos

Piedrahita belongs to the municipality of Loscos

This town is at a distance of 139 Km from Teruel

Located at an altitude of 1129 m

In 1991 had a population of 0 inhabitants

Ayuntamiento de Loscos

Horno, 7

44493 LOSCOS (TERUEL)

Phone: +34 978739050

Go to Loscos

From Zaragoza:

Loscos is accessed by the N-232 to the Belchite junction until the junction with the A-1506 towards Azuara, Moyuela and 12 km away is Loscos.

Another alternative on the N-330 towards Botorrita to Fuendetodos and Azuara.

From Teruel:

Via N-234 Calamocha: in Burbaguena on the right by Ferreruela, Cucalon, Badenas and Loscos.

Via a-222 Montalban:

Muniesa-Moyuela or Cortes de Aragon, Huesa and Loscos.

Situation of Loscos inter Zaragoza and Teruel.

Municipality Loscos belong to the Comarca del Jiloca

Ample your information on Aragon

If you want Ample your information on Aragon you can begin crossing some Monasteries, o 40 Castles another interesting route is the Mudejar, Patrimony of the Humanity, also you can extend your cultural knowledge on Aragón examining its municipal and institutional heraldy without forgetting, of course, some of its emblematicas figures as San George Pattern of Aragon or its personages I illustrate adding to these data a minimum crossed by its history o some books.

Also Aragon enjoys a diverse and varied Nature where passing by plants, animals, or landscapes we can arrive at a fantastic bestiario that lives in its monuments.

The information will not be complete without a stroll by its three provinces: Zaragoza, Teruel and Huesca and ours varied Regions, with shutdown in some of its spectacular landscapes like Ordesa or the Moncayo or by opposition in the valle of the Ebro.

If reasons of work or relatives have taken to you Far from Aragon you can Download images of bottom, sounds or animations

Also you can dedicate you to the intangible ones: from the legend compilation that also does to universal Aragon you can persecute the presence of Santo Grial in Aragon.

Other pages on Aragon in Internet

Other current also you can interest.

Huesca | Teruel | Zaragoza | Aragon | Beginning

Shields | Rural Tourism | Sports | Precipices | Tourism

La Seo | El Pilar | Mudejar | Goya | History

Water | Fauna | Flora | Geology | Nature in Aragón

Alphabetical Index | Thematic | Maps | Zaragoza Museum

Piedrahita locality of Loscos municipality

Copyright 1996-2024 © All Rights Reserved Javier Mendivil Navarro, Aragon (Spain)

Explanations or to correct errors please press here

Legal Warning . This activity of the Asociacion Cultural Aragon Interactivo y Multimedia

All administration or public institution is made independently off.

As opposed to the threat of the hope of the water trasvase: CONGRATULATIONS.