Essentially a studio-based duo, U.S. rock band Steely Dan drew from the range of American musical styles to create some of the most intelligent and complex pop music of the 1970s. Steely Dan was the creation of guitarist Walter Becker and singer-keyboardist Donald Fagen.

Walter Becker was born on February 20, 1950, in New York City, and Donald Fagen was born on January 10, 1948, in Passaic, New Jersey. The two met at Bard College in Annandale-on-Hudson, New York, in 1967. They moved to New York City in 1969, where they worked on a movie sound track and toured as backing musicians for an “oldies” act. They landed in Los Angeles, California, late in 1971 as staff songwriters for ABC Records. Working with ABC producer Gary Katz, they secretly assembled a band with other young musicians, notably guitarists Jeff “Skunk” Baxter and Denny Dias, emerging in 1972 with Can’t Buy a Thrill. To everyone’s surprise, Steely Dan’s debut album spawned the hits “Do It Again” and “Reelin’ in the Years.” By the time Fagen and Becker finished their second album, Countdown to Ecstasy (1973), they had fired vocalist David Palmer, leaving Fagen as sole lead singer. Gradually the duo ceased touring, preferring to nurture their eccentric ideas with a regular crew of studio musicians that included guitarists Larry Carlton, Elliot Randall, and Hugh McCracken, vocalist-keyboardist Michael McDonald, and drummer Jeff Porcaro. The absence of a formal group liberated Fagen and Becker, who did not have to devote energy to dominating other musicians.

Steely Dan reached its peak with Pretzel Logic (1974) and Katy Lied (1975). Dragging pop music into its high modernist phase, Becker and Fagen took musical ideas from the entire American spectrum, especially jazz, and compressed them into immediately accessible three-minute vignettes. Fagen became a distinctive singer who could put across some of the toughest lyrics in pop music with his pungent voice.

The duo’s popularity skyrocketed as their music lost its acute edge on The Royal Scam (1976) and Aja (1977). Difficulties in completing Gaucho (1980) persuaded Becker and Fagen to give the group a rest, and they pursued separate careers for many years. Fagen’s first solo album, The Nightfly (1982), recaptured many of Steely Dan’s strengths. Becker produced albums for various artists. In the early 1990s they each put out new solo albums, occasionally performed together onstage, and ultimately toured as Steely Dan, releasing a live album in 1995. By 1998 they were back in the studio working on Two Against Nature (2000). The well-crafted album, with its familiar but updated sound, silenced any doubts about the duo’s comeback and earned them a Grammy Award for album of the year and another for best pop vocal album. In 2001 Steely Dan was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. Becker died on September 3, 2017.

Christopher Walters