Situated in front of Hulhumalé ferry terminal and next to Hulhulé ferry terminal in Boduthakurufaanu Magu, Maagiri Hotel, had finally opened its doors to the public.

The inauguration of the 9-storey USD 6 million (MVR 92.5 million) hotel, was held by Regent Maldives investors, on Saturday morning. The company’s top officials were Crown Company’s Director Ahmed Nazeer, Lily Hotel’s Director Ahmed Hafeez, Abdul Muhusin and former President Ibrahim Nasir’s wife Naseema Mohamed Kaleyfaanu.

The four-star hotel, which had been built where Maldives’ first ever guest house was in the 1970s, room per night starts from USD 120 per night.

Coming with latest facilities, 100 and 62 occupancy restaurants, café, conference hall, meeting room, fitness centre.

The hotel’s four-category rooms are:

Executive Suite – 6 Suites / Max 4 Adults / 50 SQM / Ocean View / King Size Bed (203cm X 203cm)

The Executive Suite ensures the utmost luxury and comfort for its guests.

Designed to separate the bedroom and living area, guests can leave entertainment and work at the doorstep for an uninterrupted 8 hours of sleep.

The Executive Suite offers plenty of space with room to spare. Indulge in its scenic views without leaving the suite’s premises.

Junior Suite – 6 Suites / Max 3 Adults / 41 SQM / Ocean View / King Size Bed (203cm X 203cm)

Located on the eastern wing of the building, Junior Suites add a breath of fresh air to your stay at Maagiri Hotel, with nothing but the ocean blues surrounding the suites.

Catch up with your acquaintances and entertain your guests at the separate lounging area, whilst sipping on the various coffee flavours on offer.

Isolate yourself in the calm surroundings the suite has to offer and look forward to every trip to Malé city.

Premier Ocean View Room: 20 Rooms / Max 3 Adults / 22-24 SQM / Ocean View / King Size Bed (203cm X 203cm)

Catch a glimpse of one of the biggest infrastructural additions to the Maldives – Hulhulé- Malé bridge; right from your bedside.

In this cosy yet, spacious room treat yourself to a variety of TV channels and detach yourself from the daily worries.

In the vicinity of the room, all your basic necessities are at your fingertips. If not, opt to call the reception to care for your customized needs. End your busy day in Maagiri Hotel and wake up feeling refreshed and energized to start the day.

Premier Room – 20 Rooms / Max 3 Adults / 22-24 SQM / City View / King Size Bed (203cm X 203cm)

Immerse yourself in Malé city and enjoy what it truly means to be in this city, by taking in the view of busiest districts in the city.

Find solace in these warmly lighted rooms and its light grey hues, while you take your mid-day break during your busy day in the city.

Located in a fantastic spot in the capital city Malé, from the terrace you can view beautiful sunrises, exciting scenes like flights landing at the airport island Hulhulé, and Malé – Hulhulé bridge.

Facilities of the Maagiri Hotel are:

Dining

Coffee Curve

Coffee Curve with its jazzier vibes is the perfect place to grab that quick cup of coffee or have a quick mid-day snack. It provides a mix of refreshing juices and iced teas. A lighter menu of sandwiches, burgers, wraps, pastries and sugary confections are selected to give a boost of energy.

Whether it’s an espresso or a café frappe, the service at Coffee Curve ensures the best of coffee.

Faru restaurant

Offering choices of semi-fine dining with stylish buffets, express meals and a la carte dishes, Faru is a place to have your lunch and reconnect. A place to get away from the tropical heat with one of the delightfully fresh juices and chilled mojitos. Faru is the perfect place for different occasions and gives you an ideal space for gatherings.

With its refined décor and efficient service, Faru is the place for family dinners, corporate lunches and intimate wedding events.

Peak restaurant

A fantastic terrace with panoramic views of the ocean, Peak with a lounge as well lends an air of exclusivity with unpretentious service. Prepared with passion and served in a stylish atmosphere with a warm service, the menu offers you tantalizing dishes.

The peak is the place for your social lunch and it is an enamouring escape in the evening twilight. Clearly a spot for winding down with a masterly crafted mocktail, enjoying the hues of the sunset with a sharing platter or a gourmet burger.

In the midst of the hustle and bustle of the city, Peak is a frequent spot for friends, families and associates.

Wedding & Celebrations

Overlooking the ocean, Maagiri Hotel offers you ideal spaces for your gatherings and celebrations. A special aspect, the hotel being on the street where the arrival jetties are located provides your guests easy access to the event.

Whether it is an intimate wedding or a proud celebration, Maagiri Hotel provides its customers with a joyous occasion, complete with all amenities such an event needs with a warm ambience and efficient service.

Fitness & Gym

A fully-equipped gym with cardio machines and weights gives you that sense of routine. Lending you scenic views of the morning sky, the gym at Maagiri Hotel makes your morning sessions more amazing.

Professional service and the well-kept gym at Maagiri Hotel ensures you stay fit away from home.

Events & Meetings

Be it a corporate event or a business meeting, Maagiri Hotel is proud to host corporate guests for a perfect stay every time. With executive needs in mind, complete with high-speed internet, Maagiri Hotel provides the ideal space for important events and functions.

Whether Malé for a meeting or in between flights or looking to organize a lovely weekend with a mix of business and leisure, Maagiri hotel assures the best that Malé city can offer in hospitality.