San Antonio Spurs star Richard Jefferson is determined to inspire his side to a shock NBA title to make amends for his poor debut campaign.

The small forward helped Spurs surprise many pundits by finishing the regular season with the best record in the Western Conference - 61 wins and 21 losses.

After struggling for form last term, Jefferson became a free agent only to end up re-signing for San Antonio.

But he has since averaged 11 points a game and landed 44 per cent of his three-point attempts - up dramatically on 31 per cent the previous year after moving from Milwaukee Bucks.

And 6ft 7in Jefferson is desperate for San Antonio - coached by Gregg Popovich - to see off the Memphis Grizzlies, with the best-ofseven series at 1-1 ahead of tonight's clash.

Jefferson admitted: "I think last year I struggled.

"It was my first year in the system learning how to play and all the different things which come with it. For me it was just a matter of getting used to the system. A lot of people thought I didn't like it here or that me and the coach might not have got a long.

"We had a good relationship and there were some ups and downs but I have the utmost respect for him.

"When I had the opportunity to come back, I really wanted to seize it and put myself in a position to be as successful as possible.

"Now I definitely feel like I'm top of my game."

Jefferson has twice appeared in the NBA playoffs - as a New Jersey Net in his rookie year in 2002 and then in 2003 - but has never won the championship.

The US international added: "It's all coming down to the next couple of months.

"I think as a team everyone has improved. We had a lot of new guys last year, including myself.

"This year I think everyone played well which is why we had the best record in the league for most of the season. A lot of people picked us to finish fourth or third at best."

If both San Antonio and Eastern Conference winners Chicago Bulls progress, Jefferson will have to guard Britain's Luol Deng in the final.

Watch the NBA play-offs on ESPN or via NBA League Pass. For more information visit www.facebook.com/nbauk