Steve Nash filling the Brooklyn Nets head coaching vacancy was the biggest news in sports Thursday.

It was also the most debatable between people who believe he's qualified as a Hall of Fame point guard and two-time MVP and others who perceive his race as a main factor.

Retired NBA player and Phoenix native Richard Jefferson defended the Nets hiring Phoenix Suns legend on ESPN's First Take to dismiss co-host Stephen A. Smith who attributed Nash getting the job to "white privilege" over several available qualified Black NBA coaching candidates.

The Arizona alum rebutted Smith's claim that it was a basketball decision rather than looking at it through a black-and-white lens.

"I feel your exact pain and I know exactly what you're talking about, but sometimes it is a about basketball, right?" Jefferson said. "When I look at the other jobs that are open, there's the Pelicans, there's the 76ers, there's Chicago Bulls, there's a lot of jobs open."

Smith repeatedly gave utmost respect to Nash as a person, assumed Nets franchise stars Kyrie Irving and Kevin Durant signed off on the hire while predicting Nash would probably be successful in his new role. But Smith bemoaned Nash not having a coaching job title compared to candidates such as NBA On ESPN commentator and former Golden State Warriors head coach Mark Jackson, Alvin Gentry recently fired by the New Orleans Pelicans, Los Angeles Clippers assistant coaches Sam Cassell and Tyronn Lue, and L.A. Lakers assistant coach Jason Kidd.

Smith also questioned Brooklyn Nets general manager Sean Marks' decision at the height of racial strife and Black Lives Matter protests in the nation's political climate.

"You just gave all the reasons why Steve Nash should get this opportunity but then you bring it back to race. I think that's a bit unfair," Jefferson said.

Jefferson then offered multiple examples of NBA teams that hired Black players as head coaches immediately after ending their playing careers. This includes Kidd who was hired as the Nets head coach when he retired in 2013 and Derek Fisher by the New York Knicks in 2014.

Jefferson also doubled down on his attempt to eliminate the white privilege stigma about Nash on Twitter.

"Derek Fisher, Jason Kidd all got jobs right away because of 20 years of HIGH LEVEL BBall IQ. Please don’t question Steve Nash’s hire or make this about anything else," Jefferson said.

The only qualification on Nash's resume following his retirement in 2013 was that he was Golden State Warriors as a part-time consultant.

Jefferson played on the former Kidd-led New Jersey Nets during his rookie year in 2001-02 and went to two consecutive NBA Finals appearances then and the following year. Jefferson also was a member of Mark Jackson-coached Warriors in the 2012-13 season and the Tyronn Lue-helme Cavaliers which won the 2015-16 NBA title.

Have tips for us? Reach the reporter at dana.scott@azcentral.com or at 480-486-4721. Follow his Twitter @iam_DanaScott.