CHICAGO - Cleveland Cavaliers guard Kyrie Irving struggled mightily in the fourth quarter against the Chicago Bulls on Saturday and his three turnovers during that span contributed to the 105-102 loss.

Irving was loose with the ball and over-dribbled at times as Chicago picked his pocket multiple times, leading to transition baskets and momentum-building plays for Chicago. After the game, Irving did the admirable thing and took full responsibility.

"I was just real [bleep] with the basketball, that's all," he said. "My handle wasn't crisp. Justin Holiday had great defensive pressure at the top of the key and their defense was extending me out almost at half-court."

Things got out of control when Tyronn Lue started the fourth with a lineup of Irving, Matthew Dellavedova, Richard Jefferson, Channing Frye and Timofey Mozgov. With Irving the only true playmaker on the court, he probably felt the need to keep his dribble alive when the Bulls trapped him off the pick so that he could try to escape and make a play for himself or teammates.

The problem with that plan was the Bulls were not going to let him singlehandedly beat them. Even though this was the Bulls' second unit, they executed the trap to perfection and were able to manufacture turnovers and jump out to a 13-point lead midway through the quarter.

The Cavaliers' starters re-entered the game and made a valiant run. They had a chance in the closing seconds to win the game, but couldn't convert. The bench mob of the Bulls wereA the difference-makers, outscoring their counterparts, 44-11.

Irving played virtually every second of the fourth and registered zero points and three costly turnovers. He finished the game with 11 points on 5-for-17 from the field with a game-high eight assists and four turnovers.

"I've just got to do a better job of leading that second unit, especially when LeBron and Kevin are on the bench," he said. "It's more of a letdown for me, going into that fourth quarter and knowing that we had a decent lead going into that fourth. But, I've just got to be better with that second unit and I take responsibility with what transpired there."

Cleveland turned it over 16 times, translating to 26 points for Chicago. That's not going to get the job done.

"Ky has a couple of turnovers that he wishes he can get back, obviously," James said. "[He's] a great ball handler for our team and he gets a lot of guys involved. He gets himself involved. It's just a rough stretch for us."

To be fair to Irving in regards, it's natural for star players to try to do a little bit extra when playing with guys who need others to get them good shots. He was only trying to make the right plays with the talent around him.

"I don't want to make a crutch or an excuse for that unit," Irving said. "We've just got to be better."

Cleveland has lost two straight. Before that, the team was on a five-game winning streak and playing arguably its best ball of the season. On Wednesday in Indiana it was defensive issues and on Saturday, it was ball security.

The momentum the Cavs were hoping to ride on into the postseason isn't looking too good right now.

"My saying is always the same: Unforced turnovers are not OK. Attack turnovers are," James said. "We had a lot of unforced turnovers that gave them an opportunity to get out on the break and not face our half-court D and we paid for it."