In our never-ending documentations of “The Little Car That Does Everything Well,” we occasionally find variants worth noting. And by variants, here we are talking about the late great Pontiac’s version of the GM H-Body, known better as the Astre (French for “star”), shown here, built for the Canadian market (please note the shiny headlight rings) in 1973 and ’74, then sold to us here in the USA in 1975, ’76, and ’77.

The Astre was, of course, a mildly disguised Vega (Vega being the brightest star in the constellation Lyra). The USA Astre had a slightly different grille and the taillights were horizontal slits as opposed to the Vega’s more rectangular design, but other than badges and a different steering wheel, they were virtually identical cars. Which of course meant they came with the same, shall we say, “inconsistencies” that the Vega offered as well.

But Pontiac was GM’s “Excitement Division,” so their H-Body car needed something to spruce it up even a bit more. Enter Jerry Juska who took his design ideas to Dave Landrith of Motortown Corporation, who specialized in custom auto work. Their ideas included a front air dam, rear spoiler, wire mag rims, window louvers, a chrome exhaust tip, and bright stripe decals for the hood, body sides, rear spoiler, door handles, and special wheel centers.

And so the “Li’l Wide Track” was born, working off of the well-known Pontiac “Wide Track” advertising theme.

Initially, the trim was added in an old warehouse in suburban Detroit (Egad!) to a more-fitting facility directly beside the Lordstown, Ohio, plant that built the H-Body cars. But later on, the components were simply sold as a dealer-installed kit.

The bits and pieces added about $400 to the car’s price, but Astre sales seemed to need a shot in the arm. In 1975, 64,601 Astres rolled off the line compared to 207,764 ’75 model Vegas; in 1976 50,384 Astras were built, and in 1977, 32,788 were sold, about half of the first year’s number. That’s 147,773 total Astres, for those of us who don’t want to use our adding machines. Over two million Vega copies were sold. Somehow.

So yes, the Li’l Wide Track was more entertaining to look at. But it still had the Vega’s aluminum 140-cu. in., 2.3 litre Inline 4, and we all know how well that went. The Dura-built 2.3 litre didn’t arrive until 1976, and the Iron Duke showed up a year later. And nothing was done to the suspension, which could have benefited from Vega’s RPO F-41 suspension, found on the GT. And for those who ask, it’s no wider than a Vega either.

Will all of these doo-dads make us forget about the problems the car had? Maybe for a while… But out of the approximately 3,000 of these cars sold, only 2 are known to survive, making them scarcer than hens’ teeth. And as far as getting replacement parts…

But at least they do look exciting!

—Chuck Lynch