“A LANDMARK EVENT IN SCOTTISH LEGAL HISTORY”: SCARCE FIRST EDITION OF BARON DAVID HUME’S TWO-VOLUME COMMENTARIES ON THE LAW OF SCOTLAND RESPECTING… CRIMES, 1797, TOGETHER WITH HIS RARELY FOUND SUPPLEMENTAL NOTES, 1814

HUME, David. Commentaries on the Law of Scotland Respecting the Description and Punishment of Crimes. Two Volumes. Edinburgh: Printed for Bell & Bradfute… And for E. Balfour, 1797. WITH: Supplemental Notes. Edinburgh: Printed for Bell and Bradfute, 1814. Three volumes altogether. Large quarto, Commentaries: contemporary full brown calf rebacked and recornered, red morocco spine labels; Supplemental Notes: original blue-gray paper boards rebacked, original printed spine label, uncut and unopened.

First edition of Baron Hume’s groundbreaking authoritative Commentaries, the “standard work on Scottish criminal law” (DNB), an exceptional two-volumes in contemporary calf, together with the rarely found first edition of his Supplemental Notes, uncut in original boards. A seminal work by the nephew of philosopher David Hume, laying “the foundations of our modern criminal law.”

“A landmark event in Scottish legal history occurred in 1797 when Baron David Hume, nephew of the philosopher… published his Commentaries on the Law of Scotland Respecting the Description and Punishment of Crimes (Hewitt, Symbolic Interactions, 1). A prominent judge and professor of law at the University of Edinburgh, Hume “laid the foundations of our modern criminal law” (British Justice, Hamlyn Lectures). Commentaries provides “the classic statement of Scottish criminal law. The end result of Hume’s work, published in 1797, was… a clarification and consolidation of Scottish legal practice in criminal matters. No other legal writer had managed to achieve this before” (Kilday, Women and Violent Crime, 32). With this groundbreaking “standard work on Scottish criminal law” (DNB), Hume “carried the torch into all the recesses of actual practice. He not only made himself familiar with all the scattered matter that had been published, though much of it lay hid in places not commonly explored; but he was the very first who went systematically to the records” (Edinburgh Review 83:197). To his contemporaries Hume’s Commentaries, with its authoritative research into “the rise and progress of this law… will ever be held to communicate the most philosophical views of the criminal law in a popular and perspicuous manner” (Edinburgh Law Journal, I:485). Hume importantly highlights, as well, “the differences between Scottish and English laws, shaping the former into a symbol of cultural and national identity… Scottish legal professionals were proud that their system relied more on case law and judiciary discretion than did England’s… for England’s ‘bloody code’ of hundreds of offenses punishable by death did not extend to Scotland. The differences were celebrated in Hume’s Commentaries” (Hewitt, 52, 44). “The first study of judicial decisions” in Scottish criminal law, Commentaries has been officially “afforded ‘authoritative’ status” (Gibb and Duff, Criminal Justice Systems, 7).

This scarce first edition of Commentaries is accompanied by a rarely found first edition, in original boards and almost entirely uncut and unopened, of Hume’s Supplemental Notes, which contains his additional research in the records of the Court of Judiciary from 1524 up to the date of publication in 1814. Hume notes the crimes covered in Supplemental Notes are organized in the order “of their frequency and practical importance… Thus I begin with those offences which are committed against individuals, and… the last consists of those transgressions which relate to God and to religion.” Included are detailed records and Hume’s analysis of cases of theft, homicide, rape, assault, libel, judicial corruption, incest, adultery, piracy, treason, sedition, witchcraft and much more. In addition to these two seminal works, Hume’s Commentaries on the Law of Scotland, Respecting Trial for Crimes, appeared in 1800. The 1797 and 1800 Commentaries were later combined in an 1819 second edition. Harvard Law Catalogue I:967. Marvin, 405. Edinburgh Review 139:267. See NYU Catalogue, 251. Early owner signatures.

Text fresh and clean with light scattered foxing. A most desirable three volumes in near-fine condition.