John Lucas III Biography

John Lucas III graduated from Bellaire High School in Texas and played his college ball at Baylor University and Oklahoma State University. In 2004 he was an instrumental member of the Cowboys run to the NCAA Final Four, earning Third Team All-American honors that season. After being passed up on in the 2005 NBA Draft he signed a free agent contract with the Houston Rockets and played a season in the NBA D-League before earning a call-up in 2005. He played two seasons with the Rockets from 2005 to 2007 before taking his talents overseas. From 2008 to 2010 he played in Italy, China and Spain before returning to the NBA with the Chicago Bulls in 2010. From 2010-2014 he saw time with the Bulls, Toronto Raptors and Utah Jazz. After the 2014 season he signed on to continue his career in China with the Fujian Sturgeons.

Book John Lucas III for your Next Event

Disclaimer: AthleteSpeakers assists companies seeking to hire talent like John Lucas III for speaking engagements, virtual meetings, appearances, product endorsements, and business sanctions. Our speakers bureau does not claim to exclusively represent John Lucas III. Our booking agency can help with finding an athlete or sports celebrity that aligns with your upcoming events date, location, and budget. When an organization request booking details for a celebrity like John Lucas III, we work closely with the client to make sure the proposed dates does not interfere with the requested athletes schedule. We then confirm the sports celebrity fee based on the details of the request. The fees listed on the speaker profile are rough estimates based on the previous market rate for the talent. Our team then works with John Lucas III's agent, manager or assistant on the booking request. For parties interested in hiring John Lucas III, we recommend filling out the booking request form so our booking agents can help with making your next event a success.

Interested in booking John Lucas III for a virtual meeting?

Contact Athlete Speakers today at 800-916-6008 to book John Lucas III for a virtual event, virtual meeting, virtual appearance, virtual keynote speaking engagement, webinar, video conference or Zoom meeting. The booking agents at Athlete Speakers work to get you the best price for your desired sports personality.

Athlete Speakers is a leader when it comes to booking virtual events in the sports world. Since 1999, we have built close relationships with top athletes, agents, publicists and managers. We assist all types of companies as well as event planners with booking athletes like John Lucas III for these virtual engagements. Companies continue to turn to Athlete Speakers to get John Lucas III’s latest virtual speaking fee, appearance cost and schedule availability.

Book John Lucas III for your Virtual Meeting