John Harding Lucas III, often referred to as just John Lucas (born November 21, 1982), is an American professional Basketball player. He is currently a free agent.

Early life[]

Born in Washington, D.C. as the son of former NBA player and coach John Lucas and his wife DeEdgra, Lucas once lived in Wynnewood, Pennsylvania and played for the same school as current NBA All-Star Kobe Bryant (though 3 years after Bryant left and only on the junior varsity team). Lucas was the starting Point guard on the same high school team (Bellaire High School (Bellaire, Texas)) in Texas with current Charlotte Bobcats star Emeka Okafor and former Memphis Grizzlies power forward Lawrence Roberts. Lucas has a younger brother Jai, who started playing basketball at Florida in 2007-08.

He originally played collegiality at Baylor University, but transferred from there to Oklahoma State University in the wake of the 2003 Baylor University. Lucas is noted for his winning shot against Saint Joseph's University that sent the 2004 Oklahoma State Cowboys to the NCAA Final Four.

Professional career[]

In 2005, after failing to get drafted by an NBA team, Lucas signed a contract to play with the Minnesota Timberwolves' Summer League team. The Timberwolves also signed him to their training camp roster. In the regular season, Lucas was a member of the Houston Rockets for two games before being waived. He was successfully signed after the NBA granted permission to Rockets management to add to their depleted roster due to an overflow of injuries. Lucas's call-up made him the first Tulsa 66ers player to be called up from the NBA Development League. He averaged 16.6 points in 33.2 mins per game with the 66ers.

On May 10, 2006, Lucas signed with Snaidero Udine of the Serie A (basketball), to fill the gap left by Jerome Allen (basketball), who was out for the season due to injury.

On July 28, 2006, Lucas signed with the Rockets to a three-year contract. In the 2006-07 season, Lucas and the Rockets made it to the playoffs, where they lost to the Utah Jazz in the first round, in 7 games.

On October 30, 2007, Lucas was one of four players cut from the Rockets' roster, prior to the commencement of the 2007-08 season. His NBA career highs consisted of 13 points, 5 rebounds, 4 assists and 4 steals, and he subsequently returned to Italian basketball, joining Benetton Treviso. He was then later released by Treviso during that same 2007-08 season.

Lucas was signed by the Oklahoma City Thunder in September 2008, and he was released by them in November before playing in any games for them.

Notes[]

[]