1. Essay about Nobel Prize Ahmed Zewail Ahmed Zewail Nobel Prize Winner 709 Words A boy who was named Ahmed Zewail was born February 26, 1946 in Damanhur, the &quot;City of Horus&quot;, only 60 km from Alexandria. He lived a good childhood in the City of Disuq, which is the home of the famous mosque, Sidi Ibrahim. He was the only son in a family of three sisters and two loving parents. His father was liked and respected by the community because he was helpful, cheerful and very much enjoyed his life. He worked for the government and also had his own business. His mother was a good natured person and devoted all her life to her...show more content... He was admitted to the faculty of science at Alexandria University and felt the greatness of the university. His grades through out the next few years flourished. They flourished in courses like mathematics, physics, chemistry, and geology. His grades were either excellent or very good. In his second year he scored very highly in Chemistry and was chosen for a group of seven students called &quot;special chemistry&quot;, an elite science group. He graduated with the highest honors, with above 90% in all areas of chemistry. After graduating with the degree of Bachelor of Science, he was appointed to a University position as a demonstrator to carry on research toward a Masters and then a Ph.D. degree. Ahmed Zewail who is currently the Linus Pauling Chair Professor of Chemistry and Professor of Physics, and the director of the NSF Laboratory for Molecular Sciences (LMS) at the California Institute of Technology in Pasadena. He was awarded theNobel Peace Prize in 1999. He was awarded in the category of Chemistry for his new developments in the field of femotoscience. He made it possible to observe the movement of the individual atoms in a femotosecond. A femotosecond is a split second that is a millionth of a billionth of a second. This brilliant development which changed our view of the dynamics of matter holds great promise in the areas of technology and life sciences. His current research Get more content on HelpWriting.net

2. Thank Bob Dylan With The Nobel Prize December 20, 2016 Dear Nobel Prize committee, The Nobel Prize for Literature is an outstanding prize that honors extraordinary people for their works in literature. It honors people that have changed literature. On October 13, 2016 you awarded Bob Dylan with the Nobel Prize in Literature. This marks him as the first musician ever to win this prize. Many people agree with your decision, while others are not delighted with this fact. I agree with the committee to honoring Bob Dylan with the Nobel Prize in literature "for having created new poetic expressions within the great American song tradition." Bob Dylan was born as Robert Allen Zimmerman on May 24, 1941 in Duluth, Minnesota. While growing up, Bob was influenced by Elvis Presley, Jerry Lee Lewis, and Little Richard. He was also in a few bands while growing up. While he was in college he began performing folk and country music at local cafes under the name Bob Dillon. In 1960, he dropped out of college and moved to New York. In New York, Bob met his idol Woody Guthrie and visited him regularly and became great friends with him. In 1961, he signed his first recording contract at Columbia Records and became one of the most original influential voices in the history of American popular music. Throughout his lifetime he 's been awarded with Grammy's, Academy and Golden Globe awards. In 2012, he received the Presidential Medal of Freedom from President Barack Obama. Bob Dylan wrote music based on social issues, war and civil Get more content on HelpWriting.net

3. All I have to say about A Rose for Emily is that she was a crazy person! Faulkner is a really worthy and famous writer that has a lot to say in his writings and I think that he accomplishes that when he writes. "On December 10, he delivered his acceptance speech to the academy in a voice so low and rapid that few could make out what he was saying, but when his words were published in the newspaper the following day, it was recognized for its brilliance; in later years, Faulkner's speech would be lauded as the best speech ever given at a Nobel ceremony." (Padgett) When William Faulkner gave his Nobel Acceptance Speech he had a quote in there and I think that he helped man endure by lifting his heart in A Rose for Emily, he also shows how...show more content... There were a lot of different emotions that were represented in this selection, but Faulkner didn't tell us that the characters were angry he used details to show us people's emotions. "Try to be better than yourself. An artist is a creature driven by demons. He doesn't know why they choose him and he's usually too busy to wonder why. He is completely amoral in that he will rob, borrow, beg, or steal from anybody and everybody to get the work done." (Faulkner/Stein) When he talks he uses a lot of emotion and that shows his style of writing. William Faulkner gave a Nobel Prize Acceptance Speech and in it he wrote about A Rose for Emily he gives himself challenges when he writes and one of the challenges is pity and sacrifice which has been the glory of the past. When he writes he is saying that the people who have had pity thrown upon them and the people who have made their sacrifices are the only ones who get the glory. "The human drama in Faulkner's novels is then built on the model of the actual, historical drama extending over almost a century and a half." (Faulkner) In A Rose for Emily this is shown when all of those people who left her life she didn't really make a big deal out of it she kept to Get more content on HelpWriting.net

4. Informative Essay: The Nobel Prize The Nobel Prize The first element the Curies discovered was called polonium, which contained a unstable nucleus. Yet she felt there was something more powerful still trapped in the pitchblende. On December 26, the Curies announced they had found another element. This was radium! Sadly, other scientists wouldn't believe them because they didn't have any proof. So for the next four years Marie toiled day and night in a cold and damp shed to get a piece of pure radium from a ton, as in 2000 pounds, of pitchblende. Finally, in 1902, Marie produced one–tenth of gram of pure radium. In November, 1903, Curies along with Antoine Get more content on HelpWriting.net

5. Essay on Obama's Nobel Peace Prize Obama's Nobel Peace Prize It was announced on October 9, 2009 that American President Barack Obama is this year's recipient of the Nobel Prize for Peace. The Nobel Foundation states that Obama was chosen "for his extraordinary efforts to strengthen international diplomacy and cooperation between peoples." (Nobel Foundation) Controversy and debate ensued in the world wide media. Critics have debated Obama's worthiness. Supporters have cited numerous examples of the current U.S. Presidents' nobility. Obama does deserve this prestigious award. Nobel prizes are awarded for Physics, Chemistry, Physiology or Medicine, Literature, Peace, and Economics. In his will, award creator Alfred Nobel "specifically designated the ...show more content... (MacDougall) Other notable past winners include the 2007 winners Al Gore and the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) "for their efforts to build up and disseminate greater knowledge about man–made climate change, and to lay the foundations for the measures that are needed to counteract such change." In 2001 the United Nations and Kofi Annan shared the award "for their work for a better organized and more peaceful world" and, in 1993 Nelson Mandela and former South African President Frederik Willem de Klerk were each awarded half of the prize "for their work for the peaceful termination of the apartheid regime, and for laying the foundations for a new democratic South Africa" (Nobel Foundation) The question remains "What has the new President actually done in a mere 10 months in office to put him in the same league as past laureates such as Nelson Mandela and Mother Teresa?" (Savage) Savage cites four reasons the Nobel Committee gave to defend their choice. "Obama's focus on strengthening international diplomacy and supporting the United Nations, his "work for a world without nuclear weapons," his attention to climate change, and his improvement of human rights. In each area, Obama has made a start." (Savage) Obama supporters argue that "Beyond mere Get more content on HelpWriting.net

6. Wangari Maathai expresses her gratitude to the world for her Nobel Peace Prize, and also calls her audience to action. Her goal is to convince the world that the environment has much more importance than most people seem to realize. In her speech she begins by expressing her gratitude, and persuading her audience that she is worth listening to. Second she discusses the importance of the environment and explains how the Green Belt Movement has helped and changed the world. She then clarifies the problems still occurring. After establishing the problems, she goes on to make her call to action. Lastly, she ends by establishing pathos. Maathai expresses her gratitude in the beginning of the speech. She thanks all the people that made the...show more content... She does this to ensure the listeners that taking care of the environment does much more than make the world we live in look better. Taking care of the environment also takes part in ensuring a successful democracy and many other important things in society. The idea that Maathai is attempting to get across to everyone is that the Earth is our friend and we should give back what we take. She helps us understand this by explaining the awful chain reactions that occur when we don't replenish what we have consumed from Earth. Third, she makes her call to action. She asks everyone to take part in something to help the environment. She addresses each group of people separately. Men and women of all races, children, young adults, everyone, can take part in something to help. "In the course of history, there comes a time when humanity is called to shift to a new level of consciousness, to reach a higher moral ground. A time when we have to shed our fear and give hope to each other. That time is now. (4)" Hersentence structure of "That time is now," really gives emphasis on what she wants. It is short and to the point. It's also a very simple sentence. She didn't replace simple words with fancier words. This shows that what she is asking from people isn't rocket science. She is asking for something as simple as planting trees or recycling. Her call to action is for everyone to contribute to helping take care of the environment in some way. Get more content on HelpWriting.net

7. There's the Nobel peace prize, There's the Nobel Chemistry Prize, There's even a Nobel Philosophy Prize. But there's also a Nobel Physics prize, In 2015 A man named Takaaki Kajita won that prize with Arthur B. McDonald. Ever since 1901 people have been able to win a Nobel Physics prize and only 111 people have ever won one! You must be thinking, How did Takaaki Kajita get his hands on one? Well, it's clearly Not easy he was 55 when he got it! Well In this essay Not only are you gonna learn just exactly how Takaaki Kajita got the Nobel Physics prize but about his background in the process to. Takaaki Kajita was born on March 9th, 1959, in the city of "Higashimatsuyama" Which is located in Japan. Ever since Takaaki Kajita was a child he'd been...show more content... Each person shares the award with someone else so The award has been given 111 times. Out of the population of 7.442 billion people in this world, Mr.Kajita won the award with Arthur B. Mcdonald. Two people surpassed everyone else in physics in 2015! That's crazy, right? He received it for his discovery of Neutrino oscillation. So He's been awarded Three times for his discovery of Neutrino Oscillation. Looks like it's a big deal right? So they contribution that Takaaki Kajita made was discovering that neutrinos weigh something more than nothing. So before 2015 Everyone had believed they weighed nothing whatsoever, But until Takaaki Kajita and Arthur B. Mcdonald came along they changed all branches of physics of and science forever. During the award ceremony, Takaaki Kajita's wife and daughter were there. The Nobel committee said the discovery had "changed our understanding of the innermost workings of matter and can prove crucial to our view of the Get more content on HelpWriting.net

8. Caitlyn Buteaux Mrs. Parham English III AP 1st block 4 February 2013 Analysis of William Faulkner's Noble Prize of Literature Acceptance Speech William Faulkner was an often misunderstood writer of many novels and short stories. ("William Faulkner's Nobel Prize Acceptance Speech ") It was not until 1949 and after his death when he was given the Nobel Prize in Literature that people began to acknowledge him and his works. ("William Faulkner") In his Nobel Prize of Literature acceptance speech, at the city hall in Stockholm on December 10, 1950, Faulkner uses a powerful tone and effective rhetorical devices to convey his purpose. In his Nobel Prize of Literature acceptance speech, William Faulkner utilizes rhetorical devices such as...show more content... This device helps him convey that people need to start writing about emotional conflicts with themselves because that alone can make good writing. He also uses a metaphor to compare the writing of something meaningful and important to something not when he states, "He writes not of the heart but of the glands". This helps the effectiveness by comparing something major and meaningful such as the heart to something less meaningful and pity as a gland. These were effective by helping Faulkner relate to everyday situations and thing we are familiar in life therefore aiding him in connecting with his audience. Faulkner uses syntactical strategies throughout his speech to assist him in communicating his message to his audience. In the third paragraph he emphasizes a syntax device known as anaphora, when stating, "He must learn them again... He much teach himself... He writes not of love...He writes not of the heart...".The anaphora helps Faulkner be effective in his argument by the repetition of words to help him get his view of things across to the audience. To also succor his effectiveness he uses polysyndeton, which is used to draw the audience's attention therefore adding the effect of persistence and intensity to help keep his audiences attention, making his speech effective. An example of polysyndeton is when he declares "love and honor and pity and pride and compassion and sacrifice" This quote helps signify that authors need to write from their soul and Get more content on HelpWriting.net

9. Michael Binyon's Argument Analysis The article by Michael Binyon and the cartoon by Tom Toles make the claim that President Obama did not deserve to win a Nobel Peace Prize at the beginning of his presidency. Toles and Binyon share similar viewpoint, so they approach the subject in similar ways. Both of the speakers describe President Obama's lack of accomplishments at the time he received the award. They both appear to pose strong arguments about this subject; however, the article by Michael Binyon seems to be stronger than the cartoon. Even though both provide effective arguments about the topic, "Comment: Absurd Decision on Obama Makes a Mockery of the Nobel Peace Prize" seems to pose the strongest argument because Michael Binyon was able to develop his claim and effectively impact his audience using background information, evoking strong emotions, and comparing President Obama to deserving winners of the past. The cartoon does impact the audience by appealing to their emotions and making the audience remember past memories. Everyone knows that participants are supposed to receive awards after they win a race––when they deserve it. Toles depicts the Nobel Peace Prize as the award for winning a race, but he shows President Obama receiving the medal before he runs and the Nobel Committee hoping he wins. While...show more content... Binyon states his claim in the title of his article, and throughout the text, he provides evidence to support and strengthen that claim. He makes use of background information to help the reader understand the principles behind the Nobel Peace Prize, and he makes comparisons that give the audience a perspective of the controversy that they might not have had originally. Binyon creates an effective argument that shows the audience how detrimental it is to the award's reputation because of the unfair circumstances that led to President Obama's Get more content on HelpWriting.net

10. Martin Luther King Nobel Peace Prize I hereby nominate the African American civil rights leader, Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. to be awarded the Nobel Peace Prize. King should receive the Nobel Peace Prize mainly because of his nonviolent resistance of racial prejudice in America. He has emphasized equal rights with his non–violent protests and has made such a tremendous impact on the world. If he never stood up for what he believed in we could still be stuck in a time where African–Americans still couldn't use the same fountains as white people. Martin Luther King, Jr. was born in Atlanta, Georgia on January 15, 1929; and is the middle child of Michael King Sr. and Alberta Williams King. Around the age of twelve, he tried jumping out of a second story window in attempt to kill Get more content on HelpWriting.net

11. Nobel Prize Research Paper Nobel Prize In this paper I am going to discuss the Nobel Prize. Firstly I will inform you of the history of the prize, secondly its origin, and how it is awarded today. After that I will discuss the 2010 Nobel Prize for Medicine, 1901 Nobel Prize for Physics, and the 1930 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine. Alfred Nobel The Nobel Prize was named after a Swedish inventor and industrialist, Alfred Bernhard Nobel. Alfred Nobel was born in Stockholm, Sweden on October 21, 1833. He was born into a wealthy family, although due to the misfortune of losing building materials on sunken barges, Immanuel Nobel, Alfred's father, was forced into bankruptcy the same year Alfred was born. In 1842 the family moved to St. Petersburg, Russia. Alfred...show more content... Although he started working on IVF in the 1950s it took him about 30 years to make it successful, and about 60 years until he won the Nobel Prize. Edwards is a professor at the University of Cambridge England, he also founded Bourn Hall, the first IVF center. Today, vitro fertilization is responsible for over 4 million births worldwide. Edwards discovered that an embryo can be fertilized in a Petri dish in a laboratory ((4) http:/ /nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/medicine/laureates/2010/adv.html). The steps of IVF are started by prescribing a fertility medication to control the timing of the eggs release. They monitor the ovaries using ultrasound to make sure the multiple eggs can be collected and that they are developing the eggs properly and that his is called ovulation induction. To retrieve the eggs a minor operation is required, sedation and anesthesia is used to prevent discomfort. A hollow needle is inserted through the pelvic cavity into the ovary to collect the eggs. Now the sperm is needed for completion of the procedure, this is collected by ejaculation. The process of insemination now begins; a single sperm is injected into the egg for fertilization. The egg is monitored to make sure cell division is achieved. It is now considered an embryo after it is fertilized. Three days after the egg is retrieved from the ovary, and fertilization is achieved then it is inserted into the women's uterus. The two to four cell embryos is placed Get more content on HelpWriting.net

12. Does Bob Dylan Deserve The 2016 Nobel Prize? On Thursday, October 13, 2016, Bob Dylan has been awarded the 2016 Nobel Prize in Literature. Since then, it has been questioned whether or not he deserves this prize. Bob Dylan whose real name is Robert Allen Zimmerman was raised in Duluth, Minnesota. He has been singing and has been in bands since he was a teenager and has listened to songs from an even earlier age. He has been given many awards for his songs and has grown a reputation. However, being awarded the Nobel Prize had brought up a lot of arguments and questions on if Bob Dylan deserves it. The Nobel Prize was created by Alfred Nobel who want to prizes to those who have done something incredible in Physics, Chemistry, Medicine, Literature, Peace, and Economic Sciences. Winners...show more content... Alfred Nobel wants "outstanding" literature from the Literature Prize winner which is stated in his will, "...one part to the person who shall have produced in the field of literature the most outstanding work in an ideal direction." Bob Dylan has created many outstanding songs which can be proven by the awards he had won. Biography states some of the few awards, "The legendary singer–songwriter has received Grammy, Academy and Golden Globe awards, as well as the Presidential Medal of Freedom and the Nobel Prize for Literature." These prizes exhibit that Bob Dylan's work must be very impressive to have won so many awards and it further supports the reason to give him another. This also brings up the argument that Bob Dylan has too much spotlight and "real" literature writers deserve. In the article "Why Bob Dylan Shouldn't Have Gotten The Nobel Prize" nytimes.com states, "The legendary singer–songwriter has received Grammy, Academy and Golden Globe awards, as well as the Presidential Medal of Freedom and the Nobel Prize for Literature...By honoring a musical icon, the committee members may have wanted to bring new cultural currency to the prize and make it feel relevant to a younger generation. But there are many ways they could have accomplished this while still honoring a writer." This article is expressing that awarding a writer would be more appropriate for the Nobel Prize and that Dylan has already won plenty of awards. However, this would be saying that someone who is passionate and elaborate in their work all time should not be recognized because someone else wants a chance. This is saying that a person who gets 100 as their grade all the time should not be credit because someone who got a 90 deserves a chance. In Get more content on HelpWriting.net

13. Nobel Prize Acceptance Speech Analysis There is no denying conflict. Everyone faces conflict of some sort in their lives, whether it be an argument over which sibling gets to sit in the front seat of the car on the way to school, or a potentially dangerous confrontation that necessitates an immediate reaction. Writers such as Susan Campbell Bartoletti and Elie Wiesel, who wrote "Hitler Youth: Growing Up in Hitler's Shadow" and " Nobel Prize Acceptance Speech" respectively, portray such situations. Bartoletti writes about how one German girl faced conflict during World War Two, and Wiesel shares his personal experience as a Jew in a concentration camp. Both works show that the most important aspect of facing a conflict is the way in which a person chooses to deal with it. One could react to conflict by becoming angry or sullen, shouting or going silent, or simply pouting. None of these reactions are the best –– some can even be counterproductive to one's goals. The best way to deal with conflict is to take a stand for one's beliefs. First off, standing up for one's beliefs creates many positive effects, for large groups of people as well as for the...show more content... "Hitler Youth: Growing Up in Hitler's Shadow." Studysync: Reading & Writing Companion. Sonoma, CA: BookheadEd Learning, LLC, 2015. 397–400. Print. National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. "Underage Drinking." National Institutes of Health. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, n.d. Web. 24 Apr. 2017. Nobel Media. "Liu Xiaobo – Facts." Nobelprize.org. Nobelprize.org, n.d. Web. 24 Apr. 2017. Town Hall Meetings. "What's New." Town Hall Meetings To Prevent Underage Drinking. Stop Alcohol Abuse, 4 Feb. 2011. Web. 24 Apr. 2017. Wiesel, Elie. "Nobel Prize Acceptance Speech." Studysync: Reading & Writing Companion. Sonoma, CA: BookheadEd Learning, LLC, 2015. 416–18. Print. WorkLife4You. Communication Skills for Healthy Relationships. N.p.: National Oceanic and Atmospheric Association, n.d. Get more content on HelpWriting.net

14. Dear Nobel Committee for Literature, The Nobel Prize for Literature was not rewarded to the deserving writer. You have awarded Bob Dylan the Nobel Prize for Literature on October 13, 2016 degrading dedicated writers around the world. After dropping out of college in the 1960's to pursue an occupation in which he was already well known as the times "most loved folk poet", he turned to singing and writing rock–type songs with anti war messages. Whether he did "create new poetic expressions within the great American tradition" he has not proven himself worthy of such a significant award. Such a legendary award offered to many other brilliant writers, should be received by someone who can and will continue to change the world. This award could help out developing writers, developing countries, and should not be handed out single handedly. Newly prospering authors and writers deserve as much a chance as anyone. As you may recall, a few of the runner ups for the Nobel laureate were Adonis, Ngugi Wa Thiong'o, and Ko Un. All of these authors shared unique talents in writing. In point of fact, Adonis, a Syrian essayist, translator, and poet, experimented with essential elements in his poetry. He rebelled against the standard poets to say the least, "I wanted to break the linearity of poetic text – to mess with it, if you will." (poetryfoundation.org) He was not born into the wealthiest of families and found himself unable to pay for education, yet he has pushed boundaries for many Get more content on HelpWriting.net

15. Marie Curie's Second Nobel Prize Marie Curie is one of the most famous scientists that ever lived. She was born in November 7, 1867, in Warsaw, Poland and is a Polish–born French physicist who is famous for being the first woman to win a Nobel Prize. She is the first women professor; the first woman who receives a Nobel Prize; the first person ever to be awarded two Nobel Prizes. Together, her husband, Pierre Curie and she found the radioactive elements Radium and Polonium. After the couple discovery of Radium and Polonium, Marie continued to work on their discovery. In 1910, her discovery of Radium elements brings her second Nobel Prize. Looking at Marie's achievements, it is not hard to Get more content on HelpWriting.net

16. Alfred Nobel Major Accomplishments Alfred Nobel was a Swedish chemist who was born on October 21, 1833, in Stockholm Sweden. He worked with his father in his arms factory; he was very experimental as a young man and went experimenting with chemistry including explosives. In 1864 an explosion occurred went killing his younger brother, this triggered him into inventing a safer more controlled explosive called the dynamite. Alfred Nobel held over 355 different patents for different inventions that made a great impacted still to this day. The dynamite is Alfred Nobel most famous accomplishments; including the synthetic element nobelium was named after Alfred Nobel. The Nobel prizes each year that are awarded are held in categories of physics, chemistry, medicine, literature and Get more content on HelpWriting.net

17. Rhetorical Analysis of Nobel Peace Prize Acceptance Speech Malala Yousafzai Malala Yousafzai, the author of this acceptance speech, is a young female from Pakistan who won the Nobel Peace Prize with the help of Kailash Satyarthi. They won it because of their writing about the struggle for young children to receive proper education. The audience for this speech is everyone including her teachers and parents, majesties, royal highnesses, and members of Norwegian Nobel Committee. Issues that she discusses in her speech include children needing proper education and that every sex should have the same rights to education. Her main purpose for writing this speech was to encourage society to help make quality education for both boys and girls around the world. Malala Yousafzai hopes that readers understand that her speech is about the education system and how government leaders need to make quality primary and secondary education for both sexes. In Malala YousafzaiNobel Peace Prize Acceptance Speech, she discusses how important education is and how discrimination of sex affects proper education in her country. Education is important to her because it is a privilege and blessing to go to school in her country and many other countries. She shows that education is important by speaking up for children that do not have access to education. This is shown in her speech when she says, "I am here to stand up for their rights, to raise their voice. . . it is not time to pity them. It is not time to pity them" (Yousafzai 1). Throughout Yousafzai's speech she repeats phrases to show the importance of what she is trying to say. For instance, in the above quote she repeats, "it is not time to pity them", by repeating these lines she shows that she wants a person to help them and that pitying them will not do anything beneficial for their educational situation. When discussing education, she even references the Islamic religion to display how significant education is to everything. She mentions the Islamic religion when she says, "And do you not know that the very first word of the Holy Quran is the word Iqra, which means read" (Yousafzai 2). It is significant that read is the first word of the Holy Quran, because Get more content on HelpWriting.net

18. Essay On Elie Wiesel Elie Wiesel was a peace–making, Nobel prize winning, Holocaust survivor. He battled something many of us could never even imagine. Elie Wiesel's quote made me think, and then rethink, what I thought about compassion and helping people. The holocaust was a horrible time. It was a time where compassion was needed daily to survive. In a lot of ways, we still need it. Weather it's against a presidential decision, or in the safety of a school classroom. It will always be needed. Compassion is a mixture of kindness, empathy, and caring. Elie Wiesel talks a whole lot about compassion. He does and I think he means the compassion given by friends, family, and even random strangers. When you give compassion to them, they "become your anchor." In my opinion, Elie Wiesel means, you should help people rise up from the bottom line. You should speak with compassion against the tyranny shown in this world. People need to speak with compassion, act with compassion, fight with compassion, and even look at the world with compassion. Martin Luther King Jr....show more content... Maybe not in a direct way, but it did. The Holocaust was a terrible time. Many people died, or were forced to do hard labor. Elie Wiesel survived that and lived to tell us the tale. After learning about everything that happened then, I think of how privileged we all are. We will never experience what Elie or anyone in the Holocaust did. We will never truly understand. But, I do understand what we need to learn from it. We need to be kind to each other, respect each other's differences and show compassion. We need to show each other the kindness that we still don't often see. Everyone is mean to each other in this time. We need to respect each others differences. We are all different. We all believe in different things and look different ways. We shouldn't hate each other for it. Finally, we just need to show each other compassion. That's all I can say to explain. Compassion is, and forever will be, Get more content on HelpWriting.net