As a member of the Trio Immersio Chamber Ensemble, Stanković has performed throughout Europe, North America, Asia, and Africa. The same ensemble, with Stanković as its member, received the “Brivio Sforza” award in 2019 for Ensemble of the Year, given by the Art Association “Le Dimore del Quartetto”.

Within various chamber ensembles, Stanković established collaboration with notable artists, such as Nemanja Radulović, Sandra Belić, Gabriel Feltz, Stanko Madić, Tijana Milošević, Maja Mihić, Yury Revich, Jan Vogler, and Eszter Haffner, string quartets Noûs (Italy) and Epoque (Czech Republic), as well as with the Trio “Pokret”.

Nemanja Stanković has been awarded as a finalist in numerous contests and competitions, such as the International Cello Competition in Liezen (Austria), International Jeunesses Musicales Competition in Belgrade (Serbia), Johannes Brahms (Austria), Fidelio Spezial (Austria), Antonio Janigro (Croatia), Petar Konjović (Serbia), etc. In 2007, he was proclaimed the Most Promising Young Artist in Serbia by the ArtLink Association. As part of this recognition, he as well recorded his first CD featuring the works of Paganini, Dvořák, Davydov, Haydn, and Tchaikovsky.

In 2018, he was proclaimed Young Artist of the Year by the “Muzika klasika” magazine.

He also had remarkable solo performances at international festivals, such as BEMUS, Alpen Classica, Note di Primavera, Belgrade Cello Fest, and BUNT.

Nemanja Stanković was born in Kragujevac (Serbia) where he completed the Secondary School of Music in the class of Boža Saramandić, as the class valedictorian. He graduated as Student of the Year from the Faculty of Music in Belgrade, in the class of Sandra Belić. He studied at the Vienna Conservatory in the class of Natalia Gutman, where he earned his Master of Arts degree. Nemanja attended and completed his postgraduate studies at the Mozarteum University in Salzburg in the class of Enrico Bronzi, as well as in Florence (Scuola di Musica di Fiesole) in the class of Natalia Gutman and Elizabeth Wilson. In March 2015, he successfully defended his doctoral dissertation at the Faculty of Music in Belgrade, thus becoming the youngest Serbian Doctor of Arts.

He attended master classes with renowned artists such as Ralph Kirshbaum, Mischa Maisky, Alfred Brendel, Jens Peter Maintz, and David Strange.

Nemanja is currently playing the instrument made by Carlos Roberts from Cremona (2012).

He made permanent audio recordings for RTS, ORF, and RAI.

Nemanja Stanković was the principal cellist of the Belgrade Philharmonic Orchestra for the duration of eight seasons (2011 – 2019). From 2017 to 2018, he taught Cello at the Faculty of Arts in Niš, and is currently employed as an Assistant Professor at the Faculty of Music in Belgrade, at the Chamber Music Department.