„Nemanja Stanković is without a doubt one of our best cello players who actively performs easily navigating through, stylistically, a wide variety expressions“ (Radio Beograd 2, December 2018)

Nemanja Stanković, Serbian cellist and a Doctor of Arts, is one of the most impressive Serbian artists of the younger generation.

Born in Kragujevac (Serbia), he completed the Secondary School of Music in the class of Boža Saramandić, as the valedictorian. He graduated from the Belgrade Faculty of Music as Student of the year, where he studied in the class of Sandra Belić. He studied at the Vienna Conservatory in the class of Natalia Gutman, where, with the highest honours, he earned his Master of Arts degree in 2013. Nemanja completed his post-graduate studies at the Mozarteum University in Salzburg (Austria) with Enrico Bronzi, as well as at the Scuola di musica di Fiesole (Florence, Italy) in the class of Natalia Gutman and Elizabeth Wilson. In March 2015, he defended his doctoral thesis at the Belgrade Faculty of Music, becoming the youngest Serbian Doctor of Arts.

Stanković has so far had solo performances with the Belgrade Philharmonic Orchestra, RTS Symphony Orchestra, Camerata Serbica, Orchestra Giovanile Italiana, Czech Virtuosi, St. George Strings chamber orchestra, Niš Philharmonic Orchestra, Dušan Skovran String Ensemble, Bitola Chamber Orchestra, the Belgrade Faculty of Music Philharmonic Orchestra, Christianstad Symphoniker, Norbal… As a soloist, he has collaborated with conductors such as Rafael Payare, Fabrice Bollon, Bojan Suđić, Noam Zur, Denis Shapovalov, Biljana Radovanović, Lê Phi Phi, Nikola Paškovski…

From September 2017 he has been a member of the piano trio Immersio, giving performances in the USA, Canada, Japan, Mexico, Denmark, Turkey, Austria, France, Italy, Georgia, Ukraine, Senegal, Tunisia, Croatia and Malta.

As a chamber music artist, he has collaborated with Nemanja Radulović, Sandra Belić, Gabriel Feltz, Yury Revich, Jan Vogler, Eszter Haffner, Stanko Mandić, the Czech string quartet Noûs (Italy) and Epoque (Check Republic), the Pokret trio…

Nemanja Stanković has received awards and prizes of many competitions, including the International cello competition in Liezen (Austria), Jeunesses Musicales Competition in Belgrade (Serbia), Johannes Brahms (Austria), Fidelio Spezial (Austria), Antonio Janigro (Croatia), Petar Konjović (Serbia). In 2007, he was naimed the Most Promising Young Artist in Serbia by the ArtLink Belgrade artists’ association. This recognition led him to record his first CD featuring works of Paganini, Dvoržak, Davidoff, Haydn and Tchaikovsky.

In 2018 he was chosen as “The young musician of the year” by a music magazine “Muzika klasika”.

He has had remarkable solo performances at international festivals: BEMUS, Alpen Classica, Note di Primavera, Belgrade Cello Fest, BUNT, KotorArt.

He has attended masterclasses given by renowned musicians, including Ralph Kirshbaum, Mischa Mayski, Alfred Brendel, Jens Peter Maintz, David Strange…

Nemanja He is currently playing an instrument made by Carlos Roberts from Cremona (2012).

He has made recordings for RTS, ORF, RAI.

Since March 2011, Nemanja Stanković has been the principal cellist of the Belgrade Philharmonic Orchestra (2011 – 2019). He is currently employed as the Docent at the Faculty of Arts in Belgrade.

“Nemanja Stanković has a specific approach to understanding music resulting in the highest level of interpretation.“ (Natalija Gutman, cellist)

“Intense, subtle, inspired…” (Novosadski Dnevnik daily newspaper)

“It is fair to say that Stanković has proven that it is indeed possible to come very close to an ideal interpretation…” (Kulturni krugovi programme, Belgrade Radio 2)