Bojan Glušica,

concertmaster

Born in Novi Sad, where he graduated from the “Isidor Bajić” High School of Music in the class of the eminent educator Imre Jambor. Biografija

Dušan Birač

Bachelor Degree and master studies completed at the Academy of Arts in Novi Sad, class of Prof. Irina Jasvili Biografija

Iva Stanković

Born in Novi Sad in 1985. She started to play the violin at the age of five in the class of professor Caba Zima in music school “ Isidor Bajic”, where she graduated in 2004, as a valedictorian. Biografija

Aleksandar Uzelac

Born in 1981 in Subotica. He acquired primary and secondary education in Novi Sad and afterwards graduated at the Academy of Arts, class of prof. Florijan Balaz.a. Biografija

Vladimir Šaru

Born in 1984 in Novi Sad, where he graduated at the Academy of Arts in Novi Sad, class of prof. Vladimir Vrbaski. Biografija

Milena Spasić

Born in 1987 in Loznica. She graduated primary music school “Vuk Karadzic” in Loznica where she won numerous prizes and accolades at festivals and competitions. Biografija

Ana Klem Aksentijević,

Principal viola

Born in 1975. She started playing the violin at the age of five. She graduated both primary and secondary music school “Isidor Bajic” in Novi Sad, class of Imre Jambor. Biografija

Borut Pavlič

Born in Novi Sad where he graduated secondary music school as well as completed Bachelor’s degree and master studies. During his education, he attended numerous chamber orchestra and orchestra courses abroad.. Biografija

Milica Svirac,

Solo cello

Born in 1985 in Pancevo. She graduated at the Academy of Arts in Novi Sad, class of prof. Imre Kalman (2008). Biografija

Željko Ivović

Born in 1984. He was a student at School of music talents in Cuprija, class of prof. Relja Cetkovic. Biografija

Miloš Matić

Born in 1974 in Sremska Mitrovica. He graduated and completed master studies at the Academy of Arts in Novi Sad, class of professors Nebojsa Ignjatovic and Ivica Marusevic. Biografija

David Sič

Born in Subotica in 1989. He enrolled the Academy of Arts in Novi Sad in 2009, class of prof. Ivica Marusevic. Biografija

Laura Levai Aksin

Born in Subotica. She graduated and completed her master studies at the Academy of Arts in Novi Sad, class of prof. Marijan Egic. Biografija

Vera Dragaš

Born in 1972 in Novi Sad where she graduated secondary music school “Isidor Bajic”, class of prof. Zuzana Egic and Academy of Arts, class of Ljubisa Petrusevski Biografija

Robert Borbelj

Born in Zrenjanin in 1977, where he completed his primary and secondary education in class of Martin Dudas… Biografija