Table of Biography

Shamari Fears is an American singer-songwriter, dancer, and actress. Shamari Fears is best known as the lead singer in the R&B group Blaque. Moreover, she also starred in season 11 of the reality television series The Real Housewives of Atlanta.

Early Life

Shamari Fears was born Shamari Jaqua Wright-Fears on February 22, 1980, in Detroit, Michigan. Moreover, her other name is Shamari DeVoe. She holds an American nationality and belongs to the African-American ethnicity. Similarly, her age is 44 years and her sun sign is Pisces. She was born to an African-American mother and father, whom she often features on her social media pages. Moreover, she has a sibling, a sister named Martina Fears.

Shamari Fears began singing at the age of three. After her family moved to Atlanta in the mid-1980s, Georgia, Fears grew up deeply influenced by the rich musical tradition of the city as well as by Mariah Carey. Talking about her education, firstly, she attended Southwest DeKalb High School. Then, Fears had a Bachelor of Arts degree in sociology from Georgia State University.

Career and Professional Life

Shamari Fears started performing publicly during her middle and high school years and formed a country-urban girl group named Butz. She was so sure that she would succeed that she spread rumors of landing a record deal. After the group disbanded, she formed another and named it Intrigue. Fears met Natina Reed, who had recently moved to Atlanta as well, in high school. As Fears worked with Intrigue and landed a recording deal with Elektra Records, Reed formed Blaque. Fears were later introduced to Brandi Williams at a talent show. When she joined Reed in Blaque, Williams did the same as well.

Reed met Lucy “Left Eye” Lopes, a member of the girl group TLC, through her brother Ronald Lopes. Impressed by the girls, Lopes offered them a contract with her own production company, Left Eye Productions. The group made their first appearance in 1997, in the music video for Lil’ Kim’s ‘Not Tonight (Remix)’. On June 1, 1999, their self-titled debut album was out through Trackmasters and Columbia labels. Opening at number 23 on Billboard’s Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums chart, and at number 53 on the official Billboard 200, the album would go on to receive RIAA’s platinum certificate.

‘808’, the lead single of the album, was well-received by fans and critics alike and was certified gold. In mid-1999, Blaque toured with the boy band ‘N Sync’ as one of their opening acts. A year later, Fears, alongside other members of the group, was present as a cheerleader in the cult classic teen comedy ‘Bring It On. Their second album, ‘Blaque Out’, was about to be released in 2001 but was shelved after Columbia Records nullified their contract. However, it was eventually out on January 29, 2002. Containing 15 tracks, the album was not as big of a success as Blaque’s debut album, but it did earn rave reviews from their fans.

More about her career

On April 25, 2002, Lopes was killed in a traffic accident in La Ceiba, Honduras. Following this, Blaque signed a recording deal with Elektra Records and started working on what was to be their third album. ‘Torch’, their intended third album, was ultimately shelved despite featuring Missy Elliott, songwriter Linda Perry, and producer Rodney Jerkins. In 2008, there were talks of releasing the completed album exclusively on iTunes but that didn’t amount to anything. By 2005, Fears had shifted her focus to building a solo career for herself and signed with Darkchild Records. Despite this, Blaque regrouped to work on their fourth album, titled ‘Private Show’. The album was completed in 2009, but it too was never out.

Furthermore, their TV show ‘Blaque in the House’ had not been picked up. They put out the singles, ‘Cut You Off’, ‘All Nighter’, ‘Blue Jeans’, and ‘High Definition on YouTube and decided to go their separate ways. Three years later, on July 28, 2012, Fears reunited with Reed and Williams at the Left Eye Music Festival in Decatur, Georgia, and performed their most popular single ‘’808’. After the event, they were contacted by artist manager Inga “Nandi” Willis, who offered them a contract for their next album and a reality television show. Unfortunately, Reed was killed in a traffic accident on 26 October 2012. She and Williams decided to disband soon after. However, their song, ‘Cut You Off’, was later leaked online.

Shamari Fears – Net Worth 2024

Shamari Fears has an estimated net worth of around USD 4 million but her salary and income are under review. Since being on RHOA, her star has been rising on Instagram. With over 142K followers, she’s earning between $370.00 and $600.00 per post. We can expect her Instagram earnings to go even higher as more endorsements pour in. Coming to Fears’s husband’s net worth, throughout his music career, Ronnie DeVoe has amassed an estimated net worth of $500,000. This figure might seem paltry considering Ronnie has a thriving music career.

Relationship Status

Shamari Fears is a married woman. Fears married her longtime boyfriend Ronald Boyd “Ronnie” DeVoe Jr. on March 10, 2006. He is a member of the R&B/pop group New Edition and the R&B/hip hop group Bell Biv DeVoe. She gave birth to their twin sons, Ronald and Roman, in late 2017. Currently, the pair areas living there without any sign of divorce. We can also see her love for her family through the posts she uploads on her social media accounts.

Shamari Fears – Body Measurement

Coming to the body measurement part, Shamari Fears has a height of 5 ft. 8 inches and she weighs 55 kg. Also, she has dark brown eyes and black hair. Her body measurements are 34-24-35 inches and her bra size is 34B. Moreover, she has a dark complexion with a very pretty face. Also, she has a very curvy body.

Shamari Fears – Social Media

Talking about social media platforms, Shamari Fears is quite active on social media platforms. She is active on Instagram with 429 K followers and also on Twitter with 20.3 K followers. Similarly, she has a Facebook page with 756 followers. She very often posts something on her social media accounts. Her accounts are full of her family and her working pictures.

More Singer

Shamari Fears Fans Also Viewed

ncG1vNJzZmieoprAqbHRqaasrF6YvK570qGYppminnqnscCrqmg%3D