Shamari Fears is a singer-songwriter, dancer, and actress from the United States. Shamari Fears rose to prominence as the lead singer of the R&B band Blaque. She began singing when she was three years old. Fears grew up in Atlanta, Georgia, after her family moved there in the mid-1980s. She was heavily influenced by the city’s rich musical culture as well as Mariah Carey.

DeVoe joined the cast of Bravo’s reality show The Real Housewives of Atlanta in November 2018 for the show’s eleventh season. DeVoe declared on September 26, 2019, that she would not be returning for the twelfth season.

Her net worth is reported to be over $4 million USD, however her salary and income are currently under review. Her Instagram star has risen since her appearance on RHOA. She earns between $370.00 and $600.00 every post with over 142K followers. As more endorsements come in, we should expect her Instagram revenues to skyrocket. In terms of Fears’ husband’s financial worth, Ronnie DeVoe has acquired a net worth of $500,000 during the course of his music career. Given Ronnie’s successful music career, this number may appear insignificant.

Shamari formed a new band, Intrigue, after Butz split. Fears met Natina Reed in high school, who had recently come to Atlanta as well. Reed founded Blaque while Fears worked with Intrigue and obtained a record deal with Elektra Records. At a talent show, Fears was introduced to Brandi Williams. Williams did the same when she joined Reed in Blaque.

Through her brother Ronald Lopes, Reed met Lucy “Left Eye” Lopes, a member of the girl group TLC. Lopes was so taken with the girls that she offered them a contract with her company, Left Eye Productions. In 1997, the trio made their first appearance in Lil’ Kim’s ‘Not Tonight (Remix)’ music video. Their self-titled debut album was released on June 1, 1999, on the Trackmasters and Columbia labels.

Their album was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) after debuting at number 23 on Billboard’s Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums list and number 53 on the official Billboard 200.

Their tracks “808” and “Bring It All to Me” both charted in the Billboard Hot 100 Top 10. Fears was also featured on Bell Biv DeVoe’s Da Hot S*** album from 2001. She made her acting debut in the films Bring It On and Honey. She appeared on the reality television show The Real Housewives of Atlanta in 2018. Fears has starred in Lil’ Kim’s “Ladies Night” and Ludacris’ “Welcome To Atlanta” music videos. (4)

Shamari definitely added to the drama on RHOA during the one season she was a full-time cast member, which featured a violent discussion with Porsha. They did not, however, have an explosive feud, as is common in the “Real Housewives” franchise. Shamari first came on the show in 2018 as an official housewife, but was relegated to a “friend” in 2019.

Shamari Fears, however, decided to not come back for Season 12. Fears claims she left the Real Housewives of Atlanta because of poor editing. The award-winning singer, who is currently starring in BET Presents: The Encore, claims that she was represented as a “drunk” and that the filmmakers did not capture the complete image of her life. (5)