Shamari a.k.a. Shamari Fears was born in Detroit, MI. Shamari began cultivating her soulful voice at the tender age of three. When her family relocated to Atlanta, GA in the mid 1980's, Shamari poured herself into her music. During Middle and High School, Shamari began performing publicly. Shamari entered into her school's Talent Show and won 2nd place for her soulful rendition of Mariah Carey's "Hero". Shamari's Talent Show success led to the formation of her group Buutz (a country-urban female group). Ever enthusiastic and sure of success, Shamari proclaimed that she had a "deal". Soon after, Buutz disbanded and Shamari formed the urban female group Intrigue. During that time, Shamari met Lisa "Left Eye" Lopes of TLC, which resulted in the 1996 joining of Brandi D. Williams and Natina Reed, which together formed the sensational, multi-platinum R&B-Pop female group Blaque. As the collective protégé's of Lisa Lopes, Blaque soon began to flourish as the fresh new faces of R&B-Pop, resulting in an invitation for a cameo appearance in Lil' Kim's "Ladies Night" video. In 1997, Lisa Lopes flew with the group to NYC to meet with the Chairman and CEO of Sony Music Entertainment Corporation, Thomas D. "Tommy" Mattola. Blaque gave an impromptu performance showcasing their sultry, soulful and innovative style resulting in an immediate contract with Columbia Records. For almost two years, Blaque worked meticulously on their self-titled debut album, releasing their first single "808" on March 23, 1999. "808" was an immediate success, reaching #8 on the Billboard Hot 100 Chart and quickly was certified Platinum. With much public anticipation, on June 1, 1999 their self-titled debut album was released, which achieved domestic sales exceeding 1.5 million units, resulting in the outstanding accomplishment of being certified Platinum as well. Blaque also released their Billboard Hot 100 Chart topping single "Bring It All To Me" (featuring J.C. Chavez on N'Sync), which achieved it's peak position of #4 on the chart. The tremendous success of the LP led to two incredible domestic tours, first with N'Sync and then with TLC, followed by numerous Award Show Nominations and Winnings. In 2000, entranced by the girls' talent and energy, the production team of Bring It On cast them in supporting character roles in the Major Motion Picture, also starring Gabrielle Union and Kirsten Dunst. Shamari starred as "Lava", a cheerleader from the Clover's squad. Bring It On, the first feature film Shamari starred in as an actress, enjoyed huge worldwide box office success, earning more than $68 Million in United States alone. The ladies were also requested to record the first single "As If" from the Bring It On Motion Picture Soundtrack. In November of the same year, Shamari and her Blaque counterparts were offered the prestigious honor, which they accepted, to appear in a cameo role on Pamela Anderson's worldwide hit TV show V.I.P., granting them the prestige of being one of only two musical guests ever requested to appear. In 2001, Blaque recorded their much anticipated Sophomore Album BlaqueOut. Additionally, Shamari was pursued by the world renowned R&B group Bell Biv DeVoe (BBD) to record as a feature vocalist on their Universal Records Album. Additionally, Shamari also completed her amazing year by recording, along with Blaque group member Brandi D. Williams, the track "Can't Trust Myself" for the Major Motion Picture On The Line starring Lance Bass and Joey Fatone on N'Sync. Much to the dismay of eager fans worldwide, Columbia Records agreed to release the ladies from further recording commitment rather than releasing Blaque's Sophomore Album. In 2003, Elektra Records quickly seized the opportunity to sign Blaque to their roster of Multi-Platinum Recording Artists. Enthralled by their vocal performance, Blaque was successfully pursued to record their hit single "I'm Good" for the Honey Motion Picture Soundtrack starring Jessica Alba. Hot on the tails of the successful Honey soundtrack single "I'm Good", Blaque members Shamari and Brandi D. Williams embarked overseas on a European Tour. Soon after, prior to the release of Blaque's third album Torch, the ladies elected to take a hiatus in order to pursue impending Solo Projects after the departure of Natina Reed as a Blaque group member due to the impending birth of her first born child. In 2004, Shamari signed a Solo Artist Recording Deal with Dark Child / Universal Records. Shamari is currently immersed in the creative process of recording her Solo Rock-Urban-Pop Debut Album, which is anticipated for worldwide release in 2006!