Date of Birth: 1980, February 22 Years: 40 years old Nation of birth: United States of America Name Shamari fears birth name Shamari DeVoe Nationality American Place of birth / city Detroit, Mich., ethnicity White Profession Singer, songwriter, dancer, actress Working for Group R and B Net worth $500 thousand eye color Brown eyes Hair color Brown face color Black Famous for blaque Married Yes Married to Ronnie DeVoe (d. 2006) Films Go ahead

Shamari Fears is the lead singer of Grupo R and B, Blaque. She is also known for being a member of the Alpha Kappa sorority. Her group album reached the Top 25 of both the R and B charts and was certified platinum. She began acting during her middle and high school years and formed a rural-urban girl group called Buutz. She has been married to New Edition’s Ronnie DeVoe and Bell Biv DeVoe, since March 2006. The couple have twin boys born in 2017.

Early life and education of Shamari’s fears

Shamari Fears was born on February 22, 1980 in Detroit, Michigan, United States of America. She belongs to the American nationality and her ethnicity is black.

Shamari Fears spent her childhood in Detroit with her family. Her mother began cultivating her soulful voice at the tender age of three. Her family moved to Atlanta, where she completed her high school education.

During that time, Miedos de Shamari began performing publicly. Fears later entered her school’s talent show in which she won 2 North Dakota spot for her soulful rendition of Mariah Carey’s ‘Hero’. Her success on the Talent Show led to the formation of the Ella Butz group.

Shamari Fears Career

Moving on to her professional career, Miedos de Shamari began singing at the young age of three. Later, she met TLC’s Lisa ‘Left Eye’ Lopes which resulted in the 1996 move of Brandi D. Williams and Natina Reed who together formed the multi-platinum sensational R and B-pop girl group Blaque. That group gave an impromptu performance showcasing their sensual, soulful and innovative style, which resulted in an immediate contract with Columbia Records.

Blaque also released his Billboard Hot 100 chart-topping single ‘Bring It All To Me’ which reached its peak position of 4 on the chart. Fears appears as ‘Lava’, a cheerleader for Clover’s team. Following that, the first feature film Fears of Shamari featured as an actress enjoyed huge worldwide box office success, earning over $68 million in the US alone.

Additionally, Miedos de Shamari ended their wonderful year recording, together with Brandi D. Williams, a member of the Blaque group, the song ‘Can’t Trust Me’. Shamari signed a solo artist recording deal with Dark Child / Universal Records in 2004. She is currently in the creative process of recording her rock, urban and pop solo album debut. That was planned for a worldwide release in 2006.

Net Worth, Salary, and Body Measurement

Shamari Fears’ net worth is expected to be quite low as she has not been that active in singing . However, her husband Nonnie DeVoe has an estimated net worth of $500 thousand. He has a very attractive body with his slender figure and the perfect height. She looks very sexy in her light brown eyes.

Personal life and affair

Moving on to her personal life, Shamari Fears is a married woman. She married her boyfriend Ronnie DeVoe on March 10, 2006. Her husband is one of the members of the pop group R and B Ne Edition.

Even after a decade of their marriage, they still appear to be married today. They often attend events and parties together and post a lot of photos. The couple have no children yet. They seem more focused on their career than having their own children and raising them.