Shamari Fears Net Worth:- Shamari Fears real name is Shamari DeVoe. She is a singer-songwriter, dancer and actress from America. She is popular as the lead singer in the R&B girl group Blaque.

In this article, you will read about Shamari Fears Net Worth, Age, Wiki, Biography, Husband, Family & More.

Shamari Fears Net Worth

Shamari Fears estimated net worth is approx $4 million. As she is a singer-songwriter, dancer and actress from America.

Shamari Fears Age, Wiki, Biography

Shamari is 42 years old. She was born on 22 February 1980 in Detroit, Michigan, United States. Her zodiac sign is Cancer.

She comes in the reality television series The Real Housewives of Atlanta. She holds American nationality.

Name Shamari DeVoe Profession Singer-songwriter, dancer and actress Age 42 years old Birth date 22 February 1980 Birthplace Detroit, Michigan, United States Zodiac sign Cancer Nationality American

Shamari Fears Husband

Shamari marrid Ronnie DeVoe in 2006. He is an American singer and rapper. They have two children Ronald III and Roman Elijah.

Shamari Fears Family

Shamari’s father’s name is not known. Her mother’s name is not known. Her parent’s occupation detail is not mentioned on any web page. Her sibling details are not known.

Social Media Links

Instagram

Twitter

Facebook

Fact’s About Shamari Fears

Shamari Fears estimated net worth is approx $4 million. As she is a singer-songwriter, dancer and actress from America.

Shamari is 42 years old. She was born on 22 February 1980 in Detroit, Michigan, United States.

Shamari marrid Ronnie DeVoe in 2006. He is an American singer and rapper.

She is popular as the lead singer in the R&B girl group Blaque.

FAQ About Shamari Fears

Q. Who is Shamari Fears?

Ans- Shamari Fears real name is Shamari DeVoe. She is a singer-songwriter, dancer and actress from America. She is popular as the lead singer in the R&B girl group Blaque.

Q. What is Shamari Fears Net Worth?

Ans- Shamari Fears estimated net worth is approx $4 million. As she is a singer-songwriter, dancer and actress from America.