He has more than 30 film roles behind him, acted in many TV series, achieved a large number of successfully played theater roles, and is equally successful as a director. He proved himself as a songwriter, tried his hand at the role of host of the "Russian Roulette" quiz, and also showed that he knows how to deal with marketing.

Before the age of 62, Irfan Kurić was born in Sarajevo. At one point in his life, he decided to take his father's name as his surname, and today everyone in the former Yugoslavia, as well as beyond, knows him as Irfan Mensura. As he said, he remembers his days in Sarajevo for "baraberluk" and the fact that he was kicked out of school in the third year of high school due to restless "puberty bugs", which he finished in Nis, and then followed Belgrade and studies at the Academy of Theatre, Film and Television.

"I was a scumbag in Sarajevo and I am proud of my scumbag when I was young, because I managed to escape from it. Although there are some traces left, I will never admit it. I rarely go to Sarajevo because the people I would like to meet are no longer there. I admit that I am nostalgic for the South, but not for the space and geography, but for the people who surrounded me", the actor who played one of the main male roles in the first Serbian telenovela "Jelena" told "Vijesti".

He learned from Zoran Radmilović that it is important for a successful actor to be the man he plays on stage, to "cancel himself", and he successfully adheres to that lesson.

"I don't recognize Irfan Mensur privately. I respect him, but I don't recognize him. I think I'm only important as Irfan Mensur on stage. What I am private is something that is only mine, my friends. I don't like people and I don't like to make contacts. I'm quite closed and shy, not because I'm insecure, but because everyone expects an actor to be someone who will approach someone and meet someone's needs, and I think I'm just a good craftsman who knows how to do his job, whether it's on stage or in front of the camera," said the honest actor who also worked as a professor for eight years.

He brought out two generations of students whom he unsuccessfully tried to persuade to give up a job that requires so much sacrifice, and which he loves so much. He believes that happiness is necessary for everything in life, including acting.

"The one above, who governs all of us, must look at us from above, one day point his finger at us and say: 'Come on now, if you take your chance, you've taken it, if not, the darkness will eat you up.' Although Danilo Lazović and I were the best students in my class, they all started working and making careers before me. I was desperate until the day that someone looked at me from above and said: 'Now you,'" says the actor who took advantage of his chance.

One "I won't" uttered about twenty times in a scene that lasts only three to four minutes in his acting debut brought him four applauses and offers for new roles. His film and theater roles are remembered. And he remembers them and chooses his favorite ones.

"When it comes to films, I would single out a few that are dear to me because in some way, with my participation, I created the value of that film. These are 'The Beach Guard in Winter', 'The Dog Who Loved Trains', 'The Smell of Quince', 'The King's End'. When it comes to theater, I would single out the roles of Nahod Simeon, Marcel Proust, Prince Pavle and Pavle Isakovich. These are plays that in some way marked my theater career in terms of both creativity and value", are just some of the roles that Mensur is proud of.

For the last 25 years, he has also been involved in theater directing, by his own admission, perhaps even more intensively than acting. The plays he likes to single out are "The Blue Bird", which was a hit in the JDP, "Nijinsky", "The Gatherer", which won him the "Zoran Radmilović" award, and the last one, "Chekhov Said Goodbye to Tolstoy", which premiered performed last week.

"I've been enjoying directing more and more lately, as well as the solitude I need to get ready. It's better in the theater than in the movies, because in the theater I feel like a player, and that pleases me as a former athlete (he was a youth representative in volleyball). The film is more about craftsmanship. I don't like that on film, as an actor, I can't participate in the final product. I do something and then it goes into the hands of some other people, who cut me up, cut me off. That's why I prefer the theater," Mensur is honest.

So honest that he admits that he doesn't like the role of Gavrilo Princip in Veljko Bulajić's film, "which ate him", and that he is aware that awards do not mean much and that the actor does not become more appreciated or sought after because of them. Awards, as he said, are just a confirmation that you exist and an opportunity to feel good at least 24 hours a day.

He does not consider himself a poet, but only a man who can "help music to shape a thought", but the songs for which he wrote the lyrics, such as the iconic "Blue Bird" and "Street with the Name of a Suspicious Hero" have successfully lasted for years. For Đorđe David, he wrote eight out of nine songs for the album "Balkan".

At the end of the conversation, he revealed that he will soon "deal" with a monodrama that will be adapted for him by Miro Gavran, the most performed Croatian playwright, with which he will try to tour the region and "activate" himself as an actor a bit more.

A believing atheist

Mensur does not separate himself from the rosary on which there is a star of David, a crescent moon and a cross and admits that he has his own god.

"I believe in a god I invented, who is the sum of all faiths. I pray to him every night for the health of my sons, my family, my friends, and for my personal health. I even know what he looks like but I would never draw him or talk about it. It's just mine and I wouldn't share it with anyone. I'm kind of a believing atheist. I don't recognize the institution of the temple, I respect it, but I don't recognize it, because I have my god and my temple", says Mensur, while showing him his favorite rosary made by his colleague Bogdan Diklić.

The night he lost his right to be human

One night in 1992, he had to leave Belgrade.

"In 1992, I lost my right to be human because some people thought I had no right to exist and they made it clear to me. At that time, being called Irfan Mensur in Belgrade was rude. And Belgrade raised me, educated me, invested in me. I didn't feel like a foreign body. However, people appeared who thought I was a foreign body and showed me this by using force. To force, a man who has any intellect can respond by retreating and agreeing that humiliation is the only possible form of life at that moment. But you have to survive that humiliation. I survived and recovered. It was sad and ugly, I was humiliated, but it all passed with my overcoming problems, giving up the environment that raised and educated me, and then returning out of spite".

Without culture, there is no state

"I don't remember a time when the culture was good. It has always been the target of various political currents, social fractures and needs. We are used to surviving. In these areas, those structures cannot understand that there is no state and nation without culture. "We all build states, nations and nationalities relying on political pamphlets, not on culture, which should be the basis for the eventual creation of all the above," Mensur said.