He may have his hands full as a Hollywood star, but Don Johson is willing to clear his schedule if it means spending time with his kids. Though he’s killed it on the big screen for the last few decades, the Miami Vice alum’s role as a doting father deserves just as much recognition.

The legendary actor became a dad for the first time when he welcomed son Jesse Johnson with ex-girlfriend Patti D’Arbanville in 1982. The little bundle of joy arrived six years after the Django Unchained actor divorced from wife Melanie Griffith for the first time in 1976.

Don and the Working Girl star reunited in 1989, however, and welcomed their only daughter together, Dakota Johnson, that same year. The handsome hunk and Melanie were then married for almost seven years before calling it quits again for the second and final time in 1996.

It wasn’t until Don met Kelley Phleger in the late 1990s that he expanded his famous family. After falling in love with the kindergarten teacher while filming Don’s long-running action series Nash Bridges, the couple got married in 1999.

Not even a year after Don and Kelley tied the knot, the two lovebirds welcomed their first child together, daughter Grace Johnson, in 2000. They later welcomed son Jasper Johnson in 2002, as well as their youngest son, Deacon Johnson, four years later in 2006.

Though juggling his showbiz career and time at home with his family hasn’t always been the easiest task, Don has made parenting his No. 1 priority as he’s entered the later years of his life. Despite sharing a close relationship with all of his kids, a friend of the Golden Globe winner revealed he’s “trying to make up for lost time” with his older ones, Jesse and Dakota.

“He’s a doting, involved dad with the younger three,” the pal exclusively told Closer Weekly in November 2019. “And nothing makes him happier than when his whole brood is together.”

Now that Don has gotten the hang of balancing his life both on and off the camera, the Knives Out actor’s No. 1 priority is being a good role model for his kids. “I do what I can to make sure young people understand that drugs can destroy their lives,” he told Closer. “I don’t have any vices … except my children.”