Don Johnson, 74, has shared a rare photo of himself with all of his six children.

The Miami Vice veteran posted the snap to Instagram for Father's Day to his 274K followers.

shared photos of all of them in a proud Father's Day post on Instagram.

'Happy Fathers Day all you Dads! Happiness is hanging with my 6. Boy I love them all up!' shared the Book Club actor.

The children have different mothers and one of them is adopted.

His oldest is 41-year-old Jesse Wayne Johnson whose mother is Patti D'Arbanville, 72, an actress who dated Cat Stevens.

Next is 34-year-old Dakota Johnson whose mother is Melanie Griffith, 66. Don and Melanie married twice; first for a year in 1976 then in 1989 until 1996.

Then there are the three younger kids.

He has 24-year-old Atherton Grace Johnson, 22-year-old Jasper Johnson and 18-year-old Deacon Johnson.

Johnson had them all with his current wife Kelley Phleger.

The sixth child Don was referring to is 38-year-old Alexander Bauer, the son Melanie had with actor Steven Bauer.

Don reportedly adopted Alexander when he was wed to Melanie.

In one of the images, 27-year-old Stella Banderas is also seen; she is the daughter of Melanie and Antonio Banderas.

'I love kids, so it's more good times, more joy and more fun. It's no less exciting this time than it was the first time,' Johnson shared with OK! magazine following the birth of his youngest son in 2006.

Don was a massive TV star in the 1980s with Miami Vice, a series about undercover police officers that hunt down drug dealers during the cocaine boom of the 1980s.

This series is largely remembered for the stylish clothes Detectives Sonny Crockett and Ricardo Tubbs wore and the hit music.

But the story lines were solid and mirrored the real life crimes that shattered southern Florida in the wild 1980s.

Don then went on to star in the hit series Nash Bridges opposite Cheech Marin.

The crime show was set in San Francisco.

More recently he has starred in films like Book Club with Jane Fonda and Knives Out with Jamie Lee Curtis.

Don - who used to party hard - changed when he met Kelley, a Montessori school teacher.

In 2017 he told DailyMail.com: 'People don’t develop to the place where they can have long-lasting, mature relationships till they’re in their 30s, and for some of us.'

He then said, gesturing to himself, 'It takes even longer than that.'

Don said he stopped doing drugs with the help of Buddhism and New Age self help. He also let go of 'fear.'

'When I was a young man in Hollywood, drugs, alcohol and partying were everywhere and it was hard to escape.

'It doesn’t become a problem immediately, it takes time, and it led to some poor choices.’

By the late Noughties, Johnson changed, selling off his 20 cars and his ranch in Colorado.

A few years later, he won a $19 million settlement for a share of the profits from Nash Bridges, which he had conceived with the writer Hunter S Thompson.