The stretch of Fifth Avenue between 82nd and 105th Streets is dubbed the Museum Mile - an area where you’ll find yourself surrounded by some of the city’s coolest museums. What’s more, getting there from the Manhattan at Times Square will take you through some great NYC sights as well.

But first things first. What museums will you find along the Museum Mile?

Metropolitan Museum of Art

Location: From 82nd to 86th Streets

Collection: Anything from Ancient Art to Modern art, sculptures and relics.

Neue Galerie New York

Location: 1048 Fifth Avenue, at 86th Street

Collection: German and Austrian art and design.

Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum

Location: 1071 Fifth Avenue, at 88th Street

Collection: Modern art and amazing architecture.

National Academy of Design

Location: 1083 Fifth Avenue, at 89th Street

Collection: 19th and 20th century American art, and architecture works.

Cooper Hewitt, Smithsonian Design Museum

Location: 2 E 91st Street, between Fifth and Madison Avenues

Collection: Contemporary design and historic objects.

Jewish Museum

Location: 1109 Fifth Avenue, between 92nd and 93rd Streets

Collection: Thousands of years of Jewish culture and art.

Museum of the City of New York

Location: 1220 Fifth Avenue, at 103rd Street

Collection: Art, prints, objects and textiles recounting the history of NYC.

El Museo del Barrio

Location: 1230 Fifth Avenue, at 104th Street

Collection: Latin American and Caribbean culture in the US, especially Puerto Rican heritage.

Walking Tour from the Manhattan at Times Square to the Museum Mile

Through Central Park. Approximately 3.2 miles or a 1:15-hour walk - selfie stops not included!

Exit The Manhattan and walk up Seventh Avenue to 59th St.

Turn right on 59th St/Central Park South.

At the corner of Sixth Avenue, turn left to enter Central Park.

From here, you have many options, but we suggest walking around The Pond for some iconic views of Central Park nestled between NYC buildings.

Continue to The Mall and Literary Walk for some tree-lined street views.

Reach Bethesda Terrace and Bethesda Fountain.

Continue on the right side of The Lake, past Loeb Boathouse.

Cross East Drive to reach the Conservatory Water, Hans Christian Andersen and Alice in Wonderland statues.

Continue up the path until you reach 79th St Traverse to exit Central Park.

Walk a couple of blocks along Fifth Avenue and, voilà! You’ve reached The MET and the beginning of the Museum Mile.

Along Fifth Avenue. Approximately 3 miles or a 1-hour walk.

Exit the Manhattan and walk along 50th St to go through Rockefeller Center and Radio City Music Hall.

Turn left on Fifth Avenue - you can take a short detour to check out St. Patrick’s Cathedral. Otherwise, continue up Fifth Avenue.

You’ll pass some of the most famous high-end shops, such as Bergdorf Goodman, Tiffany & Co and Louis Vuitton.

Continue to 59th St/Central Park South - you’ll go past The Plaza Hotel and the Grand Army Plaza.

Carry on walking along Fifth Avenue. This is mostly a residential area with beautiful apartment buildings on your right and Central Park on your left.

The Museum Mile starts at The MET.