The Museum Mile Festival takes place on Tuesday June 9. From 6-9pm all of the museums along Museum Mile offer free admission to the public. Fifth Avenue will be closed to traffic, and there will be live music and other attractions. For full details, visit the festival website. In honor of this upcoming event, Touro College of Pharmacy student Rosa Ghiam shares her experience visiting the Metropolitan Museum of Art:

The Metropolitan Museum of Art has magnificent collections of art and antiquities. My mother and I used to take frequent trips to many museums, especially this one. It had been a long time since we had been there, but on her recent trip to New York, we decided that we should go. Reminiscent of days past when I was a little girl, we held hands and walked up the steps and turned to look at the park. The museum is located on the eastern edge of Central Park along Manhattan’s Museum Mile. It is by area one of the world’s largest art galleries.

Feelings can be overwhelming walking from room to room of incredible and authentic paintings by different artists from around the world. Art is not all that is there to see; antique musical instruments, stained glass windows, ancient statuses, and Egyptian artifacts are just some of the exhibits. It would easily be possible to spend days touring the rooms and still not be able to see every piece. It’s just that huge. In addition to the permanent collection, there are rotating exhibitions of paintings. My mother and I were able to see the exhibitions on loan from the Louvre in Paris.

The first exhibit we saw was Egyptian art that consisted of sculptures, jewelry, and many other things. I am more of a painting person, so as we walked along I became impatient and irritated because all we were seeing was sculptures, china sets, tools, and jewelry. I seemed to walk right through the exhibits I wasn’t really interested in. Next was the walk through the Modern Art room that included eccentric furniture. As we entered the room with many of the paintings I noticed one in particular. The painting that stood out the most to me was by Arthur Segal. The medium of this piece of art work was oil on a board. The first thing I noticed about this painting was that he got so into it that he even painted the frame. I was surprised because you really don’t see that too often. It took me a while to figure out that the name of the painting was “Strasse auf Helgoland II”. This painting was given to the Metropolitan Museum of Art as a gift from the Rolf and Margit Weinberg Foundation. It came from Zurich, Switzerland in 2003 and it was painted in 1924. The painting contains a lot of black, which made the few colors that are present really stick out.

If you were to visit the Met while on a break from studying, make sure you take your break early. Even though we arrived in the morning, the crowds seemed to pour in after noon and stay for most of the day. I still wasn’t able to see everything, but I definitely plan to return.

To visit the Met and many other museums for FREE, take part in the Museum Mile Festival, June 9th from 6:00 to 9:00 pm.

Contributed by: Rosa Ghiam, Touro College of Pharmacy student