Three years ago, documentary maker Kevin Macdonald won an Oscar for One Day in September, his outstanding reconstruction of the terrorist hostage crisis at the 1972 Munich Olympic. It was as enlightening as the best sort of political history, as enthralling as the most page-flippingly exciting thriller. But now he has surpassed himself. This is a documentary that, if there is any justice at all, should win him a special diamond-studded Academy award: a real-life human drama that David Lean would have loved. It had my audience on the edge of its seats, lips parted, knuckles whitened.

This is the story of two British climbers: Simon Yates and Joe Simpson, respectively 21 and 25 years old, who in 1985 set out to scale the Siula Grande, a terrifyingly difficult 21,000ft peak in the Peruvian Andes. They planned to do so, what's more, in the old-fashioned Alpinist style: just two guys connected by a rope, making their way up this unconquered and almost sheer face in what was effectively a continuous effort with minimal breaks and just one other man stationed at a lonely base camp.

Their addiction to the intoxicating thrill of climbing, coupled with the magnificent insouciance of youth, led them to take on a challenge which had defeated everyone else.

Readers of Simpson's bestseller about this ill-fated attempt will already know the horrifying situation that it led them into. I hadn't read it, and so was unprepared for its existential chill.

As the wind and snow howled around them, with visibility down to zero, and the temperature far lower than that, Simpson lost his footing and broke his leg, hanging free from his rope, swinging out into the abyss, threatening to bring Yates down with him. Even if he could be brought back to get a grip on the rock face, he was surely a dead man walking - or clambering.

Yates, poised desperately above him, and in any case almost certain Simpson was actually dead, had a choice to make. Should he just cut the rope, so that at least one of them could survive? This dilemma made both men legends in the climbing world, and those of us unfortunate enough to have seen the woeful mountain thriller Vertical Limit with Chris O'Donnell and Scott Glenn will know how Hollywood has plagiarised their lives.

Macdonald describes his film as a drama-documentary; it switches between a gasp-inducingly atmospheric reconstruction, with actors playing the climbers as their younger selves, and interviews with the present-day Yates and Simpson. These encounters with the two men make the film. They are classically English: not modest exactly - hardly that - but undemonstrative, reticent, resolutely undramatic.

"It looked steep," recalled one, and we too are vouchsafed a glimpse of the most awe-inspiring prospect imaginable. "Christ, it was big." They reminded me of the interviews I've seen with SAS men talking about the Bravo Two Zero adventure behind enemy lines in Iraq, with its similar survival dilemma - easy-going and almost casual about things which would reduce the rest of us to gibbering wrecks.

Simpson himself seems superhuman in his toughness, at one stage sucking filthy water from the freezing rock, like Shakespeare's Mark Antony, drinking the "stale of horses, and the gilded puddle/ Which beasts would cough at".

Their feelings about each other are an enigma. They are interviewed singly, in tough and unforgiving close-up. It's clearly a story they've told many times, for both men deliver a narrative worn as smooth as ice. Yet Macdonald's crampon gets a purchase.

The human story he has to tell is played out against a vertical white Sahara, a vast architecture of rock, ice and snow that makes human lives and human priorities look absurdly puny. Simpson, describing the forms into which the freezing rock was shaped by the wind, remembers "meringues and mushrooms and cornices all over the place". Yes - and all of them miles high and miles wide.

When one man finds himself plummeting into a vast crevasse, with its huge white ceiling and icy stalactites, it's like looking at a Ballardian rococo cathedral from another world, defying imagination and belief. Yet Macdonald's film, with the factual solidity of documentary and the imaginative daring of drama, somehow puts you in there with him.

"Great God, this is a terrible place," was what Scott finally said of the Antarctic, and Scott's adventure comes to mind watching this. But who gets to play Captain Oates? And if there is an Oatesian sacrifice to be made, or forced on someone else, then what has it all been for?

Something about the movie reminded me of that other great Andean horror story, the plane crash survivors forced into cannibalism, immortalised by Piers Paul Read in his book Alive - but with no comparable religious dimension. Neither man waxes poetic about getting close to God or the purity of creation. Simpson says that he was brought up a Catholic, but no thought of his maker inspired him to survive; at the end there is just nothing.

In fact, at the low point of his weakness and delirium and pain, Simpson hears music going round and round in his brain. Barber's Adagio? Beethoven's Ninth? Nope, it's Boney M's Brown Girl in the Ring, a brilliant moment in the film - exactly the sort of banal thing you might find yourself humming as you dangle over the precipice of your existence.

Macdonald's movie is thrilling not because of any divine or aesthetic rapture, but because the sheer vastness of the mountain landscape seems to go beyond beauty, exceeding the limits of the thinkable. It's a very real, scary kind of vertigo to experience in the cinema.