Katherine Vaz is the author of three novels, Saudade (St. Martin’s, 1994), a Barnes and Noble Discover Great New Writers selection, Mariana, published in six languages and picked by the Library of Congress as one of the Top Thirty International Books of 1998, and Above the Salt, to be published in 2023 by Flatiron Books/Macmillan.

Her collection Fado & Other Stories (University of Pittsburgh Press, 1997) won a Drue Heinz Literature Prize and Our Lady of the Artichokes (Bison Books, 2008) won a Prairie Schooner Award. Her most recent short story collection is The Love Life of an Assistant Animator & Other Stories was published by Tailwinds Press in 2017. The Heart is a Drowning Object, a collaboration with artist Isabel Pavão was released as an e-book with Artists Proof Editions.

Her children’s stories have appeared in anthologies by Viking, Penguin, and Simon & Schuster, and her short fiction has appeared in many magazines. She won a New York Film Academy and Writer’s Store national contest for a screenplay idea based on one of her stories.

She has been a Briggs-Copeland Fellow in Fiction at Harvard University and Fellow of the Radcliffe Institute for Advanced Study. She is the first Portuguese-American to have her work recorded by the Library of Congress (Hispanic Division) and teaches “Writing the Luso Experience” each summer in the Disquiet International Literary Conference in Lisboa, Portugal. Other honors include a National Endowment for the Arts Fellowship, a citation as a Portuguese-American Woman of the Year, an appointment to the six-person Presidential Delegation (Clinton) to the World’s Fair/Expo 98 in Lisboa, and a 2022 citation by the Portuguese-American Leadership Council of the U.S. as one of the all-time most influential women of Lusa heritage.

Asked in an interview about the best advice she received as a young writer, Vaz replied: “In my case, it was somebody saying, “Why don’t you tell me some of the things that are yours?” I think that looking for what you have inside you is the place to begin. But then, just studying stories for what they can teach you about what you can do with your own material, because you have to be an original. You cannot write like anyone else. By definition, original means that it has to come from you. So, you learn with the part of your brain that’s always trying to learn more, the way a musician has to be an original, but I’ve never met a musician who didn’t study music, what’s being done in the field. Mostly, it’s trying to say, “What’s my voice, and how do I create it?”

She lives in New York City with her husband, Christopher Cerf, an Emmy- and Grammy-winning TV producer, composer for Sesame Street, editor, and author.