David G. Hartwell, an editor who brought a literary sensibility to genres like horror, fantasy and science fiction, working with Frank Herbert, Philip K. Dick and other notable authors, has died. He was 74.

He was declared brain-dead on Jan. 20 at a hospital in Plattsburgh, N.Y., after falling down the stairs the day before at his home in Westport, N.Y., said his wife, the writer and editor Kathryn Cramer.

Mr. Hartwell worked at several publishing houses before starting as a consulting editor at Tor/Forge Books in the early 1980s. At his death, he was a senior editor there. He was nominated more than 40 times for Hugo Awards, among the most prominent prizes in science fiction, and won three times for editing.

Patrick Nielsen Hayden, a senior editor at Tor, said in an email that Mr. Hartwell had edited and published hundreds of books, including Mr. Dick’s novels “The Divine Invasion,” “The Transmigration of Timothy Archer” and “Radio Free Albemuth,” as well as novels in Mr. Herbert’s “Dune” saga and Gene Wolfe’s “The Book of the New Sun” series.

He also compiled dozens of anthologies, many with Ms. Cramer, including “The Space Opera Renaissance” (2006) and “Spirits of Christmas: Twenty Other-Worldly Tales” (1989), and he wrote “Age of Wonders: Exploring the World of Science Fiction” (1984).

Mr. Hartwell championed genre fiction long before crossover hits like the “Lord of the Rings” films, HBO’s “Game of Thrones” series and AMC’s “The Walking Dead” broadened its audience.

George R. R. Martin, whose novels are the basis for “Game of Thrones,” wrote a book with Lisa Tuttle early in his career, “Windhaven,” which Mr. Hartwell edited for his Timescape Books imprint.

“Tor’s long long track record as the pre-eminent publisher of science fiction and fantasy in the United States is based in no small part” on Mr. Hartwell’s work, Mr. Martin wrote in an online tribute.

David Geddes Hartwell was born on July 10, 1941, in Salem, Mass. He graduated from Wilmington High School in Wilmington, Mass., then from Williams College in 1963 before earning a master’s degree in English literature from Colgate University and a doctorate in comparative medieval literature from Columbia University in 1973.

He began his career at Signet in the early 1970s. In 1978, he joined Pocket Books, where he founded Timescape, which published several major science-fiction authors and released a series of “Star Trek” novels.

Mr. Hartwell married Patricia Wolcott in the late 1960s, and they divorced in 1992. He married Ms. Cramer in 1997. In addition to her, he is survived by two sisters, Rebecca Chin and Janice Hartwell; a son, Geoffrey, and a daughter, Alison Wolcott Hartwell, from his first marriage; and a son, Peter Cramer Hartwell, and a daughter, Elizabeth Cramer Hartwell, from his second.