Every game can be big fun. But to be honest every game has big flaws in different ways from user perspective or developer perspective.

For a deeper understanding check "Overview Karaoke Games" and "Recommended Games" in overview section. It tells you "whys" and "flaws".

To make it short:

If you like singstar or let's sing, we recommend Melody Mania for best overall user experience at the moment, followed by Vocaluxe.

If you like games like guitar hero, rockband or dance dance revolution: Performous is way to go. And there is also YARG.

To keep it simple: Ultrastar Play and Melody Mania are forks of UltraStar Deluxe, written in unity game engine.

They try to bring UltraStar Deluxe to modern technology standards. Cause UltraStar Deluxe uses old PASCAL Coding that no developer what to use anymore.

Ultrastar Play is the free version from the same Developer. But currently it is not further maintained.

Melody Mania is a commercial version on Steam to compensate the spend developement effort. It will have some exclusive features like online multiplayer. But the developer plans to give back some general improvements, bug fixes and so on from Melody Mania to UltraStar Play after a while.

Got problems with mics? Or songs? If you don't find the answer here or in known issues try out our Help Desk channel on our Discord. Players help players there. Many of them are so experienced that you wouldn't need direct help from a coder.

If you don't find help there you can try the special development Discord Server for Performous or Melody Mania. Here you can go to channels like "issues" or "user support". There is also a gitter chat for UltraStar Deluxe.

Keep in mind: if you do self-service then the developers got more time and energy to improve the games.

There are no song creators that do wishes in this community. But you can talk about good songs of course while chit-chating.

We have a curated song backlog to memorize most favorite songs that are liked by many. Yet it's not to be understood as wishlist.

The best way to get your favorite songs (that maybe special interest) is creating songs by yourself. It's easier than ever. Start with Karedi, YASS reloaded or UltraStar Creator now! In future there will be even AI features for more convenience with UltraSinger Project.

To help yourself: concentrate on songs that have an offical music video. cause all these games are designed for video backgrounds while singing in the end.

There are several third party websites that offer UltraStar song downloads. However, usually some effort is required to get these working.

Please bear in mind that any song, video, lyrics, music score, etc. may be copyright protected in your country.

If you download txt files (aka timecode files) please buy the equivalent music/music video files accordingly in trusted stores. Or vice versa, download only txt files for music that you already legally own.

---

The most active sites are:

USDB.animux (only txt files, works best with USDB SYNCER)

UltraStar-es (not legally proper! we do not recommend because of illegal torrents!!)

Use these websites at your own discretion.

---

Open Music game stands firmly against all forms of piracy. We neither support nor endorse piracy, as it is a violation of copyright law with serious legal consequences.

The best way to get songs (that maybe special interest) is creating songs by yourself. Check out our song editor section.

The game you're using can't handle or guessing automatically the encoding of the txt-file.

Make sure to convert the text file properly to UTF-8 encoding with "saving as".

Make sure that your song editor or tool is configured to save files with UTF-8.

Only download and upload txt files with UTF-8 encoding

⚠️ Watch out: if you go on third party pages it may occour that the txt file are saved as CP-1252/ANSI and only looks like UTF-8. Its just saved but not proper converted. That's a fault of the third-party.

Don't worry all games and third party will do UTF-8 in future - everyone agreed to that.

ℹ️ UTF-8 encoding is the future. It is a great encoding that can represent a vast number of symbols from all kinds of languages. Other encodings, like Windows code pages, are far more limited and are only suitable for a small family of languages.

There are many reasons for this.

One reason could be that there was no shared organization and community for years. Many coders were just doing their thing and don't having the energy about thinking all games, tools, txt-file-hostings and teams together. There's a lack of holistic view.

Another problem is that there weren't any project leads that make decisions actively - only maintainers keeping rough basics alive. It's still quite uncommon to have project managers in open source games. But this is essential when a community can't agree on features or new coders have to be found.

As a consequence without a motivated lead building a team there are no proper development teams with clear roles.

Finally, most of the projects use or used custom game engines. But nearly all modern game devs expect to have standard engines like unity, godot or unreal. They don't want to or simply can't build everything from scratch, especially unpaid or without any personal social benefits. This is why there is hardly progress for years.

The teams rely on following typical roles for game developement:

📊 Project manager: A project manager oversees all the developmental processes, defines the milestones and prioritize the tasks and features. He/she anticipates any potential problems or risks they may encounter. Plus they do onboarding/offboarding of team members.

💻 Game programmers: Game programming involves writing the code for the game, building the game engine, and producing playable versions for prototyping and eventual release.

📐 Game designer: Video game designers develop the rules of the gameplay. Designers determine the difficulty of gameplay, as well as the type of obstacles the player will encounter.

🎨🔊 Game artists: Animators, 3D artists, and FX artists are all responsible for developing the look and feel of the in-game assets. Sound designers and audio engineers create all the noises heard in-game, from the opening theme to the sound effects of the menu.

✅ Testers (QA): The quality assurance team tests a game over the course of its development. They report any bugs or crashes they experience.

🌍 Translators: Translators ensures that the game (incl. websites) is available and understood in many languages.

The roles has to be still implemented in GitHub pages and maybe in various related Discords.

Commercial games shut down if there's not enough revenue. Or just new consoles coming out. You loose all the songs you bought when changing the device. With open music games you can keep your collection over time because they can evolve with the future as long as it has a contributing community behind it.

Commercial music games always implode because they are commercial and have high license costs. Open music games are a way out of that logic, they are non-commercial.

You indirectly help musicians that are not listed in charts and make them visible.

Cause open source software is free it can also powering other new projects. For instance: If you support performous maybe a dj-music game can evolve in future based on performous code.

1 With open music games there is another reason again for players to buy mp3-files and music videos files in online stores instead of only stream them via spotify or youtube. So there is potentially an additional gain for musicians and licensors.

2 Cause open music games are not bound to a specific set of popular chart songs they help muscians that are not listed in charts. It may help them to gain more money (through buys of files in common digital stores) and to get more attention in general.

Commercial rhythm games in contrast can only be successful if they use the most popular songs to get the biggest crowd (and revenue) as possible. They are by default not really interested in niche music or special interest, except if there is a hype.

3 Open music games are here to stay, maybe enabeling a continous small revenue for (mostly niche) musicians in general. The projects are non-commercial and don't wanna reach the biggest audience as possible. They are made by music lovers, investing their time just to get purpose. The players themself buy individually at their own discretion mini-licenses via music stores for their personal use. Like buying vinyl editions.

In contrast big commercial music games always implode as history shows, mostly supporting only the most well-known songs. Singstar, guitar hero, rockband or fuser vanished on the long run because of the incredible high license cost and the instable trends in games industry. The costs are so high for them because of the commercial circumstances and the intended high amout of audience.

Open music games are a way out of that cycle and are independend of common gaming consoles. However commercial games may have by far a better quality and comfort in many ways. The teams and player service in open music games can be unreliable and the players have to invest in additional pc hardware.

4

So open music games and commercial music games are no enemies. They have different target groups and totally different circumstances. Licensors and musicians can directly or indireclty profit from both of them.