Justin Grant Huish is an American double Olympic champion in Archery, titles he won at the 1996 Atlanta Games. Known for his unorthodox character sporting wrap-around shades, backwards baseball cap, ponytail and an earring, Huish captivated the crowd by winning a gold medal in the individual and team events. In the individual, Huish ranked no higher than 24th in the world at the time but rose to the occasion and saw off Sweden's Magnus Pettersson 112–107 in the final. Huish was the first male archer to win double gold medals and his wins led to a popularity boost for the sport. His feat was matched by South Korea's Ku Bon-chan in the 2016 Summer Olympics. He was later credited for encouraging actress Geena Davis to pick up the sport.

As a ninth-grader he was into skateboarding, lived on a street called Broken Arrow, and thought archery was boring. But when Huish's parents opened Arrowsmith Archery, he wanted a job. He didn't pick up the sport until age 14 and would practice standing in the middle of the street, shooting arrows through the front door of his garage, through the back door of his garage, and into a target in his backyard. Only three years after taking up a bow, 17-year-old Justin Huish won the intermediate age division at the National Archery Assn.'s Outdoor Target Championships, significant victories at the 1993 US collegiate championships and the 1995 US Target Championships. He had only been on the US National Team since 1994.

Justin Huish qualified for the 2000 Summer Olympics, but withdrew later that year.

Sol turns thousands of years of human wisdom from the world’s spiritual traditions into a totally unique personality profile. To get your own profile, check compatibility with friends and much more, download the Sol App today.

Some of their strengths

Justin Huish has many admirable traits.

Based on spiritual traditions from around the world, they are someone who can be described as Energetic, Hardworking, Reliable, Loyal, Generous, Caring, and Inventive.

Smart and Hardworking

According to Mysticism’s Astrology tradition, Justin Huish is someone who is a smart, hardworking, reliable, and loyal person, who is detail-oriented and orderly, but also generous and optimistic. A person who is known for being a good partner.

Adaptable and Versatile

Based on Daoism’s Ba-Zi or ‘Chinese Zodiac’ tradition, people who know Justin Huish well know them as someone who can be adaptable, flexible, and polite, like a flower or a sapling.

Inventive and Clever

According to Hinduism’s Jyotisha or ‘Vedic Astrology’ tradition, many would also describe Justin Huish as someone who is flexible, intelligent, and quick-witted.

A person who likes to be creative, and to be recognized for their artistic talents. Who possesses intelligence, mental discipline, and ambition, and who does well in relationships and partnerships.

Vigorous and Friendly

Based on the Mayan Tzolk’in or ‘Mayan Astrology’ tradition, Justin Huish is someone who has a vigor and energy that applies itself to all life's activities and endeavors, and a knack for forming family-like structures, groups, and communities.

They are also someone who is confident and creative, and who has a love for starting new projects, inventing new things, and giving back to the community.

Patient and Perseverent

According to Judaism’s Kabbalah tradition, Justin Huish tends to be someone who is patient, faithful, hardworking and persistent, and who wants to achieve a lot in life. Who tends to be rather private when it comes to expressing feelings, enjoys being independent and self-sufficient, and who is not afraid of any obstacle.

Some of Justin Huish's challenges

While Justin Huish has many strengths, nobody is perfect. They also have some challenging traits they need to manage.

For example, Justin Huish can be Impulsive, Emotional, Suspicious, Stubborn, Careless, Standoffish, and Unfocused.

Suspicious and Stubborn

One of Justin Huish's key challenges is that they are someone who can be suspicious and stubborn.

Justin Huish must also exercise caution as they can have difficulty dealing with responsibility, authority, or criticism.

Unfocused and Indecisive

Justin Huish is someone who can be scattered, restless, and insensitive, be distracted by fluctuating professional interests, be a workaholic, and who can be arrogant and have difficulty accepting advice.

Callous and Stubborn

Finally, Justin Huish also can come across as cold and unemotional, be too dismissive of others' opinions, and be overly suspicious, selfish and crafty.