Justin Huish, who won an individual gold medal Thursday, helped the United States beat South Korea 251-249 and win its first team gold. On his last three arrows, Huish erased a three-point deficit. South Korea won its third consecutive women's team gold, beating Germany. The U.S. team was eliminated in the first round by Kazakstan.

Argentina beat Puerto Rico 87-77 for ninth place; Angola beat South Korea 99-61 for 11th.

The Americans sent five boats into the semifinals and all five failed to qualify for the finals. Not even John Mooney and Stein Jorgensen, world champions in the 200-meter kayak, could make the 500-meter final, finishing ninth overall. Italy sent five boats to the flatwater events and each will race in the finals.

Dmitry Sautin of Russia won the gold medal in men's platform diving Friday night with 692.34 points.

Jan Hempel of Germany was second with 663.27, Xiao Hailiang of China got the bronze, 658.20.

A score on a penalty corner with 119 remaining gave Australia a 3-2 victory over Germany and the bronze medal.

Spain won the gold medal in group competition with a total of 38.933 points. World champion Bulgaria took the silver and Russia the bronze.

The United States extended its dominance, winning the gold medal with a near-flawless performance in the sport's first team competition at the games. The U.S. finished with a score of 99.720 points, including nine perfect 10s. Canada took the silver and Japan the bronze.

Sweden reached the gold-medal match, beating Spain 25-20. Sweden will play for the title Sunday against either world champion France or Croatia. Dave DeGraaf scored after a penalty as time expired in the second overtime, giving the U.S. men's team a 27-26 victory over Algeria for ninth place.

Tom Brands beat Jang Jae-sung of South Korea 7-0 at 136? pounds, becoming the third U.S. wrestler to win gold in these games. "This is it. This is the pinnacle," Brands said. Bruce Baumgartner settled for the bronze at 286 pounds -- his record fourth Olympic wrestling medal. Baumgartner avenged his second-round loss to Andrei Shumilin by beating the Russian. The win came on a judges' decision assured only by Baumgartner's one-point takedown with 16 seconds remaining in the eight-minute match. Seven-time world champion Valentin Jordanov beat Azerbaijan's Namik Abdullaev 4-3 in overtime at 114?pounds for the gold. World champion Rasul Khaden of Iran thwarted Russia's Makharbek Khadartsev chance for a third consecutive gold medal at 198 pounds, winning 3-0.

The German Soling crew of Jochen Schuemann, Thomas Flach and Bernd Jaekel swept Russia in three races -- none of them close -- to capture gold medal for the second time. The United States won the bronze, beating Britain 3-1.

Michael Matz, a three-time Olympic rider who survived a deadly jetliner crash and was credited with helping save two children on the flight, was picked to carry the American flag in the closing ceremony. Matz, 45, from Collegeville, Pa., was chosen in a vote of team captains on the U.S. squad. He will march into Olympic Stadium Sunday night, holding the Stars and Stripes in the parade of flags of the record 197 nations that participated in the Atlanta Games. A veteran of the 1976 and 1992 games, Matz won a silver medal Thursday as part of the U.S. show-jumping team, riding Rhum IV. In individual jumping, he is tied for 14th with 4.00 points after the first round, and that event ends Sunday just hours before the closing ceremony. Matz is a three-time gold medalist in team jumping at the World Equestrian Championships and a two-time individual world bronze medalist who has been riding at international levels since 1973. On July 19, 1989, Matz and his then-fiance, D.D. Alexander, were on United Airlines Flight 232 when it crashed in Sioux City, Iowa, killing 112 people. First distracted when he couldn't find his future wife, who was seated in another row on the crowded plane, Matz quickly turned his attention to helping in the rescue and led two children seated across the aisle to safety. He later found Alexander safe at a rescue shelter.