Major General John Cantwell AO DSC has a new book out called Leadership in Action: Lessons for the Real World from a Real Leader, which presents a unique framework of leadership techniques that work in any situation.

John is a retired Australian Army officer who served in three distinct wars – combat duty in Operation Desert Storm in 1991; as the Director of Strategic Operations of the Multi National Forces in Iraq in 2006; and as the Commander of Australian Forces in the Middle East in 2010. For his service in the latter role he was awarded the Distinguished Service Cross for his 'inspired leadership, deep commitment to his people and superior performance on operations'.

Here are ten things we learned from John in Leadership In Action.

1. Values determine the authenticity of a leader

“As my career progressed, I found myself in ever more complex and demanding leadership roles. I discovered that personal integrity is a hard master to serve. Integrity is a lifelong commitment and a never-finished project. It’s worth the effort, however, because people respond intuitively to straightforward decency. When they sense you are truthful they see you as real; genuine; authentic.”

2. Being an accessible leader means more than just having an open door policy.

“I am a big believer in proactive accessibility. Even as a senior leader I was a walk-and-talk junkie. Whenever I paid a visit to one of the teams within my organisation I would say a quick hello to the team leader then wade into the nearest group of sailors or aircrew or soldiers. I would start shaking hands and talking about whatever they were doing at the time. I tried to spend time with my people as they went about their duties. These sessions were some of the most enjoyable in my years of military service, and some of the most valuable.”

3. Big Ideas can help leaders refocus and effect change

“In the wake of the Black Saturday fires in Victoria, my Big Idea was to work with mining magnate Andrew Forrest to deliver mine-site huts as short-term accommodation while my team built fully functioning temporary towns on crown land and football ovals close to the worst affected areas. Another time, my Big Idea was to accelerate the shift in emphasis from having Australians leading Afghan soldiers in combat, to helping the Afghans plan and conduct their own security operations. Another Big Idea, to help thousands of veterans suffering emotional trauma as a result of their military service, led to my best-selling book Exit Wounds, which continues to improve damaged lives. The concept of Big Ideas worked for me, over and over again.”

4. Storytelling can be an effective leadership tool

“There’s a good reason storytelling is the new black in leadership style: it works. I’m not referring to storytelling in the traditional form, as a way to entertain. I am talking about telling stories as a purposeful leadership tool. What is that purpose? It’s what you decide.You can use a narrative to describe your values and those of the company. Or, you might tell a story to point the way to a new reality, which is a great way to pitch your Big Idea. Storytelling is a great alternative to the vague vision statement that many organisations feel compelled to produce.”

5. Decisive leadership is not about making fast decisions

“Some people confuse the concept of rapid decision-making with the notion of decisiveness. They are not the same, although they can operate together. The first is about speed, while the second is about the quality of our decisions. Decisive leadership means making the best possible decision, at the time most likely to achieve success, based on valid motives. That doesn’t really roll off the tongue, does it? Here’s a snappier way to describe decisive leadership: it is the right people making the right decisions at the right time for the right reasons.”

6. Toughness in a leader is an admirable virtue. So is softness.

“I believe I was a tough commander when I imposed high personal standards, despite the protests of some, and when I urged my subordinates to continue missions that could get them killed. However, I’m the same guy who put a box of tissues on my coffee table when I planned a hard interview with a young, underperforming officer, and let them sit rather than stand at attention to hear my rebuke.”

7. Uncertainty means a greater risk of failure, but taking risks is how we move from mediocrity to excellence

“Unfortunately, there weren’t many positives arising from my year in Iraq. However, one of the pluses was that I gained a greater tolerance for the unknown and unknowable dimensions of problems. Having lived through a period constant doubt and confusion, every challenging situation after that seemed manageable. Fortunately, you don’t need to endure a violent insurgency to understand this and learn how to embrace uncertainty.”

8. The real test of leadership comes when you lose.

“In the summer of 2006, Iraq was being torn apart by escalating sectarian violence.The situation was costing the lives of more than three thousand Iraqi civilians every month, and the country teetered on the edge of all-out civil war. I tried to implement a weapons control scheme in Baghdad in a desperate attempt to slow down the killing. After weeks of effort, it became clear that the idea was a dead duck. I could have kept pushing, investing more resources and increasing the risks endured by the soldiers trying to enforce the policy. Or, I could have accepted that my plan simply wouldn’t work...I chose to withdraw so I could focus my energies on something with a better chance of succeeding.”

9. Enlarge the circle of understanding

“From my most junior appointments, I was taught to explain the reason my subordinates were being asked to undertake a task. The idea was to link tasks with goals. The concept is called providing a ‘task with a purpose’. The connecting phrase used was ‘in order to …’. For example, in a tactical manoeuvre, I might order my team to ‘Capture Hill X, in order to establish overwatch on Highway Z’. My subordinates immediately understand why they are attacking the hill.”

10. To genuinely influence people, you have to connect with them at an emotional level

“You can do almost anything if you know how to channel your own emotions and those of others. Emotions-based leadership is like no other, because it recognises and acts on the most primitive, yet most highly sensitive, functions of the human mind. For example, emotions are what come into play when others respond to a leader who commits to and lives by positive personal values. People don’t react to honesty or dishonesty logically: they respond emotionally. They experience either admiration and trust, or disdain and wariness. Those are powerful behavioural motivators.”