Description:

AUSTRALIAN MILITARY Cantwell's personal story, but also the story of thousands of Australian veterans from Iraq, East Timor, Afghanistan and other conflicts who bare similar emotional scars. Recounts what becomes of those men and women we send off to war, then forget once they are home. As a country boy from Queensland, John Cantwell signed up to the army as a private and rose to the rank of major general. He was on the front line in 1991 as Coalition forces fitted bulldozer blades to tanks and buried alive Iraqi troops in their trenches. He fought in Baghdad in 2006 and saw what a car bomb does to a marketplace crowded with women and children. In 2010 he commanded the Australian forces in Afghanistan when ten of his soldiers were killed. He returned to Australia in 2011 to be considered for the job of chief of the Australian Army. Instead, he ended up in a psychiatric hospital. Exit Wounds is the compassionate and deeply human account of one man's tour of the War on Terror, the moving story of life on a modern battlefield: from the nightmare of cheating death in a minefield, to the poignancy of calling home while under rocket fire in Baghdad, to the utter despair of looking into the face of a dead soldier before sending him home to his mother.051214/251122 Note: Large Print copy.(Note ex-library copy, but with minimal usual marks.) Elizabeth's Bookshops have been one of Australia's premier independent book dealers since 1973. Elizabeth's family-owned business operates four branches in Perth CBD, Fremantle (WA), and Newtown (NSW). All orders are dispatched within 24 hours from our Fremantle Warehouse. All items can be viewed at Elizabeth's Bookshop Warehouse, 23 Queen Victoria Street\, Fremantle WA. Seller Inventory # 42211

4.43 4.43 out of 5 stars

415 ratings by Goodreads

Synopsis:

A deeply personal, fast paced and insightful account of Cantwell's life in the Australian Army. He commanded at the very highest levels and fought on the front line in both Gulf Wars and as recently as 2010, where he was the General in charge of Australian forces in Afghanistan. Like David Finkel's The Good Soldiers it will take us onto the ground and into the daily demands and horrors experienced by those at the 'decisive point' of the fighting. As a young man from a large family, John Cantwell joined the Australian Army at 17 as a Private and rose to become a General. The page turning action of his book will be laced through with his insightful descriptions of his personal struggle over decades with post-traumatic stress disorder. Major-General Cantwell will describe his experiences in major wars and conflicts involving Australia over the past 20 years. He will talk about losing soldiers 'entrusted' to his care.

"About this title" may belong to another edition of this title.

Exit Wounds

Cantwell, John & Bearup, Greg

Published by Melbourne University Press, 2012

ISBN 10: 0522861784 / ISBN 13: 9780522861785

Used / Soft cover

Quantity: 1 available

Seller: RAS BAZAAR, Stoneville, WA, Australia

Seller Rating:

Soft cover. Condition: Near Fine. No Jacket. A deeply personal, fast paced and insightful account of Cantwell's life in the Australian Army. He commanded at the very highest levels and fought on the front line in both Gulf Wars and as recently as 2010, where he was the General in charge of Australian forces in Afghanistan. Like David Finkel's The Good Soldiers it will take us onto the ground and into the daily demands and horrors experienced by those at the 'decisive point' of the fighting. As a young man from a large family, John Cantwell joined the Australian Army at 17 as a Private and rose to become a General. The page turning action of his book will be laced through with his insightful descriptions of his personal struggle over decades with post-traumatic stress disorder. Major-General Cantwell will describe his experiences in major wars and conflicts involving Australia over the past 20 years. He will talk about losing soldiers 'entrusted' to his care. Seller Inventory # 0320

Contact seller