Original Title: TMNT

Directed by: Kevin Munroe

Written by: Kevin Munroe

Cinematography: Steve Lumley

Music by: Klaus Badelt

Country: USA

Genres: Animation, Action, Comedy

Duration: 87 min

Release Date: 23 March 2007 (USA)

Filming Dates: 2006

Filming Locations: USA

Synopsis:

After the defeat of their old arch nemesis, The Shredder, the Turtles are needed more than ever, but Raphael, Donatello, and Michelangelo have become lost and direction less. Leonardo has gone to Central America, on the orders of the martial arts master and father figure Master Splinter, for training. Donatello and Michelangelo have started small businesses in Leonardo’s absence. Meanwhile, strange things are happening in New York City. An army of ancient creatures threatens to take over the world and the Turtles must unite again to save it. -IMDb

Cast

Laurence Fishbourne, Sarah Michelle Gellar, Patrick Stewart, Chris Evans, Zhang Ziyi

Photos

Production stills

Videos

Trailer

Movie clips

Bonus

• The previous films in the series were all live-action. It is the first film in the franchise in 14 years. Chronologically, the film takes place after the original films.

• Karai’s first movie appearance. Karai is the adopted daughter of Shredder in the 2003 animated TV series, and was sent from Japan to take over the foot when Shredder died in the Comic Book.

• The Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles movie with the largest money budget ever made. The amount of it’s budget surpasses the live-action trilogy’s amounts.

• As revealed on the director’s commentary on the DVD one of the early drafts of the script had Raphael briefly dying and Donatello using Winter’s technology to bring him back to life. This idea was turned down by Peter Laird however who disliked the idea of having one of the turtles dying.

• The film was dedicated to the memory of Mako. Mako played Master Splinter in the film and was announced as the voice of Splinter at San Diego Comic Con the day before he died. Fortunately, he had finished the majority of his acting. —IMDb

• Ziyi’s first animated film and first voice role in her career.

Awards and Nominations