Lieutenant General Jozef Poniatowski ,The army corps commander in Polish-Russian war 1792. his performance in this war was excellent.

CoA of Prince Józef Poniatiowski, Maréchal de France.

Death of Prince Józef Poniatowski at Battle of Leipzig.

The military of the Duchy of warsaw was weakened as the French corps garrisoning it were sent to Spain in 1808, and only the Duchy's own Polish forces remained in it. With the start of the War of the Fifth Coalition, an Austrian corps of 32,000–34,000 soldiers under Archduke Ferdinand Karl Joseph of Austria-Este invaded the territory of the Duchy of Warsaw (Polish state created by Napoleon) on 14 April 1809, engaging the Polish defenders (16,000–17,000 (14,000 Polish troops and 3,000 allied Saxons) soldiers under Prince Józef Antoni Poniatowski).

He made Archduke Ferdinand running in circles and defeated his army decisively.

Józef Antoni Poniatowski was presented with the grand-aigle de la Légion d'Honneur, a ceremonial sabre and a lancer's shako for his victories.

At russia, poniatowski initial effort was wasted because Poniatowski was placed under the direction of Napoleon's incompetent brother Jerome, who criticized by Napoleon eventually left, but for Poniatowski, then put in charge of Grande Armee's right wing (he typically commented the nomination of Jerome as being "well beyond his strength and abilities"), it was too late to make up for the lost opportunities (Later on St. Helena, the dethroned emperor reflected back on the 1812 war with Russia and expressed his belief, that if he had given Poniatowski Jerome's right wing command from the beginning, Bagration's army would have been destroyed early, and the campaign would have followed a different course.

At Borodino, where the V Corps fought a major battle of its own, Poniatowski led his men from preliminary actions (September 4) and through the final onslaught again, overcame the enemy, and decisively contributed to the defeat of the Russian left flank (it took a whole day of fighting until the Utitza Mound was taken in the evening of September 7, and it happened only after Poniatowski, having put his infantry in tight formation at the center, cavalry on the sides, and himself in front, led them up the hill; the Russians withdrew a distance of "several cannon shots" and in good order, taking with them their dead and wounded).

Napoleon and Poniatowski at Leipzig

Jacques MacDonald, portrait by François Gerard.

On the 17th November 1765, a child was born to a Scottish refugee in Sedan, Ardennes, France. That child was Étienne Jacques Joseph Alexandre MacDonald. He became a Marshal of France and 1st duc de Taranto. His father, Neil MacEachen (sometimes spelled as MacEachern, but MacDonald nontheless), found it advatangeous to be unavailable to the Hanoverian authorities in Britain after his cousin Flora told all (there were many who took similar precautions). This cousin Flora (surnamed MacDonald) was she who escorted Charles Edward Stewart from Benbecula to Skye in 1746.

OK, that's the name explained, on with our tale.

In 1785, at the age of 20, he joined the Irish legion raised to support the revolutionary party in the Dutch Republic against the Kingdom of Prussia. After it was disbanded, he received a commission in the regiment of Dillon. At the start of the French Revolution, the regiment of Dillon remained loyal to the King, except for MacDonald, who was in love with a Mlle Jacob, whose father was an enthusiastic revolutionary. After his first marriage (he was either brave or daft, he married four times), he was appointed aide-de-camp to General Charles François Dumouriez. He distinguished himself at the Battle of Jemappes, and was promoted colonel in 1793.

He refused to desert to the Austrians with Dumouriez, and as a reward was made general of brigade, and appointed to command the leading brigade in Pichegru's invasion of the Netherlands. His knowledge of the country proved useful, and he was instrumental in the capture of the Dutch fleet by French hussars. Yes. Really. Hussars.

There are many sources which refer to an extraordinary event at the end of the French advance into the "United Provinces" (the Netherlands) in the winter of 1794-5. This was apparently a particularly severe winter, with a large chunk of the Dutch fleet, being icebound near the village of den Helder (at the tip of the peninsula between the North Sea and the Zuiderzee), was defeated and captured by French cavalry and horse artillery.

A number of 19th Century authors such as Adolphe Thiers Lacretelle, François Auguste Marie Mignet, Antoine Henri Jomini, and Sir Archibald Alison record this occurrence.

In 1797, he served first in the army of the Rhine and later in that of Italy. When he reached Italy, the treaty of Campo Formio had been signed, and Bonaparte had returned to France; but, under the direction of Berthier, MacDonald occupied Rome, of which he was made governor, and then in conjunction with Championnet he defeated General Mack, and took the Kingdom of Naples, which became known as the Parthenopaean Republic.

When Suvorov invaded northern Italy, and was undoing the conquests of Bonaparte, MacDonald moved northwards. With 36,000 men he attacked Suvorov's 22,000 men at the Trebbia. After three days' fighting, receiving no help from Moreau, being defeated, he withdrew to Genoa.

In 1800, he received command of the army in the Helvetic Republic, maintaining communications between the armies of Germany and of Italy. He carried out his orders, and in the winter of 1800-1801, he was ordered to march over the Splügen Pass at the head of the Army of the Grisons. This achievement is described by Mathieu Dumas, his chief of staff, and is as noteworthy as Bonaparte's passage of the St Bernard before the Battle of Marengo, although MacDonald did not fight a battle.

On his return to Paris, MacDonald married the widow of General Joubert, and was appointed French ambassador to Denmark. Returning in 1805, he was associated with Moreau and thus incurred the dislike of Napoleon, who did not include him in his first creation of marshals.

In Scotland, there is a semi-well known legend that MacDonald was the only Marshal of France who was banned (by Napoleon) from fighting the British. This ban was based on the somewhat specious daft idea that, if MacDonald heard the sound of the pipes, which he would have, this may have had an unfortunate effect on his command ability. This is, needless to say somewhat specious. MacDonald spent the 1810 and 1811 campaigning seasons in Spain where it would have been difficult not to face British troops.

Serving throughout the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars, MacDonald led major formations in the 1809 campaign against Austria, in Spain (1810–1811), Russia (1812), Germany (1813), and in France (1814).

He remained without employment until 1809, but then Napoleon made him military adviser to Prince Eugène de Beauharnais, viceroy of the Kingdom of Italy and a corps commander. He led the army from Italy to join with Napoleon, and at Wagram, led the attack which broke the Austrian centre and won the victory.

Macdonald was unique in that he was the only marshal to win his baton on the battlefield (at Wagram). Napoleon made him a Marshal of France on the field of battle, and soon after created him duke of Taranto in the Kingdom of Naples. As the Duke of Taranto, he committed a heraldic pun (is that worse than a verbal one?) when he took for his arms, the arms of MacDonald of Clanranald with the addition of a spiders leg as shown below:-

In 1810, MacDonald served in Spain and in 1812, he commanded the left wing of the Grande Armée for the invasion of Russia. In 1813, after participating in the battles of Lützen and Bautzen, he was ordered to invade Silesia, where Blücher defeated him with great loss at Katzbach. At the Battle of Nations in 1813, his force was pushed out at Liebertwolkwitz by Johann von Klenau's IV Corps (Austrian); on a counter attack, his troops took the village back. Later that day, Klenau foiled his attempt to flank the Austrian main army, commanded by Karl Philipp, Prince of Schwarzenberg. After the Battle of Leipzig, he was ordered to cover the evacuation of Leipzig with Prince Poniatowski. After the blowing up of the last bridge over the river, he managed to swim the Elster, but Poniatowski drowned. During the defensive campaign of 1814, MacDonald again distinguished himself. He was one of the marshals sent by Napoleon to take the notice of his abdication to Paris. When all were deserting Napoleon, MacDonald remained faithful to the crown. Napoleon ordered him to give his adherence to the new régime, he did, and he was presented with the sabre of Murad Bey for his fidelity.

At the Restoration, he was made a peer of France and knight grand cross of the royal order of St. Louis; he remained faithful to the new order during the Hundred Days. In 1815, he became chancellor of the Legion of Honour, a post he held till 1831.

The link below takes you to the report in the New York Times of Marshal MacDonalds visit to Scotland in 1825.

http://query.nytimes.com/mem/archive-free/pdf?_r=1&res=9E03E1DE1539E43BBC4D52DFBE66838E669FDE

The Hundred Days

Having served after Russia in many battles, including Liepzig, Ney was covered by 1814 in numerous scars across his body, marks of his courage and martial skill. However by this point, many had grown tired and disillusioned with the endless fighting and Marshal Ney become the spokesperson for the mutinous Marshals, refusing to march on Paris and demanding abdication of the French Emperor.

With Napoleon sent to Elba and the old Bourons restored to the throne of France, Ney was showered with accolades but never recieved the trust of the monarchy, unsurprisingly.

Hearing of Napoleon's escape, Ney swore to the King, Louis XVIII that he would defend the realm against Napoleon, but upon receiving a warm letter from his old commander, Ney rejoined Napoleon at Auxerre.

During the Hundred Days, Ney attacked uncharacteristically cautiously, drawing criticism for his performance (in fact, his whole behaviour during the Hundred Days has been analyzed by some as suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder).

At the Battle of Waterloo, Michel Ney displayed yet again ferocious courage, having five horses shot under him during the battle, leading a mass cavalry attack on the Anglo-Dutch line, taking the cannons but unable to break the infantry who now formed into square (very effective against cavalry). For some reason, Ney did not order the enemy cannons to be spiked (driving a spike into the firing hole making it essentially useless), which was a common military practise as the enemy gunners usually hide in the squares and retook the guns later. This the English gunners did precisely, Ney battering one cannon in fury before retreating.

After the battle, he was captured, arrested and sentenced to death by firing squad. He scorned the blindfold and was able to actually command the firing squad to fire on his orders.

A man of persistent dogged bravery, suffering innumerable wounds in the service of Napoleon, enduring the horror of the retreat from Moscow and the incessant attacks by Cossacks, forced to sleep in the corpses of his horses for warmth, Michel Ney died in one last act of bravery, a ferocious fighter for the French Empire.

I plan next to focus on Davout, however, considering the vast number of Marshals under Napoleon, I think it would be good if other members who felt like adding profiles on the Marshals, PM and we can figure out who is covering who. Sounds good?

Yeah...I think Davout actually voted against the execution of Ney in one of those councils. But it was not enough to save him...