Introduction

Jozef Poniatowski (1763-1813) was one of the greatest military commanders in the Napoleonic Era. He was the only foreigner Napoleon promoted to the rank of Marshal of France. And he was one of the few commanders who was able to conduct a successive campaign without Napoleon's supervision. This was amply demonstrated in his military command over the army of the Duchy of Warsaw in the AD 1809 Austro-Polish War. Moreover, his performance in the rest of the campaigns or battles he took part was consistently good and usually scored much praise from Napoleon. Was he actually comparable with other top-rated Marshals such like Davout, Suchet, Lannes, Massena...etc. ?

Poniatowski was bornt in AD 1763 in Poland, he showed an ardent interest in military affair since the youthhood. At age 16, he joined the Austrian army, thus began his military career. In AD 1788, he became an aide-de-camp of the Habsburg Emperor Joseph II, and participated in the Austro-Turkish War (1788-91) at the head of a dragoon regiment with the rank of colonel. His distinguished talent was recognized by the illustrious Austrian Field Marshal Franz Moritz von Lacy, who recruited him to personal staff in participation of operational planning. As a result, he soon turned out to be a capable and well-trained officer, sharpened by his courage and leadership. In AD 1789, he returned to Warsaw for helping his home-nation reorganize the armies to against the foreign threats, hereupon his career as a military commander began.

So what degree of contribution / success he had in his entire life of military career as a military commander ? The below guideline should be our focus for discussion：

The AD 1792 Polish-Russian War

Poniatowski's first experience as a military commander

His strategic, operational and logistical preparation prior to the war was equally important

The AD 1794 Kosciuszko Uprising

The AD 1809 Austro-Polish War

Poniatowski's ability of independent command was amply proven

The AD 1812 Russian Campaign

From advancing to Moscow, to precipitous retreat, he participated in almost the entire part of the central column of the Grande Armee, playing vital role in several major operations / battles

The AD 1813 German Campaign

Poniatowski's last showoff of valor and talent

While he was widely regarded as a man of honor for his extraordinary bravery, patriotism and loyalty, his talent of military command was usually underrated as the Napoleonic fans were more interested of other conspicuous French Marshals such as Soult, Davout, Lannes, Massena, Suchet, Ney...etc.

So this thread provides you the best opportunity for studying one of the less-renowned Marshals of Napoleon, and some of the campaigns / battles you might be not knowledgeable in details.

Currently I'm reading Operations of the Polish Army During the 1809 Campaign by Roman Soltyk. This book would enable me to acquire much insight on Poniatowski's military command though Soltyk was clearly biased for Poland and Poniatowski due to his background of Polish soldier.

Poniatowski was good, one of the better marshals but I find Davout, Suchet and Soult to be the best of the 3. Like Ney, Poniatowski was brave and tactically competent, but far from brilliant as a tactician.

Davout's victory at Auerstedt is enough to put in the ranks of the greatest, not to mention his performance at Austerlitz, Hamburg, Eckmuehl etc.

Suchet was an excellent commander, both as a division commander at Austerlitz and the 1806 campaign and as an independent commander in the Peninsular War. His methods kept the Spanish east coast mostly pacified and he performed far better than most.

Soult was not quite on the level as the above 2 but he was still good. At Austerlitz his seizure and subsequent defence of the Pratzen earned him the nickname of the ''foremost tactician of Europe''. His actions in Spain were good, he managed to win a great victory at Ocana and performed the best against Wellington. While he did manage to win he managed to preserve his army in the face of great odds and slow down Wellington's advance considerably. He had some bad moments at the Battle of Pyrenees and as Chief of Staff during the Waterloo Campaign but was otherwise pretty good.

Lannes was an excellent corps commander but was never really given an independent command of his own, which I think disqualifies him from being the best.

Ney was a good division commander but I think he was over promoted, out of his depth at an army level command and nowhere near as tactically brilliant as the above.

Murat was the worst.

Poniatowski is in my opinion like Ney, extremely brave and an example for his men, but he became a Marshall more as an award for his loyalty to Napoleon in a period where so many people betrayed the Emperor rather than for his abilities as a tactician.

I disagree, he had great talent in both strategic and tactical command, knowing how to seize the opportunity to strike and the battlefield to engage very well, I have done some homework for that. The only shortcoming for his military feat was that he never fought a large-sized field battle under his independent command. Zielence, Raszyn, Grochowo, Gora Kalwaria, Gorwyce, and a little rearguard battle Chirikovo in AD 1812 Campaign, none of them comprised over 40,000 men in total of both sides' armies. The largest army under his command was in the early stage of AD 1812 Campaign, during which he once commanded the 35,000-strong Corps V (including 3 infantry divisions + 1 light cavalry divisions).

His performance in AD 1809 Austro-Polish War was outstanding, despite of the advantage for fighting in the regions with so much support acquired from the native Poles in Greater Poland and Galicia.

In the entire 18th, 19th century, the AD 1809 Austro-Polish War was the only campaign the Poles scored victory just by their nation alone without other nations' aid. At the beginning of the war, the Grand Duchy of Warsaw was largely unprepared and Warsaw hadn't been fortified, Poniatowski was entrusted with leading the small army against the Austrian army which was under the command of Archduke Ferdinand. Heavily outnumbered by 1:2, Poniatowski skillfully utilized a good terrain and fought a successful defensive battle against the Austrian offensive in the Battle of Raszyn (19th April).

Afterward, he intentionally abandoned the indefensible capital Warsaw and moved his main force to the east bank of the Vistula, whereupon he thwarted the Austrian attack on the bridgehead at Praga and in the Battle of Grochowo (around 24th-26th April), driving them back to the west bank. Capitalizing on this victory, Poniatowski marched southward to seize Galicia for which he expected his operation would encourage the massive insurrection of the inhabitants there, and he was correct. Then he routed another Austrian army which pursued him in the Battle of Gora Kalwaria (2nd May), and thus gained the complete freedom in his operation of Galicia Offensive. In merely 13 days, he consecutively captured 4 major strategic towns including Lublin (14th May), Sandomierz (18th May), Zamosc (20th May) and Lvov (27th May), seized a large quantity of munitions and provisions in the Austrian supply depots and fortresses. This was no small feat.

And with such astounding success in Galicia, Archduke Ferdinand found his line of communication suddenly under grave threat by the unexpected Polish operation behind his line, and was compelled to abandon the ongoing siege of Torun and eventually evacuated from Warsaw as well, in order to marching southward to face and defeat Poniatowski's army. In consequence, all the territories the Austrian army obtained in the west bank of the Vistula in this campaign was lost without a single battle！Hence, Poniatowski acquired the strategic dominance purely by manoeuvre and siege.

Later Archduke Ferdinand attempted to crush Poniatowski's army at once in field battle, but Poniatowski tried hard not to risk his smaller army on frontal confrontation, so after repelling another Austrian attack in the Battle of Gorzyce (12th June) with well-deployed artillery and strong defense, he marched across the San to avoid the costly field battle with the Austrians. Although Sandomierz thus fell (18th June) and was shortly occupied by the Austrian army in consequence of Poniatowski's eastward retreat, the Poles prevented the huge loss of manpower and resource, and still preserve a large mobile army.

This was probably Poniatowski's cunning plan — the Russian army suddenly marched into the region of Galicia. This "nominal ally" of France might lend him an aid in this crucial moment, though...the crafty Russian failed his expectation in large extent. Obviously the Russian army had no intention to offer active support to Poniatowski, his real intention was highly suspicious. Yet the Russian army's attitude soon changed, probably due to Napoleon's consecutive success in the Danube Theater. With the Russian "friendship" secured, and the large Austrian army in the region shifted southward to support Archduke Charles in early July, Poniatowski quickly seized this golden opportunity to resume his operation, marched across the Vistula to reach the west bank and united with Donbrowski and Sokolnicki at Radon. While Napoleon's huge army scored a decisive victory in the Battle of Wagram, Poniatowski marched ahead of the Russians to capture Krakow and prevented the "allied" Russians which attempted takeover that city alone, bringing his campaign to a glorious end.

Hence, in the Treaty of Schonbrunn signed on 14th October 1809, the Duchy of Warsaw acquired most of the territories the Polish army conquered during the Austro-Polish War, in which Prince Poniatowski greatly contributed to.

Notably, the Polish army only lost 3 cannons, but captured 62 cannons for the entire campaign！

I'm

I disagree, he had great talent in both strategic and tactical command, knowing how to seize the opportunity to strike and the battlefield to engage very well, I have done some homework for that. The only shortcoming for his military feat was that he never fought a large-sized field battle under his independent command. Zielence, Raszyn, Grochowo, Gora Kalwaria, Gorwyce, and a little rearguard battle Chirikovo in AD 1812 Campaign, none of them comprised over 40,000 men in total of both sides' armies. The largest army under his command was in the early stage of AD 1812 Campaign, during which he once commanded the 35,000-strong Corps V (including 3 infantry divisions + 1 light cavalry divisions).

His performance in AD 1809 Austro-Polish War was outstanding, despite of the advantage for fighting in the regions with so much support acquired from the native Poles in Greater Poland and Galicia.

In the entire 18th, 19th century, the AD 1809 Austro-Polish War was the only campaign the Poles scored victory just by their nation alone without other nations' aid. At the beginning of the war, the Grand Duchy of Warsaw was largely unprepared and Warsaw hadn't been fortified, Poniatowski was entrusted with leading the small army against the Austrian army which was under the command of Archduke Ferdinand. Heavily outnumbered by 1:2, Poniatowski skillfully utilized a good terrain and fought a successful defensive battle against the Austrian offensive in the Battle of Raszyn (19th April).

Afterward, he intentionally abandoned the indefensible capital Warsaw and moved his main force to the east bank of the Vistula, whereupon he thwarted the Austrian attack on the bridgehead at Praga and in the Battle of Grochowo (around 24th-26th April), driving them back to the west bank. Capitalizing on this victory, Poniatowski marched southward to seize Galicia for which he expected his operation would encourage the massive insurrection of the inhabitants there, and he was correct. Then he routed another Austrian army which pursued him in the Battle of Gora Kalwaria (2nd May), and thus gained the complete freedom in his operation of Galicia Offensive. In merely 13 days, he consecutively captured 4 major strategic towns including Lublin (14th May), Sandomierz (18th May), Zamosc (20th May) and Lvov (27th May), seized a large quantity of munitions and provisions in the Austrian supply depots and fortresses. This was no small feat.

And with such astounding success in Galicia, Archduke Ferdinand found his line of communication suddenly under grave threat by the unexpected Polish operation behind his line, and was compelled to abandon the ongoing siege of Torun and eventually evacuated from Warsaw as well, in order to marching southward to face and defeat Poniatowski's army. In consequence, all the territories the Austrian army obtained in the west bank of the Vistula in this campaign was lost without a single battle！Hence, Poniatowski acquired the strategic dominance purely by manoeuvre and siege.

Later Archduke Ferdinand attempted to crush Poniatowski's army at once in field battle, but Poniatowski tried hard not to risk his smaller army on frontal confrontation, so after repelling another Austrian attack in the Battle of Gorzyce (12th June) with well-deployed artillery and strong defense, he marched across the San to avoid the costly field battle with the Austrians. Although Sandomierz thus fell (18th June) and was shortly occupied by the Austrian army in consequence of Poniatowski's eastward retreat, the Poles prevented the huge loss of manpower and resource, and still preserve a large mobile army.

This was probably Poniatowski's cunning plan — the Russian army suddenly marched into the region of Galicia. This "nominal ally" of France might lend him an aid in this crucial moment, though...the crafty Russian failed his expectation in large extent. Obviously the Russian army had no intention to offer active support to Poniatowski, his real intention was highly suspicious. Yet the Russian army's attitude soon changed, probably due to Napoleon's consecutive success in the Danube Theater. With the Russian "friendship" secured, and the large Austrian army in the region shifted southward to support Archduke Charles in early July, Poniatowski quickly seized this golden opportunity to resume his operation, marched across the Vistula to reach the west bank and united with Donbrowski and Sokolnicki at Radon. While Napoleon's huge army scored a decisive victory in the Battle of Wagram, Poniatowski marched ahead of the Russians to capture Krakow and prevented the "allied" Russians which attempted takeover that city alone, bringing his campaign to a glorious end.

Hence, in the Treaty of Schonbrunn signed on 14th October 1809, the Duchy of Warsaw acquired most of the territories the Polish army conquered during the Austro-Polish War, in which Prince Poniatowski greatly contributed to.

Notably, the Polish army only lost 3 cannons, but captured 62 cannons for the entire campaign！

Yes he was a decent army corps commander and even performed well in Russia, but in my opinion this is clearly not enough to compare it to my favorites simply because he wasn't as clinical as the unbeaten Davout, was not a supreme chief of staff as Berthier that literally had to organize entire armies' moves, and wasn't of almost all Napoléon 's military campaigns like Bessieres, as he actively supports Napoleon only from 1809.

Poniatowski is in my opinion like Ney, extremely brave and an example for his men, but he became a Marshall more as an award for his loyalty to Napoleon in a period where so many people betrayed the Emperor rather than for his abilities as a tactician.

For me he remains behind my favorite trio : Davout, Berthier and Bessieres.

To be fair I am super ignorant of the napoleonic war, but I'm not sure that is a fair criticism.

I mean you wouldn't say , "well Patton was a good general, but he was promoted because of his loyalty to America.. if he had been loyal to the Russians . He never gets the job. "

Of course not.. lol

Loyalty to the figure head is kinda one of the requirements for one to let you control large parts of his army..

Kinda like saying " well Napoleon was a good general, for one that could see.. if he were blind. He never gets the job".

That said maybe he was promoted over obviously better candidates or something like that that makes your point true on an individual level

Sent from my iPhone using Tapatalk

I think the argument is that Poniatowski was promoted based on loyalty rather than merit. Murat for example was not in any way, shape or form a good general and was promoted to being marshal based on personal connections. Promoting someone based on political loyalty rather than merit is not a good way to choose generals.

I'm very astounded that someone would claim that Murat was a grossly incapable general.

Well, even just reading a short biography about him, you would not doubt that he was an extraordinary figure and a brilliant commander.

You claimed that Napoleon promoted him because of personal connection rather than ability, this is absolutely incorrect.

Since AD 1795 Paris Coup, Murat had been proving himself one of the best right-hand men of Napoleon.

He already proved his merit and valor in numerous campaigns in Italy and Egypt before he married Napoleon's sister in AD 1800.

He was even reputed "First Horseman in Europe" by Napoleon personally.

If he was really so incapable as a general you claimed, I wonder how could he earn so great the reputation and was so popular among the contemporary European, merely because of his close association with Napoleon ?

Yes, in front of Napoleon's eyes, Murat was quite "foolish" and "lack of brain" in some occasions.

However, that was "in front of Napoleon's eyes", remember this, not in front of "ordinary people's eyes".

In comparison with the ordinary people, he was definitely one of the most daring, extraordinary and able men in the contemporary world.

Of course, in comparison with other outstanding military commanders, he was not eligible in commanding the large army.

But as a cavalry commander, he was the first-rated. (though there're some French cavalry commander better than him in overall qualities)