Glasgow Central to Whitecraigs Train Travel Guide

Travelling by train from Glasgow Central to Whitecraigs provides passengers with a convenient and efficient way to commute or explore, ensuring that they arrive on time. For a smooth travel experience, please check out our Train Journey Planner.

Plan Your Train Journey

The train from Glasgow Central to Whitecraigs takes approximately 20m. There are an average of 31 trains per day running from Glasgow Central to Whitecraigs. The first train departs at 06:17, while the last train leaves at 23:05. For more details, please refer to our Train Journey Planner and Timetable.

Book Cheap Train Tickets

You can travel from Glasgow Central to Whitecraigs with Split Ticket and Advance tickets. The average fare is about £4.30, with the cheapest fare at £4.30*. Besides, you can book cheap tickets on off-peak time, which usually begin at 09:30. (Intercity Off-Peak times: Monday to Friday from 09:30 to 16:00, and after 19:00). Accurate ticket prices vary depending on the time of day, route, and class selected.

Train Stations

You can start your Whitecraigs train journey from Glasgow Central,Glasgow,Stirling,Port Glasgow,Peterborough,Falkirk High,Bushey,or Croftfoot Station.

Why is TrainPal Cheaper?

TrainPal offers competitive rail prices and collaborates with different rail operators to secure improved deals and pass on savings to customers. This ensures that you enjoy the same quality service at a reduced cost on your train journeys.

Season Tickets Save More

Frequently commute between two stations? Season tickets help you save up to 1/3! Come to the TrainPal App and enjoy the flexibility of commuting!

Split Tickets, Save an average of 30% extra

By splitting your journey into segments, TrainPal can locate the best prices for each segment, resulting in significant savings for you.

Plenty of Voucher Options

TrainPal provides plenty of vouchers, enabling you to enjoy significant savings. Additionally, you can use the invite code to obtain additional discounts.