Rick Moranis will return to acting for the his first live-action role in more than 20 years with a Disney feature film follow-up to Honey, I Shrunk The Kids.

He'll play his original character, Wayne Szalinski, alongside Josh Gad.

Moranis was a beloved comedy star in the '80s and '90s, appearing in movies like Ghostbusters, Little Shop of Horrors, and Spaceballs.

Fans of comedy in the 80s and 90s will be able to welcome back a familiar face in the near future, as Rick Moranis has signed on to return to his original role in a Disney follow-up to Honey, I Shrunk The Kids. The comeback will find him starring alongside Josh Gad—who will play the adult version of his son—in the movie (tentatively titled Shrunk).

Moranis was one of the most popular comedic actors of the '80s and '90s, turning in memorable and beloved performances in movies like Little Shop of Horrors, Parenthood, and Mel Brooks' Star Wars spoof, Spaceballs. He also played a key role in the Ghostbusters movies and was the lead role in the Honey, I Shrunk the Kids family series.

Moranis' wife, a make-up artist named Ann Belsky, died from cancer in 1991; within a few years, the actor made the decision to pull away from movies. His last live-action movie to be released in theaters was Little Giants in 1994 (he also played Barney in The Flintstones earlier that same year).

One of Moranis' brief (relatively) recent appearances in the spotlight was back in 2006, when he released an album of comedy songs titled The Agoraphobic Cowboy. In an interview with USA Today, he pulled away from movies initially because he wanted to focus on parenting his children, but never really felt the calling to return.

"I pulled out of making movies in about '96 or '97," he said. "I'm a single parent, and I just found that it was too difficult to manage raising my kids and doing the traveling involved in making movies. So I took a little bit of a break. And the little bit of a break turned into a longer break, and then I found that I really didn't miss it."

According to Vanity Fair, Gad was especially insistent that Moranis be a part of any Shrunk production, and Moranis finally agreed to sign on. He was approached to appear in both the all-female 2016 Ghostbusters and Ghostbusters: Afterlife (out later this year), but declined both offers.

Gad expressed this sentiment on his Twitter not long after the news broke of Moranis' return. "To say it is a dream come true to once again see #RickMoranis on the big screen is the understatement of the decade," he wrote. "But to say, I get an up seat view of him returning to play one of his most iconic roles is the understatement of the Century. Welcome back hero! #Shrunk"

The original Honey, I Shrunk the Kids was released in 1989, and a sequel, Honey, I Blew Up The Kid came a few years later, in 1992. In 1997, Honey, We Shrunk Ourselves!, a straight-to-video film, marked Moranis' last live-action acting appearance (until now).

Shrunk has no release date as of now.