Sinister is a 2012 supernatural horror film directed by Scott Derrickson. It stars Ethan Hawke as true-crime writer Ellison Oswalt who discovers a box of films in his attic containing the secrets to murders committed throughout the past couple of decades.

Plot[]

True-crime writer Ellison Oswalt moves into a house where the previous family was hung from the tree in the backyard. The entire family was killed except for one missing girl. Ellison is writing a book on the murders and the missing girl.

While moving boxes into the attic, Ellison discovers a box of 8mm films. He begins to watch them in his office and discovers they show the murders of the family he is investigating, as well as other families from throughout the previous decades. Soon after he watches them, he notices a mysterious face in each video, who he suspects to be the killer.

After this discovery, mysterious things start happening in the Oswalt house, and soon the Oswalts join the other families who were murdered by the sole missing child.

List of Deaths[]

No. Name Cause of Death Killer On Screen Notes 1. Pool Party '66 family Drowned in pool tied to pool chairs Son, Bughuul Yes 2. BBQ '79 family Burned alive in car fire Son, Bughuul Yes 3. Lawn Work '86 family Run over with a lawn mower Daughter, Bughuul Partly 4. The Miller family Throats slit while tied to beds Christopher Miller, Bughuul Yes 5. The Stevenson parents and two older kids Hanged from a tree limb Stephanie Stevenson, Bughuul Yes Murders in "Family Hanging Out '11" Super 8 6. Ellison, Tracy, and Trevor Oswalt Decapitated and hacked with an axe Ashley Oswalt, Bughuul Partly Murders in "House Painting '12" Super 8

Cast[]

Ethan Hawke as Ellison Oswalt

Juliet Rylance as Tracy Oswalt

Fred Thompson as Sheriff

James Ransone as Deputy

Michael Hall D'Addario as Trevor Oswalt

Clare Foley as Ashley Oswalt

Vincent D'Onofrio as Professor Jonas (uncredited)

Victoria Leigh as Stephanie Stevenson / Family Hanging Out Girl

Cameron Ocasio as BBQ Boy

Ethan Haberfield as Pool Party Boy

Danielle Kotch as Lawn Work Girl

Blake Mizrahi as Christopher Miller / Sleepy Time Boy

Nick King as Bughuul (a.k.a. Mr. Boogie)

Videos[]

[]