5:20 p.m. update: Austin-Bergstrom International Airport set a new daily heat record for July 20, hitting 104 degrees on Friday afternoon, the National Weather Service said.

The high temperatures eclipses the record of 103 set at the airport back in 2000.

Both temperatures are nearly 10 degrees warmer than normal for this time of year, according to weather service data.

An excessive heat warning remains in effect for Travis County until 7 p.m. Sunday.

The weather service said an excessive heat warning means a prolonged period of dangerously high heat will occur and heat illnesses are likely.

Friday forecast for Austin: Temperatures are expected to match the daily record high of 104 degrees, kicking off a weekend of extreme heat that will likely continue through Monday.

The next few days will likely be the hottest in Austin so far in 2018, National Weather Service meteorologist Cory Van Pelt said.

The weather service issued an excessive heat warning for Travis, Williamson, Llano and Burnet counties from 1 p.m. Friday until 7 p.m. Sunday. During this time, residents in the warning areas are urged to take extra care while working or exercising outdoors.

GET TRAFFIC UPDATES: Use our real-time traffic map to spot delays

Temperatures have already reached into the triple digits in Austin over the past three days, hitting 101 on Tuesday, 102 on Wednesday, and 103 degrees on Thursday. But forecasters say temperatures will surge even higher from Friday through Monday.

Afternoon highs could reach 105 degrees on Saturday, then creep up to a sweltering 106 degrees on Sunday.

Monday should be even hotter — likely the hottest day of the year so far — with an expected high of 107 degrees.

If temperatures reach highs forecasters expect, Austin stands to match or break heat records in the next four days.

In addition to taking precautions when working outdoors, forecasters urged people to wear loose-fitting clothing, drink plenty of water, and check in on people with health problems and elderly friends and relatives.

Also, pets and children should never be left unattended or in vehicles.

Here’s a look at the forecast through the weekend: