Tuesday forecast for Austin: A heat advisory will be in effect all day long for Central Texas counties along and east of Interstate 35, the National Weather Service said.

The advisory will last until 7 p.m. for Travis, Williamson, Bastrop, Hays and Caldwell counties, as well as neighboring Burnet and Llano counties to the west and Fayette and Lee counties to the east.

What could possibly call for a heat advisory, you ask? Well, Austin temperatures will climb to a high near 105 degrees and the heat index will be as high as 111, forecasters said. A heat index combines relative humidity with air temperature to more accurately measure how hot outside will feel to your body.

For those keeping track, Tuesday will be the ninth day in a row that temperatures reach triple digits, according to the weather service. Tuesday's expected high of 105 still isn't a record, though — the daily record is 107 set in 1925, according to weather service data.

During a heat advisory, forecasters urge people to be extra cautious if they're spending time outside. Drink plenty of fluids, wear loose-fitting and light clothing and try to schedule your activities for the cooler parts of the day to avoid heat-related illnesses.

Hang out in the shade and be sure to check up on your family members and neighbors. You could also stay inside until November, too.

Skies will be mostly clear at night and temperatures will stay above a low of 79 degrees, forecasters said.

Believe it or not, rain is possible for the next two days, according to the weather service's extended forecast:

Wednesday: Mostly sunny and hot with a 30% chance of rain, mainly after 2 p.m., and a high near 101 and a heat index as high as 109. Mostly cloudy at night with a 30% chance of rain, mainly before 2 a.m., with a low around 79.

Thursday: Partly sunny with a 30% chance of rain, mainly after 8 a.m., and a high near 98. Partly cloudy at night with a 30% chance of rain before 8 p.m. and a low around 78.

Friday: Mostly sunny with a high near 98. Partly cloudy at night with a low around 77.

Saturday: Mostly sunny and hot with a high near 99. Mostly clear at night with a low around 78.

Sunday: Sunny and hot with a high near 100. Mostly clear at night with a low around 78.