The question is, does a heart beat beneath that cool, calculating exterior or is he a political android in the mould of Dutch Prime Minister Jan-Peter Balkenende or Estonian premier Juhan Parts?

Rop’s official CV would appear to suggest the latter. Born in the former Yugoslav republic’s picture-postcard capital Ljubljana in 1960, the future prime minister studied economics before joining the Slovene Institute for Macroeconomic Analysis and Development in 1985.

Even when Rop entered the world of politics as state secretary for economics and development at the age of 33, his work was largely technocratic.

“He managed system solutions in ownership transformation and the privatization process in Slovenia,” his CV boasts.

“Rop is not lacking in political skills and ambition,” says one MEP. “But he does lack colour and charisma.”

It does not help Rop’s image that he is a self-confessed workaholic. “He works 16 hours a day,” says a close aide. “He’s working even when he’s sleeping,” adds Jelko Kacin, president of the foreign affairs committee of the Slovenian parliament and head of the Liberals’ list for June’s European Parliament elections.

It also does not help that Rop inevitably invites comparisons with Janez Drnovsek, the country’s current president who was prime minister throughout most of the 1990s and hand-picked Rop as his successor in December 2002. “Drnovsek ruled with an iron fist, whereas Rop doesn’t appear to have the confidence a real leader should,” says one Slovenian journalist.

Alojz Peterle, Slovenia’s first prime minister after independence, agrees. “Rop is not a very strong leader. He has a strong voice but not strong power like Drnovsek.”

However, the observer MEP from the opposition New Slovenia party rates his political rival as smoother and better organized than his predecessor. “He has a very different style to Drnovsek, who always waited until the last minute and did things under pressure. Rop is more dynamic and omnipresent. He is also more PR-savvy.”

Charisma counts for a lot in politics, but results count for more – as dull former tax inspector and Spanish prime minister José María Aznar proved during his eight years in office.

Rop may be light on charisma, but his achievements speak for themselves. Slovenia will be the richest of the eight former communist states to join the Brussels-based club, with a per capita gross domestic product on a par with Greece and Portugal.

On most other indices, the mountainous country compares favourably with the current member states. Growth is double the EU’s paltry 1.5% rate, unemployment is several percentage points below the EU average, government debt is low and the country has roughly as many cars, mobile phones, personal computers and internet users per person as the present EU-15.

“We will not be second-class citizens when we join the EU,” Rop has said. “On the contrary, we believe we can be quite successful. We export 60% of goods to the European Union, so we are already in the EU from an economic point of view.”

Of course, Drnovsek and former president Milan Kucan can claim a lot of the credit for steering Slovenia towards the EU. But it is thanks to Rop’s steady hands on the wheel that the former Austro-Hungarian province nestled between the Alps and the Balkans has avoided any last-minute collisions.

“He always has a rational approach to any challenge. He doesn’t bluff, doesn’t promise the earth and is always fair,” says Kacin. “This counts for a lot when we are just about to become members of the EU and now that Europe is less of an emotional issue.”

During his turbulent 18 months in office, Rop has won two referenda on EU and NATO membership – the first with 90% of the vote, the second with two-thirds – and has overseen his country’s entry into both clubs in 2004.

“For Slovenia, the year 2004 is unique, unrepeatable and historic,” Rop told parliamentarians in February. “It represents the high point of our years of effort and struggle and, at the same time, it represents the beginning of our new role in the international community.”

The prospect of EU and NATO membership has allowed Slovenia to strut more confidently on the world stage. It sent troops to Afghanistan but opposed the US–led war in Iraq. It is also deeply involved in peacekeeping activities in Bosnia-Herzegovina, Kosovo and Macedonia.

“As a former Yugolsav republic we have some experience of dealing with possible tensions between different nationalities,” says Rop. “We believe we can understand the situation a little better in Bosnia- Herzegovina and Kosovo and are prepared to play a lead role in EU policy in the region.”

Rop will probably raise a glass to EU membership on 1 May, but he is unlikely to be giddy with joy at joining the world’s largest trade bloc.

Over a decade of meticulous preparations and painstaking negotiations have clearly taken some of the gloss off what should have been a triumphant day for Slovenia and Europe.

“We are quite realistic about EU membership,” says the prime minister. “We have already achieved what we want. We have changed our economy and our society and we have ways for a better life for our citizens. So entering the EU is much more of a formal act than something that is in reality very important.”

Life may not change much for ordinary Slovenes, but at least membership of the EU will help put the country of two million people on the map. At a recent news conference with Rop in Rome, Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi said: “I’m very happy to be here today with the prime minister of Slovakia.”

He is not the only statesman to confuse the two new member states. During the 2000 presidential campaign, George W. Bush made the same mistake and compounded it three years later by including Slovenia as a member of the “coalition of the willing” in the war to oust Saddam Hussein.

The faux-pas prompted hundreds of citizens to take to the streets in Ljubljana and Rop to protest: “We are a part of no such coalition. We are a part of a coalition for peace.”

Asked whether such slips bother him, the centre-left premier says: “What is important for Slovenia is to be successful. We are the best among the former communist countries entering the EU, so it’s not such a problem for me if someone makes a mistake concerning the name and exact location of Slovenia.”

Outside politics, there are two things that count for Rop: sport and family. The former member of the youth wing of the Slovene communist organization met his future wife at high school and the couple have three children.

“The spare time I have, I spend with them,” he says, adding: “You should ask my wife and children how do they see me as a husband and father, but I believe that quality is more important than quantity.”

Like many Slovenes, Rop and his family love skiing and hiking and every August they can be found clambering up the slopes of the Alpine country’s highest mountain, Triglav.

Tennis is another of the 43-year old premier’s ways of relaxing. On a recent official visit to Bratislava, he found time to play a few sets with Slovak Prime Minister Mikulás Dzurinda, but more often than not it is with his son.

Rop certainly has a hill to climb this autumn, when national elections are due to be held. Recent polls have put the Liberals neck-and-neck with the centre-right Slovenian Democrats, who nickname the premier ‘Robin Hood’ because of his progressive wealth distribution policies (and because Rop means ‘robbery’ in Slovenian).

However, the former finance minister is confident of victory, despite a recent outbreak of squabbling within the three-party coalition and a bitter row over citizenship rights for 18,000 stateless people from other former Yugoslav republics.

The odds would appear to be in favour of Rop winning the late September-early October poll; not because he is hugely popular or charismatic, but because he represents a safe pair of hands in turbulent times.

Advertisement