KOTA KINABALU: Parti Bersatu Sabah (PBS) has reaffirmed its commitment to work with Gabungan Rakyat Sabah (GRS) for the upcoming state election amidst a viral video claiming that the party and Sabah STAR were planning to go solo for the polls.

Its acting president Datuk Seri Dr Joachim Gunsalam said PBS will work with all eight component parties for the 17th Sabah state election which is due next year but could be called earlier.

“PBS will definitely be together in GRS which is led by Chief Minister Datuk Seri Hajiji Noor,” he said when launching the joint annual general meeting for five interior PBS divisions in the Beaufort district on Sunday (Aug 4).

“I believe this is the time for us to step up our efforts and if possible, make GRS victorious in all seats we are contesting.

"PBS will hold on to this pledge, we are with GRS,” he added.

Gunsalam, who is also Deputy Chief Minister II, also denied the claims made in the viral video, contending the clip was deliberately fabricated and spread by the Opposition over social media.

He told members, especially all division heads, to work hard to strengthen their respective areas instead of falling victim to the claims.

This was important, he said, so as to fight for the Sabah people’s rights and to also preserve them.

Some 800 PBS members attended the joint meeting.

Also present were PBS deputy president Datuk Jahid Jahim, vice presidents Datuk Ruslan Muharam, Datuk Johnny Mositun and Datuk Arthur Sen as well as other division chiefs, among others.

The video made the rounds in social media last week, claiming PBS and Sabah STAR, both of which had strong influence in Kadazandusun Murut (KDM) majority seats, will contest separately from GRS in the state polls.

Datuk Joniston Bangkuai, who holds the information chief position in both GRS and PBS, had also refuted the allegations.

Both parties presently hold a combined 13 out of the 73 seats in Sabah, which means this potentially makes them the kingmakers in the coming election.

Besides PBS and the Datuk Seri Dr Jeffrey Kitingan-led Sabah STAR, some of the other parties in GRS are Parti Gagasan Rakyat Sabah (Gagasan Rakyat) headed by Hajiji and Sabah Progressive Party (SAPP) led by Datuk Seri Yong Teck Lee.

Along with these are the United Sabah National Organisation (Usno) led by Tan Sri Pandikar Amin Mulia, Liberal Democratic Party (LDP), Parti Harapan Rakyat Sabah (Harapan Rakyat)

The latest addition is Parti Cinta Sabah (PCS) headed by former foreign minister Tan Sri Anifah Aman.