For nearly 40 years, Horizon Christian School has been serving families in Southwest Portland. They are compelled by our mission to develop a school that will glorify God. They are committed to equipping our students with a Christ-centered educational experience that will empower them to overcome obstacles and embrace opportunities at each level of their growth and development.

Horizon Christian School is dedicated to inspiring in each student a genuine love for God, love for one another, and active engagement in serving their communities.

We welcome international students and encourage students to live in personally-matched homes with local families to get a once in a lifetime cultural experience. We provide students with a welcoming family and a place to call home while pursuing their education at Horizon Christian School.

SRS Concierge specializes in providing safe, easy and world-class homestay experiences.

Our hosts are an integral part of a homestay for foreign students, as they’re responsible for opening up their home, welcoming a student, and providing the highest form of hospitality throughout the entire academic homestay.

Your host family will guide you through your U.S. journey and help you with any questions, concerns, or issues that arise.

24/7 support

Personalized student/family matches

Vetted selection of households

Lifelong friendship opportunities

Extra assistance transitioning to American student life

Help navigating the local community

We don’t take an international homestay program lightly, especially when it comes to the safety and security of our students. We only choose host families who have undergone a series of national criminal background checks, interviews, at-home inspections, orientations, and trainings. On top of intensive procedures for households, we’re also CSIET-approved, meaning StudentRoomStay Concierge is audited each year to assure each student is safe and well taken care of during their entire academic homestay.

Every student has access to 24/7 support from trained StudentRoomStay Concierge staff, as well as monthly check-ins to address additional concerns or issues. Each StudentRoomStay Concierge school offers first-rate international student programs, teachers, and counselors to assist students and their progress in American schooling, providing many resources for stability and overall health.