The good news for Dick Benschop is that failure to get satisfaction at the crunch summit which begins in Berlin next Wednesday (24 March) will not reflect on his abilities or negotiating virility.

Unlike his political masters – Kok and Foreign Minister Jozias van Aartsen – Benschop is far enough into deep cover to escape blame. Yet the last seven months of negotiations on the Agenda 2000 package of reforms to the EU’s spending programmes have been conducted primarily out of his office.

Benschop’s door at the foreign ministry may read “state secretary

for foreign affairs with special responsibility for EU affairs, asylum and immigration issues” but, to one diplomat at least, he is the “real foreign minister” and, to the Dutch press, “Wim Kok’s shadow”.

This is more than a little unfair to Van Aartsen, since ‘real’ foreign ministers are responsible for a country’s relations with the whole world. But, in that small world called European diplomacy, Benschop is undeniably seen as the key man. “He is a player, which is more than you could have said about Dutch ministers in the past,” says another diplomat.

The young Utrechter took office for the first time last August, when the second consecutive ‘purple’ coalition of Kok’s Labour Party (PvdA), Liberals (VVD) and centrists (D’66) was formed.

His background had been that of the classic budding left-wing politician. At the Free University of Amsterdam in the early Eighties, he had been chairman of the students’ council and became constituency leader for the Labour Party (PvdA) in the south of the capital.

A year of teaching was followed by a job with the parliamentary party. In his mid-20s, Benschop worked as personal assistant to former Labour premier Joop den Uyl, until the latter’s death in 1987, when he moved into the office of party leader Wim Kok.

Even then, he was known as an ‘in-the-loop’ operator. “He knew party business, but also had that kind of political intelligence that meant he was a good commentator on what was happening in the second chamber [the lower house],” says a former parliamentary reporter.

When Kok became finance minister in late 1989, Benschop moved into the office of the parliamentary leader, Thijs Wöltgens, and later became director of the PvdA national headquarters. But the ‘likely lad’ then took a surprise sabbatical in 1994, leaving politics to become a consultant.

Some clients were easier than others. Representing insurance giant Aegon was a breeze compared with lobbying for Schiphol Airport – Europe’s third largest and the bugbear of Dutch left-wing environmentalists.

Benschop’s friends say that his decision to champion the controversial growth of the airport was based on one overriding political commitment: to jobs. To the Dutch daily newspaper Het Financieele Dagblad, he is “a true exponent of arbeid [work] in the Partij van de Arbeid – a trait he shares with the PvdA leader himself”.

His political closeness to Kok is undeniable. When the premier went to the Bonn summit last month to crack key elements of Agenda 2000, he took his diplomatic adviser Ben Geerts, Dutch ambassador to the EU Ben Bot and Benschop, and nobody else.

Benschop is careful to deny claims that he is the prime minister’s spy in the foreign ministry. When Hans van Mierlo was foreign minister, Liberal leader Frits Bolkestein insisted that his man became European affairs minister to keep an eye on the mercurial diplomatic chief. And when ‘Purple II’ was being put together last summer, the same was said about Benschop. For once Van Aartsen was tapped for the top job, a PvdAer was always on the cards for the number two slot at the ministry, and who could be better than Kok’s eyes and ears.

The luck of the natural politician ensured that Benschop had an immediate opportunity to make a splash. As he drove up to the ministry doors from his home in Badhoevedorp outside Amsterdam, the real negotiations over Agenda 2000 got under way.

His overriding task – reducing the Dutch net contribution to the EU budget by close to 600 million euro – was fiendishly difficult, not to say impossible. A freak of budgetary nature had turned the Netherlands from a net recipient of funds into an increasingly significant paymaster from 1992 onwards.

‘Purple I’ ministers had griped about it, but nothing had changed. During the negotiations to create the new cabinet, Kok and Bolkestein agreed to start meaning what they said about what they believed were their ‘excessive’ payments to Brussels.

“In the past, there was a feeling that the Dutch had a position but were afraid to say it in Brussels,” says a foreign ministry official. “There have always been specifically Dutch interests, but now we are not afraid to express them.”

At the first cabinet meeting of the new coalition, Van Aartsen and Benschop were told to change the foreign ministry’s ways. They were told to stay on good terms with the Germans because their interests often coincided with those of their fellow northern Europeans, but to be careful. “Often, the Germans decide late in the day to go right when we want to go left,” says a government official.

Benschop, like most of his European colleagues, has become exasperated by the Germans’ chaotic presidency of the EU. He has been aided, however, by his closeness to Chancellor Gerhard Schröder’s political fixer, Bodo Hombach. His fluency in the language of Goethe – a skill honed by his marriage to Elisabeth, an ethnically Portuguese German – has also helped.

The same cannot be said for his facility in the language of Voltaire, but he has nevertheless struck up an excellent relationship with French European Affairs Minister Pierre Moscovici. Both Benschop and Van Aartsen are keen to mend fences in a relationship with Paris which had become fraught over the years, as the two sides squabbled over utility liberalisation, drugs policy and the presidency of the European Central Bank.

“Anything that happens in Europe still requires a settlement between Germany and France,” says a Benschop aide. “He is careful to avoid what he believes to be the mistakes we sometimes made in the past of allowing ourselves to become isolated and out of the debate.”

Unlike the Germans, Dutch ministers sing from the same policy hymn-sheet. Before every Council of Ministers meeting, government members have to attend a coordination briefing with Benschop. “His party background means that he knows when civil servants are unnecessarily trying to put the brakes on things,” says an aide. “If there is a decision to be taken, he likes to take it today.”

Benschop does not want to be seen as a fixer or a technocrat. The minister is said to be brimming with ideas about the strange relationship between the Netherlands and the European Communities – an

on-off love affair but one which is rarely questioned.

The minister delivered a key-note speech to Rotterdam University this week in which he told the country’s reputedly snobbiest students that the days of centralised European decision-making were over.

He said that while this style of government was needed to get the single market and the euro up and running, it was neither useful nor politically appropriate now. Sounding increasingly like a British politician, Benschop advocated intergovernmentalism: cajoling, peer review and ‘bench-marking’.