Credit:

Still in her office, Dorian is shocked by David’s wedding announcement – especially when Addie strolls in dressed in a wedding gown and announces herself as Mrs. David Vickers! Though Dorian thinks they just came from a costume party, David and Addie seal their Vegas marriage with a kiss, causing Dorian to gasp! With Dorian in shock, David says, “You should congratulate me. I’m a Cramer now!” However, Addie wants to be called Mrs. David Cramer-Vickers then asks Dorian, “You’re not jealous, are you?”

In Angel’s Square, Starr calls Cole and invites him to dinner at the mansion. After she hangs up, Starr says to herself, “Oh boy…” then heads home to cook a private dinner for her and Cole.

Blair arrives at the mansion and finds Starr trying to clear the smoke out of the kitchen. When Blair asks what’s going on, Starr explains that she wanted to cook for Cole, seeing as she’s going to end up breaking his heart tonight. Just then, Blair gets a call from Dorian who screams into the phone, “I need you to get over to C.E. right away! I’m calling about your mother… She’s definitely off her meds! Your mother married David Vickers!”

Cole arrives at the mansion with flowers for Starr just as Blair is heading out in a panic. Once alone, talk of the baby ensues and Cole suggests that to guarantee them a future, and to make things best for the baby, “We should get married.” However, Starr becomes nervous and informs Cole that she’s going to give their baby up for adoption. Though Cole thinks someone is pressuring Star, she tells him that she’s thought this through.

After Dorian hangs up with Blair, she warns that David will not step foot in her house, to which Addie asks sadly, “Are you going to throw me out too, Dorian?” Before Dorian can answer, David says, “Don’t worry Addie, if Dorian throws us out Viki will let us stay with her. Llanfair is much bigger than La-Blah-Lay.” Suddenly, Blair arrives and demands to see the marriage license! As Addie shows Blair the license, David reminds Blair that he’s now her father! Blair quickly lunges on David and throws him against the wall, to which David asks, “Would you like me to adopt you?”

Addie asks for a moment alone with Blair and tells her daughter, “David is gorgeous and he makes me laugh.” When Blair tells her, “He doesn’t love you,” Addie replies, “I don’t love him either.” Addie brings up how Blair married Asa for anything but love and makes Blair cringe when she describes David’s warm, sexy body then says, “I’m just making up for lost time. I’m just ticking off items on my list.” Outside the office, Dorian tells David to name his price – or suffer her wrath! Though Dorian writes down a price and offers David 5% of C.E., he turns her down and smiles to them all being one big happy family now!

Once Clint and Bo sign a paper releasing Jared of all charges, Clint approaches Natalie and demands the name of the real Buchanan heir, to which Natalie replies, “Grandpa’s long lost son is David Vickers.” When Clint lashes out at Natalie, and claims she’s lying, Bo pulls Clint out into the patrol room before he says something he’ll regret – and reminds Clint that he hasn’t been up to par on the honesty front as well! Inside the commissioner’s office, Nora warns Jared and Natalie that they better be telling the truth! Nora calls Clint and Bo back into the office, to which Clint asks Natalie, “If you’ve got more to say then say it. I want to know how you brought this family to its knees.” After Jared and Natalie explain how they found out about David’s paternity, and how they covered it, Clint demands that they stay quiet about it and says, “It shouldn’t be hard… lying is like breathing for you two.” Though Natalie apologizes to Clint, and says they were trying to make things right, Clint throws her and Jared out of the office and says, “I’ve heard enough!” Clint and Bo then repeat David’s name in disgust.

At the hospital, although Viki tells Charlie that one day she’ll be able to forgive him, forgiveness doesn’t mean that they’ll ever get back together again. Viki continues crying and says, “You ruined our chance! So many things you did were wrong… what you did to Rex… I can’t build a life on wrongs and losses and lies.” Viki admits she loves Charlie very much, as he does her, but Viki can’t move forward with him. “What we had, Charlie, is gone.” After Viki leaves, Charlie sadly looks at a picture of him and Viki and remembers when they first met.

Later, Charlie goes to an AA meeting and follows a sign that reads, “Friends of Bill W.”

Over at Llanfair, after Tina suggests that Sarah hide her out, Cris objects and reminds Sarah of her roommates. Just as Sarah gets an idea and asks Cris to allow her mother to stay with him, they hear Antonio calling out from the foyer. With Tina hidden, Antonio stops in to briefly chat with Cris and Sarah – and Tina’s cover is almost blown when David Vickers lets out a quiet bark! Once Antonio is gone, Cris reminds Sarah of all the hurt her mother has caused her then demands they find out why she’s back in Llanview. Knowing someone could come home at any time, Cris agrees to let Tina stay with her for one night – then he wants her full story! The three head to Cris’ studio.

When Viki arrives home, she calls out to Sarah but finds she’s not there. Viki then breaks down in tears and thinks about her time with Charlie in Texas – and how they fell in love…

In his limo, Jonas looks at a picture of Cris and Sarah, as he talks to someone on the phone about looks being very deceiving… “I will find the Princess, and this time I won’t miss.” Jonas then asks his contact for more info on Talia and instructs them to find out what she was doing with Antonio Vega – and what she has to do with ‘this’!

Arriving at Cris’ studio, Tina starts trying to put her personal touches on the place, but Cris halts her and asks, “Do you want to tell me why I shouldn’t call the cops right now?” When Tina claims the police will only make the situation far more dangerous than it already is, Cris reminds her that she didn’t think of that danger when dragging Sarah into her mess!

Next on One Life to Live:

Todd uses Marty to further his plan!

Starr devastates Cole with her decision!

John continues to unravel the mystery.

Thank-you for your comments and feedback! We do ask that our visitors abide by the Guidelines and try to keep all posts on the topic of the show. If you have a Spoiler that you want to post and/or discuss in the comments section below, please always remember to start your post with ***Spoiler Alert*** so others who do not wish to read spoilers can skim over your post. Please feel free to Contact Us if a moderator is required to handle any bad posts. Above all, have a great time posting!

All photographs are courtesy of Soaps.com.