File manager for Unix (X11/Motif)

Status: Beta

Brought to you by: alx210

Solaris Linux BSD

XFile is a compact file manager for Unix and alike systems running X11. It presents the file system as is, without imaginary locations, trashcans etc. XFile uses its own file type/association database in typical Unix/RC like syntax, which is easily editable. Mounting support for file systems defined in fstab, and integration with mount daemons that manage a dedicated media directory is also included.

XFile is easily configurable and customizable with X resources, and has no dependencies, save for X and Motif.

Documentation and more on the project homepage: https://fastestcode.org/xfile.html

Features

File Manager

See All Activity >

Categories

File Managers

License

MIT License

Follow XFile - File Manager

XFile - File Manager Web Site

You Might Also Like

A Complete Platform for Home Care Providers

Designed By Caregivers For Caregivers

Smart, Intuitive, and Affordable – A Complete Platform for Home Care Providers. Designed by caregivers for caregivers. See why more home care businesses are choosing SMARTcare for services. We have an astounding customer service team with a 98.2% customer satisfaction rating! Our focus is ensuring our clients can spend their time providing high-quality care rather than taking time to learning how to use a software. Ditch the headaches and technical difficulties and find out why SMARTcare is the trusted standard. Achieve higher engagement of your caregivers and staff. SMARTcare is designed for those on-the-go with our mobile app. Caregivers have access to all the tools to perform their care, be better engaged and more satisfied with their jobs. SMARTcare mobile gives them the information they need when they need it. Review schedules, clock in/out with GPS verification, review care plans, message, and document all from the mobile app. Now that’s easy!

Rate This Project

Login To Rate This Project

User Reviews

Be the first to post a review of XFile - File Manager!

Additional Project Details

Operating Systems

Solaris, Linux, OpenBSD, FreeBSD, NetBSD

Intended Audience

Advanced End Users

User Interface

Motif/LessTif

Programming Language

C

Related Categories

C File Managers

Registered

2023-02-12