XFile - File manager for Unix/X11

XFile is a compact file manager for Unix and alike systems running X11. It presents the file system as is, without imaginary locations, trashcans etc. XFile uses its own file type/association database in typical Unix/RC like syntax, which is easily editable. Mounting support for file systems defined in fstab, and integration with mount daemons that manage a dedicated media directory is also included.

XFile is easily configurable and customizable with X resources. The Tools dropdown menu can be populated with user defined commands, which may be run with selected files, current directory and user specified parameters as arguments.

The application has no dependencies, save for X and Motif, and is built using simple Makefiles. It's written in C, and the source code is freely available under the terms of the X/MIT license.

Downloads

Latest source code: xfile-src-1.0-beta.tar.xz (Updated on Jul 29 2024).

This software is still in beta development stage. Not all functionality has been implemented and thoroughly tested yet. See the included README file for build instructions. The application is usually tested on FreeBSD and some sort of GNU/Linux. If you have a question that isn't answered in the manpage, feel free to contact me (Alex): mail@fastestcode.org

See the XFile FAQ/Guide for hints on setting up XFile, and the Motif/EMWM FAQ on setting up Motif based applications in general.

You can support the author via Liberapay if you find the software useful.

Addons

xfile-xdgsvc-src.tar.xz

A shim that allows xfile to act as xdg/freedesktop default file manager and be launched over dbus (such interface is used by some GTK programs, notably firefox and gimp). See the README file included.

xfile-slanted-icons.tar.xz

Alternate (indigo magic inspired) set of directory icons for xfile (to install, just copy *.xpm files into ~/.xfile/icons)

Screenshots

Click for a larger picture.

Trivia

Git repository and release archives are also available on sourceforge and github. Note however that I'm not using these platforms for any purpose other than archiving.