Table of Contents

839 relations: Abbadid dynasty, Abbasid Caliphate, Abdul Rahman Al Ghafiqi, Abila, Absolute monarchy, Aceh, Achtung Baby, Acute radiation syndrome, AD 42, Adultery, Afonso de Albuquerque, Afonso V of Portugal, Afroasiatic languages, Ahmad Shah Massoud, Ahmed Ressam, AIESEC, Airline, Algarve, Algeciras Conference, Algeria, Algerian People's National Armed Forces, Algerian War, Algiers, Alhucemas Islands, Ali Hassan Salameh, Alicante, Allen Ginsberg, Allier, Almere, Almohad Caliphate, Almond, Almoravid dynasty, Alpha Blondy, Alpine chough, Alsace, Amon Tobin, Andalusia, Angola, Anti-Arabism, Antibes, Antisemitism, Antisemitism in the Arab world, Antoine de Saint-Exupéry, Apostasy, Appalachian Mountains, Appalachian Trail, April 7, Arab Americans, Arab League, Arab world, ... Expand index (789 more) » « Shrink index

Abbadid dynasty

The Abbadid dynasty or Abbadids (Arabic,بنو عباد) was an Arab Muslim dynasty which arose in Al-Andalus on the downfall of the Caliphate of Cordoba (756–1031).

See Morocco and Abbadid dynasty

Abbasid Caliphate

The Abbasid Caliphate (or ٱلْخِلافَةُ ٱلْعَبَّاسِيَّة) was the third of the Islamic caliphates to succeed the Islamic prophet Muhammad.

See Morocco and Abbasid Caliphate

Abdul Rahman Al Ghafiqi

Abdul Rahman Al Ghafiqi (died 732; عبد الرحمن الغافقي), also known as Abd er Rahman, Abdderrahman, Abderame, and Abd el-Rahman, unsuccessfully led the Andalusian Muslims into battle against the forces of Charles Martel in the Battle of Tours on October 10, 732 AD.

See Morocco and Abdul Rahman Al Ghafiqi

Abila

Abila is the name of several places:;Cities.

See Morocco and Abila

Absolute monarchy

Absolute monarchy, is a form of monarchy in which one ruler has supreme authority and where that authority is not restricted by any written laws, legislature, or customs.

See Morocco and Absolute monarchy

Aceh

Aceh; (Acehnese: Acèh; Jawoë:; Dutch: Atjeh or Aceh) is a province of Indonesia.

See Morocco and Aceh

Achtung Baby

Achtung Baby is the seventh studio album by Irish rock band U2.

See Morocco and Achtung Baby

Acute radiation syndrome

Acute radiation syndrome (ARS) is a collection of health effects that are present within 24 hours of exposure to high doses of ionizing radiation.

See Morocco and Acute radiation syndrome

AD 42

AD 42 (XLII) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.

See Morocco and AD 42

Adultery

Adultery (from Latin adulterium) is extramarital sex that is considered objectionable on social, religious, moral, or legal grounds.

See Morocco and Adultery

Afonso de Albuquerque

Afonso de Albuquerque, Duke of Goa (1453 – 16 December 1515) (also spelled Aphonso or Alfonso), was a Portuguese general, a "great conqueror",, Vol.

See Morocco and Afonso de Albuquerque

Afonso V of Portugal

Afonso V KG (15 January 1432 &ndash; 28 August 1481), called the African, was King of Portugal and of the Algarves.

See Morocco and Afonso V of Portugal

Afroasiatic languages

Afroasiatic (Afro-Asiatic), also known as Afrasian and traditionally as Hamito-Semitic (Chamito-Semitic) or Semito-Hamitic, is a large language family of about 300 languages and dialects.

See Morocco and Afroasiatic languages

Ahmad Shah Massoud

Ahmad Shah Massoud (Dari Persian: احمد شاه مسعود; September 2, 1953September 9, 2001) was an Afghan political and military leader.

See Morocco and Ahmad Shah Massoud

Ahmed Ressam

Ahmed Ressam (احمد رسام; also Benni Noris or the Millennium Bomber; born May 9, 1967) is an Algerian al-Qaeda member who lived for a time in Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

See Morocco and Ahmed Ressam

AIESEC

AIESEC is the world's largest non-profit youth-run organization.

See Morocco and AIESEC

Airline

An airline is a company that provides air transport services for traveling passengers and freight.

See Morocco and Airline

Algarve

The Algarve (from الغرب "the west") is the southernmost region of continental Portugal.

See Morocco and Algarve

Algeciras Conference

The Algeciras Conference of 1906 took place in Algeciras, Spain, and lasted from 16 January to 7 April.

See Morocco and Algeciras Conference

Algeria

Algeria (الجزائر, familary Algerian Arabic الدزاير; ⴷⵣⴰⵢⴻⵔ; Dzayer; Algérie), officially the People's Democratic Republic of Algeria, is a sovereign state in North Africa on the Mediterranean coast.

See Morocco and Algeria

Algerian People's National Armed Forces

The Algerian People’s National Armed Forces (Armée nationale populaire) is the armed forces of the People's Democratic Republic of Algeria.

See Morocco and Algerian People's National Armed Forces

Algerian War

No description.

See Morocco and Algerian War

Algiers

Algiers (الجزائر al-Jazā’er, ⴷⵣⴰⵢⴻ, Alger) is the capital and largest city of Algeria.

See Morocco and Algiers

Alhucemas Islands

The Alhucemas Islands is a group of islands and one of the Spanish plazas de soberanía just off the Moroccan coast in the Alboran Sea.

See Morocco and Alhucemas Islands

Ali Hassan Salameh

Ali Hassan Salameh (علي حسن سلامة) (1940 – 22 January 1979) was the chief of operations—code name Abu Hassan—for Black September, the organization responsible for the 1972 Munich massacre and other terror attacks.

See Morocco and Ali Hassan Salameh

Alicante

Alicante, or Alacant, both the Spanish and Valencian being official names, is a city and port in Spain on the Costa Blanca, the capital of the province of Alicante and of the comarca of Alacantí, in the south of the Valencian Community.

See Morocco and Alicante

Allen Ginsberg

Irwin Allen Ginsberg (June 3, 1926 – April 5, 1997) was an American poet, philosopher, writer, and activist.

See Morocco and Allen Ginsberg

Allier

Allier; is a French department located in the Auvergne-Rhône-Alpes region of central France named after the river Allier.

See Morocco and Allier

Almere

Almere is a planned city and municipality in the province of Flevoland, Netherlands, bordering Lelystad and Zeewolde.

See Morocco and Almere

Almohad Caliphate

The Almohad Caliphate (British English:, U.S. English:; ⵉⵎⵡⴻⵃⵃⴷⴻⵏ (Imweḥḥden), from Arabic الموحدون, "the monotheists" or "the unifiers") was a Moroccan Berber Muslim movement and empire founded in the 12th century.

See Morocco and Almohad Caliphate

Almond

The almond (Prunus dulcis, syn. Prunus amygdalus) is a species of tree native to Mediterranean climate regions of the Middle East, from Syria and Turkey to India and Pakistan, although it has been introduced elsewhere.

See Morocco and Almond

Almoravid dynasty

The Almoravid dynasty (Imṛabḍen, ⵉⵎⵕⴰⴱⴹⴻⵏ; المرابطون, Al-Murābiṭūn) was an imperial Berber Muslim dynasty centered in Morocco.

See Morocco and Almoravid dynasty

Alpha Blondy

Alpha Blondy (born Seydou Koné; 1 January 1953 in Dimbokro, Ivory Coast) is a reggae singer and international recording artist.

See Morocco and Alpha Blondy

Alpine chough

The Alpine chough, or yellow-billed chough (Pyrrhocorax graculus), is a bird in the crow family, one of only two species in the genus Pyrrhocorax.

See Morocco and Alpine chough

Alsace

Alsace (Alsatian: ’s Elsass; German: Elsass; Alsatia) is a cultural and historical region in eastern France, on the west bank of the upper Rhine next to Germany and Switzerland.

See Morocco and Alsace

Amon Tobin

Amon Adonai Santos de Araújo Tobin (born February 7, 1972), known as Amon Tobin, is a Brazilian musician, composer and producer of electronic music.

See Morocco and Amon Tobin

Andalusia

Andalusia (Andalucía) is an autonomous community in southern Spain.

See Morocco and Andalusia

Angola

Angola, officially the Republic of Angola (República de Angola; Kikongo, Kimbundu and Repubilika ya Ngola), is a country in Southern Africa.

See Morocco and Angola

Anti-Arabism

Anti-Arabism, Anti-Arab sentiment or Arabophobia is opposition to, or dislike, fear, hatred, and advocacy of genocide of Arab people.

See Morocco and Anti-Arabism

Antibes

Antibes (Provençal Occitan: Antíbol) is a Mediterranean resort in the Alpes-Maritimes department of southeastern France, on the Côte d'Azur between Cannes and Nice.

See Morocco and Antibes

Antisemitism

Antisemitism (also spelled anti-Semitism or anti-semitism) is hostility to, prejudice, or discrimination against Jews.

See Morocco and Antisemitism

Antisemitism in the Arab world

Antisemitism in the Arab world increased greatly in the 20th century, for several reasons: the breakdown of the Ottoman Empire and traditional Islamic society; European influence, brought about by Western imperialism and Arab Christians; Nazi propaganda;Yadlin, Rifka.

See Morocco and Antisemitism in the Arab world

Antoine de Saint-Exupéry

Antoine Marie Jean-Baptiste Roger, comte de Saint-Exupéry (29 June 1900 – 31 July 1944) was a French writer, poet, aristocrat, journalist, and pioneering aviator.

See Morocco and Antoine de Saint-Exupéry

Apostasy

Apostasy (ἀποστασία apostasia, "a defection or revolt") is the formal disaffiliation from, or abandonment or renunciation of a religion by a person.

See Morocco and Apostasy

Appalachian Mountains

The Appalachian Mountains (les Appalaches), often called the Appalachians, are a system of mountains in eastern North America.

See Morocco and Appalachian Mountains

Appalachian Trail

The Appalachian National Scenic Trail, generally known as the Appalachian Trail or simply the A.T., is a marked hiking trail in the Eastern United States extending between Springer Mountain in Georgia and Mount Katahdin in Maine.

See Morocco and Appalachian Trail

April 7

No description.

See Morocco and April 7

Arab Americans

Arab Americans (عَرَبٌ أَمْرِيكِيُّونَ or أمريكيون من أصل عربي) are Americans of Arab ethnic, cultural and linguistic heritage or identity, who identify themselves as Arab.

See Morocco and Arab Americans

Arab League

The Arab League (الجامعة العربية), formally the League of Arab States (جامعة الدول العربية), is a regional organization of Arab states in and around North Africa, the Horn of Africa and Arabia.

See Morocco and Arab League

Arab world

The Arab world (العالم العربي; formally: Arab homeland, الوطن العربي), also known as the Arab nation (الأمة العربية) or the Arab states, currently consists of the 22 Arab countries of the Arab League.

See Morocco and Arab world

Arabic

Arabic (العَرَبِيَّة) or (عَرَبِيّ) or) is a Central Semitic language that first emerged in Iron Age northwestern Arabia and is now the lingua franca of the Arab world. It is named after the Arabs, a term initially used to describe peoples living from Mesopotamia in the east to the Anti-Lebanon mountains in the west, in northwestern Arabia, and in the Sinai peninsula. Arabic is classified as a macrolanguage comprising 30 modern varieties, including its standard form, Modern Standard Arabic, which is derived from Classical Arabic. As the modern written language, Modern Standard Arabic is widely taught in schools and universities, and is used to varying degrees in workplaces, government, and the media. The two formal varieties are grouped together as Literary Arabic (fuṣḥā), which is the official language of 26 states and the liturgical language of Islam. Modern Standard Arabic largely follows the grammatical standards of Classical Arabic and uses much of the same vocabulary. However, it has discarded some grammatical constructions and vocabulary that no longer have any counterpart in the spoken varieties, and has adopted certain new constructions and vocabulary from the spoken varieties. Much of the new vocabulary is used to denote concepts that have arisen in the post-classical era, especially in modern times. During the Middle Ages, Literary Arabic was a major vehicle of culture in Europe, especially in science, mathematics and philosophy. As a result, many European languages have also borrowed many words from it. Arabic influence, mainly in vocabulary, is seen in European languages, mainly Spanish and to a lesser extent Portuguese, Valencian and Catalan, owing to both the proximity of Christian European and Muslim Arab civilizations and 800 years of Arabic culture and language in the Iberian Peninsula, referred to in Arabic as al-Andalus. Sicilian has about 500 Arabic words as result of Sicily being progressively conquered by Arabs from North Africa, from the mid 9th to mid 10th centuries. Many of these words relate to agriculture and related activities (Hull and Ruffino). Balkan languages, including Greek and Bulgarian, have also acquired a significant number of Arabic words through contact with Ottoman Turkish. Arabic has influenced many languages around the globe throughout its history. Some of the most influenced languages are Persian, Turkish, Spanish, Urdu, Kashmiri, Kurdish, Bosnian, Kazakh, Bengali, Hindi, Malay, Maldivian, Indonesian, Pashto, Punjabi, Tagalog, Sindhi, and Hausa, and some languages in parts of Africa. Conversely, Arabic has borrowed words from other languages, including Greek and Persian in medieval times, and contemporary European languages such as English and French in modern times. Classical Arabic is the liturgical language of 1.8 billion Muslims and Modern Standard Arabic is one of six official languages of the United Nations. All varieties of Arabic combined are spoken by perhaps as many as 422 million speakers (native and non-native) in the Arab world, making it the fifth most spoken language in the world. Arabic is written with the Arabic alphabet, which is an abjad script and is written from right to left, although the spoken varieties are sometimes written in ASCII Latin from left to right with no standardized orthography.

See Morocco and Arabic

Arabic name

Arabic names were historically based on a long naming system; most Arabs did not have given/middle/family names, but a full chain of names.

See Morocco and Arabic name

Arabs

Arabs (عَرَب ISO 233, Arabic pronunciation) are a population inhabiting the Arab world.

See Morocco and Arabs

Arch

An arch is a vertical curved structure that spans an elevated space and may or may not support the weight above it, or in case of a horizontal arch like an arch dam, the hydrostatic pressure against it.

See Morocco and Arch

Argument from silence

To make an argument from silence (Latin: argumentum ex silentio) is to express a conclusion that is based on the absence of statements in historical documents, rather than their presence.

See Morocco and Argument from silence

Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo

The Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo (Forces Armées de la République Démocratique du Congo (FARDC)) is the state organisation responsible for defending the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

See Morocco and Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Arnhem

Arnhem (or; Arnheim, Frisian: Arnhim, South Guelderish: Èrnem) is a city and municipality situated in the eastern part of the Netherlands.

See Morocco and Arnhem

Arrondissement

An arrondissement is any of various administrative divisions of France, Belgium, Haiti, certain other Francophone countries, and the Netherlands.

See Morocco and Arrondissement

Arsenic

Arsenic is a chemical element with symbol As and atomic number 33.

See Morocco and Arsenic

Art Deco

Art Deco, sometimes referred to as Deco, is a style of visual arts, architecture and design that first appeared in France just before World War I. Art Deco influenced the design of buildings, furniture, jewelry, fashion, cars, movie theatres, trains, ocean liners, and everyday objects such as radios and vacuum cleaners.

See Morocco and Art Deco

Asymmetric warfare

Asymmetric warfare (or asymmetric engagement) is war between belligerents whose relative military power differs significantly, or whose strategy or tactics differ significantly.

See Morocco and Asymmetric warfare

Athame

An athame or athamé is a ceremonial blade, generally with a black handle.

See Morocco and Athame

Atlas (mythology)

In Greek mythology, Atlas (Ἄτλας, Átlas) was a Titan condemned to hold up the sky for eternity after the Titanomachy.

See Morocco and Atlas (mythology)

Atlas Mountains

The Atlas Mountains (jibāl al-ʾaṭlas; ⵉⴷⵓⵔⴰⵔ ⵏ ⵡⴰⵟⵍⴰⵙ, idurar n waṭlas) are a mountain range in the Maghreb.

See Morocco and Atlas Mountains

August 14

No description.

See Morocco and August 14

August 15

No description.

See Morocco and August 15

August 21

No description.

See Morocco and August 21

August 3

No description.

See Morocco and August 3

Automotive industry

The automotive industry is a wide range of companies and organizations involved in the design, development, manufacturing, marketing, and selling of motor vehicles, some of them are called automakers.

See Morocco and Automotive industry

Averroes

Ibn Rushd (ابن رشد; full name; 1126 – 11 December 1198), often Latinized as Averroes, was an Andalusian philosopher and thinker who wrote about many subjects, including philosophy, theology, medicine, astronomy, physics, Islamic jurisprudence and law, and linguistics.

See Morocco and Averroes

Avocado

The avocado (Persea americana) is a tree, long thought to have originated in South Central Mexico, classified as a member of the flowering plant family Lauraceae.

See Morocco and Avocado

Axis powers

The Axis powers (Achsenmächte; Potenze dell'Asse; 枢軸国 Sūjikukoku), also known as the Axis and the Rome–Berlin–Tokyo Axis, were the nations that fought in World War II against the Allied forces.

See Morocco and Axis powers

Émile Loubet

Émile François Loubet (30 December 1838 – 20 December 1929) was the 45th Prime Minister of France and later President of France.

See Morocco and Émile Loubet

Bahá'í Faith

The Bahá'í Faith (بهائی) is a religion teaching the essential worth of all religions, and the unity and equality of all people.

See Morocco and Bahá'í Faith

Bahá'í House of Worship

A Bahá'í House of Worship, sometimes referred to by the name of mašriqu-l-'aḏkār (مشرق اﻻذكار), an Arabic phrase meaning "Dawning-place of the remembrances of God", is the designation of a place of worship, or temple, of the Bahá'í Faith.

See Morocco and Bahá'í House of Worship

Bamako

Bamako is the capital and largest city of Mali, with a population of 1.8 million (2009 census, provisional).

See Morocco and Bamako

Banjo

The banjo is a four-, five- or six-stringed instrument with a thin membrane stretched over a frame or cavity as a resonator, called the head.

See Morocco and Banjo

Barış Manço

Mehmet Barış Manço (born Tosun Yusuf Mehmet Barış Manço; (2 January 1943 &ndash; 31 January 1999), known by his stage name Barış Manço, was a Turkish rock musician, singer, songwriter, composer, actor, television producer and show host. Beginning his musical career while attending Galatasaray High School, he was a pioneer of rock music in Turkey and one of the founders of the Anatolian rock genre. Manço composed around 200 songs and is among the best-selling and most awarded Turkish artists to date. Many of his songs were translated into a variety of languages including English, French, Japanese, Greek, Italian, Bulgarian, Romanian, Persian, Hebrew, Urdu, Arabic, and German, among others. Through his TV program, 7'den 77'ye ("From 7 to 77"), Manço traveled the world and visited most countries on the globe. He remains one of the most popular public figures of Turkey.

See Morocco and Barış Manço

Barcelona

Barcelona is a city in Spain.

See Morocco and Barcelona

Barcelona–El Prat Airport

Barcelona–El Prat Airport (Catalan: Aeroport de Barcelona – el Prat, Spanish: Aeropuerto de Barcelona-El Prat), also known as El Prat Airport, is an international airport located southwest.

See Morocco and Barcelona–El Prat Airport

Barendrecht

Barendrecht is a town and lordship in the Netherlands, located as a suburb of Rotterdam in the province of South Holland.

See Morocco and Barendrecht

Baryte

Baryte or barite (BaSO4) is a mineral consisting of barium sulfate.

See Morocco and Baryte

Battle of Lepanto

The Battle of Lepanto was a naval engagement that took place on 7 October 1571 when a fleet of the Holy League, of which the Venetian Empire and the Spanish Empire were the main powers, inflicted a major defeat on the fleet of the Ottoman Empire in the Gulf of Patras, where Ottoman forces sailing westward from their naval station in Lepanto (the Venetian name of ancient Naupactus Ναύπακτος, Ottoman İnebahtı) met the fleet of the Holy League sailing east from Messina, Sicily.

See Morocco and Battle of Lepanto

Battle of Monte Cassino

The Battle of Monte Cassino (also known as the Battle for Rome and the Battle for Cassino) was a costly series of four assaults by the Allies against the Winter Line in Italy held by Axis forces during the Italian Campaign of World War II.

See Morocco and Battle of Monte Cassino

Battle of Navarino

The Battle of Navarino was a naval battle fought on 20 October 1827, during the Greek War of Independence (1821–32), in Navarino Bay (modern Pylos), on the west coast of the Peloponnese peninsula, in the Ionian Sea.

See Morocco and Battle of Navarino

Battle of Route Coloniale 4

The Battle of Route Coloniale 4 (called Chiến dịch Biên giới in Vietnam) was a battle of the First Indochina War.

See Morocco and Battle of Route Coloniale 4

Bedouin

The Bedouin (badawī) are a grouping of nomadic Arab peoples who have historically inhabited the desert regions in North Africa, the Arabian Peninsula, Iraq and the Levant.

See Morocco and Bedouin

Belgium

Belgium, officially the Kingdom of Belgium, is a country in Western Europe bordered by France, the Netherlands, Germany and Luxembourg.

See Morocco and Belgium

Ben & Jerry's

Ben & Jerry's Homemade Holdings Inc, trading and commonly known as Ben & Jerry's, is an American company that manufactures ice cream, frozen yogurt, and sorbet.

See Morocco and Ben & Jerry's

Berber languages

The Berber languages, also known as Berber or the Amazigh languages (Berber name: Tamaziɣt, Tamazight; Neo-Tifinagh: ⵜⴰⵎⴰⵣⵉⵖⵜ, Tuareg Tifinagh: ⵜⴰⵎⴰⵣⵉⵗⵜ, ⵝⴰⵎⴰⵣⵉⵗⵝ), are a branch of the Afroasiatic language family.

See Morocco and Berber languages

Berbers

Berbers or Amazighs (Berber: Imaziɣen, ⵉⵎⴰⵣⵉⵗⴻⵏ; singular: Amaziɣ, ⴰⵎⴰⵣⵉⵗ) are an ethnic group indigenous to North Africa, primarily inhabiting Algeria, northern Mali, Mauritania, Morocco, northern Niger, Tunisia, Libya, and a part of western Egypt.

See Morocco and Berbers

Bethesda, Maryland

Bethesda is an unincorporated, census-designated place in southern Montgomery County, Maryland, United States, located just northwest of the U.S. capital of Washington, D.C. It takes its name from a local church, the Bethesda Meeting House (1820, rebuilt 1849), which in turn took its name from Jerusalem's Pool of Bethesda.

See Morocco and Bethesda, Maryland

Bids for the 2012 Summer Olympics

Nine cities submitting bids to host the 2012 Summer Olympics and 2012 Summer Paralympics were recognised by the International Olympic Committee (IOC).

See Morocco and Bids for the 2012 Summer Olympics

Big Mac Index

The Big Mac Index is published by The Economist as an informal way of measuring the purchasing power parity (PPP) between two currencies and provides a test of the extent to which market exchange rates result in goods costing the same in different countries.

See Morocco and Big Mac Index

Bilbao

Bilbao (Bilbo) is a city in northern Spain, the largest city in the province of Biscay and in the Basque Country as a whole.

See Morocco and Bilbao

Bilingual education

Bilingual education involves teaching academic content in two languages, in a native and secondary language with varying amounts of each language used in accordance with the program model.Bilingual education refers to the utilization of two languages as means of instruction for students and considered part of or the entire school curriculum.

See Morocco and Bilingual education

Bissau

Bissau is the capital city of the African Republic of Guinea-Bissau.

See Morocco and Bissau

Black Hawk Down (film)

Black Hawk Down is a 2001 war film produced and directed by Ridley Scott from a screenplay by Ken Nolan.

See Morocco and Black Hawk Down (film)

Black people

Black people is a term used in certain countries, often in socially based systems of racial classification or of ethnicity, to describe persons who are perceived to be dark-skinned compared to other populations.

See Morocco and Black people

Black redstart

The black redstart (Phoenicurus ochruros) is a small passerine bird in the redstart genus Phoenicurus.

See Morocco and Black redstart

Blaise Cendrars

Frédéric-Louis Sauser (1 September 1887 &ndash; 21 January 1961), better known as Blaise Cendrars, was a Swiss-born novelist and poet who became a naturalized French citizen in 1916.

See Morocco and Blaise Cendrars

Bodyboarding

Bodyboarding is a water sport in which the surfer rides a bodyboard on the crest, face, and curl of a wave which is carrying the surfer towards the shore.

See Morocco and Bodyboarding

Boeing B-47 Stratojet

The Boeing B-47 Stratojet (company Model 450) is an American long range, six-engine, turbojet-powered strategic bomber designed to fly at high subsonic speed and at high altitude to avoid enemy interceptor aircraft.

See Morocco and Boeing B-47 Stratojet

Book

A book is a series of pages assembled for easy portability and reading, as well as the composition contained in it.

See Morocco and Book

Brideshead Revisited

Brideshead Revisited, The Sacred & Profane Memories of Captain Charles Ryder is a novel by English writer Evelyn Waugh, first published in 1945.

See Morocco and Brideshead Revisited

Brittany

Brittany (Bretagne; Breizh, pronounced or; Gallo: Bertaèyn, pronounced) is a cultural region in the northwest of France, covering the western part of what was known as Armorica during the period of Roman occupation.

See Morocco and Brittany

Brown bear

The brown bear (Ursus arctos) is a bear that is found across much of northern Eurasia and North America.

See Morocco and Brown bear

Brunei

Brunei, officially the Nation of Brunei, the Abode of Peace (Negara Brunei Darussalam, Jawi), is a sovereign state located on the north coast of the island of Borneo in Southeast Asia.

See Morocco and Brunei

Brussels

Brussels (Bruxelles,; Brussel), officially the Brussels-Capital Region (All text and all but one graphic show the English name as Brussels-Capital Region.) (Région de Bruxelles-Capitale, Brussels Hoofdstedelijk Gewest), is a region of Belgium comprising 19 municipalities, including the City of Brussels, which is the de jure capital of Belgium.

See Morocco and Brussels

Bursa

Bursa is a large city in Turkey, located in northwestern Anatolia, within the Marmara Region.

See Morocco and Bursa

Butter

Butter is a dairy product containing up to 80% butterfat (in commercial products) which is solid when chilled and at room temperature in some regions and liquid when warmed.

See Morocco and Butter

Camilla, Duchess of Cornwall

Camilla, Duchess of Cornwall, (born Camilla Rosemary Shand, later Parker Bowles; 17 July 1947) is a member of the British royal family.

See Morocco and Camilla, Duchess of Cornwall

Camorra

The Camorra is an Italian Mafia-type, by Umberto Santino, in: Albanese, Das & Verma, Organized Crime.

See Morocco and Camorra

Canary Islands

The Canary Islands (Islas Canarias) is a Spanish archipelago and autonomous community of Spain located in the Atlantic Ocean, west of Morocco at the closest point.

See Morocco and Canary Islands

Canon de 75 M(montagne) modele 1928

The Canon de 75 M(montagne) modèle 1928 (75 mm mle.28) was a French mountain gun.

See Morocco and Canon de 75 M(montagne) modele 1928

Cantabria

Cantabria is a historic Spanish community and autonomous community with Santander as its capital city.

See Morocco and Cantabria

Carleton S. Coon

Carleton Stevens Coon (June 23, 1904 – June 3, 1981) was an American physical anthropologist, Professor of Anthropology at the University of Pennsylvania, lecturer and professor at Harvard University, and president of the American Association of Physical Anthropologists.

See Morocco and Carleton S. Coon

Casablanca

Casablanca (ad-dār al-bayḍāʾ; anfa; local informal name: Kaẓa), located in the central-western part of Morocco bordering the Atlantic Ocean, is the largest city in Morocco.

See Morocco and Casablanca

Cavalry

Cavalry (from the French cavalerie, cf. cheval 'horse') or horsemen were soldiers or warriors who fought mounted on horseback.

See Morocco and Cavalry

Cádiz

Cádiz (see other pronunciations below) is a city and port in southwestern Spain.

See Morocco and Cádiz

Cedrus

Cedrus (common English name cedar) is a genus of coniferous trees in the plant family Pinaceae (subfamily Abietoideae).

See Morocco and Cedrus

Centime

Centime (from centesimus) is French for "cent", and is used in English as the name of the fraction currency in several Francophone countries (including Switzerland, Algeria, Belgium, Morocco and France).

See Morocco and Centime

Ceuta

Ceuta (also;; Berber language: Sebta) is an Spanish autonomous city on the north coast of Africa, separated by 14 kilometres from Cadiz province on the Spanish mainland by the Strait of Gibraltar and sharing a 6.4 kilometre land border with M'diq-Fnideq Prefecture in the Kingdom of Morocco.

See Morocco and Ceuta

Chafarinas Islands

The Chafarinas Islands (Islas Chafarinas, Berber: Igumamen Iceffaren or Takfarinas, Arabic: جزر الشفارين or الجزر الجعفرية), also spelled Zafarin, Djaferin or Zafarani, are a group of three small islets located in the Alboran Sea off the coast of Morocco with an aggregate area of, to the east of Nador and off the Moroccan town of Ras Kebdana.

See Morocco and Chafarinas Islands

Charles Martel

Charles Martel (c. 688 – 22 October 741) was a Frankish statesman and military leader who as Duke and Prince of the Franks and Mayor of the Palace, was the de facto ruler of Francia from 718 until his death.

See Morocco and Charles Martel

Cherbourg-Octeville

Cherbourg-Octeville is a city and former commune situated at the northern end of the Cotentin peninsula in the northwestern French department of Manche.

See Morocco and Cherbourg-Octeville

Chough

There are two species of passerine birds commonly called chough that constitute the genus Pyrrhocorax of the Corvidae (crow) family of birds.

See Morocco and Chough

Cinereous vulture

The cinereous vulture (Aegypius monachus) is a large raptorial bird that is distributed through much of Eurasia.

See Morocco and Cinereous vulture

Circle of latitude

A circle of latitude on Earth is an abstract east–west circle connecting all locations around Earth (ignoring elevation) at a given latitude.

See Morocco and Circle of latitude

Citadel

A citadel is the core fortified area of a town or city.

See Morocco and Citadel

Citrus

Citrus is a genus of flowering trees and shrubs in the rue family, Rutaceae.

See Morocco and Citrus

Claude Auchinleck

Field Marshal Sir Claude John Eyre Auchinleck (21 June 1884 – 23 March 1981) was a British Army commander during the Second World War.

See Morocco and Claude Auchinleck

Clermont-Ferrand

Clermont-Ferrand (Auvergnat Clharmou, Augustonemetum) is a city and commune of France, in the Auvergne-Rhône-Alpes region, with a population of 141,569 (2012).

See Morocco and Clermont-Ferrand

Cobitidae

Cobitidae, also known as the True loaches, is a family of Old World freshwater fish.

See Morocco and Cobitidae

Common blackbird

The common blackbird (Turdus merula) is a species of true thrush.

See Morocco and Common blackbird

Common kingfisher

The common kingfisher (Alcedo atthis) also known as the Eurasian kingfisher, and river kingfisher, is a small kingfisher with seven subspecies recognized within its wide distribution across Eurasia and North Africa.

See Morocco and Common kingfisher

Common ostrich

The ostrich or common ostrich (Struthio camelus) is either of two species of large flightless birds native to Africa, the only living member(s) of the genus Struthio, which is in the ratite family.

See Morocco and Common ostrich

Common redstart

The common redstart (Phoenicurus phoenicurus), or often simply redstart, is a small passerine bird in the redstart genus Phoenicurus.

See Morocco and Common redstart

Commonwealth War Graves Commission

The Commonwealth War Graves Commission (CWGC) is an intergovernmental organisation of six independent member states whose principal function is to mark, record and maintain the graves and places of commemoration of Commonwealth of Nations military service members who died in the two World Wars.

See Morocco and Commonwealth War Graves Commission

Communications in Gibraltar

Communications in Gibraltar comprise a wide range of telephony systems (both fixed-line and mobile), Internet access, broadcasting (radio and television) and satellite control.

See Morocco and Communications in Gibraltar

Constitutional monarchy

A constitutional monarchy is a form of monarchy in which the sovereign exercises authority in accordance with a written or unwritten constitution.

See Morocco and Constitutional monarchy

Copenhagen

Copenhagen (København; Hafnia) is the capital and most populous city of Denmark.

See Morocco and Copenhagen

Cork (material)

Cork is an impermeable buoyant material, the phellem layer of bark tissue that is harvested for commercial use primarily from Quercus suber (the cork oak), which is endemic to southwest Europe and northwest Africa.

See Morocco and Cork (material)

Counter-terrorism

Counter-terrorism (also spelled counterterrorism) incorporates the practice, military tactics, techniques, and strategy that government, military, law enforcement, business, and intelligence agencies use to combat or prevent terrorism.

See Morocco and Counter-terrorism

Couscous

Couscous is a Maghrebi dish of small (about diameter) steamed balls of crushed durum wheat semolina that is traditionally served with a stew spooned on top.

See Morocco and Couscous

Cuisine

A cuisine is a style of cooking characterized by distinctive ingredients, techniques and dishes, and usually associated with a specific culture or geographic region.

See Morocco and Cuisine

Culture of ancient Rome

The culture of ancient Rome existed throughout almost 1200-year history of the civilization of Ancient Rome.

See Morocco and Culture of ancient Rome

Culture of Chile

The culture of Chile reflects the relatively homogeneous population as well as the geographic isolation of the country in relation to the rest of South America.

See Morocco and Culture of Chile

Culture of France

The culture of Paris,in France and of the French people has been shaped by geography, by profound historical events, and by foreign and internal forces and groups.

See Morocco and Culture of France

Culture of the Netherlands

The culture of the Netherlands is diverse, reflecting regional differences as well as the foreign influences built up by centuries of the Dutch people's mercantile and explorative spirit.

See Morocco and Culture of the Netherlands

Curtis LeMay

Curtis LeMay (November 15, 1906 – October 1, 1990) was a general in the United States Air Force and the vice presidential running mate of American Independent Party candidate George Wallace in the 1968 presidential election.

See Morocco and Curtis LeMay

Cynara

Cynara is a genus of thistle-like perennial plants in the sunflower family.

See Morocco and Cynara

Phoenix dactylifera, commonly known as date or date palm, is a flowering plant species in the palm family, Arecaceae, cultivated for its edible sweet fruit.

See Morocco and Date palm

De facto

In law and government, de facto (or;, "in fact") describes practices that exist in reality, even if not legally recognised by official laws.

See Morocco and De facto

Death by burning

Deliberately causing death through the effects of combustion, or effects of exposure to extreme heat, has a long history as a form of capital punishment.

See Morocco and Death by burning

Declaration of independence

A declaration of independence or declaration of statehood is an assertion by a defined territory that it is independent and constitutes a state.

See Morocco and Declaration of independence

Defensive wall

A defensive wall is a fortification usually used to protect a city, town or other settlement from potential aggressors.

See Morocco and Defensive wall

Demi Moore

Demi Gene Guynes (born November 11, 1962), professionally known as Demi Moore, is an American actress, former songwriter, and model.

See Morocco and Demi Moore

Demilitarized zone

A demilitarized zone, DMZ or DZ is an area in which treaties or agreements between nations, military powers or contending groups forbid military installations, activities or personnel.

See Morocco and Demilitarized zone

Democratic Republic of the Congo

The Democratic Republic of the Congo (République démocratique du Congo), also known as DR Congo, the DRC, Congo-Kinshasa or simply the Congo, is a country located in Central Africa.

See Morocco and Democratic Republic of the Congo

Demographic transition

Demographic transition (DT) is the transition from high birth and death rates to lower birth and death rates as a country or region develops from a pre-industrial to an industrialized economic system.

See Morocco and Demographic transition

Demographics of Cape Verde

This article is about the demographic features of the population of Cape Verde, including population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects of the population.

See Morocco and Demographics of Cape Verde

Demographics of El Salvador

This article is about the demographic features of the population of El Salvador, including population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects of the population.

See Morocco and Demographics of El Salvador

Demographics of Germany

The demography of Germany is monitored by the Statistisches Bundesamt (Federal Statistical Office of Germany).

See Morocco and Demographics of Germany

Demographics of Italy

This article is about the demographic features of the population of Italy, including population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects of the population.

See Morocco and Demographics of Italy

Demographics of Morocco

This article is about the demographic features of the population of Morocco, including population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects of the population.

See Morocco and Demographics of Morocco

Demographics of Oman

This article is about the demographic features of the population of Oman, including population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects of the population.

See Morocco and Demographics of Oman

Demographics of Spain

As of 1 January 2014, Spain had a total population of 46,507,760, which represents a 0.5% decrease since 2013.

See Morocco and Demographics of Spain

Demographics of Western Sahara

All data about demographic information regarding Western Sahara is extremely error prone, regardless of source.

See Morocco and Demographics of Western Sahara

Demography of the Netherlands

This article is about the demographic features of the population of the Netherlands, including population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the population, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects of the population.

See Morocco and Demography of the Netherlands

Dipper

Dippers are members of the genus Cinclus in the bird family Cinclidae, named for their bobbing or dipping movements.

See Morocco and Dipper

Djibouti Armed Forces

The Djibouti Armed Forces (DJAF) (الجيش الجيبوتي, Ciidanka Jabuuti) are the military forces of Djibouti.

See Morocco and Djibouti Armed Forces

The Double, in association football, is the achievement of winning a country's top tier division and its primary cup competition in the same season.

See Morocco and Double (association football)

Doughnut

A doughnut or donut (both: or; see etymology section) is a type of fried dough confection or dessert food.

See Morocco and Doughnut

Drainage basin

A drainage basin is any area of land where precipitation collects and drains off into a common outlet, such as into a river, bay, or other body of water.

See Morocco and Drainage basin

Dubbing (filmmaking)

Dubbing, mixing or re-recording is a post-production process used in filmmaking and video production in which additional or supplementary recordings are "mixed" with original production sound to create the finished soundtrack.

See Morocco and Dubbing (filmmaking)

Dune

In physical geography, a dune is a hill of loose sand built by aeolian processes (wind) or the flow of water.

See Morocco and Dune

Dustin Hoffman

Dustin Lee Hoffman (born August 8, 1937) is an American actor and director, with a career in film, television, and theater since 1960.

See Morocco and Dustin Hoffman

Dwight D. Eisenhower

Dwight David "Ike" Eisenhower (October 14, 1890 – March 28, 1969) was an American army general and statesman who served as the 34th President of the United States from 1953 to 1961.

See Morocco and Dwight D. Eisenhower

Economic Community of West African States

The Economic Community of West African States, also known as ECOWAS, is a regional economic union of fifteen countries located in West Africa.

See Morocco and Economic Community of West African States

Economy of Canada

The economy of Canada is a highly developed mixed economy with 10th largest GDP by nominal and 17th largest GDP by PPP in the world.

See Morocco and Economy of Canada

Economy of Egypt

The economy of Egypt was a highly centralized planned economy focused on import substitution under President Gamal Abdel Nasser.

See Morocco and Economy of Egypt

Economy of Gibraltar

The economy of Gibraltar consists largely of the services sector.

See Morocco and Economy of Gibraltar

Economy of Morocco

The economy of Morocco is considered a relatively liberal economy governed by the law of supply and demand.

See Morocco and Economy of Morocco

Economy of Western Sahara

The majority of the territory of Western Sahara - the Southern Provinces - is currently administered by the Kingdom of Morocco.

See Morocco and Economy of Western Sahara

Edith Wharton

Edith Wharton (born Edith Newbold Jones; January 24, 1862 – August 11, 1937) was an American novelist, short story writer, and designer.

See Morocco and Edith Wharton

Eilat

Eilat (help; 'aylaat or 'aylat, also 'Um 'al-Rashrash) is Israel's southernmost city, a busy port and popular resort at the northern tip of the Red Sea, on the Gulf of Aqaba.

See Morocco and Eilat

Eindhoven

Eindhoven is a municipality and city in the south of the Netherlands, originally at the confluence of the Dommel and Gender streams.

See Morocco and Eindhoven

Elizabeth I of England

Elizabeth I (7 September 1533 – 24 March 1603) was Queen of England and Ireland from 17 November 1558 until her death on 24 March 1603.

See Morocco and Elizabeth I of England

Emirate of Sharjah

The Emirate of Sharjah (الشارقة) is one of the emirates of the United Arab Emirates.

See Morocco and Emirate of Sharjah

Emmer

Emmer wheat, also known as farro especially in Italy, or hulled wheat, is a type of awned wheat.

See Morocco and Emmer

Emperor

An emperor (through Old French empereor from Latin imperator) is a monarch, usually the sovereign ruler of an empire or another type of imperial realm.

See Morocco and Emperor

Empress Elisabeth of Austria

Elisabeth of Bavaria (24 December 1837 – 10 September 1898) was Empress of Austria and Queen of Hungary, and many other titles by marriage to Emperor Franz Joseph I. Elisabeth was born into the royal Bavarian house of Wittelsbach.

See Morocco and Empress Elisabeth of Austria

Enrico Mattei

Enrico Mattei (April 29, 1906 &ndash; October 27, 1962) was an Italian public administrator.

See Morocco and Enrico Mattei

Entente Cordiale

The Entente Cordiale was a series of agreements signed on 8 April 1904 between the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland and the French Republic which saw a significant improvement in Anglo-French relations.

See Morocco and Entente Cordiale

Ernest Gellner

Ernest André Gellner (9 December 1925 – 5 November 1995) was a British-Czech philosopher and social anthropologist described by The Daily Telegraph, when he died, as one of the world's most vigorous intellectuals, and by The Independent as a "one-man crusader for critical rationalism".

See Morocco and Ernest Gellner

Eruca sativa

Arugula or rocket (Eruca sativa; syns. E. vesicaria subsp. sativa (Miller) Thell., Brassica eruca L.) is an edible annual plant in the Brassicaceae family used as a leaf vegetable for its fresh peppery flavor.

See Morocco and Eruca sativa

Ethiopia

Ethiopia (ኢትዮጵያ), officially the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia (የኢትዮጵያ ፌዴራላዊ ዲሞክራሲያዊ ሪፐብሊክ, yeʾĪtiyoṗṗya Fēdēralawī Dēmokirasīyawī Rīpebilīk), is a country located in the Horn of Africa.

See Morocco and Ethiopia

Eucalyptus

Eucalyptus L'Héritier 1789 (plural eucalypti, eucalyptuses or eucalypts) is a diverse genus of flowering trees and shrubs (including a distinct group with a multiple-stem mallee growth habit) in the myrtle family, Myrtaceae.

See Morocco and Eucalyptus

Eugène Delacroix

Ferdinand Victor Eugène Delacroix (26 April 1798 – 13 August 1863) was a French Romantic artist regarded from the outset of his career as the leader of the French Romantic school.

See Morocco and Eugène Delacroix

Eurasian eagle-owl

The Eurasian eagle-owl (Bubo bubo) is a species of eagle-owl that resides in much of Eurasia.

See Morocco and Eurasian eagle-owl

European Bank for Reconstruction and Development

The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) is an international financial institution founded in 1991.

See Morocco and European Bank for Reconstruction and Development

European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts

The European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF) is an independent intergovernmental organisation supported by most of the nations of Europe and is based at Shinfield Park, Reading, United Kingdom.

See Morocco and European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts

European Free Trade Association

The European Free Trade Association (EFTA) is a regional trade organization and free trade area consisting of four European states: Iceland, Liechtenstein, Norway, and Switzerland.

See Morocco and European Free Trade Association

European stonechat

The European stonechat (Saxicola rubicola) is a small passerine bird that was formerly classed as a subspecies of the common stonechat.

See Morocco and European stonechat

Eurovision Song Contest 1978

The Eurovision Song Contest 1978 was the 23rd edition of the annual Eurovision Song Contest.

See Morocco and Eurovision Song Contest 1978

Eurovision Song Contest 1980

The Eurovision Song Contest 1980 was the 25th Eurovision Song Contest and was held on 19 April 1980 in The Hague.

See Morocco and Eurovision Song Contest 1980

Eurovision Song Contest 1987

The Eurovision Song Contest 1987 was the 32nd Eurovision Song Contest and was held on 9 May 1987 in Brussels, Belgium after Sandra Kim's win the previous year.

See Morocco and Eurovision Song Contest 1987

Fabien Barthez

Fabien Alain Barthez (born 28 June 1971) is a French former footballer and racing driver who played as a goalkeeper.

See Morocco and Fabien Barthez

Faisal of Saudi Arabia

Faisal bin Abdulaziz Al Saud (فيصل&#32;بن&#32;عبدالعزيز&#32;آل&#32;سعود; 14 April 1906 – 25 March 1975) was King of Saudi Arabia from 1964 to 1975.

See Morocco and Faisal of Saudi Arabia

Falconry

Falconry is the hunting of wild animals in their natural state and habitat by means of a trained bird of prey.

See Morocco and Falconry

Family law

Family law (also called matrimonial law or the law of domestic relations) is an area of the law that deals with family matters and domestic relations.

See Morocco and Family law

Fast food restaurant

A fast food restaurant, also known as a quick service restaurant (QSR) within the industry, is a specific type of restaurant that serves fast food cuisine and has minimal table service.

See Morocco and Fast food restaurant

Fatimid Caliphate

The Fatimid Caliphate was an Islamic caliphate that spanned a large area of North Africa, from the Red Sea in the east to the Atlantic Ocean in the west.

See Morocco and Fatimid Caliphate

Fatwa

A fatwā (فتوى; plural fatāwā فتاوى.) in the Islamic faith is a nonbinding but authoritative legal opinion or learned interpretation that the Sheikhul Islam, a qualified jurist or mufti, can give on issues pertaining to the Islamic law.

See Morocco and Fatwa

February 24

For superstitious reasons, when the Romans began to intercalate to bring their calendar into line with the solar year, they chose not to place their extra month of Mercedonius after February but within it.

See Morocco and February 24

February 29

February 29, also known as leap day or leap year day, is a date added to most years that are divisible by 4, such as 2008, 2012, 2016, 2020, and 2024.

See Morocco and February 29

Fennec fox

The fennec fox or fennec (Vulpes zerda) is a small nocturnal fox found in the Sahara of North Africa, the Sinai Peninsula, South West Israel (Arava desert) Encyclopedia of Zoology, Ynet and the Arabian desert.

See Morocco and Fennec fox

Ferdinand III of Castile

Ferdinand III (Spanish: Fernando III), 1199/1201 – 30 May 1252, called the Saint (el Santo), was King of Castile from 1217 and King of León from 1230 as well as King of Galicia from 1231.

See Morocco and Ferdinand III of Castile

Ferdinand IV of Castile

Ferdinand IV of Castile (6 December 1285 – 7 September 1312) called the Summoned (el Emplazado), was a King of Castile and León from 1295 until his death.

See Morocco and Ferdinand IV of Castile

Fiqh

Fiqh (فقه) is Islamic jurisprudence.

See Morocco and Fiqh

First Indochina War

The First Indochina War (generally known as the Indochina War in France, and as the Anti-French Resistance War in Vietnam) began in French Indochina on 19 December 1946, and lasted until 20 July 1954.

See Morocco and First Indochina War

First Moroccan Crisis

The First Moroccan Crisis (also known as the Tangier Crisis) was an international crisis between March 1905 and May 1906 over the status of Morocco.

See Morocco and First Moroccan Crisis

Florence

Florence (Firenze) is the capital city of the Italian region of Tuscany.

See Morocco and Florence

Foreign relations of Albania

The Foreign relations of Albania are its relations with other governments and peoples.

See Morocco and Foreign relations of Albania

Foreign relations of Algeria

Algeria has traditionally practiced an activist foreign policy.

See Morocco and Foreign relations of Algeria

Foreign relations of Bhutan

Bhutan has diplomatic relations with 52 states and the European Union.

See Morocco and Foreign relations of Bhutan

Foreign relations of China

The foreign relations of the People's Republic of China (PRC), commonly known to most states as China, guides the way in which China interacts with foreign nations and expresses its political, economic and cultural strengths, weaknesses and values.

See Morocco and Foreign relations of China

Foreign relations of Egypt

Foreign relations of the Arab Republic of Egypt are the Egyptian government's external relations with the outside world.

See Morocco and Foreign relations of Egypt

Foreign relations of Guinea

The foreign relations of Guinea, including those with its West African neighbors, have improved steadily since 1985.

See Morocco and Foreign relations of Guinea

Foreign relations of Israel

Israel joined the United Nations on 11 May 1949.

See Morocco and Foreign relations of Israel

Foreign relations of Libya under Muammar Gaddafi

The foreign relations of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya (1969–2011) underwent much fluctuation and change.

See Morocco and Foreign relations of Libya under Muammar Gaddafi

Foreign relations of Mexico

The foreign relations of Mexico are directed by the President of the United Mexican States and managed through the Secretariat of Foreign Affairs.

See Morocco and Foreign relations of Mexico

Foreign relations of Morocco

Morocco is a member of the United Nations and belongs to the African Union, Arab League, Arab Maghreb Union (UMA), Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC), the Non-Aligned Movement and the Community of Sahel-Saharan States (CEN_SAD).

See Morocco and Foreign relations of Morocco

Foreign relations of Nicaragua

Nicaragua pursues an independent foreign policy.

See Morocco and Foreign relations of Nicaragua

Foreign relations of Pakistan

Pakistan is the second largest Muslim-majority country in terms of population (after Indonesia) and its status as a declared nuclear power, being the only Muslim majority nation to have that status, plays a part in its international role.

See Morocco and Foreign relations of Pakistan

Foreign relations of Senegal

President Léopold Senghor advocated close relations with France and negotiation and compromise as the best means of resolving international differences.

See Morocco and Foreign relations of Senegal

Foreign relations of South Korea

The foreign relations of South Korea (officially the Republic of Korea) are South Korean relations with other governments.

See Morocco and Foreign relations of South Korea

Foreign relations of Spain

After the return of democracy following the death of General Franco in 1975, Spain's foreign policy priorities were to break out of the diplomatic isolation of the Franco years and expand diplomatic relations, enter the European Community, and define security relations with NATO, later joining the organization in 1982.

See Morocco and Foreign relations of Spain

Foreign relations of Sudan

The foreign relations of Sudan are generally in line with the Muslim Arab world, but are also based on Sudan's economic ties with the People's Republic of China and Western Europe.

See Morocco and Foreign relations of Sudan

Foreign relations of Syria

Ensuring national security, increasing influence among its Arab neighbors, and securing the return of the Golan Heights, have been the primary goals of Syria's foreign policy.

See Morocco and Foreign relations of Syria

Foreign relations of Taiwan

The foreign relations of the Republic of China (ROC), referred to by many states as Taiwan, are the relations between the Republic of China and other countries.

See Morocco and Foreign relations of Taiwan

Foreign relations of the Republic of Ireland

The foreign relations of Ireland are substantially influenced by its membership of the European Union, although bilateral relations with the United States and United Kingdom are also important to the state.

See Morocco and Foreign relations of the Republic of Ireland

Foreign relations of Vanuatu

Vanuatu maintains relations with more than 65 countries, and has a very modest network of diplomatic missions.

See Morocco and Foreign relations of Vanuatu

François Mitterrand

François Maurice Adrien Marie Mitterrand (26 October 1916 – 8 January 1996) was a French statesman who was President of France from 1981 to 1995, the longest time in office of any French president.

See Morocco and François Mitterrand

Francis I of France

Francis I (François Ier) (12 September 1494 – 31 March 1547) was the first King of France from the Angoulême branch of the House of Valois, reigning from 1515 until his death.

See Morocco and Francis I of France

Francis of Assisi

Saint Francis of Assisi (San Francesco d'Assisi), born Giovanni di Pietro di Bernardone, informally named as Francesco (1181/11823 October 1226), was an Italian Catholic friar, deacon and preacher.

See Morocco and Francis of Assisi

Francisco Franco

Francisco Franco Bahamonde (4 December 1892 – 20 November 1975) was a Spanish general who ruled over Spain as a military dictator from 1939, after the Nationalist victory in the Spanish Civil War, until his death in 1975.

See Morocco and Francisco Franco

Frantz Fanon

Frantz Fanon (20 July 1925 – 6 December 1961) was a Martinican psychiatrist, philosopher, revolutionary, and writer whose works are influential in the fields of post-colonial studies, critical theory, and Marxism.

See Morocco and Frantz Fanon

Freemasonry

Freemasonry or Masonry consists of fraternal organisations that trace their origins to the local fraternities of stonemasons, which from the end of the fourteenth century regulated the qualifications of stonemasons and their interaction with authorities and clients.

See Morocco and Freemasonry

French colonial empire

The French colonial empire constituted the overseas colonies, protectorates and mandate territories that came under French rule from the 16th century onward.

See Morocco and French colonial empire

French Foreign Legion

The French Foreign Legion (Légion étrangère) (FFL; Légion étrangère, L.É.) is a military service branch of the French Army established in 1831.

See Morocco and French Foreign Legion

French literature

French literature is, generally speaking, literature written in the French language, particularly by citizens of France; it may also refer to literature written by people living in France who speak traditional languages of France other than French.

See Morocco and French literature

French Third Republic

The French Third Republic (La Troisième République, sometimes written as La IIIe République) was the system of government adopted in France from 1870 when the Second French Empire collapsed during the Franco-Prussian War until 1940 when France's defeat by Nazi Germany in World War II led to the formation of the Vichy government in France.

See Morocco and French Third Republic

Friedensreich Hundertwasser

Friedrich Stowasser (December 15, 1928 – February 19, 2000), better known by his pseudonym Friedensreich Regentag Dunkelbunt Hundertwasser, was an Austrian-born New Zealand artist and architect who also worked in the field of environmental protection.

See Morocco and Friedensreich Hundertwasser

Futsal

Futsal is a variant of association football played on a hard court, smaller than a football pitch, and mainly indoors.

See Morocco and Futsal

Galileo (satellite navigation)

Galileo is the global navigation satellite system (GNSS) that is being created by the European Union (EU) through the European Space Agency (ESA), headquartered in Prague in the Czech Republic, with two ground operations centres, Oberpfaffenhofen near Munich in Germany and Fucino in Italy.

See Morocco and Galileo (satellite navigation)

Gamal Abdel Nasser

Gamal Abdel Nasser Hussein (جمال عبد الناصر حسين,; 15 January 1918 – 28 September 1970) was the second President of Egypt, serving from 1956 until his death in 1970.

See Morocco and Gamal Abdel Nasser

Geography of Africa

Africa is a continent comprising 63 political territories, representing the largest of the great southward projections from the main mass of Earth's surface.

See Morocco and Geography of Africa

Geography of Algeria

Algeria comprises 2,381,741 square kilometers of land, more than four-fifths of which is desert, in northern Africa, between Morocco and Tunisia.

See Morocco and Geography of Algeria

Geography of Malta

The geography of Malta is dominated by water.

See Morocco and Geography of Malta

Geography of Morocco

Morocco spans from the Mediterranean Sea and Atlantic Ocean on the north and the west respectively, into large mountainous areas in the interior body, to the Sahara desert in the far south.

See Morocco and Geography of Morocco

Geography of New Zealand

New Zealand (Aotearoa) is an island country located in the south-western Pacific Ocean, near the centre of the water hemisphere.

See Morocco and Geography of New Zealand

Geography of Spain

Spain is a country located in southwestern Europe occupying most (about 85 percent) of the Iberian Peninsula and includes a small exclave inside France called Llívia as well as the Balearic Islands in the Mediterranean, the Canary Islands in the Atlantic Ocean off northwest Africa, and five places of sovereignty (plazas de soberanía) on and off the coast of North Africa: Ceuta, Melilla, Islas Chafarinas, Peñón de Alhucemas, and Peñón de Vélez de la Gomera.

See Morocco and Geography of Spain

Geography of Uzbekistan

Uzbekistan is a country of Central Asia, located north of Turkmenistan and Afghanistan.

See Morocco and Geography of Uzbekistan

Geography of Western Sahara

Western Sahara is a territory in Northern Africa, bordered by the North Atlantic Ocean, Morocco proper, Algeria (Tindouf region), and Mauritania.

See Morocco and Geography of Western Sahara

Geography of Yemen

Yemen is located in Southwest Asia at the southern tip of the Arabian Peninsula between Oman and Saudi Arabia.

See Morocco and Geography of Yemen

George Borrow

George Henry Borrow (5 July 1803 – 26 July 1881) was an English writer of novels and of travel books based on his own experiences in Europe.

See Morocco and George Borrow

Ghent

Ghent (Gent; Gand) is a city and a municipality in the Flemish Region of Belgium.

See Morocco and Ghent

Ghetto

A ghetto is a part of a city in which members of a minority group live, typically as a result of social, legal, or economic pressure.

See Morocco and Ghetto

Gil Álvarez Carrillo de Albornoz

Gil Álvarez Carrillo de Albornoz (Egidio Albornoz) (1310 – 23 August 1367) was a Spanish cardinal and ecclesiastical leader.

See Morocco and Gil Álvarez Carrillo de Albornoz

Glossary of Islam

The following list consists of notable concepts that are derived from both Islamic and Arab tradition, which are expressed as words in the Arabic language.

See Morocco and Glossary of Islam

Godolphin Arabian

The Godolphin Arabian (–1753), also known as the Godolphin Barb, was an Arabian horse or Barb horse who was one of three stallions that founded the modern Thoroughbred (the others were the Darley Arabian and the Byerley Turk).

See Morocco and Godolphin Arabian

Golden eagle

The golden eagle (Aquila chrysaetos) is one of the best-known birds of prey in the Northern Hemisphere.

See Morocco and Golden eagle

Goya Foods

Goya Foods, Inc. is an American producer of a brand of foods sold in the United States and many Hispanic countries.

See Morocco and Goya Foods

Granada

Granada is the capital city of the province of Granada, in the autonomous community of Andalusia, Spain.

See Morocco and Granada

Great White Fleet

The Great White Fleet was the popular nickname for the powerful United States Navy battle fleet that completed a journey around the globe from 16 December 1907, to 22 February 1909, by order of United States President Theodore Roosevelt.

See Morocco and Great White Fleet

Greenwich Mean Time

Greenwich Mean Time (GMT) is the mean solar time at the Royal Observatory in Greenwich, London.

See Morocco and Greenwich Mean Time

Gregory Corso

Gregory Nunzio Corso (March 26, 1930 – January 17, 2001) was an American poet, youngest of the inner circle of Beat Generation writers (with Jack Kerouac, Allen Ginsberg, and William S. Burroughs).

See Morocco and Gregory Corso

GroenLinks (GreenLeft, GrienLinks, GL) is a green political party in the Netherlands.

See Morocco and GroenLinks

Guanches

Guanches were the aboriginal inhabitants of the Canary Islands.

See Morocco and Guanches

Guangzhou

Guangzhou, also known as Canton, is the capital and most populous city of the province of Guangdong.

See Morocco and Guangzhou

Guinea

Guinea, officially the Republic of Guinea (République de Guinée), is a country on the western coast of Africa.

See Morocco and Guinea

Gulf Cooperation Council

The Cooperation Council for the Arab States of the Gulf (مجلس التعاون لدول الخليج العربية), originally (and still colloquially) known as the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC, مجلس التعاون الخليجي), is a regional intergovernmental political and economic union consisting of all Arab states of the Persian Gulf except Iraq.

See Morocco and Gulf Cooperation Council

Haakon IV of Norway

Haakon Haakonsson (c. March/April 1204 – 16 December 1263) (Old Norse: Hákon Hákonarson; Norwegian: Håkon Håkonsson), sometimes called Haakon the Old in contrast to his son with the same name, and known in modern regnal lists as Haakon IV, was the King of Norway from 1217 to 1263.

See Morocco and Haakon IV of Norway

Hahnodon

Hahnodon ("Hahn's tooth") is a genus of extinct mammal from Early Cretaceous deposits in Morocco.

See Morocco and Hahnodon

Haifa

Haifa (חֵיפָה; حيفا) is the third-largest city in Israel – after Jerusalem and Tel Aviv– with a population of in.

See Morocco and Haifa

Haile Selassie

Haile Selassie I (ቀዳማዊ ኃይለ ሥላሴ, qädamawi haylä səllasé,;, born Ras Tafari Makonnen, was Ethiopia's regent from 1916 to 1930 and emperor from 1930 to 1974.

See Morocco and Haile Selassie

Hall Caine

Sir Thomas Henry Hall Caine (14 May 1853 &ndash; 31 August 1931), usually known as Hall Caine, was a British novelist, dramatist, short story writer, poet and critic of the late nineteenth and early twentieth century.

See Morocco and Hall Caine

Hangzhou

Hangzhou (Mandarin:; local dialect: /ɦɑŋ tseɪ/) formerly romanized as Hangchow, is the capital and most populous city of Zhejiang Province in East China.

See Morocco and Hangzhou

Harbor

A harbor or harbour (see spelling differences; synonyms: wharves, haven) is a sheltered body of water where ships, boats, and barges can be docked.

See Morocco and Harbor

Hashish

Hashish, or hash, is a drug made from cannabis.

See Morocco and Hashish

Hecataeus of Miletus

Hecataeus of Miletus (Ἑκαταῖος ὁ Μιλήσιος;Named after the Greek goddess Hecate--> c. 550 BC – c. 476 BC), son of Hegesander, was an early Greek historian and geographer.

See Morocco and Hecataeus of Miletus

Hedgehog

A hedgehog is any of the spiny mammals of the subfamily Erinaceinae, in the eulipotyphlan family Erinaceidae.

See Morocco and Hedgehog

Heinkel He 112

The Heinkel He 112 is a German fighter aircraft designed by Walter and Siegfried Günter.

See Morocco and Heinkel He 112

Heir apparent

An heir apparent is a person who is first in a line of succession and cannot be displaced from inheriting by the birth of another person.

See Morocco and Heir apparent

Hellraiser

Hellraiser is a 1987 British-American horror film written and directed by Clive Barker, and produced by Christopher Figg, based on Barker's novella The Hellbound Heart.

See Morocco and Hellraiser

Helsinki Airport

Helsinki Airport (Helsinki-Vantaan lentoasema, Helsingfors-Vanda flygplats) is the main international airport of the city of Helsinki, its surrounding metropolitan area, and the Uusimaa region.

See Morocco and Helsinki Airport

Henri Matisse

Henri Émile Benoît Matisse (31 December 1869 – 3 November 1954) was a French artist, known for both his use of colour and his fluid and original draughtsmanship.

See Morocco and Henri Matisse

Henry IV of France

Henry IV (Henri IV, read as Henri-Quatre; 13 December 1553 – 14 May 1610), also known by the epithet Good King Henry, was King of Navarre (as Henry III) from 1572 to 1610 and King of France from 1589 to 1610.

See Morocco and Henry IV of France

High commissioner

High commissioner is the title of various high-ranking, special executive positions held by a commission of appointment.

See Morocco and High commissioner

Highway

A highway is any public or private road or other public way on land.

See Morocco and Highway

Hinny

A hinny is a domestic equine hybrid that is the offspring of a male horse, a stallion, and a female donkey, a jenny.

See Morocco and Hinny

Hippopotamidae

Hippopotamuses are stout, naked-skinned, and amphibious artiodactyl mammals, possessing three-chambered stomachs and walking on four toes on each foot.

See Morocco and Hippopotamidae

History of Africa

The history of Africa begins with the emergence of hominids, archaic humans and – around 5.6 to 7.5 million years ago.

See Morocco and History of Africa

History of Algeria

Much of the history of Algeria has taken place on the fertile coastal plain of North Africa, which is often called the Maghreb (or Maghrib).

See Morocco and History of Algeria

History of Cuba

The island of Cuba was inhabited by various Mesoamerican cultures prior to the arrival of the Spanish explorer Christopher Columbus in 1492.

See Morocco and History of Cuba

History of France

The first written records for the history of France appeared in the Iron Age.

See Morocco and History of France

History of Guinea

The modern state of Guinea did not come into existence until 1958, but the history of the area stretches back well before European colonization.

See Morocco and History of Guinea

History of Islam

The history of Islam concerns the political, social,economic and cultural developments of the Islamic civilization.

See Morocco and History of Islam

History of literature

The history of literature is the historical development of writings in prose or poetry that attempt to provide entertainment, enlightenment, or instruction to the reader/listener/observer, as well as the development of the literary techniques used in the communication of these pieces.

See Morocco and History of literature

History of Madagascar

The history of Madagascar is distinguished clearly by the early isolation of the landmass from the ancient supercontinent containing Africa and India, and by the island's late colonization by human settlers arriving in outrigger canoes from the Sunda islands between 200 BC and 500 AD.

See Morocco and History of Madagascar

History of Morocco

The history of Morocco spans several millennia, succeeding the prehistoric cultures of Jebel Irhoud and Taforalt.

See Morocco and History of Morocco

History of Niger

This is the history of Niger.

See Morocco and History of Niger

History of Portugal

The history of Portugal can be traced from circa 400,000 years ago, when the region of present-day Portugal was inhabited by Homo heidelbergensis.

See Morocco and History of Portugal

History of Portugal (1415–1578)

The Kingdom of Portugal in the 15th century was the first European power to begin building a colonial empire.

See Morocco and History of Portugal (1415–1578)

History of Spain

The history of Spain dates back to the Middle Ages.

See Morocco and History of Spain

History of the Central African Republic

The history of the Central African Republic is roughly composed of four distinct periods.

See Morocco and History of the Central African Republic

History of the Dominican Republic

The recorded history of the Dominican Republic began when the Genoa-born navigator Christopher Columbus, working for the Spanish Crown, happened upon a large island in the region of the western Atlantic Ocean that later came to be known as the Caribbean.

See Morocco and History of the Dominican Republic

History of the Netherlands

The history of the Netherlands is the history of seafaring people thriving on a lowland river delta on the North Sea in northwestern Europe.

See Morocco and History of the Netherlands

History of the Republic of the Congo

The history of the Republic of the Congo has been marked by diverse civilisations: indigenous, French and post-independence.

See Morocco and History of the Republic of the Congo

History of Tunisia

The present day Republic of Tunisia, al-Jumhuriyyah at-Tunisiyyah, has over ten million citizens, almost all of Arab-Berber descent.

See Morocco and History of Tunisia

History of Western Sahara

The history of Western Sahara can be traced back to the times of Carthaginian explorer Hanno the Navigator in the 5th century BC.

See Morocco and History of Western Sahara

Hookah

A hookah (from Hindustani: हुक़्क़ा (Devanagari), (Nastaleeq), IPA:; also see other names), also known as the ḡalyān (Persian: قلیان), is a single- or multi-stemmed instrument for vaporizing and smoking flavored tobacco (often Mu‘assel), or sometimes cannabis or opium, whose vapor or smoke is passed through a water basin—often glass-based—before inhalation.

See Morocco and Hookah

Hornbill

The hornbills (Bucerotidae) are a family of bird found in tropical and subtropical Africa, Asia and Melanesia.

See Morocco and Hornbill

Horst Köhler

Horst Köhler (born 22 February 1943) is a German politician of the Christian Democratic Union, and served as President of Germany from 2004 to 2010.

See Morocco and Horst Köhler

House sparrow

The house sparrow (Passer domesticus) is a bird of the sparrow family Passeridae, found in most parts of the world.

See Morocco and House sparrow

Hussein of Jordan

Hussein bin Talal (الحسين بن طلال, Al-Ḥusayn ibn Ṭalāl; 14 November 1935 – 7 February 1999) reigned as King of Jordan from 11 August 1952 until his death.

See Morocco and Hussein of Jordan

Hyacinthoides non-scripta

Hyacinthoides non-scripta (formerly Endymion non-scriptus or Scilla non-scripta) is a bulbous perennial plant, found in Atlantic areas from north-western Spain to the British Isles, and also frequently used as a garden plant.

See Morocco and Hyacinthoides non-scripta

Ibn al-Shaykh al-Libi

Ibn al-Shaykh al-Libi (ALFB transliteration: Ḁbnʋ ălŞɑỉƈ alLibi; born Ali Mohamed Abdul Aziz al-Fakheri, 1963 &ndash; May 10, 2009) was a Libyan national captured in Afghanistan in November 2001 after the fall of the Taliban; he was interrogated by the American and Egyptian forces.

See Morocco and Ibn al-Shaykh al-Libi

Ifni

Ifni was a Spanish province on the Atlantic coast of Morocco, south of Agadir and across from the Canary Islands.

See Morocco and Ifni

Innsbruck

Innsbruck is the capital city of Tyrol in western Austria and the fifth-largest city in Austria.

See Morocco and Innsbruck

Inselberg

An inselberg or monadnock is an isolated rock hill, knob, ridge, or small mountain that rises abruptly from a gently sloping or virtually level surrounding plain.

See Morocco and Inselberg

Institute for Historical Review

The Institute for Historical Review (IHR), founded in 1978, is an American organization best known for publishing articles and books promoting Holocaust denial, a practice which attracted notoriety to the IHR.

See Morocco and Institute for Historical Review

International Bank Account Number

The International Bank Account Number (IBAN) is an internationally agreed system of identifying bank accounts across national borders to facilitate the communication and processing of cross border transactions with a reduced risk of transcription errors.

See Morocco and International Bank Account Number

International Brigades

The International Brigades (Brigadas Internacionales) were paramilitary units set up by the Communist International to assist the Popular Front government of the Second Spanish Republic during the Spanish Civil War.

See Morocco and International Brigades

International Electrotechnical Commission

The International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC; in French: Commission électrotechnique internationale) is an international standards organization that prepares and publishes International Standards for all electrical, electronic and related technologies – collectively known as "electrotechnology".

See Morocco and International Electrotechnical Commission

International Hydrographic Organization

The International Hydrographic Organization (IHO) is the inter-governmental organisation representing hydrography.

See Morocco and International Hydrographic Organization

International Whaling Commission

The International Whaling Commission (IWC) is an international body set up by the terms of the International Convention for the Regulation of Whaling (ICRW), which was signed in Washington, D.C., United States, on December 2, 1946 to "provide for the proper conservation of whale stocks and thus make possible the orderly development of the whaling industry".

See Morocco and International Whaling Commission

Irgun

The Irgun (ארגון; full title:, lit. "The National Military Organization in the Land of Israel") was a Zionist paramilitary organization that operated in Mandate Palestine between 1931 and 1948.

See Morocco and Irgun

Islam and antisemitism

Islam and antisemitism relates to Islamic theological teaching against Jews and Judaism and the treatment of Jews in Muslim communities.

See Morocco and Islam and antisemitism

Islamic calendar

The Islamic, Muslim, or Hijri calendar (التقويم الهجري at-taqwīm al-hijrī) is a lunar calendar consisting of 12 months in a year of 354 or 355 days.

See Morocco and Islamic calendar

Islamism

Islamism is a concept whose meaning has been debated in both public and academic contexts.

See Morocco and Islamism

Ismail Ibn Sharif

Moulay Ismail ibn Sharif (مولاي إسماعيل بن الشريف ابن النصر) (1634– 22 March 1727), reigned 1672–1727, was the second ruler of the Moroccan Alaouite dynasty. He is also known in his native country as the "Warrior King".

See Morocco and Ismail Ibn Sharif

ISO 3166-1

ISO 3166-1 is part of the ISO 3166 standard published by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO), and defines codes for the names of countries, dependent territories, and special areas of geographical interest.

See Morocco and ISO 3166-1

ISO 3166-1 alpha-2

ISO 3166-1 alpha-2 codes are two-letter country codes defined in ISO 3166-1, part of the ISO 3166 standard published by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO), to represent countries, dependent territories, and special areas of geographical interest.

See Morocco and ISO 3166-1 alpha-2

ISO 3166-1 alpha-3

ISO 3166-1 alpha-3 codes are three-letter country codes defined in ISO 3166-1, part of the ISO 3166 standard published by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO), to represent countries, dependent territories, and special areas of geographical interest.

See Morocco and ISO 3166-1 alpha-3

ISO 3166-2

ISO 3166-2 is part of the ISO 3166 standard published by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO), and defines codes for identifying the principal subdivisions (e.g., provinces or states) of all countries coded in ISO 3166-1.

See Morocco and ISO 3166-2

Issaquah, Washington

Issaquah is a city in King County, Washington, United States.

See Morocco and Issaquah, Washington

Italy

Italy (Italia), officially the Italian Republic (Repubblica Italiana), is a sovereign state in Europe.

See Morocco and Italy

ITU prefix

The International Telecommunication Union (ITU) allocates call sign prefixes for radio and television stations of all types.

See Morocco and ITU prefix

J. R. D. Tata

Jehangir Ratanji Dadabhoy Tata (29 July 1904 – 29 November 1993) was a French-born Indian aviator, entrepreneur, chairman of Tata Group and the shareholder of Tata Sons.

See Morocco and J. R. D. Tata

Jackal

Jackals are medium-sized omnivorous mammals of the genus Canis, which also includes wolves, coyotes and the domestic dog.

See Morocco and Jackal

Jacques Chirac

Jacques René Chirac (born 29 November 1932) is a French politician who served as President of France and ex officio Co-Prince of Andorra from 1995 to 2007.

See Morocco and Jacques Chirac

James Baker

James Addison Baker III (born April 28, 1930) is an American attorney and political figure.

See Morocco and James Baker

January

January is the first month of the year in the Julian and Gregorian calendars and the first of seven months to have a length of 31 days.

See Morocco and January

January 10

No description.

See Morocco and January 10

January 11

No description.

See Morocco and January 11

January 14

In the 20th and 21st centuries the Julian calendar is 13 days behind the Gregorian calendar, thus January 14 is sometimes celebrated as New Year's Day (Old New Year) by religious groups who use the Julian calendar.

See Morocco and January 14

Jørn Utzon

Jørn Oberg Utzon,, Hon. FAIA (9 April 191829 November 2008) was a Danish architect, most notable for designing the Sydney Opera House in Australia.

See Morocco and Jørn Utzon

Jean Genet

Jean Genet (–) was a French novelist, playwright, poet, essayist, and political activist.

See Morocco and Jean Genet

Jean-Claude Van Damme

Jean-Claude Camille François Van Varenberg (born 18 October 1960), professionally known as Jean-Claude Van Damme and abbreviated as JCVD, is a Belgian actor, martial artist, screenwriter, film producer, and director best known for his martial arts action films.

See Morocco and Jean-Claude Van Damme

Jinn

Jinn (الجن), also romanized as djinn or anglicized as genies (with the more broad meaning of spirits or demons, depending on source)Tobias Nünlist Dämonenglaube im Islam Walter de Gruyter GmbH & Co KG, 2015 p. 22 (German) are supernatural creatures in early Arabian and later Islamic mythology and theology.

See Morocco and Jinn

Joe Orton

John Kingsley "Joe" Orton (1 January 1933 – 9 August 1967) was an English playwright and author.

See Morocco and Joe Orton

John Vereker, 6th Viscount Gort

Field Marshal John Standish Surtees Prendergast Vereker, 6th Viscount Gort, (10 July 1886 – 31 March 1946) was a senior British Army officer.

See Morocco and John Vereker, 6th Viscount Gort

Joseph Joffre

Marshal Joseph Jacques Césaire Joffre (12 January 1852 – 3 January 1931), was a French general who served as Commander-in-Chief of French forces on the Western Front from the start of World War I until the end of 1916.

See Morocco and Joseph Joffre

Josip Broz Tito

Josip Broz (Cyrillic: Јосип Броз,; 7 May 1892 – 4 May 1980), commonly known as Tito (Cyrillic: Тито), was a Yugoslav communist revolutionary and political leader, serving in various roles from 1943 until his death in 1980.

See Morocco and Josip Broz Tito

Judaism

Judaism (originally from Hebrew, Yehudah, "Judah"; via Latin and Greek) is the religion of the Jewish people.

See Morocco and Judaism

Juliette Binoche

Juliette Binoche (born 9 March 1964) is a French actress, artist and dancer.

See Morocco and Juliette Binoche

Julius von Payer

Julius Johannes Ludovicus Payer (2 September 1841, &ndash; 29 August 1915), ennobled Ritter von Payer in 1876, was an officer of the Austro-Hungarian Army, mountaineer, arctic explorer, cartographer, painter, and professor at the Theresian Military Academy.

See Morocco and Julius von Payer

July 30

No description.

See Morocco and July 30

Kabul

Kabul (کابل) is the capital of Afghanistan and its largest city, located in the eastern section of the country.

See Morocco and Kabul

Karl Weyprecht

Karl Weyprecht, also spelt Carl Weyprecht, (8 September 1838 &ndash; 2 March 1881) was an Austro-Hungarian explorer.

See Morocco and Karl Weyprecht

Kenneth Williams

Kenneth Charles Williams (22 February 1926 – 15 April 1988) was an English actor, best known for his comedy roles and in later life as a raconteur and diarist.

See Morocco and Kenneth Williams

Kenya

Kenya, officially the Republic of Kenya, is a country in Africa with its capital and largest city in Nairobi.

See Morocco and Kenya

Khalil el-Moumni

Khalil el-Moumni (born 1 July 1941, Beni Mansour, Morocco) is a Moroccan imam who preaches at the An-Nasr Mosque in Rotterdam, the Netherlands.

See Morocco and Khalil el-Moumni

Kibbutz

A kibbutz (קִבּוּץ /, lit. "gathering, clustering"; regular plural kibbutzim /) is a collective community in Israel that was traditionally based on agriculture.

See Morocco and Kibbutz

Kindergarten

Kindergarten (from German, literally meaning 'garden for the children') is a preschool educational approach based on playing, singing, practical activities such as drawing, and social interaction as part of the transition from home to school.

See Morocco and Kindergarten

Kiteboarding

Kiteboarding is an action sport combining aspects of wakeboarding, snowboarding, windsurfing, surfing, paragliding, skateboarding and sailing into one extreme sport.

See Morocco and Kiteboarding

Koch Industries

Koch Industries, Inc. is an American multinational corporation based in Wichita, Kansas.

See Morocco and Koch Industries

Kristiansund

Kristiansund (historically Christianssund and earlier Fosna) is a city and municipality on the western coast of Norway in the Nordmøre district of Møre og Romsdal county.

See Morocco and Kristiansund

Kyoto Protocol

The Kyoto Protocol is an international treaty which extends the 1992 United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) that commits state parties to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, based on the scientific consensus that (part one) global warming is occurring and (part two) it is extremely likely that human-made CO2 emissions have predominantly caused it.

See Morocco and Kyoto Protocol

L'Hospitalet de Llobregat

L'Hospitalet de Llobregat (or; Hospitalet de Llobregat), often shortened to L'Hospitalet, is a municipality to the immediate southwest of Barcelona in Catalonia, Spain.

See Morocco and L'Hospitalet de Llobregat

L. Ron Hubbard

Lafayette Ronald Hubbard (March 13, 1911 – January 24, 1986), often referred to by his initials LRH, was an American author and the founder of the Church of Scientology.

See Morocco and L. Ron Hubbard

La Güera

La Güera (also known as La Agüera, Lagouira, or El Gouera) (الكويرة) is a ghost town on the Atlantic coast at the southern tip of Western Sahara, on the western side of the Ras Nouadhibou peninsula, west of Nouadhibou.

See Morocco and La Güera

La Rochelle

La Rochelle is a city in western France and a seaport on the Bay of Biscay, a part of the Atlantic Ocean.

See Morocco and La Rochelle

Land mine

A land mine is an explosive device concealed under or on the ground and designed to destroy or disable enemy targets, ranging from combatants to vehicles and tanks, as they pass over or near it.

See Morocco and Land mine

Languages of Africa

The languages of Africa are divided into six major language families.

See Morocco and Languages of Africa

Lawrence of Arabia (film)

Lawrence of Arabia is a 1962 epic historical drama film based on the life of T. E. Lawrence.

See Morocco and Lawrence of Arabia (film)

Lee Ranaldo

Lee Mark Ranaldo (born February 3, 1956) is an American musician, singer-songwriter, guitarist, writer, visual artist and record producer, best known as a co-founder of the alternative rock band Sonic Youth.

See Morocco and Lee Ranaldo

Left- and right-hand traffic

The terms right-hand traffic (RHT) and left-hand traffic (LHT) refer to the practice, in bidirectional traffic situations, to keep to the right side or to the left side of the road, respectively.

See Morocco and Left- and right-hand traffic

Leopard

The leopard (Panthera pardus) is one of the five species in the genus Panthera, a member of the Felidae.

See Morocco and Leopard

LGBT in Islam

LGBT in Islam is influenced by the religious, legal, social, and cultural history of the nations with a sizable Muslim population, along with specific passages in the Quran and hadith, statements attributed to the Islamic prophet Muhammad.

See Morocco and LGBT in Islam

Libyan Desert

The Libyan Desert forms the northern and eastern part of the Sahara Desert.

See Morocco and Libyan Desert

Lillehammer

Lillehammer is a town and municipality in Oppland county, Norway.

See Morocco and Lillehammer

Lillehammer affair

The Lillehammer affair (Hebrew: פרשת לילהאמר, Parshat Lillehammer, Norwegian: Lillehammer-saken) was the killing by Mossad agents of Ahmed Bouchikhi, a Moroccan waiter and brother of the renowned musician Chico Bouchikhi, in Lillehammer, Norway, on July 21, 1973.

See Morocco and Lillehammer affair

Limes

Originally the Latin noun līmes (Latin līmitēs) had a number of different meanings: a path or balk delimiting fields, a boundary line or marker, any road or path, any channel, such as a stream channel, or any distinction or difference.

See Morocco and Limes

Lion

The lion (Panthera leo) is a species in the cat family (Felidae).

See Morocco and Lion

Lionel Richie

Lionel Brockman Richie Jr. (born June 20, 1949) is an American singer, songwriter, actor and record producer.

See Morocco and Lionel Richie

List of battles 1301–1600

No description.

See Morocco and List of battles 1301–1600

List of botanical gardens

A botanical garden is a place where plants, especially ferns, conifers and flowering plants, are grown and displayed for the purposes of research, conservation, and education.

See Morocco and List of botanical gardens

List of countries and dependencies by population

This is a list of countries and dependent territories by population.

See Morocco and List of countries and dependencies by population

List of countries and dependencies by population density

This is a list of countries and dependent territories ranked by population density, measured by the number of human inhabitants per square kilometer.

See Morocco and List of countries and dependencies by population density

List of country calling codes

Country calling codes or country dial in codes are telephone dialing prefixes for the member countries or regions of the International Telecommunication Union (ITU).

See Morocco and List of country calling codes

List of country-name etymologies

This list covers English language country names with their etymologies.

See Morocco and List of country-name etymologies

List of dog breeds

Dogs have been selectively bred for thousands of years, sometimes by inbreeding dogs from the same ancestral lines, sometimes by mixing dogs from very different lines.

See Morocco and List of dog breeds

List of explorers

The following is a list of explorers.

See Morocco and List of explorers

List of former sovereign states

A historical state or historical sovereign state is a state that once existed, but has since been dissolved due to conflict, war, rebellion, annexation, or uprising.

See Morocco and List of former sovereign states

List of French people

French people of note include.

See Morocco and List of French people

List of intelligence agencies

This is a list of intelligence agencies.

See Morocco and List of intelligence agencies

List of inventors

This is a list of notable inventors.

See Morocco and List of inventors

List of kidnappings

This is a list of kidnappings.

See Morocco and List of kidnappings

List of Latin names of countries

This list includes the Roman names of countries, or significant regions, known to the Roman Empire.

See Morocco and List of Latin names of countries

List of linguists

A linguist in the academic sense is a person who studies natural language (an academic discipline known as linguistics).

See Morocco and List of linguists

List of monarchs who lost their thrones in the 20th and 21st centuries

The following monarchs either lost their thrones through deposition by a coup d'état, by a referendum which abolished their throne, or chose to abdicate during the 20th century or 21st century.

See Morocco and List of monarchs who lost their thrones in the 20th and 21st centuries

List of mountain ranges

This is a list of mountain ranges on Earth and a few other astronomical bodies.

See Morocco and List of mountain ranges

List of museums by country

This list of museums is defined for this context as institutions (including nonprofit organizations, government entities, and private businesses) that collect and care for objects of cultural, artistic, scientific, or historical interest and make their collections or related exhibits available for public viewing.

See Morocco and List of museums by country

List of official languages

This is a list of official languages of sovereign countries.

See Morocco and List of official languages

List of recently extinct bird species

Since 1500, over 190 species of birds have become extinct, and this rate of extinction seems to be increasing.

See Morocco and List of recently extinct bird species

List of rivers of Africa

This is a list of rivers in Africa.

See Morocco and List of rivers of Africa

List of Scots

List of Scots is an incomplete list of notable people from Scotland.

See Morocco and List of Scots

List of sovereign states and dependent territories by continent

This is a list of sovereign states and dependent territories of the world by continent, displayed with their respective national flags and capitals, including the following entities.

See Morocco and List of sovereign states and dependent territories by continent

List of supermarket chains

As of October 2017, this is a list of supermarket chains, past and present, which operate or have branches in more than one country, whether under the parent corporation's name or another name.

See Morocco and List of supermarket chains

List of tallest structures

The tallest structure in the world is the Burj Khalifa skyscraper at.

See Morocco and List of tallest structures

List of World Organization of the Scout Movement members

Since its conception in 1907, the Scouting movement has spread from the United Kingdom to 216 countries and territories around the world.

See Morocco and List of World Organization of the Scout Movement members

List of zoos by country

This is a list of zoological gardens (zoos) around the world.

See Morocco and List of zoos by country

Each entry below presents a list of topics about a specific nation or state (country), followed by a link to the main article for that country.

See Morocco and Lists of country-related topics

Lists of office-holders

These are lists of incumbents (individuals holding offices or positions), including heads of states or of subnational entities.

See Morocco and Lists of office-holders

Literacy

Literacy is traditionally meant as the ability to read and write.

See Morocco and Literacy

Longwave

In radio, longwave, long wave or long-wave, and commonly abbreviated LW, refers to parts of the radio spectrum with wavelengths longer than what was originally called the medium-wave broadcasting band.

See Morocco and Longwave

Louis XIII of France

Louis XIII (27 September 1601 – 14 May 1643) was a monarch of the House of Bourbon who ruled as King of France from 1610 to 1643 and King of Navarre (as Louis II) from 1610 to 1620, when the crown of Navarre was merged with the French crown.

See Morocco and Louis XIII of France

Lucian Truscott

General Lucian King Truscott Jr. (January 9, 1895 – September 12, 1965) was a highly decorated senior United States Army officer, who saw distinguished active service during World War II.

See Morocco and Lucian Truscott

MA

Ma, MA, or mA may refer to.

See Morocco and MA

Maastricht

Maastricht (Limburgish: Mestreech; French: Maestricht; Spanish: Mastrique) is a city and a municipality in the southeast of the Netherlands.

See Morocco and Maastricht

Mad (magazine)

Mad (stylized as MAD) is an American humor magazine founded in 1952 by editor Harvey Kurtzman and publisher William Gaines, launched as a comic book before it became a magazine.

See Morocco and Mad (magazine)

Madrasa

Madrasa (مدرسة,, pl. مدارس) is the Arabic word for any type of educational institution, whether secular or religious (of any religion), and whether a school, college, or university.

See Morocco and Madrasa

Maimonides

Moses ben Maimon (Mōšeh bēn-Maymūn; موسى بن ميمون Mūsā bin Maymūn), commonly known as Maimonides (Μαϊμωνίδης Maïmōnídēs; Moses Maimonides), and also referred to by the acronym Rambam (for Rabbeinu Mōšeh bēn Maimun, "Our Rabbi Moses son of Maimon"), was a medieval Sephardic Jewish philosopher who became one of the most prolific and influential Torah scholars of the Middle Ages.

See Morocco and Maimonides

Malaysian Armed Forces

The Malaysian Armed Forces (MAF, Angkatan Tentera Malaysia-ATM; Jawi:اڠكتن تنترا مليسيا), the military of Malaysia, consists of three branches, namely the Malaysian Army, the Royal Malaysian Navy, and the Royal Malaysian Air Force.

See Morocco and Malaysian Armed Forces

Maldives

The Maldives (or; ދިވެހިރާއްޖެ Dhivehi Raa'jey), officially the Republic of Maldives, is a South Asian sovereign state, located in the Indian Ocean, situated in the Arabian Sea.

See Morocco and Maldives

Mandarin orange

The mandarin orange (Citrus reticulata;; 桔, jyutping: gat1), also known as the mandarin or mandarine, is a small citrus tree with fruit resembling other oranges, usually eaten plain or in fruit salads.

See Morocco and Mandarin orange

Mango

Mangoes are juicy stone fruit (drupe) from numerous species of tropical trees belonging to the flowering plant genus Mangifera, cultivated mostly for their edible fruit.

See Morocco and Mango

Manorville, New York

Manorville is a hamlet and census-designated place (CDP) in Suffolk County, New York, United States.

See Morocco and Manorville, New York

Marabout

A marabout (lit) is a Muslim religious leader and teacher in West Africa, and (historically) in the Maghreb.

See Morocco and Marabout

Marcel Cerdan

Marcellin "Marcel" Cerdan (22 July 1916 – 28 October 1949) was a French Pied-Noir world boxing champion who was considered by many boxing experts and fans to be France's greatest boxer, and beyond to be one of the best to have learned his craft in Africa.

See Morocco and Marcel Cerdan

March 30

No description.

See Morocco and March 30

Marrakesh

Marrakesh (or; مراكش Murrākuš; ⴰⵎⵓⵔⴰⴽⵓⵛ Meṛṛakec), also known by the French spelling Marrakech, is a major city of the Kingdom of Morocco.

See Morocco and Marrakesh

Marrakesh Agreement

The Marrakesh Agreement, manifested by the Marrakesh Declaration, was an agreement signed in Marrakesh, Morocco, by 124 nations on 15 April 1994, marking the culmination of the 8-year-long Uruguay Round and establishing the World Trade Organization, which officially came into being on 1 January 1995.

See Morocco and Marrakesh Agreement

Marrakesh Menara Airport

Marrakesh Menara Airport (ⴰⵣⴰⴳⵯⵣ ⵎⵕⵕⴰⴽⵛ ⵎⵉⵏⴰⵕⴰ, Aéroport Marrakech Ménara, مطار مراكش المنارة) is an international airport serving Marrakesh, the capital city of the Marrakesh-Tensift-El Haouz region in Morocco.

See Morocco and Marrakesh Menara Airport

Marriage

Marriage, also called matrimony or wedlock, is a socially or ritually recognised union between spouses that establishes rights and obligations between those spouses, as well as between them and any resulting biological or adopted children and affinity (in-laws and other family through marriage).

See Morocco and Marriage

Martian meteorite

A Martian meteorite is a rock that formed on the planet Mars and was then ejected from Mars by the impact of an asteroid or comet, and finally landed on the Earth.

See Morocco and Martian meteorite

Marwan al-Shehhi

Marwan Yousef Mohamed Rashid Lekrab al-Shehhi (مروان يوسف محمد رشيد لكراب الشحي,, also transliterated as Alshehhi; 9 May 1978 &ndash; 11 September 2001) was the hijacker-pilot of United Airlines Flight 175, crashing the plane into the South Tower of the World Trade Center as part of the September 11 attacks.

See Morocco and Marwan al-Shehhi

Matthew Shepard

Matthew Wayne "Matt" Shepard (December 1, 1976 – October 12, 1998) was an American student at the University of Wyoming who was beaten, tortured, and left to die near Laramie on the night of October 6, 1998.

See Morocco and Matthew Shepard

Mauretania

Mauretania (also spelled Mauritania; both pronounced) is the Latin name for an area in the ancient Maghreb.

See Morocco and Mauretania

Maurice Papon

Maurice Papon (3 September 1910 &ndash; 17 February 2007) was a Fre