Emil John Feryo, Sr., of Pottsville died peacefully after a brief illness on Thursday surrounded by his loving family.

Emil was born March 21, 1928 in St. Clair, the son of the late John “Butch” and Ella Kudlick Feryo. Despite a humble upbringing in a residence without running water, Emil treasured his St. Clair roots. Upon graduation from high school, he enlisted in the U.S. Navy at the conclusion of World War II, and saw service shipboard as the war ended. His service instilled in him an indelible sense of patriotism and pride in his country. Taking advantage of that service and the GI Bill that resulted, Emil to return to Pennsylvania after his honorable discharge and attended and graduated from Penn State University with an accounting degree. It was there he met his dear friend Don Davis, who remained his close pal throughout the rest of his life. Upon his graduation from Penn State, Emil obtained employment as an accountant with General Electric Credit Corporation in Harrisburg, where he remained for several years. Subsequently Emil answered the call of his Uncle John Pappas, who convinced him to return to Pottsville to join his hearing aid dispensing business. It was there that Emil found his true calling and life’s work.

Emil remained in the hearing aid business for the remainder of his life, and worked until just weeks prior to his death. Eventually he started his own business, and at the peak of his business had 12 offices throughout Pennsylvania. He loved the vocation of fitting hearing aids to improve the quality people’s lives and was both diligent and dedicated to it. Over the course of his six decades in the business Emil received numerous awards from both hearing aid manufacturers and associations, the most recent being a lifetime award from the Pennsylvania Hearing Aid Association in March on the occasion of his 90th birthday.

Emil’s great passions in his life were his extended family, his catholic faith, Penn State Football, and any topic touching on hearing aids. He lived every day to the fullest, ate and drank fulsomely, and as they say in the sports world, left it all on the field of play. Emil was known to have opinions about practically everything, some of which were expressed in a manner that was unique. While occasionally these views seemed outrageous, to the consternation of his family and particularly his son-in-laws, they frequently proved to be correct. His only regret was that he did not make it to 100 years of age.

Emil married the love of his life, Charlene Ashman Feryo, on June 4, 1955. They enjoyed life together for 58 years, until her death 2013. Theirs was a special and entertaining romance. Despite his tendency to drive her crazy, and her constant and unsuccessful quest to tame him, they adored and worshipped each other. Emil never stopped missing Charlene after her passing Their union produced four children who survive him, Beth, wife of U.S. District Judge John E. Jones, III; Emil J. Feryo, Jr, Gary Feryo, Amie, wife of Pennsylvania State Representative Mike Tobash. He is also survived by loving grandchildren Meghan, wife of Attorney Eric Prock, John E. Jones, IV husband of Katie, Emil J. Feryo III, Dylan Feryo, Alexia Tobash and Mikeala Tobash. Emil also lived long enough to see the birth of great-grandchildren, Carys Bryn and Sophia Elizabeth, who provided great joy to their Pops in his final years.

In addition to his wife Charlene, Emil was preceded in death by his beloved brother, Gerald, who assisted him in his business for many years. He is also survived by sisters, Dolores Karam, Gloria Jelenewicz, sister-in-law Dolores Wagner, brother-in-law William Ashman, godchildren Sharon Wagner Johnson, Dr. David Pillus, Linda Karam, and various nieces and nephews. Emil was member of childhood church to of St. Mary’s Byzantine Church, St. Clair. For the past 20 years Emil attended St. Patrick Roman Catholic Church, Pottsville, where he would be seen sitting on the left side of the church for mass.