Dennis Quaid, who starred in the Christian film I Can Only Imagine is adding a few more faith-based roles to his repertoire.

Quaid played the role of Bart Millard's abusive father in the film I Can Only Imagine. Based on the lead singer of MercyMe's real life, the movie is a story of redemption.

To get into the role, Quaid says he used things in his own life, including, "my faith as a Christian," during a video interview with The Dallas Morning News in 2018.

On top of being an actor, Quaid is also a musician. He wrote a song for his mother that was used in the movie called 'On My Way to Heaven'.

"It's a connection to my faith roots in the sense that I grew up in the Baptist church, went to Sunday School, and got baptized when I was nine. I always loved the music from the church."

Quaid opened up about his Christian faith sharing his story behind the song on YouTube, shortly after the film was released.

"I went around the world in my late 20s and the question I had was 'Who is God?' I became a seeker. I read the Bible cover to cover and for me, the answer is Jesus," he says.

A new faith-based family drama coming out shortly, called On a Wing and a Prayer will star Quaid as the father who has to try and save his family as a plane is going down. The script is based off a true, harrowing story.

According to MGM's Motion Picture Group Chairman Michael De Luca and President Pamela Abdy, "On a Wing and a Prayer is a gripping take on a very real survivor story and illuminates the remarkable power of the human spirit."

According to Deadline, this upcoming movie marks the actor’s third reteaming with filmmaker Sean McNamara after Soul Surfer and the upcoming biopic Reagan in which Quaid plays the title role as the 40th U.S. President.

One of the producers of the upcoming film is Roma Downey. Her husband Mark Burnett produced the record-breaking series The Bible with her.

Brothers Jon and Andrew Erwin were the ones who directed I Can Only Imagine. Quaid is also teaming up with them again on an upcoming film American Underdog: The Kurt Warner Story. It is said to be an inspiring sports drama.