Stratified squamous epithelium: the cells originate from a layer of cells along a basal lamina and form a multilayered structure. Cells toward the surface have smaller nuclei and greater amounts of cytoplasm with keratin. Mucosal surfaces without much wear and tear are not covered with a layer of keratin (non-keratizining squamous epithelium), as on the cervix. On surfaces receiving greater wear and tear, there is a thick layer of acellular keratin (keratinizing squamous epithelium), as on skin.

Columnar epithelium: there are tall cells along a basal lamina. They typically line glandular lumena or ducts. Columnar cells often produce mucin and may be called a mucinous epithelium. An example is the surface lining of the colon. They may have cilia or microvilli along the lumenal border. The cell nuclei are typically located toward the basal lamina. A variation of this pattern is a cuboidal epithelium where the cells are about as tall as they are wide, but there are gradations between cuboidal and columnar epithelium.

Pseudostratified columnar epithelium: not all the cells along the basal lamina reach the lumenal surface, though all contact the basal lamina. This type of epithelium lines the respiratory tract from the nasopharynx down into the bronchioles of the lung. Cilia are present.

Transitional epithelium: the cells are multilayered. The cells are connected in a way that allows stretching and expansion. The overlying cell layer next to the lumen ("umbrella cells") can spread thinly. This epithelium lines the urinary tract from the renal calyces down to the urethra. An example is the ureter.

Cuboidal epithelium: the cells are box-like to rounded. Cuboidal epithelium typically lines ducts draining glands. The small ducts of sweat glands (including breast, a modified sweat gland) can pile up to a stratified cuboidal appearance in larger ducts. Cuboidal epithelium is also found in renal tubules. The mesothelium that lines many body cavities, such as the pleural space, has a simple cuboidal appearance, but mesothelial cells are of mesenchymal origin and thus, technically, are connective tissue.

Basement membrane: every epithelium lies on a basement membrane that separates the epithelial cells from the underlying connective tissue. Integrins in the epithelial cells extend into the basement membrane and attach to laminin which in turn attaches to type 4 collagen and to fibronectin in the portion of the basement membrane known as the basal lamina. There are anchoring fibrils of type 7 collagen. Thus the basal lamina acts as an anchoring point for the epithelium. The basal lamina forms a meshwork that acts as a filter, both physically and electrically, to trap or exclude molecules. A lamina reticularis of the basement membrane interfaces with the underlying connective tissue.

Keratin: this substance is produced by squamous epithelium and provides protection. It is essentially the layered remains of dead cells. The keratin layer is continuously being desquamated and replaced. Hair and nails are additional forms of keratin.

Microvilli: these tiny structures form a brush border that increases the absorbtive area on the surface of the cell. Microvilli have a central core of actin filaments anchored by villin and a terminal web with spectrin.

Cilia: these are motile structures that have a characteristic structure of microtubules with 9 doublets surrounding two central singlets to form an axoneme. Dynein arms with ATPase activity attach to the microtubules to power movement.

Terminal bars at the apical region of epithelial cells represent junctional complexes with several components. "Tight junctions" or zonula occludens form an impenetrable barrier between cells. The zonula adherens has extracellular cadherins which join cytoskeletal elements through transmembrane proteins. The desmosomes have attachment proteins that link to intermediate filaments of cytokeratin. There are also gap junctions that provide a means for selective communication by passage of small molecules between cells.