What is Stratified Squamous Epithelium?

Epithelial tissues are a group of compactly packed cells with very little intercellular matrices. It is a type of simple epithelial tissue based on differences in structural modifications. Epithelial tissue is the most widespread tissue in the human body that covers all the external and internal surfaces of our body.

Structure

Squamous epithelium is made up of a single layer of flattened cells that have irregular boundaries. These single layers of cells lie upon each other to form a stratified squamous epithelium.

The stratified epithelia thus consists of two or more layers of cells. It has a basal membrane that is made up of columnar or cuboidal cells with squamous epithelium stacked upon them.

Types of Stratified Squamous Epithelium

The stratified squamous epithelium can be of two types – keratinising and non-keratinising. Let us discuss them in detail.

Keratinised Squamous Epithelium

As the name suggests, this type of epithelium has a layer of keratin protein deposited on its surface. This deposition makes the keratinised squamous epithelium layer impermeable and dry. It protects against mechanical and chemical damage and prevents water loss.

It is usually 8-10 layers thick and it is difficult to see the basal layer in such types of epithelium. The cells on the surface are usually flat and are no longer alive, they do not have any nuclei or cell organelles. These cells start out as columnar or cuboidal cells in the basal layer, divide by mitosis and emerge to the surface and become flattened. Examples of keratinised squamous epithelium include: the skin, palms, and the oral mucosal membrane.

Non-keratinised Squamous Epithelium

Non-keratinised squamous epithelium are found in places that have to be kept moist and prevent drying out. The oesophagus is the prime example of non-keratinised squamous epithelium. Other examples include – conjunctiva of the eye, vagina, rectum and pharynx.

Function

The primary function of the stratified squamous epithelium is to provide protection against the outer environment. It also protects against abrasion by constantly shedding off the surface membrane cells and emergence of new cells from the basal membrane.

This sums up the stratified squamous epithelium. Stay connected with us at BYJU’S for more updates on NEET.

You might be interested in: