This evening is constructed around a unique musician, who is organist, composer and folk musician rolled in one. Gunnar Idenstam was born in the northernmost region of Sweden in 1961 and has benefited also from the influence of the impressive French organ school, since he studied in the class of the legendary Marie-Claire Alain. In 1984 he won the Improvisation Grand Prix at the prestigious organ competitions in Chartres and has since then given concerts across the globe. His exceptionally wide musical interests have attracted some fascinating musical partners to this concert. Thanks to this, the organ, the “queen of instruments” will now “remove her gown” and depart from its traditional framework, engaging in a dialogue with other instruments to create some never before heard sonorities. One such instrument is the “star guest”, the nyckelharpa which was known back in the Middle Ages. This interesting instrument must be played with a bow but like a hurdy-gurdy, also has a keyboard and is fitted with vibrating strings, rather like a viola d’amore. One of the greatest exponents of this instrument, which remains a Swedish folk instrument (and according to frescos found in northern churches, they were played by the angels), is Johan Hedin who frequently plays with Gunnar Idenstam. They have even released a record together. The two Swedes are joined by two towering figures in Hungarian folk music, Kossuth prize winning singer Márta Sebestyén and wind instrument virtuoso Balázs Szokolay Dongó. The four musicians will give the audience a unique experience in folk music and classical music, notated music and improvisation and by pairing the human voice with instruments.

Parking information

We wish to inform you that in the event that Müpa Budapest's underground garage and outdoor car park are operating at full capacity, it is advisable to plan for increased waiting times when you arrive. In order to avoid this, we recommend that you depart for our events in time, so that you you can find the ideal parking spot quickly and smoothly and arrive for our performance in comfort. The Müpa Budapest underground garage gates will be operated by an automatic number plate recognition system. Parking is free of charge for visitors with tickets to any of our paid performances on that given day. The detailed parking policy of Müpa Budapest is available here.

Safe ticket purchase

Dear Visitors, please note that only tickets purchased from the Müpa website and official ticket offices are guaranteed to be valid. To avoid possible inconvenience, we suggest buying tickets to our performances and concerts via the mupa.hu website, the Interticket national network (jegy.hu) or at our official ticket offices.