Making movies can be a dangerous business. In fact, many actors and crew members have been injured on-set over the years. Some have even died. The list of titles at fault might surprise you.

The 1981 film "Roar" is widely considered to be the most dangerous film ever created. In fact, its official poster reads, "No animals were harmed in the making of the film. 70 cast and crew members were."

"Roar"

The film "Roar," created by Tippi Hedren and her manager-husband Noel Marshall, was an unprecedented 11-year project inspired by the pair's recent trip to Africa.

Casting their family members -- including daughter Melanie Griffith -- in various roles, the couple brought 100 lions, tigers and other exotic cats to their California ranch and lived among them there. The project resulted in 70 animal attacks, facial reconstructive surgery for Griffith and the dissolution of Hedren and Marshall's marriage.

Now, nearly 35 years later, the film is set to roar back into theaters again.

"Mena"

Two crew members were killed and a third seriously injured, when a small plane crashed in the Colombian Andes on September 11, 2015, while filming the upcoming Tom Cruise movie, "Mena."

Prolific American film pilot, Alan Purwin, was among those killed in the crash. His film credits include "Transformers," "Pearl Harbor," and "Pirates of the Caribbean." The Piper Aerostar-600 in which he died appears to be the same aircraft that Cruise, a trained pilot, arrived in to begin filming on August 20.

"The Conqueror"

In 1956, "The Conqueror" was filmed on location in St. George, Utah, just 137 miles away from a Nevada test site where the United States had conducted above-ground nuclear weapons testing three years before. In the years that followed, many of the film's principal actors and crew members came down with various forms of cancer.

The film's director Dick Powell was diagnosed in 1963. Mexican actor Pedro Armendariz was diagnosed in 1960. And the film's stars Susan Hayward, John Wayne and Agnes Moorehead all died of cancer in the 1970s.

Of the film's 220 cast and crew members, 91 developed cancer and 46 ultimately died of the disease.

"Rocky IV"

While filming "Rocky IV" in 1985, Sylvester Stallone and Dolph Lundren agreed to legitimately spar with one another to give the movie's climactic boxing match a sense of authenticity. As a result, Stallone suffered an intense blow to the chest and had to be airlifted to St. John's Hospital in Santa Montica, California for treatment.

Stallon spent eight days in the ICU there, while doctors worked to reduce excessive blood pressure and swelling in his heart. Talk about a rocky start to production.

"The Wizard of Oz"

You wouldn't guess it by watching the film, but several injuries occurred on the set of "The Wizard of Oz" (1939).

Margaret Hamilton who played the Wicked Witch of the West, for example, was badly burned after a trapdoor malfunctioned during a scene in which her character was meant to vanish in a burst of flame and smoke, leaving her exposed to an active pyrotechnic device. Her stunt double was also injured while filming a scene with a smoking broomstick. And the role of the Tin Man had to be famously recast after actor Buddy Ebsen suffered a severe allergic reaction to the character's makeup, resulting in a collapsed lung and lasting breathing issues.

"A Clockwork Orange"

While filming the famous brainwashing scene in Stanley Kubrick's "A Clockwork Orange," Malcolm McDowell suffered temporary blindness and a scratched cornea from having his eyes propped open for so long.

"The Interview"

Seth Rogan and James Franco's controversial comedy, "The Interview", about a plot to assassinate North Korean leader Kim Jong-un ignited terrorist threats from the so-called Guardians of Peace and led to a cyberattack on Sony Pictures.

"The Passion of the Christ"

While playing the role of Jesus in Mel Gibson's 2004 film "The Passion of the Christ," actor Jim Caviezel suffered numerous injuries, including gashes on his back from scripted whippings, hypothermia and a separated shoulder after carrying the cross.

He and the film's assistant director Jan Michelini were also struck by lightning.

"Titanic"

Several actors were injured while shooting the famous sinking scene in "Titanic" (1997) after they fell and struck parts of the ship. The injuries suffered ranged from broken bones to ruptured organs.

Kate Winslet then came down with pneumonia after filming her water scenes without the help of a wetsuit under her dress. Additionally, she almost drowned while shooting a scene inside in the sinking ship when her coat snagged on a gate she was running past and pulled her under the water.

Lastly, on the final night of shooting, eighty cast and crew members were hospitalized after pranksters spiked their food with PCP.

"The Hobbit"

While no cast or crew members died during the production of this film, it is said that as many as 27 animals were killed, leading to a global protest against the film initiated by PETA.

"The Dark Knight"

Cameraman Conway Wickliffe was killed on the set of "The Dark Knight" in 2007 after the moving truck from which he was filming failed to make its scheduled turn and crashed into a tree.

It has also been rumored that the role of the Joker took a toll on actor Heath Ledger's psyche.

Ledger once told reporters that he "slept an average of two hours a night" while playing "a psychopathic, mass-murdering, schizophrenic clown with zero empathy ..." I couldn't stop thinking. My body was exhausted, and my mind was still going." Prescription drugs didn't help, he said.

"The Twilight Zone"

In 1982, star Vic Morrow and two child actors -- 7-year-old Myca Dinh Le and 6-year-old Renee Shin-Yi Chen -- were killed by a helicopter on the set of "The Twilight Zone: The Movie."

The helicopter, which was flying low at just twenty-five feet above the ground, became entangled in pyrotechnics and consequently crushed Chen. Morrow and Le were then decapitated by its tail rotor. The six people aboard the helicopter were also injured, though not fatally, when the machine went down near Six Flags Magic Mountain Amusement Park.

The crash sparked one of the most prolonged lawsuits in film history, resulting in major changes to filming codes as well.

"The Hangover Part II"

When you think of the "Hangover" franchise, you probably think of laughs, not danger. However, Australian stuntman Scott McLean suffered severe head trauma while filming a scene from "The Hangover Part II" in Bangkok.

McLean was leaning out of the window of a taxi when it failed to dodge another vehicle, causing his head to collide with it. McLean then had to be placed in a medically induced coma while doctors treated his brain and physical injuries.

"First Blood"

While filming "First Blood," Sylvester Stallone broke several ribs after filming three takes of a scene in which his character John Rambo jumps off a cliff and uses a tree to break his fall.

Stallone also sustained serious injury to his back after filming nineteen takes of a scene in which his character is clubbed with a nightstick in jail.

"Shark!"

While filming the 1969 thriller "Shark!" in Mexico, a stuntman was mauled to death on camera by a shark that was supposed to have been sedated.

The film's director Samuel Fuller later quit after the production company used this death to publicize the movie.

"Midnight Rider"

An assistant camerawoman, Sarah Jones, was killed by a train while shooting the Gregg Allman biopic, "Midnight Rider" in 2014.The accident occurred on a train trestle over the Altamaha River in Georgia and injured seven other crew members as well. Production on the film has been suspended ever since.

Director Randall Miller was sentenced February 20, 2014 to two years in jail after pleading guilty to charges of involuntary manslaughter and criminal trespass in Jones' death. He was also sentenced to eight years probation afterwards and is banned from directing for ten years.

Here, people gather at the International Cinematographers Guild national offices during a candlelight walk and memorial for Jones.

"The Sword of Tipu Sultan"

The largest number of on-set deaths in film history occurred during the production of this Indian made-for-TV movie.

Sixty two extras and crew members were trapped inside the film studio and died when it tragically caught fire one day. The film's director and star Sanjay Khan survived, but spent thirteen months in the hospital and underwent seventy two surgeries for the burns he suffered during the blaze.

"The Viking"

While on a voyage to obtain additional footage for this 1931 film about an actual seal-hunting ship, producer Varick Frissell and twenty six members of his film crew were killed when dynamite aboard their ship accidentally detonated.

"Heaven's Gate"

Much like "The Hobbit," numerous incidents of animal cruelty were reported on the set of the 1980 Western film "Heaven's Gate." These included actual cockfighting, the decapitation of several chickens, a horse being blown up with dynamite and the intentional bleeding of steer so that their blood might be used by actors in the film.

After the American Humane Association led a widespread boycott of the film, the Screen Actors Guild and the Alliance of Motion Picture and Television Producers were moved to action; contractually authorizing the AHA to monitor the use of animals in all filmed media going forward.

Pretty much all Jackie Chan movies

In 1976, Chan was knocked unconscious while filming "Hand of Death." In 1978, he nearly lost an eye while filming a fight scene for "Drunken Master." That same year, Chan's arm was slashed by a sword and one of his teeth was knocked out during the filming of "Snake in the Eagle's Shadow." In 1980, he injured his throat and consequently nearly suffocated filming a stunt scene for "The Young Master." In 1985, he dislocated his pelvis and suffered third-degree burns on his hands while filming the famous pole sliding scene in "Police Story."

As if that wasn't enough, Chan then broke his hand filming "The Protector" later that year. In 1986, Chan fractured his skull on a rock while filming "Armour of God." A fragment of his skull even cracked off and lodged in his brain, leaving him with hearing loss and a permanent hole in his skull requiring a plug. Chan then dislocated his sternum while shooting the film's sequel "Armour of God II" in 1991. And his legs were crushed between two cars while filming a stunt scene for "Crime Story" in 1993.

Unbelievably, that's the abridged list.