(Welcome to ...And More, our no-frills, zero B.S. guide to when and where you can watch upcoming movies and shows, and everything else you could possibly stand to know.)

Let's get dangerous! And by dangerous, I mean let's become ex-convicts and take a casual trip to a mysterious island to investigate the even more mysterious demise of our (collective) brother. Yup, we're talking David Hackl's upcoming film, "Dangerous," and we have all the details you desire, from the release dates you crave to the cast info that will keep you up at night (I mean, probably not, but I don't know what you're into).

Keep scrolling to check it all out, and make sure you clear you calendar for a "Dangerous" viewing.

I hope your November isn't looking too busy, because "Dangerous" will be hitting theaters and On Demand services on November 5, 2021. We don't know if it'll be available to stream, or if it'll be a wide release, but considering the cast and the hard-nosed thriller plot, I'm sure it won't be relegated to out-of-the-way arthouse cinemas.

Well, everything can be dangerous when you put your mind to it, but since we're talking about the film "Dangerous," you can expect a tough thriller, filled with people make difficult choices in morally grey areas for the people they love. You know the drill. Still, who doesn't love an artfully paced movie with a little bit of a mystery and a whole lot of edge? It looks like "Dangerous" will deliver on both of those fronts, which will make it a fun movie to watch on a casual Sunday when you know you should be cleaning something (the kitchen? The bathroom?) but you've decided to make it all Monday's problem and spend the day laying on the couch instead.

Director David Hackl has spent a sizable amount of his career working as a production designer, but "Dangerous" is far from his first directing role. He's previously directed "Saw V," which has made me honestly pretty excited to check out this film. If Hackl can bring some of that twisted and chaotic "Saw" energy into a thriller, I'll be sold. Joining Hackl is cinematographer Mark Dobrescu ("The Recall"), editor Jackie Dzuba ("Daughter of the Wolf") and production designer Kathy McCoy ("We Summon the Darkness").

The cast of "Dangerous" is filled with familiar faces, including Scott Eastwood ("The Fate of the Furious"), Kevin Durand ("X-Men Origins: Wolverine"), Famke Janssen ("X-Men"), Mel Gibson ("Braveheart") and Tyrese Gibson ("The Fate of the Furious"). Eastwood is the ex-convict (maybe with a heart of gold?) searching for his brother, while Janssen plays the FBI agent who helps him on his quest, and Mel Gibson rounds out the trio as Eastwood's psychiatrist. We don't quite know what roles Durand and Tyrese Gibson will be playing in the film yet, but I'm sure we'll find out soon enough.