Remo – Unarmed And Dangerous is one of those films that I remember enjoying, whilst also knowing it’s not actually that great. It’s based on a long running series of novels, ‘The Destroyer’ series, although I can see why they didn’t want to use that name as the title, as the film is a lot more light-hearted than that title suggests.

Full disclosure: I was watching this during our pre-christmas tidying and prep, where there was a lot of other unrelated conversation going on from the family, so if I missed some details of the plot I apologise.

It’s got an interesting movie pedigree, though, being directed by Guy Hamilton, who directed some of the classic Bond films including Goldfinger. And it’s written by Christoper Wood, who my memory told me wrote loads of Bond films, but iMDb reveals he only wrote The Spy Who Loved Me and Moonraker. Although those were my first cinema Bonds so that might have coloured my perception. Although the most startling revelation is that he pseudonymously wrote the ‘Confessions’ books as Timothy Lea, and also the ‘Rosie Dixon – Night Nurse’ books. That’s a strange bibliography.

One more credit before we discuss the movie – as soon as the music started it sounded familiar, and I realised that it reminded me strongly of the score for The Last Starfighter, one of my favourite unknown film scores, and sure enough, Craig Safan also wrote the score for this.

Oh, one more boring credit fact – in the US the original title was Remo Williams – The Adventure Begins. I think the title was changed once it was released in the UK and it was clear it wasn’t a big enough hit to spawn a series, so it became Remo – Unarmed and Dangerous.

As for the movie, Fred Ward plays a cop with a terrible moustache who, in the opening sequence, takes on a gang of armed men, and is then killed by someone pushing his car into the river with a big truck.

And he’s really dead, this person we just saw for two minutes. Honest.

If the moustache looks like an unwise fashion choice, fear not because, not only is Fred Ward not dead, he’s been saved by a shadowy government organisation whose first action after resuscitating him from his potential watery grave is to shave off that unwise face furniture.

The man in charge of the shadowy government organisation is JA Preston. Who is also the man who pushed his car into the river. I don’t think this fact is ever mentioned again. I guess we’re just meant to take it to mean he’s ruthless and will do anything.

He even picks his new name, Remo Williams, from the bottom of a bedpan, like he’s Kevin Spacey in The Usual Suspects.

The newly minted Remo isn’t happy having been coralled into this organization, so he escapes and steals an ambulance. From Officer Al Powell off of Die Hard (Reggie VelJohnson).

But his new boss is way ahead of him, and brings him to meet Wilford Brimley, who’s the guy who does all the research. He was only 51 when this film was released. I’m now older than Wilford Brimley here. He also has the same birthday as me.

His first hit turns out to be an old Korean man, who can dodge his bullets and basically beat him up easily. This, it turns out, is Chiun, who will be his mentor figure. And he’s played by that famous Korean actor [checks notes] Joel Grey. Yes, Joel Grey, who played the MC in Cabaret, in full yellowface makeup playing a Korean man. Because (according to the producer on wikipedia) “We assumed, of course, that we would be using an oriental actor. We couldn’t find one and then I thought of Grey.”

I have to say, I didn’t pay much attention to the main plot of the film, which involved some corrupt arms manufacturer, and Wilford Brimley looking at a bunch of powerpoints. Even when we meet the main villain he’s instantly forgettable. It’s one of the big flaws with this film, I think.

Also looking into the Harp project is Kate Mulgrew as Major Reyner Fleming. We meet her as she’s being harrassed by a creepy solider guy as she tries to access project information that she thinks she should have access to. He’s really awful, but at least she’s more than a match for him. “I sense frustration” he says. “I’ll bet you’ve had a lot of experience with that” she replies.

She’s trying to get reports on cost overruns on the Harp project, but gets Access Denied. When she takes it to her superior, George Coe, he doesn’t think it’s important, so you can bet he’s involved with whatever the corruption is.

Remo’s training involves improving his agility and balance.

It also take them to an amusement park, where William Hickey turns up as a bouncer

Remo is training up the statue of liberty (which is being refurbished, and surrounded by scaffolding. The bad guys, having spotted him talking to Major Fleming (Mulgrew), bribe a bunch of construction workers to climb up and hassle him. It’s a curiously flat sequence, as the disconnect between the actual bad guys and the ones hassling Remo seems several steps removed.

Remo and Preston go on a mission to find out what the Harp project is. Remo gets chased by dogs, has a rat climb up his trouser leg, sees an expensive looking satellite blown up by lasers, and Preston is shot while they’re escaping, and he hands the important computer records (on a magnetic tape to Remo before expiring heroically.

Remo wants to go after the bad guys, and bumps into Fleming again, leading the bad guys to conclude that she’s a mole handing him information. So they get locked in chamber, and comething presumably noxious is pumped in. But luckily the bad guy enters the chamber to beat up Remo a little, so Remo’s able to pull off his gas mask, and use the diamond in his teeth to scratch the window of the chamber so he can shatter it.

The climactic sequence seems a bit lacklustre, involving Remo hanging on to a tree trunk being transported along a wire. Then, at precisely the perfect moment, he drops the log, it hits another pile of logs, which them roll down the hill and just happen to hit the bad guys’ jeep, forcing them off the road. Then Remo gets to do his bullet dodging trick that he learned from Chiun to face down the head bad guy, who he blows up in his jeep.

Then it’s time for Remo and Chiun to elude the soldiers sent to arrest them, which Chiun manages to do by running across a lake. “You must run very fast.”

I can see why it never produced a series. It’s quite forgettable, spending far too much time on the training, and too little time establishing a compelling villain.

BBC Genome: BBC One – 24th June 1990 – 19:45

After this, recording continues with a news bulletin, leading with the earthquake in Iran.

This is followed by weather from Bernard Davey and a trailer for programmes on Monday.

BBC Genome: BBC One – 24th June 1990 – 21:30

This is followed by an episode of That’s Life. What a strange programme this is. Today’s programme opens with a huge crowd of people who can wrinkle their tongues.

BBC Genome: BBC One – 24th June 1990 – 21:45

There’s a trailer for Come Dancing.

Then, the start of Heart of the Matter asking if nuns should be armed on the mean streets of New York.

The tape ends shortly into this programme.