Tom Hanks has been married to Rita Wilson for 35 years, and in Hollywood terms, that is an eternity.

In fact, the celebrity power couple recently rang in their milestone wedding anniversary with a gushing post, with actress Rita declaring that "Love is everything" in a smitten celebratory Instagram snap which was inundated with well-wishes from their celebrity friends.

So, how exactly has the Forrest Gump actor's marriage stood the test, especially in an industry known for short-lived unions?

Let's take a look at memory lane to highlight his previous relationship as well as all the key moments in his marriage with Rita.

Before Rita came into the picture, Tom married American actress Samantha Lewes in 1978. They share two children together, a son named Colin, born in 1977 and a daughter named Elizbeth, born in 1982. The pair parted ways nine years later in 1987.

Tragically, Samantha passed away in 2002 from bone cancer.

A year before Tom's divorce was finalised with Samantha, he went public with Rita, who he had fallen for before even meeting her.

Speaking to TheKnot in 2016, the Cast Away actor admitted that when he first saw his future wife during her television debut on Brady Bunch in 1972, he immediately fell for her. "Oh, every now and again, I just pull it up on YouTube. All of the stuff that she was in. I was actually at a friend of mine's house when that aired and remember thinking, 'That girl is cute.'"

The pair went on to meet on set of the ABC sitcom Bosom Buddies in 1981 before being reunited on the 1985 set of Volunteers, where their chemistry was undeniable.

They tied the knot in 1988, a year after Tom's divorce from Samantha was finalised. Before their marriage, Tom converted to Rita's faith, who is a member of the Greek Orthodox Church.

The couple owns a home on the Greek island Antiparos, where they purchased a plot of land to build their own house in 2004.

And in 2018, they bought a second home in the Skala area of the Greek island of Patmos.

Meanwhile, the couple have been singing each other's praises from the very beginning. In 1989, Tom used his Best Actor Golden Globe-winning speech to thank his new wife the following year, telling the audience: "I married a Greek babe. She was born right here in California, right here in Hollywood, but her folks are great, she's marvellous, Rita Wilson — thank you, babe, for marrying me.

"You made my year already, but thank you, Hollywood Foreign Press."

In years after that, the pair share two sons, Truman Theodore Hanks and Chester' Chet' Hanks, continued to showcase their love for each other, with Rita talking about her tips for marital success in an interview from 2019.

Speaking to Us Weekly, she said: "We got married, we committed to each other, we love each other, and we work hard at our relationship.

"Not only do we love each other, we really like each other, and we like being together, and we support each other, and we keep the communication channels open. That's always important."