Toy Story 4 star Tom Hanks is married to actress Rita Wilson.

The couple have been together for 31 years and have two children together.

In Hollywood, it often seems like happy marriages only exist in movies—but Tom Hanks and Rita Wilson's real-life love story is better than any rom-com.

Like many celebrity relationships, theirs began after working on a project together. More than three decades later, they still have chemistry both on and off set. Here's how Tom, 62, and Rita, 62, went from being Tinseltown co-stars to one of the industry's most beloved couples.

How did Tom and Rita meet?

Tom and Rita during the filming of ’Volunteers.’

Tom met his future wife for the first time in 1981. At the time, he was starring in the ABC comedy Bosom Buddies and Rita made a guest appearance on an episode about a video dating service. However, sparks didn't fly until they reconnected in 1984 while co-starring in the film Volunteers. Tom was still married to his college sweetheart Samantha Lewes—but he immediately felt something towards Rita.

"Rita and I just looked at each other and—kaboing—that was that," he told GQ. "I asked Rita if it was the real thing for her, and it just couldn't be denied."

However, there was nothing scandalous about their beginnings. Tom's connection with the young actress came at a time when he says his first relationship was already "broken."

"I was just too young and insecure for marriage," he told Express in 2013. "I was 23 and my son Colin was already two when I married for the first time. I was not really ready to take on those responsibilities."

Although his divorce wasn't finalized until 1987, Tom was legally separated from his ex-wife when he and Rita made their romance public in 1986.

When did Tom and Rita get married?

Rita and Tom attend their wedding reception at Rex’s in Los Angeles, California.

After less than two years of dating, Tom and Rita tied the knot on April 30, 1988 in Los Angeles, California. Despite their star status, the actors insist their marriage is not "magic"—it's the real deal.

"The success of our relationship was a matter of timing, maturity and our willingness to have an intimate connection," Tom told Oprah in 2001. "When I married Rita, I thought, 'This is going to require some change on my part.' I won't deny that [fate] was part of us finding each other, but our relationship isn't magic the way it’s shown in movies. In real life, our connection is as concrete as me sitting here. Not that marriage doesn’t come close to being Hell in a handbasket sometimes. But we both know that no matter what, we’ll be with each other—and we’ll get through it."

How many kids do Tom and Rita have?

Tom and Rita welcomed their first son, Chester "Chet" Marlon Hanks, into the world on August 4, 1990. Their youngest son, Truman Theodore Hanks, was born five years later on December 26, 1995.

Tom also has two children from his previous marriage to Samantha: a son, 41-year-old Colin Hanks, and a daughter, Elizabeth Hanks, 37.

While Truman and Elizabeth haven't showed much interest in the entertainment industry, Colin and Chet have followed in their father's famous footsteps. In 1999, Colin had a leading role on the TV series Roswell and also appeared on the big screen in a number of movies, including King Kong, The Good Guys, and The Great Buck Howard.

Chet has also had small roles in big movies like Fantastic Four and Larry Crowne, in addition to a recurring role on Empire. When he's not acting, the 28-year-old is working on his solo music career.

What are Tom and Rita up to now?

In the 31 years since they said their vows, Tom and Rita have been through a lot. There were highs: they acted together as siblings in , co-produced two films, won *a lot* of awards, and each earned a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame.

Of course, there were also lows: In 2015, Rita was diagnosed with breast cancer and went through a double mastectomy and reconstructive surgery.

"You never know how your spouse is going to react in a situation like this," she told The New York Times. "I was so amazed, so blown away by the care my husband gave me...who knew it would make you even closer?"

Through the ups and downs, the husband and wife have always remained by each other's side.

Am I the only one who thinks their real-life love story deserves a movie of its own?!