Tom Hanks and Rita Wilson have been married for over three decades and are the proud parents of a blended family of four kids.

Hanks and Wilson, who first met on the set of the sitcom "Bosom Buddies," celebrated their 36th wedding anniversary on April 30, 2024.

"1988? April 30th? Big Doings. The Wilson & Hanks couple became Wife & Husband. 36 years! Nothing but Love since… Hanx," Hanks captioned a photo of him and Wilson he shared on Instagram at the time.

In her own anniversary post on Instagram, Wilson shared a line of poetry, writing, "Grow old along with me; the best is yet to be.”

In the decades since their wedding day, Hanks and Wilson have raised two sons together, Chester "Chet" Marlon Hanks, 34, and Truman Theodore Hanks, 28.

Tom Hanks is also a father of two other children, Colin Hanks, 45, and Elizabeth Hanks, 42, whom he shares with his ex-wife, Samantha Lewes.

In a 2019 interview with the New York Times, the "Forrest Gump" actor opened up about his philosophy on parenthood.

"Somewhere along the line, I figured out the only thing really, I think, eventually a parent can do is say 'I love you, there's nothing you can do wrong, you cannot hurt my feelings, I hope you will forgive me on occasion, and what do you need me to do?'" he said. "You offer up that to them: 'I will do anything I can possibly do in order to keep you safe.' That's it. Offer that up and then just love them."

What to know about Tom Hanks' 4 kids

Colin Lewes Hanks

Born on Nov. 24, 1977, in Sacramento, California, Colin is Tom's first child, whom he shares with ex Lewes.

Colin followed in his dad's footsteps to be an actor and has appeared on TV and in movies including "Orange County," "Life in Pieces," "American Crime Story," "Drunk History," and "The House Bunny," among others. He also received an Emmy nomination for his role in the TV series, "Fargo."

As for his personal life, Colin tied the knot to Samantha Bryant in May 2010 and the pair share two daughters: Olivia Jane who was born in 2011 and Charlotte Bryant who was born in 2013.

Elizabeth Ann Hanks

The second child of Tom and his ex Lewes, Elizabeth was born on May 17, 1982, in Los Angeles, California. Elizabeth appeared as an extra in movies with her dad as a child.

She later began a career as a writer after graduating from Vassar College, using the moniker E.A. Hanks. Her writing has been featured in publications such as the Guardian, New York Times and Times Magazine.

In November, she teased about the release of her upcoming book on her Instagram, writing in the caption, "A project a decade in the making."

Chester "Chet" Marlon

Chet is Tom's third child, whom he shares with Wilson.

Born on Aug. 4, 1990, in Los Angeles, Chet began to use his stage name Chet Haze to launch his music career.

Chet, who has several acting credits under his belt, has also worked together with his dad in the 2020 AppleTV+ film, "Greyhound."

He shares a daughter named Michaiah with former partner Tiffany Miles.

Most known for his role in the Fox series "Empire," Chet shared his dad's best acting advice while speaking to People Magazine in 2018.

"Show up on time, know your lines and be nice to everybody," he said.

In December, Chet shared a photo on Instagram with his dad, captioning the photo, "Gang."

In July 2024, Chet made an appearance in an MTV reality series called "The Surreal Life: Villa of Secrets."

Truman Theodore Hanks

Truman is Tom's fourth child born on Dec. 26, 1995, in Los Angeles. A graduate of Stanford University, Truman has also pursued a career in the entertainment business.

He appeared as the younger version of his dad's character in "A Man Named Otto," a 2022 movie, produced by his mom, Wilson.

Earlier this year, Tom spoke about his experience working with his youngest child in the movie.