Sid Luft.

Producer Sid Luft, who is credited with reviving the career of his then-wife, Judy Garland in the 1950s, died Sept. 15 in Santa Monica, Calif., of an apparent heart attack. He was 89.

Luft, a onetime amateur boxer known for his penchant for gambling and in later years for his litigiousness over the Garland oeuvre, produced films including "Kilroy Was Here" (1947), "French Leave" (1948) and "A Star Is Born" (1954).

Luft and Garland were married in 1952 and divorced a tumultuous 13 years latex'. The marriage was Garland's third and Luft's second.

They had two children together, Lorna in 1952 and Joey in 1955. Luft also was stepfather to singer-actress Liza Minnelli, who Garland had with director Vincente Minnelli in 1946.

Luft was credited with helping resurrect Garland's career after she was released from her contract at MGM in 1950 following a series of personal and professional crises.

"A Star Is Born," produced by Luft and directed by George Cukor, brought Garland an Academy Award nomination for best actress. The oft-filmed story of a troubled movie star whose career is overshadowed by that of his protegee also got five other nominations.

Luft's marriage to Garland was marked by numerous separations. During their divorce hearing in 1965, Garland told a judge that tuft was an abusive husband.

"He struck me many times. He did a lot of drinking," Garland told Superior Court Judge Edward R. Brand. Garland died in 1969 from an accidental overdose of prescription pills.

In 1993, when tuft tried to auction off the 1939 best juvenile actress Oscar that Garland won for her performance in "The Wizard of Oz," the Academy of Motion Pictures Arts and Sciences sued and won. The Academy claimed it had the right to buy the Oscar--for $10. However, tuft claimed several years later that he didn't have the Oscar, saying he had given it to Lorna.

He also sparred with Lorna over her bio "Me and My Shadows" and over ownership of Garland's performance recordings.

Luft married Patti Hemingway in 1970. That union also ended in divorce.

He is survived by fourth wife, actress Camille Keaton, whom he married in 1993; son John tuft, whom he had with first wife Lynn Bari; daughter Lorna tuft; son Joey tuft; stepdaughter Minnelli; and two grandchildren.