Kleenex boxes are strategically placed throughout Imelda Marcos’s memento-filled high-rise condominium, in the Makati section of Manila. Some of them are covered with lace, some with ruffles; all are proffered by servants she summons with a small, handheld remote-control device. Imelda’s tears, like so many other things associated with the former First Lady of the Philippines, are excessive and infamous: during the twenty-one-year regime of her husband, Ferdinand Marcos, she wept as a matter of policy, whenever she felt slighted by United States officials or foreign heads of state. She wept in 1986, when the People’s Power revolution drove the Marcoses into exile in Hawaii, and she wept for the TV cameras later, during interviews about her husband’s failing health. Imelda’s tears were very much in evidence during her trial and acquittal on racketeering charges, in Manhattan, in 1990, and, again, upon her return to the Philippines the following year, when Corazón Aquino, then the President, refused her request to bring the extremely well-preserved body of her late husband with her. (He was transported home in 1993, and now lies displayed in a refrigerated glass case near his birthplace, in Ilocos Norte.)

It is no surprise, then, that Imelda is still weeping today, given that she is besieged by lawsuits and faces a prison term. Almost five hundred million dollars in assets sits frozen in a Manila bank, while local courts try to determine how much money her husband may have pocketed during his rule; estimates run as high as two, three, and sometimes even five billion dollars. Meanwhile, Imelda has been convicted of graft for a 1993 instance of leasing state property at a rate described as “grossly unfair to the government” and sentenced to twelve years in prison. In January, the Philippine Supreme Court refused to set aside the verdict, leaving her with few options.

Imelda’s response to these setbacks has been to become a candidate in the Philippines’ Presidential election, which will be held on May 11th. Running in a field of eleven candidates, she barely registers in the polls, yet she persists in making campaign appearances, at which she promises to share the Marcos wealth with the people. “Where do I go?” she asked the other day, her eyes welling. “It’s not a political election I’m in; it’s a moral and political crusade.”

If she was once known for her beauty and charm, and later for her ruthlessness, and still later for being the world’s most avid shopper, the singular characteristic of today’s Imelda is anxiety, which is displayed in a certain hesitancy in her seductive, singsong speech, a beseeching quality about the eyes, and a categorical refusal to dispense with prepared text. A visit to her luxury condo is a routine that has become familiar to reporters all over the world. There is a tour of art works that may or may not be authentic: Pissarro, Michelangelo, Picasso, Gauguin. This is often followed by an inspection of photographs that cover every horizontal surface in the sun-drenched living room, which offers a view of Manila Bay. The photographs show Imelda posed with leaders of the Free World, such as Lyndon Johnson, George Bush, and Ronald Reagan; Imelda posed with global villains, such as Saddam Hussein and Muammar Qaddafi; and Imelda posed with American heroes, such as Charles Lindbergh and Douglas MacArthur.

The viewings are frequently followed by a lecture. Sitting in a gilded chair, Imelda presses the beeper, and a servant appears with a sketchbook and a blue marker. She then proceeds to draw a map of the world with the Philippines at the center, which, she explains, proves that its location remains strategic in the face of Chinese expansionism. That presentation is often followed by another monologue, for which another servant brings another sketchbook and a pen. In an urgent whisper, Imelda sets forth her personal philosophy. “Here I am, orphaned at eight, and the mother I keep giving to people is the mother I lost,” she says, to explain her deep desire to rule the people of the Philippines once more. She draws circles within hearts within triangles, and stick figures within circles, and six-pointed stars, to explain what she calls “A Theology of a New Human Order” and “Seven Portals to Peace and Order.” Sometimes she reads from her privately published spiritual autobiography, “Circles of Life.” (The first two sentences: “Many things have been written about me and my life. Unfortunately, they have only scathed [sic] the surface.”)

The lectures are followed by old films that have been converted to videotape and are now inserted into a VCR by yet another servant. On a big-screen TV appear the words “The History of a Race,” followed by an extravaganza of Filipino pride which Imelda staged for the 1974 Miss Universe pageant, held in Manila’s Cultural Center. It features men in primitive costumes marching down a sunny boulevard in front of men bearing wheelbarrows full of food marching in front of men bearing what looks like Second World War semiautomatic weapons, all passing by a reviewing stand that is full of beauty queens and movie stars. An alternative showing can include a fuzzy film of Imelda’s first visit to China, in 1974, where she is greeted by a shuffling Chairman Mao and performs, to the accompaniment of a Chinese youth orchestra, her golden oldie, “Dahil Sa Iyo,” which was either a love song for her husband or a love song for her country, or both. (Chorus: “Because of you I attained happiness / I offer you my love / If it is true that you shall enslave me / All of this because of you.”)

Marcos’s physical appearance remains remarkably unchanged: her massive hair still tucked, rolled, and dyed an indisputable black; her spike heels still tinted to match her handbags; a lively printed scarf at her throat; a custom-made terno, the native dress with butterfly-winged sleeves that she wore so often it became a joke on “Saturday Night Live.” Her black bra still peeks out from her plunging neckline, and she maintains, as she has done for years, that her clear, unlined face indicates a purity of soul.

She also insists that she and her husband always did what was in the best interests of their beloved country. “Perception is real, truth is not,” she asserts, with the bracing cynicism of a pro. “I’m not fighting for money and possessions. I’m fighting for something more precious. I pray that as we enter the cyber age—the Age of Transparency—the facts and the truth will out.” In other words, Ferdinand Marcos will be proved to have been a benevolent leader, Imelda Marcos will be vindicated as a selfless champion of the destitute, and the world will cease to misstate the number of pairs of shoes she abandoned when she was forced to flee the country.

Something about the whole ritual seems vaguely familiar, yet it fails to evoke either Marie Antoinette or Eva Perón, the big-time bad girls with whom Imelda is very often compared. If she resembles anyone, it’s Norma Desmond, the aging film actress in “Sunset Boulevard,” who believed that she would cease to be if she failed to appear before the public. “She doesn’t know life in the private sector,” an American political consultant who has worked for the Marcoses said. “There is no private sector.”

The Filipino intelligentsia are contemptuous of Marcos’s international celebrity and weary of the protracted legal battles. They doubt that the lawsuits will ever completely recoup the supposed stolen billions. (Seven hundred million dollars has been recovered so far.) Many Filipinos have simply decided that Imelda is already getting the punishment she deserves. “She’s ignored,” the political analyst Alex Magno says. “Not being invited to cocktail parties is bad enough. Having to break into cocktail parties is a fate worse than death. I’ve seen her sitting in corners like a wallflower.”

The Philippines was a United States colony for close to fifty years and was its principal client state in the Far East for another forty. The United States-backed revolution that led to the election of Corazón Aquino in 1986 was supposed to bring prosperity and put an end to centuries of foreign domination, internal corruption, and calamitous poverty. That did not happen. Aquino’s government was so intent on eradicating all traces of the Marcoses that it accomplished little else, and it was the target of seven coup attempts.

Fidel V. Ramos, who was elected to a six-year term as President in 1992, had served both Marcos and Aquino. His Administration got a lucky break when panicky Hong Kong investors, anticipating reunification with China, shipped their fortunes off to Manila; this economic boost allowed Ramos to restore stability and fund a number of pro-growth programs that enticed multinational corporations to create local jobs. But now the Asian crisis has forced a devaluation of the peso, and a term-limit law prevents him from running again.

In the election that will take place next month, Filipinos who came of age under Marcos’s martial law and the Aquino revolution will be transferring power to a generation that has only vague memories of both. These younger voters don’t seem to care much about nation building. Serious issues of economic development and the country’s increasingly restless Muslim minority interest them less than the scandals involving the front-running candidate, Vice-President Joseph Estrada, a former movie star who has been linked in the press to local drug lords and implicated in several assassination attempts. (Estrada denies both allegations.)

The Philippines is currently rated one of the most polluted countries on the planet, and ranks third globally in cases of tuberculosis. Agricultural mismanagement has led to the importation of formerly native crops, like sugar and rice. Crime is rife in the Philippines, which Fortune last year named the kidnapping capital of Asia. And despite the reinstatement of civil liberties and a free press the country’s ruling oligarchy remains well entrenched. Marc Plattner, who is the co-director of the International Forum for Democratic Studies and an authority on democracies, observes, “If a country’s corrupt, that doesn’t mean it’s not a democracy—it’s a corrupt democracy.”

In fact, elections in the Philippines function something like a national welfare program. In a country where the minimum wage is five dollars a day, an undecided voter is one who has not yet received gifts of food or cash from a candidate. That is the main reason that the local media have largely ignored Imelda’s candidacy. She may or may not have the necessary funds to buy votes (“In 1981, they spent a billion dollars,” one person who is familiar with the Marcos regime has asserted, “and they were in power”), but she surely lacks the massive organization needed to distribute the payoffs.

Still, Imelda must be factored into the calculus of the election, because she commands a stubborn loyalty among the poorest of the poor. She could draw enough votes to hurt Estrada’s candidacy and help that of José de Venecia, Ramos’s candidate, or Alfredo Lim, the mayor of Manila, and many observers suspect that her real aim is to barter for her freedom, throwing her support to the candidate who promises her a pardon. That would be fine with many progressive Filipinos, who dread the prospect of Imelda going to prison. “If she goes to jail, that’s Hollywood all over again,” Alex Magno said. Most Filipinos would like to avoid any situation that sets off another round of international humiliation by drawing the attention of Imelda’s true constituency, the foreign press.

Luckily for Imelda, that constituency doesn’t care whether she’s a viable candidate or not, because she’s always good copy. When a film crew for the Australian production of “60 Minutes” was in Manila in March to cover the campaign, its members visited Marcos in her condominium, where many of them had been received before. (“Did she draw the pictures for you?” one member of the crew asked me afterward, his eyes twinkling.) For the occasion, Imelda changed from a print-interview ensemble—a pink dress with green shoes—into black slacks, a black silk blouse printed with enormous yellow flowers and cut just like all her dresses, and a pair of black patent-leather mules with transparent tops. In addition to earrings made of marble-size pearls, she put on a huge heart-shaped diamond ring.

“I’ve brought you a present from Australia!” exclaimed the interviewer, a handsome fellow who had been waiting downstairs while the crew set up, so that this meeting would appear spontaneous. He greeted Imelda with the hearty, indulgent manner of a war correspondent sent to cover a beauty pageant. As the cameras began to roll, a grinning producer opened a box and handed Imelda a pair of soft leather boots—the kind worn by hipsters in the Outback and on Madison Avenue.

Imelda smiled and put a hand over her mouth. “They know how deprived I am,” she said, and then summoned a servant to help her put on the boots. (Imelda’s shoes are no longer on display at the Malacañang Palace, where Aquino liked to keep them as a reminder of Imelda’s excesses. After the Ramoses had them removed to a local shoe museum, tourist visits to the palace plummeted—a fact that Imelda never fails to mention.)

“Hey! You’ve still got the shoe phone!” the interviewer exclaimed. “Can I call my son?” Imelda nodded, and he placed the call, making himself at home.

When Imelda talks to interviewers, she evinces both eagerness and helplessness, and often bursts into flustered, girlish giggles. She encourages the shoe jokes, perhaps to deflect attention from other questions, such as those concerning torture, human-rights abuses, financial corruption, and the assassination of Marcos’s chief political rival, Benigno Aquino, during the Marcoses’ reign. “The nice part of this shoe joke is that when they went to my closet they found shoes, not skeletons,” she told the “60 Minutes” reporter.

Several women friends were at the condo with Imelda, including Sol Vanzi, a longtime aide who handles Marcos’s international press contacts, and Ileana Maramág, who describes herself as Imelda’s “personal biographer.” Vanzi announced that she had won a contest at the Manila press club the night before by guessing how many pairs of Imelda’s shoes had been left behind at the Malacañang Palace.

“One thousand one hundred and seven,” one of the ladies said.

Vanzi beamed, pleased with herself. “Everybody else said three thousand.”

“They forgot to divide by two,” Imelda said, grinning. This was obviously an old joke.

Because of its status as an American colony, and the subsequent powerful military presence of the United States at Subic Bay and Clark Air Force base, the Philippines has been an outpost of American culture in the Far East for the past century. This remains true, even though, in 1992, the Philippine Senate refused to extend the United States’ lease, and the bases were closed. In Manila today, American light rock is ubiquitous, either in its original form or remixed by Filipino pop stars, and the only people more deeply revered than American movie stars are American businessmen—for instance, Bill Gates, who visited Manila in March.

As a child growing up in the province of Leyte, a beautiful group of islands southeast of Manila, Imelda once said, “I knew how to eat an apple before I knew the banana. I knew the American anthem instead of my own anthem.” Clans determine social status in the Philippines, and when Imelda later moved to Manila she made much of the fact that she was a Romualdez, one of the country’s most powerful families. What she did not say—until an unauthorized biography published in 1970 forced her to be more truthful about her life—was that her mother had made a loveless marriage and her father had squandered his portion of the family fortune. After her parents separated, Imelda spent a part of her childhood living in a ramshackle garage with her mother; her mother died, of pneumonia, in 1938, when Imelda was eight. Thereafter, Imelda lived with her father until she was old enough to move to Manila, where she lived in the care of wealthy and scornful relatives.

Steeped in American culture, Imelda learned to flirt by enticing chocolate from American G.I.s during the forties, and perfected her singing style on tunes like “Don’t Fence Me In.” Like many poor but pretty American girls, she realized that her looks could help her achieve upward mobility. She won a series of beauty contests, and then, in 1954, charmed a young congressman named Ferdinand Marcos, who was elected President of the Philippines in 1965. In the nineteen-sixties, with the war in Vietnam escalating, the United States was intent on consolidating its power base in Asia, and the Philippines was a valuable ally. The United States government and the American press alike were well disposed to the Filipino first lady, who, like her country, appeared to be beautiful and welcoming, foreign but at the same time familiar. In 1966, Life magazine declared, “With all the grace and style of Jackie and with an energy reminiscent of Eleanor Roosevelt, Mrs. Marcos appears to be everywhere at once.”

In those days, Imelda had begun lavishing vast amounts of money on grandiose building schemes and was already cataloguing her myriad shoes according to the colors of the rainbow. But Americans tended to view the lavish spending through a patriotic lens. Just as Imelda had struggled to deflect the snubs of her wealthier relatives, she now struggled, as the First Lady, to keep her country from looking third-rate. (A summit meeting between Lyndon Johnson and several Asian leaders in 1966 is remembered by Liz Carpenter, Lady Bird’s former press secretary, as being “the most glamorous party I ever went to in my life.” The Marcoses, she explained, “were trying to put the Philippines on the map.”)

Imelda was influenced by America’s cult of celebrity as well. On her first visit to New York, in the fifties, she wanted to visit the glamorous John Robert Powers school of modelling. Throughout her husband’s Presidency, she performed pop songs at state dinners and political rallies both at home and abroad, and she always travelled with a film crew. In the seventies and eighties, she officially joined the jet set, boogying at Hippopotamus with Andy Warhol and cultivating friendships with George Hamilton, Van Cliburn, and Brooke Shields. But particularly after martial law was declared, in 1972, and her husband began jailing his critics and muzzling the press, her public image began to tarnish. She became known as the Iron Butterfly, and it was not long before she was regarded as just another dictator’s wife, frittering away her nation’s patrimony. Her spending habits were ridiculed and her show-business pretensions mocked.

But Imelda was also a crafty businesswoman, who invested some of the Marcos millions in American real estate, often under assumed names or through shell corporations. Soon after she and her husband were persuaded to cede power and flee to Hawaii, she was indicted by United States authorities on racketeering charges for some of these real-estate deals. Her trial, in Manhattan, was mobbed by the media. Imelda had attained her own strange brand of celebrity.

One night after Imelda had made a campaign appearance at a rally of Charismatic Catholics, she gave me a tour of her public works. Manila’s awful traffic makes it nearly impossible to traverse the city during the day, so after midnight she and Ileana Maramág, a few other women, a bodyguard, and I piled into a frigid air-conditioned Mercedes van and were driven through the city by her driver. The darkness, I later realized, helped obscure the fact that some of the buildings, deserted and decaying, served as homes for squatters.

“This is the film center they have abandoned,” Imelda said glumly, as we pulled up to a massive building that she had hoped would become a gathering place for international stars.

“Built in seventy-seven days!” Maramág chimed in.

We drove past the Senate Building and the Convention Center, which was built at a cost of sixty-five million dollars in the late sixties, when most of the nation lived in abject poverty. “The beautiful landmarks in metro Manila are her projects,” Maramág explained. In coffee-table books displayed in her apartment, these buildings appear in vibrant color, filled with people bustling about. Now they served only as a reminder of her fall. “That was the museum where they pulled out all my beautiful Italian paintings, because they were not Filipino,” Imelda complained, with uncharacteristic peevishness, as we passed the National Museum.

As the van sped back to the condo, Imelda caught her breath and shuddered. “There used to be flowers here,” she said. Now there was only concrete, apparently because the road had been widened during the Aquino days. Cory, Imelda declared, had “absolutely no taste.”

More sanguine Filipinos are willing to give the Marcoses some credit—for raising the country’s profile abroad, for building a highway system that tied the country together, and for improving public education. But very few citizens are nostalgic enough to wish for Imelda’s return. Particularly in Ilocos Norte, people believe that Imelda’s excesses were her husband’s undoing. Even among the poor, the loyalty to Imelda has eroded. (“I believe she would share the Marcos wealth,” one haggard woman told me at a Marcos campaign rally. “If pigs could fly,” her husband retorted.)

It’s not hard to understand why the government finally allowed Imelda to return, in 1991: Aquino, then the President, wanted to put the former First Lady within reach of lawsuits seeking some restitution for the crimes of the Marcos regime, since under Filipino law no one can be tried in absentia. What is less easy to understand is why Imelda chose to return, rather than live in comfortable exile on the spoils of her husband’s reign. She made her first attempt at a political comeback in 1992, finishing fifth in a field of seven candidates for President. Then, in 1996, she successfully ran for Congress in her home province of Leyte, whose people are happy to let her hold office, perhaps because she has shown no interest in the minutiae of lawmaking. Yet Imelda, who is close to her children—two daughters and a son—and has the financial resources to live well, apparently views a life of obscurity as no life at all.

Still, there was no evidence, despite her claims of affection for the masses, that Imelda enjoyed campaigning. It seemed to exhaust rather than energize her. Whenever crowds began to press in on the street, calling out “Ma’am! Ma’am!” (it sounded to American ears as if they were calling for their mothers), Imelda recoiled in fright. She became especially flustered when someone managed to breach her security and recite a tale of woe. Turning frantically toward a servant, she wiggled her fingers for some cash, pressed it into the speaker’s palm, and rushed on.

One sunny Sunday a few weeks ago, I accompanied Imelda to a Mass that was held in the sprawling mansion that had once been Ferdinand Marcos’s family home. During the revolution, Marcos haters vandalized the place, taking the time to chip tiles, one by one, from the bathroom. But Imelda had restored the house, and this should have been a great day for her: the crowd was full of Marcos loyalists, many of whom had been trucked in from the provinces. When the Mass was over, they traipsed behind her through the house, calling her name, threatening to topple several pink porcelain geishas that were set on a dining-room table.

But Imelda didn’t really brighten until she offered a tour of the house to a film crew from Bryant Gumbel’s “Public Eye.” She led the crew through her bedroom and that of her late husband, declaring, “We always slept together.” (“How did you decide which room to go to?” the producer asked her. “Sometimes I would crawl to him, sometimes he would crawl to me,” she replied, an answer that was particularly noted by those who recalled that Marcos was a famous womanizer and the romance of the Marcos marriage was widely assumed to have been a fiction.)

The loyalists waited for her at the bottom of the stairs, then followed her out through the garden and across a tennis court to the door of what had been a disco for her children. “Private meeting, private meeting,” one of the servants told them. We went inside to wait for the crowd to thin. There were still mirrored balls hanging from the ceiling. A nurse proffered a pad and a blue pen, and Imelda began to explain her theory of Philippine prominence to the producer of “Public Eye.”

Finally, it was time to dash for the van. The air-conditioning had already been turned up to Imelda’s chilly specifications. She settled herself on the van’s plush mauve upholstery and offered only halfhearted waves to stragglers remaining near the driveway. At last, she sighed heavily and snapped the window shade shut. “Enough,” she said, and it almost sounded as though she meant it. ♦