A PERSON of courage in adversity and a woman of humility when she gained power.

That was how former President Corazon C. Aquino was as sister, friend, boss and mother. As they struggled to hold back their tears, family members, friends, former appointed officials and a security aide of Mrs. Aquino described the woman who had touched their lives.

At the necrological services held this afternoon at the Manila Cathedral where 20 persons closest to the former president spoke, Inspector Mel Mamaril, one of her security men, recounted the kindness with which he was treated. The speakers were picked on the basis of unanimous choice by the Aquino children.

Quezon City Mayor Feliciano Belmonte Jr., Manila Mayor Alfredo Lim, Makati Mayor Jejomar Binay, and former environment secretary Fulgencio Factoran Jr. acknowledged their debt of gratitude to Mrs. Aquino for their political careers that blossomed during her administration.

“What I have been, what I am now, I owe it to you,” Lim said, who was chief of the Manila police during Mrs. Aquino’s presidency.

Businessman Ramon del Rosario said, “She looked at the business community not as piggy bank for favors but as resources to be tapped for worthy projects, especially for the poor.” He said that he had always felt honored when Mrs. Aquino sought his help.

Even a former critic ending up admiring the former president. Conrado de Quiros, columnist for the Philippine Daily Inquirer, said, “Maybe it’s not bad to start out as enemies on grounds of principle but end as friends on the same grounds.”

Explaining that his political preference lay with the left whose symbolic color was red rather than with the so-called yellow crowd which identified with the Aquinos, De Quiros said, “Maybe colors are there to unite us rather than divide us….Maybe we’re divided only into good people and bad people.”

Sister-in-law Maur Aquino Lichauco recounted the bleak days when her brother Ninoy was ordered arrested by the martial law government and could not be located by his family. Mrs. Aquino received a bundle of his belongings, including his wedding ring, sending the chilling thought that her husband might have been executed already. When Ninoy was finally found in Laur, Nueva Ecija, Cory had to content herself with seeing him across one meter of barbed wire.

Lichauco, who was already a close friend of Cory even before the latter met Ninoy, also recounted the full-body search that Cory and other family members had to endure whenever they visited her brother. Beyond prison, the Aquinos would be treated as pariahs in social events.

“I have not known anyone who would accept such humiliation with grace. Little did I know it was a preparation by God. Like a knight, she was being prepared for a task that none of us would be equal to,” Lichauco said.

Mrs. Aquino’s brother, former congressman Jose Cojuangco Jr., admitted that he had suggested to her sister to seek a second term as president.

“I told her she has formed a good Cabinet and another six years would result in a better Philippines,” Cojuangco said. But Mrs. Aquino reportedly answered, “My role is to restore freedom and democracy and I’ve already done that. And when I’ve turned over the presidency, I would have completed my role.”

Cojuangco said it was his sister who said the family should not start any new business while she was president. He added that the Cojuangcos did not have an easy time during Mrs. Aquino’s presidency.

Speechwriter Teodoro Locsin Jr. said he joined the Aquino campaign and government because of a long-standing wish to get even with Marcos whose clampdown on media had broken the heart of his father. Teodoro Sr. owned the Philippine Free Press, a hard-hitting magazine that was closed down along with other newspapers and publications when Marcos declared martial law in 1972.

As a child, Locsin said he also was fond of stories of chivalry and imagined himself a knight.

But his desire for vengeance vanished as Mrs. Aquino’s victory drew near. Still, he continued to think of himself as a knight who, among all of the president’s advisers, loved her the most.

At the hospital where Mrs. Aquino lay, Locsin tearfully recalled that he imagined himself to be by the bedside of a dying sovereign and saying to her, “If you saw me as I felt myself to be, you’d fall in love with me.”

Marred by discord and faced with pressure from Mrs. Aquino’s enemies, the early years of the Aquino administration saw the resignation of the president’s key allies, including Locsin.

Mrs. Aquino’s son, Noynoy, indicated his struggle to come to terms with his mother’s death, saying he was torn between wallowing in sadness and continuing the life that his mother had begun. He recalled his meeting with former South African president Nelson Mandela who told him, “So, you are her son. You know how to choose a parent.”

Showing the dynamics between himself and his mother over political issues, the senator said he vehemently opposed his mother’s wish to go to Fort Bonifacio to support mutineers who were calling for President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo’s resignation.

Despite his objections, Mrs. Aquino told him, “Obligasyon ko ang pumunta doon para mapigilan ang pagdanak ng dugo. Tulungan mo na lang ako (It is my obligation to stop bloodshed. Just help me).” He said his mother was always ready to shed her own blood for the country no matter what the consequences.

In all those instances, Noynoy said, his mother was always right.