THE Ninoy and Cory Aquino Foundation awarded last week the Sandra Burton - Nieman Fellowship for Filipino Journalists to a Sun.Star editor.

Nini Cabaero, Sun.Star Network Exchange (Sunnex) editor-in-chief, received from Rafael C. Lopa last Thursday the certificate recognizing her as the fellowship recipient. Lopa is the foundation president and executive director.

The awarding came at the end of the Jaime V. Ongpin Journalism Seminar of the Center for Media Freedom and Responsibility (CMFR) held at the Asian Institute for Management Center in Makati city, Metro Manila.

FELLOW. Rafael C. Lopa, Ninoy and Cory Aquino Foundation president and executive director, awards Nini Cabaero, Sun.Star Network Exchange editor, a certificate recognizing her as the Sandra Burton – Nieman Fellow. The fellowship consists of a one-year study at Harvard University in the United States. The foundation supports the fellowship. (Contributed photo)

Cabaero heads the Sunnex, the new media department of the Cebu-based Sun.Star Publishing Inc. Her office manages the website at www.sunstar.com.ph and is in charge of the company's digital strategy. At Harvard, she will study about changing newsrooms and how communities can use new media to gain equal access to national resources.

The Nieman fellowship consists of a year-long study grant at Harvard University in the United States. The late Sandra Burton was the Time Asia correspondent who covered the Philippines extensively from August 23, 1983 when the late Senator Benigno Aquino Jr. was assassinated at the Manila International Airport until the restoration of democracy in 1986 and onward.

The Sandra Burton - Nieman Fellow is supported by the Ninoy and Cory Aquino Foundation. The process calls for applications and the selection is supervised by the CMFR.

Also awarded after the journalism seminar was investigative journalist Malou Mangahas, who is the 2013 recipient of the Marshall McLuhan fellowship.

Mangahas was chosen by a committee of senior journalists from this year's panel of journalists who discussed the topic "Reporting the 2013 Campaign and Elections."

Mangahas' selection as the 2013 McLuhan Fellow was announced immediately after the seminar by the Embassy of Canada in the Philippines.