Posted on by rence chan

Palm Drive, Glorietta 3 Activity Center, Makati City-Philippines

Glorietta Activity Center

The exhibit entitled “History and Her Story” commemorative photo , memorabilia’s, and film archive gives guests a rare glimpse into former president Corazon “Cory” Aquino’s life. This marks the 5th anniversary of her death anniversary on August 1, 2009 . There were a lot of activities all over Metro Manila , while PHLPOST issued a 4 piece stamps and 1 souvenir sheet flower paintings on scented papers last week.

Photos from her school years at the St. Scholastica’s College, to her marriage to the late Senator Benigno Aquino Jr. to the People Power EDSA revolution that changed her life, and in the process, Philippine history.

Saint Scholastica’s College- Ms. Corazon C. Aquino

This is quite rare moments of Cory Aquino, when she was studying at St. Scholastica’s College elementary days. This undated photo taken sometime before the second world war .

red dress

Attire worn by former president Corazon Aquino when she was awarded Time’s magazine in 2006 as one of the top 65 Asian heroes and heroines. Not known to many- Cory’s favorite color is not yellow but it was RED !

Website: http://content.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,1555183,00.html

The exhibit showcases photographs from Cory’s close-in photographer Mr. Val Rodriguez, and the collections from the Aquino Center and Museum, and the Ninoy and Cory Foundation.

flower paintings on stamps

It was August 3, 2014 when we went to the Phlpost and saw some employees from the Philatelic section doing last minute preparations . We thought that there will be some sort of stamp exhibit about the former President Corazon Aquino – There were several stamps , fist day covers from 1992 to the definitive issues of 1999 , Cory memorial stamps in 2009 and the latest scented stamp issues .

stamps and paintings ( replica ) on display

We thought the exhibit will show all of the stamps issued during President Corazon Aquino term of office but we got dismayed on how the presentation of the framed stamps were exhibited. We thought that it was because of the security inside the mall that the real paintings which were featured on the stamps was not exhibited . All of the stamps are in private collections.

L-R yellow dress worn by President Corazon C. Aquino during the 25th anniversary of ninoy aquino death in 2008, right yellow dress worn by cory which was depicted in the new generation Php 500 peso banknote issued by the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas and she also worn the dress during People Asia magazine pictorials.

People Asia launched its issue entitled “Five Years Later Remember Cory”, which features never before seen photographs of Cory prior to and during her presidency.

video of President Corazon Aquino joint US congress address

Along with the exhibit, President Aquino also led the unveiling of a photo of former President Cory, which is featured in the special issue of People Asia magazine for August 2014. The magazine is being sold for Php 200 at the secretariat.

People Asia Magazine

The exhibited was opened by President Benigno Simeon Aquino last August 4, 2014 monday and the exhibit will be until August 10, 2014. There is no entrance fees.

Filed under: Uncategorized | Tagged: Exhibit, Glorietta, History and Her Story, Makati City, President Corazon Aquino, St. Scholastica’s College |