ARIEL SHARON

In this Sunday May 16, 2004 file photo, Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon pauses during a news conference in his Jerusalem office regarding education reform. Sharon, the hard-charging Israeli general and prime minister who was admired and hated for his battlefield exploits and ambitions to reshape the Middle East, died Saturday, Jan. 11, 2014. The 85-year-old Sharon had been in a coma since a debilitating stroke eight years ago. (AP Photo/Oded Balilty, File)

Massachusetts U.S. Rep. Richard Neal, D-Springfield, is mourning the death of former Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon.

The 85-year-old Sharon died Saturday. He had been in a coma since a debilitating stroke eight years ago. His health has been declining in recent days and he suffered from failure of vital organs including his kidneys shortly before his death.

After a distinguished, and controversial, military career, he went into politics and held a number of Cabinet posts. He was elected prime minister in 2001, and despite his hardline views, led Israel's historic withdrawal from the Gaza Strip in 2005.

Neal says he is deeply saddened by Sharon's death, adding Israel has lost a tireless defender and the U.S. has lots a good friend.

"The State of Israeli has lost a tireless defender and the United States has lost a good friend. Ariel Sharon was one of the most important and influential figures in Israeli's modern history. As a soldier, general and prime minister, he dedicated his life to protecting the people of Israel from harm," Neal said in a statement. "No one could deny the fierce dedication he had for his country or his hope that Israel would have a more peaceful future. On this sad occasion, my thoughts are with the people of Israel, one of our closest allies, who today lost has lost one of its noteworthy leaders."

Neal says no one could deny the fierce dedication Sharon had for his country and hope for peace.

Sharon, who lived on a ranch in southern Israel, was widowed twice. His second wife was the sister of his first, who died in a car accident.

He is survived by two sons. A third died as a child in a firearms accident in 1967.