October 6, 2019 – The tradition continues. On Tuesday, the World Meteorological Organization announced the winners of the 2020 calendar election, and among them are three Croatian photographers!

Better yet, no other country is represented as much in the 14 final photos selected, HRTurizam and HRT report.

The 2020 calendar, which will be viewed on all continents, will include “Gone with the Bura” by photographer Aleksandar Gospić, taken in Razanac, “Two Rainbows” by Miroslav Novak, photographed in the. Pribislavec municipality in Medjimurje, and “Sunset Lenticular Clouds” by Danij Palčić, taken on Pag.

“Gone with the Bura”, Aleksandar Gospić

“We are delighted to present the winning photos for our 2020 calendar, which will celebrate the 70th anniversary of the World Meteorological Organization. Following the public voting on the 75 shortlisted photographs, a WMO jury of meteorologists and photographers selected 14 photos for the printed calendar (one per month, plus covers). The final selection was based on votes, photographic merit, meteorological interest and relevance to the theme of the 2020 World Meteorological Day, Climate and Water. The jury also took into account geographical and regional balance in accordance with WMO’s stature as a United Nations organization. The final selection was extremely difficult because of the outstanding quality of many of the 1,100 photographs which were submitted. For us at the WMO Secretariat, it is a privilege and source of pride to organize the photo competition. We say a huge thank you to all of those who shared their photographs with us. We will endeavour to feature as many of the 75 shortlisted photos as possible on our website and social media channels and we will always credit the photographer. We would also like to thank the thousands of people who voted for their favourite photos over on our Facebook page. With best regards from the WMO Communications and Public Affairs team,” reads the WMO Facebook page.

“Two Rainbows” by Miroslav Novak

It is interesting to note this is one of Croatia’s higher honors by WMO, that is, after four Croatian photographers found themselves among those selected for the 2018 calendar.

“Sunset Lenticular Clouds” by Danij Palčić

In any case, this is an excellent promotion for Croatia, as this calendar will be viewed around the world.

These three photographs, if the authors give their consent, will compete for the 2020 calendar of the Meteorological and hydrological service of Croatia (DHMZ).

Eight Croatian photographers were shortlisted for the World Meteorological Organization’s 2020 calendar.

To read more about lifestyle in Croatia, follow TCN’s dedicated page.

Subscribe to our newsletter

the fields marked with * are required