“The Good Half,” a comedic drama starring Nick Jonas, has been acquired by Utopia and will be released in theaters this summer.

Utopia, which was co-founded by “The Good Half” director Robert Schwartzman, is partnering with Fathom Events for preview screenings on July 23 and July 25 in 900 theaters in North America. Those showtimes will feature a virtual Q&A with Jonas and Schwartzman, moderated by “Mad Men” actor Kiernan Shipka. It’s unclear if “The Good Half” will get a traditional theatrical release at a later date.

“The Good Half” premiered last June at the Tribeca Festival, where it was seeking distribution. Though Schwartzman runs Utopia, representatives stress that he independently produced “The Good Half” before his own company acquired the film nearly a year later.

Jonas stars in the movie as Renn, a writer who travels home to Cleveland for his mother’s funeral. As he reunites with his family — Brittany Snow plays his high-strung sister, Matt Walsh portrays his well-meaning father and David Arquette is the step-dad — and meets new friends — including a love interest played by Alexandra Shipp, he’s forced to come to terms with his past. It’s a more dramatic role for the 30-year-old Jonas, one that’s far removed from the rockstar-next-door he played as a teenager in Disney Channel’s “Camp Rock” franchise.

“It’s a filmmaker’s dream to hit the big screen,” said Schwartzman. “Our partnership with Utopia and Fathom will allow us the chance to show ‘The Good Half’ nationwide with a very meaningful screen commitment. We’re honored for this opportunity and excited to get our campaign in motion this summer.”

In addition to his directing career, Schwartzman is known for “The Princess Diaries” and the band Rooney. He met Jonas when Rooney opened on tour for the Jonas Brothers in 2008. Schwartzman said he cast Jonas in “The Good Half” not because he’s a rock star but because he felt they’d work well together.

“Obviously, [Nick] is a very talented musician and has done incredible work as an actor,” Schwartzman told Variety last year. “But that initial vibe was there and the trust of being able to work with someone I could really collaborate with openly, who would be honest with me when I needed the honesty back.

Of “The Good Half,” Fathom CEO Ray Nutt says, “This film will resonate with so many families who have had to deal with the myriad of feelings that come along with the loss of a loved one. We’re happy to bring this first look at this film to theaters nationwide — and especially the conversation with Nick Jonas and Robert Schwartzman.”