MUSKEGON — Downtown nightspot Club Envy will be hosting hometown rocker Aron Robinson and his Chicago-based band, Deepfield, on Saturday.

Robinson, a drummer, grew up in Fruitport.

Adding to the local mix will be fill-in bassist Brandon Spytma of Orange October and Lansing’s Sean Van Tesch on guitar. They'll be led by frontman Baxter Teal III of South Carolina.

“We’ve traveled the country,” said Robinson. “There is no greater appreciation for local musicians than here in West Michigan. ... it’s great to have a band supported by it’s hometown.”

After graduating from Fruitport High School, Robinson, a drummer, moved to North Carolina where Deepfield originated. He said he was invited to join the band in 2008.

Deepfield, which signed with InDeGoot Records in 2006, will be releasing its second CD this summer.

IF YOU GO

• What: Deepfield in concert

• Opening bands: Deadwood Stone and 8th and Amsterdam

• When: Saturday, doors open at 6 p.m.

• Where: Club Envy, 441 W. Western

• Cost: 21 and older, $5; 18-20, $10.

• Information: clubenvymuskegon.com or deepfieldrock.com

The rock group has spent the past couple of years touring with Shinedown, Chevelle and Saving Abel, among others.

Thus far, it has released three popular singles — “Get It,” “Into the Flood” and “American Dream” — receiving extensive XM and Sirius radio play, including air time on “The Howard Stern Show.”

Teal, the lone remaining founding member of Deepfield, started playing guitar when he was 18, and “hasn’t looked back.

“Music has been my drug,” he said. “Fans have stuck with us and it means a lot. They still want to hear rock music!”

Opening for Deepfield on Saturday will be Grand Rapids' Deadwood Stone and Muskegon band 8th and Amsterdam.

Deepfield is looking forward to its Muskegon performance.

“I’ve paid my dues in this town,” said Robinson, veteran of the vibrant Thorazine Shuffle and other bands along the way. “It’s still responsive, I hope.”

If you miss Saturday's show, Deepfield will be playing with Deadwood Stone and others March 4 at The Intersection in Grand Rapids.