Deepfield acquired by Nokia

Ann Arbor-based company Deepfield's acquisition by Finnish company Nokia was announced yesterday, said founder and chief executive officer Dr. Craig Labovitz, and was celebrated by staff with a champagne toast at the office.

(Courtesy photo )

ANN ARBOR, MI - Communications giant Nokia's planned acquisition of Deepfield is prompting the Ann Arbor-based technology company to expand and bring in more employees, according to its chief executive officer.

Craig Labovitz is a founder and chief executive officer of Deepfield, a technology startup created in 2011 that provides integrated cloud, application and IP network insight in real time, according to its website.

The acquisition of Deepfield by Finnish company Nokia was announced Thursday, Dec. 15, he said, and was celebrated by the Deepfield staff with a champagne toast at the office.

"The Nokia acquisition gives us a global reach, with all the benefits of a global company with all that comes with that," Labovitz said. "This was a fantastic outcome for the technology and the team. We're even more excited about all we can do now."

According to a statement released by Nokia and Deepfield, the acquisition will "extend Nokia's leadership in real-time, analytics-driven network and service automation, providing customers including communications service providers, cable operators and cloud, webscale and large technology companies with greater network and application insight, control and DDoS protection."

The statement cited Deepfield's Genome technology as a problem solver for identifying popular cloud applications and services, tracking traffic, and providing multi-dimensional views of networks and applications.

"We are impressed with Deepfield's unique approach to network analytics and their deployments with major providers around the globe, delivering critical visibility into how leading cloud applications and services flow through their networks," said Basil Alwan, president of Nokia's IP/Optical Networks business group, in the statement.

The acquisition has been in the works for the better part of a year, and now means a push to hire additional engineers and expand Deepfield's presence in the technology world.

"We'll be hiring another 40 to 60 engineers over the next 12 to 18 months," Labovitz said.

That will almost double Deepfield's current employee base of 65 people, and also mean a search of expanded office space and a rewrite of the company's growth plan. The plan is to keep the main engineering office in Ann Arbor, and possibly expand with more office space at its current location at 111 N. Ashley St.

"We're really excited to keep the culture of the Ann Arbor office. We will continue to be an Ann Arbor-based company but now with a global company," Labovitz said.

Being able to leverage Deepfield's technology through global reach offers a significant advantage, Labovitz said.

"Today, Deepfield sells all over the world with customers in Europe, Latin America and throughout the United States," he said. "It takes a lot of sales, a lot of support, and a lot of other functions to support companies across the world."

He and co-founder Joe Eggleston, Deepfield's chief technology officer, started the business after leaving Arbor Networks in spring 2011.

Growth has always been a goal for Deepfield, which Labovitz said has doubled each year since 2012.

"This is a path that certainly allows us to continue that growth," Labovitz said.

He does not foresee any hurdles to the acquisition, which is expected to close in the first quarter of 2017 pending regulatory approvals.

"I think this is a great success story for Ann Arbor," Labovitz said.

Deepfield is starting the search for employees who want to join in on the success story. Its online Job Board already features a few postings for software engineers and tech engineers, and Labovitz said more will be added through the end of the year.

"We typically like folks with expertise in big data, cloud computing. Our primary need is for software engineers," Labovitz said.