Wipro’s first testing facility in the U.S., the Center will offer clients advanced 5G testing capabilities as well as mission-critical support

AUSTIN, Texas | BENGALURU, India – June 15, 2023 – Wipro Limited (NYSE: WIT, BSE: 507685, NSE: WIPRO), a leading technology services and consulting company, announced the opening of its new 5G-Def-i Innovation Center (“the Center”) in Austin, Texas, underscoring the company’s commitment to helping clients realize the benefits of 5G technology through safer, more sustainable, and compliant products and services.

The Center will leverage Wipro’s 5G Def-i platform and provide fully integrated offerings for 24X7 product qualification, compliance, pre-certification, and interoperability testing with industry accreditation. The state-of-the-art center will provide a controlled environment designed to simulate real-world conditions, allowing clients to optimize the performance of 5G networks and devices.

“Our new 5G Def-i Innovation Center will bring together world-class engineers and researchers, facilitating collaboration with partners and stakeholders to help realize the full potential of 5G,” said Lourdes Charles, Vice President, 5G Connectivity Services, Wipro Limited. “The comprehensive Innovation Center will bring clients a full suite of development and testing capabilities to help them manage risk and lower development costs while increasing speed to market.”

Wipro engineers and researchers will use the Center to certify the compliance of 5G smartphones, tablets, modules, and IoT endpoints with rigorous standards for network accessibility and data performance. Additionally, the Center will play a vital role in qualifying the performance of 5G mobile network infrastructure, ensuring optimal functionality and efficiency.

"Wipro and Palo Alto Networks together have long been trusted partners to global organizations, helping them stay secure as they transform their business,” said Anand Oswal, Senior Vice President, Palo Alto Networks. “Collaboration, and especially strategic partnerships, are essential to accelerating the adoption and impact of 5G technology and we look forward to joining forces with Wipro in paving the way toward a safer digital landscape. By leveraging our expertise with theirs, we will be able to develop cutting-edge solutions that cater to the evolving needs of our clients.”

The Innovation Center will focus on services such as collaboration, research and development, and incubation to help customers develop new products and services to drive growth and success. Interactive demos offered at the Center will provide a platform for understanding how 5G can help drive innovation, transform industries, open doors to new opportunities, and empower customers to exchange innovative ideas and joint solutions to accelerate 5G technology adoption.

About Wipro Limited

Wipro Limited (NYSE: WIT, BSE: 507685, NSE: WIPRO) is a leading technology services and consulting company focused on building innovative solutions that address clients’ most complex digital transformation needs. Leveraging our holistic portfolio of capabilities in consulting, design, engineering, and operations, we help clients realize their boldest ambitions and build future-ready, sustainable businesses. With over 250,000 employees and business partners across 66 countries, we deliver on the promise of helping our customers, colleagues, and communities thrive in an ever-changing world. For additional information, visit us at www.wipro.com.

Wipro Media Contact:

Laura Barnes

Wipro Limited

laura.barnes@wipro.com

Forward-Looking Statements

The forward-looking statements contained herein represent Wipro’s beliefs regarding future events, many of which are by their nature, inherently uncertain and outside Wipro’s control. Such statements include, but are not limited to, statements regarding Wipro’s growth prospects, its future financial operating results, and its plans, expectations and intentions. Wipro cautions readers that the forward-looking statements contained herein are subject to risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results anticipated by such statements. Such risks and uncertainties include, but are not limited to, risks and uncertainties regarding fluctuations in our earnings, revenue and profits, our ability to generate and manage growth, complete proposed corporate actions, intense competition in IT services, our ability to maintain our cost advantage, wage increases in India, our ability to attract and retain highly skilled professionals, time and cost overruns on fixed-price, fixed-time frame contracts, client concentration, restrictions on immigration, our ability to manage our international operations, reduced demand for technology in our key focus areas, disruptions in telecommunication networks, our ability to successfully complete and integrate potential acquisitions, liability for damages on our service contracts, the success of the companies in which we make strategic investments, withdrawal of fiscal governmental incentives, political instability, war, legal restrictions on raising capital or acquiring companies outside India, unauthorized use of our intellectual property and general economic conditions affecting our business and industry.