AUSTIN, Texas | NEW YORK | BANGALORE, India – May 19, 2022: Wipro Limited (NYSE: WIT, BSE: 507685, NSE: WIPRO), a leading global information technology, consulting, and business process services company, today announced the launch of its latest Innovation Studio in Austin, TX.

Situated in a brand new 40,000 sq. ft. Class-A office building in Austin’s premier technology and research park, Wipro’s Innovation Studio is designed to be a productive, state-of-the-art collaborative space of 36 huddle rooms, 12 conference rooms and 330 individual think spaces, energizing community spaces, and areas for focused collaboration.

The Innovation Studio will leverage Wipro’s deep reservoir of IPs, patents, and innovation DNA and will draw from a diverse portfolio of transformative technologies including artificial intelligence, 5G, mixed reality/metaverse, blockchain, tokenization, multi cloud & edge computing, crowdsourcing, and robotics in collaboration with leading technology partners to experiment new solutions and serve clients.

The Studio will provide a dynamic collaborative workplace environment with a harmonious balance of diverse work settings and amenity offerings. It will also create a fresh intake of new-age talent for hot tech skills thereby creating hundreds of new jobs locally and bringing investments from tech organizations starting from the first year itself.

Srini Pallia, CEO of Americas 1, Wipro Limited, said, “For decades, Wipro has been accelerating innovation throughout the global technology industry. With an objective to provide an innovation hub and think tank for partners and clients, our Innovation Studio will be the foundation to co-develop high quality technology solutions for advanced digital engineering, cyber security leveraging Java Full Stack, Cloud, Snowflake, and S/4HANA technologies, amongst others. The Studio will provide our clients a wide range of solutions, with a potential to unlock a world of possibilities for their business.”

About Wipro Limited

Wipro Limited (NYSE: WIT, BSE: 507685, NSE: WIPRO) is a leading global information technology, consulting, and business process services company. We harness the power of cognitive computing, hyper-automation, robotics, cloud, analytics and emerging technologies to help our clients adapt to the digital world and make them successful. A company recognized globally for its comprehensive portfolio of services, strong commitment to sustainability and good corporate citizenship, we have over 240,000 dedicated employees serving clients across six continents. Together, we discover ideas and connect the dots to build a better and a bold new future.

Media Contact:

Sandeep Deb Varman

Wipro Limited

sandeep.varman@wipro.com

Forward-Looking Statements

The forward-looking statements contained herein represent Wipro’s beliefs regarding future events, many of which are by their nature, inherently uncertain and outside Wipro’s control. Such statements include, but are not limited to, statements regarding Wipro’s growth prospects, its future financial operating results, and its plans, expectations and intentions. Wipro cautions readers that the forward-looking statements contained herein are subject to risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results anticipated by such statements. Such risks and uncertainties include, but are not limited to, risks and uncertainties regarding fluctuations in our earnings, revenue and profits, our ability to generate and manage growth, complete proposed corporate actions, intense competition in IT services, our ability to maintain our cost advantage, wage increases in India, our ability to attract and retain highly skilled professionals, time and cost overruns on fixed-price, fixed-time frame contracts, client concentration, restrictions on immigration, our ability to manage our international operations, reduced demand for technology in our key focus areas, disruptions in telecommunication networks, our ability to successfully complete and integrate potential acquisitions, liability for damages on our service contracts, the success of the companies in which we make strategic investments, withdrawal of fiscal governmental incentives, political instability, war, legal restrictions on raising capital or acquiring companies outside India, unauthorized use of our intellectual property and general economic conditions affecting our business and industry.