The centre will leverage Wipros 5G Def-i platform and provide integrated offerings for product qualification, compliance, pre-certification, and interoperability testing with industry accreditation.

Wipro opens new 5G Def-i Innovation Center in Texas

The company said that the center will offer clients advanced 5G testing capabilities as well as mission-critical support, and highlights the company’s commitment to helping clients realize ...

Wipro Opens New 5G Def-i Innovation Center in Austin, Texas

Wipro’s first testing facility in the U.S., the Center will offer clients advanced 5G testing capabilities as well as mission-critical support

Remarks of OSTP Director Arati Prabhakar at the 2023 AAAS Annual Meeting

“Achieving America’s Aspirations: Progress and the Work Ahead” As Prepared for Delivery in Washington, D.C. Thank you! It’s great to be here with you all today. I want to start our ...

Analysis of international competitive situation of key core technology in strategic emerging industries: New generation of information technology industry as an example

In the context of the current technological revolution and unprecedented major changes, countries are facing the situation of accelerating the development of key core technologies, which is ...

The Innovators Toolkit: Here are the world’s Best Innovation labs

In industry and technology sectors R&D is a crucial component of innovation and a key factor in developing pRoducts and Services.

Microsoft expands footprint in India with new engineering hub in NCR

The new centre will build on Microsoft's commitment to tap India's world-class engineering talent to create solutions for global impact.

SMEs and entrepreneurs futureproof their business with help of Cork research centre's innovative technology

Nimbus Research Centre is bringing its business partners to new heights, having spotted a gap where its work could not only enhance academic ...

CIO Leadership: Resilient Leadership in the Face of Economic Headwinds Will Power the Discussion at the 2023 New York CIO Summit of America on April 13

The concurrent Global Women in Technology Summit will explore the role of female tech leaders as enterprise change agents Join the World's Top CIOs Register to attend the upcoming 2023 New ...

Fortune Names UKG One of America’s Most Innovative Companies

Fortune has named UKG one of America’s Most Innovative Companies. Developed by Fortune and Statista, the inaugural list honors U.S.-based companies across all industries for excelling in ...

Aston University to take part in West Midlands Innovation Accelerator to spark growth and innovation

Aston University has been awarded funding for three projects to be delivered as part of the West Midlands Innovation Accelerator to bolster the region’s innovation and R&D capability and ...

5G Era

Find out how 5G will improve our lives by driving innovation in the connectivity industry.

AI Takes Center Stage In Tech Development, But Enterprises Still Require A Digital Foundation

How can technology leaders best leverage AI to benefit their companies and their customers? We've focused on a few areas that all technology leaders could benefit from.