Welcome to the settlement website for the Rentrak Corporation Shareholders Litigation (the “Action”).

The purpose of this website is to inform you of the proposed settlement (the “Settlement”) of the above-captioned consolidated class action lawsuit (the “Action”) and the hearing held by the Court (the “Fairness Hearing”) on September 12, 2017, at 9:00 a.m., where the Court:

Approved the Settlement of the Action for $19,000,000.00 in cash to be paid to the Class (defined in the Notice of Proposed Class Action Settlement [(the "Notice")]) as fair, reasonable, and adequate;

Entered a judgment dismissing with prejudice, extinguishing, or otherwise releasing the Actions and all Released Claims (as defined in the Notice);

Determined whether and in what amount the Court should award Class Counsel attorneys’ fees and reimburse Class Counsel for expenses from the Settlement Fund (as defined in the Notice); and

Considered such other matters as may have properly come before the Court.

The Court has certified a class consisting of all record and beneficial holders of Rentrak Corporation (“Rentrak”) common stock whose Rentrak shares were converted to comScore, Inc. (“comScore”) stock upon the closing of the merger between Rentrak and comScore on January 29, 2016, with the exception of Defendants and any person, firm, trust, corporation, or other entity related to or affiliated with any Defendant. The Court has preliminarily appointed plaintiffs Andrew B. Nathan, as Trustee for the Ira S. Nathan Revocable Trust, and John Hulme (collectively, “Plaintiffs”) as Class Representatives and Block & Leviton LLP and Andrews & Springer LLC (collectively, “Class Counsel”) as attorneys representing the Class, respectively, for the sole purpose of effectuating the proposed Settlement.

Although the information on this website is intended to assist you, it does not replace the information contained in the Notice of Proposed Class Action Settlement previously sent to Class Members on or around June 21, 2017. This and other case documents can be found and downloaded by clicking on the Documents tab above. We recommend that you read the Notice and other relevant case documents carefully and in their entirety as the Notice provides information about how to make a claim for payment from the Settlement Fund, object to the proposed Settlement, or request exclusion from the Class.

Moreover, the Notice contains only a summary of the terms of the proposed Settlement. The records in the Action may be examined and copied at any time during regular office hours, subject to customary copying fees, at the Clerk of the Circuit Court for the State of Oregon for the County of Multnomah, 1021 S.W. Fourth Ave, Portland, OR 97204. In addition, all of the Settlement documents, including the Stipulation, the Notice, the Proof of Claim form, and proposed Judgment, may be obtained by contacting the Claims Administrator by email at info@RentrakCorporationShareholdersLitigation.com, by phone at 1-888-737-9548, or by mail at the following address:

Rentrak Corporation Shareholders Litigation

Claims Administrator

P.O. Box 4234

Portland, OR 97208-4234

In addition, you may contact Jason M. Leviton or Joel Fleming of Block & Leviton LLP, 155 Federal Street, Suite 400, Boston, MA 02110, 617-398-5600, if you have any questions about the Action or the Settlement.

If you are a member of the Class, your legal rights are affected whether you act or do not act.