rentrak-office.jpg

Rentrak's headquarters near the Portland airport.

(Rentrak image)

Family night in front of the TV is giving way to YouTube, Netflix, streaming music and viral comedy.

And that transition is what's behind Tuesday's sale of Portland-based Rentrak, which monitors box-office results and online video viewership. The buyer is comScore, a Virginia company known for measuring online audience.

The all-stock deal brings together companies collectively valued at $2.3 billion before the deal, at the forefront of quantifying what people do online - and selling that information to advertisers. The share price in each company shot up on word of the transaction, inflating Rentrak's market value by 13 percent to nearly $750 million.

Rentrak and comScore

RENTRAK

Revenue

(fiscal 2015): $103 million, up from $76 million

Net loss

: $2.2 million

Employees

: 419 full time, 113 part-time

COMSCORE

Revenue

(2014): $329.2 million, up from $286.9 million

Net loss

: $9.9 million

Employees

: 1,300

"What we've done here is reflective of the American consumer, how they've changed their habits," Bill Livek, Rentrak's chief executive, told Wall Street analysts on a conference call Tuesday."The consumer is watching more TV, more ad-supported TV, than ever before. It just hasn't been measured properly."

Tuesday's deal gives comScore's shareholders two-thirds of the combined company, which will take comScore's name, retain that company's headquarters in Virginia and put comScore CEO Serge Matta in charge. Livek becomes the company's president.

The deal positions the combined company to compete with Nielsen, which dominates the market for TV ratings but has struggled to keep up with the shift to online viewership.

Rentrak's sale is the latest in a rapid series of deals for many of Oregon's best-known companies that began in July, fueled partly by low interest rates and large corporate cash balances.

The flurry of transactions has included deals for the state's second-largest company, Precision Castparts, and many other of the best-known names in Oregon business. The sheer number of big companies sold in such a short time may be unprecedented in state history.

Tuesday's combination, though, isn't a surprise: Rentrak had been considered a takeover target for more than two years, and advertising firm WPP had acquired a minority stake in each company this year, suggesting last month it would "welcome them coming together."

Investors welcomed the news, too. The deal sent comScore shares up 5 percent in after-hours trading. Rentrak, which had been trading near a 52-week low, jumped nearly 13 percent.

Rentrak history

Founded in 1977 as National Video, a national chain with 700 franchised retail video stores -- briefly the largest video chain in the U.S. The company held an initial public stock offering in 1986, sold its video stores in 1988 and changed its name to Rentrak in 1988, a year it nearly went bankrupt.

Bailed out by a pair of big investors, Rentrak became a videocassette distributor monitoring the popularity of its titles. Eventually that became its main business, and in the early 2003s big movie studios signed on to use Rentrak software to track box-office results. It ultimately evolved to monitor viewership levels for online video.

"This is a deal that has made a ton of sense for a long time and investors have asked about it historically," Bob Peck, an analyst with SunTrust, said on Tuesday's conference call. Other analysts, though, suggested the deal might undervalue Rentrak.

The companies said they expect to save $20 million next year as a result of their combination, and at least $35 million in 2017.

Rentrak started in 1977 as a video rental chain called National Video, which was once the nation's largest. It became a videocassette distributor that tracked the popularity of its titles, eventually making that its main business and ultimately adapting its focus to video on demand and online video.

Rentrak had revenue of $103 million last year, up $76 million from the prior year. It's roughly a third the size of comScore, and its 419 employees are also about one-third of comScore's total.

Dallas Mavericks owner and "Shark Tank" TV star Mark Cuban once held a 7 percent stake in the Portland company, but he sold his remaining interest in May.

-- Mike Rogoway