Cecilia Cheung (張栢芝) and Nicholas Tse’s (謝霆鋒) 6-year marriage has officially ended! The pair filed for divorce last summer after an inability to resolve marital differences. Since Cecilia and Nicholas still loved each other and have two sons, Lucas and Quintus, speculations continued that the pair would reconcile. Although Nicholas and Cecilia were still friends, the court had officially approved their divorce filing!

It was understood that Cecilia Cheung received the divorce papers on May 20th. Cecilia’s manager, Ms. Chow, confirmed that Cecilia and Nicholas were now officially divorced. Nicholas Tse was unable to be reached for comment on the matter.

Cecilia Cheung Heading to 65th Annual Cannes Film Festival

Yesterday was Cecilia Cheung’s 32nd birthday. She appeared at the Hong Kong airport, flying to France to attend the 65th Annual Cannes Film Festival. Cecilia will be in Cannes for approximately one week, promoting her new film Dangerous Liasions <危險關係>, which was a finalist competing in the Cannes’ Directors Fortnight category. The film also starred Jang Donggun and Zhang Ziyi (章子怡), who did not attend the film festival.

It was reported earlier that Cecilia was offered a role in a major Hollywood action movie, starring opposite either Nicholas Cage, Russell Crowe, or Hugh Jackman! Cecilia’s management company confirmed that negotiations were currently in progress.

At the Hong Kong airport last night, Cecilia appeared to be in a jovial mood. Normally curt with the media in the past, Cecilia was unexpectedly curteous, advising reporters to be careful in walking and not trip. With her career in the international spotlight and setting up her own production studio recently, Cecilia appeared to have a newfound level of maturity since separating from ex-husband, Nicholas Tse.

Nicholas Tse Continues CEO Track

Nicholas Tse was the successful CEO of Post Production Office Group, a post-production company generating $100 million HKD in annual revenue. Displaying an earnest passion for cooking recently, it was speculated that Nicholas may even open his own restaurant business.

Appearing at a guest presenter at a culinary event yesterday, Nicholas’ mother, Deborah Li (狄波拉), commented, “Attending this event tonight, I’m afraid everyone will think that Nicholas will be entering the dining industry!” Asked whether Nicholas was indeed interested to open his own restaurant, Deborah replied, “Although I support my son to open a restaurant, the rents in Hong Kong are too high! It is difficult to afford!”

Source: Apple Daily via ihktv.com, On.cc

Note: This article is written for JayneStars.com. DO NOT re-post this article on any other websites. No part of this article may be copied, reproduced, rearranged, redistributed, modified by any means or in any form whatsoever without prior written permission. You may use the content online and for your non-commercial, personal use only. Copying these materials for anything other than your personal use is a violation of copyright laws.

Should you wish to share this article, we recommend that you: (i) link directly to the article at JayneStars.com on your website; or (ii) share this article link via social media sites such as Facebook and Twitter.

Jayne: Wish that Cecilia and Nicholas could have worked things out in their marriage!