Nicholas Tse and Cecilia Cheung are rumoured to be separating after five years of marriage.

The cause was said to be related to none other than Edison Chen, the artiste with whom Cecilia was involved in the 2008 sex photo scandal.

It was reported that Nicholas was furious that his wife interacted with Edison when they coincidentally met on a flight to Beijing early this month.

He has reportedly sent a legal letter a few days ago to Cecilia demanding for a separation.

The couple, both 31, has two sons – Lucas, three, and Quintus, one.

This is not the first time their marriage is rumoured to be on the rocks.

When the sex photos of Cecilia and Edison were leaked to the media, Nicholas was said to be greatly affected by the issue.

But, he forgave his wife.

Senior entertainment reporter Cha Siu-yan, who has befriended many artistes, said the couple’s marriage was on the rocks even before the Hong kong Film Festival in April during which Nicholas won the Best Actor award.

But she said Nicholas did not send out a legal letter to ask for a separation.

"In fact, it was Cecelia who wanted to sell their current house and move into a rented unit with the children.

"The rental is over HK$100,000 (RM38,855) a month and Nicholas had paid upfront for a year," she said in a radio programme.

She said the couple had always argued over minor matters but Nicholas had been very patient.

"He transferred his money to Cecilia, set up a foundation and made her the sole beneficiary.

"Nicholas even gave his wife the house, worth over HK$40mil (RM15.5mil) he bought for his father.

"He will do everything for the sake of the children."

Cha also revealed that Cecilia had called her saying that she was worried Nicholas would dump her.

"Everyone is focusing on Cecilia now. She may bring the children to Malaysia and kneel in the public to beg for forgiveness from her husband.

"Insiders said it had happened before," said Cha, adding this is what the film crew in Malaysia is most worried about.

Another move to save the marriage would be Cecilia announcing her pregnancy.

"Probably in the next few days, a magazine will report the news on its front page. If she is pregnant, Nicholas will not split with her," said Cha.

The couple, however, could not be reached for comment.

Source: Agencies

Another photos leak incident, but this one is a happy one.

Nicholas Tse and Cecilia Cheung held a secret wedding back in 2006 and only a few guests attended; even their parents didn't know about it. Now several years later, their wedding photos are suddenly exposed to the public and they are circulating on the internet right now. Looking at the photos, the couple look very sweetly in love and in one of them, Cecilia appeared to be emotional after Nicholas proposed to her.

These photos were taken by a Filipino photographer and it's believed they got leaked after he posted them on his Facebook. Others said the photographer received permission from Nicholas to post. Cecilia's manager expressed will take actions after the photographer. Cecilia and Nichloas have yet comment.

It's known Nicholas planned his proposal and wedding for 2 months. He and Cecilia traveled to a small island in Philippines along with some good friends. On a sunny day at the beach, he suddenly got down on his knees and proposed to Cecilia. Cecilia was shocked but still said "yes" after 8 seconds.

http://news.xinhuanet.com/english2010/indepth/2011-05/31/c_13902647.htm

No divorce, but plenty of rows for "happy" couple

BEIJING, May 31 (Xinhuanet) -- Another episode in the bumpy marriage of Hong Kong heartthrobs Nicholas Tse and Cecilia Cheung was revealed yesterday when a radio announcer said the seemingly-happy couple had been involved in a long-running dispute over property.

Eileen Cha, a Hong Kong radio show host who claims to be a close friend of Tse's family, dismissed rumors that the couple had divorced but said their relationship was "rocky" after actress Cheung had her second baby and returned to the film industry while Tse concentrated on his career as a singer and actor.

Disputes, especially over money issues, had increased, Cha said, and the couple had frequent arguments.

She said Cheung had asked Tse to transfer ownership of all his properties, including a US$1 million villa Tse bought for his father, to her name. Cha said Tse had agreed but Cheung then asked Tse to sell his shares in a lucrative company that he owned.

"It seemed as though Cecilia wanted to drain Nicholas of all his assets and property - when I heard this news about Cecilia, I actually didn't really believe it myself," Cha said.

Rumors of a divorce began after reports that Cheung and Edison Chen sat together on a flight from Taiwan to Hong Kong on May 8.

Cheung was one of the women involved in a notorious photo scandal three years ago.

Cheung had been married to Tse for two years when the scandal broke after Chen indirectly caused intimate photos of Cheung and himself to be leaked onto the Internet in 2008.

Tabloid speculation that Cheung had reconciled with Chen was said to have upset Tse and had led him to demand a separation.

But Tse, who is shooting an action thriller in Malaysia, issued a statement yesterday saying he had never requested a separation.

Tse said he would take legal action against "false reports " in yesterday's Apple Daily, a Hong Kong newspaper.

Tse's agent said the actor was in good mood and would be back to Hong Kong by July.

Tse's father, Patrick, told reporters he didn't know anything about his son and daughter-in-law.

"Now everyone claims he knows an inside story. You can also write some inside stories if you like," he told a reporter in an interview with 163.com, a news website, yesterday.

Cheung was not available for comment.

The couple's marriage has weathered waves of gossip and controversy after the photo scandal.

Many praised Tse for his support for Cheung following the photo scandal.

The couple had two sons and often showed off their romance by behaving lovingly in public, winning the hearts of their many fans.

But according to Cha's radio program yesterday, this was merely a facade in the best interests of their children and their families.

(Source: Shanghai Daily)

thats right ...but most singapore man suka suka pamper their wife or gf for nothing ....must make them work hard to get pampered ..nothing in this world is free including love ...by the way king of the jungle happens to be a male lion ...

This is due mainly to women writing the script for perfect romance, perfect marriage and perfect man; and men with little marbles up there tend to follow the script as it it's gospel truth.

In the past, it was men who wrote the script and women then had to abide by the rules of the game. There has been a 'power shift' since, and women have now turned scriptwriter and director of romance and marriage.

Men hide behind the facade of words like 'fatherly', 'loving', 'tender' to masquerade their weakness in will and emotion. Women are smart and have created 'trophy-like' words like 'new sensitive man' and market such words as being desirable characteristics of a man. Sadly, majority of the male population fell for it.

thats right ...but most singapore man suka suka pamper their wife or gf for nothing ....must make them work hard to get pampered ..nothing in this world is free including love ...by the way king of the jungle happens to be a male lion ...

Singaporean men are one of the nicest and most tolerant in the world. The woman throw shit at them and make them pay for their own entertainment, they believe they are gentlemen. The woman demand everything and the men believe they are obliged to fulfill all of it. I learned how to be a MCP when I saw how my friend, a real nice guy, got ill-treated and cheated by a demanding bitch. Japanese and Korean MCP style may look bad on paper, but it works.