Rajkummar in a still from Shahid

New Delhi: The critically acclaimed Shahid scored two big wins at the National Film Awards - Best Director for Hansal Mehta and Best Actor for Rajkummar Rao. (Also read: Ship Of Theseus, Bhaag Milkha Bhaag win National Awards)

Rajkummar Rao, who just had a big hit in Queen, was applauded on Twitter by his Kai Po Che director Abhishek Kapoor: U Giant of an actor. Congrats on the national award. Very proud of you

Arbaaz Khan, producer of Rajkummar's next film, tweeted: Shooting with national award winning actor Rajkummar Rao on the sets of Dolly ki Doli. Celebrations on the set, arre kaam kaun karega :)Shahid producer Sunil Bohra told news agency ANI that it was "emotional moment" for the team and they were very happy.

Filmmaker Mahesh Bhatt posted: Mahesh Bhatt: Hansal Mehta (best director) and Rajkummar Rao (best actor) get the National Award for 'Shahid'. Mubarak!

Hansal Mehta said the award was an acknowledgment of the hard work and honesty that he has put in to make the biopic. "I am very overwhelmed and really happy after hearing this. It is an award for the entire team and it is the recognition to the fact that anything made with determination will succeed," the director told IANS."You don't make films to win National Award or anything, you make films to present a story and honestly that was an intention. These are all recognition of hard work and honesty that has been put while making the film," he added.

Shahid, based on the real life story of murdered lawyer-activist Shahid Azmi, was feted by critics when it released to unanimous acclaim last year. Rajkummar Rao's performance as the eponymous Shahid who appears for the accused in high profile terror cases like the 26/11 attacks in Mumbai was singled out as one of the finest in Indian cinema cinema and won the Filmfare Critics Award for Best Actor.

Entertainment I Read Latest News on NDTV Entertainment. Click NDTV Entertainment For The Latest In, bollywood , regional, hollywood, tv, web series, photos, videos and More.