Right-hand traffic is not as commonplace as many believe today. In former times, in Roman times, when there were still many horsemen and carriage drivers on the roads, left-hand traffic was indeed the rule in most regions of the world. The reason for this was the majority of right-handed people who preferred to mount their horse from the left. Even coachmen, who usually sat on the right side of the coach box so as not to endanger the people sitting behind them when lashing out with the whip, preferred the left side of the road for reasons of visibility.

It was only as a result of the French Revolution that traffic in France and later also in the European countries conquered by Napoleon was converted to right-hand traffic - and most of the countries stuck to it. Only Austria switched back to the old customary left-hand traffic for a limited period of time. By 1967, however, the whole of mainland Europe had moved to the right. Sweden was the last nation to adjust its direction of travel.

1. Can you drive a German car in left-hand traffic?

In principle, there are no legal restrictions. So if you own a left-hand drive car, you can also drive it in the UK or Ireland. However, if you want to live in the respective country for a longer period of time, you must at least re-register your left-hand-drive vehicle.

2. Can the rule "right before left" simply be changed to "left before right"?

No. In England, for example, the rule does not exist. There are clear signs or markings on the road at intersections that regulate the right of way. In Australia, on the other hand, the "right before left" priority rule applies despite left-hand traffic. Therefore, it is important to always be well informed before travelling.

3. Could it be that at some point Germany will also switch back to left-hand traffic?

This is not to be expected because the effort to convert the entire road traffic would be far too great. In addition, all other European countries would then have to change their direction of travel as well, because otherwise great chaos would ensue. And even so, the Germans seem to have rather little interest in left-hand traffic. This was evident when news circulated in April 2018 that the city of Hanover was going to start a model trial and shift traffic from the right-hand side to the left-hand side. The excitement was great - until the April Fool's joke was dismissed a little later.