Post by Action Reel on

Character Name:

Gravedigger

Nickname:

Epitome of Hardcore, Digger, GD, Gravey

Hometown:

Phoenix, Arizona

Height:

6'6"

Weight:

258 lbs.

Alignment:

Super Heel

In-Ring Style:

Hardcore / Brawler

Bio:

John Burroughs was a twin until the age of 14 when his sister, Jennifer, drowned in a swimming accident. Her death inspired his eventual wrestling name, Gravedigger. He has graced the rings of all the major federations and walked out with world titles, tag team titles, and hardcore titles added to his shelves. Gravedigger is the self-proclaimed Epitome of Hardcore. He is a Hall of Famer in WCF where he spent most of his career, including a stint for a few months as the company's owner.

Before becoming a co-owner of Action Wrestling, he was the owner of Penn State Wrestling Federation, a developmental fed for WCF. He has been a commentator in both WCF and UCI, another fed known to many in WCF and here in AW. For about five years, he was the owner of a popular nightclub in Phoenix called The Graveyard.

His final stint in WCF ended this past January at WCF's One pay-per-view. Gravedigger quietly retired from active competition, but not from the wrestling world. He shocked the world when it was announced that he was starting a new wrestling organization along with Torture called Action Wrestling.

Outside of the ring, Gravedigger is currently single, still licking his wounds from a bad breakup last year with his ex Juanita Juarez aka JJ. Gravedigger has been a member of the deadly street gang known as Mara Salvatrucha aka MS-13 since 2010. He joined after meeting JJ and her brother, Diagur, a leader in MS-13. MS-13 got involved countless times during Gravedigger's wrestling career since 2010 going so far as to leave opponents for dead, burning down homes, and even causing a dangerous riot at a wrestling show once that resulted in multiple deaths and dozens of injuries.

Gravedigger remained just a member for the longest time until last year when he made a quick power grab with the help of some dirty cops and rose to leadership status, taking over nearly the entire Southwest territories and parts of Mexico. It remains unknown if he still is a leader of MS-13 since Action Wrestling's birth.

During his time in MS-13, Gravedigger has been the subject of many investigations into a range of crimes from theft to armed robbery, destruction of property, assault with a deadly weapon, and murder.

Gravedigger has two brothers, Brian Burroughs and Chester Burroughs. Brian was in the business back in the 90s but suffered an injury that resulted in early retirement. Chester has been in the business since the late 90s and was a former tag team partner of Gravedigger's on many occasions.

Despite spending most of his career as a heel, Gravedigger is well-liked and well-respected by nearly everyone who has ever stepped in the ring with him as well as most fans.

Attire:

Wears black wrestling tights and a black t-shirt with a biker jacket over the shirt which has MS-13 markings all over it. He wrestles without the jacket. Close-cropped dark hair and a goatee.

Theme song:

"Change" by Deftones

Pic Base:

Shane Carwin

Signature move(s):

Grave Marker (clothesline from hell, his most widely used signature move)

Embalmer (Reverse Death Valley Driver)

Death From Above (frog splash)

Respecto (Rock Bottom)

Toluca Slam (running powerslam)

South of the Border (R-Truth’s Shut Up finisher)

Finisher(s):

Death Driver (places the opponent over his shoulder and drops to a sitting position causing their head to impact on the mat)

Gringo Stretcher (This is a modified Torture Rack)