GRAVEDIGGER

What is he that builds stronger than either the mason, the shipwright, or the carpenter?

— “Hamlet,” Act 5, Scene 1

With apologies to William Shakespeare and the Prince of Denmark, the answer to the Gravedigger's question at the DCU Center stage this weekend will be … Dennis Anderson.

Anderson is the man who created Grave Digger, which may be the world's best known monster truck, and the Advance Auto Parts Monster Jam will be at the DCU Center Friday, Saturday and Sunday.

“In the beginning when I was a kid there were no monster trucks,” Anderson reflected during a telephone interview, sounding pleasantly down-to-earth with a Southern accent (originally from Norfolk, Va., he now lives in Poplar Branch, N.C.).

However, this is the 30th year anniversary of Anderson's first Grave Digger, although it was put together in the days when there was also no Monster Jam.

Times change. Anderson noted that he now has 10 Grave Digger teams competing across the country. There will be several other Monster Jams nationwide this weekend, reflecting the popularity of the event.

But Anderson will be competing at the DCU Center, making his first visit to Worcester in what he reckoned to be about 20 years.

Monster trucks are about 12 feet tall and 12 feet wide and sit on 66-inch-tall tires and weigh a minimum of 10,000 pounds. Built for short, powerful bursts of speed, they are capable of reaching up to 100 mph and can fly up to 35 feet in the air over distances of 125 to 130 feet. They truck along a custom-designed track full of obstacles to soar over, or smash through.

“It's very entertaining (to watch), but it's competition for us. It's not like something that's rigged,” Anderson said. At weekly competitions that tour the country drivers can collect points in racing and freestyle categories. The top point-getters then battle it out at the world championships which this year will be March 23-24 in Las Vegas. Anderson was world freestyle champion in 2000 and world racing champion in 2004, 2006 and 2010. His two older sons now drive the circuit, and Adam Anderson was world freestyle champion in 2008.

“I have sacrificed a lot of family time (for Monster Jam),” Dennis Anderson said. “I thought my boys would say ‘Screw that, I'm gonna get a job in the post office.' But Adam's attitude changed a little bit, and lo and behold he was the youngest in the history of monster truck to conquer the world championship.”

Attitude seems to have a lot to do with the world of monster trucks.

Thirty years ago, Anderson, 51, said he was employed at a big farm operation while working on a 1951 Ford pickup truck in his off time. Truck racing, often impromptu, also took place on the side. One of the people Anderson worked for, “very arrogant and cocky,” had a truck “with all this shiny stuff on it.” Worse yet, he was rather disparaging about Anderson's vehicle. “We had a few choice words. He was down-talking me.”

Shakespeare would have called what happened next a challenge to a duel. Anderson and the owner of the shiny truck agreed to bring their vehicles to what was a muddy field on a rainy day. Anderson told him, “I'll dig your grave.”

The words have become the stuff of Shakespearean legend in the world of trucks. What the owner of the shiny truck did not know was that Anderson hadn't yet equipped his truck with some huge tires he had acquired. But the monster looking tires were on for the duel. The look in the man's eyes said it all. “Holy ….” Anderson recalled. The newly christened Grave Digger won the day.

“As time went on I was the hometown hero. I had the biggest, baddest truck.”

With that kind of attitude, he rode to success when professional monster truck circuits started to become popular.

This weekend at the DCU Center, Anderson and Grave Digger will have competition from trucks with names such as Maximum Destruction, Wolverine, Wrecking Crew, Stone Crusher, MOPAR Magic, and Aftershock.

So there's no resting on laurels.

“Yeah, I run it hard. People expect a lot out of me. My fans have always paid me. I thank them for every nut and bolt on my truck,” Anderson said.

He's done cartwheels in Grave Digger, and landed turned over. It can come at a price. For one thing the cost of a truck capable of seriously competing is now about $250,000. Anderson estimated that maintenance runs $8,000 to $15,000 every week he's in contests.

As for injuries, “Not really terribly bad. But I have been to the hospital a couple of times.” The last serious accident was in 2006, when Anderson said he broke a shoulder and some ribs. “Usually it's something stupid I did. Like I didn't have the safety harness on properly and didn't stop.”

Anderson said in 30 years he's had 2,500 crashes but just six major injuries. “That's a pretty good record.”

But that doesn't include “pretty good beatings inside the truck” almost every time out.

“It's a lot of pressure, not just for myself. Grave Digger is the most popular monster truck in the world,” he said.

All the world's become a stage. Or a truck stop.

“People expect you to ride, and ride hard. We've got a reputation to live up to. We want to thrill the fans.”

When: 7:30 p.m. Friday, 2 and 7:30 p.m. Saturday, and 2 p.m. Sunday Where: DCU Center, 50 Foster St., Worcester How Much: Adults, $27.75 & $22.75. Children (ages 2-12), $14.25 & $11.75. Limited Front Row: $55.75 (adults & children). Limited VIP: $40.75 (adults & children). Note: All ticket prices increase by $2 on the day of the show. Pit Party passes are $10 — limited number available. Tickets available at the Box Office, Ticketmaster outlets, by phone at (800) 745-3000 and online at ticketmaster.com.

Advance Auto Parts Monster Jam