It’s very common for theatrical events to form the basis for a film production. In fact, many films become theatrical events and vice versa, many theatrical events will become films. This sometimes occurs with operas as well as with operettas. But what is an operetta? If you’re new to theater, and opera, you might have never heard of the term operetta before. So what is an operetta and how is it different from an opera?

What is an Operetta?

An operetta is essentially a light opera in which the underlying tone is more on the humorous side than would be expected of a true opera.

Operettas use a mix of spoken dialogue and song to formulate a humorous or comic theatrical event in which the plots are often satirical in nature.

Operettas are essentially a mix between a musical and an opera. They fall somewhere in between the two.

For Example

The first operetta was produced by Jacques Offenbach. A French composer that would ultimately see that the operetta would become an international art form.

His works, including Orpheus in the Underworld, and several others would ultimately pave the way for others to begin introducing operettas into theater as a unique genre of its own.

Offenbach would produce more than 100 operettas in his time despite many years of his license not allowing for full stage, full length operettas.

How is an Operetta Different from an Opera?

An opera typically includes pure song, devoid of any dialogue although there might be narration. Likewise, an operetta includes a mix of dialogue and music.

Falling somewhere between a musical and an opera. The operetta uses spoken dialogue along with song to formulate a satirical, witty, and often far less complex show than what would be expected from an opera.

Operettas and musical theater have coexisted for most of the 20th century. Many musical theater versions of famous operettas have been staged prior to musicals actually becoming a genre of their own.

Examples of Operettas in Modern Culture

As we look at answering the question, “What is an operetta?” It’s most important to also consider what operettas have been exhibited in modern society. You might recall the operetta Oklahoma!?

This operetta examined true issues and real life situations through a mix of musical elements, singing, dancing and acting as well as dialogue.

Operettas became incredibly popular in New York during the very early turn of the 20th century around 1907. But the Great Depression would largely kill off the operetta and give rise to musicals as a new genre that would largely take over.

So while there are occasional operettas, and while some like to refer to some operas such as The Phantom of the Opera as an operetta, there are very few confirmed operettas produced in modern culture.