While Zelig (1983) remains writer-director Woody Allen’s most highly analytical and brilliantly funny film, Manhattan, which was co-written by Marshall Brickman, is his most romantic and appealing one, and is equally hilarious—the closest cinema has come to Astaire & Rogers post-1930s. Visually, it is a dream of the city, gorgeously photographed in black and white by Gordon Willis—but a dream into which Allen’s anxious psyche intrudes, as though Allen, in the persona of Isaac Davis, cannot help playing chicken with his dream. Isaac’s adolescent cynicism borders on defeatism, and Manhattan’s comedy and romance teeter on the brink of evaporation, which indeed they do, because of the Depression, in Fred & Ginger’s Swing Time (George Stevens, 1936). No sooner than a dreamy montage of wide-angle shots of the city opens the film than Woody/Isaac’s voiceover deflates what we see, suggesting his ambivalence; sure, this is the most beautiful city on Earth, but it is also a metaphor, Isaac tells us, for everything he finds degenerate. The images are bold and decisive, but we hear Isaac beginning his book (an expansion, he claims, of his story about his mother, “The Castrating Zionist”), scrapping what he has written, starting again, scrapping, restarting, etc., until we are not sure what Isaac feels about the city—or about himself. Manhattan ought to be locating Isaac, stabilizing his wobbly ego, but instead it has become a part of this as he projects upon it his self-doubts. Matters in his life reflect the self-uncertainty that his cynicism covers: Jill, his more recent ex-wife (Meryl Streep, terrific), left him for a woman and is now writing a book smearing their unfulfilling marriage; Tracy, his current girlfriend (Mariel Hemingway, sensitive and sublime—along with Allen, giving the best performance), is 17 (“She does homework!”)—Isaac is 42—and therefore cannot possibly, he says to her exquisite face, be really in love with him. But she is; Isaac, we can see for ourselves that she absolutely is. Isaac, open your eyes! Before you trample something fragile and wonderful!

Isaac sets himself up for another fall, breaking off with Tracy and settling in with Mary (Diane Keaton, coming damn close to sublimity) after this “high-strung” journalist guiltily breaks off with Yale (Michael Murphy), Isaac’s married best friend. But Mary, still in love with Yale, dumps Isaac for Yale, confirming Isaac’s cynical view of things. The Manhattan that Isaac loves is disappearing (some of it is literally being demolished); relationships are evanescent. Tracy must lose the quality of innocence—narcissistically, her teachableness for Isaac—and everything else also must change. How does one hold onto things when the world keeps turning? Well, one thing one can do is insist on one’s own moral authority. When Isaac jiminy-crickets him, Yale explodes, “You’re so self-righteous. You think you’re God!”—to which Isaac explains, “I’ve got to model myself on someone.”

Beneath all the wit and humor, there is that undertow of melancholy—just as there is in Swing Time, Follow the Fleet (Mark Sandrich, 1936) and Shall We Dance (Sandrich, 1937). As with the last of these Astaire-Rogers musical romances, all the music we hear in Manhattan is by Gershwin, beginning and closing with rousing chords from Rhapsody in Blue. Folks, when you start to hear “But Not for Me” on the soundtrack, head for the hankies.

Best Film prizes: BAFTA, César, Bodil, Italian film journalists, National Board of Review. Best Direction: National Society of Film Critics; New York film critics.