SHARI LEWIS:

WITH LAMB CHOP, SHE CREATED LASTING WONDERMENTS

A PUPPETEER, VENTRILOQUIST, ACTRESS, SINGER & MORE

PCC's Vintage Interview with the Legendary Children's Performer

By Paul Freeman [1990 Interview]

She charmed, entertained and inspired children and adults for nearly 50 years. Shari Lewis and her lovable puppet pal Lamb Chop created a magical world that helped young fans deal with real-life emotions and situations.

We had the pleasure of interviewing Ms. Lewis in 1990. A full-fledged star since 1960, she was finding a whole new legion of adoring fans on PBS at that time. Throughout her career, Lewis displayed remarkable talents, warmth and sensitivity.

Cancer took Lewis away from us in 1998, when she was just 65 and still a vibrant performer. But Shari, Lamb Chop and other puppet friends such as Charlie Horse, Hush Puppy and Wing Ding, made an indelible impression on generations of kids.

When Baby Boomers reminisce about the performers who entertained them in the good old days -- Pinky Lee and Howdy Doody, for instance -- their grandkids are apt to roll their eyes, exclaim, "No wonder they call it 'Doody,' and begin to question the validity of genetics.

There are a few children's performers, however, who appeal to multiple generations. Shari Lewis is a sparkling example. A puppeteer, ventriloquist, actress, producer, musician, recording artist, symphony orchestra conductor and author, she continues to captivate a wide range of ages, in a variety of media, as she has for decades.

Lewis began performing at the age of two and was featured on TV by the time she was 13. "My mother was the music coordinator of the New York City Board of Education," the vivacious Lewis told Pop Culture Classics. "My father was named 'Official Magician' of New York by Mayor LaGuardia. He did shows in schools all over the city, interesting kids, through magic, in other subjects like math and chemistry.

"So I came naturally to what I do. Maintaining a childlike quality is a family trait. My father was Peter Pan, the Magic Man."

Lewis remembers her first performance at London's famed Palladium Theatre. "Princess Anne, who was in her teens, ran up to me and said, 'How did you come to do what you do? It's so unusual for a girl.' I said, 'Well, my father was an entertainer and we always had magicians and puppeteers and ventriloquists around the house.' The princess took one breath and said, 'Yes, we do tend to get involved in our family business, don't we?'"

Lewis' first puppet was named Taffy Twinkle. "I dressed her in my Brownie uniform. My father would take me to a park bench every Wednesday to study with a 99-year-old black vaudevillian who taught me ventriloquism."

At 15, she was a ballerina. "I couldn't get out of the chorus, which was discouraging, because I didn't have a chorus psyche. So I said to my father, 'Where did you put that puppet?' It was under the bed. I took it out and focused on it and, there months later, won on 'Arthur Godfrey's Talent Scouts.'"

In 1956, Lewis was invited to appear as Mr. Greenjeans' niece on "Captain Kangaroo." She decided to introduce her newest character, Lamb Chop. "I was studying acting at the time. I took out this new puppet that I had never talked to and did a standard Stanislavski improvisation. She came to life freely and fully. If a puppet doesn't talk comfortably and naturally right from the start, I give it away."

Lamb Chop, adorable and mischievous, became an instant sensation and the energetic Lewis rose to the upper levels of stardom. "Lamb Chop represents a genuine facet of my personality," Lewis told us. "Everybody has a lot of different personalities within their system. I'm just luckier than most, because I'm able to give each of them a presence. I can be demure or hostile, smart or stupid, depending on whom I'm talking through."

"The Shari Lewis Show" was a hit Saturday morning series on NBC from 1960 to 1963, taking over the "Howdy Doody" time slot.

Incredibly versatile, Lewis is a gifted singer, dancer and actress. She recorded a number of LPs. She has appeared in films, legitimate plays and all sorts of TV shows, including game shows, variety programs, "The United States Steel Hour," "The Man From U.N.C.L.E," "The Banana Splits Adventure Hour," "Love American Style," "Car 54, Where Are You" and "The Nanny."

She is a prolific writer, having penned 50 children's books, as well as poetry, and even a classic episode of the original "Star Trek" series. She co-wrote the 1969 episode, titled "The Lights of Zetar," with second husband, book publisher Jeremy Tarcher.

But these days, Lewis is achieving new popularity through her PBS series, "Lamb Chop's Play-Along" and "The Charlie Horse Music Pizza." She has released numerous acclaimed videocassettes. The latest, "Don't Wake Your Mom," asks for a great degree of viewer participation. During vacation time, parents consider it a godsend.

"It's guaranteed to give Mom an extra 45 minutes of sleep," Lewis declared. "There are audience-participation stories, where every time you hear the word 'prince,' you do one thing and every time you hear the word 'horse,' you do another. There are audience-participation songs. In one song, the kids learn how to measure a minute. It's all fun and games, all constructive."

Among her other well-received videos are "101 Things for Kids to Do," "Lamb Chop's Sing-Along, Play-Along," "Lamb Chop in the Land of No Manners" and a Christmas concert. Lewis revealed her method for capturing and holding a child's attention: "You'e got to keep the kid involved. If children are doing, not just viewing, if they're part of the show, nothing could be more entertaining to them."

Parents will also find fun in these shows. Lewis said, "Hans Christian Andersen, when asked, 'Do you write for adults?' answered. 'I write for children, but I always remember that adults are listening.'"

Lewis' social conscience equals her creative drive. The mother of a 26-year-old daughter, she has been on the national boards of the Girl Scouts of the USA and Music Educators National Conference and is chairperson of the Board of Trustees of the International Reading Foundation.

She has no plans to slow down. "I don't analyze what I do or why I'm doing it. I make the commitment, because I derive so much pleasure from it. I love the feedback I get from kids and from their parents, many of whom were fans when they themselves were young. They give the feeling that I'm really doing something worthwhile."