Shari Rigby is an actress, director, producer, author and inspirational speaker. She is best known as one of the leading actresses in faith and family inspirational entertainment for her roles in Overcomer, October Baby, The Least of These, Not Today and Wildflower. Outspoken and passionate about her faith and family, Shari continues to thrive in the entertainment industry as a role model and mentor to women of all ages through her ministry, The Women In My World. Shari and her husband, Matt, have been married for twenty-three years and have been blessed to raise two boys together.

She is the founder of “The Women In My World,” a women’s group focusing on identity, purpose, ministry, serving others and living life in Hollywood. Shari speaks on these topics and has spoken to over 70,000 people and counting. Shari’s passion is serving others by creating and sharing powerful stories of individuals overcoming the odds.

Here’s what we talk about:

Finding your purpose in life

Inspiring women to thrive

Women’s ministry

Christianity in Hollywood

Shari, a former model who represented numerous companies such as Mercedes Benz, Humira, American West Airlines, Suzuki, Blue Cross/Blue Shield and Cox Cable, got her start in acting as a lead in the Dove award winning music video, “Slow Fade,” by Casting Crowns.

She also appeared in The Young and the Restless and The Bold and the Beautiful. Her feature films include Not Today which received seven awards including an IFFF Spirit Award and Best Justice Film, October Baby named one of the “Top 15 Impressive Box Office Performances of 2012” by CNN, and leading roles in the upcoming films Boonville Redemption (starring Diane Ladd, Ed Asner), Wildflower (starring Cody Longo and Nathalia Ramos), The Journalist (starring Sharman Joshi and Stephen Baldwin), Extraordinary (starring Karen Abercrombie, Leland Klassen and Lindsley Register), and Overcomer (starring Alex Kendrick, Priscilla Shirer and Aryn Wright Thompson).

Shari co-wrote her biography, Beautifully Flawed, with Claire Yorita Lee, which was published in Feb. 2015, and the screenplay has been completed. Recently, Shari has completed a new 7 day devotional titled, Pursue The Passion, for the re-release of The Passion Of The Christ.

Shari’s directing debut was for her book trailer for Beautifully Flawed, which she co-wrote and produced. This short film launched Shari into writing and directing several pieces such as, Birdie’s Song, a short film nominated for 8 awards at the 168 Film Festival. Lassies for the Salvation Army, The Church That Never Sleeps for the Dream Center, and Pursue The Passion short video for FOX/ICON just to name a few. Shari is currently the Executive Producer, Writer and Director for the Dream Center television show currently airing on Daystar and has recently been made the Director of Broadcast Media for the Dream Center. Shari continues writing on her book series, 3M’s – Mother, Mother-in-Law and Me and Ladies Don’t Smoke, all part of theBeautifully Flawed brand. Shari’s passion is about tell stories that move, inspire and move people into action.

LISTEN ON ITUNES

Related Links: