Reviews

Moolah Beach (2001)

Moolah Beach is not like Survivor!

1 October 2001 - 2 out of 2 users found this review helpful.

Some would say Moolah Beach is like Survivor but it really isn't. This show is a pleasure to watch because it is different. It kind of reminds me of those good Nickelodeon game shows that are now gone. With most of television so boring Moolah is a huge plus. It airs on Fox Family Channel which is home to Mall Star Countdown which also gets high marks in my opinion. If you haven't been watching the show start watching it or record it. In fact I'll let you find out how good it is. I won't be describing the show here. Like "The Amazing Race" on CBS which is struggling in the ratings probably because it airs after the frozen 60 Minutes 2. Moolah Beach gets high marks!

See more▼See less▲

Kristin (2001)

Sometimes the best shows air during the Summer!

5 June 2001 - 5 out of 12 users found this review helpful.

I was very impressed with Kristin. It was a show that could hope make NBC a better network. With a lot of 30 minute shows boring this one made sense. Forget Frasier this show belongs on the list. You want tv to be different and interesting. One thing that needs to go is a serious reduction in Dateline which I find is useless. In short give Kristin snatched an 83/100 and it is a small little wonder. Here's to the Summer!

See more▼See less▲

First Years (2001)

NBC scores a win on "First Years"

20 March 2001 - 3 out of 7 users found this review helpful.

I saw the first minutes of the NBC show "First Years" on 3/19/MMI and I was like finally the peacock station has a drama that works. In fact this is only the second new drama that I have seen that I actually like on the network. If you haven't noticed there have been changes at NBC. Mainly an alliance through their NBC Studios branch that produces DAG/The Fighting Fitzgeralds/Three Sisters/Will and Grace and now the new show I like "First Years" One of the girls is talking about "panties" ok now we know that the person who wrote the episode is a girl so she is trying to show us from a female point of view. First Years is about the people my age a little older working in the law firm but finally this is a show made for the YA group[Young Adults] Watching this show was like talking about how good it is because it drifts like the WB Network's hot handed Felicity. If you don't like First Years it would tell me you don't appreciate tv that is better and more interesting. If NBC works with this show it will be around for at least 7 years. You heard me it is that good. You even felt the characters were talking about "underwear" but maybe they were in diapers and kept it out of the public's vision. But this show will tell it like it is. If something is lame it will explain why things are the way they are. I loved this show so much I'm renewing it for more episodes it is that good. I hope you like it. Hopefully it stays and not the lower quality of Dateline we all know that needs to walk the plank.

See more▼See less▲

In a Heartbeat (2000)

A charming little show!

19 November 2000 - 5 out of 5 users found this review helpful.

So you have The Disney Channel with a lot of their shows that lack something. Well In a Heartbeat is not that way it has a charm to it. This is a show about substance and quality. This is a show that could wind up on the WB Network it is that good. Now Shawn Ashmore spent time on the Nickelodeon show Animorphs which was a good offering that didn't last at Nick. All I can say is give In a heartbeat a chance with the sugar speckled theme song to the way it travels with the characters you'll see why this show is worth your time and mine.

See more▼See less▲

Boston Public (2000)

Boston Public works for Fox!

23 October 2000

Here we go again David E Kelley comes with a show that yes is in conjunction with 20th Century Fox wow are they everywhere! But Boston Public works on many different levels. If you remember the other show Get Real they tried with the school thing and it suffered. Boston Public goes the distance explaining the school atmosphere if it be emotions dipped in sugar or the line drawn with the students. What is the scene with a kid wearing a diaper if that wasn't interesting. You have to love the show and for it to score a 91/100 with me for the first episode. Add Ally Mc. Beal/ The X Files/ The Street/ and Dark Angel and Fox looks good if another network you like gets into repeat trouble with their shows. As I will say this show is worth your time if it be on tape or watching it while it airs. Boston Public is produced by David E Kelley productions in association with 20th Century Fox.

See more▼See less▲

Welcome to New York (2000)

Welcome to New York a different direction and it works!

12 October 2000 - 1 out of 8 users found this review helpful.

You have to love Studios Usa one of the major studios that says we won't be like 20th Century Fox and make almost every show you can think of for the network's. Welcome to New York worked for me for the intro perspective of Gaffigan and Christine. The other stars worked in their limited roles. But it really didn't give away the sugar induced details that will make you return for me. Unlike Bette that seemed hyped this show stuns you because it is different. Studios Usa made Brother's Keeper which I really loved hopefully this show hangs around. Now if the studio sticks behind this show it will work. Remember if the show doesn't work it is the studio. Welcome to New York scored an 88/100 for its first try as it surged 23 notches ahead of Bette.

See more▼See less▲

M.Y.O.B. (2000)

The Summer Season can be interesting and this show scored for me!

6 June 2000 - 4 out of 26 users found this review helpful.

What can you say Summer is low television quality I don't think so. Survivor scored for me last week but Mind your own business did as well picking up a 90/100 also this show is from NBC Studios the same production company that makes Will and Grace another show that is very entertaining and sugar dipped.