Shari Rigby

Director/Writer/Actress/Producer

Shari Rigby began her career starring in films like OVERCOMER, EXTRAORDINARY, WILDFLOWER, OCTOBER BABY, NOT TODAY, and many more. Moving to the back of the camera, she most recently directed Great American Pure Flix, DIVINE INFLUENCER, winner of the prestigious Epiphany MovieGuide Award as well as an ICVM Gold Crown Award, and IDENTITY CRISIS, a scripted feature streaming on Amazon. Shari worked as a development consultant for Affirm Sony Pure Flix. She was an associate producer on the Kendrick Brothers/Affirm Sony’s feature film, THE FORGE, releasing in 2024. Shari directed, wrote, and produced the pilot Beautifully Flawed and The Dream Center television series. She is a three time author and is the founder of The Women in My World, a non-profit serving women in entertainment and media.

Claire Yorita Lee

Writer/Producer

Claire Yorita Lee is a former recipient of both the ABC/Disney and FOX Writing Fellowships, and has worked on a number of TV shows and pilots for ABC, FOX, NBC, Paramount, Disney, Warner Bros. and more. An award-winning writer, she wrote and produced an episode of PBS’ Independent Lens, funded by an ITVS grant, co-wrote the book, Beautifully Flawed, produced/wrote 20 episodes for the TV series Dream Center, and co-wrote the online devotional for the re-release of FOX's The Passion of the Christ. Claire has written two features for Hallmark, as well as animated scripts for Disney, Hasbro, Discovery Family, Sesame Workshop, and HBO Max. She currently is writing on the second season of the animated series, Jade Armor, and has Divine Influencer, winner of the prestigious Epiphany MovieGuide Award and ICVM’s Gold Crown Award on Great American Pure Flix. Claire lives in LA with her husband and 3 kids.

Micah Lynn Hanson

Actress/Producer

Micah Lynn Hanson began acting at the age of 16 in a small children's theater in her hometown of Coeur d’Alene, ID. She immediately fell in love with performing and she hasn’t looked back since. God has truly guided each of her steps in this crazy industry and she has had the the privilege to not only play on the stage—Belle in Disney’s “Beauty and the Beast” and Wednesday Addams in “The Addams Family The Musical” being two of her favorite theater credits—but also hone her film acting skills working on projects like “A Match Made At Christmas”, “Divine Influencer“, CMT’s NASHVILLE, as well as getting to work with the Kendrick Brothers on their films “OVERCOMER” and “Like Arrows”. Micah currently resides in the Atlanta, GA area learning from and working alongside, Shari Rigby and her non-profit ministry, The Women In My World.

Katie Kenny Phillips

Writer/Editor/Children’s Author/Screenwriter

Katie Kenny Phillips is an accomplished children's author, with her most recent title, "Today I Feel Like a Jelly Donut" by Harvest House Publishers releasing in 2023. Katie also served as Senior Writer and Editor for best-selling author Shaunti Feldhahn and collaborated on Shaunti’s successful Find Series devotionals and journals. Katie is a screenwriter as well as the leader of a creative mastermind group for women of faith in the entertainment industry. Katie works alongside Shari Rigby to help advance the mission and ministry of The Women In My World. She lives in Atlanta with her husband and 5 kids.