Shari Leid’s Post

Attorney, Writer, National Speaker, Friendship Expert - Owner at An Imperfectly Perfect Life® As seen on The Today Show, ABC, CBS, FOX, NBC, CTV, Pure Wow, Real Simple, Shondaland, HuffPost, Woman's World, TIME, AARP

2mo Edited

Award winning journalist May Lee https://lnkd.in/g4igSGAa Actress Kelly Hu https://lnkd.in/gtAqvxFS Actress Tamlyn Tomita https://lnkd.in/gZW-WbZj And me! Episode link: https://lnkd.in/gzRnDCFV Posted @withregram • @mayleeshow NEW “SHOES OFF INSIDE” EPISODE ALERT!! Would you be willing to travel on your own dime to all 50 U.S. states and sit down with a total stranger over a meal? Well that’s exactly what Shari Leid @an_imperfectly_perfect_life, former attorney turned life coach, did and she lived to tell the many tales. Her purpose was to find connection and common ground in our growingly divided country. All of her connections were women of all ages, backgrounds and experiences. Through this journey, Shari not only discovered the beauty of pushing beyond fear and stereotypes, but as a Korean adoptee, she experienced her own unexpected epiphany. Her story is one of courage, adventure, patience and, ulimately, self-love. Click bio ☝️☝️to watch full episode or listen wherever you get your podcasts. Show Notes: https://lnkd.in/gkHMMZ5n https://lnkd.in/gx4z9cCT Link to purchase slippers in bio ☝️☝️ @kellyhu @thetamlyntomita @shoesoffinsidemkt

Like Comment

Transcript

So let let's ask you specifically, you know, what are some of the most memorable people or experiences that you had along the way? Because I know that you made an effort to really get a cross section of people from all over the country. And like you said, sometimes you want to really small towns where I'm sure you probably felt a little nervous about even being there as an Asian woman. Yes. So I, the interesting thing is my only criteria was that these women communicate well with me because I booked all of that. So 2022, I had this idea for travel in 2023, got on top of it, had everyone booked at least my initial group, 50 women in like a couple of months. So it was a long time, especially for the women I was traveling to meet later on in the project, a lot of months we're passing some of my only criteria was that they communicate well with me. So it wasn't a certain demographic. I was looking at, it happened to turn out that way. But yes, I was nervous initially. I was very nervous to travel to the South because I had, you know, growing up in Seattle, I had ideas of how I would or would not be accepted in the South. Yeah, I actually felt very accepted in the South and it was granted. It's just me traveling, so I'm not, I'm 5 foot two. I'm not this offensive person coming into your town, but people are afraid of. So I met, I met some of the best people in the South and I found out when they ask you questions like how are you? They actually want to talk to you about it. I really would like to encourage people to go into these conversations with curiosity because. We become stronger when we hear what other Even if we don't agree, we can become stronger understanding why people believe the way they believe. It's Yeah, it's not. You said something very important. You said we should go into these conversations. What's happening is that we're not even having the conversations. We refuse to have the conversations with anybody who has a very differing opinion. And that's why there's no connection happening or or even level of understanding. Like you're saying, you know, you didn't agree with them maybe on certain positions, but at least you were having a civilized conversation with them, right? That's right. And that was the bigger part of this project for me too. With that, through COVID, we, we developed our, our physical bubbles, who we felt safe with. And we also through everything that's gone on in our country, we developed our emotional bubbles and our, you know, our mental health bubbles. So that we start to look at one another saying, OK, this person, because of the way they look, they must believe this. They, you know, I can't be friends with them. I can't even talk to them. And I think our whole country hurts at that point when, when we stop talking. One another, not necessarily that we have to believe and, and, and buy off on what we're, you know, we're saying, but we have to we have to listen and we we can do so with a level of respect that we have lost.

To view or add a comment, sign in