Stacey Dash was seen for the first time since announcing her split with fourth husband Jeffrey Marty.

The 53-year-old actress was seen on a solo walk in Los Angeles on Sunday weeks after ending her relationship with her spouse of two years.

Back on April 30, Dash addressed her 157K followers on Instagram as she made the announcement that she was moving on from her fourth legal partner.

'My husband and I have made the hard decision of ending our marriage. After much prayer, I feel this is the right path for both of us,' she wrote.

She added: 'I wish him nothing but the best. Thank you everyone for your support and respecting our privacy during this difficult time'.

The Clueless star and lawyer Marty married in April 2018 in Florida reportedly just 10 days after they first met.

Dash was arrested for investigation of domestic battery in September in Florida.

Body camera footage of her arrest showed Dash handcuffed while being placed in the back of a squad car.

Dash had called police to her Florida home claiming that her husband had placed her in a chokehold.

She was arrested for investigation of domestic battery after Pasco County Sheriff's Office deputies who arrived on the scene observed that Marty had red scratch marks on his left arm.

Dash was bailed out of jail by her husband and prosecutors in Florida dropped their domestic battery case against her in October.

On her most recent outing, Dash looked relaxed as she sported a baggy hoodie featuring grey camouflage all over it with the US Army logo on it as it instead said 'God's Army Jesus Strong.'

She completed the look with a pair of clinging black leggings with matching Nike Pegasus 35 running shoes.

Stacey tucked her locks under a trucker cap as she went make-up free.

The New York City native rose to fame portraying Dionne Marie Davenport in the 1995 film Clueless starring Alicia Silverstone, 43.

Dash was previously married to Brian Lovell, James Maby and Emmanuel Xuereb.

She has a 16-year-old daughter Lola with Lovell and 28-year-old son Austin Williams from a previous relationship with singer Christopher Williams, 52.

Dash also played Dionne in the TV series Clueless from 1996 to 1999.

She was a contributor on Fox News from 2014 to 2016.