Emmanuel Xuereb is an actor and the former husband of Clueless actress Stacey Lauretta Dash. Emmanuel’s ex-wife Stacey Dash has appeared in the films Moving, Mo’ Money, Renaissance Man, and View from the Top. She has also appeared in music videos for Carl Thomas’ “Emotional” and Kanye West’s “All Falls Down”.

Emmanuel Xuereb: Bio Summary

Emmanuel Xuereb was born on November 17, 1965, in New York, New York, USA. He will be celebrating his 58th birthday in 2023, on November 17. His parents’ identity hasn’t been disclosed. He is the twin brother of actor Salvator Xuereb. He attended New York University.

Emmanuel Xuereb Is An Actor And Producer

Emmanuel Xuereb is an actor and producer. He served as the co-producer of Erosion. He has starred in The Bonfire of the Vanities, The Dutch Master, Amateur, The Cowboy Way, Natural Born Killers, Bad Boys, Stonewall, and Grim. He appeared in the TV Series Law & Order and New York Undercover.

Emmanuel Xuereb is known for his performance in Tales of Erotica, QM, I Think I Call Her QM, Hand on the Pump, and Jerks. He played roles in TV Series such as Whip in Buffy the Vampire Slayer, Jacques in The Bold and the Beautiful, and Matthew Taymach in The Division.

Emmanuel Xuereb played Alex in Saved by the Rules. He has also appeared in The Discontents, Fathers and Sons, Life Ride, Erosion, Cold Case, Passions, and Smith. He appeared as Richard Jacobs in the TV Series Criminal Minds. He starred as Officer Barron in The Mannsfield 12, and Harris Briggs in Dark Reel.

Emmanuel Works In Real Estate

Emmanuel Xuereb is a Real Estate agent. He runs a real estate brokerage in Los Angeles – Team X Real Estate. He started a career in Real Estate in his early 20s, in his hometown, New York City while he was training as an actor. As his career as an actor grew, his work took him to Los Angeles.

Also Read: Jeffrey Marty: Facts About Stacey Dash’s Husband

“I remember in New York saying…I will always be in Real Estate…” Emmanuel said. “I loved it then I still do now. Close to 30 years later it’s still my passion. It’s fascinating, really. I would love to see everyone be able to own their own home.” He knows Los Angeles very well as he has lived in different areas.

Emmanuel has reportedly lived, from the top of Nichols Canyon to Beverly Hills, Valley Village, West Hollywood, and Los Feliz now resides in Beachwood Canyon, where he lives with his British Fiancée Claire, who also works on his team. He and his twin brother have been supporters of the foster care system.

They have reportedly adopted separately two inner-city teenage brothers. He also enjoys connecting people promoting local culture with his Newsletters Blog. Speaking of his clients, he said:

“I love when my clients cannot believe what we were able to get them… It’s simple for me, I look at it as if I were buying the home for myself,” adds, “I felt I had to create a team to take great care of our clients, which is how our team was born. how else could I replicate myself, then to turn to… my twin brother, Salvator…”

Emmanuel Xuereb is the executive and team leader of The Xuereb Group. Per their website,

Emmanuel and Salvator Xuereb’s team, The Xuereb Group, are all about taking great care of our clients. As a result, we’ve been one of the top teams in Los Angeles and partnered with Compass which has become the number one brokerage in Los Angeles. Combining cutting-edge technology and high-class service, our goal is to be the best and most professional at what we do. We want our clients to relax and enjoy the buying and selling process. We have a first-rate team of agents and support experts to help provide a great buying and selling experience.’

Emmanuel Was Married To Stacey Dash

Emmanuel Xuereb and Stacey Dash used to be husband and wife. The duo got married on July 7, 2007, in a lavish wedding ceremony. Emmanuel became the third husband of Stacey. He also became the stepfather of Stacey’s two children: Austin Williams and Lola Lovell. They had things going on well for them in the early days of their union. Eventually, Stacey filed for divorce in January 2010. Their divorce was finalized on September 21, 2011. They had no children together.

Emmanuel And Stacey’s Divorce

Emmanuel Xuereb and Stacey Dash’s divorce was not amicable. Stacey filed a restraining order against Emmanuel the same day she filed for divorce. She alleged that, Emmanuel was abusive during their three-year union and she was too afraid to report it, according to documents E! News obtained at the time.

Emmanuel is said to have hit Stacey and used violent force against her during their marriage. According to a description of an incident on Jan. 23,

“Mr. Xuereb had been drinking, was banging pots and being noisy at 11:30 p.m. Mr. Xuereb came into our bedroom, irate, grabbed the covers, ripped them off me, held me down with a tight grip on both arms. He then threatened me and told me it would be the worst night of my life. He was in a rage and was about to strike me. I was able to calm him down. I am afraid he will hurt me.”

Also Read: Lola Lovell: Who Is Stacey Dash’s Daughter?

Stacey claimed that Emmanuel “used physical force by restraining my arms and body with his hands and body weight” and has “hit me in the head, face and on my body” in the past. Emmanuel is to stay at least 100 yards from her, her two children, and their house. Stacey did not request any spousal support.

Before getting married to Emmanuel Xuereb, Stacey Dash was married to Brian Lovell (m. 1999; div. mid-2000s), and James Maby (m. 2005; div. 2006). After her divorce from Emmanuel, she got married to her fourth husband lawyer Jeffrey Marty in Florida on April 6, 2018.

In April 2020, Stacey announced that she and Jeffrey had separated. In June 2020, she filed for divorce. It is uncertain if their divorce has been finalized or not.