Northland Barbershop Chorus of the Sault, Ontario Chapter of the Barbershop Harmony Society is proud to announce its 55th annual show “You Don’t Know Me (...Maybe Heaven Can Help)” will be presented Sat. April 6 starting at 7:30 p.m. at the Sault Community Theatre Centre.

This show takes its inspiration from “It's a Wonderful Life,” the 1946 American fantasy-drama film directed by Frank Capra. The film is one of the most beloved in American cinema, and has become traditional viewing during the Christmas season. The film stars James Stewart as George Bailey, a man whose imminent demise on Christmas Eve brings about the intervention of his guardian angel, Clarence Odbody (Henry Travers). Clarence shows George how different life in his community of Bedford Falls would be if he had never been born.

The Northland Chorus will present a show that borrows this theme but with a musical twist. Chorus member Bill Bailey (Mike Doherty) just wants to simplify his too-busy life. Despite the support of his loving wife Brenda (Penny Gribbon) for his singing hobby, he reaches the fateful decision that something has to go.

Like his Wonderful Life counterpart George Bailey, Bill Bailey makes a wish resulting in unforeseen consequences. He wishes, not that he had never lived, but that he had never sung!

An Angel named Charlie (Chuck Holgate) is sent on special assignment from The Boss (recorded in 2001 by then 9-year old Nathan Shami). He must find Bill Bailey, grant him his wish, and in doing so show him that perhaps he has taken singing and music for granted. Bill learns what many of us sometimes also forget: that without singing and music, life may be forever changed, diminished in ways one cannot, predict or even imagine.

Lee Ann Pearson handles stage direction of the play written by Bob Shami. It is based upon a story the chorus first presented in 2001 co-written then by Bob Shami and Stephen Patterson.

Barbershop is not an era, rather it is a style of singing any kind of music from pretty much any era – so long as it’s got the potential for our particular type of four-part harmony. The chorus will present 10 songs in this traditional a cappella style that span the musical spectrum. These include a mid-1700’s era Celtic folk song (“The Parting Glass”), and songs from The Platters (“Only You/The Great Pretender” - 1956), Beach Boys (“In My Room” - 1964), The Browns (“Three Bells” - 1962), Fiddler on the Roof (“Sunrise, Sunset” - 1964), The Carpenters (“End of the World” - 1979) and more.

The title song (“You Don’t Know Me” ) was first sung by Eddy Arnold in 1956. The best-selling version of the song is by Ray Charles, who took it to #2 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart in 1962.

From its origins in the late 1800’s on street corners and barbershops, through the formation of the Barbershop Harmony Society in 1938, to the present day, this show illustrates once again why this unique style of music remains popular with both singers and audiences of all ages.

A major portion of the show proceeds go to the Speech-Language Pathology Unit at Sault Area Hospital in support of local speech therapy programs. As of this show, the Chorus will reach a major milestone: more than $100,000 will have been donated by the Northland Chorus to this cause since 1995. Several thousand more has been donated to the Speech Dept at War Memorial Hospital in Sault, Mich. More information about the long history of support of the local Speech Therapy services by the Northland Chorus can be viewed online at www.northlandchorus.com

Featured musical performers:

Northland Barbershop Chorus: Now in their 58th year. Bob Shami – Music Director (www.northlandchorus.com)

Headline Quartet

‘Shoptimus Prime: Award-winning Quartet from Toronto, Ont. and Buffalo NY. They are the 2015 Barbershop Harmony Society International Collegiate silver medalists and 2012 Ontario District Champions. www.shoptimusprimequartet.com

Doors open at 6:45 p.m. Curtain is 7:30 p.m.

All Tickets: General Admission – $28* Canadian Funds, available at: Theatre Centre Box Office* (Station Mall — * A $4/ticket service charge is added by the Mall Box Office to all tickets they sell. Box Office price is $28 + $4 = $32), Hess Jewellers (Churchill Plaza), from any member of the Northland Chorus, or at Soo Theatre/STARS (534 Ashmun St. in Sault, Mich.) Tickets may also be available at the door. In Canada, Bob Shami at (705) 253-9574; in the US, Gary Deuman at (906) 322-7062.

You Don’t Know Me (...Maybe Heaven Can Help)