Impresa Pizzarotti & C. S.p.A. was founded in Parma in 1910 as a sole proprietorship by Gino Pizzarotti and it was later transformed in 1945 into a limited liability company by Pietro Pizzarotti, father of the current President Cavaliere del Lavoro Paolo Pizzarotti. In 1961 it became a joint stock company with a share capital of 250 million euros. Today, the Company has reached the fourth generation, represented by Michele Pizzarotti, Vice President of the company, together with his sister Enrica and his brother Pietro. Over the years, Impresa Pizzarotti has gone through a continuous evolution, until it became one of the main Italian general contractors. The company has always aimed at a constant development in the realization of complex works: road and freeway infrastructures, also in concession, tunnel works, airports, dams, industrial infrastructures, railway constructions and health and residential buildings. Today the Pizzarotti Group is present in almost all over the world, where it operates with a workforce of approximately 3,500 employees.

Read more

Impresa Pizzarotti & C. S.p.A. was founded in Parma in 1910 as a sole proprietorship by Gino Pizzarotti and it was later transformed in 1945 into a limited liability company by Pietro Pizzarotti, father of the current President Cavaliere del Lavoro Paolo Pizzarotti. In 1961 it became a joint stock company with a share capital of 250 million euros. Today, the Company has reached the fourth generation, represented by Michele Pizzarotti, Vice President of the company, together with his sister Enrica and his brother Pietro. Over the years, Impresa Pizzarotti has gone through a continuous evolution, until it became one of the main Italian general contractors. The company has always aimed at a constant development in the realization of complex works: road and freeway infrastructures, also in concession, tunnel works, airports, dams, industrial infrastructures, railway constructions and health and residential buildings. Today the Pizzarotti Group is present in almost all over the world, where it operates with a workforce of approximately 3,500 employees.

Read more

Reach More Decision-Makers with Scale Plans

Let us show you how our accurate B2B company and contact data can help you reach the right decision makers and close more deals.

What can you expect?

See how Lusha can speed up your workflow

Learn how to reach your ideal prospects

Discover the practices of the best performing sales teams

Trusted by 280,000+ revenue teams of all sizes