Rasmussen Global, the political advisory firm founded by former NATO Secretary General and Danish Prime Minister Anders Fogh Rasmussen, is expanding its presence in Berlin, Brussels, and Copenhagen.

In Berlin, Nico Lange has joined as a Senior Advisor. Nico was previously Chief of Staff at the Federal Ministry of Defence of Germany from 2019 to 2022, under Annegret Kramp-Karrenbauer. He brings vast experience from the top echelons of German politics, holding numerous senior positions in the German CDU party. Nico served as director of the Ukraine office of Konrad-Adenauer-Stiftung in Kyiv from 2006-2012 and was awarded a Robert Bosch Fellowship in St. Petersburg, Russia from 2003-2006. He is a fluent Ukrainian and Russian speaker and adds to Rasmussen Global’s growing reputation as the go-to consultancy on all issues regarding Ukraine.

In Brussels, Helene Bille Albrechtsen has joined as a project manager focused on critical raw materials and energy. Having most recently served in the Cabinet of European Commission Executive Vice-President Margrethe Vestager, as well as having worked four years with trade in the Danish Ministry of Business, Helene is an expert on the European regulatory landscape and its strategic agenda. Meanwhile, Arthur de Liedekerke has been appointed as the new Director for European Affairs. Arthur will continue working on areas related to cyber, digital policy, and space, while also focusing on business development. Harry Nedelcu is the new Director for Geopolitics. Harry will focus on Rasmussen Global’s sovereign clients and the firm’s work on Ukraine.

In Copenhagen, Rasmus Grand Berthelsen has been promoted to become Director for the Nordics. Rasmus works closely on green energy policy and will also work on business development in the region. Rasmussen Global’s Copenhagen office has been strengthened with the appointment of Betzy Hänninen and Marie-Cæcilie Adamsen as Policy Advisors. Betzy joins Rasmussen Global from the Nordic Council of Ministers, having previously worked at the European Free Trade Association (EFTA) and as a conscript soldier in the Royal Norwegian Air Force. Marie-Cæcilie joins Rasmussen Global from the Danish Ministry of Foreign Affairs, where she worked on development and security policy. She focused on the MENA region and Eastern Europe, most recently on the war in Ukraine.