National Data Consultant (NDC) a Temenos Partner for T24 Consulting and Implementation Services for banks has been awarded the "Partner Project of the Year" award at the Temenos Community Forum annual awards which took place in Rome. The award was in recognition of NDC's outstanding performance in the Islamic Banking Implementation at Yemen Bank of Reconstruction and Development. The project was delivered within 6 months and enabled the bank to be the first in Yemen to offer both conventional and Islamic products to their customers. In addition, having an Upgraded core banking platform in place enabled the bank to purchase Temenos Connect for digital-channel delivery. The award was presented to NDC in the presence of 900 attendees by David Arnott, CEO of Temenos.

Commenting on the above achievement NDC Chairman & CEO Mr. Behram Ahmed stated "NDC's partnership with Temenos dates back to 2000 which over this time has built a strong foundation for us. NDC's footprint covers the entire Middle East and North Africa today and is a testimony to the investment in training of T24 specialists who are now deployed globally on projects. This long term investment in specialized human resource development, experienced project management and Temenos methodologies helped NDC to win the Temenos Partner Project of the Year Award."

NDC President Ms. Ammara Masood commented, "It is an honor to be recognized for this prestigious award which is very competitive to achieve within the Temenos Partner community. NDC winning this award for the second time in four years shows our continuous commitment to the quality and delivery capability as well as customer satisfaction."

Mr. Mike Head, Global Alliances Director, Temenos said, "We are delighted to have presented our Partner Project of the Year award to NDC, in recognition of its exceptional performance in implementing our Islamic banking solution at Yemen Bank of Reconstruction and Development. The dedication of the team to the project and the level of collaboration displayed were very impressive, and resulted in the very fast implementation. The project fully followed the Temenos implementation methodology, enabling the bank to become one of the first adopters of the new Temenos Connect products for digital-channel delivery."

About NDC

National Data Consultant (NDC) is an award winning accredited Partner of Temenos providing Core Banking Consulting & Implementation Services for T24 across Middle East & Africa region. Our focus is on providing high quality standards for customers through certified resources while adapting industry and IT best practices. Our regional success is evident from our clientele which includes several large & mid-size reputable banks and financial institutions. We leverage a wealth of expertise and experience in the areas of Conventional Banking, Islamic Banking, Central Banking, Microfinance Banking, Investment Banking and Non-Banking Financial Institutes. Our Services include Implementation, Upgrades, Training, Post Live Support, and Data Migration.

For more information please visit www.ndctech.net