Temenos Group, a software company specialised in enterprise solutions for banks and financial services, has emerged as the winner of the best digital banking solution at the Banker Africa – North Africa Banking Awards.

Banker Africa, a brand of CPI Financial, is a monthly magazine established in 2013 and circulated to over 9,000 C-level executives in financial institutions throughout Africa. Until now, the awards has always gone to banks, making this the first vendor-specific award.

“I am delighted that Temenos is the first vendor to win this prestigious award,” said Jean-Paul Mergeai, Temenos’ Managing Director for Middle East and Africa. “We are constantly striving to keep our market-leading digital banking software ahead of the curve and awards like this demonstrates that the market recognizes our efforts. Our strategy to invest 20 per cent of our revenues on R&D every year is clearly paying off.”

The Geneva-based company, according to its statement released on Thursday, was given the award in recognition of its market-leading digital banking software and continued dedication to the North Africa region. Earlier this month, Temenos Infinity – a digital front office product – and Temenos T24 Transact – the next generation in core banking – were launched.

According to the statement, these new products further demonstrate a commitment to constant innovation, leveraging 25 years of functionality from 3,000 banks in more than 150 countries with the most advanced cloud-native, cloud-agnostic, API-first technology and design-led thinking.

Temenos digital banking solutions empower banks to serve up the right customer insight at the right moment, via the right channel. The platform also drives massive efficiencies in the back-office. And as an end-to-end digital platform, the technology offers front-office differentiation with back-office automation.

Winners of the awards were decided by readers of CPI Financial, mid-management to senior board-level members of banks and financial institutions, who submitted votes after experts from the publication compiled a shortlist.

“The Banker Africa Awards program has become a valued and respected benchmark within the industry,” said Matthew Amlôt, Editor of Banker Africa. “Temenos should be proud that our readers have chosen them for this prestigious prize, which is a celebration of innovation in banking software. This demonstrates the trust and respect for Temenos from the banking and financing community across the North African region.”