Chet Atkins, a seminal figure in country music as an innovative guitarist and producer who was instrumental in shaping "The Nashville Sound," died Saturday in Nashville, Tenn. He was 77.

Atkins, who battled cancer for several years and had a tumor removed from his brain in 1997, died at his home, a funeral director announced.

More than any other single figure, Atkins turned the twangy country sound of the 1950s into the more polished pop-friendly style that country music is today.

As a producer and A&R (Artists and Repertoire) man his musical vision, including the introduction of string sections, allowed the new country sound to fit easily on pop music radio formats as well as country stations. Listeners turned off by rock music, gravitated to Atkins' vision of country music. And while some country purists criticized his innovations, many historians have saluted his vision.

As a talent scout he was golden. His first RCA signing was Don Gibson, who enjoyed an immediate hit with "Oh Lonesome Me." Other signings included Jerry Reed and Waylon Jennings, and he was instrumental in signing Charlie Pride, one of the first black country singers.

His studio credits include formative work with Elvis Presley, Gibson, Jennings, Roy Orbison, the Everly Brothers, Willie Nelson and Dolly Parton.

As a leading guitarist, Atkins recorded more than 75 albums of instrumentals that sold tens of millions of copies around the world. His playing can be heard on legendary recordings such as Presley's "Heartbreak Hotel," Hank Williams' "Your Cheatin' Heart" and The Everly Brothers' "Wake Up Little Susie."

Respect for Atkins went well beyond the country boundaries of Nashville. He shared the stage or time in the recording studio with jazz musicians (including George Benson, Larry Carlton and Earl Klugh), rock musicians (including an entire album with Dire Straits' Mark Knopfler) and several symphony orchestras.

Other recording partners over the years have ranged from Les Paul to Ravi Shankar. Several years ago, Guitar Player magazine named Atkins the most influential instrumentalist stylist in popular music.

Born Chester Burton Atkins near Lurell, Tenn., Atkins' father was a music teacher, piano tuner and evangelical singer.

Growing up in rural east Tennessee, asthma left Atkins in such poor health that he missed months of school. When he was 8, he got a guitar -- and it became his solace.

As he wrote in his 1974 autobiography, "Country Gentleman": "That guitar and the others that followed it, would absorb almost every moment I could find for it for the rest of my life."

Atkins grew up hearing the legendary guitarist Merle Travis.

By the time he was 16 Atkins was performing regularly on local radio stations and at dances. By the late 1940s, Atkins signed a contract with RCA beginning an association that would last into the 1980s.

He received some early attention for such songs as "Canned Heat" and "Bug Dance" from his first sessions. But in 1949, he began to establish an audience for his style with "Main Street Breakdown."

Atkins' successes continued with the 1953 instrumental hit "Country Gentleman" and the 1955 country smash "Mr. Sandman."

In 1957, Atkins started managing RCA's Nashville office. In 1968, the label named him division vice president in charge of country music.

Along the way, he won 14 Grammys, including a Lifetime Achievement Grammy in 1993, and was elected to the Country Music Hall of Fame in 1973, its youngest inductee at age 49.

Survivors include his wife of more than 50 years, Leona Johnson Atkins, and a daughter, Merle Atkins, who was named after Merle Travis.