"I love you, it's ruining my life."

Taylor Swift shared on Monday the song titles and information about two collaborations for her 11th era, "The Tortured Poets Department," an album she announced after winning her 13th career Grammy on Sunday.

There are four sides to the album, according to a post on Swift's Instagram account. Based on the names of the songs, fans may be in for a break-up album about her ex-boyfriend and actor Joe Alwyn, who Swift dated for six years.

Side A:

"Fortnight (feat. Post Malone)"

"The Tortured Poets Department"

"My Boy Only Breaks His Favorite Toys"

"Down Bad"

Side B:

"So Long, London"

"But Daddy I Love Him"

"Fresh Out the Slammer"

"Florida!!!" (feat. Florence + The Machine)

Side C:

"Guilty as Sin?"

"Who's Afraid of Little Old Me?"

"I Can Fix Him (No Really I Can)"

"loml"

Side D:

"I Can Do It With a Broken Heart"

"The Smallest Man Who Ever Lived"

"The Alchemy"

"Clara Bow"

What are the Taylor Swift songs dropped at 2 a.m.?

"The Black Dog"

"imgonnagetyouback"

"The Albatross"

"Chloe or Sam or Sophia or Marcus"

"How Did it End?"

"So High School"

"I Hate it Here"

"thanK you aIMee"

"I Look in People's Windows"

"The Prophecy"

"Cassandra"

"Peter"

"The Bolter"

"Robin"

"The Manuscript"

Keeping a secret for two years

"I want to say thank you to the fans," Swift said on Sunday while holding her Grammy for pop vocal album, "by telling you a secret that I've been keeping from you for the past two years, which is that my brand-new album comes out April 19."

By that timeline, the relationship with Alwyn may have been in trouble for a while before Swift announced its end in the spring of 2023. As a poetic hat tip to the end of the relationship, Swift changed her opening "Folklore" song during the Eras Tour from "Invisible String" to "The 1."

Swift also said she wrote "You're Losing Me," a bonus track on her "Midnights" album, two years ago. The track is about a relationship on life support, with Swift pleading with a lover to "do something, babe, say something" and bring the romance back to life.

At first glance, there are many nods in the "Tortured Poets Department" track list to London and England, where Alwyn is from. It seems the flirtatious nature of the pop bop "London Boy" has turned dark with this album's titles "My Boy Only Breaks His Favorite Toys," "So Long, London," "But Daddy I Love Him," "I Can Fix Him (No Really I Can)" and "The Smallest Man Who Ever Lived."

"Fortnite" may be a popular video game, but Swift's track "Fortnight" is in reference to a unit of time equal to two weeks or 14 days.

"loml" is an acronym for "love of my life."

"Clara Bow" was an American actress, most famous for silent films. The black-and-white motif of "The Tortured Poets Department" matches a movie Bow would have starred in during the Roaring '20s. She appeared in 46 silent films, and her appearance in movies was a guarantee to investors that fans would fill the seats.

Swift is heading to Tokyo this week for the start of her 2024 Eras Tour leg.