Taylor Swift achieves one of the most record-shattering weeks in the history of the Billboard Hot 100 songs chart – surpassing unprecedented heights that she previously set – as she claims the top 14 positions on the survey dated May 4. All 14 songs, led by “Fortnight,” featuring Post Malone, are from her new album, The Tortured Poets Department, which, following the Republic Records set’s April 19 release, blasts in at No. 1 on the Billboard 200 chart.

Swift was already the only artist ever to dominate the Hot 100’s entire top 10 — thanks to tracks from her last album of all-new material, Midnights, in 2022, led by the collection’s “Anti-Hero.”

Among other new chart feats for Swift, “Fortnight” becomes her 12th Hot 100 No. 1, as she ties for the sixth-most leaders in the chart’s archives; she ups her career count of top 10s from 49 to 59, the most among women; and she charts 32 songs – all 31 from the deluxe version of The Tortured Poets Department plus established smash “Cruel Summer” – on the latest list overall, the most ever in a single week by a woman.

The Hot 100 blends all-genre U.S. streaming (official audio and official video), radio airplay and sales data, the lattermost metric reflecting purchases of physical singles and digital tracks from full-service digital music retailers; digital singles sales from direct-to-consumer (D2C) sites are excluded from chart calculations. All charts (dated May 4, 2024) will update on Billboard.com tomorrow, April 30. For all chart news, you can follow @billboard and @billboardcharts on both X, formerly known as Twitter, and Instagram.

Luminate, the independent data provider to the Billboard charts, completes a thorough review of all data submissions used in compiling the weekly chart rankings. Luminate reviews and authenticates data. In partnership with Billboard, data deemed suspicious or unverifiable is removed, using established criteria, before final chart calculations are made and published.

Below is a look at Swift’s latest groundbreaking week on the Hot 100.