Obviously, the album is called The Tortured Poets Department — but fans suspect there are layers to that title. Namely, Swifties were quick to note how similar it sounds to a certain group chat shared by Swift’s ex-boyfriend Joe Alwyn and Paul Mescal, as revealed by the two actors in a December 2022 Variety interview: “The Tortured Man Club.”

In the black-and-white album cover shared by Swift moments after announcing the album, she poses in a black top and shorts with her arms wrapped around her body, lying back on white bedding. Similar to the original 1989 cover, the top half of her face is obstructed.

Stylist Joseph Cassell revealed on Instagram that the photo features Swift wearing a black cami tank top and matching high-rise briefs from Mary Kate and Ashley’s fashion brand The Row.

The Tortured Poets Department tracklist featured two major collaborations: Post Malone, whose name is billed on track one, “Fortnight,” as well as Florence + The Machine on track eight, “Florida!!!”

Both Posty and Florence Welch have sung Swift’s praises in the past, with the rapper calling the pop star “a great f—in’ songwriter” in an October 2023 interview with Howard Stern, and Welch and Swift trading compliments in a 2015 Billboard interview.

“What sets Florence apart? Everything,” Swift said at the time. “Every time I’ve been around her, she is the most magnetic person in the room — surrounded by people who are fascinated by the idea of being near her.”

While sharing the album’s cover art to Instagram, Swift also included a photo of what appeared to be a handwritten lyric from one of the project’s tracks. “And so I enter into evidence/ My tarnished coat of arms,” reads the message, penned in black pink on white stationary labeled “TTPD.”

“My muses, acquired like bruises/ My talismans and charms/ The tick, tick, tick of love bombs,” it continues. “My veins of pitch black ink.”

“All’s fair in love and poetry …,” Swift signed off the note. “Sincerely, The Chairman of The Tortured Poets Department.”

Swift’s superstar boyfriend, Kansas City Chiefs tight end Travis Kelce, revealed in a pre-Super Bowl press interview that he got to be one of the singer’s beta listeners for The Tortured Poets Department — and his review was a rave.

“I have heard some of it, yes, and it’s unbelievable,” he told Extra on the field at Allegiant Stadium in Las Vegas. “I can’t wait for her to shake up the world when it finally drops.”

During her first Eras Tour show in Japan on Feb. 7 — just days after first announcing Tortured Poets — Swift revealed that the project had been in the making for a little while. “I’ve been working on it for about two years,” she told her crowd at Tokyo Dome. “I kept working on it throughout the U.S. tour, and when it was perfect — in my opinion when it’s good enough for you — I finished it and I am so, so excited that soon you’ll get to hear it.”

She also noted, “I’ve been working on Tortured Poets since right after I turned in Midnights,” which would’ve been a few months before the latter album dropped in October 2022.

Swift announced a second version of Tortured Poets dubbed “The Bolter” during her Feb. 16, 2024, Eras Tour stop in Melbourne, complete with an alternate cover that reads “You don’t get to tell me about sad” on the back.

In place of “The Manuscript,” she confirmed that this edition of the album will feature a bonus track also titled “The Bolter.”

While discussing the album during her Feb. 16, 2024, show in Melbourne — the same one she announced “The Bolter” special edition — Swift revealed that Tortured Poets is her most cathartic project yet.

“It kind of reminded me of why songwriting is something that actually gets me through my life,” she shared, sitting at her floral-painted surprise song piano. “I’ve never had an album where I needed songwriting more than I needed it on Tortured Poets.”

About a week after announcing the “Bolter” edition of Tortured Poets, Swift unveiled another Tortured Poets installment called “The Albatross” during her Feb. 23, 2024, show in Sydney, Australia. Again, the third version of the album features its own cover and limited bonus track.

Merriam-Webster defines the term “albatross” as “large web-footed seabirds that have long slender wings, are excellent gliders, and include the largest seabirds” as well as “something that causes persistent deep concern or anxiety.”

“Am I allowed to cry?” reads the back cover.

At her March 3 Eras Tour performance in Singapore, Swift announced the fourth — and final — version of Tortured Poets. Titled “The Black Dog,” the issue’s cover features a black-and-white portrait of the singer dramatically wrapping her arms around her head.

Complete with its own bonus track, the “Black Dog” edition’s tagline is as follows: “Old habits die screaming…”