Disability ReFramed: In Media considers the opportunities, strategies, and challenges facing journalists and filmmakers on both sides of the camera, and imagines what the future could be.

In this inaugural event, Producer, Director and cinematographer Dan Habib, creator of award-winning, nationally broadcast documentary films Including Samuel, Who Cares About Kelsey?, Mr. Connolly Has ALS, and Intelligent Lives, will join panelists Cara Reedy, Founder and Director of the Disabled Journalists Association; Liz Pritchard, creator and CEO of PaperBag Comic, flash mentor for Lights! Camera! Access! and Post-Production Supervisor for ADA Lead On Productions; and Meghan Smith, Senior Producer at GBH News. They will discuss how disability is covered in film and in newsrooms, and speak candidly about how "Nothing About Us Without Us" applies to work behind the camera, on film sets and in newsrooms, and organizations more broadly.

Disability ReFramed is a new annual event at GBH designed to consider the opportunities, strategies, and challenges we face as a community and to imagine what the future could be. Join us to meet and network prior to the event and learn more from organizations presenting in the GBH Atrium.

Some of the questions we hope to address:

What are the common pitfalls in news and film coverage; the impacts on public perception and community self-image; as well as strategies to overcome them?

Award-winning filmmaker Dan Habib leads an important conversation with media makers for this inaugural event at GBH designed to address topics related to disability, access, and inclusivity.

An expert panel will consider: Are people with disabilities considered, consulted, and represented accurately as both subjects and producers?

How are journalists considering disability and the impact on disabled people when covering major news stories ranging from employment, climate change, healthcare, education and more?

Is your newsroom, film set, or workplace ready to support disabled employees and makers?

How can organizations meaningfully implement “Nothing about us without us” to benefit storytelling in news and film?

Please send us your great questions!

Event registration is FREE but required for the in-person and virtual experience. In-person seating is general admission.

Important update regarding this event:

Due to unanticipated travel complications, and to ensure the best possible participant experience, we at GBH and some of our partners have decided to move this event to be fully virtual. If you have signed up to join in-person, please re-register to join online. We don’t want anyone who has made the commitment to join in-person to come to our studios and be disappointed. Since not everyone checks their email, if you know of someone who had plan to join in-person, please let them know about this important change.

Tickets are free but we suggest a donation of $5 per ticket.

This event will be recorded and send to people to RSVP after the event.