John Cleese's ex-wife Connie Booth is reportedly set to quietly attend the Fawlty Towers stage show when it launches in the West End. The actress, 83, is credited for co-writing the sit-com alongside her ex-husband John, 84.

Booth is reportedly “looking forward” to the brand-new stage production, but will keep a low profile when the play launches. Monty Python star Cleese also starred in the show as its main character, hotel owner Basil Fawlty.

Meanwhile, American actress Booth played chambermaid Polly in the series. The show, which ran from 1975 to 1979 on BBC Two, featured hilarious scenes all taking place in Torquay’s most chaotic hotel.

Booth is now planning to “sneak into the audience”- to watch her and Cleese’s beloved show as it's brought to the stage, according to MailOnline. Booth’s second husband John Lahr, whom she wed in 2000, told the publication: “She’ll be going to see it - probably not on opening night but she’ll be there.”

While the American actress declined to comment about the production, Lahr went on to explain his wife likes to “keep a low profile” nowadays. He said: “I understand people are interested - why wouldn’t they be?

“Connie is not giving interviews. She doesn’t generally do it anymore.”

A source added: “She is looking forward to seeing it but she likes to keep a low profile these days and stay very much out of the limelight.”

Fawlty Towers has been dubbed the greatest British sitcom of all time, according to a 2019 Radio Times poll.

Cleese and Booth, who share a 53-year-old daughter named Cynthia, sadly split a year before the final series of the show was screened in 1979.

Booth later quit the showbiz world in 1995 and took a totally different career path, training as a psychotherapist and working in that field until she retired.

She now lives a quiet life in North London with her second husband Lahr.

The Fawlty Towers stage show, which makes its debut at the Apollo Theatre in the West End on Saturday, is adapted from three of Cleese’s favourite episodes.

Adam Jackson-Smith will take on the role of Basil, while Anna-Jane Casey will play his long-suffering wife Sybil, formerly portrayed by Prunella Scales.