The Science Fiction Collection at Houghton Library consists largely of 20th-century trade paperbacks, magazines, fanzines, and prozines. Established as a discrete collection in 1957, it complements the Rev. Francis G. Peabody Utopian Literature Collection, as well as the library’s individual author collections of such writers as Jules Verne, H.G. Wells, and Edward Bellamy.

History

Following the death of his son, junior Richard “Dick” W. Clarkson (Class of 1955), Paul S. Clarkson donated Dick’s collection of science fiction books to the Harvard University Library. The collection was curated by Lauriston Ward, curator of Asiatic Archaeology at the Peabody Museum, and a keen science-fiction fan. He was assisted by G. William Cottrell Jr., research associate in ornithology at Harvard's Museum of Comparative Zoology and founding editor of the Harvard Library Bulletin.

Ward and Cottrell arranged a space for the collection within Houghton Library and solicited gifts to grow it, adding many volumes from their own libraries.

Acquisitions declined following Ward’s death and Cottrell’s departure from the Harvard Library Bulletin, both in 1960, and ceased altogether by 1972.

In 2009, funding from the Ruth Miller Memorial Philanthropic Fund enabled the library to catalog the collection, making it available to readers for the first time.

Highlights

The collection includes many works of science fiction, fantasy, and horror by both well-known and lesser-known authors, including:

Poul Anderson

Isaac Asimov

John Brunner

Murray Leinster

Eric Frank Russell

Robert Sheckley

Roy Sheldon

Robert Silverberg

Clifford D. Simak

E.E. Smith

George O. Smith

Jerry Sohl

Vargo Statten

Theodore Sturgeon

John Taine

J.R.R. Tolkien

E.C. Tubb

Wilson Tucker

A.E. Van Vogt

Jean-Gaston Vandel

Jules Verne

Stanley Grauman Weinbaum

H.G. Wells

Dennis Wheatley

Jack Williamson

S. Fowler Wright

John Wyndham

Material in the collection dates from the 1880s to the present and also includes numerous anthologies and runs of nearly 200 science fiction periodicals.

The collection also contains collections of fanzines, prozines, and APAs (amateur press association publications): the general collection, covering 1939–1971; that formed by William Wilson Goodson Jr., 1970–2008; and the New England Science Fiction Association APAs.

Recent additions to the collection include The Star Trek Guide, a handbook detailing everything an aspiring writer needed to know write a script for the series. (Read more about the guide here.)

Manuscript collections of science fiction authors include: