Dateline Lawrence, Kansas. Home of the Chesty Lions, an 1863 pro-slavery massacre and arson that nearly wiped out the city, and the deathplace of William S. Burroughs.

It's also a sea of Democratic blue in a very red state.

So, that oughta tell you something right there. We're not dealing with just any two-bit Kansas town.

But those Jayhawk fundies mean business. If they're not laughably arguing that Intelligent Design, is, well... intelligent, then by golly they're gonna make darn sure that we all know the true meaning of Christmas--saving babies from evil abortionists one aerobics class at a time.

In a bad idea gone even worse, Birthright of Lawrence thought it would be a good idea to decorate minature Christmas trees adorned with plastic fetuses and place them in area businesses as a fundraising promotion. Three local women cancelled their fitness club memberships after the owner of Body Boutique displayed one of the trees in the lobby.

Yeah, nothing says Happy Holidays Merry Christmas like a "tree [that] contained a dozen blue and pink stockings, each stuffed with a plastic figure and attached card that labeled the dolls as being "between 11 and 12 weeks old."

According to the Lawrence Journal-World:

The tree also held coupons for Birthright videos, pamphlets and children's clothes. Other coupons included savings on a video titled "After the Choice," another video showing abortion procedures, a brochure on the morning-after pill and a card that offered quart-size, press-and-seal plastic bags.

Birthright of Lawrence intended that people take a figure home in exchange for a $5 donation.

Yeppers, can you imagine the look of joy on little Cindy's face on Christmas morning tearing into festively-wrapped boxes to find brochures on the terrifying descent into hell that awaits the lusty Lolitas who uncross their legs nevermind the righteous Christian free pass for the boys? Now, that's family values!

Plus, those quart-size press-and-seal plastic bags can always come in handy in the back alley.