Married 35-year-old arrested at her home just yards from the brutal scene of war hero's death

Frail widower William Davis was found at his house late on Sunday evening

Officers believe his killer battered him to death with a 'blunt instrument'

Tragic: War hero William Davis, 92, who was believed to have served in the Navy, was found dead at a house in Willenhall, West Midlands

A woman who used to take meals round to a decorated war veteran found battered to death at his home has been arrested on suspicion of his murder.

Mother-of-three Charlotte Doody, 35, who lived opposite 92-year-old William Davis, was last night being questioned over the killing of the ‘fiercely independent’ pensioner.

Neighbours said the builder’s wife was among several residents of Hobley Street who used to keep an eye out for the widower.

Mr Davis, who was known as Bill and had a collection of medals from serving with the Royal Navy in the Second World War, was found in his heavily bloodstained terraced house in Willenhall, West Midlands, on Sunday.

Detectives have revealed the great grandfather was seen alive at around 3pm when a neighbour took him round some dinner.

Some time over the next three hours he was viciously beaten about the head with a blunt instrument before his killer fled.

Mrs Doody and her husband Michael, who runs a building firm, have three children.

On Tuesday, one of them wrote on Facebook: ‘OMG poor poor bill I will always miss u and I love you xxx you was like a granddad to me.’

When asked by a friend ‘have u got questoined (sic) yet?’, she replied: ‘Nah mum as (sic).’

Neighbours said Mrs Doody was among several in the community always willing to help Mr Davis.

The woman, named locally as Charlotte Doody, was arrested at her home, just yards from where the frail widower was found collapsed in a pool of blood.

He died as a result of severe head injuries, West Midlands Police said.

Mrs Doody was being questioned by police, as forensic teams scoured her property. She would regularly deliver meals to the pensioner who walked with the aid of a zimmer frame, according to neighbours.

Neighbour Jaga Sehmbi, 56, said of Mr Davis: ‘Everyone knew him. I would see him walking down the road taking small steps.

‘I would stop and talk to him for half an hour. He had so much knowledge, especially about the local area.

‘The community is devastated, it’s shocking. You could never think anyone would harm such a lovely old bloke.’

At a press conference held by the force yesterday, Detective Superintendent Richard Baker described Mr Davis as a fiercely independent decorated war veteran who was father to two, grandfather to four and a great-grandfather to one.

He said: 'Bill used to go into Willenhall on a weekly basis. He tended his own garden and maintained his home on his own.

'He was very well-known in the local community and used to stop and chat to his neighbours.

'We know he was seen at 9am on Sunday April 1 in his front garden, where he stopped and chatted to passers-by.

'At around 3.15pm a neighbour took some lunch round to his house. At 6pm concerned neighbours who were unable to rouse Bill gained access to his property and found him.'

Officers were called to the scene at around 6.30pm on Sunday evening

'The motive is still unexplained but there doesn't appear to be any sign of forced entry or any sign of a search within the address. There's also no indication of anything being stolen.

'It's highly likely that the person or persons responsible for this may have left the address heavily blood stained.'

He also pointed out that anyone responsible would have left the address heavily blood-stained.

Neighbours spoke of their shock at the savage killing.

An employee at the local newsagent said Mr Davis had been going there to buy his paper every day for 60 years until difficulty walking meant he couldn’t manage it any more.

‘He would say hello to everybody in the street, he was a really kind bloke,’ he said. ‘You would look at him and think “He’s not 90, he’s about 70”.

‘The amount of stories he’s told me and the medals he has shown me – it was unreal.

‘What happened yesterday was a proper shock. It’s absolutely tragic.

‘We heard that somebody had broken in and stabbed him after he tried to challenge them but the police are not telling us anything.’

Pamela Griffin, 72, who lived opposite Mr Davis for more than 20 years, said: ‘William was a lovely man, very kind and generous and would talk to anyone. He would always talk about his time in the Navy. He was very proud of his war medals.

‘I last saw him on Saturday afternoon. He was pottering in his front garden and looked happy and cheerful.’ Police have refused to say how Mr Davis died or whether there were any signs of a break-in at his home. They described him as a ‘very well-regarded, nice elderly gentleman’.

Mr Davis is believed to have served during World War Two and been awarded several medals.