A junkie mum who battered her decorated war veteran neighbour to death so she could profit from his will was today jailed for life after being convicted of murder.

Evil Charlotte Frazier-Doody, 36, savagely beat frail 92-year-old William Davis around the head with a “heavy object” believed to be a saucepan after conning her way into his home by bringing him a meal.

William, who was known as Bill and had nine medals from serving with the Royal Navy in World War Two, was found by neighbours in his heavily bloodstained terraced house in Willenhall, West Midlands, on April 1.

Despite his horrific injuries, brave William managed to survive the attack for three hours but died in hospital later that evening.

Self-confessed heroin user Frazier-Doody, who lived opposite and claimed to look out for the widower, attacked him as he lay “defenceless” on the floor of his home.

Frazier-Doody denied murder but today a jury of three men and nine women took just four hours 40 minutes to return a unanimous guilty verdict at Wolverhampton Crown Court.

Judge John Warner sentenced Frazier-Doody to life and ordered her to serve a minimum of 20 years behind bars.

He told her: “Only two people know the true circumstances of what happened on that day and why he came to be murdered and one of them is no longer with us.

“In what should have been the safety and security of his own home, he was savagely beaten to death by you, one of his neighbours and that involved the use of some kind of substantial object.

“He suffered many blows to his head and it is clear that he was either attacked when on the floor or the attack continued when he fell on the floor.

“He also clearly tried to protect himself judging by the injuries to his arms and forearms.

“He was obviously desperately grabbing your hair and he pulled out a clump of it.

“But clearly he was no match for you and whatever weapon you were using.

“In my judgement the motive for this frenzied attack remains a mystery and will continue to be so unless you decide to say at some stage what actually happened and why.”

Earlier, the court heard Frazier-Doody had been heard boasting about benefiting from William’s will after he died.

Peter Grieves-Smith, prosecuting, said: “The only conceivable explanation for the violence is that she wanted money and that led to violence.

“If there be another explanation we haven’t heard it, and in our submission it is a safe and sound inference from all the evidence.

“Violence against a man she knew to be elderly and physically frail, violence in his own home.

“He was attacked in his back room. Experts believe the blows were delivered when he was lying on the ground, defenceless.”

Mr Grieves-Smith said CCTV cameras caught her driving her moped towards Mr Davis’ home shortly before the murder.

Nothing except a set of saucepans was missing from his home and his wallet - containing £280 - was still in his pocket.

After the brutal killing, William was described as a fiercely independent decorated war veteran who was father to two, grandfather to four and a great-grandfather to one.

He worked as a locksmith after leaving the Navy after serving in Japan, Malta and Dunkirk, William got married to Clara.

She died in 2006, three years after they marked their diamond wedding anniversary.

Speaking after the case, Martin Lindop, from West Midlands Crown Prosecution Service, said: “William Davis was a war veteran who had served his country with great courage and pride.

“He was extremely independent, but his neighbours would always assist him when he needed any help. To this extent, he trusted those around him.

“On the afternoon of 1 April 2012, neighbours heard banging from Mr Davis’ house.

“They went to investigate, but initially did not find anything.

“Later that afternoon they went back to his house, used a key that one of them had been given previously, went inside and found Mr Davis lying in a pool of blood.

“He had multiple head injuries, which an expert has said were caused by repeated blows using a heavy object. Paramedics were unable to revive him.

“We do not know what motivated Charlotte Frazier-Doody to kill Mr Davis. The only property missing from the address was a set of saucepans.

“She was addicted to heroin and crack cocaine. However, she has never told the truth about what happened.

“Our thoughts are today with the family and friends of Mr Davis and I hope that the outcome of the trial will go some way to help them to deal with their loss.”