Richard Curtis has admitted it’s unlikely the Love Actually sequel will feature a tribute to the late Alan Rickman .

The movie’s writer and director has said time constraints in his Comic Relief sequel mean he’s unable to devote time to exploring what happened to every original Love Actually character

When asked by Press Association if he would pay tribute to Alan, Richard replied: “You know dealing with Alan is very complicated so not really."

“We’re not doing everyone," he added.

"We’re doing about two thirds of people.”

He added that Emma Thompson, who played Alan's character's wife in the film, would not be featured either, explaining: “Ems isn’t in it. She just can’t do it.”

Alan and Emma’s storyline was one of the most poignant in the original movie; her Karen was heartbroken after discovering Alan’s Harry bought his much younger secretary an expensive necklace for Christmas, while giving her a simple CD.

A devastated Karen accused Harry of making a fool of her and a mockery of their marriage, but the film ended with her appearing to have decided to stay with him for the sake of their two young children.

Alan passed away last year, aged 69, after a battle with cancer.

It's believed Emma visited him shortly before his death, as she tweeted after the tragic news: "I have just kissed him goodbye."

It’s been more than a decade since Love Actually graced our screens, so fans of the festive and romantic film were thrilled last week when it was announced the cast are reuniting for a special Comic Relief movie called Red Nose Day Actually .

Original stars Liam Neeson and Thomas Brodie-Sangster have been pictured recreating their famous scene on London’s Southbank, where newly widowed Daniel talked all things love with his heartbroken stepson Sam.

But it's actress Olivia Olson - aka Joanna - that has everyone talking!

Schoolboy Sam’s American love interest Joanna was last seen boarding a flight to New York after treating besotted Sam to his first kiss.

But Olivia's appearance on set has got everyone wondering if Sam and Joanna actually become a couple and stick it out for the long run?!

After all, why else would Joanna randomly be on South Bank at the exact same time as Daniel and Sam? Though it is a romantic comedy and everyone knows there are lots of coincidences in romcom land.

Olivia was just 11 years old when she wowed audiences with her rendition of Mariah Carey's All I Want For Christmas Is You.

She's now 24 years old.

Since Love Actually, she's become a successful voice actor, working on the likes of Phinneas and Ferb which also, in a twist, starred her Love Actually beau Thomas!

She's also released an album called Beauty Is Chaos and has a popular YouTube channel.

In the original film, young Sam was going through the utter agony of being in love with someone who didn’t even know he existed… so, on learning Joanna would be singing at the school Christmas concert, he decided to learn the drums to impress her.

Sadly for Sam, it all seemed to go wrong when she declared she wanted everyone for Christmas (not just Sam) and then darted off to grab a taxi to the airport with her mum.

But then Daniel stepped in to ensure true love would prevail, and whisked Sam off to the airport, watched as he broke through security and tracked down Joanna’s plane to say his goodbyes.

She responded by giving him a kiss before boarding.

The cast were down on South Bank recreating the famous scene from the 2003 movie, where Sam and Daniel talk about love.

Look how grown up Sam is!

The cherubic blond-haired youngster that made hearts melt back in 2003 has been replaced by a rugged, all grown up man.

He even has a moustache!

Red Nose Day Actually is set 14 years after the original movie, so Sam and Olivia would be in their 20s now.

The ten-minute short has been written by Richard Curtis himself (the original's director and writer), and has the likes of Hugh Grant, Martine McCutcheon, Keira Knightley and Liam returning.

His short sequel will see many of the 2003 rom-com's characters dealing with life in the present day, 14 years after the events of the original film took place.

Speaking about the return of one of his most beloved creations, the British director said: "Over the years I've enjoyed doing Red Nose Day specials on TV things I've worked on – Blackadder , The Vicar of Dibley , and Mr Bean .

"It seemed like a fun idea this year to do a special sketch based on one of my films, since Red Nose Day is now in both the UK and America.

"I would never have dreamt of writing a sequel to Love Actually , but I thought it might be fun to do ten minutes to see what everyone is now up to."

And of the likes of Hugh and Keira returning in their roles as the Prime Minister and Juliette, Lucia Moniz (Aurelia), Thomas Brodie-Sangster (Sam), Olivia Olson (Joanna), Bill Nighy (Billy), Marcus Brigstocke (Mikey), and Rowan Atkinson (Rufus) have all signed up to reprise their roles as well.

And clearly delighted to have so many of the original cast back on board to tell the next chapter of his noughties rom-com, Richard said:

"We've been delighted and grateful that so many of the cast are around and able to take part – and it'll certainly be a nostalgic moment getting back together and recreating their characters 14 years later.

"We hope to make something that'll be fun – very much in the spirit of the original film and of Red Nose Day – and which we hope will help bring lots of viewers and cash to the Red Nose Day shows."

However, fans of the show will have to be content with re-watching the original till Spring, as the Love Actually sketch won't be broadcast until part of Red Nose Day 2017 , March 24, on BBC One.

The original film followed the lives of eight very different couples in London (and abroad), dealing with their love lives in various interconecting tales all set during a frantic Christmas month.