Love Actually fans have revisited the 'modern day' classic romantic comedy 20 years since it's release many have since been blindside by a blunder which has now 'ruined' the movie.

The hit Christmas film starring Hugh Grant, Dame Emma Thompson, Bill Nighy, Martine McCutcheon and Keira Knightley has been watched by millions across the globe.

But the sad scene in the otherwise feel-good film which shows Emma Thompson' s character Karen finding out her cheating husband, Harry, the late Alan Rickman, has sparked social media backlash.

In one of the most heartbreaking moments in the film, Karen breaks down in tears in her bedroom as it dawns on her that her husband has been unfaithful after she finds a gift that is for his mistress.

Standing alone in her bedroom and wiping the tears from her face, Karen is seen rearranging her bed before leaving the room.

However, eagle-eyed viewers have pointed out a major mistake - there are no pillows on the bed.

One wrote: "Why doesn't she have any pillows?"

Another posted: "Emma Thompson. There's no pillows on the bed in the scene where she cries after not getting the necklace."

A third said: "Just noticed Emma Thompson and Alan Rickman have no pillows on their bed in Love Actually and quite frankly the whole film is ruined for me."

Another wrote: "Whaaaat?? No wonder they're a miserable couple, they've not slept for 20 years!"

But others were convinced the pillows were hiding under the duvet.

Someone else added: "They are there!!!! Under the duvet!"

But a critic of the movie – loved by millions – quipped on twitter: "The lack of pillows is the least of that film's problems."

Meanwhile some of the cast have been got back together to reminiscing over making of the movie as viewers in the US tuned in for the Love Actually TV special to mark the 20-year anniversary of the festive classic.

Five of the original cast members, including the now grown-up Thomas Brodie-Sangster, 32, and Olivia Olson, 30, sat down with Diane Sawyer to chat about the legacy of the 2003 Richard Curtis movie and share behind the scenes secrets.

Lead actor Hugh called an iconic scene in Love Actually the 'most excruciating thing ever committed to celluloid' during the special.

But in the reunion, Hugh Grant even revealed how he really feels about his character's iconic Downing Street dance scene in the festive favourite.

He told Sawyer: “I watched it for the first time this past Christmas since the premiere. And I'd forgotten how good it was.”

Fans will remember the character getting his groove on to the Pointer Sisters' Jump in the offices at Number 10 - before being caught by his secretary.

Sadly for Love Actually Fans there's no date planned for The Laughter & Secrets of Love Actually: 20 Years Later as yet.