They're reuniting to celebrate the 20th anniversary of the comedy - but what happened to the cast of Love Actually in the years since?

An hour-long special will air on US network ABC on November 29, with no current UK release date, and will include Emma Thompson, 63, Hugh Grant, 62, Bill Nighy, 72, and Laura Linney, 58, who all memorably starred in the movie.

The Laughter & Secrets of Love Actually: 20 Years Later sees journalist Diane Sawyer interview the actors as well as writer and director Richard Curtis.

Since its release in 2003, Love Actually, which follows the intertwined stories of various characters in the build up to December 25, has become a bona fide Christmas classic.

But while it's been easy to keep tabs on Hugh and high profile cast-mates like Keira Knightley over the two decades since the film landed in cinemas, whatever happened to Joanna the singing schoolgirl or 'god of sex' Colin Frissell?

Here, FEMAIL reveals the very different fortunes of the movie's cast - from Oscar-nominated performances to a Game of Thrones role and a gigging comedian...

SAM (THOMAS BRODIE-SANGFORD)

Game of Thrones fans might have noticed a familiar face beyond the Wall in early seasons of the popular show.

Jojen Reed was played by Thomas Brodie-Sangster, the child star who played grieving Liam Neeson's stepson Sam in Love Actually.

The actor, who runs through the airport to tell his schoolgirl crush he loves her during the film's big finale, had a recurring role in the HBO series, as a young heir tasked with helping to protect Bran Stark.

The now 32-year-old has starred in the hit sci-fi adaptation Maze Runner and in 2017 he starred in a 15 minute sequel to Love Actually, shown on the BBC as part of Comic Relief's Red Nose Day.

Thomas has enjoyed film success in Nanny McPhee, Nowhere Boy - in which he played a young Paul McCartney - and Star Wars Episode VII: The Force Awakens.

Speaking to People about being in the film, he said: 'I remember already having the part and going into the read-through and not knowing who else was in it. I'd just go, "Oh, it's another job. Great. I'm on another job."

'And then all these faces started walking in through the door and I realised that this is probably quite big.'

JOANNA (OLIVIA OLSON)

Olivia Olson was 11 when she starred as the adorable schoolgirl who stole her classmate Sam's heart - and stunned viewers with her powerful rendition of Mariah Carey's All I Want for Christmas is You.

At the time, her singing was so good that director Richard Curtis was reportedly worried the audience wouldn't believe it was her own voice, and trained her to make it sound 'more believable'.

Now, 30, Olivia's incredible singing voice saw her release her first EP 'Beauty is chaos' in 2013, before releasing album Nowhere Land in June 2018.

The LA-based actress and singer has also been part of the cast behind two animated series - the Cartoon Network's Adventure Time, in which she voiced Marceline the Vampire Queen, and Disney's Phineas and Ferb, in which she voiced Vanessa Doofenshmirtz.

She will feature in the reunion special, 'reliving' the classic Christmas tune she performed in the movie with viewers.

In 2019, she featured as one of many stars taking part in the ITV reality series The X Factor: Celebrity.

When asked what she would like viewers to know about her, Olivia told MailOnline at the time: ‘For the love of god I’m so much more than the Love Actually girl!’

Olivia also admitted she hadn't seen much of the Love Actually cast since the film although she did reunite with Thomas Brodie-Sangster.

She said: ‘Well the last time I saw Thomas [Brodie-Sangster] was when we filmed the Love Actually Red Nose Day sequel and I haven’t seen him much since then.

‘I live in Los Angeles and back in the day cell phones weren’t even a thing. When you left you just left, and it was like “bye”! But even then I don’t have my AOL anymore!

‘So we didn’t really stay in touch but we did play co-stars in one of the animated shows that I did. And it was such a funny, random occurrence that we both got cast. They wrote it in that his character had a crush on my character.'

COLIN FRISSELL (KRIS MARSHALL)

Aside from his memorable turn as would-be ladies' man Colin Frissell in Love Actually, Kris Marshall, now 49, is perhaps best known for playing Nick Harper in the comedy series My Family.

Optimistic geek Colin travels to Wisconsin in Love Actually, in search of American women who will appreciate that 'Stateside, I am Prince William'.

Since then Marshall has appeared in the BBC film Heist, the independent British rom-com Sparks & Embers in 2015, and starred in a long-running ad campaign for BT.

He played lead detective DI Humphrey Goodman in the BBC drama Death in Paradise from 2014 to 2017. He also showed off his acting chops in the ITV adaptation of Jane Austen's Sanditon.

He shares two children with wife Hannah Dodkins, who he married in 2012. The family live in Bath together.

MARK (ANDREW LINCOLN)

Young Sam had competition in the broken heart stakes from camera man Mark, who struggles to be around his best friend's wife Juliet [played by Keira Knightley] after falling in love with her himself.

One of Love Actually's most famous scenes shows Mark standing outside the couple's house in the snow to finally tell Juliet how he feels - via a series of hand-scrawled cardboard signs, and to a soundtrack of carollers singing Silent Night.

Since then, Andrew Lincoln, 49, has gone on to enjoy success Stateside, where he starred as sheriff's deputy Rick Grimes in the hugely popular AMC series The Walking Dead.

Lincoln has received various awards and nominations for his portrayal of Rick Grimes; including Saturn Award for Best Actor on Television in 2015 and 2017.

In July 2022, Andrew announced he would be returning to his popular show for a The Walking Dead spin-off.

He will reprise his roles as Rick for the AMC+ series in 2023, which will replace the Rick Grimes movies that were announced when Lincoln left the show in 2018.

Announcing the news during a surprise appearance at Comic-Con, Andrew said: 'This is kind of overwhelming. Because you are the hardest of the hardcore fans, we have something we want to tell you first.'

Andrew has two children, Matilda and Arthur, with Gael Anderson, daughter of Ian Anderson, flautist and vocalist of Jethro Tull.

DAISY (LULU POPPLEWELL)

Schoolgirl Daisy, the daughter of Emma Thompson and Alan Rickman's characters, was memorably cast as a lobster in her school nativity play in Love Actually.

Now 31, former child star Lulu Popplewell is a writer and stand-up comedienne.

Lulu previously voiced the character of Lyra Belacqua in the BBC Radio 4 version of His Dark Materials, and her older sister is Anna Popplewell, who played Susan Pevensie in the Chronicles of Narnia films.

In October 2020, she criticised Love Actually for being 'cheesy' and showing women as 'passive objects'.

The comedian made the comments during an appearance on podcast Almost Famous, adding that she thinks the classic Christmas flick is a 's**t film'.

Speaking about her experience doing the film when she was 12-years-old, Lulu said: 'I don't regret it at all. Look, softly be it spoken I think it's a s**t film.

'I think it's aged badly. All the women in it are sort of passive objects. I think that there was an article describing them as passive objects to be acquired.

'On re-watching it's not great. You also have to remember that he [Richard Curtis] was writing in the context of the time. I mean I don't know how he excuses more recent work. But it was in 2003 or whenever it was out.

'But it is also not for me because I don't like cheese. I'm glad people like it.'

NATALIE (MARTINE MCCUTCHEON)

She was previously best known for playing Tiffany in Eastenders, but since Love Actually Martine McCutcheon will forever be the Downing Street staffer who swears like a sailor and wins the heart of the Prime Minister, played by Hugh Grant.

Since playing Natalie, McCutcheon, who won an Olivier award for her role as Eliza in My Fair Lady in the West End, has made guest appearances in Spooks, starred in a Tesco ad campaign, and published a novel, The Mistress.

In 2016 she was unveiled as a new full-time panellist on the ITV show Loose Women, but left after one season.

English actress Martine, 46, has been married to musician husband Jack McManus, 38, since 2012. The couple share son Rafferty.

The reunion special on US network ABC will also include a message from Martine.

In October 2022, Martine revealed that she turns down most job offers in order to spend time with her husband Jack, and their son Rafferty, seven.

She struggled to have children, encountering several miscarriages due to Lyme disease which caused her body to be too weak to carry a child.

The former EastEnders actress explained how she's not going to get another child to share precious childhood moments with.

Martine explained to The Mirror: 'With filming, you have to be on call 24/7 and it's normally 17-hour days. So that's the reason why, for movies and TV dramas, I've taken a step back.

'We've only got the one child and I don't want to miss anything. I'm not going to get another one to get those moments with. When jobs come in for myself and Jack, we say, ''Family first for us''.'

'Rafferty is so precious… we're so lucky to have him. And what is the point if we're never going to be around to do the school pick-up or drop off?

'We have to say, ''OK, take that job and leave the other three.'' It's hard. You want to be able to do them all, but you just can't.'

BILLY MACK (BILL NIGHY)

Bill Nighy stole the show in Love Actually as an ageing rocker in search of one last hit for old time's sake - a role that won him a BAFTA for Best Supporting Actor.

The actor, now 72, has enjoyed a career resurgence in the years since the classic rom com was released, racking up roles in major franchises like Pirates of the Caribbean, Harry Potter and the Best Exotic Marigold Hotel.

Nighy has also lent his talents to several children's and young adult films, with roles in Detective Pikachu and Arthur Christmas. He also appeared in the 2016 film version of Dad's Army.

Known for his classic style and dapper suits, Nighy was listed as one of the 50 best-dressed over-50s by The Guardian in 2013 and one of GQ's 50 best-dressed British men in 2015.

JULIET (KEIRA KNIGHTLEY)

Keira Knightley's star continued to rise and rise after she appeared as Juliet in Love Actually at the age of 18.

In the years since, Knightley has gone on to deliver Oscar-nominated performances in Pride and Prejudice and The Imitation Game.

The British star, 37, has previously been listed among Hollywood's highest paid actresses.

Keira is married to Klaxons keyboard player James Righton, and the pair married in an intimate ceremony in the South of France in 2013.

The frugal starlet made sure to keep costs down by having just 11 guests at the wedding itself, and 50 at the reception.

Keira and James welcomed their first child, daughter Edie, now seven, in 2015.

They confirmed that they had welcomed their second child Delilah in September 2019 when they were seen pushing the baby in a pram on a walk in London.

PETER (CHIWETEL EJIOFOR)

His character Peter had few lines in Love Actually, but Chiwetel Ejiofor has become one of the most successful of the film's alumni.

He was nominated for an Oscar, a Golden Globe and a BAFTA for his searing performance as Solomon Northup in the film 12 Years a Slave.

The actor also starred opposite Thandie Newton in the big-screen adaptation of Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie's novel, Half of a Yellow Sun.

He is also an acclaimed stage actor - his portrayal of Othello at the Donmar Warehouse in 2008 earned him an Olivier award for Best Actor.

Chiwetel, 45, has since starred in Doctor Strange, The Lion King, and The Boy Who Harnessed the Wind.

MIA (HEIKE MAKATSCH)

German actress Heike Makatsch plays Mia, who makes her intentions towards her married boss - played by the late Alan Rickman - more than clear in the movie as staff prepare for the annual work Christmas party.

Bemused but intrigued, Harry buys Mia a necklace as a Christmas present, which his wife Karen (played by Emma Thompson) discovers and thinks is for her.

Karen holding back tears after tearing the wrapping paper off a CD from her husband - and realising he bought the necklace for another woman - is one of the most moving scenes in the film.

Since playing temptress Mia, Heike, a former flame of Daniel Craig, has appeared in German productions and also played Leisel's mother in the movie version of The Book Thief in 2013.

Heike, 51, has appeared on the panel of the German TV 'Goldene Kamera' Awards and lives in Berlin.

DAVID (HUGH GRANT)

Still going strong nearly 20 years after starring as newly elected British Prime Minister David in Love Actually, Hugh Grant remains an icon of the British screen.

Grant appears to pick and choose occasional film roles that appeal rather than working on back-to-back projects.

He appeared in the sci-fi drama Cloud Atlas in 2012 and won widespread acclaim for his role in Stephen Frears comedy drama Florence Foster Jenkins, opposite Meryl Streep.

Grant gave his talents to surprise hit film Paddington 2 in 2017 and a Very English Scandal in 2018, as well as The Gentlemen in 2019.

Since Love Actually, Grant has also become a father of five, welcoming children with two different women.

In September 2011 he had a daughter, Tabitha, with Tinglan Hong. In September 2012, Grant had his second child, a son, with Swedish television producer Anna Eberstein.

In December that year Hong gave birth to Grant's third child, a son, after they reunited briefly.

In December 2015 he and Eberstein had a second child together, a daughter, with their third child together born in early 2018. Grant and Eberstein married in May 2018.

SARAH (LAURA LINNEY)

Three-time Oscar nominee Laura Linney played Sarah in Love Actually, who prioritised caring for her brother over her secret crush on her colleague Karl in the movie.

Since playing Sarah, she's appeared in numerous acclaimed films, including Kinsey and The Savages.

She starred in Sully, the Clint Eastwood movie about a pilot who tried to make an emergency landing on New York's Hudson River, alongside Tom Hanks.

In 2017 she joined Netflix hit drama Ozark alongside Jason Bateman, a performance which saw her Screen nominated for the Actors Guild Award.

KAREN (EMMA THOMPSON)

Emma Thompson, who plays a wife who discovers her husband has bought a necklace for another woman, is responsible for many of Love Actually's most memorable scenes.

The acclaimed British actress, an Oscar and a BAFTA winner, has appeared in everything from Harry Potter to an instalment of Men in Black in the years since the movie's release.

She appeared in the most recent Bridget Jones movie alongside her fellow Love Actually cast-member Colin Firth, and was also part of the cast for Disney's action version of Beauty and the Beast.

In an exclusive clip of ABC's special, Dame Emma recalls watching Love Actually for the first time.

She says: 'Hugh came up behind me as we were walking out and said "is that the most psychotic thing we've ever been in?"'

Grant also reveals that he thought he would 'hate' the iconic dancing scene in Downing Street. 'But I will give myself the credit of having the secretary catch me,' he says.

In another clip, Curtis tells Sawyer: 'I do think that the way to think about life is that every day has the potential just to be gorgeous.'

JAMIE (COLIN FIRTH)

As Jamie, Colin Firth escapes to France after learning his brother has been sleeping with his other half behind his back.

But the would-be author finds love again with his Portuguese housekeeper in the Christmas classic.

Since then he's appeared in acclaimed films including The King's Speech, Tom Ford's A Single Man, and the John le Carré adaptation Tinker Tailor Soldier Spy.

Colin went on to appear in Bridget Jones's Baby, Kingsman: The Golden Circle, Mamma Mia! Here We Go Again and Mary Poppins Returns.