The Cincinnati Reds radio broadcasts will remain on 700 WLW for at least the next five years as the two organizations came together to renew their broadcast deal. The extension should come as no surprise given that the Reds games on the radio have been sent out from 700 WLW’s radio tower since 1969.

While many of us use our phones or smart devices to stream radio stations these days, the reach of the radio waves from 700 WLW still get out there to states as far as Texas under the right conditions and that kind of reach is still important because not everywhere has wifi or cell service, particularly when you’re driving. But the car you’re in will still pick up a radio station. No other local station has that kind of carry.

While we are talking about broadcast deals, we still don’t know entirely what’s going to happen with the televised games at this point. It seems that Bally Sports parent company Diamond Sports Group, which is a subsidiary of Sinclair Broadcast Group, is on the verge of filing for bankruptcy. That would put Major League Baseball teams under the Bally Sports umbrella in the position to take back their television rights. What they would do with those rights remains a bit cloudy. In the short term it would seem that the plan would be to put local games on MLB.tv with an “in-market” streaming option as well as possibly have the local games show up on MLB Network while everyone tries to secure another option for their games.

We covered much of that a week ago, but there’s another wrinkle now coming up. Another company which owns the broadcast rights to several Major League Baseball teams (as well as several other professional sports league rights) – Warner Bros Discovery is looking to get out of the regional sports network business according to The Wall Street Journal. They have alerted the teams that they have deals with that they can’t pay their broadcast rights fees and that bankruptcy is on the table for them if the teams and leagues do not want to take over the rights. They have the broadcast rights to the Colorado Rockies, Pittsburgh Pirates, and Houston Astros.

That would put a total of 17 Major League Baseball teams television contracts on the block. Teams are going to fall well short of what they were expecting to get from their rights deals in the short term. It will be interesting to see how all of this plays out over the next few years as teams who remain with a network who can make their payments could have large advantages in revenue over teams who don’t and won’t be able to get “pre-cord cutting” prices if they do find a new network to broadcast their games on your local cable/satellite provider.