The Cincinnati Reds and their Cleveland counterparts will officially get their Cactus League play underway for the 2021 slate tomorrow afternoon. Your ears will be able to follow along, as a regular radio broadcast is scheduled to be carried on WLW, as well as via the MLB At-Bat app.

There will be no televised feed, however, and as of yet there has been no concrete information from FS-Ohio (or Bally, or whatever it is they’ll be calling themselves this season) about when, or where, they’ll televise any spring games this year. That said, you’re still going be able to watch the Reds build up their form twice in the coming week.

On Saturday morning, MLB Network announced the first week’s worth of programming, and the Reds will be featured in a pair of live broadcasts twice in that time.

Tuesday will see the Reds on TV first, as they’ll face off against Mike Trout and the Los Angeles Angels at 8:00 PM ET live from Goodyear. That is, of course, assuming Mike Trout is playing that day, which is no guarantee. You could also see some of Raisel Iglesias in that tussle, seeing as he’s now a gainfully paid baseballer for that franchise, or even a mix of Packy Naughton, Jose Iglesias, Juan Graterol, Phil Gosselin, or Scott Schebler, as each is in camp as non-roster invitees for the AL West’s purveyor of sport.

Wednesday will feature more live Reds ball against a Los Angeles foe, this time with the Reds facing off against the reigning World Series champs. The Dodgers will play host to the Reds at their Camelback Ranch facility, with another 8:00 PM ET start time scheduled. I’m not sure I really need to list the former Reds that might feature in that one seeing as it’s a mix of a Cy Young winner, a guy who has thrice received MVP votes in blue, a top pitching prospect, and Matt Davidson, but there is your teaser nonetheless.

We’ll have more on these two contests once lineups and pitching plans are further announced, but rest assured you’ve got at least a little bit of Reds baseball for your eyes to absorb in the coming days.