Rockets' Jalen Green Encourages Fans To Attend Draft Party: 'Be There and Show Up!'

The Houston Rockets will host a party for fans during the first round of the 2024 NBA Draft on Wednesday. The event will take place at the George R. Brown Convention Center on June 26.

Chris Paul Reacts To Clip Of Ex-Houston Rockets Teammate

Gerald Green most recently played in the NBA during the 2018-19 season when he was a member of the Houston Rockets. That season, he averaged 9.2 points, 2.1 rebounds and 2.5 assists per contest while shooting 40.0% from the field and 35.4% from the three-point range in 73 games.

Green Headlines Rockets' Broadcast Team

LAKE CHARLES, La. - The Houston Rockets recently announced their broadcasting team for the upcoming 2023-24 NBA season. Craig Ackerman and Ryan Hollins will continue to handle play-by-play duties with Vanessa Richardson as the sideline reporter.

Top five NBA Slam Dunk Contests of all time

Based on the field, this year's NBA Slam Dunk Contest might not be the most exciting. However, it does provide the perfect opportunity to revisit the best contests in the event's history since its inception.

Opinion: The Phoenix Suns Should Bring Back Gerald Green

View the original article to see embedded media. On August 27, NBA veteran Gerald Green still remains a free agent available for any team in the NBA to

NBA Veteran Gerald Green Is Still A Free Agent

View the original article to see embedded media. On Thursday, August 25, Gerald Green still remains a free agent available for any of the 30 teams in the

Former Rockets Fan Favorite Signs With BIG3

During his time with the Houston Rockets, Gerald Green was a fan favorite. But now, he's taking his talents to a new league and joining the BIG3. According to ESPN, Gerald Green is signing with Bivouac for the upcoming BIG3 season this summer.

Veteran guard Gerald Green signs with team in Puerto Rico

Green, a 12-year veteran, will head overseas for the first time since 2011.

Gerald Green Makes Bold Claim About Kevin Porter Jr: "We Could Be Looking At The Next James Harden."

Rockets guard Kevin Porter Jr. has drawn a lot of comparisons since his days over at USC. From Kelly Oubre Jr. to Nick young, there are plenty of names people think of when they see this young stud play.

Gerald Green Lost His Finger While Competing Against His Brother Over Who Could Touch The Highest Point On A Door Frame

Gerald Green had a memorable stint in the NBA. He entered the league in 2005 when he was drafted by the Boston Celtics. Within 2 years, Green became a fairly popular figure, thanks to his incredible dunking ability.

Gerald Green Says The Rockets Could Have Won The Championship In 2018: "If Chris Paul Doesn't Get Hurt, We Win A Ring. Easy. We Would've Beat Cleveland Pretty Easy. We Were Special."

The Houston Rockets enjoyed an excellent era of basketball with James Harden leading the franchise as their superstar from 2012 to 2021. Starting in 2017, they acquired legendary point guard Chris Paul to join Harden, building a team of elite role players around the duo.

Gerald Green’s love for the game of basketball remains unwavering

Former Rockets guard Gerald Green seeks NBA return following a two-month stint on the Houston coaching staff. Gerald Green brushed aside his teammate, Marvin Smith, to create space between his defender.

A Former NBA Star Is Reportedly Unretiring

According to Shams Charania of The Athletic, Gerald Green (who was an assistant coach for the Houston Rockets) is unretiring, and signing with the Rio Grande Valley Vipers to try to return to the NBA.

A Former NBA Star Is Reportedly Unretiring

According to Shams Charania of The Athletic, Gerald Green (who was an assistant coach for the Houston Rockets) is unretiring, and signing with the Rio Grande Valley Vipers to try to return to the NBA.

Former 1st Round-Pick Is Reportedly Unretiring

According to Shams Charania of The Athletic, Gerald Green (who was an assistant coach for the Houston Rockets) is unretiring, and signing with the Rio Grande Valley Vipers to try to return to the NBA.

A Former NBA 1st Round-Pick Is Reportedly Unretiring

According to Shams Charania of The Athletic, Gerald Green (who was an assistant coach for the Houston Rockets) is unretiring, and signing with the Rio Grande Valley Vipers to try to return to the NBA.

A Former NBA Star Is Reportedly Unretiring

According to Shams Charania of The Athletic, Gerald Green (assistant coach for the Houston Rockets) is unretiring, and plans to sign in the NBA's G-League to try to return to the NBA.

Report: Rockets assistant coach Gerald Green unretiring, plans to sign in G League

Green hasn't appeared in an NBA game in more than two-and-a-half years, as he last played with the Houston Rockets during the 2019 Western Conference Semifinals against the Golden State Warriors.

Rockets look for two in a row vs. Celtics

Another one at the Toyota Center tonight! Houston Rockets vs. Boston Celtics - Sunday, October 24, 2021 @ 6pm CST Location: Toyota Center, Houston, Texas TV: NBATV Radio: Sportstalk 790 Online: Rockets App Celtics SB Nation site: Celtics Blog The Rockets are 1-1 and staying in H-town to take on the Celtics tonight.