Serbia holds the status of a republic non-federal state (Constitution of the Republic of Serbia, 2021). The territory of Serbia includes two autonomous provinces: the Autonomous Province of Vojvodina and the Autonomous Province of Kosovo and Metohija1, 174 local government units including 145 municipalities, 28 cities and the capital City of Belgrade (Law on the Territorial Organization of the Republic of Serbia, 2020). Although the administrative system has been officially decentralised since 1970, the state has traditionally had a central decision-making role. Since the 1970s, there has been no major restructuring of the administrative structure, which traditionally recognises the national and local levels of administration, except for the autonomous provinces. In line with the EU framework for territorial divisions, Serbia implemented the International Nomenclature of Territorial Units for Statistics Level 2 (NUTS 2) as planning units, but without administrative status at the regional level.

National level

The government of the Republic of Serbia is officially a parliamentary democracy, with a president as the head of state and a prime minister as the head of the government. According to the Law on State Administration (2018) and the Law on Ministries (2022), state administration bodies are organised as 1) ministries, 2) administrative bodies within the ministry, and 3) special organisations. Ministries perform the tasks of state administration, such as participating in shaping government policy, monitoring policy implementation, executing laws and regulations, and inspecting, supervising, and organising public services (services of general economic interest). Currently, there are 25 ministries in the Republic of Serbia. The number of ministries, their name and scope of competence are determined according to the priorities of development at the national level. Inspectorates and directorates are administrative bodies that form part of the ministries and are responsible for official inspections and executive tasks. In the field of spatial planning, the responsible ministries include the Ministry of Construction, Transport and Infrastructure (Section for Spatial Planning and Urbanism); the Ministry of Environmental Protection; the Ministry of European Integration (section for cross-border and transnational cooperation programmes and cooperation with authorities and organisations at the local and regional level for more efficient use of funds); the Ministry of the Economy; the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Management; the Ministry of Mining and Energy; the Ministry for the Care of Villages; the Ministry of Tourism and Youth; and the Ministry of Public Investments. Serbia also has two ministers without portfolio: one is in charge of balanced regional development and the other is responsible for the development of underdeveloped municipalities (Government of the Republic of Serbia: https://www.srbija.gov.rs/link/2497). Secretariats, professional organisations and enterprises, and research and development institutes are types of special organisations in the field of urban and spatial planning.

Provincial level

The Constitution of Serbia (2006) established decentralised territorial units of the autonomous provinces and their local government units. The responsibilities within the administration in the Autonomous Provinces of Vojvodina (45 municipalities and eight cities) and of Kosovo and Metohija (28 municipalities, one city) are determined in the Law on Employees in Autonomous Provinces and Local Government Units (2021). The province is delegated certain powers from the central government, particularly in the realms of legislative, judicial, and executive authority. The tasks of the provincial administration are performed by the provincial secretariats, provincial administrative organisations, as well as public services and directorates. In the provinces, citizens exercise their rights to provincial autonomy (Government of the Republic of Serbia). The Autonomous Province of Kosovo and Metohija is under the provisional administration of the United Nations under Security Council Resolution 1244.

Local level

Local self-government units in Serbia are organised in municipalities, cities and the City of Belgrade (Law on Local Self-Government in Serbia, 2021). The boundaries and seat of the local self-government units are determined by the Law on Territorial Organisation (2020), which defines the criteria for the establishment of municipalities and cities 2. The establishment, abolition and change of the boundaries of a local self-government unit requires a referendum. Serbia is divided into 145 municipalities, 28 cities, and the City of Belgrade. The City of Belgrade consists of 17 city municipalities, each with its own governing structure.

There are 6,158 local settlements in total, of which 193 are urban settlements. The average number of inhabitants per municipality is around 40,000. Urban municipalities have larger populations, some of which have more than 100,000 inhabitants. The smallest municipalities, such as Crna Trava municipality, can have as few as 1,300 inhabitants (according to the 2022 census). The municipal bodies are the Municipal Assembly, the President of the Municipality, the Municipal Council, and the Municipal Administration. The city bodies are analogous, i.e. the City Assembly, the Mayor, the City Council, and the City Administration. The status of the capital city of Belgrade is specific, as it is a NUTS 2 territorial unit, and is also the largest city in Serbia. In the process of EU integration, Serbia is harmonising its legislation with European regulations and standards in the competences of local self-government units and public policies (Law on the Planning System, 2018).

Submunicipality level

In order to meet the needs of the population in a certain area, local self-government units can form a submunicipality unit (mesna zajednica) in accordance with the Law on Local Self-Government (2021). A submunicipality can be formed in a rural or urban settlement if proposed by its citizens and the local administration. In submunicipality units, citizens can participate in meetings, propose initiatives, and, to some extent, influence local policies. The Submunicipality Council also proposes measures for the development of communal activities.

The submunicipality has evolved as a formal local administration in the ex-socialist system of governance to better address the specific needs and concerns of the local population (Vujošević, 2003). As the political landscape in former Yugoslavia changed after the fall of socialism, these administrative structures underwent a dismantling process in most municipalities. While they may no longer hold an official administrative status, the submunicipality units continue to play a significant role in the mobilisation of citizens through participatory planning practice (Čolić and Dželebdžić, 2018).

1 United Nations Security Council Resolution 1244.

2 A municipality is a unit of local self-government which is an economically unified space usually established across an area that represents a natural and geographical entity with at least 10,000 inhabitants, or less in some exceptional cases (Law on Local Self-Government in Serbia, 2021).

The Government of the Republic of Serbia operates in the context of a parliamentary democracy. The government consists of the executive, the legislative, and the judicial branches. The functions and working relations of the three arms of government are defined in the Constitution of Serbia (2006). The executive division is led by the government and president, who appoints the prime minister and the cabinet. The legislative division is represented by the National Assembly (Serbian parliament), consisting of 250 members / deputies elected by political representation, who are responsible for formulating and adopting laws. The judicial division is independent and is headed by the Supreme Court, which is responsible for interpreting the law.

Executive branch

The executive power in Serbia is exercised by the prime minister who is also the Head of the Cabinet. The president of Serbia is a representative of the country. The president is chosen through a popular vote, with the possibility of serving a maximum of two consecutive five-year terms. The president’s accountability lies with the citizens of Serbia rather than the National Assembly. The prime minister, who acts as the head of government, is appointed by the National Assembly based on the president’s recommendation. The prime minister presents the government’s agenda to the National Assembly and proposes the Cabinet of ministers for parliamentary approval. The Cabinet comprises the prime minister, deputy prime ministers, cabinet ministers with portfolios, and cabinet ministers without portfolios.

Legislative branch

The legislative powers are exercised by a unicameral parliament, i.e. the National Assembly, which is composed of 250 elected deputies. The members of parliament are elected in a direct election using a proportional electoral system. The National Assembly is responsible for enacting laws, approving budgets, scheduling a presidential election, approving Cabinet nominees, selecting and dismissing the prime minister and ministers, ratifying international treaties and agreements, and more. Members of the National Assembly of Serbia are elected for a four-year term and have no term limits.

Judicial branch

The judicial branch consists of the constitutional court and several other regular courts. The Supreme Court of Cassation serves as the highest authority within the country’s judicial system, functioning as the ultimate court of appeal and the last legal recourse. Administrative courts and commercial courts are considered courts of special jurisdiction. The judicial branch is overseen by the Ministry of Justice. The Serbian police are responsible for maintaining law and order, as well as enforcing the law.

Serbia was one of the founding members of former Yugoslavia, which existed in various political forms until its disintegration in the 1990s. Still, the current planning doctrine is most often recognised internationally as ‘post-socialist’. The Serbian planning system evolved in the post-WWII period from (a) centralised planning (from 1947 to 1965); (b) political decentralisation and societal self-management planning (from 1965 to 1989); to (c) ‘democratised’ planning, from 1989 to the present (Simmie, 1989; Vujošević and Nedović-Budić, 2006; Zeković and Vujošević, 2018). Urban planning gained significant prominence during the early socialist era. During this period, the primary development driver was a renewal strategy aimed at restoring the functionality of urban areas that had been destroyed during the Second World War, and addressing the housing needs of the expanding urban population. In 1949, the basic Decree on the General Urban Plan evolved as the first comprehensive legal framework in the field of urban development, which, among other things, regulated public participation processes during plan preparation and adoption. The West influenced Eastern and Central European planning practice through the norms and standards in urban design and the development of the Athens Charter in physical planning (Perović, 2008; Nedović-Budić et al., 2011; Čolić and Nedović-Budić, 2021). Spatial planning practice was introduced in the legislation of the former Yugoslavia through the Law on Urban and Regional Spatial Planning (1961). Some key characteristics of planning included a deterministic approach, lengthy procedures, control over land use, and centralised yet interdisciplinary decision-making rooted in research (Hirt, 2012). Planning professionals and other stakeholders mainly relied on technical standards, particularly those related to the design and function of the built environment.

Former Yugoslavia introduced an integrated planning system in the late 1960s that had a partially decentralised structure (Nedović-Budić et al., 2011). The former Yugoslav regime operated as a sort of ‘self-management system’, employing participatory decision-making processes, with the submunicipality serving as the fundamental local unit with significant authority. The 1990s, on the other hand, brought an unstable political situation (civil wars and the disintegration of Yugoslavia) along with a major economic crisis, NATO bombing and isolation of the country, extremely weakened production, and an informal sector economy. These events led to great pressure on cities, demands for affordable housing (along with the mass privatisation of the social/public housing stock, see Zeković et al., 2016), and the proliferation of informal development without the correct construction permit 3 (Milić et al., 2004). That was especially the case in the metropolitan area of Belgrade, where planning instruments and untransformed urban land policy induced excessive urban sprawl – the largest among European metropolises (Zeković et al., 2015).

The period following the 2000s witnessed a growing necessity for planning to embrace greater flexibility and adjust to the dynamics of a transitioning economy. This era saw significant shifts such as the privatisation of public enterprises, a focus on market-driven strategies, intensified efforts to attract foreign direct investments, and the increased influence of political and economic elites on urban development. The process of re-decentralisation led to the introduction of new administrative tiers, the restructuring of existing ones, and the establishment of new statistical regions based on the European NUTS classification, albeit without the accompanying administrative responsibilities.

3 The Ministry of Construction, Transport and Infrastructure created the first database of illegally constructed buildings/facilities (2.05 million or 43.42% of the total number of buildings/facilities in 2017).

The current legal framework governing the spatial and urban planning and development procedures in Serbia is the Law on Planning and Construction (Official Gazette of the Republic of Serbia, No. 72/2009, 81/2009, 64/2010 – Constitutional Court Decision, 24/2011, 121/2012, 42/2013; Constitutional Court Decision, 50/2013; Constitutional Court Decision, 98/2013; Constitutional Court Decision, 132/2014, 145/2014, 83/2018, 31/2019, 37/2019, 9/2020, 52/2021 and 62/2023), and Regulations on the content of and procedure for creating spatial and urban planning documents (Official Gazette of the Republic of Serbia, No. 32/2019). These acts establish the formal regulations for planning processes and instruments, as well as the responsibilities of the relevant planning bodies at all levels of decision-making.

The first version of the Law on Planning and Construction was adopted in 2003, after the democratic changes, integrating the previously separated fields of spatial planning, urban planning, construction land, project management, and the development and legalisation of informal settlements. The subsequent version of the Law underwent 15 amendments from 2009 until 2023, which were motivated by political urgency and the need to direct future development (Ferenčak, 2015). Some of the most prominent changes in the Law were initiated to regulate ownership over urban land, accelerate the procedures for issuing construction permits to private investors, and regulate large-scale informal development. Recent amendments to the Law from 2014 introduced the two-stage public participation in the plan formation process in line with European standards.

Serbia is harmonising its legislation with European regulations and standards in the area of public policies and the planning system, as well as the competences of the local self-government units to govern territorial development. The new aspects in the planning system relate to introducing new instruments of integrated urban development, regulated in the Law on the Planning System (2018). This Law provides the framework for the public policy system, the types and content of planning documents, the mutual compliance of planning documents, the procedure for determining and implementing public policies and the obligation to report on the implementation of planning documents. The Law defines the type and content of the strategy as a main public policy document (Articles 11, 12, and 13). In the field of integrated territorial development, the Law supports urban governance as a theme encompassing economic, societal, and environmental justice in urban settlements.

The competences associated with the formulation and implementation of strategies and local development programmes arising from the Law on the Planning System are delineated within the provisions of the Law on Local Self-Government (2018). Within this legal framework, the municipality and its administrative organs establish the governing rules, fiscal allocations, and annual financial statements, all of which are instrumental in the formulation of policies, as well as strategic plans and programmes (together with traditional planning tools such as spatial and urban plans and municipal development programmes). An open question relates to the readiness and capacities, both at an institutional and individual level, to effectively harness these instruments to attract diverse sources of funding in order to substantiate the municipality’s development priorities.

The Constitution of the Republic of Serbia (Official Gazette of the Republic of Serbia, No. 98/2006 and 115/2021) allocates the responsibilities for spatial and urban planning to national, provincial, and local entities and their corresponding bodies. The main authority for spatial planning at the national level is the Ministry of Construction, Transport and Infrastructure of the Republic of Serbia. The Ministry has a multifaceted role in delineating the legal framework, shaping development policies, assessing law enforcement, and authorising projects with national significance within the Republic of Serbia. These plans include the National Spatial Plan of the Republic of Serbia, Regional Spatial Plans (based on the NUTS 2 division) and Spatial Plans for Special Purpose Areas. The minister issues the ultimate approval for these plans.

In accordance with the Constitution of the Republic of Serbia, the Law on Determining the Competences of the Autonomous Province of Vojvodina (Official Gazette of the Republic of Serbia, No. 99/2009, 67/2012 – Constitutional Court Decision, 18/2020 and 111/2021), and the Law on Planning and Construction, the Provincial Secretariat for Urbanism and Environmental Protection is the competent authority of Autonomous Province of Vojvodina for spatial planning at the sub-national level. The Secretariat is responsible for drafting planning documents adopted by the Assembly of the Autonomous Province of Vojvodina, namely the Regional Spatial Plan and Spatial Plans for Special Purpose Areas for areas located entirely within the territory of the autonomous province.

At the local level, city/municipal administrations and their departments for urban planning are in charge of drafting planning documents adopted by the Local Assembly. Local planning agencies and urban and spatial planning institutes (public or private) have expert roles in drafting plans and facilitating public participation processes. A planning professional who bears the professional title of Authorised Spatial Planner or Urban Planner leads the plan preparation process. The Serbian Chamber of Engineers issues the licences for these positions. The records of the ministry in charge of urban and spatial planning indicate that there were 147 local planning agencies across Serbia in 2002, while this number dropped to 30 public planning agencies in 2015 (Association of Spatial Planners in Serbia). A number of agencies were transformed and became part of the city/municipal administration.

The local Planning Commission performs the professional tasks of expert verification of the compliance of urban projects with the other relevant and higher-level plans, policies and the Law on Planning and Construction. The Commission’s president and members are selected from experts specialising in urban planning, spatial planning, and construction. Additionally, a third of the Commission’s members are appointed based on the minister’s recommendations. Typically, the Planning Commission comprises five members and plan approvals are determined through a voting process.

The traditional planning instruments in Serbian practice are spatial and urban plans that can be drafted at the national, subnational, and local levels. The system of plans in Serbia is top-down, where according to the Law on Planning and Construction, lower-level plans must be in line with higher-level plans (elaborated in the figure ‘Planning system of Serbia’). Spatial planning in Serbia plays a pivotal role in shaping the strategic allocation of activities, signifying both national and regional priorities for socio-economic advancement and environmental protection. The scope, content, and coverage of spatial planning typically extend beyond that of urban planning at the city level, albeit with less detail in terms of specifying precise standards for physical expansion and land use. Plans are published in the Official Gazette of the Republic of Serbia or by the local self-government units, which makes them legally binding.

The Spatial Plan of the Republic of Serbia is a basic spatial planning document at the national level that sets out strategic development priorities and has a regulatory role in the coordination of lower-level plans, the organisation of networks of settlements, the main infrastructure projects, etc. The plan forms a strategic framework through synthesising spatial development priorities in relation to territorial organisation, land, water, forests, mineral resources, environmental protection, the protection of natural and cultural heritage, the defence of the country, the ranking/organisation of infrastructure, and more. The Spatial Plan of the Republic of Serbia until 2035 is in the process of being adopted, led by the Ministry of Construction, Transport and Infrastructure.

In addition to spatial planning, the Law on Planning and Construction and the Law on the Planning System acknowledge other instruments of urban governance at the national level, such as the Sustainable Urban Development Strategy of the Republic of Serbia until 2030 (2019). Planning practice has recently derived a strategy to respond to the requirements of territorial governance of the EU Cohesion Policy. While traditional spatial planning instruments typically address physical development potentials and constraints, the Strategy (2019) outlines fundamental principles and a set of measures that should be integrated into the priority areas of spatial intervention in urban settlements through a participatory approach for resource mobilisation (Čolić et al., 2021). The process of its adoption was led by the Ministry of Construction, Transport and Infrastructure with technical support from the German Agency for International Cooperation.

Although Serbia has no official regional administrative subdivision except for the autonomous provinces, it adopted the international Nomenclature of Territorial Units for Statistics Level 2 (NUTS 2) as units of planning, but not as administrative units. Here the national government and the Ministry of Construction, Transport and Infrastructure are responsible for the adoption of Regional Spatial Plans and Spatial Plans for Special Purpose Areas. Regional spatial plans can be based on NUTS 2 divisions or parts of NUTS 2, i.e. on two or more NUTS 3 regions that are considered as gravitational zones or logical geographical regions. The Spatial Plans for the Special Purpose Areas derive from the Spatial Plan of the Republic of Serbia for the areas that require special treatment due to their natural, cultural, historical, or environmental value for areas of mineral resources, areas of tourist potential, infrastructure expansion, hydropower potential, etc., but also for areas with specific strategic and political interest for the state (Zeković and Maričić, 2022). These plans contain a detailed elaboration of land use for special purposes that allows direct implementation of development within the designated area. The time frame for the preparation of these plans may vary from six months to several years, depending on the plan’s complexity and stakeholder engagement.

At the local level, spatial plans cover the entire area of a local government unit (municipalities/cities), outlining guidelines for development activities, land use, and the conditions for balanced development. Unlike urban planning, these plans do not contain norms or standards for urban regeneration, given their broader scope. The time frame for the preparation of these plans is usually around one year.

Concurrently with spatial planning, general urban planning serves as a crucial tool within local administration units for both strategic and physical development, a concept often referred to internationally as ‘zoning’. The system of general urban planning in Serbia recognises three types of urban plan. The General Urban Plan is a strategic document outlining general spatial development elements, adopted at the city/municipality level. The General Regulation Plan encompasses the same geographical area as the General Urban Plan but further includes land use and regulatory standards, especially for specific zones with more detailed elaboration, such as inner-city areas. This plan provides the necessary ‘granulation’ to enable the direct application of planning norms and standards as a basis for obtaining construction permits at the plot level.

A Detailed Regulation Plan is created and endorsed at the neighbourhood level. This plan features comprehensive planning standards that facilitate the direct implementation of the plan, including the issuance of construction permits. In the context of urban regeneration projects, the Detailed Regulation Plan serves as an essential instrument for altering land use, developing unregulated or informal areas, and establishing regulatory standards as sets of technical rules for plot-level development. The time frame for preparation of urban plans may vary from several months for the lower-level plans, to a year or more for city-level urban plans.

Finally, the Urban Project is an auxiliary planning tool that may serve as a basis for obtaining construction permits. Although not formally acknowledged within Serbia’s planning system, the Urban Project stands as the principal technical documentation for the execution of higher-level plans like the General Regulation Plan.

Within this array of planning instruments, four plans hold the potential to directly facilitate the issuance of construction permits for development: Spatial Plans for the Special Purpose Areas, General Regulation Plans, Detailed Regulation Plans, and Urban Projects. In general, plans at all levels of decision-making are valid until new plans for that area are adopted. The typical duration of the national and city-level plans and strategies is 10 to 15 years.

The planning legislation in Serbia is recognisable in terms of an established legal framework, instruments, procedures, and mechanisms for public participation (Čolić, 2006; Maričić et al., 2018). In the course of planning processes, there is a degree of collaboration among pertinent institutions, whereas the shift towards market-oriented approaches entails negotiations with investors during the planning phase. All plans, except the Urban Project, necessitate a two-phase public participation process involving an early public consultation on the Concept Plan (for 15 days) followed by a public consultation on the Draft Plan (for 30 days). Conversely, the Urban Project mandates only seven days of public participation, including weekends. Within the formalised practice, the primary objective of participation is to safeguard the legal entitlement of participants to engage in the planning process. However, participatory planning in Serbia is frequently perceived as a procedural formality with limited impact on the ultimate planning outcomes (Vujošević and Petovar, 2006; Čolić and Dželebdžić, 2018). The realisation of its potential within the broader planning landscape of Serbia is manifested through small, pragmatic steps and practices that should contribute to effective urban governance on specific challenges (Čolić et al., 2023; Pantić and Čolić, 2023).