Electoral race, amidst numerous procedural obstacles and mutual obstructions, is slowly entering the home stretch, and nearly all media attention of the current campaign has been consumed by the Belgrade elections, where in addition to the City Assembly, councilors in all 17 municipalities are also being elected. This is not only due to the chronic centralism from which not only Serbia suffers, but also due to the fact that last year’s Belgrade elections were the initial spark for the post-election crisis from which we have yet to emerge.

However, on June 2, the electoral race will be run in 66 municipalities and cities across the country, making the pre-election picture far more complex than it might initially appear. If it is exhausting for the average citizen to follow who in Belgrade is boycotting and who is participating in the elections, whose electoral lists have been invalidated and for what reasons, then the electoral equation becomes unsolvable when multiplied by 66. The only common denominator for all elections in local communities is that opposition representatives hope that they could be the ones to dent the dominance of the Serbian Progressive Party (SNS), which has controlled every populated place in the country for the past four years. In about a dozen local self-governments, including central Belgrade municipalities, the opposition has a better than theoretical chance to do just that.

Novi Sad: Experiment of united opposition

At first glance, the situation should be the simplest in Novi Sad. On one side is the SNS coalition, which includes, besides the parties they have long since absorbed, the Socialist Party of Serbia, the Oathkeepers, and the Serbian Radical Party. On the other side, their strongest competitor will be the “United for a Free Novi Sad” list, which survived the splitting of the “Serbia Against Violence” (SPN) coalition. This coalition includes all the parties of the former SPN, as well as the HOPE coalition, the League of Social Democrats of Vojvodina trying to recover from the “communal coalition” with the government, and the activist movement "Bravo." The list is led by Miloš Tubić, president of the City Board of the New Democratic Party of Serbia (Novi DSS), with Borislav Novaković from the People's Movement of Serbia and Vladimir Vrsajkov from the Party of Freedom and Justice (SSP), named as key candidates.

The ruling coalition will certainly receive all the votes obtained by the list of the Alliance of Vojvodina Hungarians, while the “Go-Change - I Am Also Novi Sad” movement list is unquestionably positioned as opposition. Considering that in the parliamentary elections last December, the opposition achieved a result close to that of the ruling party, it should come as no surprise that the SNS reacted vehemently, characterizing the formation of a united opposition list in their typical manner as “the mess a drunkard vomits up after a heavy bout of drinking and reckless mixing of different drinks.”

Miran Pogačar, from the “Bravo” movement, emphasizes to NIN that if the votes received by the Branimir Nestorović movement are also counted as opposition votes, then the people of Novi Sad gave more votes to the opposition in the parliamentary elections last December, which encourages them for the upcoming local elections.

“The opposition has gathered into the largest coalition since the DOS (Democratic Opposition of Serbia) era, and we are certainly aiming for victory. The ruling party has also gathered a broad coalition around itself, creating a referendum-like atmosphere in the city. We believe that the citizens will support us so that we can change Novi Sad,” says Pogačar.

With a clear division between the two camps and a referendum-like atmosphere, one might think that the citizens of Novi Sad will have an easy task in the elections, regardless of whether they support the government or the opposition. However, there will be as many as 14 lists on the ballot paper. Some of them, especially the newly established ones, are suspected of being there just to muddy the waters. The mystery of how they managed to collect signatures will linger over the lists like “For the Right Things, Support GARI,” “Novi Sad, Capital of Vojvodina - Autonomy Movement,” or “A Completely Different Story - City for the Citizens.”

Particularly interesting is the position of the “Heroes” list led by Miša Bačulov, a martial arts trainer, YouTuber, and humanitarian. Although he entered the electoral race suddenly, which is often a reliable indicator of being a satellite of the government, he had procedural problems with the electoral lists similar to those of genuinely opposition lists. Additionally, he continues to accuse government representatives of obstruction, including hacking his phone and expecting the release of private photos. The ballot paper will also feature better-known names like “Enough is Enough,” the Dveri coalition, the People’s Party, and the “I Live for Serbia” movement of Jovana Stojković, or the “Dad, This is for You” movement. Besides the artificial inflation of electoral lists, it is notable that in recent weeks Novi Sad has been covered in graffiti calling for a boycott, even though all parties in Novi Sad are participating in the elections.

Unlike some other municipalities, the SNS in Novi Sad relied on already proven personnel, with the second place on their list being Milan Đurić, the man who took over the city's leadership when Miloš Vučević began his rise in the national executive government. In the first place is dr Vesna Turkulov, who came into the public spotlight at the height of the COVID-19 pandemic when it was revealed that the Clinic for Infectious Diseases, which she directed, had created a sort of “VIP COVID” ward, even though a COVID hospital had started operating. The provincial government, headed by Igor Mirović, dismissed her, but soon the Assembly of the Autonomous Province of Vojvodina assumed the founding rights, taking control of the University Clinical Center. Turkulov cushioned her dismissal with the position of State Secretary in the Ministry of Health.

Niš: New lineup opposite the four coalitions

Another city where the opposition hopes to achieve victory is Niš, a place from which the unraveling of Milošević’s regime began at the local level. Here, the opposition is running in four blocs. The “We Choose Niš” list consists of a group of opposition parties that are not boycotting the Belgrade elections, while the Novi DSS coalition is running together with the Social Democratic Party (SDS), Enough is Enough, the “Niš - My City” movement, the People’s Party, and 12 other associations. Independently from them, the New Face of Serbia, which is otherwise part of the “I Choose to Fight” coalition, is also participating in the elections, this time with the “Niš - Our City” movement led by Branislav Jovanović. The “Go-Change” movement list, under the name “I Am Also Niš,” will also participate in the Niš elections.

A specific feature of the elections in Niš is certainly the group of citizens “Dr Dragan Milić,” led by the director of the Clinic for Cardiovascular Surgery, who gained national recognition when he, along with his colleagues, managed to eliminate the waiting lists. The opposition status of this list was called into question when Milić refused to sign a protocol of non-cooperation with the SNS in April, justifying it by stating that others had refused to sign a protocol on depoliticization. However, in Serbia, nothing indicates that you are not aligned more than a dismissal, and Milić experienced just that when his contract was recently not renewed at the Niš Medical Faculty.

Determined to put an end to factional struggles within their ranks, the SNS has come out with a completely new lineup before the citizens. Leading their list is Dragan Pavlović, the director of the Public Utility Company “Medijana,” while Igor Novaković, the president of the Niš SNS, is second on the list. The third spot is occupied by Milan Lazarević, a cardiovascular surgeon from Niš and the son of General Vladimir Lazarević, a former commander of the Pristina Corps who was convicted by the Hague Tribunal. The name of the current mayor, Dragana Sotirovski, is still not on the list, which she justified by natural generational change, stating that it's time for younger people. Sotirovski has spent six years in politics. The list also does not include old SNS cadres such as Zoran Perišić and Darko Bulatović, nor any of the nine current councilors.

The ballot paper in Niš will be just as colorful as the one in Novi Sad, considering that there are 11 lists on offer. There will also be the “We Won’t Give Niš” list of Bojan Avramović and Vladica Đorđević, former members of the SNS who left the party in protest after the city government “gifted” the Niš airport to the Republic. They participated in previous elections boycotted by the opposition, winning about two thousand votes. According to experts on local conditions, they then withdrew from politics, only to suddenly register a list, although few saw them collecting signatures. There is also the list of the Russian Party, with the first of eight names on the list being that of Tihomir Perić, a man who spent three decades in the Serbian Radical Party.

Milan Zirojević, the editor-in-chief of “Južne vesti,” speaking to NIN about minority lists, says that “Niš is only missing a list of Lusatian Serbs.”

“No one, of course, is against minorities, but here we are talking about the potential political abuse of the right to candidacy, and the legality is also questionable, which is why legal experts should speak out,” concludes Zirojević.

Čačak: Velja, "Dveri"...

Unlike Niš or Novi Sad, the political scene in Čačak is not as overcrowded. The “Serbia Against Violence” coalition did not survive in this city either, but the name remains. Thus, the coalition consisting of the Democratic Party (DS), the People's Movement of Serbia, the Serbia Center Party, the New Face of Serbia, the civic group “Čačak Is Ours,” and the Novi DSS will, under that name, attempt to defeat the parties grouped around the SNS. Among the opposition offerings, the Dveri movement will also be present, along with the former leader Boško Obradović, who returned to local politics after the debacle of the December elections. Another well-known name will appear in these elections. Velimir Ilić, leader of the New Serbia party and former Minister of Construction, is running in the coalition “All for Čačak,” which includes his party, as well as the People's Party, the Movement for the Restoration of the Kingdom of Serbia (POKS), and the Movement of Agriculturalists of Serbia. The list is rounded off by the civic group “Awakening Čačak” and the group “Ivan V.Ćalović.” Like in other places, smaller civic groups needed to prove their opposition credibility, so in that regard, the lawyer Ivan Ćalović had his statement notarized that he would not collaborate with the SNS. However, the local SNS did not believe him, so in a statement, they called this move a “transparently populist maneuver, without any legal weight.”

Valjevo: Will it dawn on the opposition?

To avoid the impression that Belgrade is the only city where lists “fall” due to formalities, the example of Valjevo illustrates this. However, in this city, the coalition “United Valjevo Can - Dawn is Coming,” which is the local name for a part of the parties that constituted “Serbia Against Violence,” along with Novi DSS, was the one filing objections. They filed an objection to the list of the European Green Party, which registered as a list of the Russian national minority, due to non-compliance with gender equality, but the list was returned to the ballot paper after an appeal. Besides the European Green Party, Valjevo residents will also be able to vote for the “Russian Party - Russia and Valjevo in the Heart.” A constant in all local self-governments, including Valjevo, is the list around the SNS, and the offerings are rounded out by the coalitions of POKS and Branislav Nestorović’s movement, as well as the alliance of Dveri and the People’s Party. Due to two candidates for councilors not having residency in the municipality, the election commission invalidated the list of the “Now Movement.”

Užice: The fire changes the balance of power?

The fire at the Duboko landfill, besides further deteriorating the air quality in Užice, has also increased the chances of the opposition in this city, given that the result of the long-standing rule of the SNS can now be even smelled. The ongoing mixing of opposition cards is evidenced by the coalition between the Democratic Party and the Serbia Center party. On the other hand, a separate list will feature the coalition of the Green-Left Front and the People’s Movement of Serbia, as well as the Novi DSS and the New Face of Serbia. Alongside the indispensable list “Aleksandar Vučić - Užice tomorrow,” there is also Healthy Srbija led by Milan Stamatović. A wildcard in this game could be the group of citizens “Sloga,” led by police officer Glišo Vidović. The patriotic colors in these elections are carried by the alliance of POKS, the People’s Party, and Dveri. The list ends with another novelty - for the first time, a group of citizens called “Užice Defensive League – Užice Action” led by lawyer Radovan Novaković is participating in the elections.

Jagodina: "Palma" factor

Perhaps the only local self-government where the SNS does not run together with the SPS and the United Serbia is in Jagodina, where they run on two different lists. This is also the only self-government where the SNS does not have to defend its current position but can hope that Jagodina will finally fall. The basis for this hope lies in the recent parliamentary elections, where the SNS had about five thousand more votes than the coalition led by Dragan Marković Palma. The clash of ruling parties will try to disrupt the local party Bunt, which runs with the Dveri, the New Face of Serbia, and the People’s Party. Also, on the list will be the coalition “Jagodina Deserves Better,” consisting of the People’s Movement of Serbia, DS, SDS, PSG (Movement of Free Citizens), “Jagodina Against Violence,” Right to Choose, and the Ecological Uprising. The fifth list consists of members of the movement “It’s Time for Change - Old Inhabitants.”

This is just a fragment of the political mosaic that voters across Serbia will assemble on June 2. After the voting, politicians begin to construct the post-election picture, and the rules of the game are often unpredictable. Nonetheless, with so many open fronts and various opposition formations, chances are that somewhere, someone will challenge the homogeneous rule of the SNS.