Operations Team:

The Operations Team, comprised of the clinical and laboratory teams, is integral to the daily operations of the biobank. The clinical team collaborates closely with partners at the Cornell University Hospital for Animals and the Department of Clinical Sciences, overseeing sample collection and processing, including case selection, biospecimen collection, and obtaining owner consent. Meanwhile, stationed at the Baker Institute for Animal Health, the laboratory team manages blood and tissue processing, as well as the long-term storage of samples..

Marta Castelhano, DVM, MVSc

Associate Research Professor, Director of the Biobank,

Governance Committee Member

An expert in veterinary biobanking and medical genetics, Dr. Castelhano manages the collections and allocation of samples for ongoing and future research projects. She is a collaborator in several projects at Cornell and other institutions, in addition to conducting her own studies. Dr. Castelhano creates and oversees the organizational structure of our Biobank, leading the team through daily operations and representing the Cornell Veterinary Biobank in specialty conferences worldwide.

Susan Garrison, LVT

Assistant Director, Biobank Clinical Services

With clinical experience in shelter medicine, anesthesia, medical genetics and ten years of biobanking experience, Mrs. Garrison is a licensed veterinary technician responsible for recruiting, collecting and storing high-quality tissue and blood samples. As the Biobank’s Assistant Director of Clinical Services, she oversees clinical sample recruitment, and acquires and manages relevant clinical data associated with these samples, consulting with clinical specialists for phenotypic confirmation to ensure accurate data entry in the Biobank database. Mrs Garrison is also involved in project management, tissue sample distributions, and handling client and researcher communications during studies and ahead of clinical trial protocol development. As part of the quality assurance team that developed the quality management system, she helped prepare the Biobank for accreditation. In addition to her two human children, Susan lives with her two adorable (and mischievous) feline children, Lily and Gus.

Lisa Mitchell, LVT

Veterinary Technician

Ms. Mitchell is a licensed veterinary technician who has worked with the Equine Performance Clinic helping diagnose airway disease, cardiac issues and lameness problems. She bridges the clinical team with Cornell’s large animal hospital – and is responsible for the collection and processing of tissue samples, particularly from horses. She is an active owner of four dogs who likes to compete in performance events and field training.

Lin Lin, BS

Laboratory Specialist

Ms. Lin, equipped with a strong background in chemistry and over 34 years of expertise in molecular biology technologies acquired through work in both medical school and research laboratories, adeptly conducts various procedures, including nucleic acid purifications, Plasma and serum preparations, as well as PBMC preparations. Beyond her professional work, she finds joy in travel, indulging in gourmet foods, immersing herself in literature, exploring documentaries, and nurturing her garden where she grows vegetables. She takes pride in being the devoted guardian of two cats, CC and Pepper, along with two parakeets, and seven delightful chicken hens.

Ahmed Atef

Biobank Operations Manager

As the Biobank Operations Manager, Dr. Ahmed Atef focuses on optimizing operations to enhance efficiency and provide superior services for our clients. He firmly believes in the pivotal role of sample quality and service excellence in driving successful research outcomes. Originally from Egypt, he holds a bachelor’s degree in veterinary medical sciences from Menoufiya University and an MBA from Dakota State University. With a diverse background spanning banking, high-tech manufacturing, pharmaceuticals, and healthcare, Ahmed's passion centers on project management within academic environments. Across 14 years, he has collaborated across three countries, valuing cultural diversity. Ahmed is a proud father, and his compassion for animals is reflected in his active involvement with rescue organizations, where he mentors his children in caring for and training fostered animals. While soccer tops his list of favorite sports, he also enjoys gaming, albeit conceding victory to his kids in that arena.

Statistical Unit:

Comprised of specialists in genetics and genomics research, the statistical unit is responsible for the data analysis of all Biobank samples, and provides genotypic data that’s associated with each sample and each animal’s clinical phenotypes.

Jess Hayward, PhD

Senior Research Associate

As a member of the Biobank statistics team, Dr. Hayward analyzes data generated by the clinical and laboratory teams of the Biobank. Her expertise lies in canine genetics and genomics, particularly in using genome-wide association studies (GWAS) to identify loci associated with traits and disorders. She shares her home and kibble with Blueberry, a golden retriever.

Elisa Benedetti, PhD

Translational Data Specialist

Dr. Elisa Benedetti has more than 9 years of experience in biostatistics and omics data analysis, leading high-impact collaborative research teams in precision medicine and metabolic health, and is passionate about using her skills in integrating translational datasets to improve the healthspan of our canine companions and their humans. She leads our team’s translational data integration efforts from Munich, Germany. Elisa serves at the pleasure of 11-year-old “Luf”, an Italian of-its-own-breed, bigger-than-life canine.

Quality Assurance:

By overseeing its quality management system, the quality assurance team helps our Biobank maintain compliance with ISO 20387 standard. This ensures authentication and traceability of biological materials and associated data along with validation of the processes, thereby providing our clients with the assurance that they are receiving fit-for-purpose products and services.

Denise L. Archer, BA

Quality Manager

Ms. Denise Archer assisted the team with creation and implementation of our Biobank's quality management system and helped us prepare and acquire ISO 20387 accreditation. With over twenty years of experience in manufacturing and academic laboratory environments, expertise in quality systems development and implementation, training, assessment and consultation of laboratories to Good Laboratory Practices (GLP), Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP) and ISO standards, Denise continues to oversee CVB's quality management system. Denise enjoys spending downtime with her aptly named mare, Moxie.

Alyssa P. Stablein, MBA

Quality Assurance Lead

Ms. Alyssa Stablein has more than 18 years of research experience, spending 8 of those within the quality assurance landscape, in AAVLD, ISO 17025, and GLP environments. In her previous role in the Cornell Comparative Coagulation Lab, Alyssa served as a supervisor and trainer to their high-impact team, and as a member of the Cornell Animal Health Diagnostic Center QA advisory team. Alyssa is passionate about creating functional teams in highly collaborative environments. Alyssa is a proud graduate of our Cornell Johnson Graduate School of Management, where she completed her MBA. Alyssa currently leads the team's quality efforts at the Dog Aging Project and Cornell Veterinary Biobank. At home, she serves as a devoted dog-mother to “Pixie”, a food enthusiast.

Marketing and Communications:

With a shared mission to enhance and preserve the university's brand and reputation, marketing and communications works closely with University Relations to raise the visibility of the Biobank and its world-renowned discoveries and thought leadership.

Debra Jaramilla

Assistant Director, Business Development

Ms. Debra Jaramilla has over 15 years of experience in managing and directing roles in marketing at several private sector companies. Her skills and expertise in strategic marketing, product marketing, campaign management, content creation, events, and social media are vital to driving awareness and sustainability to the biobank. Debra leads the formulation and execution of the biobank's marketing and business development strategies. She is based in Los Angeles, California with her family, including a tenacious bulldog named Maximus.

Karli Rizzo

Biobank Marketing and Communications Manager

Ms. Karli Rizzo is a strong advocate for storytelling and creative communication using modern technology and media. With 15 years of experience spanning industries from NASCAR to cryogenic electron microscopy, she brings a wealth of expertise to our team. Karli is a graduate of Syracuse University's S.I. Newhouse School of Public Communications. Outside of work, she is a proud dog mom to Mega, her 7-year-old furry companion.

Governance committee:

The governance committee provides oversight and strategic planning to ensure sustainable growth of the Biobank. Aiming to provide perspective and guidance in various subjects, its members are specialized in different areas.

Dr. Rory Todhunter BVSc, MS, PhD, DACVS

The Maurice R. and Corinne P. Greenberg Professor of Surgery, Governance Committee Member

Dr. Todhunter is the visionary behind the Cornell Veterinary Biobank. He started the CVB in 2006 initially as an archive for genetic material from dogs with orthopedic conditions. As the project grows, Dr. Todhunter provides guidance by defining the goals and strategies critical for the Biobank’s continuing impact. He is also a veterinary specialist in small animal orthopedic surgery and medical genetics the Director of The Cornell University Richard P. Riney Canine Health Center.

Dr. Adam Boyko, PhD

Assistant Professor, Governance Committee Member

Dr. Boyko is an evolutionary geneticist specializing in canine genomics with broad research interests in population genetic analyses, particularly complex trait mapping and inference of demography and selection in domesticated species. Besides being an active contributor and user of the Biobank resource, he also works as a researcher and committee member to develop collaborative research projects that contribute to the core scientific mission of the Biobank and ensure its continued success and growth.