JOHN DAVID EBERTS, OC

FILM PRODUCER

7-7-1941 — 5-9-2012

JAKE Eberts, the Canadian independent producer and founder of Britain's Goldcrest Films, which revived the British cinema industry in the 1980s with Oscar-winning movies, including Gandhi and Chariots of Fire, has died in Montreal of a rare cancer of the eye that spread to his liver. He was 71.

During four decades in the film business, Eberts financed or produced more than 50 films, including four that won Academy Awards for best picture: Chariots of Fire (1981), Gandhi (1982), Driving Miss Daisy (1989) and Dances With Wolves (1990). In all, his films amassed 37 Oscars.

He also produced The Killing Fields (1984), City of Joy (1992), The Legend of Bagger Vance (2000) and the ecological documentary Oceans (2009).

Eberts was known for his financing savvy and personal approach to filmmaking, backing projects that appealed to him on a deep emotional level and presenting compelling stories without gratuitous sex, car chases and violence.

''He was truly the gentleman of Hollywood,'' said Jim Berk, chief executive of Participant Media, which partnered Eberts on several projects.

''Jake's purpose in life was to try to create content that not only tells stories but leads to social awareness and people inspired to do things that are beyond the norm. So he would look for that. He had that special touch finding those stories.''

Eberts was a struggling, 33-year-old investment banker in 1974 when he was approached to arrange the financing for an animated feature about a group of beleaguered rabbits. Watership Down (1978), based on the novel by Richard Adams, became a box-office and critical success and hooked Eberts on the movie business.

In 1976, he formed Goldcrest Films with producer David Puttnam, with backing from the British publishing giant Pearson. The company's first big success was Chariots of Fire, a drama about two runners at the 1924 Olympic Games. The film was nominated for seven Oscars, and won four.

In rapid succession Goldcrest produced Gandhi, the epic about India's charismatic Mohandas Gandhi , and The Killing Fields, a gripping story about Cambodia's brutal Khmer Rouge regime told from the perspective of two journalists.

''Films had to touch his heart,'' his wife, Fiona, said. ''He went by gut feeling on a lot of them, starting with Gandhi,'' which director Richard Attenborough had tried to make for 20 years until finally finding his angel in Eberts. The film won eight Oscars.

When Goldcrest came on the scene, the two main British studios, EMI and Rank, were in steep decline.

''Jake got on with the business of making big, popular movies,'' said Terry Illott, who covered the media business for the Financial Times and co-wrote Ebert's 1990 memoir titled My Indecision is Final: The Spectacular Rise and Fall of Goldcrest Films, the Independent Studio that Challenged Hollywood.

''Goldcrest was so ambitious, so confident and so enterprising that it threw the creative and entrepreneurial failure of Rank and EMI into sharp relief,'' said Illott. ''People in the industry in the UK started to look to Goldcrest as a model, as they have done ever since.''

Eberts left Goldcrest in 1984 to work for Embassy Pictures, but was lured back a few years later.

The company was on the verge of collapse, having sunk millions into some problem-plagued films, including Revolution, a sweeping 1985 drama about the American Revolution, starring Al Pacino. Eberts was unable to avert disaster and the company was sold in 1987.

After leaving Goldcrest for the second time, Eberts founded Allied Filmmakers, an independent film development and production company based in London and Paris. With Eberts as president and chief executive, Allied Filmmakers was behind such movies as The Adventures of Baron Munchausen, Last Exit to Brooklyn (1989) and Super Mario Bros. (1993).

Earlier, he suffered his biggest personal setback in 1979 when he invested $US750,000 of his own money in Zulu Dawn, about the Battle of Isandlwana between British and Zulu forces in 1879 in South Africa. It took him almost a decade to recover financially.

In the late 1980s he was approached by producers Richard and Lili Fini Zanuck, whose project about a crotchety spinster in Atlanta and her African-American chauffeur had been turned down by every big American studio. But Eberts liked the story and put up $US3.25 million, which attracted an additional $US4.5 million from Warner Bros. Driving Miss Daisy was nominated for nine Academy Awards and won four.

''Without Jake Eberts,'' Richard Zanuck told The New York Times in 1990, ''Miss Daisy would never have been made.''

The son of an Alcan (aluminium company) executive, Eberts was born in Montreal and, after completing his schooling in Quebec, trained as a chemical engineer at McGill University. He started work as an engineer and diesel-engine salesman, but found he wasn't very good at it. In 1966, he earned an MBA from Harvard University and worked on Wall Street for three years before moving to London in 1971 to join Oppenheimer & Co, an investment house. By 1976 he was managing director.

His other feature films include The Dresser (1983), Hope and Glory (1987), Black Robe (1991), A River Runs Through It (1992), James and the Giant Peach (1996), Grey Owl (1999), Chicken Run (2000) and The Illusionist (2010).

In his last decade, he began concentrating on developing nature-themed documentaries. Eberts collaborated with National Geographic on several projects, including its coming theatrical release about nanotechnology, Mysteries of the Unseen World.

He was serving as chairman of National Geographic Films, which distributed the Oscar-winning documentary March of the Penguins (2005) under his watch.

''People wouldn't think of someone with a chemical engineering background to end up in the movie world,'' Eberts wrote in My Indecision is Final, ''but life can take you down these wonderful paths.''

His most recent project, Jerusalem, is an Imax 3D documentary to be released next year. He was also involved in a $US60 million film project in China, as well as with Hugh Hudson (director of Chariots of Fire), in a nature film to be shot in Canada.

In 1992, he was appointed an Officer of the Order of Canada for his achievements in film.

Eberts is survived by his wife, Fiona, a daughter, Lindsay, and sons Alexander and David.

LOS ANGELES TIMES, THE AGE