Announced on November 29 in its newsroom, RATP is creating a new BU, Mobility as a Service. Attached to RATP Smart Systems, focus on this restructuring with the aim of “anchoring the company definitively in the ultra-competitive MaaS market”.

A mobility expert at the head of the service

Marketing and Communication Director, then Managing Director of Mappy, Florence Leveel has been appointed to head the new Business Unit. A department that includes Mappy and Bonjour RATP teams. This choice is far from trivial. Especially since Mappy was acquired by the RATP Group a year ago. But above all because Florence Leveel has “actively contributed to the transformation of Mappy, evolving from a historical mapping service to the third-largest mobility player in France after Google Maps and Waze.” In terms of numbers, this translates into 4 billion routes calculated in 2020, 11 million unique monthly visitors and 340 million visits to its app and website.

Becoming true digital companions for everyday life

Since the acquisition of the Mappy Group a year ago, the two groups have accelerated their MaaS strategy. Indeed, as Hiba Farès, Director of Customer Experience, Services and Marketing at the RATP Group, points out, the group is aware that it has “been in the MaaS and integrated mobility services battle for more than a year now”. To keep their leadership position, it is essential to quickly integrate new services on their respective platforms. Totally multimodal, today Bonjour RATP allows you to book your Marcel VTC, a TIER scooter, and from 2022, Lime self-service scooters and bikes! Mappy also offers multimodality, with the location of Zenpark parking lots and Dott and TIER scooters. To discover how to launch an effective multimodal MaaS solution in a territory, feel free to discover our latest ebook. To go further, download for free our in-depth analysis of 10 biggest MaaS applications and discover how they cover all the mobility needs of their users.

Not just B2C, an RATP offer for local authorities

Although the RATP and Mappy groups are primarily known for their platforms, they are now seeking to be considered leaders in MaaS in France. And thus, confirm their position as experts in supporting cities. And this via an offer, totally adapted to their problems.

Mobility as a Service BU is intended to strengthen the already ubiquitous links between our digital solutions in the Paris region and nationwide, in order to further enrich our users’ experience. It also aims to provide cities and local authorities with a clearer commercial offer, with the objective of supporting them in each of their projects.

Hiba Farès, Director of Customer Experience, Services and Marketing at the RATP Group