WELCOME TO THE RATP DEV MIDDLE EAST CAREERS SITE

Thank you for visiting our site to learn more about working at RATP Dev Middle East. Joining RATP Dev means promoting more sustainable cities through innovative, accessible, and environmentally friendly mobility solutions. Joining RATP Dev also means helping an agile, dynamic, and ever-changing international company grow. And last but not least, joining RATP Dev means working with open-minded, multicultural, and richly diverse teams.

WHERE DO I APPLY?

We have job opportunities available right now across the region. You can apply directly to open vacancies on this site and you can also visit our regional subsidiary career sites at the links provided below for opportunities in Saudi Arabia, Qatar and Egypt. Our talent acquisition teams are working hard to review all applications and will respond at the earliest possible time if your profile matches to our requirements.

Capital Metro Company (CAMCO) - a joint ownership between RATP Dev and SAPTCO.

RKH Qitarat - a consortium between RATPDev, Keolis and Hamad Group Trading.

RATP Dev Mobility Cairo (RDMC) - a subsidiary of RATP Group.

For details about job opportunities in RATP Dev globally please visit here.

ABOUT US

Our story begins in Paris, almost 120 years ago, through that of RATP, our parent company. The first metro line crosses the capital. It entered service for the Universal Exhibition on July 19, 1900, after less than a year and a half of work - a record already. Since then, we have never stopped innovating: from the first pneumatic subways, in the 1950s, to electric trams and autonomous shuttles today. A technical excellence which allows us to be today the world leader of the automatic metro and the tram.

The birth of RATP Dev in 2002 marked a turning point. The objective: to develop, operate and maintain new networks in France, in Europe and around the world, by drawing on and deploying the expertise of the RATP group. Since then, we have been moving forward. 1.5 billion travelers use our networks each year. We have grown, our expertise too. But our passion remains: to build with you, to bring to the cities of the world the excellence of an innovative and sustainable service.

RATP Dev in the Middle East and across the world, we are committed to developing and optimising public transportation systems. Everywhere, we operate to boost the local economy and quality of life of our passengers. Everywhere, we are driven by excellence, passion and determination in welcoming challenge. Our regional head office is based in Dubai with operations in Saudi Arabia, Qatar and Egypt. Globally we have over 27,000 employees, 107 subsidiaries across 14 countries in more than 780+ partner cities.

For more details, please feel free to visit our website here.