He is multi-talented, multi-band, and multi-album, He is... Josh Homme !!

So this time we will review his musical career through the albums he was part of and there are lots...

Let's try to focus on full studio albums...

(Photo: redbull.com)

1. In 1991 he released his first album and debut album "Wretch" with the Stoner / Desert band he formed called "Kyuss". The band went through a lot of names and a lot of demos until the first full album came out. The composition is considered to be one of the root compositions of the Stoner genre. Josh was in charge of the guitars and production of the album.

(Photo: ultimate-guitar.com)

2. In 1992 the band released their second album "Blues for the Red Sun" which was less successful than the first album but is today considered one of the most influential albums in the stoner rock genre.

3. In 1994 the band released their third album "Welcome to Sky Valley" through the big label Elektra Records which was a much bigger success than the previous two albums.

4. In 1995 the band released their fourth and final album called "... And the Circus Leaves Town". The album was a bit of a success and marked the band's breakup.

5. In 1996, Josh formed the band "Queens of the Stone Age" as the leading character, lead guitarist, and singer, in fact in most of the band's albums the musicians change, and sometimes in the singing role different singers take over. The debut album bearing the band's name was released by the band in 1998, with Alfredo (Kyuss) on drums and Josh playing all the other roles on the album.

6. In 2000, Josh releases his second album, "Rated R". Compared to the first album released under an independent label, this album was released under the Interscope Records label. Unlike the previous album performed entirely by Josh and Alfredo, here Josh begins his collaborations with other artists and hosts a diverse battery of artists in various fields, most notably Mark Lanegan and with him: Dave Catching, Gene Trautmann, Barrett Martin, Mike Johnson, Rob Halford, and others.

7. In 2002 the band released their third album "Songs for the Deaf" with the band's three most famous singles "No One Knows", "Go with the Flow", and "First It Giveth". This time joins Langan on drums and Dave Grohl with Nick Oliveri on bass (as on previous albums). This album continues the band's success from the first album but brings it to the international arena and it breaks into other countries in the world and occupies good positions at the top black of the charts.

8. In 2005 Josh releases the album "Lullabies to Paralyze", the band's fourth. This album reaches number five on the Billboard 200 but this time apart from Josh and Langen joins guitarist Troy Van Leeuwen and drummer Joey Castillo.

9. In 2007 the band releases their fifth album called "Era Vulgaris" which Josh describes as tough and electronic as a construction site. The album reached number 14 on Billboard and here too Josh collaborates with many other artists such as: Alain Johannes, Julian Casablancas, Serrina Sims, Brody Dalle-Homme, and of course Langen.

10. In 2013, the sixth album "... Like Clockwork" is released, in which bassist Michael Shuman and guitarist and keyboardist Dean Fertita join/replace. Josh describes the album as a documentary of the transitions the band went through in the two years before the album. This is the band's first album that reached number one on the Billboard charts and nominated the band for three Grammy Awards. Three singles came out of the album: "My God Is the Sun", "I Sat by the Ocean" and "Smooth Sailing".

11. In 2017 the band's seventh and final album "Villains" was released and this is the band's first album that does not include guest artists but only the band itself. Josh decided that on this album he wanted to create music that would make people dance so he enlisted the role of the producer from none other than Mark Ronson (Uptown Funk for those unfamiliar). The album topped the charts and was also nominated for a Grammy.

12. Another and one of the most significant projects in the music scene in the US and in the world was The Desert Sessions. Old and rare recordings and accessories, with everything connected to a generator or played analogously. In each session, artists, writers, composers, and songwriters would connect instead. 12 different EPs were recorded from 1997 to 2019 in which various artists from many genres would come to the studio. , Playing and recording, including: Brantת Bjork, PJ Harvey, Jeordie White (aka Twiggy Ramirez), Dave Catching, Nick Oliveri, Mark Lanegan, John McBain, Ben Shepherd, Josh Freese, and many others

13. In 1998 Josh together with guitarist and singer Jesse Hughes formed the band "Eagles Of Death Metal", the two are the only regular musicians in the band that usually changes mainly on tour, Josh does not participate in the band's tours but only for album recordings. In 2004, the band's debut album "Peace, Love, Death Metal" is released, which despite its name and despite the name of the band does not belong to the Death Metal genre at all.

(Photo: Chapman Baehler)

14. In 2005 the band's second album "Death by Sexy" is released. The album features influences from the "Rolling Stones", "Motley Crue" and "Loverboy". Similar to the first album, this album is also a success among rockers.

15. In 2008 came out the third album "Heart On" which had moderate success and reached the 50th and 20th places on the Billboard and Top Rock charts.

16. In 2015 came out the fourth and final album to date "Zipper Down", one of the most famous songs from the album is a cover of the song "Save a Prayer" by the band "Duran Duran".

17. In 2009, the supergroup's debut album bearing the band's name "Them Crooked Vultures" was released. This supergroup was formed by Josh, and Dave from the "Foo Fighters" and "Led Zeppelin's" bassist John Paul Jones. The album reached number 12 on the Billboard charts and won the 2011 Grammy Award for "Best Hard Rock Performance".

18. In 2023, 6 years after their previous album and with the same lineup, the band releases their eighth album "In Times New Roman...". Josh said that the album sat on the shelf for a year and a half until he had the courage and experiences to write lyrics and release the album in its entirety.

Follow us on Facebook or Subscribe to our website