Josh Homme is a California-based singer, musician, songwriter, and record producer who has been an essential part of the most renowned stoner/metal rock band Kyuss and Queens of the Stone Age.

Kyuss, coming from Palm Desert, was created in the late 1980s and became insanely popular for their generator parties in the desert. Making their debut in 1991 with Wretch, the band didn’t get much of the audience’s attention then. Besides, their Blues for the Red Sun received great critics in 1992, but Josh Homme, along with other band members, failed to make it a commercial success. But, before they called quits in 1995, the band partnered with Elektra to give a couple of releases to make its impact.

Josh Homme made a comeback in music after Kyuss as the second lead guitarist of the band on the Dust tour of 1996. It is head to cameo recordings of other artists and the starting of multi-volume series Desert Sessions that featured Monster Magnet, Kyuss, and Soundgarden. This rekindled a desire in Josh’s heart to form a band again.

Homme then met the former drummer from Kyuss Alfredo Hernandez and formed a Queens of the Stone Age band. The band changed the monolithic rock of the former band, Kyuss, focusing on varied styles and songwriting. Gradually more people began to come together to join the band. Ultimately, Stone Gossard’s label Loose Groove signed the Queens of the Stone Age band in 1998 and issued their first album.

After that, they released R in 2000, which was QOTSA’s sophomore effort which received critical praise as the band undertook the tour with popular celebs, including the Foo Fighters, Hole, and The Smashing Pumpkins. Audiences were getting crazy for them, and their stardom was on the rise. They received critical appreciation with Song for the Deaf of 2002 that featured a modern classic number, “No One Knows.” It became one of the biggest hits of the time. They were unstoppable, and their success was continuing to pour with Lullabies to Paralyze. It was named after the “Mosquito Song” lyrics which was part of Songs for the Deaf tracks.

Between the releases of QOTSA, Josh used to stay busy with other ventures. He formed Eagles of Death Metal along with his friend, Jesse Hughes, during one of these times. Josh Homme married Brody Dalle in 2005 of the Distillers fame. Together they have one daughter and two sons. Homme has also featured in a 2013 song with his wife Brody Dalle and other prominent celebrities as well such as Nick Oliveri, Dave Grohl, Alex Turner from Arctic Monkeys, and Mark Lanegan.

Josh Homme has a unique and impressive music style that is referred to as unconventional and dynamic. He had worked and performed with several popular names in the music industry, such as Iggy Pop, Arctic Monkeys, and Foo Fighters. His musical journey has been commendable. Josh is the living legend of rock and continues to work as one of the rock stars sparkled with renewed energy.