Disaster recovery and data protection solutions vendor, Acronis, has strengthened its business development in Australia and its alliance partnerships across the Asia Pacific region with new appointments.

Acronis’ general manager, Pacific, Karl Sice, announced the promotion of Simon Bills, a foundation member of the Acronis sales team, to the new position of Alliances Lead for APAC, responsible for managing key alliance partners, including VMware, Red Hat and Dell, and the development of programs and initiatives to grow the business.

Dean Schroder has been appointed End User Business Development Manager (BDM), for the Australia North region, responsible for originating new Acronis licence and virtualisation project business in the region, which comprises NSW north of Sydney Harbour, the ACT and Queensland.

Sice said Schroder had extensive storage market knowledge and experience gained during a 15 year career with storage vendors and systems integrators including SecureData Group, XSI Data Solutions, Quantum and Exabyte. He said Bills had been instrumental in building Acronis’ strong channel business in Australia and New Zealand, and coupled with previous APAC experience, was ideal to take up his new position within the region to foster and grow the company’s “valued partner business.”

About Acronis

Acronis is a leading provider of easy-to-use disaster recovery and data protection solutions for physical, virtual and cloud environments. Its patented disk imaging technology enables corporations, SMBs and consumers to protect their digital assets. With Acronis’ disaster recovery, deployment and migration software, users protect their digital information, maintain business continuity and reduce downtime.

Acronis software is sold in more than 90 countries and available in up to 14 languages. For additional information, please visit www.acronis.com. Follow @Acronis on Twitter: http://twitter.com/acronis

Acronis® and the Acronis logo are registered trademarks or trademarks of Acronis Inc. in the United States and/or other countries.

Contact Information

Lucy Millington

Acronis, Inc.

T: 781.782.9181

E: [email protected]