The Acronis Foundation has just opened the doors to a new school it has built in Senegal, helping to provide a safe learning environment for children.

Four months after a group of Acronis employees went to the remote village of Soupa Serere in Senegal to participate themselves in the building of a new school, today the school opened its doors to 140 excited boys and girls eager to learn and chase their dreams.

The school was built as part of a joint project between the Acronis Foundation (a non-profit organisation established to build a more knowledgeable future) and buildOn (a non-profit organisation focused on breaking the cycle of poverty, illiteracy and low expectations through service and education).

The school’s opening ceremony took place this Saturday April 6th and brought together families, village elders, local government representatives, local media and high-profile guests who all celebrated this new access to technology and the promising opportunities the new school will offer.

“It is all about joining forces for a better future for these kids,” said Jochen Berger, managing director of the Acronis Foundation.

“Acronis and its partners from around the world are bringing not only hope but the actual means for local students to have access to the knowledge they need by empowering them to follow and fulfill their dreams.”

With the great help from its high-profile sports partners ROKiT Williams Racing Formula One team and Arsenal Football Club, the Acronis Foundation provided educational supplies, shirts, and footballs – promoting health and physical education.

“We are proud to support the Acronis Foundation by raising awareness and donating team memorabilia for their fundraising activities,” said Graeme Hackland, CIO of ROKiT Williams Racing Formula One team who attended the opening ceremony.

“It is an unforgettable experience to see the joy in the eyes of boys and girls, so willing to learn.”

“It is always a privilege to support local communities and children who love football,” said communications & community affairs director, Mark Gonnella.

“We believe that football has the power to inspire young people and teach them valuable life skills, such as team work and respect. These are transferable into other aspects of their lives and can help them to unlock their true potential.”

The West African coastal country of Senegal is home to more than 13 million people with more than 50% of the population living below the poverty line. Less than 40% can read and write.

The new school will provide a safe learning environment to Soupa Serere’s children who previously had to walk four kilometers every day to attend another school in a nearby village.

This is the fourth school built by the Acronis Foundation since the launch of the Schools Initiative program in 2018.

An additional four projects are already under way, and the Foundation has the goal of building 15 schools during the next three years to provide access to education to thousands of boys and girls around the world.

“We provide empowerment; it is not just schools that we are building as we work with communities to break the cycle of poverty,” said Maurice Muchene, vice president of business development at buildOn.

“Every school is a great investment in the children and communities that we support. Building a new school in this community has the potential to change lives.”

To find out more how you can support Acronis Foundation projects, please visit https://acronis.org/.

Image credit: Alioune Gueye Sall