Acronis will open a data centre in Nigeria under its Global/Local Initiative.

Cybersecurity firm Acronis has announced the availability of a new Acronis Cyber Cloud Data Center in Lagos, Nigeria.

The new data centre, one of 111 data centres being deployed by the company, will enable service provider partners to offer their clients faster access, constant data availability, and data sovereignty through a full range of cyber protection solutions.

The opening of the Nigerian data centre is part of the Acronis Global/Local Initiative, an effort that includes global management for all data centres, geographic redundancy, and control for local partners, and a local disaster recovery site – all with competitive pricing.

The goal of this initiative is to ensure service providers will have no trouble meeting the ever-changing compliance, data sovereignty, and performance requirements they and their clients face.

During an event that took place at Lagos Oriental Hotel, leaders from the industry and special guests all gathered to celebrate the launch including Tony Ojobo, President of the Board of Trustee of the ICT Foundation and Former Public Affairs Director of the Nigerian Communications Commission (NCC).

The global network of Acronis Cyber Cloud Data Centres already includes more than 40 data centres. With the new data centre in Nigeria, local service providers will have a location within the country where they can store business-critical data for their clients. Managed service providers (MSPs) will also benefit from the full range of managed cloud solutions and cyber protection solutions available via the Acronis Cyber Cloud platform.

Commenting on the new launch, Chidi Oliseowe, Team Lead, Madonna Systems Nigeria Limited, said: “Today the world depends so much on data to the point where we can say data is life, and data security cannot be overemphasised. We at Madonna Systems are so proud to be associated with Acronis, a foremost leader in cyber protection. With the opening of their new data centre in Nigeria, Acronis demonstrates its level of commitment to the Africa Market.”

Peter French, Regional General Manager Middle East & Africa at Acronis, added: “A local presence is a necessity for modern cloud businesses and we are proud to deliver the Acronis Cyber Cloud Data Center in Nigeria. Now, Nigerian companies, and businesses from neighbour countries too, will be able to store their strategic data locally while being backed by a global partner who is on standby 24/7/365 to address any issues.”

Joel Friday, Senior Sales Manager, Promethean Consulting Limited, stated: “We have been an Acronis partner since 2017 and we do not see our company partnering with anyone else. It is the only cyber protection company with integrated cyber security and data protection (with backup for OEMs). Acronis building a data centre in Nigeria is a huge milestone for the industry in Nigeria. In-country data security has been a priority for most organisations in Nigeria, and the idea of a DC locally will definitely help partners like us add more value to our end users’ infrastructure.”