Acronis has a total of 63 patents globally, out of which 7 have been granted. Of these 63 patents, more than 96% patents are active. The United States of America is where Acronis has filed the maximum number of patents, followed by Switzerland and Europe. Parallelly, United States of America seems to be the main focused R&D centre and also Switzerland is the origin country of Acronis.

Acronis was founded in 2003 by Serg Bell & Ilya Zubarev. The company provides backup and recovery solutions for businesses and individuals. It offers backup and disaster recovery programs and platforms for critical data across physical, virtual, and cloud environments.

Do read about some of the most popular patents of Acronis which have been covered by us in this article and also you can find Acronis patents information, the worldwide patent filing activity and its patent filing trend over the years, and many other stats over Acronis patent portfolio.

How many patents does Acronis have?

Acronis has a total of 63 patents globally. These patents belong to 37 unique patent families. Out of 63 patents, 61 patents are active.

How Many Patents did Acronis File Every Year?

Are you wondering why there is a drop in patent filing for the last two years? It is because a patent application can take up to 18 months to get published. Certainly, it doesn’t suggest a decrease in the patent filing.

How many Acronis patents are Alive/Dead?

Worldwide Patents

How Many Patents did Acronis File in Different Countries?

Countries in which Acronis Filed Patents

Where are Research Centers of Acronis Patents Located?

The Research Center of Acronis Patents is the United States of America.

10 Best Acronis Patents

US20190014176A1 is the most popular patent in the Acronis portfolio. It has received 25 citations so far from companies like Sony, Alibaba Group, Panasonic.

Below is the list of 10 most cited patents of Acronis:

What Percentage of Acronis US Patent Applications were Granted?

Acronis (Excluding its subsidiaries) has filed 27 patent applications at USPTO so far (Excluding Design and PCT applications). Out of these 26 have been granted leading to a grant rate of 96.3%.

Below are the key stats of Acronis patent prosecution at the USPTO.

Which Law Firms Filed Most US Patents for Acronis?

What are Acronis’ key innovation segments?