The board of directors sets the tone for how the company operates on a daily basis. Building on Acronis’ foundation of ethical behavior, Judge Sullivan will help the company to continue acting on its ethical principles, attracting new talent, and maintaining its positive reputation within the community.

“Acronis works hard to build and preserve an ethical culture in all of our offices worldwide. Strong work ethics improves our productivity and helps us to be an active part of the community. We are committed to maintaining ethical relationships with our employees and customers, respecting the environment and fair business practices. The Honorable Eugene R. Sullivan will help our company become an even more responsible member of the community,” said John Zanni, the president of Acronis.

“I’m pleased to join Acronis as a board advisor. Before I accepted this position, I met with the Management of Acronis and observed a Board of Directors’ Meeting at its Swiss Corporate Headquarters. I was greatly impressed with the vision and the integrity of Management. Acronis is on the right path to ethical and business successes and I am privileged to be a part of this company,” Judge Sullivan said.

Judge Sullivan is a Senior Federal Judge with more than 16 years of appellate experience. Nominated by President Ronald Reagan, Judge Sullivan was installed as a Federal Judge in 1986, became Chief Judge of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Armed Forces in 1990, and was elevated to Senior Status in 2002. When not recalled to active court service, Judge Sullivan is a senior partner at Freeh, Sporkin & Sullivan law firm.

After graduating from the United States Military Academy, West Point, Judge Sullivan served in the Army, qualifying as a tanker, an Airborne Ranger, a Ranger Instructor, and a Jumpmaster. Judge Sullivan was awarded the Bronze Star, the Air Medal and other decorations for his service in Vietnam, and was inducted into the U.S. Army Ranger Hall of Fame.

Following his Army service, Judge Sullivan graduated from Georgetown University Law Center, serving as an editor of the Georgetown Law Journal in his senior year. He was part of the White House’s legal defense team for President Nixon during the Watergate investigation in 1974. From 1974 to 1982, he was a trial attorney in the U.S. Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.

Between 1982 and 1986, Judge Sullivan served in the Pentagon as the General Counsel of the U.S. Air Force. Judge Sullivan was the General Counsel of the National Reconnaissance Office and the Governor of Wake Island. In 1988 and 1989, Judge Sullivan served on the Federal Commission to review the West Point Honor Code. He is a Trustee Emeritus and the founding Chair of the Ethics Committee of the West Point Board of Trustees (Association of Graduates) and serves on the Executive Board of the Duke Law School Center for Law, Ethics and National Security.

Judge Sullivan is a renowned author and public speaker, giving many lectures on American law to visiting international judges and lawyers. During his career in promoting the rule of law, Judge Sullivan has been awarded the Medal of Justice from Romania, the First Class Medal of Defense from Hungary, the Defense Minister’s Citation of Merit from the Republic of China, an honorary Doctor of Law degree from New England School of Law, the Air Force Exceptional Civilian Service Medal, the Medal for Distinguished Public Service from the U.S. Department of Defense, and the 2001 Castle Award from the West Point Society. Sullivan is also a recipient of the Ellis Island Medal of Honor.