Sahasam Swasaga Sagipo Movie Review Achcham yenbadhu madamaiyada review

TELUGU360 Rating 2.25/5

Starring Naga Chaitanya and newbie Manjima Mohan in the lead pair, Sahasame Swaasagaa Saagipo is a Gautam Menon directional that is due for release from a long time. The film was postponed numerous times and is finally making it to the screens today (Nov 11) after clearing all the hurdles. As the first word in the title suggests – It will be a big ‘Sahasam’ (brave attempt) to release a film at this point of time due to demonetization effect. But the makers of Naga Chaitanya’s Sahasame Swasagaa Saagipo are not going to defer its release. Tipped to be a romantic entertainer, the film features Baba Sehgal as the main antagonist. The refreshing posters and the heartwarming songs have already become a rage with the audience. A R Rahman composed the soundtrack for the film. M. Ravinder Reddy is the producer. Let’s see if Chaitu can end this year on a high with another hit.

Story :

Leela Satyamurthy ( Manjima Mohan) ,is a resident of Maharashtra state. Pursuing career as an assistant director, Leela visits Vizag to stay at her friend Maitreyi’s home for few weeks. Leela starts liking Rajanikanth (Naga Chaitanya) – brother of Maitreyi. Rajanikanth, who is an MBA student and bike enthusiast, plans for a bike trip to Kanyakumari along with Leela. In the road trip, they meet with an accident and at around same day Leela’s parents are attacked in Maharashtra.

Puzzled by the course of the events, the injured duo learns the reasons behind the accident, attacks. Rest of the story is how Rajanikanth protects Leela and her family in Maharashtra from the goons

Positives:

Romantic musicals

Lead pair Naga Chaitanya, Manjima

Negatives:

Slow narration in first half

plot in second half

Insipid script

Half-baked villainy

Analysis:

Sahasam Swasaga Sagipo starts off in typical Gowtam Menon style: A boy, girl and natural development of love between them. Narrated as a musical love story, first of the movie has many songs, bit songs and montage songs. All songs are completed within the first half. Nagachaitanya, Manjima Mohan’s chemistry is just fine, with very few good dialogues. Overall, despite slow narration, first half is passable

Once the movie hits the crime path, direction went haywire. The chaos after attack on Leela’s parents in Maharashtra are prolonged, testing the audience patience. Nagachaitanya’s one man heroism in rescue of Leela’s parents works out only in parts and majority of the times in-effective. The whole second half is rather frivolous.

Naga Chaitanya and Manjima are good in their roles. Baba Sehgal as bad cop has done decent job.

Vellipomake song visuals are good but placement of the song is an experiment of sorts. This song, which is misplaced, comes right after a serious accident occurs to the lead pair. All other song bits are ok on screen but none of them linger after leaving the theater.

Cinematography is natural and captured picturesque Kerala well in few shots. However, the director utterly failed in weaving gripping crime story. Screen play is extremely laggard for taste of Telugu audience.

Verdict:

Sahasam Swasaga Sagipo is a below average movie, if you are a Naga Chaitanya fan you may watch it once. For all other sections, there is not much in offer. Released after multiple postponements and with low expectations, openings of this movie are doubtful and survival at the box-office can be uphill task.

Release Date : November 11, 2016

Director : Gautham Menon

Music director: A. R. Rahman

Production Company: Dwaraka Creations

Cinematography : Dan Macarthur

Starring : Naga Chaitanya, Manjima Mohan

TELUGU360 Rating 2.25/5