Raymond Felton

Dallas Mavericks point guard Raymond Felton is mentioned by Matt Moore of CBSSports.com as a good fit for the Detroit Pistons through free agency.

(David Zalubowski | Associated Press file)

We're less than three days from the start of the NBA free-agency period. Officially, it opens at 12:01 a.m. Friday.

Point guard and power forward are the positions at which the Detroit Pistons need the most help.

Matt Moore of CBSSports.com offered up some possibilities for the Pistons in a recent post about his top 80 NBA free agents and where they might be a good fit.

Among the point guards Moore suggests as good fits for the Pistons, he lists Austin Rivers of the Los Angeles Clippers and Raymond Felton of the Dallas Mavericks.

Moore ranks the 23-year-old Rivers as the 59th-best free agent among his list of 80. Rivers is an unrestricted free agent.

As for Felton, Moore lists the 32-year-old as the 69th-best free agent. Felton is an unrestricted free agent with the Dallas Mavericks. In Moore's words, Felton is "back from the dead!"

Moving to power forwards who could be good fits with the Pistons, Moore lists 28-year-old Darrell Arthur of the Denver Nuggets as the 33rd-best free agent, ranks 28-year-old Marreese Speights of Golden State at No. 36 and rates 25-year-old restricted free agent Donatas Motiejunas of the Houston Rockets as the 41st-best free agent.

Other players on Moore's list who he deems as good fits for the Pistons, whether it's a position of need or not: shooting guards Courtney Lee (No. 25) of Memphis and Garrett Temple (No. 66) of Washington and centers Al Jefferson (No. 40) of Charlotte and Jared Sullinger (No. 61) of Boston.

Pistons center Andre Drummond is listed as the No. 3 free agent available. Moore says that the Pistons are "almost certain" to re-sign the 22-year-old Drummond to a max deal via restricted free agency.

Another reported Pistons target, power forward Al Horford of Atlanta, is listed by Moore as the No. 4 free agent available. However, Moore does not list the Pistons as a "good fit" for Horford.

Familiar face at PF? In a recent post sharing his thoughts on the Pistons as they approach free agency, Rod Beard of the Detroit News mentions familiar face Anthony Tolliver as a possibility to make a return. Beard wrote that Tolliver could be a bargain, allowing the Pistons to better afford a point guard.

Elsewhere in the NBA: Power forward Pau Gasol declined his $7.7 million player option with the Chicago Bulls on Monday, and it's being reported that San Antonio is a potential landing spot for the 35-year-old, according to Brandon Wile of theScore.com. ... The Los Angeles Clippers and New York Knicks are among seven teams eyeing former University of Michigan star and three-time NBA Sixth Man of the Year Jamal Crawford, per a report by James Herbert of CBSSports.com. ... Chris Walder of theScore.com reports that the Miami Heat, Los Angeles Lakers and Boston Celtics are the three most likely teams to land the services of Heat unrestricted free agent Hassan Whiteside.