PEOPLE WHISPERS: MOVES, PROMOTIONS, AND MILESTONES*

Congratulations to all! Thanks for your emails and alerts. If you’ve got a change or know of a promotion, keep dropping me a line! If you need a referral, don't hesitate to reach out to me via Linked In.

Richard Barnett joins Fine Solutions as a Vice President for Business Development. Richard last served as the CMO at Kineticsware, Inc and served as an evangelist for the Microsoft Dynamics product lines as Director of Product Marketing.

Alan Bowling leaves his post as CIO of Northern Foods and joins the Training and Development Agency for Schools as CIO. Alan also serves as the Chairman of the very independent and influential SAP UK & Ireland Users Group.

Max Efimov became Director of Emerging Technologies at SITA CORP in November 2008. Previous roles include serving as a Manager of Enterprise Solutions - SAP for BearingPoint, Enterprise Solutions Architect at Tesoro Corp and Lead Systems Specialist at Valero Energy Corp.

Bill Geist has been promoted to Executive Vice President of Services at CDC Software. Bill formerly served as the SVP of Customer Services. Bill brings a wealth of management consulting, staffing and professional services experiences with several senior roles as a Partner at Tatum, L.L.C., CEO of Application Partners, L.L.C., Senior Vice President for Headstrong, Inc., Partner of Whittman-Hart, Inc., Director at Cambridge Technology Partners, and VP of IT and Services for Scientific Atlanta.

Aloke Ghosh has been appointed as the new CFO for Systime.

Peter Graf is now Chief Sustainability Officer at SAP. Peter served as the Executive Vice President for Marketing at SAP Labs.

Allison Guidette became VP & GM at Thomson Reuters in January 2009. Prior to Thomson Reuters, Allison served as Senior Vice President of Product Management at Merrill Corporation, Vice President of Business Law at Thomson West, and Senior Director at Corporate Executive Board.

Christof Herzog became Manager Customer Segmentation Fachleiter Kundensegmentierung at Deutsche Telekom in January 2009. Past roles include Principal Analyst at Vodafone and Senior Quantitative Analyst at Forrester Research.

Indu Khattar brings strong operational experiences to SYSTIME as the COO. Indu draws upon 2 decades of senior management experience with Fujitsu, ICIM, and Wipro

Marketing Analyst at Mobilcom Freenet

Zukunftsforscher Telecoms & Technology at Z_punkt The Foresight Company

see less...

Tom Kucharvy serves as the CEO at Beyond IT, Inc. in January 2009. Tom bring a wealth of star analyst skills from Ovum where he was an Senior Vice President and from his experiences in building Summit Strategies as President and CEO.

Norman Liang leaves Fox Interactive Media (Photobucket) to join stealth startup Fire-Exit. Norm currently advises TripJane and the Martini Media Network. Prior to Photobucket, Norm served a Business Development role at Nokia.

Justin Mckenna is now a Business Development Representative at CIBER. Justin's experiences include roles as a Business Development Executive at One Technologies and Account Manager at Forrester Research.

Vinay Nair joins IBM Cognos as an ERP market strategist. At International Data Corporation (IDC), Vinay served as the Research Manager for the Canadian Enterprise Applications market and a Senior Research Analyst for the Middle East and Africa regions.

Sean O'Neill leaves uTANGO to join GMI as Vice President of product and program management. Sean has served executive roles in product management including seven years at Amazon.

Matt Pawl was promoted in March 2009 to Vice President of Marketing at Hayes Technology Group. Matt previously was the marketing director.

Anita Rao joins Symantec with the Global ERP Systems team. Anita bring senior IT experiences from Visa, Garage Technology Ventures, Jamcracker, Oracle, Merrill Lynch, and Bear Stearns.

Richard (Rick) Reidy has been promoted from COO to President and Chief Executive Officer (CEO) at Progress Software Corporation. Reidy bring both a products and management background to the position.

Joel Rosenberger joins GMI as Vice President of Engineering. Joel bring experience from Amazon's Web Services team as well as roles as technical diplomat at Microsoft, CTO of TransLink Software, and Senior Architect at Attachmate.

Dave Sampson takes on the role of Vice President for demand generation and customer experience at GMI's marketing strategies. Dave was previously vice president of marketing for Sampa Corporation.

Eilleen Shields takes on new responsibility as a Business Development Manager at Planpower a UXC company. Prior roles include senior sales positions with SAP, Forrester Research, and Jupiter Research.

Michael Sotnick moved to ActivIdentity in December 2008. As Executive Vice President of Worldwide Sales and Field Operations, Michael will put his sales, channel, and partner enablement experiences from SAP and Veritas to work.

Chloe Stromberg is now a Senior Survey Research Manager at comScore, Inc. Chloe brings analytical and survey experience from work at IdeaLab and the University of Michigan.

Mike Thoma became CTO and CMO at Blink Logic Inc. in December 2008. Previous experiences include roles as a special advisor to the CEO at Blink Logic and VP of Product Marketing at Actuate Corporation.

Angus Thomson takes on a new role at Intuit as VP & General Manager of the Grow Your Business Division. Angus formerly led Intuit's Mid-Market group as VP & General Manager.

Chris Townsend joins i-Nova Software as their VP of Marketing.

CORPORATE WHISPERS

Hearing from leading CIO's and VP's at technology firms:

Many clients refusing to pay maintenance fees and have let contracts lapse

Vendors fearful of the high interest in third party maintenance. Some customers considering anti-trust suits in EU and US

Virtualization, Business Process Outsourcing, and SaaS seen as cost saving investments

Interest in SOA on the decline, but party faithful still in large numbers

Gov contracting, healthcare, compliance, project based solutions, and BI remain hot investment sectors for M&A