BQ Aquaris E4.5 Ubuntu Edition does things differently to Android and iPhone

Feb 11, 2015

Phones

[MUSIC] Time for something new. I'm Richard Trenholm for CNET and this is the BQ Aquaris E4.5 Ubuntu Edition. Ubuntu is a new operating system that does things a little bit differently. So one of the interesting. Some things about Ubuntu is that it doesn't do much with hardware buttons. It's all done on the screen so this is a version of the phone that's an existing Android model, but with Ubuntu software in it. So it won't actually have these Android familiar icons in the finished version. It doesn't have a camera button, for example. It just has a volume button and a power button on the side. So the main difference between Ubuntu and Android, and other types of smartphone operating systems is that there, it doesn't necessarily have apps. It has scopes. And they're like home screens, where you can different sources, and services, and publications all pulled into one place. So for example, here's your Today scope, which shows you the weather, your calendar appointments, and recent messages, and recent news, or what's trending, trending on Twitter, that kinda thing. So here's your news scope which has headlines from different sources, and different publications. So you can see what's going on in the world. And another scope is nearby, which has location services. Say for example you put in restaurant reviews if you were hungry. If you are on the move, you could see traffic updates, and the weather, and that kind of thing. One of the clever things about scopes is they combine sources that you might have had to keep in different apps on other phones. So for example, in the photos app, you've got the photos that you've taken on your camera itself and then you've also got your Instagram photos on the same page. So, as well as being kind of home screens, you can have individual branded scopes made by publishers of services. So here in the music service, we can see the music scope we can see we can see 7Digital, Soundcloud,. Song kick, YouTube and so one. And if you want you can add lots of different sources, Grooveshark, YouTube and all the rest. And then when you click on individual one you will go through to the actual branded scope so for example here's the Songkick one it allows you to see events in Songkick made by the publisher themself. So, [UNKNOWN] is controlled by swiping in from different sides of the screen. For example, if you swipe in from the top, you can control all your settings like network, brightness, battery settings, or that kind of thing. If you swipe in from the right, you can move through all the apps and scopes that you have open at the moment. Swipe away the ones you don't want. And quickly open up the ones that you wanna open. Swipe in from the left for the launcher, which has all your favorite apps in there for quick access, or you can go straight back to the home scope. And if you swipe up from the bottom, you can manage your scopes and change the order a bit here, and show which ones you wanna show. So another clever feature is that when you get a new text message it will appear in the notifications at the top. So you can simply tap on it an reply straight away. So this first Ubuntu phone is going on sale in a series of flash sales throughout 2015. I'm Richard Trenholm and this is the B! Aquaris E4.5 Ubuntu Edition.