Senator Joan Huffman started her career as a public servant in 1981. Upon earning her

undergraduate degree from Louisiana State University, she became a secretary for the Harris County District Attorney’s office. It was there that she became inspired by the work of prosecutors and decided to attend law school. While continuing to work full-time, she took night classes at the South Texas College of Law.

Upon earning her law degree, Huffman was hired as a prosecutor in Harris County and advanced from misdemeanor court to Chief Felony Prosecutor, Special Crimes Gang Prosecutor, and Legal Counsel to the Organized Crime Narcotics Task Force. She served as lead prosecutor in over 100 jury trials, including murders, sexual assaults, and aggravated robberies. Huffman earned a reputation as a fair but tough enforcer of the law, both as a prosecutor and a twice elected Judge to the 183rd Criminal District Court.

Senator Huffman was first elected to the Texas Senate in 2008 and has been re-elected five times.

As a respected conservative voice in the Texas Senate, Lt. Gov. Dan Patrick has looked to her to serve in leadership roles that have a direct impact on every aspect of our state government. Senator Huffman currently serves as Chair of the Senate Committee on Finance and is a senior member of the Senate Committee on Criminal Justice and the Legislative Budget Board.

Senator Huffman’s common-sense approach to solving complex issues and her reputation as a trusted conservative leader has helped her to build strong working relationships with her colleagues and state leadership. For her efforts, she has received awards and recognitions from advocacy groups and organizations like the Texas District and County Attorney’s

Association, the Texas Municipal Police Association, the Texas Sheriff’s Association, the National Rifle Association, the Texas Veterans Commission, the Texas Association Against Sexual Assault, the Children’s Hospital Association of Texas, the Cancer Action Network, the Texas Association of Business, the Texas Farm Bureau, and many more.