Free Consultation. Call Now:

940-320-7777

WLW Radio Advertising

Serving the Greater Cincinnati metropolitan area, WLW – branded Newsradio 700 WLW – is a commercial news/talk radio station licensed to Cincinnati, Ohio, Owned by iHeartMedia, Inc., WLW often identifies itself as The Big One.

DX Media Direct is the easiest way to get WLW advertising rates and availability.

Radio Advertising Rates. Now.

We help reach your audience... for less!

Name*

First Last

Email*

Phone*

Text Message Opt-in*

CAPTCHA

Δ

“WGY Radio Advertising”

Serving the Capital District including the Albany-Schenectady-Troy radio market, WGY is a commercial AM radio station licensed to Schenectady, New York. WGY airs a News/Talk radio format, and is owned by iHeartMedia.

DX Media Direct is the easiest way to get WGY advertising rates and availability.

Radio Advertising Rates. Now.

We help reach your audience... for less!

Name*

First Last

Email*

Phone*

Text Message Opt-in*

CAPTCHA

Δ

N

With our pre-negotiated rates and volume discounts you save 35% -90% off what local advertisers pay.

N

Radio reaches 92% of adults 18 + every week. (Nielsen Total Audience)

N

Radio is America’s #1 Reach Medium. It’s targetable, flexible and efficient.

Format: News/Talk

Gender: Men 60.3% | Women: 39.7%

Median Income: $91,789.00

College Graduate or More: 20.9%

WLW Radio Advertising

Full demographic information available in our datasheet, which is available upon request, includes:

Age

Income

Education

Radio Consumption

Purchase Likeliness

Sample DX Media Radio Rates:

1 million weekly listeners: 140 Country Music Stations – $250 per spot ($1.78 per local spot).

200 National News stations: $450 per spot ($2.25 per local spot).

Host Endorsement 118 stations: $400 per spot ($3.39 per local spot). Listen to host endorsement samples.

Top 10 Major Market talk station: Over 1.5 million weekly audience impressions – $3,500 a week.

Google Rating

5.0

5.0

Joseph Saigh

17:00 11 Dec 17

We are very pleased with the results from DX Media and will continue to use them in the future.

Need Him

20:21 18 May 17

The team brings a strategic focus and insight to our media planning and buying that exceeds all our previous experience. They are always professional and responsive. They consistently take the time to understand our business and objectives and keep producing results that exceed our expectations. We are grateful for the partnership.

Shawn B

20:47 04 Mar 17

We have worked with DX Media and Buddy Vaughn for over 5 years now. Their results and service levels for the client is second to none. We have enjoyed hitting our sales goals and cost per call targets since the inception, with each passing year better than the prior. Hats off to the DX Media team, u guys rock!

Dawn Sprayman

19:35 25 Feb 17

I have worked with DX Media Direct for several years and find them to be the best in the business. They provide expert guidance, they are results- driven, and they are so easy to work with! I highly recommend them.

Shea Pruitt

20:46 24 Feb 17

I've worked with DX Media for a number of years now. They are very knowledgable and professional and I will continue to use their services to help grow my business. More than once, I've appreciated their honest approach to advertising.

Sarah Wheeler

20:40 18 Sep 18

This agency is incredible to work with! They have so much experience and know how to give you exactly what you need to get the results you want. I will work with them again in a heartbeat!!

Rick Silva

15:27 10 Aug 21

I’ve been working with Buddy, the owner of DX Media Direct for the better part of the last decade, and he’s been exceptionally honest and forthright.DX Media has fulfilled all my marketing requirements, on every single vertical I’ve needed.I’ve used their marketing services for 4 of my companies successfully.His willingness to help my companies maintain cost per call and acquisition has been the only reason why I’ve been able to operate a successful and profitable enterprise.As we all well know, the past couple years have been treacherous.With that said, I highly recommend Buddy Vaughn and his team at DX Media.Use them with confidence, they will not steer you wrong, and if they do, they’ll make it right, which is unheard of nowadays with any marketing company.I look forward to using them for all my ventures, new and old, for many years to come.Thank you again for everything, DX Media.Sincerely,Rick S.

Eric

17:41 16 Nov 23

I can’t say enough how much this company has helped my business grow. Best in the business as far as I’m concerned. Keep up the great work DX!!!

Paige Gibson

17:44 16 Nov 23

This company has been really great to us for the last 7 years, we are pleased to continue working alongside them. Fantastic service and ownership!

Kara Abramoff

20:06 28 Dec 22

I have been working with Gregg for about a year now. I have to say, he is really great to work with. He took something I didn't love doing off my hands, and has exceeded my expectations.

See All Reviews

“DX Media Direct is one of the best agencies I have ever worked with. Their creativity and solutions are outstanding. They track results like no one I know.”

D. Sprayman

Executive Marketing Director

PointBank

Radio: The “Take With You” Medium

It’s Targetable – Flexible – Efficient.

Respond quickly to market conditions.

Influence ultra-busy consumers.

Local Formats: Target your markets and customers anywhere.

Network Radio: Hundreds of stations for the cost of a few.

Host Endorsement: The Original Influencer Marketing. Get local and national hosts to put their influence behind your brand. Instant Trust and Credibility.

FREE Radio Production: DX Media Direct will write, produce, hire talent, get studio time that includes one voice talent at no charge.

REVIEWS

DX Media Direct exceeded all expectations, developing budget-friendly solutions to maximize results.

Pete Miller

They’re in tune with market trends and are constantly adjusting their efforts to provide the best results.

Shawn B.

They went above and beyond to understand the target market and meet all needs.

CEO

Brands that Trust DX Media Direct

Copyright ©2020 DX Media Direct

Dallas, Fort Worth, and Across the USA

940-320-7777

Privacy Policy

All materials are copyright of their respective owners. Demographic information is sourced from publicly accessible websites and is used for informational purposes only. Advertisements on this radio station are estimates. Note: Individual radio station rates are negotiated weekly. Our estimates are based on local and regional. Advertising rate estimates are typically for a 30 second spot. Seasonal factors and volume discounts should also be considered.