Hi everyone,

I'd be happy if someone could help me with this. I've read that 'a tutto tondo' can mean well-rounded or complete when talking about people but I have no idea how to translate it in this context. It is an article from a magazine about psychology and it's talking about transgression in a patient-analyst relationship, and the paradox of the analyst's role.

...e ciò ancora più se il pensiero tenta ricondurci ad un improponibile confronto, dove l'immagine della realtà soggettiva ed umana dell'analista — inafferrabile per il paziente — si contrappone aquella a tutto tondo di coloro che, nella storia dell'umanità, per trasmettere il loro messaggio di fratellanza, di amore o di libertà hanno dovuto interpretarlo e viverlo alla maniera degli antichi profeti:...My attempt:

...And even more so if our mind tries to bring us back to the in appropriate question, where the analyst's image of the subjective and symphatetic reality, that is elusive for the patient, clashes with that (?) of those who, in order to convey their message of brotherhood, love or freedom, had to interpret and live it in the manner of ancient prophets:...

Thank you so much in advance!

...and even more so if our mind tries to bring us back to the inappropriate question, where the analyst's image of the subjective and human? reality that is elusive for the patient clashes with the image of all those who, throughout the story of humanity, had to interpret and live it in the manner of the ancient prophets in order to convey their message of brotherhood, love or freedom:...

Hi nikit,

Maybe "all those" would work here. I couldn't find any definition for "symphatetic" - I haven't heard of this word in English. I would also take out the commas before "that is" and after "patient" and I've changed the sentence structure in order to accommodate "nella storia dell'umanità"

What elfa say is right, If we analize the phrase the expression "a tuttotondo" refers to "image". We can rewrite the italian sentence in this way: "si contrappone con l'immagine a tutto tondo di coloro che", but elfa didn't translate the adjective "a tutto tondo" so the translation can became "opposed with the comprehensive one(image) of all those who". I believe that "comprehensive" is the perfect translation in this case.

I'm sorry for the grammar errors that I may have made, I started to study english only few month ago

What elfa say is right, If we analize the phrase the expression "a tuttotondo" refers to "image". We can rewrite the italian sentence in this way: "si contrappone con l'immagine a tutto tondo di coloro che", but elfa didn't translate the adjective "a tutto tondo" so the translation can became "opposed with the comprehensive one(image) of all those who". I believe that "comprehensive" is the perfect translation in this case.

You're right, mon.d, I didn't translate it - but I wonder whether "comprehensive" is quite right here. Maybe

...is contrary to the prevailing image of those who...

Like I said i'm new to english, but if I well translated "prevailing image", it means "the most accepted/widespread image of reality" or somthing similar to me and the italian sentece don't say that. My interpretation of "a tuttotondo image of reality", in this case (based on the last part of the phrases) is an image of the reality observed in the manner of the ancient prophets, an image universal that include/explain everything. That's the reason because I translate "a tuttotond" with "comprehensive".

Maybe I'm wrong but the other translations don't seem right to me

Thanks KC and mon.d - I see what the Italian is trying to say now. However, it is difficult to encapsulate both elements of the meaning. You could use "universal" - something like

...is at odds with the universal image of those who... but that would leave out the "fully visible" element that KC is hinting at - the opposite of "inafferabile."

Maybe "concrete" might work.

...contrasts/is at odds with the more concrete image of those who...

What do you think?

Edit: @ mon.d - I'm afraid "comprehensive" doesn't have quite the same meaning in Eng as in Italian, and I wouldn't use it paired with "image".

Yes Elfa, given that in this case it seems that we cannot find (until now, at least) a precise translation for this figurative use of a tuttotondo I think that your solution is a good workaround, in that it nails the essence of this contrast.

I believe "Concrete" may work even if it's not the exact translation.

@elfa: I choose of "comprehensive" was based my dictionary's definition which is "including all the necessary facts, details, or problems that need to be dealt with" but I start to think that this definition is uncommon in the spoken language. While I was checking again the definition I found a synonym, "thorough" (definition=including every possible detail), Do you thing it's better?. I'm curious because I had never seen/heard it before...