Phase One lenses are designed to resolve well beyond the high-resolution medium format sensors of the XF System. Using large sensors, large pixels and optics prepared to scale, the Schneider Kreuznach Leaf Shutter range is already capable of going beyond 100MP resolution.

With an integrated Leaf Shutter, the range of Schneider Kreuznach lenses delivers industry leading flash synchronization speed of up to 1/1600th of a second. Photographers can overpower daylight and gain complete control over ambient light using flash, in order to perfectly freeze motion or create beautiful lighting effects.

The 35mm LS and the 120mm LS are the latest additions to the high-resolution lens range. With a range of lenses designed to resolve even beyond the limits of current sensor technology, new Schneider Kreuznach lenses are ready for the future.

The new “Blue Ring” lenses had several improvements from previous lenses.

Serialized: Every lens is now electronically identifiable. Some customers like rental houses that have several Phase One bodies and several copies of a given Phase One lens (e.g. five copies of the Schneider “Blue Ring” 120LS). The Phase One XF can identify and calibrate focus for each specific Blue Ring lens. The serial number will also be embedded in the metadata, making it easier to track down which specific lens was used in a given photo shoot.

Tolerances: Both the physical design of the lens (how it holds the optical elements in place) and the manufacturing process in place during manufacturing have been improved. This means tighter quality control and better optical results.

Feel: The “Blue Ring” lenses now match the polished and professional look and feel of the XF Camera System. The metal focusing ring and AF/MF selector ring is made from precision milled aluminum and the lens hood is a solid metal design with a subtle and practical rubber lip.

Warranty: Like all Schneider LS lenses, the new “Blue Ring” lenses feature a five year warranty when purchased in a kit with a Phase One IQ3 digital back. This warranty includes a loaner lens provided during any repairs or service of the lens. Combined with the tightened quality control and more robust industrial design this warranty provides great assurance that purchasing these “Blue Ring” lenses is a long term investment.