Leaf Educational Systems Limited), a subsidiary of the Company, since 2009, Dalian Beipeng Educational Software Development Inc., a subsidiary of the Company, since 2011, Maple Leaf CIS Holdings Pte. Limited, a subsidiary of the Company, since March 2020. Mr. Jen was appointed as the executive director and the chairman of the Board of Directors of Kingsley Edugroup Limited (“Kingsley”), a subsidiary of the Company formerly listed on GEM of the Stock Exchange (former stock code: 8105) on 19 March 2020 and as a director of Kingsley International Sdn. Bhd., an indirect subsidiary of the Company on 30 April 2020. Mr. Jen remained as executive director and chairman of Kingsley after it was delisted on 24 July 2020 until it was dissolved on 31 March 2021. Mr. Jen was also appointed as a director of Star Readers Pte. Ltd., an indirect subsidiary of the Company and Canadian International School Pte. Ltd., an indirect subsidiary of the Company, both on 26 August 2020. Mr. Jen is a director of Sherman International Investment Limited (“Sherman Int’l”) and Sherman Investment Holdings Limited (“Sherman Investment”), both of which have an interest in the shares and underlying shares of the Company which would fall to be disclosed under the provisions of Divisions 2 and 3 of Part XV of the Securities and Futures Ordinance.

Mr. Jen has more than 26 years of experience in the education industry. In 2004, he was selected as one of the most influential figures in the private education industry in China by sohu.com.

In 2005, he received the Outstanding Chinese Entrepreneur Award from the Overseas Chinese Affairs Office of the State Council of the PRC. In 2011, he was honored as one of the “Top Ten Figures of our Time” by a group of media organizations and industry associations.

In 2013, he received the Governor General’s Medallion from Mr. David Johnston, Governor General of Canada, for his contributions to international education.

In October 2014, he received the Chinese Government Friendship Award from the PRC Premier Mr. Li Keqiang and two Vice Premiers, which is the highest honor awarded by the Chinese government to foreign experts for their outstanding contributions to the modernized development of the PRC.

In 2019, he was recognised as one of the “Top 10 Most Influential Education leaders in China” by Knowledge Review, a United Kingdom leading education magazine, and was honorably featured on the cover of the August 2019 edition.

Mr. Jen received his Bachelor of Arts degree in English Language and Arts from Beijing Foreign Languages University, the PRC in May 1978, his Master of Business Administration by distance learning from the University of Wales, New Port, the United Kingdom in September 2005 and an Honorary Doctor of Laws degree (Hon. LL.D.) from Royal Roads University in British Columbia, Canada in June 2013. Mr. Jen is a resident of Hong Kong. Mr. Jen is not a resident of Canada for Canadian taxation purposes.