On the New York side:

Delaware and Hudson Canal

sullivanny.us/Departments/ParksRecreation/DelawareHudson

16 Bova Rd., Summitville

About:

Part of the historic Delaware and Hudson Canal is included in the Upper Delaware Scenic and Recreational River region. Constructed between 1825 and 1829, the canal was built to transport anthracite coal from mines in northeastern PA to markets on the Hudson River. It ran from Honesdale, PA to Kingston, NY. Portions of the D & H Canal were designated a national historic landmark in 1968.

Remnants of the canal can still be seen. In the Town of Mamakating, the section is preserved as a linear park with a towpath trail.

An interpretive center is maintained in Summitville, open beginning Memorial Day weekend and on weekends until Labor Day. Trails and grounds are open year-round from 8 a.m. to dusk. “The center takes the visitor on a journey through each phase of the canal’s construction and its 70 years of operation. Photographs document the terrible social impact the canal had on many of its employees, as well as the enormous contribution the project made to the region’s industrial development.”

Indian Head Canoes

845/557-8777 • www.indianheadcanoes.com

3883 Rte. 97, Barryville, NY

1036 Rte. 97, Sparrowbush, NY

1138 Delaware Dr., Matamoras, PA

About:

Indian Head offers rafting, canoeing, kayaking and tubing at three locations on the Delaware River: Barryville, NY; Sparrowbush, NY (Knights Eddy) and Matamoras, PA. Visitors can camp in log cabins, deluxe cabins or bunkhouses, or set up a tent on the campgrounds.

Kittatinny

845/682-3539 • www.kittatinny.com

3854 Rte. 97, Barryville, NY

2389 Rte. 97, Pond Eddy

About:

Kittatinny covers 120 miles of the Delaware River with bases in Barryville, NY; Pond Eddy, NY; Matamoras, PA; Dingmans Ferry, PA and Milford, PA. It offers camping and river trips—canoeing, kayaking, rafting or tubing through crystal-clear calm and whitewater.

The Outside Institute

www.theoutsideinstitute.org

39 Lower Main St., Callicoon, NY

About:

“The Outside Institute was founded in 2017 in the Upper Delaware Valley with a mission to inspire joyful awareness and essential reciprocity between all beings, regardless of species or race. year-round includes guided nature walks, forest immersion, sustainable foraging education, wildcrafting workshops and botanical mixology. We often collaborate with experts in botany, herbalism, plant dyes, natural cosmetics and more.”

Roscoe Campsite Park

607/498-5264 • www.roscoecampsitepark.com

2179 Old Rte. 17, Roscoe, NY

About:

At Roscoe Campsite Park, on the banks of the Beaverkill River, visitors will find hiking trails and can search for signs of wildlife, including white-tailed deer and red foxes. There are hundreds of miles of paths for biking too. The area offers fly fishing, kayaking and tubing.

Beyond tent sites, Roscoe Campsite Park offers cabins and covered Conestoga wagons for guests to rent.

Sullivan County Dove Trail

Multiple locations

www.sullivancatskills.com/interactive-dove-map

About:

“The Sullivan Catskills Dove Trail© commemorates the 50th anniversary of the 1969 Woodstock Festival and celebrates its impact on Sullivan Catskills.” Visitors can see the dove sculptures, which can be found throughout the county. Each dove is handpainted by a local artist and was inspired by the Woodstock concert.

Landers River Trips

800/252-3925 • www.landersrivertrips.com

40 Skinners Falls West, Narrowsburg | 69 De Mauro Ln., Narrowsburg | 3909 Rte. 97, Barryville

About:

Landers River Trips is family-owned and operated; it was founded in 1955 by Bob Lander. Now Landers offers riverside locations from which to launch rafts, canoes and kayaks. They also offer camping.

The Skinners Falls campground “is perfectly suited for the young at heart who enjoy late nights around the campfire and ongoing activity. Riverfront sites, lean-to sites and open-field sites available, located within walking distance from Skinners Falls.” The Narrowsburg campground “is located at the midpoint/heart of most river trips... also offers electric sites and a large selection of wooded sites.” The Minisink Ford campground offers “a quiet, more intimate camping experience... a favorite choice for families who like to get away from it all.”

And in Pennsylvania:

Archbald Pothole State Park

570/945-3239 • bit.ly/3M1kWVy

Business Route 6, Archbald

About:

Archbald Pothole State Park is a 150-acre park named for the Archbald Pothole, a geologic feature that formed during the Wisconsin Glacial Period around 15,000 years ago. The pothole is 38 feet deep, has a volume of about 18,600 cubic feet, and thus could hold about 140,000 gallons. It would take 35 fire truck tankers to fill the pothole, the website notes.

The entrance can be reached from Interstate 81. Take Exit 191A to Business U.S. Route 6 east towards Carbondale. The park entrance is six miles on the right.

Bushkill Falls

888/287-4545 • www.visitbushkillfalls.com

138 Bushkill Falls Rd., Bushkill

About:

“The ‘Niagara of Pennsylvania,’ Bushkill Falls is among the Keystone State’s most famous scenic attractions. This unique series of eight waterfalls, nestled deep in the wooded Pocono Mountains, is accessible through a network of hiking trails and bridges which afford fabulous views of the falls and the surrounding forest.”

Beyond hiking trails, Bushkill Falls offers opportunities for guests to fish, mine for gemstones and more.

Delaware and Hudson Canal

570/685-4871 • www.nps.gov/upde/learn/historyculture/dhcanal.htm

274 River Rd., Beach Lake

570/253-3240 • www.waynehistorypa.com/museums/canalparklock31

179 Texas Palmyra Hwy., Hawley

About:

Parts of the historic Delaware and Hudson Canal are located in PA as well as New York, and are in the Upper Delaware Scenic and Recreational River region under the National Park Service. Constructed between 1825 and 1829, the canal was built to transport anthracite coal from mines in northeastern PA to markets on the Hudson River. It ran from Honesdale, PA to Kingston, NY. Portions of the D & H Canal were designated a national historic landmark in 1968.

In PA as well as in New York, remnants of the canal can still be visited (see page 23). of the canal can still be visited. The D&H Canal Park at Lock 31 has 16 acres to hike and explore, and a towpath trail to hike.

Delaware Highlands Conservancy

570/226-3164 • www.delawarehighlands.org

571 Perkins Pond Rd., Beach Lake

About:

“The Delaware Highlands Conservancy (DHC) is an accredited land trust dedicated to conserving the natural heritage and quality of life in the Upper Delaware River region, in partnership with the region’s landowners and communities.”

DHC offers various outdoor educational opportunities and plenty of fun to be had while you’re learning. For example, on Saturday, May 25, from 1 p.m. to 3 p.m., try a pond investigation. Get your hands dirty looking for insects, and use the findings to determine how the pond is doing. Registration required.

Dorflinger-Suydam Wildlife Sanctuary

570/253-1185

dorflinger.org/wildlife-sanctuary

55 Suydam Drive, Honesdale

About:

“The Dorflinger-Suydam Wildlife Sanctuary is dedicated to the preservation of woodlands and open spaces.” Home to the Dorflinger Glass Museum, the property hosts the Wildflower Music Festival. Visitors will also find “miles of well-maintained walking trails clear the mind and refresh the soul. During winter months, there is a special solitude in the slish of cross-country skis breaking through the snow. It all fosters the belief that enduring values are part of a worthwhile way of life that should be preserved for and shared with future generations.”

It is maintained by volunteers. Trails are open daily from 8 a.m. to dusk.

Indian Head Canoes

845/557-8777

www.indianheadcanoes.com

1138 Delaware Dr., Matamoras

About:

Indian Head offers rafting, canoeing, kayaking and tubing at three locations on the Delaware River: Barryville, NY; Sparrowbush, NY and Matamoras, PA. Visitors can camp in log cabins, deluxe cabins or bunkhouses, or set up a tent on the campgrounds.

Kittatinny

845/682-3539

www.kittatinny.com

2130 Rte. 739, Dingmans Ferry

1147 Delaware Dr., Matamoras

378 Rtes. 6 and 209, Milford

About:

Kittatinny covers 120 miles of the Delaware River with bases in Matamoras, Dingmans Ferry and Milford, as well as the New York bases in Barryville and Pond Eddy. It offers camping and river trips—canoeing, kayaking, rafting or tubing through crystal-clear calm and whitewater.

Lacawac Sanctuary

570/689-9494

www.lacawac.org

94 Sanctuary Rd., Lake Ariel

About:

Lacawac Sanctuary has a mission to “preserve the natural beauty of Lake Lacawac, its watershed and surrounding lands; to conduct long-term research on natural systems as part of a global effort to understand and protect the Earth’s biodiversity; and to increase appreciation of this effort through innovative, field-based educational programs for students, teachers and the community.” Lacawac Sanctuary is an environmental education center, nature center and biological field station.

Lacawac Sanctuary hosts multiple week-long summer camps, educational workshops, artists’ residences, a variety of themed hikes, and meetings and retreats. The public is invited to take self-guided hikes on the grounds; visit www.lacawactrails.org for detailed information.

Pocono Environmental Education Center

570/828-2319

www.peec.org

538 Emery Rd., Dingmans Ferry

About:

“The Pocono Environmental Education Center (PEEC) is located within the 77,000-acre Delaware Water Gap National Recreation Area, along the Delaware River... PEEC is an independent nonprofit organization and a 44-year education partner of the National Park Service.”

PEEC offers summer day camps and a wide variety of programs, many of which teach new hobbies like snowshoeing and birdwatching. Over Memorial Day weekend, a family camp weekend will take place from Friday through Monday, and a Plant ID 101 class will be held on Saturday, May 25 from 10 a.m. to 12 noon. Call to register.