International airports near Summitville, NY

86 miles to: New York, NY (LGA / KLGA) LaGuardia Airport

97 miles to: New York, NY (JFK / KJFK) John F. Kennedy International Airport

102 miles to: Newark, NJ (EWR / KEWR) Newark Liberty International Airport

128 miles to: Philadelphia, PA (PHL / KPHL) Philadelphia International Airport

134 miles to: Syracuse, NY (SYR / KSYR) Syracuse Hancock International Airport

147 miles to: Hartford, CT (BDL / KBDL) Bradley International Airport

150 miles to: Atlantic City, NJ (ACY / KACY) Atlantic City International Airport

Note: Some distances are straight-line estimates, click on the link to calculate actual driving distance.

Domestic airports near Summitville, NY

36 miles to: Newburgh, NY (SWF / KSWF) Stewart International Airport

74 miles to: Teterboro, NJ (TEB / KTEB) Teterboro Airport

83 miles to: White Plains, NY (HPN / KHPN) Westchester County Airport

84 miles to: Morristown, NJ (MMU / KMMU) Morristown Municipal Airport

86 miles to: New York, NY (LGA / KLGA) LaGuardia Airport

89 miles to: Scranton, PA (AVP / KAVP) Wilkes-Barre/Scranton International Airport

97 miles to: New York, NY (JFK / KJFK) John F. Kennedy International Airport

Local airports near Summitville, NY

25 miles to: Montgomery, NY (MGJ / KMGJ) Orange County Airport

25 miles to: Monticello, NY (MSV / KMSV) Sullivan County International Airport

Map of airports near Summitville, NY

Click here to show map

More trip calculations

Hotels near Summitville, NY

Cities near Summitville, NY

Location of Summitville, New York

Airports in New York

Cities in New York

Airports in the United States

Cities in the United States

Nearest major airport to Summitville, New York

PLEASE NOTE: Summitville may be a smaller town so be sure to check all locations and airports. Contact us if you have any questions.

The closest major airport to Summitville, New York is Stewart International Airport (SWF / KSWF). This airport is in Newburgh, New York and is 36 miles from the center of Summitville, NY. If you're looking for domestic flights to SWF, check the airlines that fly to SWF.

Search for direct flights from your hometown and find hotels near Summitville, NY, or scroll up for more international airports or domestic airports. You can also browse local airports if you're a pilot.

Summitville, New York

City: Summitville

State: New York

Country: United States

Category: cities

Nearest airports

Travelmath helps you find the closest airport to any city, as well as a list of smaller local airports. You can use these pages to plan your trip and figure out the easiest way to get to your destination. Many times there are multiple airports near the city you want to visit, so you can often find a cheaper flight into a different airport. This is especially useful if you are getting a rental car, since it might be better to drive a bit farther in order to save money on airfare. If you're booking an international flight, you probably want the closest major airport, otherwise if you're a pilot you may be looking for a local airport. Use this tool along with the flight distance pages to plan your travel.