By Elizabeth Kelly

Imagine being a student, doing homework, attending classes, eating macaroni and cheese and then within a year becoming a professional basketball player for an NBA team, driving a flashy car and eating steak every night.

So is the life of Toronto Raptors center and former BYU men''s basketball player Rafael Araujo, who appeared at the Delta Center on Tuesday, Jan. 17 2006, with diamond stud earrings in his ears. Araujo is playing in his second year for the Raptors after going eighth overall in the 2004 draft.

'I am so blessed,' Araujo said of becoming a professional basketball player. 'I used to eat at Wendy''s and Denny''s, now I eat out at restaurants and have steak and potatoes before the games.'

The 6-foot-11 Araujo started for the Raptors in Tuesday night''s game, and is averaging 2.2 points per game and 2.9 rebounds per game for the season.

After being picked so high in the draft, many felt that Araujo, who is only playing an average of 11 minutes per game, would be performing at a higher level.

After all, both years that he attended BYU he led the Cougars to the NCAA tournament. In his senior year he paced the Cougars with 24 points and 12 rebounds against Syracuse in the NCAA tournament and earned the Mountain West Conference Co-Player of the Year and first-team all-conference honors.

Araujo, however, said he is not worried about his playing time.

'I do not care if I start or even play, I am just happy to be here,' he said.

Araujo has been surrounded by controversy since being drafted in the lottery. In some circles he has been deemed a bust. Media and fans in Toronto have criticized the franchise for what they view as a wasted lottery pick. Araujo though, said he doesn''t feel any pressure to perform based on his draft status, nor does he feel it would have made any difference if he had gone later in the draft.

'If they picked me eighth or number 29th, I would be happy to be in anywhere,' Araujo said. 'I do not feel any pressure because I have to learn and keep working because it takes a little time.'

Although stats say that Araujo is averaging a minute less than last season, he played 18 minutes against the Knicks last week and 12 minutes versus the Jazz on Tuesday. He went scoreless against the Jazz, missing both of his field-goal attempts, but pulled down three rebounds.

Raptors head coach Sam Mitchell feels that Araujo is continually improving and playing time is not an issue.

'In the NBA it always takes bigger guys a little longer to develop' coach Mitchell said. 'Other players are doing well and I am not concerned with Araujo''s time. The focus is on his progress.'

Araujo is now in his second season and said he is feeling a little more comfortable with his position on the Raptors team.

'I am focusing on playing defense, getting the rebounds, and doing the little things that I do to help my team get a win,' he said.

The Raptors usually start Araujo and then go with 6-foot-11 forward Charlie Villanueva or 6-foot-10 forward Matt Bonner. Araujo has started 29 of 37 games this season and Mitchell feels that the big Brazilian is meeting the coaching staff''s expectations.

'We''re not worried about him scoring, we want his big presence in the middle, his rebounding and defense,' Mitchell said. 'I am really pleased with his progress.'

Due to stronger and quicker players in the NBA, Araujo has worked hard to lose weight and get stronger so he can become a better post player for the Raptors.

'Being a professional player is another challenge for me,' Araujo said. 'In this league you have to be quick because every guy is professional and every night you play the best of the best. Even the guy who comes off the bench is a great player and you have to respect him.'

Araujo showed his loyalty to the Cougars when he visited his BYU friends while he was in town.

'It will always be special to come back to Provo,' Araujo said. 'The good times and good feelings I have here and the good memories I will never forget the rest of my life.'

(For comments, e-mail Elizabeth Kelly at elizabethkelly14@yahoo.com)