After the first half of play, it seemed that the BYU Cougars would win their first game at the Huntsman Center in almost 10 years. BYU outplayed the U men’s basketball team and went into the break with a 15-point lead.

But for the Utes, that is when the game began.

Slow starts have plagued the Utes all year and BYU led the game by as many as 17 points, but the Utes came back for an emotional 64-56 victory.

“I love Coach [Rick Majerus],” U senior Nick Jacobson said in tears. “I know he is proud of us and we did this for him.”

The absence of Majerus earlier in the week due to a heart condition rattled the team, and may have been the reason for the Utes’ sluggish start.

“It was a tough start and I couldn’t even shoot because my arms were shaking, but I knew if I could come out of it, the team could come out and they carried me to the second half,” Jacobson said.

The offense looked absolutely awful in the first half, as almost every possession ended up in a desperation one-on-one move by one of the Utes, which was obviously not the game plan.

“I think we came out and we were sluggish, and when you are sluggish, people think that they have to go and make plays,” U point guard Tim Drisdom said.

While the Ute offense was struggling, the BYU offense was not turning many heads either, but it was clearly playing much better than Utah.

Even though a lot of attention was paid to BYU center Rafael Araujo, it was guard Mark Bigelow who blew the game open.

With the score 20-17, Bigelow hit two straight threes, and then drove in and got fouled as he made another shot. As Bigelow kept hitting big shots, Jacobson could not get going. For the most part, it was BYU guard Mike Hall who kept Jacobson from getting a good look. Before the Utes knew it, they were down 34-19 at halftime.

“Defensively, in the first half, our effort was good,” U interim coach Kerry Rupp said. “Bigelow got loose and we really focused on tightening it up with him and staying consistent on battling in the post with Araujo.”

At the beginning of the second half, the Cougars kept it rolling and extended the lead to 17 points, but then Andrew Bogut took over.

“In the first half, we were having trouble without wing entry, so we decided to use the high post and the pick-and-roll,” Rupp said.

The Aussie freshman almost single-handedly cut down the deficit, scoring eight straight points to make the score 40-34. Bogut scored 17 of his 21 points in the second half and pulled down 12 rebounds. Along with Bogut, Drisdom played his best game of the season and kept the offense moving much more fluidly than it did in the first half. Drisdom finished the game with 14 points, seven rebounds and two assists.

Jacobson had been quiet all game long, but when the Utes needed him most, he came through. He hit two straight long threes, and with seven minutes left in the game, Jacobson hit another trey to put the Utes up by a point.

After that, Jacobson hit another three to put the Utes up 55-50, and then Drisdom nailed one from long distance to effectively finish off the Cougars.

“[Jacobson] is huge, and he always comes through,” Drisdom said. “He has the nickname ‘Butter’ because he comes through every time.”

“Luckily, I got loose a little bit,” Jacobson said. “The other players stepped it up, and I knew they would start to get tired, so I just bided my time until I knew I would get the opportunity.”

Even though Jacobson got loose, it didn’t mean that any of his big shots came easy. Most of the threes came well behind the three point arc. “Those were tough, contested shots that he hit,” BYU coach Steve Cleveland said.

The Utes’ defensive effort against Araujo throughout the entire game was almost perfect.

“We wanted to stay in front of him, and if we got behind him, then push him back,” Rupp said. “We tried to do different things with him. We faked like we were taking away the middle to make him take the tough baseline shot.”

“He’s a good player, but we have three guys that he has to deal with, and we only had to deal with one dominating presence,” Jacobson said.

Araujo finished the game eight points and nine rebounds, while Bigelow went was only 1-for-6 in the second half.

“We really lacked aggressiveness in the first half,” Rupp said. “I told them, ‘Let’s not end this game when we haven’t laid everything out on the line. Step up intensity and focus and have the courage to step up and hit the shot.'”

The difference between the two halves was astounding. For Jacobson, it was all about belief in the seemingly impossible.

“I knew at halftime we could do it,” Jacobson said. “BYU did it to us twice at their place, and I just told the players that we need to believe in our hearts that we can come back and win.”

The emotion of the loss of Majerus may have hurt them in the beginning, but at the same time, it may have been the difference in the end.

“I think the whole team struggled with it, and that was one of the reasons for the slow start,” Jacobson said. “Everyone in their hearts wanted to win the game for Majerus, and we did it.”

The win was huge because a third conference loss would have given MWC leader Air Force much more breathing room in the conference race.

Even though the Utes came out with a huge victory, Drisdom knows they can’t keep making the same mistakes.

“We don’t want to be down 17 again, but we have to come out and start stronger,” he said. “This is definitely a big win for us, and we are going to use it to carry us to the next game.”