By Jeff Jordan

Everybody got a piece the action on Wednesday, Dec. 10 as five Cougars scored in double figures during a 92-56 beat-down of Western Oregon University.

Rafael Araujo led BYU with 15 points and 14 boards, marking his fourth straight double-double of the season.

Joining Araujo in double digit scoring were fellow seniors Mark Bigelow (15 points) and Luis Lemes (13 points), junior Mike Hall (13 points), and freshman Mike Rose, who finished with 14 points on 4-5 shooting from three-point territory.

BYU head coach Steve Cleveland said he used Western Oregon, a Division II school, as an opportunity to develop his younger talent.

'These games are for me to give people opportunities to play, especially in the grind of the preseason,' Cleveland said. 'You want to find some games where you know you can play all 12 people. That''s why you schedule these games.'

BYU got an early boost from Lemes, who carried BYU in the opening minutes, scoring 12 of BYU''s first 13 points when the rest of the Cougars couldn''t buy a bucket.

'Lu has been really solid and tonight he hit some shots when nobody could make a basket,' Cleveland said. 'He''s always a guy who''s going to get a quiet eight or 10 points and not make too many mistakes.'

Sparked by Lemes, BYU finally caught fire 10 minutes into the game, opening up a 49-30 halftime lead. The Cougars never looked back from there.

WOU was led by seniors Robert Day (23 points) and former Ricks College player Sean Kelly (21 points), who combined for 44 of the Wolves'' 56 total points.

Cleveland said he was impressed with Day''s performance.

'This team was overmatched in almost every area, but Day was tough to guard,' Cleveland said. 'They did a real good job isolating, and we didn''t do a real good job adjusting.'

But BYU won''t spend any time reviewing the WOU game.

'We''re going to start preparing for USC tonight ,' Cleveland said.

Now BYU looks forward to its Saturday night matchup with the University of Southern California of the Pac-10 Conference.

'USC is going to give us a different look,' Cleveland said. 'They''re going to press, they''re going to trap and they''re going to do combination defenses.

'They have more size, plus they''re better offensively than .'

The Trojans are lead by 6-foot-8, 260 pound forward Jeff McMillan, who has averaged 15.8 points and 8.4 boards per game in his first five games.

USC (3-2) is coming off a 96-90 overtime win over Cal State Fullerton. The Trojans lost 92-83 to UNLV of the Mountain West Conference earlier this season.

Bigelow said he is looking forward to Saturday''s game.

'Anytime you can get a PAC-10 team as talented as this USC team is, especially on your home court, it''s going to be exciting,' he said. 'We''re going to have to play a pretty good game to win.'

Saturday''s tipoff is set for 7 p.m. at the Marriott Center.