By Jeffrey Baer

When 6-foot-11-inch Rafael Araujo walked around BYU campus last year, he stood out. Not only was his size the topic of conversation, but his colorful personality and tattoos made the basketball star even more recognizable.

Yet when Araujo joined the rest of the Toronto Raptors in the ritual of bumping shoulders and chests Wednesday night at the Delta Center for the game against the Utah Jazz, the former Cougar fit right in.

Since the Raptor rookie made the move from Provo northeast to his new home in Canada, he has not seen much playing time, but said he is already benefiting from the experience. He played for a total of four minutes, pulled in one rebound and committed a foul in their victory over the Jazz, 104-95.

'Every day you learn something,' he said. 'You learn about the game and how to play against good players. You just have to develop your game every night.'

In light of the move to Toronto, a reporter shoved a microphone to the Brazilian''s face and asked, 'Have you learned any French?'

Araujo laughed and said, 'I''m still learning English.'

He''s also followed the trend of teammate Chris Bosh. Each has an earring set in their left ear, studded with a large diamond.

'I had it pierced before,' Araujo said. 'I just couldn''t wear it at BYU.'

He''s also reported that he has not acquired any new tattoos since being drafted by the Raptors.

'I just keep playing,' he said. 'I have no free time to think about it. Maybe this summer.'

Life in the NBA is more physically demanding than Araujo expected coming out of college.

'We''re going to play 90 games,' he said. 'We play like almost three seasons in seven months. We are going to be on the road for another week.'

Araujo was drafted 8th overall last year, but said it didn''t really come as a surprise.

'I a little idea, because I did so well in the workout,' he said. 'I just wanted to be drafted. When I got called at No. 8, I was really excited.'

Araujo attributes BYU to helping him prepare for the jump to the NBA.

'In college, we played with the good players,' he said, 'and I worked hard and developed my game.'

He also said head BYU basketball coach Steve Cleveland had a positive influence on him, especially with the experience of making the NCAA tournament.

'If you are a rookie, you cannot play the game defense,' Araujo said. 'That''s a good thing I learned about.'

There were some BYU fans present at the match up against the Jazz. When his name was called over the loud speaker, the familiar cry of 'Arauuuujo' filled the stadium.

'Thanks for supporting me and coming here to watch my game,' Araujo said, when asked what he would say to his Cougar fans. 'It feels good to have some fans supporting me.'

While adjusting to life in the NBA, Araujo said he has not forgotten his alma mater.

'I just wish luck to BYU this year, just want them to keep doing really well,' he said. 'I can''t wait to have free time at the All-Star game, and maybe I could come watch.'

Along with the transition to the NBA came yet another living adjustment in Canada for his wife and his seven-month-old daughter, although he said he doesn''t do much while in the country.

'I just spend so much time in the weight room and work out,' Araujo said. 'I live by the gym, so I just walk and walk back.'

Although time on the court is limited, he expects his work to pay dividends later.

'I don''t play a lot, so I always have to keep running and keep in shape,' he said. 'That''s how a rookie''s life is going. Coach always says to me, ''Just hang in there; it''s a long season and anything can happen.'' Maybe I''ll start playing. You never know.'