By Nicholas Goodfellow

The Cougars traveled to Colorado Saturday afternoon March 1, and handed the Air Force Academy just its third in-conference home loss of the year, 56-43.

'This game was our most important game of the season,' Coach Steve Cleveland said. 'It was important for NCAA Tournament implications, conference tournament implications and for our confidence. I couldn''t be happier for this group, how hard they work and how they''ve played on the road this season.'

Junior Rafael Araujo was dominant, as he singe-handedly overpowered each and every Falcon defender that tried to stop him. He finished the game with a career-high 31 points, while also contributing four steals on the defensive end.

'The fans and community know that Rafael is a driven young man,' Cleveland said. 'He has just been trying to do so much recently, so I''ve just told him to play hard, defend hard and rebound hard. He can''t worry about how many fouls or not being aggressive. His ability to defend and rebound is critical to our success. He realized that and we saw the results of that tonight.'

BYU also held the Falcons'' two top scorers, Tim Keller and Joe Gerlach, to just 19 points combined, seven below their average.

The Cougars'' game plan at the beginning of the game was obvious -- get the ball to Araujo, and let him use his size against the much-smaller Falcons.

Araujo stepped up to the challenge by scoring the Cougars'' first six points, giving them a quick 6-2 lead.

'I''m grateful that my teammates had confidence in me today,' Araujo said.

Air Force senior Tom Bellairs answered with a three from the top of the key. This brought the Falcons to within one, but the Cougars weren''t about to let their early lead go to waste as they outscored Air Force 12-4 over the next four minutes and extended their lead to 18-9.

Cleveland then gave Araujo a much-needed breather, and the Falcons took advantage as they slowly weeded away at the Cougars lead.

Araujo didn''t stay out long, re-entering the game at the eight-minute mark, but Air Force had already gained the confidence it needed to make a run at the Cougars.

AFA freshmen Antoine Hood''s jumper with four seconds left in the first half brought the Falcons to within four, at 26-22, which is the closest they had been in over 15 minutes, and also gave the Academy the momentum going into the locker room.

The second half belonged to the Cougars'' big man, as Araujo picked up where he left off in the first half, scoring BYU''s first eight points and 17 of the Cougars'' first 22 points.

Air Force was able to keep it close with its good clock management, but Araujo was just too much to handle, as the Cougars kept the Falcons to just four three-point field goals in the game.

In Air Force''s two meetings with the Cougars this year, the team has made just nine of 52 three-point shots, which is well below its average.

The Cougars now travel to Albuquerque to take on the Lobos of New Mexico. The Lobos are just 4-8 in conference play, but they got a huge victory against first-place University of Utah Saturday afternoon.

The Lobos are led by senior Ruben Douglas, who leads the nation in scoring. The Cougars know of his capabilities, but Cleveland has confidence in his team.

'It''ll take a great effort Monday, but if we continue to play hard we''ll have a great opportunity to win there,' Cleveland said.

Game time is 7 p.m. and can be seen on KSL TV Channel 5. It can also be heard on KSL Radio 1160.