Talia Marlena Runnels

Ring Name:

Talia Runnels

Height:

5'3

Weight:

110 lbs

Born:

March 3, 1992 (Age: 19) Gainesville, Florida

Billed From:

Palatka, Florida

Resides:

Tampa, Florida

Trained By:

Terri Runnels

Golddust

Cody Rhodes

Dusty Rhodes

Debut:

February 13, 2012 (Raw)

Early Life

Talia is the oldest daughter of Terri Runnels and Golddust and she was close with her parents at first but as she got older she got less close to them because of the way they were acting. Growing up she met her best friends Daisy Simon and Pamelia Satullo. She was also best friends with Chelsea Benoit and Bridget Guerrero and unlike Daisy and Pamelia she was as close to Chelsea and Bridget as well as them.

Wrestling Career

Talia started out in the Indys as Daisy's and Pamelia's Manager. They were also sort of her guardians since she really didn't want to be around her parents Drama. She was more close to her Uncle Cody and her grandpa more than anyone. Despite being a manager she is also a trained Wrestler.

They contuned to wrestle in the Indys until they were contacted by Carrie Wilson who told them that her and Redemption needed help with Interim Raw GM John Laurinaitis and her, Daisy and Pamelia agreed and signed WWE contracts which they're expect to make their debut on February 13th on Raw.

Talia along with Daisy and Pamelia made their debut on Raw on February 13th when Talia was seen in John Laurinaitis's office flirting with him then running out of his office and laughing with her teammates. A few days later on Smackdown she did the same thing. Her and her teammates haven't had a match yet since they've been messing with John Laurinaitis

Personal Life

Talia is the oldest daughter of Golddust and Terri Runnels. She is also the Grandaughter of Dusty Rhodes and the niece of Cody Rhodes

Talia has a tattoo of a top half of a skellton on her upper left arm.

Siblings: Dakota Runnels (Sister)

Family Members: Golddust (Dad), Terri Runnels (Mom), Cody Rhodes (Uncle), Kristin Ditto (Aunt)

Finishing Moves

Diving Crossbody

Move Your Body (Standing Hair Pull followed by a Leg Drop)

Tag Teams/Stables

Radicalz 2.0 (With Daisy and Pamelia mostly manages them)

Wrestlers Managed

Daisy Simon

Pamelia Satullo

Entrance Music

Move Your Body by My Darkest Days (Singles Themes)

Radical by Jim Johnston (Radicalz 2.0 Theme)