Jennifer Denise Gray-White, 40, of Center, Texas, passed away Thursday, May 25, 2023, surrounded by loved ones at CHI St. Luke Baylor Hospital in Houston, Texas. She was born February 21, 1983, in Center, Texas, to Jonathan Gray and Nancy (Berry) Gray.

A Celebration of Life service will be held at Mangum Funeral Home, on Friday, June 2, 2023, at 1pm with Rev. Anthony Jackson officiating.

Jen was born and raised in Center, Texas. She graduated from Center High School, the Class of 2001. In 2011 she married the love of her life, Garnet White Ill. The two spent over 13 years together. Jen enjoyed laughing, spending time with family, friends, and was always the life of the party. She loved her husband, children, and family dearly. She was an outstanding cook and interior decorator. She enjoyed trying new recipes, watching cooking shows, mukbangs, and grilling. All of her loved ones had a special entree or dessert of hers they loved and would often request her to make. She was a Daddy’s Girl. She did it all. From field dressing deer to scaling fish with a spoon. Jen worked serving others as a private caretaker as her heart was focused on serving others. She was a very compassionate, kindhearted, and thoughtful person. She was full of charisma and had a magnetic personality that will be truly missed.

Jennifer is survived by:

Her loving husband, Garnet White III

Children,

Austin Randle

Cali White

Bonus children,

Isaiah White

Sean White

Mother,

Nancy Gray

Grandmother,

Lurline Wade

Brother,

DeQuinn Nickerson and wife Stephanie

Sisters,

Katina Hubbard and husband Greg

Jessica Watts and husband Justin

Nieces,

Sykera Hubbard (CaDarius)

Kylie Hubbard

Lia Nickerson

Great-Niece,

Essence Evans

Nephews,

Gregory Hubbard Jr.

Jaxon Watts

Levin Nickerson

Special cousins,

Carlos Berry and wife Veronica

Valerie Moore and husband Jeremy

Regina Patton

Courtney Dock

Special friends,

Katrina Starling and husband Cory

Sara Garcia and husband Moro

Shellie Jackson (Dakota)

Shanika Collins

Jarvis Hubbard

Nykoha White

Cathy Duthu

And numerous family members, friends, aunts, and uncles that will miss her dearly.

She is preceded in death by her father, Jonathan Gray; great-aunt, Lucille Gray; special friend Christina Jackson.