the-afc.com

Bangkok

Iran got their AFC Futsal Asian Cup Thailand™ 2024 Group D campaign off to a strong start at Hua Mark Indoor Stadium with a 3-1 win over debutants Afghanistan on Thursday.

A brace from Saeid Ahmadabasi and a strike from Mahdi Karimi proved to be the difference as Iran eventually broke down hard-working opponents who restricted the Asian futsal powerhouses to just one goal at half-time before Mehran Ghorlami wrote his own little piece of history with his nation’s maiden goal at the tournament.

Afghanistan kept a dominant Iran at bay in the opening phases of the match until the 12-time champions finally opened the scoring just before the halfway mark of the first half when Karimi broke the deadlock.

And it was a goal worth waiting for as ’s cute backheel pass found Karimi steaming through on the left to slam his strike past Mohammad Safari.

If the game had to wait a while for its first goal following the initial kick-off, it needed no time for its second after half-time as right from kick-off Ahmadabasi closed down the Afghanistan defense, recovered the ball, danced he way past two opponents with ease and then unleashed a rocket of a shot into the roof of the net.

And just a minute later the same player had his brace and Iran’s third. A flowing move saw Ali Asghar Hassanzadeh find Mohammadhossein Derakhshani who in turn played in Ahmadabasi to drill confidently home from a slight angle.

Vahid Shamasee’s side did not have it all their own way and Afghanistan aimed to hit the Iranians on the counter when the opportunity allowed, but it was the continental heavyweights who could have extended their lead further when Behrooz Azimi slammed an effort from just inside the area against the crossbar on 24 minutes.

Nevertheless, Afghanistan continued to seek a historic maiden AFC Futsal Asian Cup goal, and two minutes later their hard graft was rewarded when Ghorlami fired home after being set up by Hussain Mohammadi.

Despite conceding, Iran were content to sit on their two-goal advantage and Afghanistan were unable to make further headway as the 2022 runners-up began their campaign on the front foot.

Iran will next face Bahrain on Saturday, while Afghanistan meet Kuwait in the day’s earlier game at Hua Mark Indoor Stadium.

Hossein Tayebi’s injury is not serious enough to miss the Asian Nations Cup.

Hossein Tayebi, the captain of Iran’s national futsal team and Palma club, was injured during his team’s match against Barcelona in the Spanish La Liga, The match ended with a 1-0 defeat for Palma, raising concerns about his absence in the AFC FUTSAL ASIAN CUP™ 2024, which is scheduled to be held in Thailand. The injury of the captain of the national team is not serious as Palma’s medical crew is trying to prepare him for the next games. According to the announcement of the Futsal Team Melli coaching, the participation of the national team in the first camp and friendly tournament in Vietnam is not mandatory for Tayebi, and the announced list, which includes the players of the domestic league, is supposed to participate in these matches.

Vietnam Four-side International tournament

The International Futsal Quadruple Tournament at the national team level will take place in Ho Chi Minh City. HCM from March 28 to 31. This is the “springboard” for Vietnam Futsal (VN) to activate the World Cup ticket-hunting campaign for the third time in a row. Iran will find this invitational tournament an opportunity to test itself against strong opposition and lay a claim to the title that is held by Japan.

In addition to the Vietnamese team, the three international guests are Iran (Asian runner-up), Morocco (African champion), and New Zealand (Oceania champion – OFC). The teams will play in a round-robin format.

AFC FUTSAL ASIAN CUP™ 2024

Group A: Thailand, Vietnam, Myanmar, China PR

Group B: Uzbekistan, Saudi Arabia, Iraq, Australia

Group C: Japan, Tajikistan, Korea Republic, Kyrgyz Republic

Group D: IR Iran, Kuwait, Bahrain, Afghanistan

MATCHES SCHEDULE

18 April 2024 – 16:00 – Iran v Afghanistan – Indoor Stadium Huamark, Bangkok

18 April 2024 – 21:00 – Kuwait v Bahrain – Indoor Stadium Huamark, Bangkok

20 April 2024 – 16:00 – Afghanistan v Kuwait – Indoor Stadium Huamark, Bangkok

20 April 2024 – 21:00 – Bahrain v Iran – Indoor Stadium Huamark, Bangkok

22 April 2024 – 21:00 – Iran v Kuwait – Indoor Stadium Huamark, Bangkok

22 April 2024 – 21:00 – Bahrain v Afghanistan – Bangkok Arena, Bangkok

Iran’s Moslem Oladghobad was confirmed as the AFC Futsal Player of the Year after guiding his nation to the Final of the AFC Futsal Asian Cup™ Kuwait 2022, where he was named the tournament’s Most Valuable Player.

The 27-year-old player is currently playing in Spain with Palma in the Primera División de Futsal. He was a member of several major teams in Iran like Giti Pasand, Mes Sungun, and Alvand Crop before moving on to Spain.

In the annual AFC award ceremony for the best of players in several categories, Salem Al Dawsari of Saudi Arabia and Australian icon Samantha Kerr have clinched the prestigious AFC Player of the Year Award in the men’s and women’s categories respectively at the AFC Annual Awards Doha 2023 on Tuesday at the Qatar National Convention Centre’s Al Mayassa Theatre.

Mehdi Taremi was a candidate but fell short of the selection in the AFC Asian International Player of the Year: award which went to Bayern Munich and Korea Republic player, Kim Min-jae.

Iran also had a candidate for the AFC Asian Youth Player of the Year, who was Amin Hezbavi but the award went to the Japanese Kuryu Matsuki .

Bishkek: Iran national Futsal team stamped its authority with a 10-2 win over Kyrgyz Republic in Group C of the AFC Futsal Asian Cup™ Thailand 2024 Qualifiers on Monday.

Following the 18-2 win over the Maldives in the opening round Iran flexed its muscle, this time against the host. Captain Hossein Tayyebi got the ball rolling for 12-time champions Iran with a strike in the second minute before Mohammadhossein Derakhshani and Karimi got into the act with efforts in the 17th minute.

Iran pushed further in the second half and were immediately rewarded with their sixth and seventh of the evening through strikes from Mahdi Rostami Ha and Saeid Ahmad Abbasi respectively.

Kyrgyz Republic reduced the deficit through Daniiar Uulu Abdurakhim in the 25th minute only for Iran to score again through Karimi’s 30th-minute effort followed by Mohammadhossein Derakhshani’s goal four minutes later with the No 7 ending the proceedings with his third and Iran’s 10th goal.

Iran meets Lebanon on Matchday Three, while Kyrgyz Republic faces Maldives.

Group C

In the second friendly game, Iran’s national futsal team defeated Uzbekistan by a wide margin thus ending its training camp with full marks.

The national futsal teams and Uzbekistan met in their second match on Monday with this game ending 8-1 in favor of Iran. In this game, which started at 20:00 in Tehran’s Pass Stadium, Iran scored goals by Behdad Sheikh Ahmadi, Mehdi Karimi, and Saeed Ahmad Abbasi (twice each), Hossein Tayibi and Duran Cherif (own goals). Uzbekistan’s goal was scored by “Akbar Usmanov”. Unlike the first game against Uzbekistan, Vahid Shamsaei’s men started their work without stress and with authority in this match and achieved a 5-0 lead in the first half.

In the second half, even though Uzbekistan tried to make up for the lost goals, Iran continued its offensive game and was able to continue the scoring process. In this half, Mehdi Karimi, Saeed Ahmad Abbasi, and Hossein Tayyebi scored three goals, and Uzbekistan only allowed the ball to cross Iran’s goal line once.

Iran won 5-3 in the first game held on Sunday. If financial resources are provided, the Iranian national team will head to the Brazil tournament in September to hold a few friendly matches and then prepare for the preliminary and final stages of the AFC Futsal Asian Cup.

Iran’s national futsal team returned to Iran on Sunday from Kuwait, after losing to Japan in the finals of the 16th AFC Asian Futsal Cup. Ehsan Usooli, head of Iran’s futsal committee, who was in Kuwait with the national team, was questioned by the media at the airport who were seeking some justifications for the avoidable loss.

in response to reporters’ questions, Usooli said that Vahid Shamsaei, the head coach, will continue to be employed according to his contract. The contract of Shamsai and his assistants with the national team is until the end of 1401 (March 2023) adding that this contract will probably be extended for another year. Shamsaei has experienced three competitions as Iran’s futsal head coach. First, in the preliminary and qualifying rounds of the AFC Futsal Asian Cup and then the Thailand Continental tournament where Iran lost to Morocco in the final, while the last one was in the appearance AFC Futsal Asian Cup 2022 where he again tasted defeat in the final match against Japan. Currently, the Iranian national team does not have a special plan after the Asian Championship, and it seems unlikely that the Caspian tournament will be held with the participation of teams such as Russia, Kazakhstan, and Azerbaijan.

Usooli did not indicate if there will be an internal review of Shamsaei’s performance and failures and his suggestion that Shamsei will be continued as a head coach indicates that there will be no performance analysis.

Shamsaei in a bold but not very wise move completely overhauled the national team getting rid of most of the players that were winners of trophies at the Asian level and performed admirably at FIFA competitions. However, that was a major mistake by the relatively inexperienced coach and it meant that Iran lost its title in a match that a more experienced coach and players would have probably won easily.

Iran’s national futsal team lost its title against fierce rival Japan in a thrilling match in Kuwait.

While Iran’s road to the final was quite smooth, scoring a plethora of goals against its opponent all the way to the finals, Japan had a difficult road and only managed to qualify from the group stages thanks to goal difference. Japan also had difficult matches against its rivals in the Quarter and Semifinals. However, in the final, Japan managed miraculously to beat Iran which had almost 70% possession, and bombarded the Japanese keeper who was the undisputed hero and the man of the game in the final match.

Iran’s head coach Vahid Shamsaei expressed his hope that his players will learn from this defeat at the press conference of this match. Shamsaei said: “I told my players that I am responsible for the defeat. They gave their best with maximum effort.” The head coach of Iran emphasized: “My players did not want to lose the trophy and were crying, but they have to accept the result. If they want to create a good future for themselves, they must understand failure.” Shamsaei continued: “We had a plan for our team, and if something goes wrong, the responsibility is on me and my colleagues. I wanted to present this win to the people of my country and I hope they will accept my apology.

About the sure performance of Iran’s Legionnaire OladGoghbad, Shamsaei said “he (OladGoghbad) was chosen as the best player of the Asian Championship: All my players were great, but he (OladGoghbad) was wonderful as always and like the rest of the players against Japan. Referring to the changes he made in his team, Iran’s head coach said: “After the loss, I don’t want to talk about the past. I have picked 10 new players to replace the 10 legends. In the very near future, these 10 new players will be legends of Iranian futsal. In the end, Shamsai said: “If I continue with the team, I will definitely work on all our weaknesses. I don’t want to make excuses or say it was a missed opportunity. Our program was not supposed to be for today. I am ashamed that I could not present a win to the people of Iran today.”

Shamsaei committed several tactical mistakes during the final game. Although Iran was the better team, the head coach failed to introduce a game plan that could penetrate the compact Japanese defenses. On his own team, the failure in defense was the reason for Iran’s inability to defend its title. It was three out of three defensive mistakes that allowed the Japanese to score two goals while Saeid Ahmad Abbasi gifted them a goal by passing the ball into his own team’s net during the powerplay!

Shamsaei in his first experience as Team Melli coach was doing fine until the final game, where he failed against a formidable defense of Japan and had no solution for their tight defending.