It's a man's world for Niloufar Ardalan, one of Iran's best female soccer players and known as Lady Goal for her on-field exploits in international women's Islamic tournaments.

Ardalan says she will not be able to compete in an upcoming tournament in Malaysia because her husband has refused to grant her permission to travel abroad as required by Islamic laws enforced in Iran.

The 30-year-old athlete has captained Iran's national team and was set to compete in the Asian Football Confederation's women's championship in futsal, an indoor version of soccer in which each team fields five players, to be held in the Malaysian town of Nilai on September 21-26.

In Iran, however, married women need the consent of their husbands to leave the country and can be banned from traveling abroad if their spouses do not sign the paperwork needed to obtain or renew a passport.

Ardalan says her husband, a sports journalist and television presenter, has used this authority to prevent her from competing in the upcoming tournament because he does not want her to miss the first day of school for her 7-year-old son on September 23.

The frustrated soccer star says she had trained hard for weeks to compete in the games and make her country proud.

"But my husband didn't give me my passport so that I can [participate] in the games, and because of his opposition to my travel abroad, I [will] miss the matches," Ardalan said in a September 11 interview with the news site Nasimonline.ir.

In a September 12 interview with Shirzanan Global, a news portal that promotes participation in sports by female Muslims, Ardalan said that her passport had expired and that her husband had refused to sign a form required for its renewal.

The case highlights Iran's discriminatory laws that favor men, including in matters related to inheritance, divorce, and child custody, and effectively give women the status of second-class citizens.

Iranian men do not need permission from their wives to travel abroad.

"I wish authorities would create [measures] that would allow female athletes to defend their rights in such situations," Ardalan was quoted by Nasimonline.ir as saying.

She added: "These games were very important to me. As a Muslim woman, I wanted to work for my country's flag to be raised [at the games], rather than traveling for leisure and fun."

There has not been any public comment from Ardalan's husband, Mehdi Toutounchi, who, according to Iranian media, has been supportive of women's soccer in the past.

Breaking The Silence

Shadi Sadr, a prominent Iranian women's rights advocate and the director of the London-based rights group Justice For Iran, says the case demonstrates the need to change the travel law, which she says affects tens of thousands of Iranian women.

"This just shows to what extent this law can impact a woman's life," Sadr said in a telephone interview with RFE/RL. "Even if a woman reaches the highest ranks in politics, sports, or culture, she still needs her husband's consent for one of her most basic rights -- traveling abroad."

Ardalan's case and her decision to go public about the travel ban have attracted considerable attention on social media, where many have condemned her husband's refusal to allow her to compete in the tournament.

"Is this the only way [Ardalan's husband] could prove he's a man?" one woman wrote in a Facebook discussion devoted to the issue.

"Many Iranian men pretend in cyberspace that they're defenders of women's rights. But in practice, and when it comes to the rights of their wives, they act more traditionally than previous generations," another woman wrote.

A man wrote: "This woman's husband must have his own reasons. We shouldn't make one-sided judgements."

Sadr welcomes the ongoing debate. She said Ardalan should be praised for publicly speaking about her plight. "She broke the silence, and this could lead to other women taking the courage to detail and shed light on other similar cases," she said.

Ardalan has said that she will pursue the case through women's rights groups.

"Boys have the issue of military service [which prevents those who have not completed their compulsory service from traveling abroad]. A solution is found for them, and something should be done for women as well," she said in an interview with the daily sports newspaper Goal.

She added, "What is the difference between us?"

Jailed Iranian Nobel Peace Prize winner Narges Mohammadi and other women inmates in Tehran's Evin prison were injured earlier this week in clashes that erupted after a spate of executions, Mohammadi’s family says.

Mohammadi’s husband, Taghi Rahmani, said Mohammadi suffered breathing problems and severe chest pain after being punched in the chest and was transferred to the prison's clinic.

Rahmani, who spoke by phone to RFE/RL from Paris, said several women came under attack by guards during the clashes on August 6. Mohammadi was hit in her chest, and her arm was bruised, he said.

The injured women were later taken to the prison clinic for treatment and were returned to their ward.

Rahmani said the news agency of the Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps claimed the clash was a riot, but he said it should be made clear that it was a protest in which the women in Evin prison chanted in the prison yard against the death penalty.

He added that he and the rest of Mohammadi’s family were worried about her health especially because she was hit in the chest. Mohammadi had surgery for blocked arteries in 2022.

Rahmani added that Mohammadi, who is renowned as a staunch advocate for the Women, Life, Freedom movement, cannot contact her sister in Iran and she hasn’t been allowed to contact her children for 2 1/2 years. She also has had no contact with her lawyer.

"These restrictions make all of us worried about her situation in that ward where other women are also facing difficult conditions," Rahmani told RFE/RL.

Before Rahmani spoke with RFE/RL, Mohammadi's family issued a statement about the clash on August 8. It said several women who stood in front of the security forces were severely beaten.

It said the women in Evin prison had been actively protesting against executions in Iran, and following the execution of Reza Rasaei, several prisoners gathered in the prison yard to voice their dissent, chanting slogans against the death penalty.

One woman suffered a nervous breakdown and passed out and another prisoner also fainted from the emotional strain, the statement said, adding that Mohammadi and several other prisoners protested against the locked doors that were preventing the critically ill inmates from being taken to the prison clinic.

Iranian authorities acknowledged a confrontation took place on August 6 but blamed Mohammadi for a "provocation" and denied any of the prisoners had been beaten.

Two prisoners "had heart palpitations due to the stress," but medical examinations determined that their general condition "is favorable," Iran's prison administration said in a statement, according to the Tasnim news agency.

Mohammadi, 52, has been campaigning for human rights in Iran for decades and has been in and out of prison for the last 20 years. She has been convicted five times since March 2021 and is currently serving a 12-year prison sentence for "spreading propaganda" against the Islamic republic.

The executions that took place this week drew outrage from rights groups. The Norway-based Iran Human Rights group said 29 people were executed at two prisons in the Tehran satellite city of Karaj on August 7 alone.

Rasaei, 34, was the 10th man executed by Iran in connection with the "Women, Life, Freedom" protests that erupted after the death of a woman in police custody. The Iranian judiciary said Rasaei was executed on August 6.

With reporting by AFP

Russia and Iran have both seen their international standing diminish in recent years. And as each seeks a way to boost their military and diplomatic influence, Africa looks like a land of opportunity.

There are no signs that Moscow and Tehran, whose bilateral ties have become closer as they each try to counter punitive international sanctions, are working in lockstep in Africa.

But their aims in the continent often align, and experts say the two are each attempting to capitalize on similar situations, including political instability, war, and apathy toward the influence of Western powers.

"Both Iran and Russia, what they see in Africa is an opportunity to break their diplomatic isolation," said Cameron Hudson, fellow at the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington. "They have been isolated by the West, financially, politically -- essentially branded as pariah states. And so, in Africa, they see 54 opportunities to break that status."

Russia and Iran have stepped up their engagement with African states, some of which are wary of the West and open to finding alternative trade and investment partners. Tehran and Moscow are notably active in places of conflict, such as West Africa and the Sahel, where juntas have made clear that Western forces are not welcome.

Hudson said Moscow's and Tehran’s involvement in Africa also has the "ancillary benefit of thumbing their nose" at the Western states behind the crippling international sanctions imposed on them.

The sanctions -- imposed over Russia's war in Ukraine and Iran's controversial nuclear program, among other things -- have effectively cut both Russia and Iran off from the global financial system and harmed their lucrative trade in arms and oil.

New Avenues

By opening new avenues of trade and influence in Africa, Moscow and Tehran can show that the attempts to isolate and punish them "is only marginally successful, and that they can build coalitions of states who support their interests," Hudson said.

The two countries see Africa as "a battleground where they can supplant the West and better position themselves economically, politically, and even militarily for prolonged tension with the West," said Liam Karr, an analyst with the American Enterprise Institute's Critical Threats Project.

Karr noted that Burkina Faso, Mali, and Niger -- former French colonies in the central Sahel where anti-Western military juntas have taken power -- "have increased cooperation with Iran and Russia as they distanced themselves from France."

The situation has already led to the expulsion of French troops from Niger and Mali. U.S. forces battling Islamist insurgents in the region have withdrawn from Niger's capital, Niamey, and will completely leave the country by September.

The rapidly changing landscape has led to some uncomfortable situations, such as when Russian troops backing Niger's junta were deployed in May to an air base housing U.S. soldiers.

Both Iran and Russia "use military engagement to 'get their foot in the door' with unstable or other isolated countries to pursue greater economic and political cooperation," Karr explained. Such military engagement, he added, also "allows them to use limited resources to threaten critical waterways, such as the Mediterranean and the Red Sea."

'Opportunity In Chaos'

Moscow's influence is marked by high-level political engagement, business dealings including arms sales, and the ubiquitous presence of pro-Kremlin mercenaries in conflict areas.

"Russia finds opportunity in chaos. And so, when there is political instability in a country, when there is a kind of organic rejection of the West, which we have seen in a lot of states in Africa that view the West as a kind of neocolonial actor, then that creates openings and opportunities for Russia to come in with its narrative," Hudson said.

Russia's military footprint is also the most hazardous, as evidenced by the deaths of scores of Russian Wagner mercenaries in fighting against Tuareg separatists linked to the Al-Qaeda terrorist network in Mali last month.

Iran is playing catch-up to its Russian ally, working to expand its influence on the continent through trade ties, arms sales, and the use of proxies and militant partners as part of its "axis of resistance" against Israel and the West in general.

In West Africa, Iran has reached out to the trio of juntas in Burkina Faso, Mali, and Niger. In Nigeria, Tehran has established a proxy group called the Islamic Movement of Nigeria, which functions like other proxies and partners.

Tehran has also used proxies to make its presence felt across the Sahel to the Horn of Africa, allowing it to put more pressure on regional adversaries, primarily Israel.

'Aligned Interests'

Iran's and Russia's interest in Africa sometimes overlaps, as is the case in Niger and in Sudan, where both are playing a role in the yearlong civil war between the Sudanese military and rebel forces.

"Sudan is a clear area where they both have military interests. Iran and Russia have both offered military support to the Sudanese Armed Forces hoping to secure a military base on Sudan’s Red Sea coast that would enable them to improve their military posture in the area vis-à-vis the West," Karr said. "Iran has offered drones, whereas Russia has offered 'unrestricted qualitative military aid.'"

Juntas that have taken power in Mali and Niger, meanwhile, are looking to Moscow and Tehran to fortify their positions.

"They certainly lack legitimacy in the West and among international institutions, and so building relations to Iran or to Russia helps them build legitimacy, because all of a sudden they look like state actors," Hudson said. "They look like they're doing the trade and diplomacy that a legitimate government would do."

Both Karr and Hudson say there are no clear signs that Russia and Iran are coordinating their strategies in Africa.

Karr said that "similar aims and methods mean that most of their efforts mutually reinforce each other," while Hudson noted "a set of aligned interests, but not interests that are being explicitly coordinated."

Autocracies around the world have become increasingly mutually reinforcing in their competition with democratic societies, Pulitzer Prize winning U.S. journalist and historian Anne Applebaum said in an interview with Current Time.

"Russia, China, Iran, North Korea, Venezuela, and Zimbabwe, Azerbaijan, and Angola don't have a common ideology," Applebaum said. "But they have places where they can cooperate and common interests. And some of their interests are financial."

"The Chinese invest in autocratic regimes all over the world and help prop them up," she added. "The Russians do the same…. They offer mercenaries to dictators in Africa who are in trouble. They look for areas where they have something in common and where they can help one another."

"They don't need a common ideology to do that," Applebaum said.

In her new book, Autocracy, Inc.: The Dictators Who Want To Rule The World, Applebaum writes that such governments are undergirded by "sophisticated networks composed of kleptocratic financial structures, surveillance technologies, and professional propagandists, all of which cooperate across multiple regimes," the book argues, according to the author's website.

Applebaum told Current Time this is a fundamental difference from the geopolitical situation in the 20th century, "when there was a thing called the communist bloc and they all used the same language…and they even had very similar political and social systems."

Despite the lack of a centralizing ideology, the world's autocracies share a "common enemy," she noted.

"The common enemy is…anybody who lives in the democratic world and anybody who uses the language of democracy…of human rights, transparency, accountability, the rule of law, justice," Applebaum said. "That language is threatening to them and, of course, it is most threatening to them when it comes from their own opposition movements and their own internal critics and…dissidents."

In addition, freed from ideology, modern authoritarian regimes have much greater scope to influence political and social developments in open societies.

"Authoritarian propaganda can now reach people in the United States in a way that communist propaganda could not," Applebaum said. "The money that autocratic states have gives them a kind of power that, again, the Soviet Union never had, whether it's to invest as investors, whether it's to buy influence among politicians or…the business community, whether its even in the form of dark money to fund political campaigns."

"All those things give them more tools to influence the internal debates and political conversations of democracies, as well as their economies, than they used to have," she added.

Media outlets like the Kremlin's RT network, Applebaum added, "turned out to be good at…crafting an authoritarian narrative that described autocracies as safe and secure and stable, and democracies as divided, chaotic, and degenerate."

"And some version of that, in millions of forms, is now available on the Internet," she said. "And that…chimed with a part of the American political spectrum that is…feeling disgruntled, that doesn't like social change, demographic change, economic change, and political change over the last couple of decades and is seeking to reverse it."

Authoritarian regimes did not cause the "backlash against democracy" in the United States and other democratic countries, "but they helped give it language," she said. "They make existing divisions deeper."

Nonetheless, these regimes understand that democratic values and language remain in demand. In Venezuela, for instance, people have taken to the streets to call for transparency, justice, and the rule of law despite the country's "really ugly dictatorship."

"People want to live in a society where there's rule of law, where judges are real judges," Applebaum told Current Time, a Russian-language TV and digital network run by RFE/RL. "I think you can see this in a lot of places. It's about the innate appeal of the idea of living in a more fair society where citizens have some influence."

"I think this one of the reasons why the autocratic world has, if you will, rearmed itself or has girded itself against the democratic world in a much more dramatic way than it did two decades ago," Applebaum said.

Written by RFE/RL's Robert Coalson based on reporting by Current Time correspondent Ksenia Sokolyanskaya.

Iran executed 36 people on August 6-7, including 26 in a group execution in one prison, a rights group said on August 7, a day after Tehran faced international condemnation for executing an Iranian activist arrested during the "Women, Life, Freedom" protests.

The Norway-based Iran Human Rights (IHR) group said 26 men, including two Afghan nationals, were executed in a group hanging in Ghezelhesar prison in Karaj outside Tehran.

IHR said that a group execution on this scale in Iran was unprecedented, with the last comparable example dating back to 2009.

Those executed had been convicted of murder as well as drug-related and rape charges, according to both IHR and the Center for Human Rights in Iran (CHRI).

Human rights groups have repeatedly accused Iran of making use of the death penalty to instill fear in society in the wake of the 2022 protests that swept the country after the death of Mahsa Amini in police custody.

"Without an immediate response from the international community, hundreds of individuals could become victims of the Islamic republic's killing machine in the coming months," IHR director Mahmood Amiry-Moghaddam said.

In addition to the 26 men executed at Ghezelhesar prison, three other men were executed in Karaj's city prison, one man was executed in Sabsevar in Khorasan Razavi Province, three were executed in Shiraz in Fars Province, and three were executed in Badar Abbas in Hormozgan Province, according to the CHRI.

“These are only the known executions; there are often additional executions that take place without public knowledge,” the organization said in a news release.

Reza Rasaei, 34, was the 10th man executed by Iran in connection with the "Women, Life, Freedom" protests that erupted in September 2022 after the death of Amini, a 22-year-old Iranian Kurd who was arrested for an alleged breach of the country's strict dress code for women.

Rasaei, a member of the Kurdish ethnic minority and follower of the Yarsan faith, was convicted in connection with the death of an officer for the Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps (IRGC) during unrest in the Kurdish city of Sahneh. He denied the charges.

Amnesty International said he was executed in secret with neither his family nor his lawyer being given prior notice. It said his family was then forced to bury his body in a remote area far from his home.

"Iranian authorities have carried out the abhorrent arbitrary execution in secret of a young man who was subjected to torture and other ill-treatment in detention...and then sentenced to death after a sham trial," said Diana Eltahawy, Amnesty International's deputy director for the Middle East and North Africa.

She said the execution was another instance of Iran using the death penalty as a "tool of political repression to instill fear among the population."

France's Foreign Ministry on August 7 condemned Rasaei's execution and reiterated its "unchanging opposition to the death penalty in all places and circumstances," calling it an "unfair and inhumane punishment."

IHR said Iran has now executed at least 345 people this year and there has been no let-up in the use of the death penalty since reformist President Masud Pezeshkian was sworn in last week.

With reporting by AFP

The Middle East faces its biggest crisis in years as it braces for a potential full-blown war between Iran and Israel that could drag in the entire region.

Israel's suspected killing of Ismail Haniyeh, the political leader of the EU- and U.S.-designated Palestinian terrorist group Hamas, in Tehran on July 31 has pushed the region to the brink.

A major military response by Iran against Israel, which Tehran has promised, could spark an all-out war that would pit Iran and its regional proxies against Israel and the United States, experts say.

"I think this is the first time we're really heading toward a potential full-scale regional confrontation," said Raz Zimmt, a senior researcher at the Israeli-based Institute for National Security Studies.

'Only A Matter Of Time'

The region has been bracing for an Iranian response since the assassination of Haniyeh, who was killed in an affluent neighborhood of Tehran hours after attending the inauguration of President Masud Pezeshkian.

Iran has directly blamed Israel, which has not claimed responsibility for the killing. Iranian Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei has vowed, and reportedly approved, a military response.

Haniyeh's killing came just hours after Israel killed a top commander of Hizballah, the Iran-backed Lebanese extremist group, in Beirut. A member of Iran's Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps was also killed in the July 30 Israeli air strike.

In April, Iran and Israel appeared to be on the verge of war after Tehran launched an unprecedented direct air attack against its archfoe.

Days later, suspected Israeli strikes hit a military base outside Iran's central city of Isfahan.

Iran's attack was in retaliation for a suspected Israeli air strike on the Iranian Embassy's compound in Damascus on April 1 that killed seven Iranian commanders.

Tehran's barrage against Israel was highly telegraphed and aimed at deterring future Israeli attacks, experts said. But its response to the killing of Haniyeh on Iranian soil could provoke a harsher response.

"It's much more likely that we will see a combined, orchestrated attack against Israel" from Iran and the so-called axis of resistance, Tehran's loose network of militant groups and proxies that aid it in opposing Israel and the United States, said Zimmt.

"This makes the situation much more complicated because the consequences of an Iranian and Hizballah attack would probably be worse than what happened in April," he added. "That certainly brings us closer to the possibility of a regional campaign."

Hizballah and Iran-backed militant groups in Iraq, Syria, and Yemen have carried out attacks against Israel after it launched its devastating war in Gaza, which came shortly after Hamas's October 7 attack in Israel that killed around 1,200 people.

Even as Iran's hostilities with Israel decreased after April, it was "only a matter of time before the next phase of direct confrontation" between the archfoes, said Hamidreza Azizi, a fellow at the German Institute for International and Security Affairs.

"This might be the most dangerous moment in the region in the past few years," he added.

Hard To Rein In

There has been a flurry of diplomacy in the region aimed at easing the escalating tensions between Iran and Israel.

Jordan's foreign minister made a rare visit to Tehran on August 4, during which he pleaded for peace.

Iran has insisted that it is not looking to escalate tensions but that it has a "legitimate right" to hit Israel.

"As far as the violation of our territorial integrity is concerned, we will not make any compromises," Iranian Foreign Ministry spokesman Nasser Kanani said on August 5.

A direct Iran-Israel war would likely drag in the entire region, including Tehran's proxy allies, including Hizballah in Lebanon, the Huthi rebels in Yemen, Hamas in the Palestinian territories, and pro-Iranian militias in Iraq.

Any conflict would also likely draw in the United States, Israel's key ally, which has sent additional warships and fighter jets to the region.

On August 5, a U.S. spokesperson confirmed that "several" American personnel were injured in a rocket attack claimed by pro-Iran fighters on a military base in Iraq.

Ali Vaez, the director of Iran Project at the International Crisis Group, said that signals from Tehran suggest that "they are intent on a larger response" with more drastic consequences.

If Iran's potential attack causes significant damage and casualties, "containing the escalatory cycle becomes far more difficult," Vaez warned.

"This is without doubt the closest we've been to" a direct face-off between Iran, Israel, and their allies, he said.

The United States on August 6 charged a Pakistani man with alleged ties to Iran in connection with a foiled murder-for-hire plot to assassinate a U.S. politician or government officials in the United States.

The U.S. Justice Department identified the suspect as Asif Merchant, 46, who is in U.S. custody. The department did not name the politician whom the suspect allegedly wanted to assassinate, but said in a news release that law enforcement foiled the plot before any attack could be carried out.

A criminal complaint unsealed in Brooklyn, New York, on August 6 said Merchant sought to recruit people in the United States to carry out the plot in retaliation for the killing of Qassem Soleimani, a former commander of Iran's Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps' (IRGC’s) elite Quds Force, who was assassinated in January 2020.

Then-President Donald Trump approved the drone strike on Soleimani. Iran has repeatedly vowed revenge for the high-profile killing.

Merchant, who prosecutors allege spent time in Iran before traveling to the United States from Pakistan, was charged with murder for hire in federal court in Brooklyn.

An individual Merchant contacted in April to help assist with the plot reported his activities to law enforcement and became a confidential informant, according to the complaint, the Justice Department news release said. Merchant instructed the informant to arrange meetings with individuals whom Merchant could hire to carry out the assassination and other acts.

Merchant met in June with the would-be hitmen, who were in fact undercover U.S. law enforcement officers.

Merchant said he had received instructions to "finalize" the plan and leave the United States from the unidentified "party" he had been working with. He told the undercover agents that they would receive instructions in either the last week of August or the first week of September after he had departed the United States.

Merchant subsequently made flight arrangements and planned to leave the United States on July 12. Law enforcement agents placed him under arrest before he could leave the country. The complaint said a federal judge ordered Merchant detained on July 17.

Trump, the Republican Party’s nominee in the November 5 presidential election, was wounded on July 13 in an assassination attempt at a campaign rally in Pennsylvania.

Attorney General Merrick Garland said that investigators have found no evidence that Merchant had any connection to the attempt on Trump's life. Investigators have said the shooting, which wounded Trump in his right ear, was carried out by a lone 20-year-old gunman.

U.S. Attorney Breon Peace for the Eastern District of New York said Merchant "planned the murder of U.S. government officials on American soil" working on behalf of others overseas.

"This prosecution demonstrates that this office and the entire Department of Justice will take swift and decisive action to protect our nation’s security, our government officials, and our citizens from foreign threats."

The FBI is investigating the case. Merchant has said that he has a wife and children in Iran and a wife and children in Pakistan. Avraham Moskowitz, a lawyer for Merchant, did not respond to a request for comment, Reuters reported.

With reporting by Reuters

Sayyed Hassan Nasrallah, the leader of the Iran-backed Lebanon-based group Hizballah, which has been designated a terrorist organization by the United States, said Israel's recent actions will not go without a "strong and effective" response amid fears of a full-blown war in the region.

Hizballah said six of its fighters were killed in Israeli attacks on August 6, while it claimed to have launched missiles and drones at Israel, though no casualties were immediately reported.

For months, Israel and Hizballah have traded constant cross-border attacks -- including a deadly rocket attack from Lebanon on July 27 that hit the Israeli-occupied Golan Heights, killing 12 youths and children -- that have killed many and displaced thousands of people.

Pressure has continued to build since strikes killed top military commander Fuad Shukr in a Beirut suburb and Ismail Haniyeh, the political leader of Hamas, which has also been designated a terrorist organization by the United States and the European Union, in Iran.

Tehran is Hizballah's main ally, and the Lebanese militant group is a key member of Iran's so-called axis of resistance, a loose network of militant groups and proxies that aid it in opposing Israel and the United States.

Hizballah is also considered a key part of Iran's efforts to deter Israel or Washington from going to war against Tehran.

Tehran "finds itself obliged to respond, and the enemy is waiting in a great state of dread," Nasrallah said in a televised address on August 6 to mark one week since Shukr's death.

“Whatever the consequences, the resistance will not let these Israeli attacks pass by," he added, saying that Hizballah will respond "alone or in the context of a unified response from all the axis" of Iran-backed groups in the region, "whatever the consequences."

Experts say no side wants an all-out war in a region that has been reeling since Israel launched its war against Hamas after it killed some 1,200 people in a raid and took 240 people hostage on October 7.

Hizballah has not usually shied away from claiming attacks on Israeli targets. But it issued a rare denial of responsibility after the attack that killed the children and youths in the Golan Heights.

Israel has not claimed responsibility for the two recent assassinations, but it has admitted to killing other senior Hamas leaders, including Saleh al-Arouriand Mohammed Deif, the movement's military commander.

Hamidreza Azizi, a fellow at the German Institute for International and Security Affairs, recently told RFE/RL that if war did break out, members of the "axis of resistance" would likely intensify their attacks against Israel while also targeting U.S. troops and bases in the region in a bid to pressure Washington to rein in Israel.

U.S. Secretary of State Antony Blinken on August 5 called it a "critical moment" for the region and said Washington was "engaged in intense diplomacy, pretty much around the clock" to help calm tensions amid fears Iran is preparing a retaliatory strike against Israel over Haniyeh's assassination in the Iranian capital.

As the world waits to see how and when Iran carries out its promised response to Haniyeh's assassination, Hamas named its Gaza leader, Yahya Sinwar, as Haniyeh's successor.

Sinwar is considered the architect of the October 7 attack on Israel, and is believed to be in hiding in Gaza, evading Israeli attempts to kill him since the start of the war.

Fears of a wider Middle East conflict intensified late on August 5 as a U.S. spokesperson confirmed that “several” American personnel were injured in a rocket attack claimed by pro-Iran fighters on a military base in Iraq.

"There was a suspected rocket attack today against U.S. and coalition forces at Al-Asad Airbase, Iraq,” the spokesperson said. “Initial indications are that several U.S. personnel were injured."

Details of the attack, potential casualties, and damages remain unclear.

One of Iran’s so-called proxy groups -- an Iraq-based militia -- claimed to have launched the assault on the base in Iraq’s Anbar Province that hosts some of the remaining U.S. soldiers in the country, just days after a U.S. air strike killed at least four pro-Iran extremists in Iraq.

Iran-backed groups have resumed rocket attacks on U.S. troops in recent days after a lull, apparently seeking to punish Washington for its close alliance with Israel.

The report comes as concerns grow that Iran, or one of its proxy groups, could seek revenge after the assassination in Tehran of Ismail Haniyeh, the political leader of the U.S.- and EU-designated Palestinian terrorist group Hamas.

Iran and its Lebanese Hizballah ally -- which has also been deemed a terrorist organization by Washington -- vowed to avenge that attack and other deadly strikes in Iran and Beirut that Tehran has blamed on Israel.

Iran on August 5 said punishing Israel will prevent further instability in the Middle East, but it added that it does not want to escalate tensions already running high after the assassination of Haniyeh.

Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu has warned Iran and its proxies against attacking his country and said Israel was already in a "in a multifront war against Iran's axis of evil."

The Tasnim news agency, which is linked to the Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps (IRGC), quoted Iranian Foreign Ministry spokesman Nasser Kanaani as saying that "we believe that Iran is entitled to punish the aggressor within the framework of international law…. Iran will definitely and decisively take serious and deterrent measures by exercising its inherent right on the basis of international principles to ensure its security."

"Iran believes that stability will be achieved with the punishment of the aggressor," he added.

Israel has not taken responsibility for Haniyeh's killing in the Iranian capital in what has become a major embarrassment to the authorities in Tehran.

Russian Security Council Secretary Sergei Shoigu arrived in Tehran on August 5, according to Russian state media, for a working visit with senior Iranian officials, including President Masud Pezeshkian, who was sworn in less than a week ago.

According to Iranian state media, Pezeshkian told Shoigu that Tehran was determined to expand relations with its "strategic partner” and expressed appreciation for Moscow’s support.

"Russia is among the countries that have stood by the Iranian nation during difficult times," Pezeshkian reportedly told Shoigu.

The IRGC said on August 3 that a short-range projectile was behind the killing and accused the United States of supporting the attack, which it blamed on Israel. The IRGC said in a statement that a rocket with a 7-kilogram warhead was used to target the residence of Haniyeh, who was the political leader of Hamas.

Citing unnamed sources, The New York Times reported that the blast that killed Haniyeh was a bomb covertly smuggled two months ago into the guesthouse where Haniyeh was staying in Tehran.

Kanaani said the international community, and the United States in particular, had failed to help maintain stability in the region.

A day earlier, U.S. Defense Secretary Lloyd Austin pledged Washington's "iron-clad support" for Israel if Tehran were to launch an attack.

On August 5, State Department spokesman Matthew Miller said that Washington has sent messages through diplomatic channels urging countries to tell Tehran that escalation in the region "is not in anyone's interest."

Miller told a briefing that Secretary of State Antony Blinken spoke on August 5 with Qatari Prime Minister Sheikh Muhammad bin Abdulrahman Al Thani and Egyptian Foreign Minister Badr Abdelatty on regional tensions, but he did not say whether messages had been delivered to Iran.

Washington and Tehran do not have diplomatic relations and messages are often transmitted by third-party nations.

As calls for de-escalation continue from around the globe, Tehran has called for an emergency meeting of the Organization of Islamic Countries (OIC) over Haniyeh's assassination. The group, which consists of 57 states including all of Israel's neighbors, agreed to meet on August 7.

Tensions have been running high in the region since Hamas launched an attack on Israel on October 7 that killed some 1,200 people, with another 240 being taken hostage as Hamas fighters retreated back into the Gaza Strip.

In response, Israel launched a withering war against Hamas that, according to the Hamas-led Health Ministry, has left almost 40,000 people dead and hundreds of thousands homeless.

Then, on April 13, Iran attacked Israel with more than 300 drones and missiles -- which caused limited damage and casualties -- in response to a suspected Israeli air strike on the Iranian Embassy compound in Damascus on April 1 that killed seven Iranian commanders, including two generals.

With reporting by AFP and AP

Jordanian Foreign Minister Ayman Safadi, who arrived in Tehran on August 4 on a rare visit to discuss rising tensions in the Middle East, said he was not carrying a message from Israel to Tehran, but he nevertheless pleaded for "peace, stability, and security" in the troubled region.

"I did not come to Tehran to convey a message from Israel to Iran or vice versa," Safadi was quoted by the Palestinian news agency Sama and Al-Jazeera as saying.

Jordan has generally good relations with neighboring Israel.

"My visit to Iran is to consult on the serious escalation in the region and to engage in a frank and clear discussion about overcoming the differences between the two countries with honesty and transparency," Safadi told a Tehran news conference alongside his Iranian counterpart, acting Foreign Minister Ali Baqeri Kani.

Safadi and Baqeri Kani spoke on the phone twice in the past two days to discuss developments in the Middle East after the assassination in Tehran of Ismail Haniyeh, the political leader of the U.S.- and EU-designated Palestinian terrorist group Hamas.

Safadi's trip to Iran was the first by a Jordanian foreign minister since March 2015.

Fears that the Gaza war could turn into a wider regional conflict have intensified as Iran and its Lebanese Hizballah ally have vowed to avenge deadly strikes in Tehran and Beirut that Iran has blamed on Israel.

In Tel Aviv, Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu warned Iran and its proxies against attacking his country and said that Israel was already in a "in a multifront war against Iran's axis of evil."

"I reiterate and tell our enemies: We will respond and we will exact a heavy price for any act of aggression against us, from whatever quarter," Netanyahu told his cabinet, according by his office.

After the meeting in Tehran, the Jordanian foreign minister said in a statement that Amman wants the Middle East region to be peaceful, secure, and stable and wants to see an end to the tensions.

Safadi also called for an end to the Gaza war and the continuation of negotiations for the recognition of the Palestinian state.

The statement called the assassination of Haniyeh an "escalatory step" and warned that a regional war would have a "devastating impact on all."

Israel has not taken responsibility for Haniyeh's killilng in the Iranian capital in what has become a major embarrassment to the authorities in Tehran.

Iran's Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps (IRGC) said on August 3 that a short-range projectile was behind the killing and accused the United States of supporting the attack, which it blamed on Israel.

The IRGC said in a statement that a rocket with a 7-kilogram warhead was used to target the residence of Haniyeh, who was the political leader of Hamas.

Citing unnamed sources, The New York TImes reported that the blast that killed Haniyeh was a bomb covertly smuggled two months ago into the guesthouse where Haniyeh was staying in Tehran.

Separately, French President Emmanuel Macron and Jordan's King Abdullah II on August 4 agreed in a phone call that an escalation of military actions in the Middle East must be avoided "at all costs," the French presidency said.

With reporting by Reuters, AFP, and dpa

Iran’s Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps (IRGC) said on August 3 that a short-range projectile was behind the killing of Ismail Haniyeh and accused the United States of supporting the attack, which it has blamed on Israel.

The IRGC said in a statement that a rocket with a 7-kilogram warhead was used to target the residence of Haniyeh, who was the political leader of Hamas, which has been designated as a terrorist organization by the U.S. and EU.

The IRGC said that, according to its investigation, the rocket also caused heavy damage when it hit Haniyeh’s residence in Tehran on July 31, but the statement didn't include details of the location from which it was fired, the type of projectile, or the identity of the person or persons who fired it.

Haniyeh was in Iran to attend the inauguration ceremony of President Masud Pezeshkian.

The statement said the action was designed and carried out by Israel with the “support” of the U.S. government. It also reiterated a call for retaliation.

Haniyeh’s killing has triggered fears of an escalation in the region where tensions have already been high since the start of the war in Gaza.

The Israeli government has yet to comment officially, but a photo of Haniyeh with a stamp on his forehead saying "Eliminated" was posted on the Government Press Office's Facebook page. The post, which was later deleted without explanation, did not specifically claim the strike was carried out by Israel.

U.S. Secretary of State Antony Blinken on August 1 said that Washington was "not aware of or involved in" Haniyeh’s assassination and wouldn’t speculate on the impact it might have on the region.

Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu has vowed to destroy Hamas over the group’s October 7 attack inside Israel's territory that killed 1,200 people. Around 250 others were taken hostage, some of whom have since been released.

Some of the hostages have died while in Gaza as Israel carries out a massive military operation that has killed tens of thousands of Palestinians as the Israeli military pursues the goal of eliminating Hamas.

Milad Bidi, a member of Iran’s Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps (IRGC) was killed in an Israeli air strike on July 30 that targeted top Hizballah commander Fuad Shukr in Beirut, Lebanon.

Confirming his death, IRGC’s top commander Hossein Salami hailed Bidi on August 1 for his “fight against the criminal and occupying Zionist regime,” referring to Iran’s archfoe, Israel.

“He will be an inspiration to the country’s revolutionary and passionate youth of today and tomorrow,” Salami wrote in a statement released by the IRGC-linked Tasnim news agency.

Bidi is the second member of the IRGC to be killed in an Israeli strike since the April 1 bombing of the Iranian Embassy compound in Damascus. That attack killed seven members of the IRGC, including two generals.

Iran responded by launching an unprecedented missile and drone attack against Israel and warned that a "new equation" had been established whereby Tehran would retaliate against any Israeli attacks on its interests in the region.

Raz Zimmt, a senior researcher at the Israeli-based Institute for National Security Studies, told RFE/RL in June that it was unlikely that Iran and Israel understand what the “new equation” is.

Shukr and Bidi were killed hours before Ismail Haniyeh, the political leader of the U.S.- and E.U.-designated Palestinian terrorist group Hamas, was killed while on a visit to the Iranian capital, Tehran.

Iranian Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei said after Haniyeh’s killing that it was “our duty” to avenge his death, which Tehran and its regional allies blame on Israel.

At least 20 members of the IRGC have been killed in suspected Israeli strikes in Syria and Lebanon since that start of the war in Hamas-controlled Gaza in October 2023.

Israel began its assault, which has killed nearly 40,000 people in Gaza according to the local health authorities, after Hamas launched a surprise attack on Israeli settlements, killing nearly 1,200 people.