Tokyo, Feb 15 (EFE). — Emperor Akihito of Japan on Monday received Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas, who is on a fourday official visit to Japan to boost bilateral ties.

“The Government of Japan sincerely welcomes the visit of the President, which will further strengthen the friendly relations between Japan and the Palestinians,” said the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in a statement published on the government website.

The meeting marks Abbas’ fourth visit to Japan since he came to power in 2005, but is the first time a Palestinian leader has spoken with the Japanese emperor.

During the meeting, the Palestinian president reportedly showed Emperor Akihito a map of the Middle East to explain the ongoing conflicts in the region, the Imperial Household Agency told Japan’s Mainichi newspaper.

Abbas said he wanted peaceful relations with Israel through dialogue without resorting to violence or terrorism, while Akihito responded that he believed many people across the world wish for peace in the restive region.

The Palestinian president who arrived in Japan on Sunday began the official agenda of his visit Monday after reviewing a royal guard of honor ceremony at Prime Minister Shinzo Abe’s official residence and workplace at Kantei, just adjacent to the National Diet Building.

After speaking with Akihito, Abbas met with Natsuo Yamaguchi, the leader of the Buddhist party New Komeito, a coalition partner of Abe’s Liberal Democratic Party.

The session was followed by a conference with the president of the Japan International Cooperation Agency.

Abbas today signed an agreement to receive up to 74 million yen ($649,350) in General Cultural Grant Assistance to restore an Islamic construction in Jericho, Hisham’s Palace, as part of a project to boost social development and tourism in the region, according to the Ministry.

On Tuesday, the president of the Palestinian National Authority is scheduled to visit Tokyo’s National Museum of Emerging Science and Innovation and meet the governor of the Japanese capital.

Abbas’ visit comes a little over a year after Abe reaffirmed Japanese support for a twostate solution between an independent Palestine and Israel, calling for an end to Israeli occupation and settlement activities, according to a joint press release issued by the two leaders from the Palestinian city of Ramallah in the central West Bank on Jan. 21, 2015.