Nicholas Mahut and Edouard Roger Vasselin clinched their first ATP Tour title of the season as a team at the UniCredit with their 7-6 (7-4) 6-3 win over Ivan Dodig and Austin Krajicek after 1 hour and 31 minutes.

Mahut and Roger Vasselin fended off both break points they faced in the opening set and came back from a break down in the second set.

The first set went on serve with no break points en route to the tie-break. Mahut and Roger Vasselin went up a 5-0 lead with three mini-breaks. Dodig and Kraijcek pulled both breaks back to reduce the gap to 3-5. Mahut and Roger Vasselin earned three set points at 6-3. Dodig and Krajicek saved the first set point, but Mahut and Roger Vasselin closed out the first set on their second set point.

Dodig and Roger Vasseliin went up a break in the first game of the second set, but Mahut and Roger Vasselin won four consecutive games from 2-3 down to seal the second set 6-3.

Mahut and Roger Vasselin won a trophy at the ATP Challenger Tour in Orleans last week.

The Frenchmen did not drop a set en route to their eighth tour-level title and their first tATP Tour rophy since Tokyo 2019. Earlier this season Mahut won the title in Montpellier with Piierre Hugues Herbert. Roger Vasselin reached the final with Santiago Gonzales.

“We had a great week on and off the court. It was the first time for me in the city and I enjoyed every moment. I think it was a great event for the first year. Everthing was perfect. It is a great achievement to have an eighth title together”, , said Mahut.

Bianca Andreescu admits she is frustrated with her performance after losing in the first round of the National Bank Open in Toronto.

Andreescu was in complete control of her match against Ukraine’s Lesia Tsurenko after winning the first seven games played before falling 0-6, 6-3, 6-4. A frustrating outcome for the Canadian who won the tournament five years ago in 2019. During the last two sets of her match, she was broken in six out of her nine service games played.

“I played some of my best tennis for the first set and a little bit,” The Canadian Press quoted Adnreescu as saying afterwards.

“And then tennis just kicks you right in the butt sometimes.”

The 24-year-old is currently ranked 175th in the world and has only played six tournaments so far this season after missing the first part of this year due to a back injury. Andreescu, who is a former US Open champion, has been troubled by physical problems throughout her career. These include issues with her knee, foot and ankle.

“All I can really think about is how s—-y I feel,” she continued.

“I was feeling really great coming into the tournament, feeling my tennis really well.”

Meanwhile, Tsurenko has registered her first Tour-level win since April. Coming into this week, she had only won one out of her last six matches played. Although two of those defeated were due to retirements.

Tsurenko will next play 10th seed Anna Kalinskaya, who defeated American qualifier Louisa Chirico 6-2, 6-3.

There was better news for another former champion with Elina Svitolina storming past Shelby Rogers 6-2, 6-0, in her opening match. The 2017 champion dropped serve only once in the match and capitalised on her opponent’s unforced error count of 35.

“I love to play here,” said Svitolina who is playing in Toronto for the first time since 2019. “I won here years ago. It’s always a pleasure for me to play here in front of so many great fans. Just happy to be here.”

Svitolina has won 22 matches on the Tour so far this year. In the next round, she will play compatriot Marta Kostyuk who is seeded 11th in the draw. Kostyuk began her campaign with a comprehensive 6-0, 6-2, win over Germany’s Tatjana Maria.

World No.58 Elina Avanesyan has been formally granted Armenian citizenship and will start representing the country during the North American hardcourt swing.

The 21-year-old had been representing Russia on the Tour but in recent months confirmed her intention to represent the country where both of her parents are from. Her family moved to Russia from Nagorno-Karabakh following the outbreak of the First Nagorno-Karabakh War which ended eight years before the tennis player was born. According to the WTA website, Avanesyan is currently listed as the only player representing Armenia with a singles ranking.

“I am extremely proud to represent the Armenian flag at the Cincinnati Open and US Open,” Avanesyan said in an official press release.

“It is an extraordinary opportunity and a tribute to my roots, my family, and my community, who have always supported me. I would also like to extend my gratitude to the Keron Development Foundation for supporting throughout this process.”

“I aim to achieve great results as an Armenian athlete and have ambitious goals to bring the country significant success in the world of tennis over the coming years.”

Earlier this season, Avanesyan scored high-profile wins over Maria Sakkari at the Australian Open, Ons Jabeur in Charleston, and Qinwen Zhang at the French Open. Last month she reached her first WTA final at the 2024 Iași Open in Romania where she retired from the third set of her match against Mirra Andreeva due to injury.

Speaking about her change in allegiance, Avanesyan says she hopes to be a role model to others and encourage more people to take up tennis.

“I dream of being an inspiration for Armenian citizens, especially amongst younger generations,” she said.

“I want to be a role model for aspiring athletes and encourage young people to take up sport. My goal is to strengthen tennis in Armenia and ignite a passion in a new generation of athletes.”

The first tournament where she will be representing her country will be the Cincinnati Open. She also plans to play at the Tennis in the Land event in Ohio before the US Open.

Seb Korda has followed in the footsteps of his father Petr by winning the Citi Open in Washington.

The American recovered from a set down to defeat Flavio Cobolli 4-6, 6-2, 6-0, to win his first ATP 500 title at the age of 24. Coming into this week, he has lost seven out of eight Tour-level finals contested with his sole triumph being on the clay at the 2021 Emilia-Romagna Open in Italy.

“He’s got a really tricky serve. He tosses it super far behind him. You don’t really know what he’s going to do with it,” Korda said of Cobolli. “He’s such an explosive player, incredibly fast. When he’s feeling fresh, he’s incredibly dangerous.”

“We played in Rome as well this year. A tough three-setter, and now again with a three-setter. Luckily for me, I guess he was feeling a little tired from all the hours that he spent on court here.”

The triumph is even sweeter for Korda who grew up at the tournament. He has previously been a ball boy at the event which his father won in 1992.

“Coming to these tournaments, being around the guys, having just a lot of fun around here, was the biggest key to my career, realizing how badly I wanted to be a professional tennis player,” he said.

“I mean, I cried a little bit. Yeah, it was pretty emotional. So many times I’ve practiced or played on center court here, and you see my dad in ’92 [on the stadium facade] always right across from where you sit down. It’s pretty cool to finally put my name up there, as well.”

Korda, who was seeded fourth in the draw, also defeated Frances Tiafoe and Jordan Thompson earlier in the tournament. As a result of his triumph, he will rise to 18th in the ATP standings.