WTA 250 Livesport Prague Open

In an historic all-Polish final at the Livesport Prague Open in the Czech Republic on Friday, 4th-seeded Magda Linette crushed her compatriot, Magdalena Frech, the No 6 seed, 6-2 6-1, in 80 minutes, and then fretted as to how she could get to Paris for the Olympic Tennis Event.

I'm on my way to the Olympics! If angels exist, they are all named Rafal... Magda Linette

Linette saved all 4 break points she faced to earn her 3rd career title, her first on clay and first since 2020, winning 84% of her first-service points, 27 of 32, and broke Frech’s serve 4 times in 7 chances.

“I knew how tough it was going to be,” Linette said. “I needed to play my best to beat her, I really have to play my best, and I’m glad I took all my chances today.”

The World No 48 was contesting her 8th final and 2nd of 2024 after falling to Sloane Stephens in Rouen.

Next stop for both Linette and Frech is Paris, and although Linette had accepted that her success in Prague meant that she would miss the Opening Ceremony, an announcement added further disappointment.

“Honestly, when I heard that Céline Dion would be performing, I almost started crying,” she said. “Because it’s my absolute dream to see her live. Four times I’ve had tickets, and four times the show has been cancelled. That’s a fifth time. I think maybe it’s just not meant to be!”

Linette and Frech made a mad dash to Paris with the help of Polish billionaire compatriot, Rafal Brzoska, the CEO and founder of Polish mail company InPost, who stepped in to provide his private jet after he saw Linette’s appeal for help on social media.

After playing in the singles final, the two Olympic teammates were nearly stranded in Prague as a security measure resulted in the closure of French airspace within 150 kilometres of Paris because of the Opening Ceremony, which was due to kick off hours later.

Replying to Linette’s post on X (formerly Twitter), the mogul, who had a net worth of $1.3 billion in 2021, asked the 2022 Australian Open semi-finalist to ‘DM [direct message] him the details’ and he would ‘try to help’, and, around 16 hours later, it turned out that Brzoska had.

“I’m on my way to the Olympics,” Linette wrote in an update to her channels a little more than 2 hours after she had secured the title in Prague.

“If angels exist, they are all named Rafal,” she added later, posting a picture of herself seated in Brzoska’s plane.

26-year old Frech started the season by reaching the 4th round of a Grand Slam for the first time at the Australian Open, and continued to break new ground this week by making her first tour-level final.

She had defeated Linette 7-5 6-7(2) 6-2 in their only previous meeting, in the 2022 Saint-Malo 125 quarter-finals, but her compatriot delivered a near-flawless performance on Friday to race to victory in the rematch, dropping just 5 points on serve in a dominant first set.

In the second, she saved all 4 break points she faced, and snuffed out any hint of a come-,back from Frech, outmanoeuvring her by using perfectly timed and pinpoint-accurate forehands to finish off rallies.

Linette tallied 24 winners to just 9 unforced errors, while Frech was unable to deliver her usual consistency off the ground, even in the longer exchanges, and racked up 17 unforced errors to only 10 winners.

Both players go on to the Paris Olympics, where Linette is expected to face Roland Garros semi-finalist Mirra Andreeva in the 1st round of singles, and will team up with Alicja Rosolska in doubles against No 7 seeds Dayana Yastremska & Marta Kostyuk from Ukraine.

Bulgaria’s Viktoriya Tomova awaits Frech, and she could clash with 11th-seeded American Emma Navarro in the 2nd round.

Gintare Karpaviciute/WTA

Top seeds Barbora Krejcikova & Katerina Siniakova reunited to win their first title as a team on home soil, defeating wild-cards Bethanie Mattek-Sands & Lucie Safarova, 6-3 6-3, in the doubles final.

Krejcikova & Siniakova, the winners of 7 Grand Slam trophies together, ended their regular partnership at the end of 2023, but the Czech duo will be aiming to defend their Olympic Gold medal in Paris, and prepared for it by taking their 17th title alongside each other without dropping a set.

The trophy is Siniakova’s 4th of 2024, all with different partners, and 27th overall, while it is Krejcikova’s 1st of 2024, and 19th overall.

Five-time major champions Mattek-Sands & Safarova were also reuniting this week.

Safarova had come out of retirement to play her first tour-level event since Roland Garros 2019, and was partnering Mattek-Sands for the first time since the 2018 US Open. They did not drop a set en route to their first final together since winning Roland Garros 2017.

WTAtennis.com

WTA 250 UniCredit Iaşi Open

Top-seeded Russian teenager Mirra Andreeva outlasted her countrywoman and No 5 seed Elina Avanesyan to capture her maiden WTA Tour title at the UniCredit Iaşi Open in Romania.

The 17-year old was leading 5-7 7-5, 4-0 when Avanesyan retired after 2 hours and 21 minutes after leading 5-4 lead in the second set, and then dropping the last 7 games.

Andreeva, who lost just 4 points in the decider, converted 7 of her 13 break chances, and saved 5 of 10 break points to become the youngest woman to win a tour-level title since Coco Gauff in 2021.

The Russian faced a short turn-around to get to the Olympic Games in Paris over the weekend where she faces Magda Linette in the 1st round of singles, probably on Sunday, and will also play women’s and mixed doubles alongside Diana Shnaider and Daniil Medvedev.

After an early exit from Wimbledon, she had gambled on playing in Romania to get used to clay again, entering the tournament as top seed and favourite despite having never won a title.

The final was was supposed to start at 5pm on Friday, but it had to be postponed until 9.15pm because of rain, delaying her departure to Paris.

Andreeva started well, going up an early break, only to relinquish it and hand the initiative to Avanesyan.

She did so twice, as she went 5-6 down in the opening set, and Avanesyan sneaked through to start the second on a positive note.

Again Andreeva led by a break, and twice she lost her advantage. She was close to losing the match at 5-4 down but Avanesyan ran into trouble, prompting the Russian to win 9 points in a row, and, from there, the momentum swung her way.

She won 4 straight games in the decider to lead 4-0 when Avanesyan retired, struggling with a knee issue.

The No 1 seeds also won the doubles title, as Anna Danilina & Irina Khromacheva defeated Alexandra Panova & Yana Sizikova, 6-4 6-2, in the earlier final