Hardcover. Condition: Near Fine. Dust Jacket Condition: Very Good. 1st Edition. Published In 1998 : 1st. Edition : Hamish Hamilton Publishing : Semi Large Print : Quite A Thick & Heavy Book : This Edition Is 3 Books In 1 : " The Sheep - Pig " / " Ace " / " Daggie Dogfoot " : Very Light To Faint Face Rubbing To The Dust Wrapper : Leaf Edge Yellowing : Price Un-Clipped : Last Owner's Name Neatly Stamped On The Front End-Paper : Still Reasonably Crisp & Tight , With Good Solid Binding & Bright Clear Text & Illustrations : Overall , A Very Nice Children's Book :

Hardback. Condition: Very Good. Dust Jacket Condition: Very Good. Rayner, Mary (illustrator). 1984. Slightly better than very good condition in a nearly fine dustwrapper. Charming story of a pig which thinks it's a sheepdog. B/w text illustrations. Winner of the Guardian Childrens's Fiction award 1984 and made into the film "Babe". Blue boards, gilt title to spine. Third impression of the first edition. Spine very slightly bumped with a little fading to top of spine. Some foxing to textblock else contents clean. Dustwrapper is very slightly faded to spine. Packaged with care and promptly dispatched!.

Hardcover. Condition: Very Good. Dust Jacket Condition: Good. 1st Edition. First edition, second printing hardback in Very Good condition with a Very Good clipped jacket. Blue cloth boards, slightly bumped, clean with slight edge wear, 118 pages, lengthy but neat inscription (dated Christmas 1984) to fep, light use wear and marks, binding tight with slight roll. Jacket has two small perforations to the spine, otherwise clean and with only the lightest wear, now protected in a removable clear plastic sleeve. A very nice copy, the same as a first printing but at a more affordable price. Free standard airmail worldwide (including tracking).

Hardcover. Condition: Very Good. Dust Jacket Condition: Fine. Mary Rayner (illustrator). 1st Edition. Crown Publishers, New York. 1986. 118 pages. First American edition stated, with full numbeline including one. Second printing stated below full-numberline. Book is tight. Binding and hinges are strong and sound. Pages and endpapers are clean. Blue paper-covered boards are clean. Minor sun-toning along edges (barely.) One corner tip gently pushed. Original DJ is fine; only flaw is a price-clipped flap. A VG+ copy in fine DJ. Basis for the blockbuster film of the same name.

Hardcover. Condition: Very Good. Dust Jacket Condition: Very Good. 1st Edition. First edition, first printing hardback in Very Good condition with a Very Good clipped jacket. Blue cloth boards, bumped, clean with minor edge wear, 118 pages, inscription (dated Christmas 1984) to fep, minor use wear and marks, binding tight and almost square. Jacket is rubbed to the spine ends otherwise clean and with only the lightest wear, now protected in a removable clear plastic sleeve. A presentable first edition. Free standard airmail worldwide.

Hardcover. Condition: Fine. Dust Jacket Condition: Very Good. 1st Edition. First edition, first impression published by Gollancz in 1983. Illustrations and dust jacket art by Mary Rayner. Famously adapted to cinema in 1995 under the title 'Babe'. Original dark blue cloth with lettering to spine in gilt. A fine book in a very good or better dust jacket with a couple of small tears to bottom edge and one very small nick to spine head. A lovely, bright example.

First edition, first issue of the basis for the Oscar-winning film 'Babe'. Octavo, original cloth. Illustrated by Mary Rayner. Signed by the author on the front free endpaper, "With best wishes - Dick King-Smith." Fine in a near fine dust jacket. Jacket illustration by Mary Rayner. Rare and desirable signed. Set in rural England, where King-Smith spent twenty years as a farmer, The Sheep-Pig follows the adventures of a lone pig on a sheep farm. King-Smith won the 1984 Guardian Children's Fiction Award for the book and it was adapted as the 1995 comedy-drama film 'Babe', which was a great international success, winning both Academy and Golden Globe Awards.