The Sheep Pig – By Dick Smith

The idea and concept behind the Sheep Pig is about an unwanted pig who is adopted into a farming family, with dogs and other animals soon to become its friends. What is focused about the adaptation between the movie and the book, is that the central character, Babe, is involved with conflict of not only its kind, but with human beings. It speaks in a third person as read so that it can be read out aloud to a class or for a parent to read to a child. Not only is Babe the centre of attention and the main focus, but the Farmer Hogget creates the story. Without Farmer Hogget bringing Babe into the farming family, a different approach and story line could have been created. An example that Farmer Hogget could have chosen …show more content…

The plot is simple enough to understand without making it overdramatic or unrealistic. In a sense, the plot could be considered a real life story, as there are animals around the world who have adapted the styles and ways of other animals and are no longer considered to be that creature. E.g. a cat who acts like a dog, or a bird that thinks it’s a human. As Dick Smith himself was also a farmer, and majority of the books he has written is about farms/farming, it appears that he likes the idea of selling it to perceive the motion to children. Its theme delegates that the farm is important, and without the pig, the theme and all the ideas surrounding it would be nonexistence. There are several points of conflict that do appear within the novel, such as person vs society, person vs nature (competition battling with the rain as the dogs are unable to hear the owners). However, the points of view are also multifocal, in that each you’re able to understand the mood and setting of how the character feels when they speak or moving. Multiple perspectives is also a key symbol, as for example, the little pups don’t get why there’s a pig joining them, and that’s from their perspective, yet from other characters, they’re able to …show more content…

Brian finds himself stuck in the forest after the plane he was on crashed due to the pilot suffering a heart attack. There are many things running through Brian’s head during this time, and not only was the divorce of his parents, but the secret he was keeping.

Its set in what appears to be late 80s, focal points are the surrounding trees, hills, mountains, and the outback land of America and Canada. Starting off in the Hamptons, there’s the picturesque ideal 3 story holiday houses, and as the book progress, you begin to sense the current feel and mood travel towards despair and loneliness. The plot gives a child who were to be reading the strength that if they were caught in the same situation, they’d have some knowledge of being able to work around it. Interestingly enough, there is plenty of description between the differences of the father and mother, and how they react and speak with each other because of the divorce. E.g “your father” the mother addresses, and Brian picks it up as it should be said as “my dad”. It brings in an issue that became more frequent within the 80s, but a focal point that teaches the child about relationships and the impact it can have on the family. The point of view appears to be all from Brian, and the characteristics and interactions with others. It’s a matter of person vs society, as the