This review's longer title might run: ‘Apart from the narratives, the visual pleasure, the innovations in form and content, the recognition, the stereotypes and the challenges, what has cinema ever done for psychiatry?’ One of the many subversions in Monty Python's Life of Brian, banned on its initial release in Ireland and many other countries, is that Roman occupation also brought enduring benefits to a divided people. It strikes me when some psychiatrists complain about their unfavourable representations on film that cinema has given psychiatry and psychiatrists a platform they would not otherwise enjoy. Given the iron triangle of public anxiety and distrust of people with mental illness, an alienated tabloid press and government policies focused on populist measures (Reference CooperCooper 2001), any media coverage that helps to engage that public is better than none. The worst response to ‘bad’ films would be a siege mentality/ asylum culture among mental health professionals. Would we and our patients really be better off if films with a theme of mental illness were censored or banned? Certainly, like the ancient Romans, some film-makers have been brutal in their actions, using a rigid doctrine to justify them, but it is better to engage with popular culture than to pretend we can operate outside it. My medical textbooks predicted manic patients with delusions of divinity, but I have seen more young people with psychosis who reference The Truman Show (1998) and The Matrix (1999) than higher powers. Many films perpetuate public perceptions that violence is a symptom of mental illness, but films depicting mental illness are not universally negative. No film has ever advocated reduced funding of mental health services: from factual films (Titticut Follies 1967, banned until 1991) and real-location films (One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest 1975) to modern releases (12 Monkeys 1995), they have shown substandard in-patient facilities. These films shine a useful light on institutional abuses and we must acknowledge our past failings when addressing some films' excesses.

Good grief

The opening narrator in Field of Dreams (1989) sets up his own world:

I'm 36 years old, I love my family, I'm about to become a father. Until I'd heard the Voice, I'd never done a crazy thing in my whole life.

The intense yearning and hallucinations of acute grief have spawned a subgenre (third column, Table 7) of bereavement films. At 20 films, the list is short but contains highly successful films, crossing mainstream genres with only three horror films. Were this list to include more horror, dozens of zombie films, including their comic variants, ‘zom coms’, would lengthen it. Despite a perception that cinema denies death (bullet-proof heroes, high body counts, the gift of eternal youth to actors from make-up and lighting departments), all of the 76 films in Table 7 portray the aftermath of a death. Some therapists advocate watching these films as part of psychotherapy but evidence is unlikely to justify prescribing films for individual patients: many could overwhelm.

Although Field of Dreams is not strictly a film about mental illness, aspects of its fantasy are useful to understand normal grief. There are various markers of pathological grief (phobic avoidance of people/places related to the deceased; extreme guilt and anger; total lack of grief; overidealisation of the deceased; physical illness; and recurring nightmares of the deceased) and it is also defined by longevity. Although fewer films depict this consistently, these films (third column, Table 7) have profound insights into the process, whereas others (first and second columns) portray some aspects of pathological grief.

Traits of mind

Representations of people with personality disorders are too numerous to list here. Borderline and dissocial personality disorders are excellently portrayed by Evelyn and Joey in Play Misty for Me (1971) and Goodfellas (1990) respectively. Although people with personality disorders and personality difficulties make for challenging patients, their dilemmas and behaviours make for great cinema: rule 4 (illness over health) and rule 5 (if it bleeds it leads). The challenge might be to list powerful dramatic films in which characters do not have personality difficulties: without conflict and misunderstanding there would be no drama. Referring back to Table 1, the absence of personality difficulties from the mainstream movie psychiatry genre is striking. Only three films feature a central character with a personality disorder. McMurphy's psychopathy in One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest and Bob Wiley's dependent personality disorder in What About Bob? are each stand-out performances, and a cinematic gift to teachers. Of equal merit, Girl Interrupted showcases borderline and dissocial personality disorder in two highly regarded central performances: Winona Ryder and Angelina Jolie. This film is exceptional in that it breaks the rule that, as with psychosis (Table 6), most representations of these two common personality disorders are of violence: rule 5 (if it bleeds…)

How long might it take to agree the personality profile of the eponymous Citizen Kane (1940)? The film showcases childhood loss, grief, narcissism, selective recall, alcohol misuse, attempted suicide and probable alexithymia in Kane himself. As with psychosis, violence – especially in the context of the two personality disorders mentioned above – dominates these representations: rule 5 again.