Summary

This Italian sculpture most likely dates from the 16th century. The bust’s short-shell curls bear resemblance to a number of late 16th century statuettes of Black Africans, particularly a bronze depiction of a young Black slave attributed to Andrea Riccio. The headband would once have been gilded and there are holes for lost earrings, with both of these features common in depictions of both African men and women. As a result, there has been some debate over whether this figure is an adolescent boy or girl. The motif of an ear piecing was sometimes used in the 16th century to illustrate an imagined ideal of voluntary slavery, a symbol which remained popular at least into the 17th century.

The bust is remarkable for both its medium and quality. It is carved in the hard, semiprecious, dark green stone serpentine, which was prized in the ancient world. This tendency to use coloured stone for sculpture and decorative carving was particularly popular in central Italy and Rome in the late 16th and early 17th centuries; however, this bust is remarkable for both its medium and quality, with serpentine rarely used in sculpture. The lower edge of the bust is curved and bevelled, suggesting that it was originally set into a bronze or marble base. The base is likely a later addition, with the stone of a much less fine quality.

Bibliographic references

Bindman, David and Louis Gates Jr., Henry (ed.), The Image of the Black in Western Art, Volume III Part 1. From the "Age of Discovery" to the Age of Abolition: Artists of the Renaissance and Baroque. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2010, p.171.

Seelig, Lorenz, '"A welcome in the shape of a Moor's head of silver-driven work": The rediscovered Mohrenkopf cup by Christoph Jamnitzeeer from the late 16th century' in Eikelmann, Renate (ed.), Der Mohrenkopfpokal von Christoph Jamnitzer Exhibition Catalogue, Bavarian National Museum, Munich, 2002, pp. 86-7.

Ladurie, Emmanuel Le Roy (ed.), Vrai ou Faux?: Copier, Imiter, Falsifier (exposition, Paris), Bibliothèque nationale, [Cabinet des médailles et des antiques, 6 mai-29 octobre 1988], p.45.

Hofmann, Werner. Zauber der Medusa : Europäische Manierismen, Wien : Löcker, 1987 no. V70

Pope-Hennessy, John. Catalogue of Italian Sculpture in the Victoria and Albert Museum. London: Her Majesty's Stationary Office, 1964. pp.479-480.