Former federal treasurer Peter Costello is one of three prominent public figures who have received the top accolade on this year's Australia Day honours list.

He is joined by Chief of Army Lieutenant General Ken Gillespie and Queensland Governor Penelope Wensley in being awarded the Companion of the Order of Australia (AC).

Mr Costello has been recognised for his service to the country through his policy reforms and representative roles with global financial organisations.

He thanked Australians for giving him the opportunity to serve as treasurer for 12 years.

"I've tried to make our country a better place and make a contribution to it," he told ABC News 24.

"We all do that in our own little ways, and to - along with other Australians - be recognised for that, is a deeply humbling experience."

"I think anyone who's recognised in the Order of Australia feels immensely privileged and honoured by it," he added.

"I went into public life to try to make a difference and I devoted 20 years of full-time effort to do that. I hope I did make a difference.

"To have a measure of recognition of that humbles me, but I feel enormously grateful that that contribution has made Australia a better place."

Queensland Governor Penelope Wensley has also been honoured with the AC in recognition of her work in international relations, as well as her work with United Nations initiatives.

She has paid tribute to the Queensland spirit after thousands of people were hit by the devastating floods.

"One of the principal roles of the governor in ordinary times is to acknowledge the contribution of people to the community," she said.

"It will be those hundreds and thousands of ordinary people who just stepped in, did courageous things and helped their neighbours, helped complete strangers (who deserve thanks)."

In 2001 Ms Wensley was appointed an Officer of the Order of Australia for her service to the development of Australia's international relations.

Lieutenant General Ken Gillespie has received the AC in the military division for his 42 years of "unswerving dedication, commitment and the pursuit of excellence in serving Australia".

The citation says his "enthusiasm and astute command traits have delivered exceptional advances in joint capability development, improved strategic command and control arrangements and an Australian Army better positioned to respond to the challenges of generating and preparing land forces for the future."

Lieutenant General Gillespie dedicated the award to soldiers and Army families, and expressed gratitude to his family.

"I consider it an important privilege to have been tasked with leading the awesome institution that is the Australian Army and while 2010 was a difficult year, I am proud to say that Army's professionalism never wavered," he said.

Governor-General Quentin Bryce has expressed her support for all of this year's recipients.

"They elevate the concept of giving to others. They heighten our respect for one another, and they encourage Australians to think about the responsibilities of citizenship in our democracy," she said.

"Awards in the Australian honours system represent the highest level of recognition accorded by our nation for outstanding achievement and service.

"The honours announced today recognise community values and celebrate what is important and unifying in Australian life."

Honour roll

An eclectic mix of well-known faces, plus those providing services to the country behind the scenes make up the list of 441 Australians who have been honoured this year.

Ian Parmenter's signature "bon appetit" sign-off became common parlance for thousands of Australians who got hooked on his five-minute cooking show, Consuming Passions.

The London-born ex-journalist and TV producer said he had no credentials for a presenting job, let alone one involving cooking, when he was approached to front the show in the early 1990s.

But with 450 shows - which were syndicated overseas, including the UK - as well as several books to his name, Parmenter helped kickstart Australia's culinary awakening.

John Angove received a nod for his accomplishments in helping raise Australia's status as one of the top 10 wine-making countries in the world, after taking over the family-run winery from his father, Thomas Angove.

Thomas Angove brought cask wine to the masses, though his 15-year-old son almost thwarted the plan by telling him Australians would find it unpalatable.

Mr Angove has more than made up for the near-miss, having been recognised for his promotion of Australian wine overseas as well as development and research within the industry.

ABC journalist Sally Sara, who is currently the broadcaster's Afghanistan correspondent, is among those named as members of the Order of Australia.

Sara has been awarded an AM for services to journalism as a foreign correspondent and for her reporting on rural Australia.

"It's a lovely surprise and a great honour," Sara said.

"I'm part of a team so it's a joy to be able to celebrate with ABC colleagues around the world today, and I'm also thinking of my family back home in South Australia."

Fred Brophy is among the colourful characters to make the honours list, a legend in the receding world of tent boxing.

The fourth-generation showman, who held his final boxing tour only last year, has been honoured with a Medal of the Order of Australia.

More mainstream sports are well represented on the list, with former Wallaby Mark Loane recognised for his efforts on the rugby field, as well as his contribution as an eye surgeon in remote Indigenous communities.

Outspoken diplomat John Dauth, fashion designer Liz Davenport, former Australian Medical Association president Mukesh Haikerwal, and Sidney Myer, the entrepreneur who sparked dozens of Boxing Day sales, were also among the Australians recognised in 2011.