From a real-life spider woman to a retired District Court judge - the nation's top achievers are recognised in today's Australia Day honours which capture an array of achievements, hard work and milestones across the country.

The 2011 awards list features a number of well-known faces including the symbol of economic stability during the Howard government years, former treasurer Peter Costello. Mr Costello will be awarded the country's highest civic honour, a Companion of the Order of Australia (AC) for his service to the Australian Parliament.

The man who would have liked to be prime minister but was Australia's longest-serving treasurer was also singled out by the judges for his development of landmark economic policy reforms.

One of two other recipients of the top gong this year went to Chief of the Australian Army Ken Gillespie.

Gen. Gillespie, who received the military AC, dedicated his award to his troops who helped during the Queensland floods.

"I couldn't be more proud of them," he said. "I'm at the top of this organisation and it's a great privilege, but it's a team effort that sees these things realised."

Queensland Governor and former United Nations ambassador Penelope Wensley was also appointed a Companion.

Retired WA chief District Court judge Antoinette Kennedy was the only West Australian to receive an Officer of the Order of Australia (AO) - the nation's second-highest honour.

FULL AUSTRALIA DAY HONOURS LIST

FOOTY GREAT'S INDIGENOUS SCHEME

AUSSIES OF THE YEAR BACK A NEW FLAG

GALLERY: Thong challenge

GALLERY: WA celebrates

WA residents on the Member of the Order of Australia list (AM) include Professor Jillian Milroy, for her work in indigenous education, anaesthetist Dr Walter Thompson, artist Robert Juniper, former senator Michael Beahan, conservationist Marion Blackwell, businessman Barry Court and dentist Terry Pitsikas.

John Angove, who received a nod for his work to raise Australia's status as one of the top 10 wine-making countries in the world, is another award winner.

Mr Angove's father, Thomas, brought cask wine to the masses.

Mr Angove has been recognised for his promotion of Australian wine and development and research in the industry.

Fred Brophy is another colourful character to make the honours list, a legend in the vanishing world of tent boxing.

The fourth-generation showman, who held his final boxing tour only last year, has been honoured with a Medal of the Order of Australia.

Other recipients included WA-based former TV chef Ian Parmenter, fashion designer Liz Davenport, arachnologist Barbara Main, former Australian Medical Association president Mukesh Haikerwaland the late department store entrepreneur Sidney Myer.

With AAP