More than a dozen people from Canberra and the surrounding regions have been recognised with Australia Day honours.

Chief of Army Lieutenant General Ken Gillespie, earned a Companion in the Military Division of the Order of Australia, while ACT Police Chief Roman Quaedvlieg was awarded the Australian Police medal.

General Gillespie has been honoured for more than four decades of service to the Defence Force.

He says he is dedicating his award to those who serve alongside him.

"I think that the people and the defence families that support our people are just awesome in our country," he said.

"If you have a look at what they're doing in places like Timor and Afghanistan and Sudan and then have a look at what they're achieving in Queensland and Victoria and the professionalism and compassion they show, this award is for them."

Work at the ground level in Canberra has also been recognised, with Rhonda Obad awarded for her work with young homeless men.

She has operated a home for young men for over 10 years.

"It gives them stability, a place that they can call home and a place where they can relax and become part of society," she said.

That special home was born from tragedy.

"The foundation was formed out of the death of my son, I needed to be active, I needed to turn a negative into a positive, and something that i believed in close to my heart was helping those who were really suffering," she said.

Ms Obad says she is indebted to the local community for their help with the program.

"The success of the program has not just been my success, it's been the success of the Canberra community.

"I can't thank them enough because I don't think I would have succeeded really and truly as much as I have without the support of the community," she said,

While some have worked extensively in one field, there are those in the region who have spread themselves thin.

Dorothy Horsman has volunteered extensively in Yass for 25 years.

""To me, if you've got the ability to do it then you do it," she said.

From those who work with people, to those who work with the environment.

Dr Penny Olsen has been honoured for her work conserving Australia's birdlife.

"I was very touched to be nominated, and I take it as a recognition of the importance of the natural environment," she said.

Many of those honoured have worked hard to improve Canberra and the region. David Marshall has been busy selling the city to the world.

Over the years, the former Tourism ACT boss has watched the city grow.

"It's a spectacular city, Australians and Canberrans appreciate it but probably not enough. It's a wonderful city," he said.

Mr Marshall says says the thought of earning an accolade had not crossed his mind.

"Anyone involved in giving their time in this community does it for the sheer satisfaction of it, and there are many many people in the organisations I am responsible for and involved with that get an absolute delight out of just assisting," he said.