Michael J. Bauer, age 60 of rural Nicollet, passed away on Monday, June 7, 2021 at Mayo Clinic Health Systems-Methodist Campus in Rochester.

Funeral services will be Friday June, 11, 2021 at 2:00 P.M. at Woodland Hills Chapel in Mankato. Interment will be on Monday, June 14, 2021 at Calvary Cemetery in Mankato at 1:00 P.M. Mike's family invites family and friends to attend.

Visitation will be Thursday afternoon from 5:00 P.M. to 7:00 P.M. at Woodland Hills Chapel, and will continue on Friday afternoon for one hour prior to services at Woodland Hills Chapel. Woodland Hills Funeral Home of Mankato is handling arrangements.

Michael John was born on September 13, 1960 to George John and Jean Marion (Simonett) Bauer in Mankato, Minnesota. He graduated from Loyola High School in 1978. On May 31, 1980 he was united in marriage to Teresa Daufenbach, they later divorced. With this union four children were born, Katie, Joleen, Melinda, and Matt. Mike did upholstery work with his brother Tom, beginning at Staley's Upholstery and later founded Mike's Upholstery. Most recently he was employed by Delta Thermal Services as an Industrial Insulator. Mike lived his life to the fullest, hanging out with family and friends whether it was partying, concert going, race car events or listening to music around a bonfire, and shooting off fireworks. He appreciated the outdoors; camping, hiking along the river, canoeing, ice fishing, deer hunting, or just juking to check out nature. Recently, he spent his time with Missy on their hobby farm landscaping, tinkering with stuff, enjoying the wildlife that surrounded them, cruising around on the Mule and antiquing to find treasures to personalize their home.

He is survived by his mother, Jean Bauer of Mankato; daughters, Katie (Jake) Rux and their children, Kayden, Kashton, and Elsie of Mapleton, Joleen (Diedrich) Buesing and their children, August and Janee of North Mankato, Melinda Bauer and her children, Logan and Nolan of Mankato; son, Matthew (Maribel) Bauer of Minot, ND; brother, Tom (Carla) Bauer of Mankato; sisters, Marlene (Byron) Houg of Mankato, Rose (Joe Lyons) Hanson of North Mankato; by many nieces, nephews, and other relatives and friends.

He was preceded in death by his father; his significant other, Melissa "Missy" Palmquist.