“Paisà.” A corrupted word from the Italian-American “paesano,” roughly translated as “buddy,” “countryman,” or “neighbor,” often used by American soldiers during the war as a friendly way of greeting their Italian comrades.

The word underscores the entire philosophical tenor and humanist soul of Rossellini’s avant-garde masterpiece, a defining film of the neorealist movement that is much closer to traditional definitions of neorealism than his previous work. Nonprofessional actors, authentic locations, and documentary newsreel techniques are all in full force, with less melodrama, less narrative, and less convention at the helm.

There is nothing original about Rossellini relying upon these elements, as they were also used during the fascist period, but the degree to which he moves away from traditional, Hollywood-style narrative and reaches towards a more fractured, complex, revolutionary style is what sets PAISAN apart from its predecessors.

For historical context, Italy had declared war on Germany in late 1943 after the Allied invasion primed the pump, with American and British soldiers storming the southern tip of Italy starting in Sicily, then rising north to liberate the rest of the country from the Nazis. Rossellini geographically captures the Allied struggle in six short episodes, emphasizing the failures of communication between two alien cultures, Italian and American, with results that prove to be tragic and completely devastating. However, there are moments of great empathy despite the language barrier, evolving the film’s linguistic problem into a moral one that challenges our ethical responsibility towards alterity (the difference of otherness).

Amid these images of despair, shame, horror, and disappointment, a message of Christian humanism provokes a profound theme of universal love and brotherhood into the margins, one that transcends the borders of our vastly different ethnic, religious, economic, and political backgrounds. In each episode, Rossellini will create complex images of otherness that will get us to reexamine our ethical response towards the Other, in turn reflecting a microcosm of the war’s origins and the solidarity that should have prevented it.

Ultimately, PAISAN poses a radical, even incomprehensible spiritual insight: love of one’s enemy, a complete integration into the partisan struggle for liberty. The “Cinema of Reconstruction” begins here, says Tag Gallagher, Rossellini’s biographer. “In the new Italy ideological differences would be transcended through fraternity, even Fascists would be reincorporated. And PAISAN demonstrates this idea, in each of its episodes, as characters inhabiting mutually uncomprehending universes momentarily bridge gaps dividing them.” This idea of universal fraternity is likely to puzzle and perhaps anger many viewers, but it’s here where the film’s title becomes a reality. PAISAN hopes for us to become “neighbors” to all.

SICILY

Mood dressing for the entire film. A real downer that bleeds the heart dry and delivers a fierce wallop to the gut. American soldiers have landed in a strange, alien environment, the land of their enemies — the Italians. Linguistically, neither side understands the other. There is no common language and hence no feeling of trust. Sicilians are naturally suspicious of these American savages invading their land, and rightfully so, little realizing they are here to liberate them from a fascist dictatorship. Despite this barrier, an American GI and Sicilian woman want to be friends and seek to communicate their feelings within the womb of a cave. The possibility of empathy grows between them as they stumble and stretch their way towards a shared vocabulary (“paisan,” “spaghetti,” “bambina,” etc.). But in the end, despite their best efforts to become “paisàs,” the cruelty of war rears its ugly head. Their attempt at fraternity leads to catastrophe, leading the Americans to further misunderstand the outcome of the tragedy altogether. This is how wars begin. Ideology mixed with misunderstanding. It is this confused “dialectic” that will reoccur again and again throughout the film, symbolizing the air of non-communication and the wider origins of war’s inhumanity.

NAPLES

Rubble, ruin, and crumbling slums. A barren wasteland dominated by the disastrous effects of a war-maimed city, destroyed in the bombing raids. The wreckage was created by American bombs, not German bombs, a point that doesn’t fully detonate in our brains until the final revelation. Here, in this Neapolitan city of collapse, an American soldier befriends a young Italian street urchin, who steals to survive due to forces arrayed against him. It is a representation of a harsh socio-economic reality for many Italian people in the postwar period, riddled by hunger, poverty, and suffering. The young child warns the drunken solider, “Watch out if you sleep! I’ll steal your shoes,” and then he does. The deed is humorous, but when it later comes back to haunt the scene, it is the solider, not the child, who becomes unmasked.

Asking where his parents are, the boy replies: “Boom! Boom! Understand? The bombs.” The revelation is blinding. The American solider is hurled into a confrontation with shame. He now understands the boy is orphaned and homeless, among thousands of other children made homeless by the Allied raids. It is too much for him to fathom. He is triggered by impulse, by sheer nerve. His bombs have crippled these children, stolen their parents, in turn transforming them into wily thieves who must steal to survive.

The allies here are not a “paisà” to the children, they are the enemy, and in shame, the American soldier flees the scene in pain and humiliation. Lattuada said: “Rossellini taught Italians not to be ashamed to look at themselves in the face.” Here, on the countercultural end, the shadow of American shame is unable to reconcile itself with the reality of Italian misery, even though empathy for the Other has been clinched. The solider, witnessing the feral dwellings of the children, has taken his first step towards empathy, towards understanding the face-to-face reality and consequence of war. But empathy is not fraternity. “Truth will always be a moral revelation of human fraternity,” says Gallagher. And so, we must keep moving forward through Rossellini’s dark, despairing night of the soul to reach that moral revelation.

ROME

This postwar treatment of prostitution once again underscores the brutal socioeconomic circumstances that followed Italy’s liberation. It’s a perfect segue from NAPLES, where instead of children thieving out of economic desperation, it is women who sell their bodies on the streets of Rome out of economic necessity, similar to Paola selling herself in Milan in Rossellini’s previous film, DESIRE. The story also deconstructs the perennial male fantasy of the pure-hearted whore, that innocent woman who reserves her sexual purity for a chauvinistic man, in this case an American man, who longs after a time when Roman women were pure and simple before the war. It recalls discussions of “Springtime” in ROME OPEN CITY, when Francesco and Pina yearned for a better tomorrow and a brighter future, craving, as they did, a new “springtime in Italy” before the war corrupted everything. Here in this episode, an American soldier becomes disillusioned by the end of innocence, mourning over his Italian lover no longer untouched. Before the war, the two had been studying Italian and English to better understand each other, to bridge the language barrier between them to achieve “paisà.” After the war, the perfect storm of irony and cynicism keeps them far apart, strangers in each other’s arms unable to be lovers, let alone neighbors. The war and its ravages have made them alien all over again. The barrier is too thick and corrupted to iron out the failures of their communication. Once again, Rossellini is demonstrating war’s uncomprehending reality, showing in microcosm how two would-be lovers have failed to overcome the barriers between them, resulting in their profound unhappiness.

FLORENCE

Where the first three episodes reveal failures of communication, FLORENCE reveals a divided city where lovers have already bridged the linguistic gap. Unlike the couple in ROME who speak in broken English and Italian, the American nurse in this episode speaks Italian perfectly, only she’s physically divided from her heroic partisan lover across the city. The place is a battle zone, whizzing with German bullets. She hears word that her lover has been wounded, and that love of hers compels her into the war-ravaged streets to brave the crossfire. Such commitment to assisting the Italian struggle endows her with the title “paisà,” but again, similar to the outcome in SICILY, the attempt to bridge the gap between two alien cultures ends tragically. If one were to turn off the film at this point, Rossellini’s “despair of history” would indeed be troubling, if not completely devastating. We are now ready to turn to the penultimate episodes, ROMAGNA and PO DELTA VALLEY — the first a philosophical message on brotherhood and universal love, the second a visceral application of that philosophy in its purest form.

ROMAGNA

This is the most puzzling, controversial, least understood, least accepted episode in the film, and maybe in Rossellini’s entire filmography. While it embraces the philosophical-humanist soul of the entire film, it also leaves us with a tremendous amount of ideological dissonance that is neither easily understood or embraced, let alone solved. So head-scratching are its dimensions that one Letterboxd reviewer even made a joke out of its absurd conclusion: “Three Chaplains walk into a monastery. Two vanish into thin air.”

To appreciate the joke’s meaning, which is to say I’m going to destroy the joke’s punchline, allow me to break this down.

Three American Chaplains visit a group of secluded Franciscan monks in a monastery out in Romagna, Italy. One is Catholic, one is Protestant, and one is Jewish. Three very good friends, mind you, despite their ideological differences, but differences nonetheless that the Franciscans are shocked to learn about. How has the lead chaplain, the Catholic, made no efforts to convert these “two lost souls,” as the monks put it. How do they all coexist in the ministry when they all can’t be right, and only one of them can be in possession of the one true faith? This seems to be the line of thinking of the monks, who begin praying for “the light of truth” to descend upon the two non-Catholics. The monks are resolute and undoubting in their faith, which by definition makes them intolerant. It is here where “the monks have given proof of the same sort of intolerance and fanaticism that helped cause the war,” says Gallagher, only they don’t quite understand it themselves, as they are too blinded by dogma and ideological difference. As another writer put it, “the monks hold such engrained prejudices against non-Catholics that we can easily see how intolerance persists across Europe.” In other words, “The monks are unaware pharisees.” And so the Catholic responds:

“I’ve never asked them anything because I’ve never thought I could judge them. I know them too well. They’re very good friends. Perhaps you, in this peaceful world, in this atmosphere of untroubled meditation, consider me guilty. I don’t feel guilty.”

The monks, sensing the Catholic’s resolute ecumenism, turn to fasting as a genuine act of faith, a way for God to provide the grace needed for his fallen friends to reach salvation, leaving all three chaplains to eat by themselves as they pray together. It is here where one would expect the Catholic to be triggered by his own defenses and condemn the bigotry and antisemitism of the slanted monks, but his response instead baffles us.

“What you’ve given me is such a great gift that I’ll always be in your debt. I’ve found here that peace of mind I’d lost in the horrors and the trials of the war, a beautiful, moving lesson of humility, simplicity, and pure faith.”

No censure. No disapproval. No defense mechanisms or mouth-off vitriol leading to insults or wars of fisticuffs. The chaplain simply accepts their evangelical message as a matter of genuine, pure, simple religious faith. Nothing more, nothing less. But wait a minute, these narrow-minded monks have literally denied the existence of the other two non-Catholic’s faiths, causing them to “vanish into thin air.” Shouldn’t this message be condemned? “This question is key to Paisan,” says Gallagher. “Has war taught us anything?” In a world where religious and political campaigns narcissistically position themselves as monopolizing The Good, The True, and The Beautiful under the partisan framing of an exclusive-organized faith, the Catholic chaplain finds a new spiritual light that is radically counterintuitive. Love your enemy, even and especially when ideology profiles your disagreement. Love your enemy, through and through. The chaplain does not stop to consider that intolerance caused the war. He is only in recognition, instinctively, that tolerance must also tolerate intolerance. He cannot afford to substitute humility with a closed, cocksure faith. His faith is far above the petty, self-righteous infighting imbibed by the culture wars that started WWII. He will “bridge ideological differences through fraternity,” through brotherhood, through “paisà,” as a means of constructing a community that is ecumenical, generous, liberal, and universal in its dispensing of divine truth as belonging to everyone in general and no group in particular.

Gallagher elucides further:

“The guiding idea of the Italian resistance and the postwar period was not to purge every person or idea one found disagreeable. In the new Italy ideological differences would be transcended through fraternity, even Fascists would be reincorporated…Paisan hopes for similar grace and growth in us. Can we accept the monks’ effort? Can we understand why the chaplain reacts as he does?

The episode ends in love and respect, not drama or conflict. We do not understand this, and perhaps many of us will disagree with the chaplain’s response. And yet, this is where PAISAN’s message of Christian humanism will stand apart from our own ideological biases. Gallagher continues: “In most movies, heroes actions mirror public consensus; they react to problems as most people would, or would like to. But now Rossellini’s heroes react from private revelation or private trauma, and in ways that often defy public consensus.” The world will continue to hate its enemies and prolong the never-ending cycle of World Wars ad infinitum, but the chaplain will contently break bread with those who refuse to do so, and in turn will achieve a level of peace and tranquility that you and I will fail to experience. This is all philosophy at this point, by the way; it is spiritual expression that hasn’t yet achieved its final integration with the Other.

We now turn to the Po Delta Valley.

PO DELTA VALLEY

This is the ultimate follow up to ROMAGNA and the film as a whole. It takes the fraternal life pulse of the Catholic Chaplain’s ecumenical worldview and applies it directly to the enemy-Other partisan struggle deep in the aquatic reeds. We are no longer in the monastery listening to religion, but are seeing it practiced in a flesh-and-blood war-zone experience. Remember, Italy and Germany were recent allies in the war under respective fascist dictatorships, while America and British forces were considered the enemy. What Rossellini has been showing us up to this point is how the Allied Invasion sought not only Italy’s liberation, but a reconciliation of their own enemy status. Such reconciliation meant closing the gap between two alien cultures, American and Italian, sealing the linguistic and moral barriers between them. And it is here, in the Po Delta Valley, that we see American and English officers throw themselves into a shared struggle so intimate, it results in their annihilation on behalf of their fellow “paisà.” In other words, “the greatest love one can have for his friends is to lay down his life for them.”

Italy and the Allied Powers momentarily achieve a visceral brotherhood worthy of the film’s title, for no love is greater. It matters that this group of allied forces are all slaughtered alongside their partisan comrades, but what matters even more is they were slaughtered under the bonds of human fraternity. “Truth will always be a moral revelation of human fraternity,” says Gallagher. “But far from confirming the precepts of Party or Church, truth will always fly in the face of accepted, conventional belief.” Rossellini is unable to reconcile the profound disparities and misunderstandings inherent in war and war-inspired trauma. And yet, no matter how alone and bereft and exquisitely tragic his portrait of war is, he never concludes that life is ultimately cynical or worthy of ruin. The unconventional morality of ROMAGNA and PO DELTA provide a resolution that does not seem to be a resolution. It runs counter to our common sense, but it is here where PAISAN achieves a fundamentally spiritual, mystical, perhaps even metaphysical status. It is one that hopes to make “neighbors,” “countrymen,” and “buddies” of us all.

As Rossellini himself recounts:

“We had been under the domination of the Germans, under the Fascists, under persecution, and then one beautiful day the others arrived as enemies. Three days later they realized we weren’t enemies, because we were people like them. I remember a phrase that in Rome was on everyone’s lips, ‘He’s poor mama’s boy too,’ and this realization produced an extraordinary fraternity during the war…a wonderful fraternity.”