Paisan is a revolutionary, documentary-style film, consisting of six separate but seemingly related episodes. Director Roberto Rossellini uses this film to portray the drastic consequences of war on a nation, the people, and overall society. Neorealism was a pivotal movement, and Paisan brought attention to the Fascist influence by showing the harsh economic and social reality of World War II. Rossellini also uses Paisan to allude to regionalism and the importance of a unified nation. Paisan exposes

ending of the Cold War and initiation of neoliberalism was expected to lead to a decline in conflict and result in a cooperating international system under the anarchic system. In addition, to the new features of liberalism, new features of realism (neorealism) opposing neoliberalism emerged attempting to explain the flaws in cooperation. Neoliberalism is derived from the early theoretical framework; classical liberalism. The original liberal school of thought emphasizes human nature and human behavior

Ricci is also shown to be a working housewife, however her appearance is far more realistic than that of Joan Crawford. Maria Ricci is shown to be wearing tattered clothing, her hair is unkept, and she has what appears to be a completely naked face. Neorealism in Bicycle Thieves captures the raw essence of a woman living in poverty, who’s life revolves around her home, and the living conditions she has to endure on a daily

This Essay will discuss how neo realism only lasted ten years and how it was committed to representing life as it was lived, in complete contrast to the fascist propaganda films it superseded. It will discuss and debate this by analyzing some of the most prominent films and their directors that represented the movement. The main exponents of the neorealist movement were Visconti, Rossellini and De Sica (Hayward, 2000), “The Movement lasted from 1942 to 1952, even though critics credit Roberto

The Ukraine crisis has emerged from a domestic conflict and developed into an international issue because of the Russian federation intervention. The evolution of the Ukrainian crisis demonstrated the inability of the international community to handle it in a timely manner and prevent conflict escalation and ultimate stalemate. Although Ukrainian separatists seek to follow the Crimean strategy, many Western countries are strongly opposing to the Russian annexation of Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts due

another through sheer influence. Classical realism would see the United Nations as a farce, or tool in exercises the will of the hegemony over the entire world, or as an instrument of balance to check the sole great power that is the United States. Neorealism we see the collaboration of many states to overcome DPRK in a nonviolent method as completely natural. In working together, the prove the point that ethics are not ignored by nation states at large, helping to disprove

Italian neorealism sought to portray the subject matter at hand truthfully and without adding any sort of artistic touch. A cinematic movement dedicated to portraying a post war Italy that was slumped into an economic and moral depression. This portrayal is meant to highlight the general Italian psyche at the time. And films of this movement typically reflect everyday life of the Italians including poverty, oppression, injustice and desperation. What we perceive as stories as an audience are everyday

Hollywood has become synonymous to great cinema, be it American or an international equivalent, it always comes back to a Hollywood comparison. Classical Hollywood style exhibits clarity, unity, goal-orientated characters, and closure, while most other elements are set aside to further progress the cumulative buildup of narrative. Often referred to as the “invisible style,” because it relies on this “unobtrusive craftsmanship,” classic Hollywood practices ensure viewers will be completely immersed

Realism is not a new concept. Classical Realism has its roots firmly placed in ancient Greece at the time of Thucydides where in the ‘History of the Poloponneasean War’ he wrote “The strong do what they have the power to do, the weak accept what they have to accept” (Thucydides 1972: 402). Thucydides is thought to explain the role of power within politics at this early stage (Donelly, 2000) through to the time of Machiavelli in the 16th Century. Stanley Hoffman is quoted as saying that the theory

granted production loans” (Passion and defiance film in Italy from 1942 to the Present, pg.90-91) The neorealism genre topics shifted as years progress from focusing on the war and fascism in 1942-1944 to pink neorealism in the fifties that glamourize poverty. The Italian films in the fifties were produced to help people escape mentally from their impoverish life. But in reality, these pink neorealism films was showing