Kofi Annan (born April 8, 1938, Kumasi, Gold Coast [now Ghana]—died August 18, 2018, Bern, Switzerland) was a Ghanaian international civil servant, who was the secretary-general of the United Nations (UN) from 1997 to 2006. He was the corecipient, with the United Nations, of the Nobel Prize for Peace in 2001.

Annan, whose father was governor of Asante province and a hereditary paramount chief of the Fante people, studied at the University of Science and Technology in Kumasi before enrolling at Macalester College in St. Paul, Minnesota, U.S., where he received a bachelor’s degree in economics. He continued his studies at the Institute for Advanced International Studies in Geneva. He earned a master’s degree while a Sloan fellow at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1971–72.

Annan began his career with the UN as a budget officer for the World Health Organization in Geneva in 1962. With the exception of a brief stint as the director of tourism in Ghana (1974–76), he spent his entire career with the UN, serving in several administrative posts. On March 1, 1993, he was elevated to undersecretary-general for peacekeeping operations. In that position he distinguished himself during the civil war in Bosnia and Herzegovina, particularly in his skillful handling of the transition of peacekeeping operations from UN forces to NATO forces.

Because Boutros Boutros-Ghali, Annan’s predecessor as secretary-general, had alienated some member nations—most notably the United States—with his independent and aloof style, Annan entered office with the tasks of repairing relations with the United States and reforming the UN bureaucracy. Soon after becoming secretary-general, he introduced a reform plan that sought to reduce the organization’s budget and streamline its operations, moves that were welcomed by the United States. Other priorities included restoring public confidence in the UN, combating the AIDS virus, especially in Africa, and ending human rights abuses.

In 2001 Annan was appointed to a second term. Later that year the September 11 attacks occurred in the United States, and global security and terrorism became major issues for Annan. In 2003 the United States launched a war against Iraq without receiving approval from the UN Security Council, and Annan’s subsequent criticism of the war strained relations with the United States (see Iraq War). Later in 2003 Annan appointed a panel to explore the UN’s response to global threats, and he included many of its recommendations in a major reform package presented to the UN General Assembly in 2005. A number of measures were later adopted; the proposal to expand the Security Council from 15 to 24 members was among those rejected. In 2005 Annan was at the centre of controversy following an investigation into the oil-for-food program, which had allowed Iraq—under UN supervision—to sell a set amount of oil in order to purchase food, medicine, and other necessities. A report described major corruption within the program and revealed that Annan’s son was part of a Swiss business that had won an oil-for-food contract. Although Annan was cleared of wrongdoing, he was criticized for his failure to properly oversee the program. In 2006 Annan’s term ended, and he was succeeded by Ban Ki-Moon.

In 2007 Annan was named chairperson of the Alliance for a Green Revolution in Africa (AGRA), an organization aiding small-scale farmers; AGRA was funded by the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation and the Rockefeller Foundation. He later played a crucial role in resolving the Kenyan election crisis that began in late December 2007, eventually brokering a power-sharing agreement between the government and the opposition on February 28, 2008. In the same year, he received the Peace of Westphalia Prize, awarded biannually for contributions to unity and peace in Europe, and became chancellor of the University of Ghana. In 2007 he founded the Kofi Annan Foundation, a not-for-profit organization that promotes peace, sustainable development, human rights, and the rule of law.

In February 2012 Annan was appointed Joint Special Envoy for Syria by the United Nations and the League of Arab States. His core diplomatic effort consisted in delivering to the Syrian government a six-point proposal for ending the country’s civil war, a plan endorsed by the Security Council. The proposal enjoined Pres. Bashar al-Assad’s government to take significant steps, including ending all fighting operations. The Syrian government formally accepted the plan in March but continued its attacks on rebel forces and on popular demonstrations. In August Annan announced his demission as Joint Special Envoy, citing a lack of unity and political will among world powers to resolve the conflict.

Annan coauthored a number of works. The memoir Interventions: A Life in War and Peace (cowritten with Nader Mousavizadeh) was published in 2012.