United Nations Secretary-General Kofi Annan visited Macalester College, in St. Paul, Minnesota, on 22 April, where he gave an inaugural speech at the College’s newly created Institute for Global Citizenship.

The Secretary-General earned a bachelor’s degree at Macalester in 1961, and was also a member of the College’s track and soccer teams.

Upon arrival at the College, the Secretary-General attended a flag-raising ceremony for the United Nations flag on the College’s main lawn. He then met the College’s President, Brian C. Rosenberg, before having a brief meeting with Professor Roger Mosvick.

Then, dressed in academic robes, he took part in a procession that made its way to the Convocation ceremony.

In his remarks at the Convocation ceremony, the Secretary-General said the mission of the Institute -- to advance Macalester’s commitment to internationalism, multiculturalism and understanding -- is more important than ever in today’s world. (See Press Release SG/SM/10425.)

The Institute for Global Citizenship is the latest expression of the global outlook that has always been part of Macalester’s very heart and soul, the Secretary-General said.

He added that its launch could hardly come at a more crucial time in the life of the international community in general, and the United Nations in particular. More than ever before, the human race faces global problems -- from poverty and inequality to nuclear proliferation, from climate change to bird flu, from terrorism to HIV/AIDS, from ethnic cleansing and genocide to trafficking in the lives and bodies of human beings, the Secretary-General said.

After his remarks, the Secretary-General answered a set of questions, which had been composed by the College’s students.

Following the Convocation the Secretary-General held a press encounter, where he took questions on the relevance of the United Nations, the role of global citizenship, Senator Norm Coleman, accountability and reform at the United Nations, and his possible return to Macalester College to lecture.

At a luncheon held in the Secretary-General’s honour, he was presented with the Caux Round Table Award for Principled Leadership in recognition of his value-based leadership in initiating the Global Compact, which provides a partnership for private capital and business with public agencies in the improvement of economic, social and political outcomes of globalization around the world.

In addition, the Caux Round Table recognized the leadership of the Secretary General for promoting the Millennium Development Goals, designed to significantly reduce poverty within the human family.

In a speech at the luncheon, the Mayor of St. Paul, Chris Coleman, declared 22 April 2006, to be Secretary-General Kofi Annan Day. The proclamation is usually given to individuals and organizations to recognize their contributions to the City of St. Paul, and was intended to publicly celebrate and acknowledge the Secretary-General’s contributions to St. Paul City through his work at the United Nations and his affiliation with Macalester College.

That afternoon, the Secretary-General visited the Walker Art Center in Minneapolis, before returning to New York.