The Leininger Sporn is a highly prominent ridge in the northeast of the Palatinate Forest in western Germany, mainly composed of the rock formations of the Middle and Upper Bunter. It forms the western edge of Upper Rhine Plain between Grünstadt in the north and Leistadt, a village in the county of Bad Dürkheim, in the southeast. In the natural region system of the German Central Uplands it is considered one of the four sub-units of the Middle Palatinate Forest. The Leininger Sporn lies between the valleys of the river Isenach in the south and the Eckbach stream in the north, and has an area of around 44.8 km2. From north to south it is about 10 kilometres long, and from east to west it is about 4 to 5, and at its northern tip, only about 2 to 3 kilometres wide.The outer boundary of this hill ridge runs from the Kleinkarlbach in the northeast, southwards along the edge of the Rhine Graben, before swinging southwest at Leistadt. Here it follows the Lambrecht Fault, a fracture line that crosses the Isenach valley at Hausen between Peterskopf and Teufelsstein, and separates the mountain range of the Haardt from the Leininger Sporn and the Limburg-Durkheim Forest that lies to the southwest. At the Alten Schmelz it turns north and reaches the valley of the Höninger Bach and village of Höningen after crossing the Rahnfels hill (517 m AMSL (NHN)). Here the natural region transitions smoothly in the west into the foothills of the Inner Palatine Forest and, in the northwest, into the Stumpfwald and the forest clearances of the Eisenberg Basin. From Altleiningen the boundary follows the valley of the Eckbach as far as Kleinkarlbach in a northeasterly direction. The name "Leininger Sporn" was coined by the geographer, Adalbert Pemöller, who in the 1960s developed a detailed internal subdivision of the Palatine Forest for the Handbook of Natural Region Divisions of Germany. In doing so, Pemöller gave the historic name, Leiningerland, for this natural sub-region, which in turn was derived from the formerly important noble family of the House of Leiningen.