Description

Rocky and Bullwinkle

Here is a Rocky and Bullwinkle Pinball game for sale. This game features ramps, multiball and a very cool hat trick feature where he pulls one of 3 animals out of a hat! It is based on the cartoon from the 1960’s, with all the features of a 1990’s pinball machine. This game has a Dot Matrix Display with lots of animations from the original cartoon. It has a save Nelle feature with a spinning saw blade.

The following is from the International Pinball Database:

Description

Manufacturer: Data East Pinball, Incorporated (1986-1994) Date Of Manufacture: February 01, 1993 Model Number: 500-5522-01 Common Abbreviations: R&B MPU: DataEast/Sega Version 3 Type: Solid State Electronic (SS) Production: 5,500 units (confirmed) Serial Number Database: View at The Internet Pinball Serial Number Database (IPSND.net) (External site) Theme: Cartoon Specialty: Mechanical Backbox Animation Notable Features: Flippers (2), Pop bumpers (3), Slingshots (2), Standup targets (7), Vertical up-kickers (2), 5-bank drop targets (1), Subway, Left outlane kickback. 3-ball multiball. Mechanical backbox animation (Bullwinkle pulls from his hat either Rocky, a rhino, or a lion). Design by: Tim Seckel Art by: Kevin O’Connor Dots/Animation by: Kurt Andersen, Jack Liddon Mechanics by: Norm Wurz Music by: Brian Schmidt Sound by: Brian Schmidt Software by: Kristina Donofrio, John Carpenter, Lonnie D. Ropp Notes: It was initially reported to us that, at the direct demand of a French distributor, games shipped to France had black cabinets instead of the normal blue, and that some of these black cabinet games were also sent to Canada and locations in the United States. We now have images in this listing showing the black cabinet games exported to England. Reportedly, they exported to Italy, too.

We previously listed the Manufacture Date as February, 1993 (no day specified).

This game was produced from Feb-1-1993 to Apr-23-1993.

Marketing Slogans: “Here’s Something You’ll Really Like!”

“Presto! Change-O! Pinball!”

“Moose Up Your Collections at Locations Nationwide”

*Note: These are photos of the actual game you can purchase!*

*all games that are sold, are refurbished and optimized before customers receive the final game. Please allow one to two months after purchase so our highly skilled technicians thoroughly go over your game. thank you!*

Looking for something else?

Click to browse online through our extensive showroom of classic and new Pinball machines!

Looking for more photos or information about the history of this machine or international versions of this machine?