BULLWINKLE

KRYLOV AND LA FONTAINE COME BACK TO LIFE IN MODERNITY...

Bullwinkle J. Moose is a fictional character in the 1959–1964 animated television series Rocky and His Friends and The Bullwinkle Show, often collectively referred to as Rocky and Bullwinkle, produced by Jay Ward and Bill Scott. When the show changed networks from ABC to NBC, its name was changed to The Bullwinkle Show, reflecting the popularity of Bullwinkle

Bullwinkle,Rocky and Boris tangle with Admiral Nelson

Ward and his then-assistant Alex Anderson created Bullwinkle for The Frostbite Falls Review, a storyboard idea which was never developed into a series. They gave him the name "Bullwinkle" after Clarence Bullwinkel, a car dealer, because they thought it was a funny name. Both Bullwinkle and Rocky were given the middle initial "J" in reference to Ward.

From his debut along with Rocky, Bullwinkle's gloves were blue. Later in the second story arc and for the rest of the series, they become white.

Rocky and Bullwinkle go to Frostbite Falls and do the Flower Fair

Part 1

Bullwinkle shared a house with his best friend Rocky in the fictional small town of Frostbite Falls, Minnesota, a parody of the real-life American town of International Falls, Minnesota. Bullwinkle's college alma mater was "Wossamotta U." In the half Cartoon/live action movie The Adventures of Rocky and Bullwinkle Bullwinkle receives a Honorary Mooster's Degree from Wossamotta U -due to the nefarious plans of Boris Badenov

The FrostBite Falls Flower Show

Part 2

Bullwinkle was noted for being well-meaning, but also quite dim-witted, which made for a source of jokes during the show's run. Despite this, the so-called "moronic moose" often aided the brains of the "moose-and-squirrel" duo, Rocky, during their various adventures. Although on opposite ends of the I.Q. scale, he and the "plucky squirrel" had a shared sense of optimism, persistence and traditional ethics and moral standards. Although not as intelligent as Rocky, Bullwinkle often made references breaking the fourth wall, so he was not always as clueless as he appeared.

Bullwinkle and Rocky at the Frostbite Falls Flower Shower

Finale

Bullwinkle also hosted other segments of the program, including: "Mr. Know-It-All," where he tried to demonstrate his supposed expertise at a subject, such as disarming bombs or curing hiccups; "Bullwinkle's Corner," where the moose would attempt to read poetry; and various interstitial drop-ins. In one classic running gag, Bullwinkle would attempt to pull a rabbit out of a top hat (to Rocky's dismissal: "Again?!" or "But that trick never works!", and Bullwinkle's canonical rejoinder, "Nothing up my sleeve...Presto!" or "This time, for sure! Presto!"), only to pull out something unexpected instead (such as a bear), and occasionally even Rocky himself. After each failed attempt, Rocky would segue to the next sketch by saying, "And now, here's something we hope you'll really like!"

Fractured Fairy Tales from the Rocky and Bullwinkle Show...

Rapunzel

Bill Scott, Ward's partner and head writer of the series, was the original voice of Bullwinkle. In the 2000 Universal Studios film The Adventures of Rocky and Bullwinkle, Bullwinkle was voiced by Ward fan Keith Scott (no relation to Bill), as Bill had died of a heart attack in 1985.

Fractured Fairy Tales from the Rocky and Bullwinkle Show...

The Elves and the Shoemaker

In addition to the television series and movies, Bullwinkle has appeared in television commercials, a newspaper comic strip, lunch boxes, and a coloring book.

Bullwinkle was originally going to have a cameo in Who Framed Roger Rabbit along with Rocky, but the rights to use the characters could not be obtained in time due to their time budget

Meet Boris Badenov and Natasha Fatale...

Boris is a spy for the fictional nation of Pottsylvania, and would take orders from the nation's leader, Fearless Leader (and occasionally the rarely-seen Mr. Big). Boris' missions range from trying to steal a secret rocket fuel formula to eliminating all television from the United States as part of Pottsylvania's various attempts to seize power. Boris, who is thoroughly dedicated to (and takes delight in) all manners of nefarious deeds, would also sometimes engage in his own schemes, such as starting his own organized crime gang. Separately from the television series, a commercial for the Rocky and Bullwinkle Show featuring Boris established that he was an active member of Local 12 of the Villains, Thieves, and Scoundrels Union. During this commercial, Badenov also claims to be "the world's greatest no-goodnik." Boris is also quite proud of the fact that the nicest thing Fearless Leader ever did for Boris Badenov was sending a picture of himself to Boris inscribed "Drop Dead-Fearless Leader".

From his debut along with Natasha Fatale, Boris Badenov's eyes were red and he was taller. In one of the segments of Mr. Know-It-All, "How to be a Good Umpire," Boris appears to have what seems to be his twin brother or a clone.

Boris is nearly always accompanied by his fellow spy, Natasha Fatale. The first time she wasn't with him was in the story arc, "Buried Treasure." The first time that they both didn't appear in is the story arc, "The Three Moosketeers."

Usually, Boris' misdeeds are thwarted by Rocky the flying squirrel and Bullwinkle the moose. Boris' attempts at killing "moose and squirrel" (as he refers to them) also always end in failure, usually by his own scheme backfiring on him. As Boris expresses his plight in one episode: "I put bomb in squirrel's briefcase and who gets blown up? Me!"

Catchphrases Boris' main catchphrase (spoken when frustrated) is "Raskolnikov!" (a reference to the novel Crime and Punishment by Dostoevsky), spoken in his Pottsylvanian accent (a mock-Russian accent).

Boris would also say "SHARRUP YOU MOUTH!!!" to Natasha, when his schemes failed. In one episode, Natasha said those very words to Boris as the car they were in dropped over a cliff to the ground in the 8-segmented story arc, "The Treasure of Monte Zoom."

[ Name and Parody of Hollywood Actor Boris' name "bad enough" is a play on that of the 16th-century Russian Tsar Boris Godunov "good enough", or the opera of the same name. Pottsylvania is a play on the Polovetzian Dances of Alexander Borodin. Boris' accent and explosive temper is an homage to Hollywood actor Akim Tamiroff, especially to Tamiroff's role in The Great McGinty (1940), directed by Preston Sturges

A Bullwinkle Parody of Desperate Housewives

Archives

July 2008

Categories

All