Corporate Information

Information listed here is shown as of the date of release. Please note that production, sales and programs may be terminated or contents such as specifications and prices may be modified by the time you read this information.

Alps Electric to Exhibit at Sensors Expo 2018

Introducing IoT Sensor Network Modules and a Virtual Reality Solution

Alps Electric Co., Ltd. (TOKYO: 6770; President: Toshihiro Kuriyama) will be exhibiting at Sensors Expo 2018, the industry’s largest show, on June 26 through 28 at the McEnery Convention Center in San Jose, California, USA.

Alps Electric will be exhibiting at Sensors Expo 2018 and presenting their sensing devices for IoT and automotive. This year, Cirque Corporation, a subsidiary of Alps Electric will also exhibit their VR Grip™ at the ALPS booth.

＜Exhibit Highlight: IoT Smart Modules＞

Integrating low-power, high-precision and compact sensors with a Bluetooth® communication module, these products are capable of acquiring pressure, temperature, humidity, ambient light and other environmental data, as well as six-axis (geomagnetism + acceleration) sensing.

A special app (for Android) is available for viewing data and changing sensing settings on a smartphone or tablet. In addition, radio certification has already been acquired for various regions around the world, allowing smooth, low-cost progression to demonstration testing.

At Sensors Expo 2018, we will also exhibit a Function Expansion Type enabling connection of an extra sensor.

＜Exhibit Highlight: VR Grip™ Platform＞

VR Grip™ is Cirque’s finger position proximity sensing device with a high-resolution circle trackpad. This solution transforms a virtual reality controller, joystick or game controller into a fully touch sensitive surface.

In addition to tracking a user’s hand and fingers on the controller surface, proximity sensing also tracks finger position in the open space above the controller surface. This provides functionality similar to a glove tracking system, while maintaining the direct tactile feedback and trigger control of a controller. Unique custom flexible sensors allow this solution to fit into almost any industrial design.

【Outline of the Exhibition】

Dates June 27-28, 2018 Venue McEnery Convention Center, San Jose, CA, United States Booth No. 916 (900 Aisle) Other Demonstrations

Magnetic Steering Angle Sensor

Coreless Current Sensor for Automotive

About Alps Electric Co., Ltd.

Alps Electric (Tokyo: 6770) is a leading global manufacturer of high-quality electronic components for mobi le devices, home electronics, vehicles and industrial equipment. With the philosophy of “Perfecting the Art of Electronics,” Alps Electric supplies over 40,000 different components to about 2,000 companies all over the world. For more information, visit http://www.alps.com.

About Cirque Corporation

Cirque is one of the original inventors of capacitive touch technology and continues to push the innovation envelope for new input methods in markets like virtual reality, secure payment and computing. For more about Cirque and the range of solutions we offer, visit http://www.cirque.com.