Cirque Corporation Email Format

Semiconductor ManufacturingUtah, United States51-200 Employees

What is more intuitive than the human touch? That’s what inspired Cirque’s founder almost 30 years ago to provide a better interface solution using capacitive touch technology. At the time trackballs and joysticks for laptops were ok, but using your own fingers to perform simple or complex navigation task was even cooler. So Cirque invented the GlidePoint® Trackpad that has now proven to be a very reliable and versatile user interface for decades. Cirque continues to push the innovation envelope today by providing customers with both custom and standardized solutions for notebook touchpads, VR gaming accessories, secure point of sales touch screens, and proximity sensing capabilities. In 2003, Cirque became a wholly owned subsidiary of Alps Electric Co., Ltd. (6770:JP). In addition to our own products, Cirque functions as an ALPS R&D center for capacitive sensing. Working together with ALPS Electric allows us to refining existing products and introduce Cirque’s capacitive touch technology into countless new applications that improves both the form and function of human interface platforms. Cirque is currently hiring for multiple positions so check out our cirque.com/careers page and apply. We offer competitive benefits as well that elevate our employees lives. Here are just a few: Medical, Dental, and Vision - Cirque pays 100% of the premiums for you and a ­minimum of 85% for your spouse/domestic partner and children. Health Savings Account (HSA) - $5k for Family and $3k for individual HSA deposited per year. Wellness Reimbursement - We give employees $750 each calendar year to go towards wellness activities like, biking, skiing as well as gym memberships. It’s cirques way of promoting healthy life activities. Generous 401k match that is 100% vested on day 1. Recharge with 120 hrs PTO for your first and second year, 160 hrs of PTO after 2 years, and unlimited PTO after 5 years of service.