Corporate Information

Information listed here is shown as of the date of release. Please note that production, sales and programs may be terminated or contents such as specifications and prices may be modified by the time you read this information.

Alps Electric to Introduce Input Device for Autonomous Cars and Other Technologies at CES 2018

＜Exhibit Highlights＞

1. Capacitive Input Device for Automotive Use

For autonomous cars of the future, Alps Electric is putting forward an input device based on capacitive technology that enables gesture and touch input and control of systems around the driver. The device contributes to a comfortable user experience by allowing accurate input, such as selection of menu options, without actually making direct contact with the touch panel. This is achieved using a highly sensitive capacitive sensor, an Alps-developed algorithm and original ASIC design.

The Alps booth will present examples of solutions integrating the device with natural materials such as leather and wood, taking advantage of its excellent sensitivity and accuracy. Visitors to the booth will be able to operate them.

2. HAPTIC™ Trigger Plus

Alps Electric’s force feedback technology is applied in the HAPTIC™ Trigger Plus, a controller that realistically recreates the feel of objects. Besides recreating pressure, vibrations and thermal sensations, HAPTIC™ Trigger Plus includes a feature that senses finger movements using a capacitive sensor, providing for a much more immersive virtual reality control experience.

Visitors to the Alps Electric booth can try the demonstration, which recreates a variety of haptic sensations using items like a stainless steel cup, a snowman or a puppy.

When you are at CES 2018, please stop by the Alps Electric booth.

【Outline of the Exhibition】

Exhibition CES 2018 Dates January 9-12, 2018 Venue Las Vegas Convention and World Trade Center Booth location North Hall Meeting Room N103 Exhibits

Capacitive Input Device for Automotive Use

HAPTIC™ Trigger Plus

Thin Touch Input Module

IoT Sensor Network Module

IoT for Sports Technology

VR Grip™ Platform*

GlidePoint® Circle Trackpads* and more…

*Technologies of Alps Electric group company Cirque Corporation

(Salt Lake City, USA)

【Alps Electric Core Technologies】

Alps Electric possesses core technologies in three areas—human-machine interfaces, sensors and connectivity—and persistently creates electronic components of value for the customer through enrichment and fusion of those technologies.

The company has performed tremendously well in these areas. In the human-machine interface and sensor domains, Alps Electric has been selected as primary supplier of products for applications including smartphones, game consoles and automobiles. And in the connectivity domain, the company led the industry in commencing mass production of V2X modules for vehicle-to-vehicle and vehicle-to-infrastructure communication.