Tom Hanks and Rita Wilson have been married for over 30 years, and we can’t get enough of their endearing and wholesome love.

With such a long-lasting relationship, they clearly know how to make it work when many other celeb couples seem to struggle with the pressures of the industry.

Here are 10+ facts about Tom Hanks and Rita Wilson’s relationship that fans need to know.

1. They met in the early ’80s while filming a sitcom.

Hanks was starring in the ABC sitcom Bosom Buddies at the time when Wilson appeared in an episode about a video dating service.

Hanks was actually married to Samantha Lewes, his college sweetheart, at the time, so they didn’t get together right away.

However, they felt the spark right away.

Even though he was married at the time, Hanks felt right away that Rita Wilson was someone special.

“Rita and I just looked at each other and — kaboing — that was that. I asked Rita if it was the real thing for her, and it just couldn’t be denied,” he told GQ .

2. Then, they starred in a movie together.

After meeting while working on Bosom Buddies , fate further brought them together when they both starred in the 1985 film, Volunteers.

They got to know each other better, but they remained friends as Hanks was still married. But, the seeds of a romantic relationship were clearly there.

3. The start of their relationship was a bit messy.

Hanks felt like his marriage was already broken and that was something was missing when he met Wilson.

He and his first wife split up when their son, Colin, was seven, and their daughter, Elizabeth, was three.

However, the divorce wasn’t finalized until 1987, but he and Rita were together in public in December of 1986.

4. Hanks had a crush on Wilson after seeing her on *The Brady Bunch.*

Wilson’s acting debut was as the cheerleader Pat on The Brady Bunch , and Hanks developed a small crush on her.

“I was actually at a friend of mine’s house when it aired and I remember thinking ‘that girl’s cute,” Hanks said at a movie premiere in 2016.

5. The couple wed in 1988.

After a somewhat messy beginning, the couple was married on April 30, 1988, and they clearly made the right choice as they are still together today.

This just goes to show that finding true love isn’t always a straight, simple path.

6. Hanks says their success is all about “timing” and “maturity.”

When Oprah interviewed Hanks about his marriage in 2001, he explained that their success involved having the willingness to grow and change.

“The success of our relationship was a matter of timing, maturity, and our willingness to have an intimate connection. When I married Rita, I thought, ‘This is going to require some change on my part.'”

7. They rocked some iconic ’80s and ’90s looks together.

Since these two have been together for decades and attended many big Hollywood events over the years, it’s fun to see their style evolve with the times.

They really brought some iconic ’80s and ’90s fashion, and Wilson even gently poked fun at herself in a tweet.

8. Their first child was born in 1990.

While Hanks already had two children, a son, and a daughter, from his first marriage, Hanks and Wilson welcomed their first son on August 4, 1990.

Chester “Chet” Marlon Hanks is also an actor and has appeared on Empire , Shameless , and many other television shows.

9. They played best friends in *Sleepless in Seattle*.

Rom-com fans know that Hanks starred in this Nora Ephron classic alongside Meg Ryan, but not everyone knows that Wilson also acted in the film.

They actually played best friends in the movie instead of love interests which is definitely something that doesn’t happen a lot for celeb couples.

10. Hanks has credited Wilson for a lot of his success.

After winning the Oscar for Best Actor in 1994, Hanks thanked Wilson in the speech and gave her a sweet tribute.

Then, when he won the Best Actor Oscar again in 1995 for Forrest Gump , he thanked her in his speech yet again.

11. Hanks says that Wilson is his “best friend.”

In his same interview with Oprah, Hanks explained another secret to their success was that they were really close friends.

“In addition to being my lover. And it has been that way from the very beginning. We laugh just as much now at two in the morning as we always have. And we fight less and less.”

12. They co-produced *My Big Fat Greek Wedding.*

The rom-com is highly successful and hilarious, but not everyone knows that this power couple co-produced the film.

They also were producers of the film adaption of Mamma Mia! and the sequel, Mamma Mia! Here We Go Again.

13. They grew closer as Rita Wilson fought breast cancer.

Wilson was diagnosed with breast cancer in 2015, but, of course, Hanks was there for her every step of the way.

“You never know how your spouse is going to react in a situation like this. I was so amazed, so blown away by the care my husband gave me…who knew it would make you even closer?” Wilson told The New York Times.

14. Their 30th wedding anniversary was in 2018.

After 30 years of career success, children, health issues, and more, the couple celebrated their marriage lasting three decades in 2018.

We definitely can’t wait to see this amazing couple continue to thrive and grow over the next decades of their marriage.