RITA Wilson is gearing up to support her husband Tom Hanks at his Inauguration Day special, which will air on January 20 to celebrate President Joe Biden and Vice President Kamala Harris.

The actress and producer, who married Hanks in 1988, has starred in several big-name films and television shows throughout her Hollywood career of more than four decades.

Who is Tom Hanks' wife Rita Wilson?

Rita Wilson was born in Los Angeles, California, and began her acting career back in 1972.

As well as working on TV and film, the star has also performed on Broadway.

The 63-year-old is also a singer and songwriter having released the albums AM/FM, Rita Wilson, Bigger Picture, and Halfway to Home.

In March 2019, she received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame.

When did Tom and Rita get married?

Tom and Rita first met in the early 1980s after starring together on an episode of his sitcom, Bosom Buddies, as well as the film Volunteers.

They tied the knot in April 1988 and share sons Chester and Truman.

Tom also has son Colin and daughter Elizabeth with his first wife Samantha, who are Rita's stepsons.

The pair have become one of Hollywood's most beloved couples and starred together in six films: Volunteers (1985), The Bonfire Of The Vanities (1990), That Thing You Do! (1996), Sleepless In Seattle (1993), Magnificent Desolation: Walking On The Moon (2005) and Larry Crowne (2011).

Rita and Tom will appear at an Inauguration Day special to honor Biden and Harris, hours after the two were inaugurated into the White House.

The special will air at 8:30pm on January 20 on NBC, MSNBC, ABC, CBS, and CNN, and will also be live-streamed on YouTube, Facebook, Twitter, Twitch, and Amazon Prime Video.

The list of star-studded performers includes Justin Timberlake, Jon Bon Jovi, and Demi Lovato.

What TV shows and films has Rita starred in?

Rita has had roles in both movies and TV shows during her career but she is best known for:

Volunteers (1985)

Sleepless In Seattle (1993)

Jingle All the Way (1996)

That Thing You Do! (1996)

Runaway Bride (1999)

My Big Fat Greek Wedding (2002)

It's Complicated (2009)

Mamma Mia! (2016)

She also guest-starred on shows such as Frasier, Law & Order: Special Victims Unit, From The Earth To The Moon, Curb Your Enthusiasm, The Good Wife, Girls and Body Of Proof.

What else is Rita known for?

Rita has produced a number of films and shows including My Big Fat Greek Wedding, My Big Fat Greek Life, Mamma Mia! and My Life In Ruins.

She has also been a contributing editor to Harper's Bazaar, Editor at Large of The Huffinton Post's Huff/Post50 and has also written for O, The Oprah Magazine.

On March 11, 2020, Tom and Rita revealed they had caught coronavirus in Australia.

Tom said they tested positive after seeking precautionary medical advice.

Tom, who is in Australia working on director Baz Luhrmann’s untitled Elvis Presley film, said: "We felt a bit tired, like we had colds, and some body aches.

"Rita had some chills that came and went. Slight fevers too.

"To play things right, as is needed in the world right now, we were tested for the coronavirus, and were found to be positive."

He added: "Well now. What to do next? The Medical Officials have protocols that must be followed.

"We Hanks will be tested, observed, and isolated for as long as public health and safety requires.

He continued: "Not much more to it than a one-day-at-a-time approach, no?

"We'll keep the world posted and updated. Take care of yourselves! Hanx!"

The couple are now in isolation in a Gold Coast hospital.

Who is Tom Hanks' first wife?

Tom and Rita began dating in the early 1980s.

The actor was married to his college sweetheart Samantha Lewes when they first met, but Tom and Rita did not begin dating until he had officially ended his marriage.

Actress Samantha grew up in California and met Tom in college, they welcomed their son Colin in 1977 before they tied the knot in 1978.

Tom has since admitted he was too young for marriage at the time: "I was just too young and insecure for marriage.

"I was 23 and my son Colin was already two when I married for the first time. I was not really ready to take on those responsibilities."

Samantha died aged 49 in 2002 following a tragic battle with bone cancer.