September is a great time of year to visit the United Kingdom, with fewer tourists around than the peak summer months and mild weather. We recommend visiting Stonehenge, London, Edinburgh, and Oxford. Keep reading for more about travel and weather, including temperatures, rainfall, humidity, and tips for September.

United Kingdom Weather in September: Overview

Averages:

Temperature range: 10–18°C (51–64°F)

Rainfall: 8 cm (3 inches)

Rainy days: 12

Sunshine hours/day: 6

Humidity: around 73% (wet and a little humid throughout the country)

September marks the beginning of autumn in the United Kingdom, with a slight drop in temperatures, particularly towards the end of the month. There are still plenty of sunny days, with an average of 6 hours of sunshine per day, and you can expect a high of around 18°C (64°F) on average.

In terms of rain, September sees around 12 rainy days with approximately 8 cm (3 inches) of rainfall on average. The good news is that the rain usually doesn't persist all day in September, so as long as you've got an indoor destination planned as a backup you should be able to still enjoy your travels.

Discover real reviews of Highlights Travel Family's best-rated service across trusted platforms.

September Climate Comparison (Averages) for the United Kingdom's Top Tourism Areas

The Best Places to Visit in the United Kingdom in September

For visitors looking to explore the United Kingdom in September, there are so many great places to choose from. Given that the warmth at the beginning of September is still similar to the United Kingdom's summer temperatures, and that the end of the month is just a little milder, we would recommend exploring indoors as well as the outdoors.

In September we recommend starting off your adventures in London, then heading up to Oxford, west to Stonehenge, and also heading further up north to the beautiful Edinburgh.

1. See London from the Top of the London Eye

For some of the best views of London, we recommend taking a ride on the famous London Eye. From there, you'll be able to see all over the Thames and spot Big Ben, the Houses of Parliament, St Paul's Cathedral, as well as some of the impressive skyscrapers that make up the commercial city of London.

Afterwards, we recommend heading over to Borough Market to explore the shops and food stalls that are available there. The market is open every day except Mondays, and is a great spot for some lunch.

There is of course a lot more to see in London. To find out some of our other suggestions, we recommend checking out some of our previous pieces about visiting London, for example visiting the United Kingdom in April or visiting the United Kingdom in July, for more about exploring London's parks.

2. Admire the Beautiful Architecture at Oxford's Famous Colleges

If you've ever had an interest in the United Kingdom, you've undoubtedly heard of Oxford and its famous Oxford University, home to some of the most beautiful colleges. For those visiting in September, we recommend visiting Oxford, which can be done as a day trip from London by train, or you could spend the night there.

Here, take a walking tour through the old city to admire the impressive architecture, and head on over to Christ Church College (whose dining hall mirrors the one used in Hogwarts!), Magdalen College, and the University Church of St Mary the Virgin.

Afterwards, or in case you get a little bit of rain, we do recommend spending some time exploring the Bodleian Libraries as well as the Ashmolean Museum, and there is also the beautiful Oxford Museum of Natural History which is particularly great if you are traveling with your family.

3. Visit Ancient Stonehenge

Stonehenge has captured the interest of scholars and historians, as well as mystics, for centuries. Nobody knows exactly how it was built, considering the fact that the megaliths weigh up to 30 tons, but we do know that it served to align with the solstice. During the summer solstice, the sun rises precisely over the Heel Stone, with rays shining into the middle circle.

However, Stonehenge is worth visiting at any time throughout the year (in fact the solstices there are incredibly busy and you will be unlikely to get close to it).

The ways that the megaliths were built together make for an impressive sight, and we would recommend bringing a tour guide so that you can learn about the history of the site, both what we know and what we don't know.

4. Finish Off Your United Kingdom Tour in Edinburgh, Scotland's Capital

We do also recommend going over to Edinburgh, the capital of Scotland. There you can visit some of the royal buildings, such as Holyroodhouse, the official residence for the British monarch, but there are also some lovely walks and hikes in the area, for example to Arthur's Seat.

For more information about this please read our article about visiting the United Kingdom in February.

End of High Season: Some Crowds and a Little More Expensive

Since September marks the end of the tourist season in the United Kingdom, with the school holidays still ongoing in some neighboring European countries, there will be some crowds during your time in the United Kingdom. Prices might also be a little higher than in the cooler months, so we do recommend booking ahead where possible to avoid disappointment.

What to Wear in September

September's weather in the United Kingdom is a mix between mild and the occasional cool or warm day. We would recommend bringing both a few summer items just in case, as well as some more autumnal items. Jeans would be a good idea, along with a jumper or a hoodie or a sweater.

There is the potential for the temperature to drop a little bit, particularly if you are going to visit Edinburgh, so we do recommend bringing a light jacket just in case. We would also suggest bringing a waterproof jacket or an umbrella should you come across a little bit of rain.

Monthly Weather in United Kingdom