Q. Where is hot in September 2024?

A. As autumn begins to creep into Northern Europe, September is a wonderful time of year in the Mediterranean with temperatures of 25-29ºC, warm seas and uncrowded resorts. In recent years, the weather in the UK has also been very good.

I think September is one of the best months for a holiday. It’s still hot in the Mediterranean with lashings of sunshine: as a rule, the further south you go, the hotter it gets. Cyprus can average as high as 32ºC.

It’s also a great time to pick up a cheap holiday deal. These are my personal recommendations with links to companies tested and approved by our editors. Also see the best singles holidays in September.

* Did you know you can save up to 40% on holiday prices? See our latest travel deals and enter your email address below to get updates every fortnight.

Nice, France

Average temperature in September: 24ºC

Hours of daily sunshine: 8

Flying time from UK: 2 hours

You don’t need to travel a long way south to find warm weather in September. Take the Eurostar or fly to glamorous destinations such as Nice and St Tropez in the South of France. It’s not the hottest place in Europe in September but it consistently has some of the best weather. This is also an excellent month to visit the gorgeous French island of Corsica where you’ll find deals on apartments and villas (check out the special offers in September).

Crete, Greece

Average temperature in September: 26ºC

Hours of daily sunshine: 10

Flying time from UK: 4 hours

Fly further south and you’ll get warmer temperatures and longer days of sunshine. Crete is the most southerly of the Greek islands (and my personal favourite) and one of the hottest beach holiday destinations in September. Beware: it can be a bit too hot for sightseeing in the middle of the day. Cool down in one of these lovely villas (see the latest deals). If you want a family hotel, we recommend the GK Beach Hotel.

Also consider: the smaller island of Kos, which enjoys similar temperatures. Our editors like the all-inclusive IKOS Aria resort.

Halkidiki, Greece

Average temperature in September: 26ºC

Hours of daily sunshine: 9

Flying time from UK: 3 hours 15 minutes

Until recently, Halkidiki on the Greek mainland was a well-kept secret, but now many people are discovering its pristine beaches, traditional villages and pine forests. For me, the best places to stay are the Sani Resort and the upmarket all-inclusive hotels, IKOS Olivia and IKOS Oceania. For each of these, we’ve negotiated a £250 discount exclusively for our readers. See more holiday ideas in Greece and our guide to the hottest places in Greece in September.

Also consider: if you want real heat, head to Cyprus where the mercury regularly tops 32°C in September.

Malta

Average temperature in September: 29ºC

Hours of daily sunshine: 9

Flying time from UK: 3 hours 10 minutes

The historic island of Malta is one of the hottest destinations in the Mediterranean and it has some good-value four-star and five-star hotels. Take a look at the latest special offers.

Also consider: the often-overlooked island of Menorca which has sandy beaches, lovely harbours and unspoilt villages. We think you’ll like these villas with private pool.

Azores, Portugal

Average temperature in September: 25ºC

Hours of daily sunshine: 6

Flying time from UK: 4 hours

For something different, how about the Azores, a collection of nine Portuguese islands in the Atlantic with lush volcanic countryside, uncrowded beaches and some of the best whale and dolphin watching in Europe. It’s also perfect for walking and cycling. See more holiday ideas in Portugal and our guide to the hottest places in Portugal in September.

Also consider: exploring the beautiful island of Mallorca (just keep away from the package resorts).

Aquitaine, France

Average temperature in September: 23ºC

Hours of daily sunshine: 8

Flying time from UK: 1 hour 35 minutes (to La Rochelle)

The coastline of Aquitaine in south-west France is a lovely stretch of wide sandy beaches, dunes, seafood and surfing. There are some gorgeous villas to rent or you could base yourself on the chic little island of Ile de Ré connected by bridge from the mainland. It’s an amazing destination for lazing on the beach, eating at oyster shacks and cycling between charming little villages.

See more holiday ideas in France and our guide to where’s hot in France in September.

Sardinia, Italy

Average temperature in September: 27ºC

Hours of daily sunshine: 8

Flying time from UK: 2 hours 30 minutes

Why compromise when you have the pick of the best resorts in September? The charming island of Sardinia will be basking in late summer sun and you can enjoy the white sand beaches and turquoise seas without the crowds, because the Italians all tend to holiday in August. It’s a similar picture in Sicily which has wonderful weather in September – discover the historic town of Taormina with views of Mount Etna. Check out these hip-and-good-value places to stay. In the deep south of Italy, where the beaches of Puglia will be hot.

Also consider: Tuscany where you can get good deals on luxury villas, and the Amalfi Coast where you can stay in a classic hotel in pretty Sorrento. Find more holiday destinations in Italy.

Kalkan, Turkey

Average temperature in September: 30ºC

Hours of daily sunshine: 11

Flying time from UK: 4 hours (to Dalaman)

Its beautiful Aegean Coast – dubbed the Turquoise Coast for the colour of the sea – is far enough south to enjoy hot temperatures throughout September. I recommend you avoid the bigger holiday centres and instead seek out small authentic resorts such as Kalkan and Fethiye.

Also consider: a gulet cruise in Turkey. It’s a glorious way to explore this beautiful coastline.

Jordan

Average temperature in September: 29ºC

Hours of daily sunshine: 11

Flying time from UK: 5 hours

If you want adventure and spectacle, head to Jordan, a compact country that is home to both natural and man-made treasures, including the rock-carved city of Petra, the Dead Sea, Mount Nebo, Jerash and the deserts and dunes of Wadi Rum. You’ll need at least a week to do it justice but this 8-day Splendours of Jordan tour includes all the key highlights. See a full selection of small-group tours in Jordan.

Croatia

Average temperature in September: 25ºC

Hours of daily sunshine: 8

Flying time from UK: 2 hours 30 minutes

Croatia has gradually grown in popularity over recent years as more people discover its beautiful Adriatic coastline, hundreds of pretty islands, beautifully-preserved Venetian ports and hilltop villages. Best known is Dubrovnik, a beautiful walled city, but there are so many more options such as Split which offers easy ferry access to the islands of Hvar and tiny laid-back Vis. In the north, I recommend the lesser-visited region of Istria where you can escape the crowds in the village of Fazana and the wonderful Brijuni islands.See our guide to where’s hot in Croatia in September.

Hottest short-haul destinations in September

Destination Average temperature Average hours of sun Monthly rainfall (mm) Marrakech 31ºC 9 11 Malta 29ºC 9 22 Jordan 29ºC 11 1 Kalkan 28ºC 11 15 Crete 27ºC 10 16 Sardinia 27ºC 8 17 Rome 26ºC 8 57 Barcelona 25ºC 8 91 Dubrovnik 25ºC 8 97 Azores 25ºC 6 93 Nice 24ºC 8 73 Venice 23ºC 6 64

Short breaks in September

If you’ve used up all your holiday allowance – or just fancy getting away for a few days of sunshine – September is also an excellent month for a European city break. In Spain, Madrid and Barcelona both enjoy temperatures in the mid-20s, although Barcelona has the advantage of a city beach. Further south, Seville is still very hot, with temperatures around 32°C, so you’ll want to pace yourself and avoid the midday sun. See where’s hottest in Spain in September.

In Italy, Florence reaches 26°C and Rome 27°C – ideal temperatures for some lazy sightseeing and al fresco meals. See how hot is Italy in September.

Venice – never the best place to visit in high summer – is starting to become civilised again as the crowds drift away. The ultimate way to get there is on the Orient-Express from London. You can also join a luxury hotel barge cruise in the Venetian lagoon.

It’s only a two-hour flight to Budapest, a good-value city that is packed with fascinating sights. And if you really enjoy the heat, head to Morocco.

Long haul destinations

September is one of the best months to visit Africa. It’s spring in Southern Africa and the dry, warm weather makes conditions perfect for game spotting as the animals congregate around the water holes. In Botswana and Tanzania you can expect temperatures of up to 28°C.

The Masai Mara in Kenya is a pleasant 24°C while the Victoria Falls – accessible from either Zambia or Zimbabwe – hits 29°C.

It’s a wonderful time to visit the USA after the heat and crowds of summer. You could experience one of the world’s most scenic road trips on this 12-day Pacific Coast Self Drive Tour or take the Northern California Loop to Yosemite and Lake Tahoe. The second half of September is one of the best times to see the New England Autumn Colours.

In the beautiful state of Tennessee you can explore the music capitals of Memphis and Nashville and take a road trip along the Mississippi and into the Great Smoky Mountains. Expect highs around 28ºC.

The paradise island destinations of the Indian Ocean are hot in September. The Seychelles and the Maldives both hover around the 30°C mark. It’s a perfect time to be in Madagascar where you can laze on white sand beaches and discover the island’s unique flora and fauna.

It’s generally thought best to avoid the Caribbean in September because of the risk of hurricanes.

Much of South East Asia is hot and wet in September, so I’d avoid Thailand, Malaysia and Vietnam. One of the best destinations at this time is Bali where you can expect temperatures of around 33°C and minimal rainfall. The weather in Sri Lanka should be fine and dry with temperatures around 29°C. Beyond the beaches, you’ll find these unique holiday experiences.

It’s still hot in September in Egypt and Dubai. Unless you are in search of blistering heat, you should perhaps save these destinations for later in the autumn or winter.

Hottest long-haul destinations in September

Destination Average temperature (ºC) Average hours of sun Monthly rainfall (mm) Dubai 37ºC 10 2 Bangkok 33ºC 6 280 Mauritius 28ºC 8 75 Maldives 28ºC 7 140 Seychelles 28ºC 8 122 Bali 27ºC 9 50 Colombo 27ºC 7 240 Botswana 26ºC 10 2 Barbados 26ºC 9 150 Nairobi 25ºC 9 60

What are the hottest places in September?

Dubai (37ºC) is the hottest holiday destination in September followed by Bangkok (33ºC). In the Indian Ocean, the Maldives, Mauritius and the Seychelles will all average 28ºC. However, there is a large difference in rainfall in September. Dubai and other Gulf states such as Abu Dhabi and Qatar will see almost no rain, while Bangkok can expect 280mm of monthly rainfall. The Maldives and Seychelles will be wetter than Mauritius.

Hottest short-haul destinations in September

The hottest short-haul destination is Marrakech (31ºC), just three hours flying time from the UK. In Europe, the best choice is Malta (29ºC) followed by Turkey (28ºC), Crete (27ºC) and Sardinia (27ºC). The highest average daily hours of sunshine can be found in Turkey (11 hours) and Jordan (11 hours) followed by Crete (10 hours).

For more inspirational holiday ideas, see our full list of recommended September holidays and the best honeymoons in September.

Compare months

January – February – March – April – May – June – July – August – September – October – November – December

Up to 40% off your next holiday

* Did you know you can save up to 40% on holiday prices? See our latest travel deals and enter your email address below to get updates every fortnight.