This is a classic teen movie from my era – it has become a film of cheesy nostalgia. If you watched and loved it as a teen, you’ll watch and love it as an adult. Starring young Demi Lovato and the Jonas Brothers, this was peak Disney Channel movie time. Forget about the new stuff, this was when Disney Channel was excellent. The era of Hannah Montana, Wizards of Waverly Place, Phineas and Ferb and That’s So Raven. ‘Camp Rock’ is solidly in the middle of this classic era.

Mitchie (Demi Lovato) has always wanted to go to Camp Rock, a musical camp over the summer holidays. One year, her wish comes true and she is able to go. However, when she arrives, she believes that her mother working as the cook is an embarrassing truth so instead lies to be considered more “popular”. With obvious holes in her lies, she continues on through her Camp Rock experience trying to hide the truth. Meanwhile, teen idol Shane Gray (Joe Jonas) is forced to make an appearance and become an instructor for the Camp Rockers. As he’s convinced he just wants to get back to his famous life as a musician, he instead goes on a journey himself to find the reason he fell in love with music in the first place. He returns to his routes when he sets out to find the talented and mysterious girl who sang the song which took him back many years. I wonder who that could have been…

As we are at Camp Rock, this movie is also a musical. You could have guessed with Demi Lovato and the Jonas Brothers starring. I’m not going to lie, I do love some of these songs. ‘This is Me’ has to be a Disney Channel belter, sung by Demi Lovato, of course it is extremely well sung! I also love ‘Play My Music’, which stars the Jonas Brothers. A large part of my teenage phase was dominated by the love of both Demi Lovato and the Jonas Brothers (I would be lying if I said this didn’t continue into my 20s), so ‘Camp Rock’ is obviously a film I do adore!

‘Camp Rock’ is completely and utterly cheesy through and through. The acting is awkward, the plot is even more so. But that’s what makes it such a teen movie classic! I whole-heartedly accept that this is a terrible film in all cinematic ways possible. But I still cannot help but just appreciate the nostalgia this movie has created. It’s just simply joyous and easy to watch. Within all the awkwardness, there is just stupid comedy and great songs. It’s on the same parallel as films like ‘Hannah Montana the Movie’, however, I will forever believe ‘Hannah Montana the Movie’ is better because that just holds a special place in my heart.

I am a child at heart and I still love to watch the newest Disney films. So yes at the age of 24, no longer having the excuse of a little brother to go see kids films with (as he’s “too old” for them now as a teenager), I will still happily watch them because Disney continues to create excellent animations. I’m pleased to announce that this one is no different. ‘Raya and the Last Dragon’ is a beautiful film with an exceptional story which is told perfectly. I loved the entire movie from beginning to end.

As an adventure story, this plot is fantastic. The whole thing is so cohesive and makes sense perfectly within its world. Obviously within the fantasy world, rather than a truthful one as many Disney revolves in fantasy worlds. The realm we travel to in ‘Raya and the Last Dragon’ are the five lands of Kumandra: Fang, Heart, Spine, Talon and Tail. The five lands are all named after the parts of a dragon which they all cherish and worship. When sinister monsters named Druuns take over, everyone they consume turns to stone including all of the dragons. A young warrior of the land Heart takes upon the challenge to track down the legend that the last dragon is hidden in a river somewhere on the realm. The entire mythical story is told so beautifully and simply, although it feels so fresh and different from a lot of other Disney films. It is joyful to become absorbed into this magical world.

The animation is brilliant, although we’ve come to expect this excellence from Disney. But if I had to choose one thing that made this Disney Classic so super, it would have to be the characters. For starters, the character of Raya is fantastic. ‘Raya and the Last Dragon’ doesn’t explore a romantic side (because women are not damsels in distress), instead it highlights powerful women warriors. Not just Raya, but Namaari, the Princess warrior of Fang, too. What I loved about Raya the most was that she wasn’t a perfect character, she had a learn along the way, particularly learn to trust again. But also, there were times when she didn’t act perfectly, but was absorbed by rage instead. It felt like these Disney characters felt real human emotions. As we continue along the journey, many characters join Raya as she travels across the realm. I loved the addition of all of these characters, they were all so different but fun too. The one thing that connected them all together was that they all were victims of the Druuns in some way.

There were many emotions throughout this adventure film. I became absorbed into the adventure of the plot, it was fun to travel along this journey with the characters, especially seeing the different realms. But there was also the standard Disney comedy throughout. For example, the dragon is very funny. She made me giggle multiple times throughout the film. Along with some comedy, this animation actually made me cry also. I became so wrapped up in the story, that I found it so moving to watch. With comedy and moving scenes, we had some action scenes too.

Of course, there is a moral to the story. I do think in the times that were going through, of what 2020 and 2021 have been, this moral does hit home. It’s all about trust. And yes, it may be overdone and exaggerated (it is a kids film), but the simplicity of the moral being about trusting people is very heart-warming and important.

I thought ‘Raya and the Last Dragon’ was a superb film. I truly thought it was beautiful from beginning to end. I enjoyed learning about the new characters and the legends that this new realm embodies. It was a fun adventure to get lost into. I had a giggle, I had a cry, it’s Disney through and through. It shouldn’t be underestimated and actually should be celebrated more of how good it was! A top-notch Disney animation in my opinion! Plus Raya has a sidekick and he’s just adorable.

I believe everyone must acknowledge the craze and success of the original ‘Frozen’ back in 2013. Even if “Disney isn’t your thing” or “you’ve outgrown it” (which are two things I don’t believe could be true), you must recognise that ‘Frozen’ hit everywhere. The amount of Elsa and Anna costumes became an obsession, the singing of ‘Let it Go’ was around every corner – ‘Frozen’ really did hit a wide audience. So, in 2019, when the second Frozen was released, you would expect the exact same trend would occur again. Although many rushed to see ‘Frozen II’, I don’t think it quite managed the success from the first film.

Unfortunately, I cannot say ‘Frozen II’ has the strongest plot. Compared to the original, it is quite similar and that is a shame. It’s the same story of Elsa in search of her powers to discover more. This time a voice leads her into the Enchanted Woods. Now, I do like this change in scenery. The Enchanted Woods is a fantastic new setting, with winds with their own minds, with new creatures and mist to explore the mystery of the unknown. It is exciting to delve into this new fantasy world.

Of course, most Disney films are musicals and this one is no different. I would say the most successful song of this film has to be ‘Into the Unknown’ and it is a great one. The majority of the other songs are not as memorable. They are no ‘Love is an Open Door’ or ‘Do You Want to Build a Snowman’, ‘Fixer Upper’ or ‘In Summer’. Nevertheless, ‘Frozen II’ songs are still enjoyable to watch. They are performances in their own plots and the emotion executed across the film is heartfelt. Of course, Idina Menzel is fantastic in her songs, her voice just as strong and emotional from the first film. I will also always be a big fan of Kristen Bell voicing Anna.

One of the highlights of ‘Frozen II’ has to be the comedy. There is comedy throughout but one character is the main reason for this. Once again, Josh Gad voicing Olaf is fantastic. He has some of the most hilarious one-liners. Whether he’s asking where Samantha is, explaining in brutally honest ways of Elsa and Anna’s past or realising he is feeling other emotions for a snowman; Olaf is extremely amusing. Olaf is the best part of the film, bringing so much joy and hilarity.

I did enjoy this film; it ticks many of the boxes of what a Disney Classic is. However, due to the weak plot it isn’t as amazing as it potentially could have been. ‘Frozen II’ isn’t a film that I would watch over and over again (and trust me there are many Disney Classics that I would watch repeatedly). I do wish the songs were more memorable, rather than an echo of the voice heard in the woods in every song. I don’t know whether ‘Frozen II’ could actually have ever repeated the success of the first film, so for what it is, they’ve done a decent job. We explore Elsa’s magical powers in more detail and understand more of the past of Arendelle and the Enchanted Woods. Although, I did become confused by inevitable saving grace that ended the film. For a good laugh with Olaf this film is cracking.

Disney Classic no. 53, another Disney film. In a world of advanced technology, we venture into the scientific brain of young Hiro. When a villain erupts into the city of San Fransokyo, a group of high-tech heroes band together including young Hiro and an unlikely friend, a robot named Baymax.

I personally think Baymax is the highlight of the entire film. This inflatable robot gets me into fits of giggles. The simplicity of just pointing out the obvious is classic. Or him learning of what a fist bump is and getting it tragically wrong. Or even better the hilarious moment when the poor robot has low battery. I adore this robot, made to help the people around him, he is the centre of the show who brings the comedy and the tears. Without this cuddly robot that just wants to do good, the film wouldn’t have been nearly as amazing as it is.

‘Big Hero 6’, alike to many Disney films, has a much deeper meaning across the film. This Disney Classic does not follow the route of the hero doing everything correctly, instead it proposes the opposite. The underlining theme of this film is grief – the hurt, loss and anger. Within tackling such strong emotions, the film is so clever in creating sadness and laughter.

Overall, I believe ‘Big Hero 6’ to be yet another fantastic Disney Classic. The film explodes with technological heroes saving the world, along with sci-fi elements of advanced scientific knowledge. I can’t really explain when this film is set but it does seem futuristic – particularly with the robot. There’s action and adventure, also comedy which does make me laugh out loud. Finally, there are moments of heart-breaking sadness – yes it’s another film I cry in… If I’ve not given enough reasons to add this film to the watchlist, then just watch for Baymax!

Another Classic Disney film I can’t fault. ‘Wreck-It Ralph’ is such a beautiful story of friendship with a genuinely good plot too, plus great animation (as always from Disney) and some fun-loving characters.

‘Wreck-It Ralph’ follows its namesake, from the game Fix-It Felix Junior, the bad guy, Ralph, feels unwanted and out-of-place in his own arcade game. In a desperate plea to be recognised for his need in the game and to be more liked by the good guys, Ralph leaves his game, wonders into Game Central Station and into another game. After discovering at the end of Hero’s Duty a medal can be won, Ralph wants anything to prove he can be a good guy and earn his own medal. However, as he tries to be someone that he is not, he ends up wrecking more things. Ralph ends up in the game Sugar Rush when an unlikely bond forms with a “glitch”, Vanellope.

I do love this Disney Classic. The plot has a lot to it where more than what you’re watching is going on. This makes it quite interesting with different subplots other than the main one revolving around Ralph. The film never gets boring! The whole idea of the film invested inside arcade games felt so different and fun. Where even the idea of characters travelling through plugs to meet other characters as their route of travel was so cleverly refreshing on screen. I just loved every aspect.

There are also some pretty recognisable voices in this animation. Such as John C. Reilly, Jack McBrayer, Jane Lynch (Sue Sylvester from ‘Glee’), Adam Tudyk, Mindy Kaling, Joe Lo Truglio (Charles Boyle from ‘Brooklyn Nine-Nine’) and Ed O’Neill (Jay Pritchett from ‘Modern Family’). All the voices are well-suited and the characters are all so different being from many recognisable arcade games such as Pac-Man, even Bowser from Super Mario Bros and many others.

Of course as a Disney film there is a clear moral within the story. ‘Wreck-It Ralph’ tells a message of friendship and being accepted as who you are, that a simple label doesn’t define you. It really plays on the heart strings, even made me tear up a little. The friendship between Ralph and Vanellope is so adorable and should be loved by the audience!

As Disney are doing remakes, I think everyone was excited to find that Disney’s next project was the classic ‘The Lion King’ from 1994. Everyone must know the story of ‘The Lion King’ – it contains one of the most distressing moments in Disney films, the death of a beloved lion king. This film only makes this moment seem more real, more heart-breaking in Simba’s pleas for help and Mufasa’s stillness in the gorge.

This film is so visually pleasing, it’s a beautiful film in its special effects. It follows the 1994 version extremely accurately. Except there are a few differences, which are happily welcomed. There seems to be more of a context, a background story, between Scar and Mufasa. Additionally, there are a few new songs. The songs are taken a little more realistically, rather than animals standing upon each other like in ‘I Just Can’t Wait To Be King’ – where in the animation this was a fantastic spectacle, the new film takes a turn in adding to this realistic feel of these Pride Lands. ‘In the Jungle’ was a brilliant scene, with the animals dancing, the immense jungle in which the “outcasts” have been left with is stunning and explored during this song amongst other scenes. I cannot forget to mention the little snap of a beloved song from another Disney film, which I loved!

Now with the songs, as it is a musical, I can’t say all the songs were better than the original, however all were enjoyable. I can’t say I’m the biggest fan of Beyoncé (I know unpopular opinion), and she seemed to make the songs a lot more flowery than the classic originals. For example, I definitely prefer the original of ‘Can You Feel The Love Tonight’. Although saying this, it didn’t take anything away from the film as obviously the songs have to be sung again for a remake!

Pumbaa and Timon are excellent as usual! They hold so much comical spirit. With Seth Rogen voicing Pumbaa I wasn’t certain if I would like the outcome, but I was so wrong with this one! He was excellent. I loved the new twist to ‘Hakuna Matata’ with it’s added comical moments. Also, Pumbaa’s brilliant line of “I may run away from Hyenas, but I stand up to bullies” was fabulous. Pumbaa and Timon seem to have more to say in this film and hold a lot more as characters than just the friends Simba found when he ran away. They are brilliant characters in both the 1994 and 2019 versions.

The whole movie seemed to hold a lot of modern elements in its meanings. Which should be loved by the audience in the strength of the female characters not just male on screen. Scar still creeps me out, he has to be one of the darkest villains on Disney screen. There does seem to be more violent in this film, compared the first original, which is probably why it’s actually a PG rather than a U. I really did enjoy this new remake. Loved that they kept the voice actor of Mufasa as James Earl Jones the same as the original too! ‘The Lion King’ (2019) is a visually beautiful film which holds the best elements of the original and adds some new great additions too. I don’t know whether it would beat the original classic version, because that will always hold as one of the best Disney Classics in nostalgia and perfect songs. I do prefer Rowan Atkinson as Zazu too. Nevertheless, both are enjoyable and still an emotional rollercoaster whenever Mufasa is on screen.

Fall into a new fantasy adventure of the Disney Classic ‘Dumbo’. From 1941 to 2019, Tim Burton reimagines this emotional tale of a circus and an elephant whose looks are different from others. Ridiculed and misunderstood by its large ears, the baby elephant has to perform for laughs. But soon, they discover this calf is only one that has a secret talent: it can fly!

As we all know, Disney Classics are coming out as live-action films quicker than anything – maybe not as quick as Marvel at the minute, but you get my point. From ‘Beauty and the Beast’ to the waiting of the new ‘Lion King’; ‘Dumbo’ has been released as a live-action film to reminisce all the way back to 1941. I don’t know about anyone else, but ‘Dumbo’ hasn’t been one that I always jump too when I watch Disney Classics, but after watching this remake, it only intrigues me to re-watch the film I’ve seen so many years ago! As it’s been a while, I can’t comment on the similarities between the two, but I do believe, as you would always assume, Tim Burton has put his magical twist to reinvent this wonderful tale.

This is truly a beautiful tale; it is so emotional! The graphics are phenomenal in bringing in the life of the circus, you become invested in this adorable little elephant. An elephant whose emotions are felt by the whole audience, and you can’t not have a little tear up when he’s feeling down. And understandably so! This elephant goes through a lot!

Furthermore, I thought the addition of these excellent actors who pave the way for Dumbo’s journey is also magnificent. The two children, Milly (Nico Parker) and Joe (Finley Hobbins) Farrier have an adorable love for the elephant as we watch them teach him how to fly. And I cannot forget the flawed character of the circus leader, Max Medici, whose want for greed and money, transfers into him discovering the need of a family. I only mention this character due to the brilliance of its actor, Danny DeVito, bringing this character to life in the forefront of the circus. But also, he has the comical unwanted duo sketch with the rebellious monkey. All the personalities in this film have deeper real-life challenges, which only brings the characters to life in a more realistic way on screen. This is not only a film of an elephant, but one of a family in a circus altogether.

This remake definitely has a deeper emotional moral embedded into the film. It feels real to watch, making it become even more hard-hitting of how animals can be treated. It’s a film that paints a moral of looking after our animals and ending animal cruelty. Don’t be expecting a film to have a good laugh, instead it becomes one of drama and chaos, but brilliance and satisfying to the end. Watch as all the characters develop in spirit and personality throughout the film, as new enemies rise and old challenges have to be faced. If that doesn’t make you want to watch this magical film, just watch the sheer spirit in little Dumbo and his feather.

Disney Classic number 44, so yes it’s not one of the older classics, however that does not mean it is not a good one. This Disney Classic might be less known than the older ones, such as ‘Bambi’, or ‘Pinocchio’, or even ‘The Jungle Book’, and no it isn’t a Disney Princess film either. This is a review highlighting the greatest of ‘Brother Bear’ and emphasising that this film is a Classic Disney film, even if one that not as many have seen and that is where things should change as it is one to watch.

So if you know the plot of ‘Brave’, this is similar, but I have to say, ‘Brother Bear’ is the original animation of a person being turned into a bear! As much as I love ‘Brave’, it came out in 2012, ‘Brother Bear’ 2003. Although saying this, there is of course a different reason and altogether a different plot, just happens they’re both turned into bears, I guess that’s where the similarities end. Where the Queen in ‘Brave’ is turned because her daughter put a spell on her, Kenai (Joaquin Phoenix) is turned by the spirits to teach him a lesson of the importance of being a man. Straight away from the beginning, we notice what sort of person Kenai is, he glides through life in hope of becoming a strong, brave man, but when he is given his totem and it is the bear of love, he is repulsed as he didn’t get bravery or strength. The film moves on quickly escalating when a tragedy hits, and out of anger Kenai tries to avenge what has happened, unfortunately this isn’t the way to go, so he is turned into a bear by the spirits to learn a more important lesson of how love can influence life.

It’s along his journey we hit the comedy of the film, but also some emotional and heart-warming moments. Furthermore, a realisation in the film which is actually quite heart-breaking, and done so well to be emotional and hit the audience powerfully. There is a moral to the story but this is obvious for Disney films. This moral yes might not be so different from other films, but it is executed in a different way. There is love and there is family, amongst humans and bears.

Anyway, on this journey, there are some great characters that we meet. We can never forget the two characters that I always remember ever since I was little from when I first watched this film, the two moose. They stand out as the comedy of the film, still great to this day. Rutt (Rick Moranis – Dad in ‘Honey, I Shrunk the Kids’ and Seymour in ‘Little Shop of Horrors’) and Tuke (Dave Thomas). They are the memory of the film in my opinion, they truly are great and bring so much comedy, their stupidity, their jokiness, it’s all brilliant in the film. There are also two other characters, which aren’t in the film for long at all, but they bring dumb stupid humour as well. On his travels, Kenai meets a young cub separated from his mother, this is Koda (Jeremy Suarez), an adorable young cub who influences more of the moral of the story than anything else, but just a great main protagonist within the film.

Don’t assume that because it’s a Disney Classic it is a musical, because this one isn’t. Although, saying this there is a soundtrack and it has one of my favourite Disney songs on it. The soundtrack done by the same as ‘Tarzan’, Phil Collins, in which he does do some pretty amazing Disney chill songs. In ‘Brother Bear’ this being ‘On My Way’, which is great in my opinion. Even though ‘Brother Bear’ isn’t a musical, it is clever in the way how the music is so influential in this film. The soundtrack is occasionally used in this film to portray the emotions of the characters without them saying anything, when we already know what is supposed to be said but instead the music takes over and we witness the facial expressions. It is very clever for the audience to witness. There is particularly one part where they do this and it is very powerful for the audience (bringing my little brother to tears, and probably many others).

So as you can probably tell, this is a positive review as I believe more should jump to knowing what this film is about and that it is a Classic Disney. I would definitely recommend it. It is also quite a short film, only 85 minutes and it flies through, with actually quite a lot being said. This is a great film and should not be ignored. Come and watch Kenai take his journey from boy to man.

This has to be one of my favourite Disney Classics. Number 36. And not to be forgotten or lost in the mass. This is one of the Disney films projecting a strong moral to the story, I know all Disney films send a message, but this one in particular is different to others before it, and should be acknowledged as one of the most important ones.

If you haven’t seen this film or even know the plot, then I will explain now. ‘Mulan’ is set in China, and when China are under attack by the Huns led by Shan Yu, the only thing they can do is to build an army strong enough to defeat them. This brings in Mulan, a young woman who doesn’t quite fit in, she’s not like all the other girls, the ones who put beauty first, that they must be married off to a great man and uphold the family honour. Instead, Mulan values thought and knowledge. When her injured father is called to the army, Mulan does the only thing she can think of, which happens to be high treason… Pretend she is male and fight in the place of her father so he would not have to go. Mulan, now Ping, is transported into a different life, but luckily she has the help of one of her ancestors, guaranteed it is one ancestor that was demoted, but nevertheless he is there every step of the way, this is Mushu (a voice you would probably recognise as Eddie Murphy – even if you only recognise it through Donkey from ‘Shrek’). Mushu is one of the best characters, he is comical, spirited, and definitely an improvement in the film, without him it wouldn’t be as near as great, and yes that does go to Eddie Murphy as he does it so excellently! However, it’s not just Mulan and Mushu, of course she has her horse and the luckiest cricket, because of course it is Disney, there needs to be animals!

‘Mulan’ is a musical, although not so much as other films, especially newer films. Also, they aren’t the best Disney songs out there, though I do love ‘I’ll Make a Man Out of You’ and of course the most popular of the film, ‘Reflection’. Oh, there’s ‘A Girl Worth Fighting For’, as well! Other than that, I can’t actually remember any other songs, maybe there isn’t many others, or maybe they just don’t stick out as much. I think one of the reasons for this is that the actors that voice the characters, don’t do the singing, they have different singing actors to those speaking. But regardless of this, I don’t think it makes much of a difference, yes it’s less of a musical, but still a classic great film. The film more revolves around the plot of the story, rather than the film being carried by songs.

So the moral of the film, is very gender based. It’s a Disney film of women being able to act the same as men and do the same things as them as well, for them to be taken more seriously than just marriage. Obviously a very important message, this has changed now anyway but it is a film set in the past, being made in 1998. I think this makes ‘Mulan’ a film so different from the older Disney’s, especially if you go back to the beginning. ‘Snow White’ is so different to ‘Mulan’, don’t get me wrong I love ‘Snow White’ being the first Disney Princess, however I definitely prefer ‘Mulan’.

This is a film with comedy, action and little bit of romance, and I mean like the smallest amount. Because the film is revolved around family honour and ancestors, we are transported to a different life from the other Disney films which is great. There is action in the film, the villain is quite creepy, and could be scary for some children, although he is a great villain to go against Mulan. The film is based in a war, so action and adventure in the film is understandable, although I do think it’s great and again different from other Disney’s. It is done well, it isn’t a film to scare children, obviously, it is a kid’s film. And like I’ve already mentioned, there is comedy, I even find it funny now.

As you can tell, I would definitely recommend ‘Mulan’. One of my favourites. Different from so many, yet enjoyable, comical, action-filled and a strong moral of the story. Watch ‘Mulan’ for an enjoyable hour and a half. Especially if you’re a fan of Disney and haven’t seen it!

I remember when I was young I’d watched this Disney film repeatedly on video, other than ‘Song of the South’ of course, which was my all time favourite! I guess I used to love the fun animals that appear in these movies. I used to find them enjoyable and a great watch, especially if you throw in some cheery songs and some comical moments. And ‘The Rescuers’ definitely does this, a movie all about how two mice so small can do things so big and help others if they are determined to do so. Once again, moral to the story!

At the Rescue Aid Society, with a fun repetitive song to get in your head right at the beginning of the film, a message in a bottle is found. A message crying for help from a little girl named Penny (voiced by Michelle Stacy) from Morningside Orphanage. The Rescue Aid Society being a group of mice, a mouse representing each country gathered when a crisis has risen and they need to take action. In this case, save Penny. Hungarian representative, Miss Bianca (Eva Gabor) is quick to show determination, but she must choose a co-agent on this dangerous trip. So she chooses the superstitious janitor, Bernard (voiced by Bob Newhart – Papa Elf from ‘Elf’). And off they head on the adventure of a lifetime to save the young girl from whatever she is crying out for help for.

The adventure is fun and enjoyable. More animals are met on the way, other mice, the airplane bird (definitely a comical character), a dragonfly (again, is brilliantly funny to be appreciated), a cat and many others. All the animals should be loved by children, they all bring a different personality to the film which is enjoyable for both children and adults. It’s not a film that is just for children in my opinion. Even though I watched and loved it as a child, watching it recently, I still loved it!

There’s parts in ‘The Rescuers’ that is almost slapstick comedy in a way. There’s parts with overdramatic music and fighting to reach the diamond, it is clever and should be appreciate as is comical. But what I think is clever about this film, is that they have something to contrast this. There are parts of the film, where the audience’s heart strings are really pulled on. The audience just wants happiness for this young orphaned girl. She’s a character for children to recognise the different experiences in life from different people, which obviously is a big moral to the story. One executed and done cleverly and beautifully.

Now of course we have to have a villain! And this one is sure to get the audience hating her. Her name is Medusa (voiced by Geraldine Page). The evil villain has an obedient sidekick, trying his best but failing to meet her needs, again comical for the audience, Mr Snoops (Joe Flynn). She also has two pets. Which of course the audience can recognise as bad animals compared to the poor innocent small mice, two alligators… But cleverly they add to the humour in the end as well. As it is a Disney film don’t expect twists and turns to shock you, that’s not why you would watch it. The whole plan of Medusa’s is told to the audience, and we know when something bad is about to happen or were supposed to feel uneasy about this certain place, as the lighting of the animated film is considerably darker than the bright happy Rescue Aid Society singing, for example.

This Disney Classic number 23 is one that shouldn’t be ignored and thrown aside. It is an adventure to enjoy and love the characters. Routing and wishing for the two small mice to succeed. Even if this Disney Classic is one less known, it shouldn’t be disregarded. And yes you can tell it’s an older film, but I think that just adds to the essence that it is a Disney Classic after all and should always be one. It’s an enjoyable family film of two mice with opposite personalities, one anxious and clumsy, another fearless and adventurous. So if you haven’t seen this Disney Classic film, I would recommend it! Besides, what can two little mice do anyway? Aren’t you a little curious what happened to the young girl Penny?