He's best known for his iconic comedy role as the hapless Mr Bean.

But Rowan Atkinson has another part to play: that of the doting boyfriend.

The 60-year-old actor stepped out with his girlfriend Louise Ford, 32, in London on Sunday, the twosome looking loved-up and relaxed in each other's company.

Scroll down for video

The Blackadder star has been dating the comedy actress, who is half his age, for about a year.

Looking loved-up, they took a casual stroll through north London, both in jeans for their day in the early spring sunshine.

The brunette beauty looked lovely in her skinny denim bottoms and a blouse, while covering up in a leather jacket and trendy striped scarf.

Meanwhile Rowan also opted for jeans, keeping his look rather smart by covering up in a blazer and a jumper.

They held hands as they stepped out together, while at one moment the British acting icon placed his hand protectively on his pretty girlfriend's back.

They then took themselves along for a lunch date at a nearby restaurant where they looked deep in conversation.

Rowan and Louise went public with their romance about a year ago, after his 23-year marriage to Sunetra Sastry came to an end.

The couple met when they appeared together in 2012 in the West End comic play Quatermaine's Terms.

And, somewhat ironically, he was photographed with his wife in one of their last pictures together going for dinner after a performance of the same play.

But since they made their relationship known, he has been spotted with Miss Ford openly in public and outside her two-bedroom flat in a leafy, affluent suburb in south London.

Rowan has two grown-up children with his ex-wife, whom he married in 1990.

He first met Sunetra, the daughter of an Indian engineer from Ealing, West London, in the late Eighties, when she was working as a make-up artist for the BBC. He was previously in a relationship with Men Behaving Badly star Leslie Ash who he planted an avenue of rowan and ash trees for at his country home.

Shortly before he met and fell for Louise, the actor revealed in an interview he had a certain kinship with the lonely, single characters he portrays. 'I've played quite a few of these sad, isolated bachelor figures — Bean is the most obvious. And I think I do identify with them, or aspects of them.'

Miss Ford grew up in Bexleyheath, south-east London, before gaining an English degree at Southampton University.

After graduating, she won a place at RADA where she was in the same year and treaded the boards with now Hollywood actress Gemma Arterton.

This led to appearances at the Edinburgh Fringe Festival with the Royal Shakespeare Company and parts in television comedies including BBC's Misfits and starring alongside Inbetweeners actors Simon Bird and Joe Thomas in Sky's Chickens.