Hardcover. Condition: Good. No Jacket. Norman Mansbridge (illustrator). 2nd Edition. Second edition. In a hardcover with black titles to red spine and red titles and a black illustration to cream front board. No dust jacket. 60 pp. with numerous black and white drawings. The book is in good condition. There is moderate shelf-wear to the extremities and extensive tanning to the boards, heaviest to the extremities. The binding is tight. There is some light foxing and minor marking to the end papers, there is minor offsetting to the feps and a dedication to the ffep. There are a few spots to the half title and very occasionally throughout, otherwise the pages are clean and unmarked.

Hardcover. Condition: Fair. Dust Jacket Condition: Poor. Norman Mansbridge (illustrator). First Edition. Presenting this work of humour, a parody of Lewis Carroll's Alice in Wonderland, instead becoming Adolf in Blunderland. In this work, a caricature of Adolf Hitler finds himself making many mistakes and fumbling about foolishly. This satirical work was intended to present Hitler as a fool who deserved true justice of the law. Written by American actor and songwriter James Dyrenforth in collaboration with British scriptwriter and lyricist Max Kester.Profusely illustrated by British cartoonish Norman Mansbridge. Dust wrapper is badly torn,boards aare rubbed, slight foxing to end papers, internally very good Size: Octavo . Illustrator: Norman Mansbridge. Category: Humour; For further information on this title or for further photographs, please click on the "Ask Seller a Question" button directly underneath this listing. We aim to reply within three working days. Buyers from OUTSIDE of the UK are strongly recommended to make contact, to ask for an accurate shipping cost, BEFORE buying.

Condition: Near Fine. Dust Jacket Condition: Near Fine. Norman Mansbridge (illustrator). Third Edition. This was originally broadcast as a radio piece for the BBC, before being published in book form The first, second and third editions of this work were all published in the same month of December, 1939 Frontispiece, plates and illustrations by Norman Mansbridge, original pictorial boards, small mark to upper cover, fractional bumping to corners and spine extremities, dust-jacket, faint spotting to upper panel, fractional creasing to corners and spine extremities, 4to DJ is now in a protective plastic cover 60 pp.

Hardcover. Condition: Fine. Dust Jacket Condition: Very Good plus. Norman Mansbridge (illustrator). 64pp; orange boards printed red & black, matching yellow jacket (unpriced & unclipped); 237 x 160 x 10 mm. First Canadian edition (originally 1939: Muller, London), with Foreword dated December 1939; printed in Toronto by T.H. Best. Initially aired by the BBC in a slightly sanitized version (6 October 1939), ostensibly to leaven the spirits of the British public following the declaration of war (3 September; in Canada, it took another week, the country's first ever autonomous declaration, since gaining legislative independence, 1931). Includes a typographically appropriate adaptation of 'the mouse's tale' to the "tale of a Jewish mouse". With 14 illustrations by cartoonist Norman Mansbridge (4 full-page), his first book. Immensely popular in Britain, the spoof went through five printings, while a single printrun appears to have sufficed in Canada. Curiously, Max Kester (1901-91), co-writer & British counterpart to transplanted American actor & songwriter, James Dyrenforth (1895-1973), was in fact the son of journalist & artist, James Arthur Dodgson of Leeds (1872 -19??). Jacket rear advertises a Canadian issue of Mein Kampf. Ink name on ffe (dated March 1940); bookseller's label at heel of pastedown: "Wendell Holmes Ltd Books & Stationery, London-St Thomas". Otherwise tight & clean in dust-soiled jacket with wear confined to spine ends & tips. The Canadian edition remains uncommon.

1st Impression. 18.7 x 25.1cm, pictorial paper covered boards, 60pp with black and white illustrations throughout. Together with an original unclipped dust jacket with a 3/6 net price. The boards have been well protected by the dust jacket and are clean and bright with only a little shelf wear to the bottom edge and a bruise to the top of the spine and top fore edge corner of the front board. Internally, there is a gift inscription to the front free endpaper and light spotting to the prelims and last couple of pages. The dust jacket is very good considering its age, having a 2cm closed tear and a 1.5 cm right angled tear extending along the top edge of the rear board. There is some rubbing to the shoulders and spine tips and a little creasing along the top edge mainly by the tear. A really nice copy of this Alice in Wonderland parody produced at the beginning of World War II which includes caricatures of Hitler, Chamberlain and Stalin. The dust jacket is now in a protective removable cover (not shown in the images). Rainford & Parris Books welcomes enquiries, so please do not hesitate to ask if you require further images or have any questions. All books are packaged with great care.

Hardcover. Condition: Fine. Dust Jacket Condition: Near Fine. Norman Mansbridge (illustrator). 64pp; orange boards printed red & black, matching yellow jacket (unpriced & unclipped); 237 x 160 x 10 mm. First Canadian edition (originally 1939: Muller, London), with Foreword dated December 1939; printed in Toronto by T.H. Best. Initially aired by the BBC in a slightly sanitized version (6 October 1939), ostensibly to leaven the spirits of the British public following the declaration of war (3 September; in Canada, it took another week, the country's first ever autonomous declaration, since gaining legislative independence, 1931). Includes a typographically appropriate adaptation of 'the mouse's tale' to the "tale of a Jewish mouse". With 14 illustrations by cartoonist Norman Mansbridge (4 full-page), his first book. Immensely popular in Britain, the spoof went through five printings, while a single printrun appears to have sufficed in Canada. Curiously, Max Kester (1901-91), co-writer & British counterpart to transplanted American actor & songwriter, James Dyrenforth (1895-1973), was in fact the son of journalist & artist, James Arthur Dodgson of Leeds (1872 -19??). Jacket rear advertises a Canadian issue of Mein Kampf. A tight clean copy in dusty jacket with three short closed tears & a small faint stain rear. The Canadian edition remains uncommon.

Hardcover. Condition: Very Good. Dust Jacket Condition: Very Good. HARDBACK IN THE ORIGINAL DECORATED BINDING WITH THE ORIGINAL UNPRICE CLIPPED DUST JACKET, SEVERAL FULL PAGE ILLUSTRATIONS + SOME ILLUSTRATIONS AMONG TEXT. BOOK MEASURES APPROX 10 x 8 INCHES WITH 60 PAGES. SOME MINOR CHIPPING TO EDGES OF DUST JACKET, SPINE OF JACKET SLIGHTLY FADED, FEW MINOR MARKS TO JACKET, BUMP TO TOP RIGHT CORNER OF FRONT BOARD WITH THE OCCASIONAL CREASE TO TOP RIGHT CORNER PAGE MARGINS, VERY OCCASIONAL MINOR BLEMISH OR MINOR CREASE TO PAGES, ENDPAPERS LIGHTLY BROWNED. OVERALL A VERY GOOD COPY WITH NO MAJOR FAULTS. PLEASE NOTE: DUST JACKET HAS A CLEAR REMOVABLE COVERING THAT MAY SHOW SOME REFLECTIONS OR WRINKLES IN IMAGES. EXTRA POSTAGE COSTS MAY APPLY TO OVERSEAS ORDERS.

Hardcover. Condition: Fine. Dust Jacket Condition: Fine. Mansbridge, Norman (illustrator). 1st Edition. (Carrolliana) ADOLF IN BLUNDERLAND: A POLITICAL PARODY OF LEWIS CARROLL'S FAMOUS STORY by James Dyrenforth and Max Kester; with illustrations by Norman Mansbridge. London: Frederick Muller Ltd., (1939). FIRST EDITION. 4to - 7-7/16" x 10". Red cloth backed black and red pictorial paper covered boards with a minute touch of wear to the head and tail of spine for what is an immaculate copy of the book. Publisher's original price-clipped black and red pictorial dust wrapper with a minute touch of wear to the head and tail of spine for what is an immaculate copy of the wrapper. 60 pp. Illustrated with black and white drawings within text. The condition of the book is FINE. The condition of the dust wrapper is FINE. One of the nicest copies of this title that one is ever likely to encounter.