The Humble Indie Bundle is back for a third round. A team of independent game developers has once again gotten together to sell a handful of independent games, at any price point you want, and will divide the earnings among creators and charities.

[partner id="wireduk"]The most recent promotion includes 2008's Independent Games Festival winner Crayon Physics Deluxe, which lets you draw out objects like flat planes, pivoting seesaws, wheels and ropes to guide a ball into a collection of stars.

And Yet it Moves, from Broken Rules, is a papercraft puzzle game where you rotate the entire game world to guide your spiky haired hero to safety, while turning walls into floors, slides into platforms, and stacks of rocks into dangerous hazards.

There's also rock-hard retro-themed puzzle platformer VVVVVV from Terry Cavanagh and multiple award-winning steampunk tile-slider Cogs, from Lazy 8 Studios. Finally, Hammerfight is a frantic multiplayer combat game from Russia.

All the games would set you back about £30 if you bought them separately, but the Humble Indie Bundle lets you set your own price – as long as its more than a penny. You can also choose where your money goes – including to the game developers, the EFF, Child's Play and the Humble Bundle team.

The games are also DRM-free, most are redeemable on Steam and the games work cross-platform between PC, Mac and Linux.

The site also shows how many bundles have sold (92,000, at the time of writing) how much money has been made ($434,000) and the average price that is being spent by gamers on all three operating systems.

Linux fans are the most magnanimous (spending $11 on average) while Windows zealots are the greediest (a paltry $4 per bundle, on average). Mac users float in the middle, spending around $6 for the five games, on average.

See Also:- More Games, Source Code Join ‘Humble Indie Bundle’

Pay What You Want For 5 Indie Games, Again

Name Your Own Price for World of Goo, Other Indie Games

How World of Warcraft Devs Launched One of the Biggest Unions in Video Games

Microsoft’s acquisition of Activision Blizzard created an environment that helped workers. Amid layoffs and worries about AI, their efforts could be an indicator of the future of the industry.

Video Game Performers Are Going on Strike Over AI

The union representing the voice and motion-capture actors who work in video games authorized the strike after talks with gaming companies stalled over the use of AI.

A Chaotic History of Clickolding, the Year’s Most Disturbing Game

Strange Scaffold’s hit couldn’t have been made without a little help from their friends—and a late night joke that took on a life of its own. Here’s the oral history of the summer’s clickiest game.

Fortnite Has a Political Violence Problem

In a report shared exclusively with WIRED, the Global Project Against Hate and Extremism says it found more than a dozen user-generated games on Fortnite that featured antisemitism and political violence.

How Telegram Game Hamster Kombat Got 300 Million Users—and the Ire of Iran’s Military

In June, Iranian authorities claimed the crypto game was distracting voters during the presidential election. Last month, Telegram's CEO touted its potential to bring millions to blockchain. Its creators say they’re just getting started.

AI Is Already Taking Jobs in the Video Game Industry

A WIRED investigation finds that major players like Activision Blizzard, which recently laid off scores of workers, are using generative AI for game development.

The 42 Best Shows on Hulu Right Now

The Bear, Futurama, and Solar Opposites just a few of the shows you should be watching on Hulu this month.

Gamergate’s Legacy Lives on in Attacks Against Kamala Harris

A decade after Gamergate launched a new, toxic era of online communication, the tactics developed and honed in 2014 are now in full view in attacks against the vice president.