Back in 2007 Matt Blum reviewed Crayon Physics for the PC, an innovative game where you draw on-screen with a virtual crayon to solve puzzles. The Deluxe version of that is nearly ready to ship for PC, but the iPhone version is already out. I had a chance to sit down and give it a run-through.

Crayon Physics Deluxe for the iPhone is a $4.99 game featuring 54 levels. For each level you have to draw shapes on the screen to move the circle over to a star using the gravity and momentum that your circles, squares, and other shapes generate. Along the way you have to get around obstacles, and as the game progresses you get more complex tasks, such as using cables and levers. It's a casual puzzle game in the spirit of Enigmo on the iPhone, or, for you old timers, you might rememberThe Incredible Machine series from years ago. (As an aside, The Incredible Machine on iPhone could be awesome!) The game features a level editor (more on that later) and relaxing background music. Each level usually takes only a few minutes at most, especially at the lower levels, so it's a great pick-up-and-play game for times when you have a few minutes to spare.

The touch controls on the game are intuitive, you just draw the shape you want, such as a square, circle, line, or triangle. On later levels you might need to pivot your shape, and for that you draw a tiny circle, then draw your shape around the circle. There's a pretty big bug in the 1.0.0 version I tested where the game appears to run out of memory and gives you a "Can't draw" error no matter what you try to draw. If you hit this you'll need to restart your iPhone/iPod touch. The Application Description on the App Store page says that the developer is aware of the issue and will release a new version soon. In addition, the level load times and game play can be a bit laggy on my iPhone 3G, and there are reviews on the App Store that say the problem is even worse on first-gen iPhones and iPod touches. This isn't a unique problem for new iPhone games, and hopefully it will be addressed quickly.

The initial levels are easy, and most experienced gamers will get through the first ten or so levels very quickly. After that the going gets tougher, and by mid-game the levels can be quite a challenge, in a good way. I haven't made it past level 25, but if the difficulty curve keeps progressing the game will be hard enough by the end to challenge even the best puzzle masters. There is also a level editor included with the game, but unfortunately it is either broken in this version or desperately in need of documentation. Every level I tried to make would simply drop all the pieces I placed when I hit start. There are "pins" that theoretically can be used to pin down the pieces, but I couldn't get it to work and there is no help for this on the developer site or in the game. It also appears that you can only make simple levels, and you can't make spinning wheels or any of the advanced features that show up in later levels of the game. You also don't appear to be able to share your levels or load levels from other players. Overall the level editor feature is promising, but not usable in this version.

At $4.99, Crayon Physics Deluxe should be a better game. If Kloonigames/Hudson can address the memory issues, frame rate lag, fix the level editor, and add the ability to load levels from other players then it will be well-worth the price. For now, though, I have to recommend holding off until some of these issues are addressed. Or you might want to pick up the PC version for $20.

Strangely, there is almost an exact clone of Crayon Physics Deluxe for the iPhone called Touch Physics. It is a far less-polished game with only 30 fairly-easy levels, no level editor, and much simpler play, but I found no bugs in it and it is currently only 99 cents (normally $1.99) "for a limited time". Anyone know the story behind these two almost-identical games? Let us know in the comments.

How World of Warcraft Devs Launched One of the Biggest Unions in Video Games

Microsoft’s acquisition of Activision Blizzard created an environment that helped workers. Amid layoffs and worries about AI, their efforts could be an indicator of the future of the industry.

Fortnite Has a Political Violence Problem

In a report shared exclusively with WIRED, the Global Project Against Hate and Extremism says it found more than a dozen user-generated games on Fortnite that featured antisemitism and political violence.

How to Control Android Auto or Apple CarPlay With Your Voice While Driving

Both smartphone platforms offer a number of ways to interact with your phone while keeping both hands on the wheel. Follow these tips to get the most out of in-car voice commands.

The Top New Features Coming to Apple’s iOS 18 and iPadOS 18

Apple Intelligence has arrived in the iOS 18.1 developer beta, bringing features like the updated Siri and Writing Tools. Here’s how to access it, plus the top new features in iOS 18 and iPadOS 18.

You Can Actually Use a Chromebook Offline. Here’s How

The always-online laptop doesn’t really have to always be online.

All the Top New Features Coming to MacOS Sequoia

Apple has officially released the public beta for macOS 15 Sequoia. We break down how to install it, all the new features to look forward to, and tell you whether your current Mac will support the new operating system.

Flush With Cash, Tether Has Got Microsoft, Google, and Amazon in Its Crosshairs

Under new CEO Paolo Ardoino, the crypto company is spending heavily in a bid to muscle into an AI market dominated by the world’s largest tech firms.

Back to BASIC—the Most Consequential Programming Language in the History of Computing

Coding was a preserve of elites, until BASIC hit the streets.