The Machine Girl Credits Title: The Machine Girl Genres: Action Directed by: Noboru Iguchi Written by: Noboru Iguchi Produced by: John Sirabella; Yoshinori Chiba; Yoko Hayama; Satoshi Nakamura Music by: Koh Nakagawa Cinematography: Yasutaka Nagano Edited by: Kenji Tanabe Production Distributed by: Fever Dreams

Nikkatsu

Spotted Productions Released: March 22nd, 2008 Rating: Unrated Running time: 96 min. Country: Japan Language: Japanese Navigation Next: Shyness Machine Girl

The Machine Girl (片腕マシンガール) is a Japanese feature film of the action genre. It was written and directed by Noboru Iguchi. It was presented by Fever Dreams and produced by Nikkatsu. The movie premiered in Japan at the Yubari International Fantastic Film Festival on March 22nd, 2008. It was distributed theatrically through Spotted Productions and received limited theatrical release in Japan on August 2nd, 2008.

Cast[]

Actor Role Minase Yashiro Ami Hyuga Asami Miki Nobuhiro Nishihara Sho Kimura Kentaro Shimazu Ryûji Kimura Ryousuke Kawamura Yu Hyuga Yuya Ishikawa Suguru Sugihara Noriko Kijima Yoshie Tsutomu Ichigasaki Unknown Hiroko Yashiki Unknown Taro Suwa Kimura gang member Hiroyuki Yoshida Unknown Demo Tanaka Kaneko Naohiro Kawamoto Unknown Masaki Inatome Unknown Hitoshi Fukushima Unknown Kouji Kawamoto Unknown Kensuke Sonomura Unknown Shuhe Unknown

Notes[]

The Japanese title for this film is Kataude mashin gâru, which translates as One-armed Machine Girl. The Japanese transliteration for the film title is 片腕マシンガール, which redirects to this page.

Machine Girl and The Machine Girl both redirect to this page.

The Machine Girl premiered in the United States on May 23rd, 2008. It was screened at the Another Hole in the Head Genre Film Festival on June 6th, 2008 and at the Asian Film Festival of Dallas in Dallas, Texas on August 19th, 2008.

There are thirty-eight credited cast members in this film. There are sixteen voice actors in the Engish-language dubbed version.

This movie features visual effects by Yoshihiro Nishimura, who also worked on films like Meatball Machine.

Fun Facts[]

The tagline to this film is "It's Payback Time!"

This movie bears some similarities to the 2007 film Planet Terror. In the film, a female protagonist has a limb severed and replaced with a weapon. Her leg is replaced with a machine gun, whereas in The Machine Girl, it is her arm that is severed, and is likewise replaced with a machine gun.

Writer and director Noboru Iguchi also wrote and directed the second chapter of the 2010 film Mutant Girls Squad, which was titled "Revolution".

This is the first credited acting work for Minase Yashiro.

Recommendations[]

Asian gore-fest

Grotesque

Meatball Machine

Machine Girl

Mutant Girls Squad

Female revenge films

Brave One, The

Faster, Pussycat! Kill! Kill!

Kill Bill, Vol. 1

Kill Bill, Vol. 2

Machine Girl, The

Mother's Day

Other Woman, The

Peppermint

RoboWoman

TNT Jackson

[]

The Machine Girl at Wikipedia