Arthur Ashe regularly wrote newspaper columns and appeared at borough meetings as part of the early 1990s effort to keep the U.S. Open Tennis Championships in New York. Approval by borough and community groups was among the many needed for the push to be successful.

“If there was anyone who was voting who was going to go negative, [Ashe] changed their mind right off the bat,” said attorney Sid Davidoff, who represented the U.S. Tennis Association in negotiations with the city and local community groups.

The deal that was eventually reached more than doubled the size of the National Tennis Center site and built a new stadium that ultimately bore Ashe’s name.

Ashe died in 1993 before the venue was named in his honor, never seeing the financial impact that the sport’s largest stadium had on the USTA, or its flagship event, the U.S. Open, which brought in $406 million for the organization in 2021. Arthur Ashe Stadium celebrates its 25th anniversary this year and its impact has been more symbolic for tennis, beyond just the USTA’s bottom line.

“They wanted to send a message that they were not just a country club sport, but that they had players of all races, all ages, all economic backgrounds,” said Donald Dell, Ashe’s longtime friend and agent. “They could have named that center court with a company or product, so they forgo a lot of money to name it ‘Arthur Ashe.’”

The USTA needed a new home for the U.S. Open in the early 1990s, and it was New York City Mayor David Dinkins, an avid tennis fan, who carried the effort. Atlanta and Chicago had reportedly attempted to wrest the Open from New York City but Dinkins, who died in 2020, wrangled a deal with the USTA in 1991 to build a new $150 million tennis stadium, paid for by the USTA. Before departing office, Dinkins signed a 99-year lease with the USTA National Tennis Center ensuring the U.S. Open would stay in New York, where it has been held since 1924.

The new stadium, designed by the Rossetti architecture firm, opened in 1997. Its 90 suites were expected to bring in $8 million per year; that alone would fund half of what the USTA was spending on its core mission in the mid-1990s. The expanded footprint allowed for better and more extensive sponsor activations, which enhanced the festival-like quality of the event.

“Immediately we saw some effect,” said Judy Levering, who was first vice president of the USTA during the stadium naming decision, and later became the USTA’s first female president. “It wasn’t paid for immediately, but not only did you have all those seats in Ashe Stadium, but you had a lot more going on on the grounds. People were coming to something that was more than [just] a bigger stadium.”

Naming the venue after Ashe spoke more directly to the USTA’s mission, availing tennis to everyone. The U.S. Open has another stadium court named after a Black man (Louis Armstrong), all within a tennis center named after a gay woman, Billie Jean King.

Levering remembers walking to the top of the 23,000-seat venue and wondering who would want to sit all the way up there. Twenty-two years later, more than 737,000 people attended the record-setting 2019 edition of the tournament, many of whom drank in the expansive views of Manhattan and burnt orange sunsets from the stadium’s top rows.

“It really expanded the experience of being at the Open to so many more people, which was great,” said Levering.