Arthur Ashe, a champion tennis player who opened the door for other black athletes and fought for human rights and against AIDS, died Saturday. He was 49.

Ashe died at 3:13 p.m. of AIDS-related pneumonia, said New York Hospital administrator Judith Lilavois.

A Wimbledon and U.S. Open champion, Ashe used the celebrity status he won on the tennis court to fight racism in sports.

In 1963, he became the first black to play on the U.S. Davis Cup team. He also was the first black to win at Wimbledon, in 1975. Ashe was ranked No.

1 in the world in 1968 and 1975.

A heart attack forced him to retire from tennis in 1979.

He had suffered from chronic heart disease, and had another, more minor heart attack last September, months after revealing he had AIDS.

At Madison Square Garden, there was a 10-bell tribute to Ashe prior to the Michel Dokes-Riddick Bowe heavyweight championship fight. Jesse Jackson, at ringside, recounted a visit he had with Ashe following his last heart attack.

"Arthur traveled a long distance from segregated tennis courts in Richmond to world championships," Jackson said. "Most athletes' talents are confined to within the lines, how well they perform within the lines. Arthur's dignity went beyond the lines.

"His was the ultimate strength of character and will. He helped to transform the whole world."

Ashe was forced to go public with his disease last April, after being told USA Today was about to publish the story.

Ashe said that when the newspaper confronted him with the rumor, "It put me in the unenviable position of having to lie if I wanted to protect my privacy. No one should have to make that choice. I am sorry that I have been forced to make that revelation now.

"After all, I am not running for some office of public trust, nor do I have stockholders to account to. It is only that I fall under the dubious umbrella of public figure."

He said he was infected by a blood transfusion during heart bypass surgery, probably in 1983.

After going public, he became active in the fight against AIDS, forming a fund-raising foundation and joining the boards of the Harvard AIDS Institute and the UCLA AIDS Institute.

Ashe had been scheduled to appear at an AIDS forum Saturday night in Hartford, but canceled at the last minute and sent a videotape instead.

Members of the audience said they were stunned by the news.

"I'm real surprised by the obvious shock I have seen here tonight," said Manuel Magaz, the executive director of Latinos Against AIDS. "People who never met him were crying."

"If we'd acted this way when the first people died, perhaps we wouldn't have had the amount of deaths that we do today," said Magaz, who has the AIDS virus.

Ashe said in an interview last November that his days were busier than ever, although he had his good ones and bad ones.

He remained active politically. On Sept.

9, he was arrested along with 94 other protesters in front of the White House while protesting the Bush administration's policy toward Haitian refugees.

"He went to jail to free Haiti," Jackson said.

Ashe suffered his latest heart attack soon after he was jailed.

"I went to visit him in the hospital that Sunday," Jackson recounted. "He was lying in bed, with monitors hooked up to him. He said, "Jesse, I'm glad to see you. We've got to free Haiti.'

"

The protest continued a long tradition of political activism for Ashe. In 1973, he became the first black person to compete in an integrated sporting event in South Africa, and later he was instrumental in getting South Africa barred from Davis Cup competition for its apartheid policies.

But he said the happiest moment of his life was not winning Wimbledon but when anti-apartheid political prisoner Nelson Mandela was freed from jail Feb.

11, 1990.

In between fights against racism, he racked up tennis wins.

In 1968, Ashe, then 25, won the U.S. Open as an amateur, was ranked No.

1 and helped the United States overcome Australia for its first Davis Cup victory in five years.

During the early 1970s, Ashe added another Grand Slam event to his list, winning the 1970 Australian Open.

That same year he began a string of four consecutive appearances in the World Championship Tennis Finals. The streak reached its apex in 1975 when he triumphed over 19-year-old Bjorn Borg.

The WCT win set the stage for one of Ashe's proudest moments. Matched against the seemingly invincible Jimmy Connors in the 1975 Wimbledon final, Ashe summoned up the skills and the savvy needed for a 6-1, 6-1, 5-7, 6-4 win. The victory helped him earn the No.

1 ranking and marked the 10th time in as many years that he was listed among the world's top five.

Ashe was forced to sit out most of 1977 because of a recurring heel injury and an eye inflammation problem. In the face of the injuries and a computer ranking that fell to No.

257, most observers concluded that a brilliant career was coming to a close.

But Ashe regained his health, put himself through rigorous training and returned to the tennis tour in 1978. He was back in the top 10 rankings within 11 months.

In 1979, Ashe was ranked No.

8 when he was felled by a heart attack. Though the resulting quadruple-bypass surgery was successful, initial plans for a comeback were eventually set aside.

Ashe officially announced his retirement on April 16, 1980. At the same time, at age 38, he assumed the captaincy of the U.S. Davis Cup team, fulfilling a lifelong dream.

In 1985, he was inducted into the International Tennis Hall of Fame.

He was named Sports Illustrated magazine's Sportsman of the Year in December for his work, the first athlete to win the award after his playing days were over.

Ashe was born July 10, 1943 and grew up in Richmond, Va. He began to play tennis in a neighborhood park where his father was employed as a guard.

Survivors include his wife, Jeanne-Marie Moutoussamy, and their daughter, Camera Elizabeth.

_ Information from the Associated Press, Reuters, the Washington Post and the Times library was used in this report.