Kolosovykh Island

The Kolosovykh Island (Russian: остров Колосовых; Ostrov Kolosovykh) is an island, in the Kara Sea off the coast of Siberia.

Kolokol Group

Kolokol Group (Russian: Группа Колокола) is a group of somma volcanoes located in the central part of Urup Island, Kuril Islands, Russia. The group is named after its highest volcano but also includes volcanoes called Berg, Trezubetz (which erupted …

Kola River

Kola (Russian: Кола) is a river on the Kola Peninsula in Murmansk Oblast, Russia. It is 83 km long, with a drainage basin of 3,850 km². The river flows out of Lake Kolozero north into the Kola Bay of the Barents Sea, some 10 km south of Murmansk. Th…

Kola Bay Bridge

Kola Bay Bridge (Russian: Мост через Кольский залив) across the Kola Bay in Murmansk, Russia is the world's longest automobile bridge north of the Polar Circle (the railway Yuribey Bridge, also in Russia, is the only longer bridge in the Arctic). Wi…

Koidula, Põlva County

Koidula is a village in Värska Parish, Põlva County, in southeastern Estonia, on the border with Russia. It's located few kilometeres northwest of Russian town Pechory. Koidula is the border crossing point of Karisilla–Pechory road (nr. 63), Tartu–P…

Kochechum River

The Kochechum (Russian: Кочечум) is a river in Siberia, Russia, it flows through the Krasnoyarsk Krai. It is right and most significant inflow of the Nizhnyaya Tunguska river.

Klin (air base)

Klin is an air base in Russia located 4 km north of Klin. It is halfway between Moscow and Tver, with many military transport types (Il-76, An-12, An-26, Tu-134, etc.) in service. The airfield was active until the 1990s.

Kiya River

Kiya (Russian: Ки́я) is a river in Tomsk and Kemerovo Oblasts of Russia. It is a tributary of the Chulym (in the Ob's drainage basin), and is 548 kilometres (341 mi) long, with a drainage basin of 32,200 square kilometres (12,400 sq mi).

…

Kineshma Bridge

Kineshemsky Bridge (Russian: Кинешемский мост) is a bridge across the Volga River. It is located in Ivanovo Oblast, near Kineshma and Zavolzhsk. It is a part of Highway Kineshma-Kostroma. It connects the Trans-Volga region to the Zavolzhsky District…

Kilpola

Kilpola (Finnish: Kilpolansaari) is an island 6 x 8 km among the skerries in the northwestern part of the Lake Ladoga, in Lakhdenpokhsky District of Republic of Karelia, connected to the mainland by a bridge. It is composed of granite hills rising u…

Kikhpinych

Kikhpinych (Russian: Кихпиныч) is a stratovolcano located in the eastern part of the Kamchatka Peninsula which feeds the famous Valley of Geysers.

Khoro, Verkhnevilyuysky District, Sakha Republic

Khoro (Russian: Хоро) is a rural locality (a selo), the only inhabited locality, and the administrative center of Khorinsky Rural Okrug of Verkhnevilyuysky District in the Sakha Republic, Russia, located 15 kilometers (9.3 mi) from Verkhnevilyuysk, …

Khodutka

Khodutka (Russian: Ходутка), also known as Khodutkinskiye Gory (Russian: Ходуткинские Горы), is a stratovolcano located in the southern part of Kamchatka Peninsula, Russia.

Khirlepposi

Khirlepposi or Khirleppos' Melesh (Russian: Хирлеппоси; Chuvash: Хирлеппуç Мĕлĕш, Hirleppuş Mĕlĕš) is a rural locality (a village) in Tautovskoye Rural Settlement of Alikovsky District of the Chuvash Republic, Russia, located 6 kilometers (3.7 mi) w…

Khaypudyr Bay

Khaypudyr Bay or Khaypudyrskaya Bay (Russian: Хайпудырская губа) is a gulf in Russia, located in the Pechora Sea (Southeastern Barents Sea) between the coastline of the Yugorsky Peninsula and the lowlands and marshy areas in the mainland south of Do…

Kesova Gora

Kesova Gora (Russian: Ке́сова Гора́) is an urban locality (an urban-type settlement) and the administrative center of Kesovogorsky District of Tver Oblast, Russia, located 32 kilometers (20 mi) from Kashin and 50 kilometers (31 mi) from Bezhetsk.

…

Kekurniy Island

Kekurniy Island (Russian: Остров Кекурный) is a very small island in the Gertner Inlet of Taui Bay, in the Sea of Okhotsk, within Magadan Oblast, Russian Far East.

Kebeney

Kebeney (Russian: Кэбеней) is a shield volcano located in central Sredinny Range, in the northern part of the Kamchatka Peninsula, Russia.

Kazim River

Kazim (Russian: Казы́м) is a river in Russia. It flows over the West Siberian Plain, and is a right tributary of the Ob. The Kazim is 659 kilometres (409 mi) long, with a drainage basin of 35,600 square kilometres (13,700 sq mi). Its average dischar…

Kazan State Finance and Economics Institute

The Kazan State Finance and Economics Institute (KSFEI) is an Institute in the city of Kazan of the Republic of Tatarstan, Russia.

Kasplya River

Kasplya (Russian: Каспля) is a river in Russia and Belarus, a left tributary of the Daugava River. Its length is 224 km, the first 157 km in Russia (Smolensk Oblast), and the rest in Belarus (Vitebsk Voblast). It starts from Lake Kasplya at (54°59′N…

Kashira Highway

Kashirskoye Highway or Kashira Highway (Russian: Каширское шоссе, Kashirskoye Shosse) is a major street in Moscow, Russia, continued as a highway beyond the city into Moscow Oblast as a backup route for highway M4. It was named in the 19th century a…

Karpinsky Group

Karpinsky Group (Russian: Вулкан Карпинского) is a volcanic group located at the southern end of Paramushir Island, Kuril Islands, Russia. The group is capped by two gently sloping cones rising to a height of 1345 m. They are composed of andesites a…

Karaginsky Gulf

Karaginsky Gulf (Russian: Карагинский залив) is a large gulf in the Bering Sea off the northeastern coast of Kamchatka (Russia), which cuts 117 km deep inland. The depth of the gulf is between 30 to 60 m. The largest island in the gulf is the Karagi…

Karabikha

Karabikha (Russian: Кара́биха) is a village in Yaroslavl Oblast, Russia, located 15 kilometers to the south of Yaroslavl center. The great Russian poet Nikolay Nekrasov lived and worked there for some time.

Kanchalan River

The Kanchalan River (Russian: Канчалан) is a 426-kilometre (265 mi) long stream in Far East Siberia. It passes through the sparsely populated areas of the Siberian tundra and flows southwards into the Bering Sea at the Gulf of Anadyr through the Ana…