Russian aircraft carrier Admiral Kuznetsov

Admiral Flota Sovetskovo Soyuza Kuznetsov (Russian: Адмира́л фло́та Сове́тского Сою́за Кузнецо́в "Admiral of the Fleet of the Soviet Union Kuznetsov") was built by the Black Sea Shipyard, the sole manufacturer of Soviet aircraft carriers, in Mykolai…

Kolsky District

Kolsky District (Russian: Ко́льский райо́н) is an administrative district (raion), one of the six in Murmansk Oblast, Russia. As a municipal division, it is incorporated as Kolsky Municipal District. It is located in the northwest of the oblast, par…

Murmashi

Murmashi (Russian: Мурмаши́) is an urban locality (an urban-type settlement) in Kolsky District of Murmansk Oblast, Russia, located on the Kola Peninsula on the lower Tuloma River, 23 kilometers (14 mi) southwest of Murmansk.

Kola Bay Bridge

Kola Bay Bridge (Russian: Мост через Кольский залив) across the Kola Bay in Murmansk, Russia is the world's longest automobile bridge north of the Polar Circle (the railway Yuribey Bridge, also in Russia, is the only longer bridge in the Arctic). Wi…

Tsentralnyi Profsoyuz Stadion (Murmansk)

Tsentralnyi Profsoyuz Stadion is a multi-use stadium in Murmansk, Russia. It is currently used mostly for football matches. The stadium holds 13,400 people.

Molochny

Molochny (Russian: Моло́чный) is an urban locality (an urban-type settlement) in Kolsky District of Murmansk Oblast, Russia, located on the Kola Peninsula on the lower Kola River, 15 kilometers (9.3 mi) south of Murmansk.

Lake Semyonovskoye

Lake Semyonovskoye (Russian: Семёновское озеро) is a freshwater lake on the Kola Peninsula, Murmansk Oblast, Russia in Murmansk. It has an area of 0.195 km².

Lake Kildinskoye

Kildinskoye (Russian: Кильдинское) is a lake on the Kola Peninsula in Murmansk Oblast in Russia.

Kildinstroy

Kildinstroy (Russian: Кильдинстрой) is an urban locality (an urban-type settlement) in Kolsky District of Murmansk Oblast, Russia, located on the Kola Peninsula on the lower Kola River, 9 kilometers (5.6 mi) south of Murmansk.

Rosta River

Rosta River (Russian: Роста) is a river in the north of the Kola Peninsula in Murmansk Oblast, Russia. It is 10 km in length. The Rosta River originates in the Lake Rogozero and flows into the Kola Bay.