Friday, February 5, 2010

Moscow, Russia - February, 3, 2010 - Dialogic Corporation ("Dialogic"), a global provider of world-class products and technologies for media and signal processing, today announced the opening of a regional laboratory in Russia. This laboratory will enable companies and independent professionals who specialize in telecom software development to try the latest Dialogic® products and solutions and test their own applications for compatibility with them. The laboratory covers several fields:

SS7 and VoIP networks interaction

SS7 and SIP-I/ T protocol conversion

SS7/SIGTRAN/BICC signaling protocols

3G video

Multimedia in IMS networks

The clients can also try the following products:

Dialogic® IP Media Server Software

Dialogic® Vision™ CX Video Gateway

Dialogic® Vision™ VX Integrated Media Platform

Dialogic® IMG 1010 Integrated Media Gateway

Dialogic® Digital Signaling Interface (DSI)

The goal of opening this laboratory is to expand Russian software outsourcing. Access to this laboratory is available to any specialist or company from Russia and CIS. For further information, please contact Dialogic’s Russian office at dialogic.russia@dialogic.com or visit www.dialogic.com/ru/lab.

***

Dialogic® IP Media Server

The Dialogic® IP Media Server is a software-based product that leverages the simplicity, openness, and flexibility of SIP, VoiceXML, and MSCML to provide a cost-effective and scalable IP media server solution suitable for carriers. Typical services include IVR, contact center, conferencing, messaging, and network announcements.

Dialogic® Vision™ CX Video Gateway

The Vision CX Video Gateway can also support real-time video and voice transcoding, allowing service providers and mobile operators to deliver enhanced video quality and interoperability for converged services, such as video portals, multimedia contact centers, and multi-terminal video conferencing.

Dialogic® Vision™ VX Integrated Media Platform

A standards-based integrated media and signaling platform that supports the creation and deployment of multimedia audio and video telephony services using VoiceXML and CCXML, which allows the rapid prototyping and deployment of rich audio and video services.

Dialogic® IMG 1010 Integrated Media Gateway

A carrier-ready VoIP gateway that supports both media and signaling in a single chassis. Simultaneous support for PRI, SS7 signaling, SIP, and H.323 provides a flexible, cost-effective platform that can evolve from TDM-IP to all-IP.

Dialogic® Digital Signaling Interface (DSI) Components

SS7, SIGTRAN and media components that enable voice, video, and data solutions. DSI stacks, boards, and signaling servers are the foundation for primary applications like Mobile Prepaid, Call Management, and Roaming as well as value-added services such as CRBT, SMS, and LBS.

About Dialogic Corporation

Dialogic Corporation is a leading provider of world-class, innovative technologies based on open standards that enable innovative mobile, video, IP, and TDM solutions for Network Service Providers and Enterprise Communication Networks. Dialogic's customers and partners rely on its leading-edge, flexible components to rapidly deploy value-added solutions around the world.

Headquartered in Montreal, Canada, Dialogic and its subsidiaries have over twenty offices worldwide, providing local presence, knowledge and support to serve its customers around the globe. Dialogic's research and development centers are located in Parsippany, New Jersey; Getzville, New York; Needham, Massachusetts; Hyannis, Massachusetts; Salem, New Hampshire; Chicago, Illinois; Fordingbridge, England; and Renningen, Germany as well as Montreal.

Information about Dialogic is available at http://www.dialogic.com/. Also, join our social networking community, the Dialogic Exchange Network (DEN), at www.dialogic.com/den or visit our Facebook, Twitter and YouTube pages for additional Dialogic news, updates and partner application demos.

Dialogic is a registered trademark and Vision is a trademark of Dialogic Corporation. Other trademarks mentioned and/or marked herein belong to their respective owners. Dialogic and its subsidiaries encourage all users of their products to procure all necessary intellectual property licenses required to implement their concepts or applications, which licenses may vary from country to country.

Contact:

Nadya Mikheeva

Gurov and Partners Communication Group

+7 (495) 645-8074

mikheeva@gurovpr.ru