Research Interests

My research is about the role of heritage and memory institutions, practices, and discourses in mediating public representations of people’s histories, cultures and identities.

I am interested in how institutions of public culture work, what drives their behaviours, and how can we understand this in terms of questions of power, agency and control.

My work is primarily about publicly-funded museums, art galleries, and heritage organisations but I am also interested in how these are part of what I call a public ecology of remembering which could also include memorials, archives, rituals, commemorations, and public spaces such as parks.

I am particularly interested in dimensions of public culture and heritage which deal with national identity and diversity.

Although my work is rooted in ideas of cultural theory, I aim to draw out the implications for curatorship and wider museum practice. My work seeks to connect theoretical debates with practical concerns; my teaching and research projects frequently involve collaborating with heritage sector professionals.

Research projects:

2016-2019: European Union. Horizon 2020 Award. ‘CoHERE’. Overall value:€2.5 million. Newcastle Award Value: €800K. (Co-Investigator)

2014-2017: European Union. ERASMUS ‘Active Ageing and Heritage in Adult Learning.’ Overall value: €290,000. Newcastle Award Value: £19,833. (Newcastle Principal-Investigator)

2015 Newcastle University Institute for Social Renewal Award. Collaborative research project with Tyne and Wear Archive and Museum. ‘Who do we think we are? Exploring Place, Identity in the North-East at the Discovery Museum, Newcastle.’ Overall value: £4,907. (Principal-Investigator)

2015 Newcastle University Institute for Creative Practice. Collaborative research project with Discovery Museum, Tyne and Wear Archives and Museums. ‘Digital Designs for Museum Dialogues’. Overall value: c£4,879. (Co-Investigator)

2011-2015 European Union. FP7 Award. ‘MeLa: European Museums in an Age of Migrations.’ Overall value: €2.7 million. Newcastle Award Value: £220,821. (Co-Investigator)

2011-2012: AHRC Follow-on Award. ‘Intellectual Property and Informed Consent: Partnerships and Participation in Museum Work.’ Overall value: c£40K. (Principal-Investigator)

2011-2011: AHRC Follow-on Award with UCL. ‘Heritage, Health and Wellbeing: Mapping Future Priorities and Potential.’ Overall value: c£40K. Newcastle Value c.£4K. (Co-Investigator)

2008-2011. AHRC ‘Art on Tyneside: Redeveloping a permanent display about art, place and identity at the Laing Art Gallery’. Overall value: £345K. (Principal-Investigator)

2010-2011: Holding memories: Memory, Objects, Museums and Older People workshop series, Newcastle University Changing Age Programme, with Joint-Principal Investigator: Areti Galani. (£4k). With Areti Galani, I organised two interdisciplinary workshops in September and November 2010 on this theme. The workshops brought together external academics and practitioners with colleagues from ICCHS and other parts of our University. These workshops were supported through the University's Changing Age programme.

Esteem Indicators

Editorial Board Member of museum and society journal

Editorial Board Member of Memory Studies journal

Editorial Board Member of Journal of Museum History

AHRC Reviewer

I am a founder member of the Heritage@Newcastle NUCoRE and am a member of the steering group.https://research.ncl.ac.uk/heritage-newcastle/