b2

Says Apurva Asrani, writer-editor of Shahid and Aligarh, who was struck by facial paralysis five months ago and is now on a break

He’s been working non-stop since 2011— editing eight films and scripting three screenplays. His repertoire includes films like Satya, Shahid, CityLights,Waiting, Aligarh and Simran. Last year, Apurva Asrani saw through the biggest controversy of his career, vis-à-vis Simran. Then, five months ago, he suddenly woke up with Bell’s Palsy, a type of facial paralysis. “It was stress induced. I couldn’t shut one eye or eat without food dribbling from the side of my mouth. It was frightening! Luckily I found doctors who helped me recover most of my face, but I needed a break from the city so that I could heal my mind too,” he says.

Apurva spent his 40th birthday in the quieter part of Goa and fell in love with a neighbourhood with more trees than people. “After 11 years of being together, my partner Siddhant and I decided to gift ourselves a shot at this life. A writer can live anywhere with good internet and Sid works in music, so this place is a godsend. We are a 45-minute flight away from Mumbai and can hop across for meetings and creative sessions easily,” he reasons. He loves Mumbai for its ‘live-and-let-live’ mindset, the freedom to be who you are and to do what you want. “What I don’t miss is the concrete and the traffic. When you waste hours stuck in jams, you try and make up for lost time during the rest of the day. Everything is hurried, you don’t live a quality life.”

Apurva Asrani with his dog

The Mumbai he grew up in wasn’t so congested and one had time to unwind. He sighs that today, when you get home from work, you’ll think 100 times to make a plan with someone living a few kilometres away. “If you make a late night of it, you start the next day under-slept and in a rush. It is unhealthy to work so hard without decompressing,” he warns, adding that at the village the only time the road is blocked is when a herd of 20 cows decides to sit down for an afternoon chill. “But they respond better to honks than Mumbai cows do,” he chuckles. “There’s time for exercise, good food, beach walks, bike rides, night outs and I still put in regular writing hours.”

Were his health issues brought on by the break of a 20-year working relationship with filmmaker Hansal Mehta and the controversy over writing credits with Kangana Ranaut on Simran? Apurva admits that while the fight did cause a lot of distress, it was his decision to go to battle. “If I’d accepted the status quo, I’d still be at parties with them and working on their next films. More than standing up against Hansal, I stood up to something that is wrong in our star-driven system; something he may also be a victim of. It came with collateral damage, but I wanted to set a precedent for other writers,” he asserts.

He informs that around that time his father needed a kidney to survive. Since waiting lists are painfully long, his mother decided to donate one of her kidneys. “All this happened after the post about Kangana and the writing credits went viral. So, while the papers were filled with malicious accusations, my brother and I waited outside the ICU praying for our parents to survive. I felt crushed emotionally,” he recollects. “But I can’t blame anyone else for my personal issues. In retrospect, I think Hansal was doing what he thought best to protect his film, but he should know I took up the fight to protect the same film.”

A year later, while working on his garden patch and his third oil painting, Apurva is also writing two screenplays. One is for a filmmaker who wants to do something out of the box. “The other is for myself. A producer who’s signed me to direct is patiently waiting for me to finish it. I’m mining from my own life so there’s a lot of introspection and rejected drafts. I’m in no rush. I don’t need to prove anything to anyone anymore,” says the National Award and Filmfare Award winner.

What about editing? “I wouldn’t give it up for anything, but it’s very hectic when you work as a ‘cutter and joiner’ with a director tapping on your shoulder. I’m happiest collaborating on films where the director wants my creative interpretation. Hansal Mehta, Nila Madhab Panda and Ram Gopal Varma have spoiled me like that,” he says.

How have his parents, brother, dog and partner reacted to the shift? He informs that while his parents, who’ve made a good recovery from the transplant, miss him, they know he’s a short flight away. “My brother is relieved to see me getting better. My dog is old and the busy Mumbai pavements used to be tough to navigate. He’s loving the long walks and the extra attention here. Sid is with me through thick and thin. We take each day as it comes without projecting too far into the future. I am grateful for the wealth of these relationships,” he says emotionally.

And colleagues? “The number of creative people who’ve moved to quieter places is staggering, so everyone is used to such shifts. Writers are famous for going into spells of hibernation to create new work, but we emerge dutifully for calls, meetings and deadlines,” he laughs.

The last six months have changed Apurva as a person. From being a social animal he can now go through days without meeting anyone. He took a workshop in a film school in Chennai recently and the dean rewarded him with a treasure trove of world cinema. “I watch these films without interruption, then, spend hours thinking about them. I’m also having more meaningful conversations here that aren’t time bound; that’s when you get to hear the best stories. It is valuable stuff for a writer,” he says.