The following are updates to previously-reported items and other recent regulatory filings and actions concerning Upper Midwest broadcast stations. This report is created by the author and is not an official report of the FCC.

Iowa

On The Go Media closed on its purchase of KLMJ/104.9 (Hampton) and KQCR-FM/98.9 (Parkersburg) from CD Broadcasting on Feb. 28.

Digital Networks-Midwest’s K31PO-D (Des Moines) was granted a move of its transmitter from its present site near Marshalltown to one between Marshalltown and Des Moines, remaining 2kW.

Minnesota

Pioneer PBS’ KSMN/20 (Worthington) reports that it went off the air Feb. 24 because of a failure of the equipment used to relay programming from its Granite Falls studio to its transmitter site near Chandler. The station’s request for special temporary authority to remain silent says the equipment cannot be repaired and they are uncertain when new equipment will arrive.

Minnesota Public Radio’s KRSW/89.3 (Worthington) reported that it returned to full power of 100kW on Feb. 28 after repairs following extreme icing earlier this year.

The FCC approved SagamoreHill of Minneapolis’ purchase of KMYN-LD/32 (Duluth) from My Central Valley, and the deal was consummated on Feb. 28. KMYN-LD continues to carry Buzzr.

Digital Networks-Midwest’s K27OW-D (Rochester) was granted a move from its present site near Austin to a site near Rochester, upgrading from 5.62kW to 8kW.

Leighton Enterprises’ KYCK/97.1 (Crookston-Grand Forks) was granted a move to a tower about five miles west of its present site, remaining 100kW and slightly increasing its antenna height from 113 to 121 meters above average terrain. The new location, in Bygland, is already home to Leighton’s KZGF/94.7 (Grand Forks) and KZLT-FM/104.3 (East Grand Forks).

Nebraska

KJSO-LP/101.3 (Omaha), owned by the North Omaha Loves Jazz Cultural Arts and Humanities Complex, reported that it went off the air Feb. 28 due to an interruption of its programming feed. KJSO-LP shares time with KXNB-LP/101.3 and the two had shared a common format at one time.

CSN International’s K255CJ/98.9 (Briggs-Omaha) was granted special temporary authority to transmit with 7 Watts so that it can return to the air by March 9, the statutory deadline for it to resume broadcasting after going silent last year. K255CJ had previously transmitted from the former WOWT(TV) building and has a construction permit to move to a different tower; the latest filing says construction at the new site cannot begin before March 9 due to a structural study and other issues. The filing also says that during its STA, K255CJ will relay KLNG/1560 (Council Bluffs) rather than KHLW/89.3 (Tabor, IA) because KHLW cannot be received at the temporary site.

NRG Media’s KROR/101.5 (Hastings) submitted a new request for special temporary authority to use 2kW from a tower near its licensed site, the KHGI-TV tower, due to work on the TV tower. KROR normally uses 100kW. The filing was identical to one submitted last June.

The FCC approved Tri-State Christian Broadcasting’s purchase of K237DV/95.3 (McCook) and the construction permit for a new 500-Watt station on 88.1 in McCook from The Praise Network.

Digital Networks-Midwest’s K36QD-D (Omaha) was granted a move to a site near Valley with 3kW directional, replacing its present 2kW facility from near Schuyler.

Wisconsin

Radio 74 Internationale’s WQMN/88.7 (Minocqua) was granted an upgrade from its present 400W/30m (class A) to 50kW/67m (C2), expanding its main coverage area to include Eagle River.

Disclosure: Jon Ellis is an employee of Gray Media Group. The statements and views expressed in this posting are his own and do not reflect those of Gray Media Group.