HONG KONG, April 30, 2012 /PRNewswire-Asia/ -- SevOne, the leader in network performance management, today announced it has expanded its partnership agreement with Terilogy, a Japan-based leading global provider of service assurance solutions, by appointing the company as a master distributor in the Asia-Pacific region. This expanded relationship solidifies Terilogy's strategic relationship with SevOne, and provides infrastructure foundation for Asian expansion.

"Terilogy has invested to meet the growing demands of Asia-Pacific based companies that recognize the importance of immediate visibility as to how their IT infrastructure is performing," stated Terilogy Chief Operating Officer Nubuo Miyamura. "SevOne is the recognized market leader as they deliver significant business value and platform differentiation. The network has become the key business platform for numerous companies and SevOne, in real-time, proactively and reliably assures peak performance at all times."

Under the partnership agreement, Terilogy will recruit and manage resellers while continuing to resell and support SevOne's performance management solution through Terilogy Japan, where SevOne is integrated into its complete suite of best-of-breed network infrastructure solutions and technologies. The company employs a team of highly experienced sales and technical support engineers and will also be managing professional services training and specialist professional services support to resellers.

"Asia-Pacific companies have a fast-growing appetite for next generation performance management technologies. This is evident by the immediate interest for SevOne's solutions that Terilogy has been experiencing," said Bill Conners, SVP of Worldwide Sales and Business Development for SevOne. "With its heritage and knowledge of the local business issues and concerns, it made perfect sense for us to take the next step with Terilogy and formalize our relationship into a master distributorship agreement. Both of our companies will benefit as we focus on expanding on our success and growing our worldwide customer base and market penetration."

About Terilogy

Terilogy Co., Ltd. provides network infrastructure solutions and technologies in Japan and internationally. The company's solutions enable information technology (IT) managers and non-technical users to manage their IT resources. The company markets its solutions primarily to telecommunications companies and Internet service providers, as well as to various IT-intensive organizations, such as financial services companies, outsourcers of IT services, application service providers, and other multinational companies. Terilogy was founded in 1989 and is headquartered in Tokyo, Japan. Terilogy Co., Ltd. is a public listed company on the JASDAQ Exchange (Code 3356). Visit us at http://www.terilogy.com.

About SevOne, Inc.