According to the Pennsylvania Department of Labor & Industry, IT managers usually require at least a bachelor's degree, however associate programs are sometimes acceptable, which translates to a demanding and lucrative career.

Vess Bakalov is the co-founder and CTO of SevOne, an IT company based in Philadelphia, and "provides the most scalable performance management solution to the world's most connected companies." You can find SevOne on Forbes Magazine's 'Most Promising Top 50 Companies' list.

What type of education is needed in your field?

"Education is a continuous process, especially when it comes to technology. Technology evolves very quickly. What has made us successful until now won't be what makes us successful tomorrow. While not an absolute requirement, having a well-rounded college education focused on the fundamentals of computing and networking (and not necessarily the latest fad) is a great investment."

What advice would you give someone pursuing a career in technology?

"Skills play a vital role in landing a job in the technology field. How one comes to have those skills is not as important. Education, however, gives the foundation on top of which skills can be built more quickly. In my experience, a well-rounded educational background helps people learn new skills faster, since they already understand the concepts of underlying technology."

What is the most relevant aspect of your education in your day-to-day job?

"Learning to learn. Learning requires a measure of discipline, concentration and passion. This goes hand in hand with learning how to research and find information about topics. Finally, in this age of informational overload, a measure of critical thinking helps separate the wheat from the chaff."

What is the most fun aspect of your job?

"Creating awesome technology while interacting with some incredibly smart individuals. I enjoy both learning and teaching. I taught as an adjunct professor in the University of Delaware for three semesters, and loved the experience. Whether it's talking to customers and explaining our technology, interacting with partners or even groups in the company - telling people about the breakthroughs and challenges of the field is always something I enjoy. I also enjoy listening and learning about their challenges, and the solutions they have created.."