An expanding Newark-based network management company was given a $1 million vote of confidence by the state's Council on Development Finance - most of it to be doled out incrementally as the firm creates new positions.

SevOne, launched in 2005 by University of Delaware graduates and recent signee of a 13-year lease for space at UD's Science, Technology and Advanced Research, or STAR, campus, was awarded a grant of $956,480 for hiring assistance and another grant of up to $90,000 to "prepare and outfit" its new digs during the council's Jan. 26 public hearing.

The larger of the two, a Delaware Strategic Fund Performance grant, is a per-person allowance that will give SevOne between $4,000 and $7,000 for every brand-new job the firm creates in the state.

"This grant encourages us to hire new people," said Mike Shanahan, chief financial officer for SevOne, which has 402 employees worldwide, nearly half of them in Delaware.

The amount paid is pegged to a job's starting salary, Shanahan said. SevOne's starting engineers, right out of school, earn in the $50,000 range. Such a hire which would net a grant payment on the lower end of the scale, he said. In return, SevOne promises to maintain that newly created position for at least three years.

"And it's a pay-as-you-go situation," Shanahan said. "So if we hire the folks we expect to, it helps us with the on-boarding and the recruiting expense."

The company projects hiring 50 new employees in Delaware in each of the next three years - and a total of 100 worldwide, Shanahan said. Most of the new hires will work in product development, customer support and quality control, he said.

Those estimates are on the conservative side, Shanahan told council members during his Jan. 26 presentation. "One of our biggest difficulties is forecasting our growth," he said. "We know we will have significant growth. When you're dealing with real estate, the ability to plan into the future for a high-tech company is a challenge, at best. And the STAR campus represented a great opportunity for us to get in on the ground floor of something that has significant expansion possibilities."

At STAR, he said, "We see an opportunity to grow, frankly, beyond the projections we've given you." The grant, he said, "represents an opportunity for us, as we grow around the world, to concentrate growth of our development and technical resources here in Delaware, at a place where we are very confident in the source of the talent that we need."

SevOne will retain its offices on New Linden Hill Road as it expands to STAR, a move Shanahan expects to take place in May.

Contact William H. McMichael at (302) 324-2812 or bmcmichael@delawareonline.com. On Twitter: @billmcmichael