Michi wrote: Masaharu Fukuyama and Miho Shiraishi ?

who is Miho Shiraishi anyway?

last time Masha was with Yuki Uchida rite?

but now she's already married to someone else. how sad.

oh btw, dont u think Goro Inagaki is cute

and Kassy dating Hiroko Hatano?

I've never seen Miho Shiraishi directly on TV but I hear she's a TV presenter & TV personality in Japan.

Here she is :

Miho Shiraishi

I also hear that Masaharu "Masha" Fukuyama & Miho already break up their romance relationship.

From other Miho's pictures that I saw, sometimes I think she looks like Masha's ex : Yuki Uchida.

Geeee,...Masha surely really loves Yuki until he has to find girl that looks like his ex.

I hear that Masha & Yuki broke their long time relationship because Masha was not ready to get married and he also made some affairs with other women.

Takashi "Kassy" Kashiwabara was also dating Miho Kanno back then ( I guess before Miho dates Goro )

I found this on a site:

she worked alongside actor Tsutsumi Shinichi (38), who plays her father in the movie. "He's very open and honest," she said, "but not my type!"

Uchiyama fans can now smile that she's not with Tsutsumi

juliana_phang wrote: i thought there was some kind of relationship between fujiwara n aaron kwok...

Are you guys serious? Last I heard, I thought she and I were an item.....

Nah, but I never anything about an Aaron Kwok dude. I thought she was with a Japanese dude. (Forgot his name although)

ahochaude wrote:

Are you guys serious? Last I heard, I thought she and I were an item.....

Nah, but I never anything about an Aaron Kwok dude. I thought she was with a Japanese dude. (Forgot his name although)

You mean Kato Masaya..hehehe..glad they broke up ( Jyodan da yo!) Anyway, She broke up with him because Kato Masaya lives in LA while she's in Japan, they could not work it out. Kato Masaya is available now I better rush to LA (yeah..as if )

juliana_phang wrote:

my goodness!

lee hom?!

uh... don't be so shock, juliana... that was a long time ago too when she visited taiwan (or HK) I think... and when he hosted her for dinner the tabloids all started talking Daijoubu dayo!