Takashi Kashiwabara was born on March 16, 1977 in Kobe, Hyogo Prefecture, Japan. Japanese actor and singer.

Takashi Kashiwara was born on March 16, 1977 in Kobe, Hyogo Prefecture, Japan. He is the eldest son in the family, and has a younger brother Kashiwara who is two years apart and a younger sister.

In 1993, at the age of 16, Kashiwara was a sophomore in high school. Because an aunt who knew each other sent his photos to participate in the sixth "junonsuperboy" audition sponsored by Junon magazine. Originally did not intend to participate in the competition, he agreed to participate in the competition with the help of his mother. In the final talent show, he won the crown by singing a rock-tick song, thus embarking on the road of acting.

In 1994, Takashi Kashiwara participated in the first TV series "Shadow of Youth" and officially debuted.

In March 1995, Kashiwara Takashi co-starred with Miho Nakayama and Yoji Toyokawa in the film "Love Letter" directed by Shunji Iwai, playing the role of the teenager "Fujii Tree". For this film, he won the Newcomer Actor Award at the 19th Japan Film Awards, the Newcomer Actor Award at the 10th Takasaki Festival, and the Newcomer Award at the 21st Osaka Film Festival.

In August 1995, Takashi Kashiwara collaborated with Wenko Asano and Toshiro Yanagiba on the TV series The Last Incident of Myoko Samuji, playing the role of juvenile delinquent Takeo Hyuga. In November, he starred in the movie "Legend of Fighting Cards" adapted from the manga, playing the role of mahjong genius "Shigeru Akagi".

In January 1996, Takashi Kashiwara played the role of "Yusuke Hasebe" in the campus drama series "White Line Stream", which won the 8th Japanese Drama Academy Award for Best Film.

In April 1996, he starred in the cooking TV series "Shotai's Sushi", playing a hot-blooded teenager.

In October 1996, Takashi Kashiwara and Ryoko Sato starred in the TV series "Mischievous Kiss", which was adapted from the manga, and was well known to the audience for playing the role of the talented teenager "Naoki Irie".

In April 1998, Takashi Kashiwahara starred with Nanami Suzuki and Seiichi Tanabe in the film "The Edge of The Heart" directed by Hirosumasa Taguchi, challenging the role of the six-fold personality for the first time. The film was not only shortlisted for the Young Director Award at the 10th Tokyo International Film Festival, but Takashi Kashiwara also won the Newcomer Award at the 23rd Golden Flying Awards for this drama.

In 2013, in July, Takashi Kashiwara made a cameo appearance in episode 15 of "A Kiss and a Promise ~ Love in Tokyo", playing the role of doctor "Takashi Yamashita".

In January 2000, Kashiwara Takashi and model Hiroko Hatano met through the filming of the TV series "Eros Mischief" and quickly developed a romantic relationship; in December 2002, Kashiwara Takashi had to temporarily interrupt filming due to neck, shoulder and wrist disease and migraines. During his recuperation, Hiroko Hatano accompanied Him to his rehabilitation, and the two began to live together; in June 2004, Kashiwara Takashi and model Hiroko Hatano entered the marriage hall together; in February 2006, the two decided to divorce for their respective careers.

In May 2010, Kashiwara Takashi's relationship with actor Yuki Uchida was exposed. The two worked together on commercials in 1995 and the TV series Giant Wings in 2001, but have not worked together since. It was not until 2009 that the two met again, because of the same friends to increase the opportunity to meet each other, and officially began to communicate at the end of the year.