Novak Djokovic says Nenad Zimonjic is like an "older brother" as the former doubles No. 1 joined him at the Monte Carlo Masters.

The men’s world No. 1 is in Monaco for his hometown event as a resident of the Principality, and it represents his first action since splitting with his long-time coach, Goran Ivanisevic.

Ivanisevic became the Serbian’s coach in 2019 but their split was announced towards the end of March, leading to speculation that a new coach would be brought in.

Djokovic spoke to Eurosport to discuss the tournament, but also touched on Zimonjic and, later, Rafael Nadal.

For now, it appears no decision has been made but he explained the background of the relationship and how they started working together.

He said: “We have known each other really well for more than 20 years. He’s been always like an older brother to me. A mentor, a friend, who always tried to help me as a person and as a player.

“When I stopped with Goran, I was starting my clay-court preparation in Belgrade and he was there. He came to the court, and we really enjoyed our collaboration and I asked him to come here for a few weeks.

“We are trying to make the most of it. He’s been giving me really useful advice to find the proper position when I’m approaching the net, and it’s something I’m not best at because I don't play as many doubles matches.

“And Nenad was one of the best doubles players in the world, he’s won many Slams and tournaments, been No. 1 on the tour.”

'For the sake of all tennis' - Djokovic hopes for Nadal return

Asked about the absence of Nadal from the tournament, Djokovic was hopeful that he and the veteran Spaniard would get one last match with one another.

Nadal withdrew from the Monte Carlo Masters and has only played at the Brisbane International event at the start of the year.

“As a tennis fan I want him to play at least one more tournament before he retires,” Djokovic said. “He was saying that this might be his last season, but he just played one tournament in Brisbane but hasn't played since.

“We travelled together to America. I saw him at Indian Wells, he was trying his best to play. It’s his favourite surface. We all know what he’s done on clay in his career, particularly Roland-Garros. That’s his goal, we all know that, he’s been saying it.

“For the sake of all tennis and Roland-Garros in particular, we hope that he can play there.

It would be great to have another great encounter.”

Rafael Nadal & Novak Djokovic

Image credit: Eurosport

Some of the best matches have taken place between Djokovic and Nadal over the years, and he reflected on his own personal highlights from their rivalry.

He added: “The one to remember that I won, the Australian Open final which went almost six hours. In 2012, and of course the first time I won against him on clay, here in 2013.

“The first time I won against him in Roland-Garros, I think it was 2015, but I lost way more times against him on clay. I think we played more than 50 times. It’s amazing, I’ve been very proud of that rivalry. I think we can probably reflect on it and appreciate it more once we retire.

“When you’re active, there’s not much time to reflect, even if you win a Grand Slam. It’s a non-stop journey. It’s very rewarding but there’s not much chance to reflect.”

- - -