Nenad Zimonjic has shed light on his relationship with Novak Djokovic and spoken about his role as his fellow Serbian’s coach.

The former doubles world No 1 hinted that the pair’s collaboration could be over as he referenced his stint as coach in the past tense.

Djokovic worked with Zimonjic in preparation for the clay-court season and was coached by his compatriot at last month’s Monte Carlo Masters.

The 24-time Grand Slam champion reached the semi-finals in Monte Carlo to achieve his best result at the ATP Masters 1000 event since winning it for the second time in 2015.

Prior to his partnership with Zimonjic, Djokovic had split with his long-time coach Goran Ivanisevic in March after his shock third round exit at the Indian Wells Open.

Ivanisevic, a former Wimbledon champion, had been part of Djokovic’s team since 2019 and helped the Serbian enjoy a hugely successful spell in his thirties.

Djokovic has not confirmed whether Zimonjic will remain a part of his team and recently revealed moving forward without a coach was an option he was considering.

“I am considering that as well, whether I should or shouldn’t have the coach,” the 36-year-old told The Guardian in April.

“I had a really good time with Nenad Zimonjic as my coach the last three weeks so we’re talking about continuing and seeing. Let’s see, I’m going to make the decision in the next period.”

Djokovic is set to play his first tournament since Monte Carlo at the Italian Open next week, having opted to skip the Madrid Open.

READ MORE: Novak Djokovic rolled the dice ahead of the French Open – and he has hit the jackpot

During an interview on the Mastorija TV show, Zimonjic was asked how his partnership with the world No 1 came about.

“Novak asked me, Can you be there for the training sessions, for the matches? Because I know him very well (translated from Serbian),” Zimonjic explained.

“On the other hand, he is someone who has tremendous respect for me and knows how much I know. I’m glad that I was able to help, and it was a great experience for me.”

Djokovic was full of praise for what Zimonjic was offering as a coach as he opened up on his close relationship with the former doubles star in Monte Carlo.

“We have known each other really well for more than 20 years. He’s been always like an older brother to me. A mentor, a friend, who always tried to help me as a person and as a player,” he told Eurosport.

“When I stopped with Goran, I was starting my clay-court preparation in Belgrade and he was there. He came to the court, and we really enjoyed our collaboration and I asked him to come here for a few weeks.

“We are trying to make the most of it. He’s been giving me really useful advice to find the proper position when I’m approaching the net, and it’s something I’m not best at because I don’t play as many doubles matches.

“And Nenad was one of the best doubles players in the world, he’s won many Slams and tournaments, been No 1 on the tour.”