NEW YORK, June 21—Nia Long, one of Hollywood’s most beloved icons, will publish a memoir with 13a, an imprint of Gallery Books. An intimate portrait of untold stories and personal reflections, the memoir focuses on Nia’s position as a celebrated actress, mother, activist, and long-standing cultural figure with decades of experience in Hollywood. “I am thrilled to have found a home for my memoir at Gallery and 13a,” says Nia. “My steps to finding divine purpose have been thoughtful and intentional. For better or worse, you will find truth and transparency in the storytelling, sprinkled with 90s nostalgia.”

Nia Long made the transition from 90s “It” girl to seasoned screen veteran, without ever compromising her voice and who she wants to be in this world. She is central in conversations about the nuances of being a working Black actress, starring in numerous classic coming-of-age films that changed the face of Hollywood. Nine separate Essence covers, and a bevy of dedicated song lyrics by hip-hop legends (Jay-Z, Missy Elliott, A Tribe Called Quest, Nas, Snoop Dogg, and more), speak to her cultural impact and reverence among peers. Throughout her storied career, Nia has used her platform and voice to champion Black women, to advocate for gender pay equity and inclusion across the board, and to break barriers in an entertainment industry rife with racism, sexism, and ageism. The memoir is a candid account of Nia’s life and journey as one of Hollywood’s most resilient, relatable stars.

“Nia Long’s life has unfolded on screen, right before our eyes, from Boys in the Hood to Love Jones and beyond. Yet there is just something so relatable about her. She is a trailblazer who is all about action. We are looking forward to her telling her truth as only Nia can,” says Charles Suitt, Publisher of 13a.

Vice President, Executive Editor Pamela Cannon acquired World Rights for 13a from Verve. Please contact Paul O’Halloran at paul.o’halloran@simonandschuster.com for rights information.

Nia Long is widely known for her iconic work and legendary roles across both film and television. Long can most recently be seen in the worldwide hit Netflix comedy YOU PEOPLE from Kenya Barris, starring opposite Eddie Murphy, Jonah Hill and Julia Louis-Dreyfus, debuting at #1 on Netflix. Long also recently reprised her role in THE BEST MAN franchise alongside the original cast for the limited series THE BEST MAN: THE FINAL CHAPTERS for Peacock, for which her performance earned her a 2023 NAACP Award. She also headlined Sony’s follow-up to the hugely successful and critically acclaimed box office hit SEARCHING, entitled MISSING, along with Storm Reid. Long previously produced and starred in the Netflix smash hit thriller FATAL AFFAIR which debuted at #1 on the platform. She also starred with Samuel L. Jackson and Anthony Mackie in the Apple TV+ feature film THE BANKER. A four-time NAACP Award winner, Long has starred in BOYZ N THE HOOD, FRIDAY, LOVE JONES, THE FRESH PRINCE OF BEL-AIR, THIRD WATCH, Tyler Perry’s THE SINGLE MOMS CLUB, PREMONITION, ARE WE THERE YET, MADE IN AMERICA, NCIS: LOS ANGELES and EMPIRE, as well as the Sundance Film LEMON, Netflix’s ROXANNE ROXANNE opposite Chanté Adams and Mahershala Ali, Kenya Barris’s #BLACKAF, and Justin Simien’s DEAR WHITE PEOPLE, among others. Long is a longtime supporter of the United Nations Foundation and currently resides in Los Angeles.

13a, named for the amendment that abolished slavery, publishes the leading Black voices in sports, entertainment, lifestyle, and other areas. Its authors include Patti LaBelle, Stephen A. Smith, Aisha “Pinky” Cole, and Nia Long. 13a’s books celebrate Black voices and inspire all readers to follow their dreams.

Gallery Books, a division of Simon & Schuster, is an imprint dedicated to publishing a variety of must-read books on a wide array of topics. Launched in 2010, Gallery is designed to showcase established voices and to introduce emerging new ones—in both fiction and nonfiction. Gallery Books is the publisher of Taste: My Life Through Food by Stanley Tucci, The Last Black Unicorn by Tiffany Haddish, Where Tomorrow’s Aren’t Promised by Carmelo Anthony, The Girl with the Lower Back Tattoo by Amy Schumer, The It Girl by Ruth Ware and Anna: The Biography by Amy Odell.