Household icon Nia Long is letting us in on her life behind closed doors!

According to Essence, actress Nia Long will be exclusively delivering a powerful tell-all about the “better” and “worse” of being one of the most-celebrated ladies in Hollywood.

The forthcoming memoir, scheduled to be published by Gallery Books imprint 13a, is reportedly set to explore Nia Long’s decades-long career… beyond the flashing cameras and red carpets. Readers can also expect a candid look into her journey through motherhood, social advocacy, and self-awareness.

When speaking of the anticipated book of reflections, the 52-year-old told the outlet,

“I am thrilled to have found a home for my memoir at Gallery and 13a. My steps to finding divine purpose have been thoughtful and intentional. For better or worse, you will find truth and transparency in the storytelling, sprinkled with 90s nostalgia.”

13a publisher Charles Suitt added:

“Nia Long’s life has unfolded on screen, right before our eyes, from ‘Boyz n the Hood’ to ‘Love Jones’ and beyond. Yet there is just something so relatable about her. She is a trailblazer who is all about action. We are looking forward to her telling her truth, as only Nia can.”

With an illustrious résumé in the film/TV field, Long’s classic contribution to the industry has (without a doubt) deemed her a legend of the art.

You may have first grown familiar with the Brooklyn native during one of her earlier characters in a 1986 episode of NBC’s sitcom 227, which starred the honorable Marla Gibbs and Jackée Harry.

However, from there, Long hustled her way up the acting ladder in the 1990s/2000s, taking on a number of roles that serve as staples in Black cinema today.

Along with ‘Boyz in the Hood’ and ‘Love Jones,’ the 4-time NAACP winner is widely known for her groundbreaking work in ‘The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air,‘ ‘Friday,‘ ‘Soul Food,‘ and ‘The Best Man,‘ among a list of others.

Long took to her Instagram to express her gratitude for having the opportunity to bring her anticipated biography to the shelves.

With the headline of the Essence article attached, she wrote in a caption,

“The best chapter is the next chapter! Incredibly grateful for my kick a** team.”

As you may know, it’s been a rocky past year for Long, who recently went through a notorious split from her former partner, NBA coach Ime Udoka.

Controversy struck after Ime Udoka was exposed for having an affair with one of his then-Boston Celtics female colleagues in 2022.

Long and Ime Udoka got engaged in 2015 and share an 11-year-old son together.