20. RESERVATION ROAD (2007)

“Reservation Road” was considered an awards frontrunner right up until people actually saw the film. Director Terry George’s disappointing follow-up to “Hotel Rwanda” tells the story of a man seeking justice for his young son killed in a hit-and-run accident, who does not realize how close he is to the guilt-ridden perpetrator. The actors do their best with the melodramatic script, including Connelly in the role of the boy’s grief-stricken mother.

19. HULK (2003)

Connelly’s second outing as a superhero’s girlfriend was in Ang Lee’s uneven big-screen adaptation of “The Incredible Hulk.” She plays Betty Ross, who is both the love interest of Dr. Bruce Banner (Eric Bana) and the estranged daughter of the general trying to capture him (Sam Elliot).

18. INVENTING THE ABBOTTS (1997)

Connelly is the best part of this middling indie movie about a messy love triangle between two poor brothers and the wealthy sisters they have their eyes on in a 1950s midwestern town. Though she is cast as a stereotypical seductive “bad girl,” as she often would be throughout her career, she nevertheless gives her character an interesting edge.

17. HIGHER LEARNING (1995)

Connelly has a small part in John Singleton’s college drama as the lesbian leader of a campus feminist group who recruits and falls in love with a naive freshman.

16. DARK WATER (2005)

Connelly elevates this fairly average horror movie about a mother and daughter who move into a haunted New York apartment. She doesn’t play the role like a character in a horror movie, but rather as a mother terrified for herself and her daughter.

15. THE HOT SPOT (1990)

Dennis Hopper directed Connelly in this obscure little neo-noir. The film was Connelly’s transition from a child star to adult actress, though unfortunately that meant no shortage of scenes shot from the perspective of the male gaze. She plays a sweet, innocent bookkeeper trapped in a one-horse town who catches the eye of a rough and tumble drifter.

14. ONCE UPON A TIME IN AMERICA (1984)

12-year-old Connelly was cast in her first film role in Sergio Leone’s Jewish gangster epic. She played the younger version of Deborah, the future love interest of Robert DeNiro’s New York thug.

13. ALITA: BATTLE ANGEL (2019)

Connelly returned to the world of blockbuster spectacle in Robert Rodriguez’s adaptation of the popular manga. “Alita” tells the story of a cyborg girl who is rescued by a kindly scientist. Connelly plays Dr. Chiren, the scientist’s estranged ex-wife who now works for the enigmatic leader who rules over their city.

12. MULHOLLAND FALLS (1996)

This 1950s noir features one of Connelly’s many femme fatales. She’s the victim at the heart of this murder mystery, a lost Hollywood girl who we come to learn has had quite an intimate relationship with one of the detectives investigating her death.

11. BLOOD DIAMOND (2006)

In this action thriller set against the backdrop of the African diamond trade, Connelly plays a journalist working to expose the truth of the titular “blood diamonds.” Her serious, sympathetic performance nearly covers up the fact that the movie doesn’t realize her character exploits poor Africans almost as much as Leonardo DiCaprio’s sleazy diamond smuggler.

10. THE ROCKETEER (1991)

Connelly was often cast for her classic movie star looks, and that was perhaps most apparent in her role as Jenny Blake in Disney’s period superhero movie. She projects a sweet, retro wholesomeness as the love interest of stunt pilot Cliff Secord (Bill Campbell).

9. POLLOCK (2000)

Connelly was tapped by Ed Harris for his biopic about the famous abstract painter Jackson Pollock. She plays Pollock’s mistress, Ruth Kligman, who drives a wedge between the artist and his wife.

8. NOAH (2014)

Connelly reteamed with both her “Requiem for a Dream” director and her “Beautiful Mind” co-star in this alternative take on a biblical epic. As Noah’s wife, she holds on with quiet strength as she goes up against Russell Crowe’s unrelenting shipbuilder to protect their children from his rage.

7. HOUSE OF SAND AND FOG (2003)

Connelly faces off against Ben Kingsley in this adaptation of the novel of the same name. She plays an alcoholic who loses her house when she neglects to pay her property taxes. The place is bought at auction by an Iranian immigrant struggling to provide for his family. Connelly isn’t afraid to make her character unlikeable, but you can’t help but root for her.

6. PHENOMENA (1985)

Dario Argento’s horror film (released as “Creepers” in the US) was Connelly’s first leading role. She plays a young woman attending a remote Swiss boarding school who discovers she has psychic powers that allow her to communicate with insects and uses them to pursue a serial killer.

5. LITTLE CHILDREN (2006)

Connelly plays a cold and calculating documentary filmmaker who cares a lot more about her films’ subjects than she does about her husband (Patrick Wilson). Like “American Beauty,” “Little Children” explores the darkness, unhappiness and resentment hidden underneath American suburbia. The performances are strong and engaging throughout, and Connelly is no exception.

4. LABYRINTH (1986)

Connelly first gained wide public recognition when she starred opposite David Bowie in Jim Henson’s fantasy adventure. She spends most of the film acting against Henson’s fanciful puppets, and it’s her sincere performance that grounds the film in some sort of reality.

3. DARK CITY (1998)

In Alex Proyas’s sci-fi film noir, Connelly once again fills in the role of the mysterious femme fatale. Seen primarily in broken memories, she plays the wife of John Murdoch (Rufus Sewell), a man struggling to figure who he is and the truth behind the strange city in which he finds himself.

2. REQUIEM FOR A DREAM (2000)

“Dream” was Connelly’s first role to get her serious attention as a talented dramatic actor, and not just as a sex symbol. She plays a drug addict in a relationship with another addict (Jared Leto) whose happy middle class life is being lost. Connelly goes all out with her portrayal of her character’s physical and mental collapse as she turns to prostitution to support her habit.

1. A BEAUTIFUL MIND (2001)

Director Ron Howard cast Connelly as the wife of tortured mathmetician John Nash (Russell Crowe) in this biopic about a genius coping with mental illness. As Alicia, Connelly is the heart of the film; even before his symptoms of schizophrenia begin to appear, Nash is cold and calculating, and Alicia brings out his humanity. Her powerful performance earned her a Best Supporting Actress Oscar.