National Benzole was a British petroleum brand used in the United Kingdom from 1919 to the 1960s. In 1957, the National Benzole Co. became wholly owned by Shell-Mex and B.P. Ltd, but continued its separate trading identity.

What does it have to do with the Smurfs?[]

Ever since 1978, this gas company launched a line of Smurfs figurines. In order to promote these and their own gas stations, National Benzole created a series of animated commercials featuring Smurfs which began airing on May 20th, 1978. These commercials were created before the cartoon series by Hanna-Barbera, instead resembling The Smurfs and the Magic Flute film. This commercial series featured and introduced a Smurf who went by the name of National Smurf, who leads the other Smurfs into helping and working in the gas station and keeping it good. There are other Smurfs introduced in the advertisements, such as "Helpful Smurf", "Cheerful Smurf", "Oily Smurf", "Busy Smurf", and "Shine Smurf", although there was also one no other than Brainy Smurf, who has a book named "Rhymes". And the jingle song is sung to the tune of Father Abraham's Smurf song.

The first commercial has the National Smurf instructing the Smurfs into doing a perfect job. He is satisfied with how the Smurfs line up in order together so they can start working. National then allows them to help the car by filling in the gasoline, checking the temperature, and filling in the tire with air. Brainy gets blown away while National Smurf drives the car away. The Smurfs place the signs they were holding in the beginning of the commercial.

Note: This one has dialogue for all of the Smurfs in the advertisement.

The second commercial has the same scenes used in the first commercial while National Smurf explains the things the station will do while their job is done.

Note: At the time the commercial ends, National sends a message to the viewers giving them quick advice on driving the car steadily and carefully and not to speed. His voice is heard at the end saying "Thank you!"

The third commercial has the Smurfs singing the jingle song, in which, like mentioned before, is sung by the same tune of Father Abraham's Smurfs song. (See lyrics below).

Note: National Smurf doesn't have a mustache like in the first and second commercial.

The fourth commercial has the Smurfs sing a quick song about the station. The lyrics were:

"Well please to meet you, how'd you do! Welcome to National! So glad you're here and have no fear we do you proud!"

Note: National Smurf wears a coat while wiping the sign.

The fifth, sixth, and seventh commercial has the Smurfs saying their names.

The eighth commercial had National Smurf and the Smurfs marching and acting like if they were in the army.

Note: National Smurf gets his mustache back in this episode.

The final commercial features a stadium where the Smurfs race a clock in a marathon involving them doing their gas station duties. At the end, four female Smurfs resembling Smurfette are holding letter posters while the Smurfs are rewarded, in which Papa Smurf finally appears in that commercial in the end part while the Smurfs sing the jingle song.

Jingle Song[]

Lyrics:

National Smurf: May we introduce ourselves!

Helpful Smurf: We are Smurfs...

Cheery Smurf: ...not gnomes...

Brainy Smurf: ...or elves! (pulled away)

National: We all work at National.

Helpful: Giving help...

Cheery: ...and fun...

Brainy: ..for all! (a Smurf who is standing on him accidentally covers Brainy's eyes with his hat)

National: We call it service with a Smurf!

Helpful: Petrol...

Oily: ...oil...

Busy Smurf: ...and air...

Brainy: ...with mirth!

National: National's the one place on earth.....

Smurfs: You get service with a Smurf!

This full-version of the song is used in the third commercial. The first and second had a short version in the end of the commercial, using the last part of the song: "National's the one place on Earth, you get service with a Smurf."

Merchandise[]

Ever since then, besides giving action figures based on the Smurfs, they also did other things, such as making pictures featuring Smurfs, gave out Smurfs comic stories, such as King Smurf, watches, etc.

Trivia[]

This might count as a "non-canonical" Smurf presentation due to it being an advertisement featuring the Smurfs.

This is also a British commercial series only involving British voice actors with no American voice actors, although it is not related with the UK dub of the animated film adaptation to The Smurfs and the Magic Flute.

The 1978 National Benzole commercials marked the very first time The Smurfs spoke in English. This predates the 1979 UK and 1983 US dub of The Smurfs and The Magic Flute, alongside the 1981 cartoon series from Hanna-Barbera.

The slogan "You Get Service With A Smurf" and the jingle would later be reused in a series of Australian commercials for BP in 1979, One commercial had Papa Smurf singing the lyrics instead of National Smurf, and the animation was handled by an unknown animation studio due to it being handled outside of the US and having no relevance to the Hanna-Barbera cartoon. Papa Smurf and the other smurfs were also voiced by unknown Australian actors. The Australian commercials were notable for having more fluid animation. The Australian commercials were used to be uploaded on YouTube sometime around 2009/10, but are now lost and hard to track down.

The song "Welcome To Smurfland" [1] from the 1981 album "The Smurfs All-Star Show" actually came from the National Benzole commercials as a different jingle.

Gallery[]