THE HAGUE, Netherlands — The battle to carve up Holland’s cable territories by some of the biggest Western players appears to be coming to a head, with a consortium led by France Telecom looking to be in pole position as the highest bidder for the territory’s largest cable company, Casema.

France Telecom, in partnership with Holland’s Rabobank, has beaten back bids by U.S. West and United International Holdings (UIH) with a 1.75 billion guilder ($820 million) offer for Casema, according to the Dutch newspaper De Volkskrant.

Both France Telecom and KPN, the Dutch telephone and postal company, have refused comment on the report, but a spokesperson for KPN told Daily Variety that negotiations on the Casema sale were in their 11th hour and could be wrapped in a matter of days. Sources close to U.S. West confirmed the company is not currently in the running for the Casema property. UIH could not be reached for comment.

KPN was ordered by the Dutch government nearly a year ago to reduce its shares in Casema from 77% to 20% if it wanted to be a candidate for a telephony license. The Dutch telco had attempted to sell all of Vision Networks, which house its cable interests, but bidders were only interested in Casema and its 1.2 million cable subscribers. Vision Networks’ other properties includes cable investments in France, Poland, the Czech Republic and the U.K. through Telecential.

France Telecom also is in the running for a telephony license in Holland, and with ownership of Casema, is likely to become KPN’s strongest competitor.

But Holland may be just the first stop for the French telco in what could be a strategy of using cable investments to move into telephony in other European territories. France Telecom is also reported to be in talks with a cable operator in Spain to bid for a telecom license in that territory.

The French telco belongs to one of two international alliances of telecoms pitted against each other in the race to carve up European territories. France Telekom is a partner with Deutsche Telekom in the Global One telecoms alliance, which includes the U.S.-based Sprint. KPN is in partnership with AT&T in the U.S., Swisscom, and Telia of Sweden in another competing alliance called Unisource.