HATTIESBURG, MS (WDAM) - The University of Southern Mississippi will soon change their Golden Eagle logo, as soon as feedback is gathered from fans to help create the final design.

USM alum Rodney Richardson ('94) of Rare Design created two options for the new Golden Eagle: "Traditional Eye" and "Dynamic Eye."

The difference in the two logo options is, as described in the title, the Eagle's eye. The traditional version kept the same eye that the Golden Eagle has now.

The dynamic version has more gold inside the eye, which several Southern Miss fans have called a "fierce look."

The logo change is the result of a 2011 ruling by the United States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO), which said USM's Golden Eagle head too closely resembled the logo of the Iowa Hawkeyes.

The university said they have "worked successfully with the University of Iowa in recent months" to ensure an agreement with the new Golden Eagle logo.Southern Miss fans can give their official feedback on either option by clicking here.

The results will be used by Richardson and licensing agent Licensing Resource Group to select and finalize the logo. Feedback must be submitted by Friday, November 21.

WDAM has created a one-day poll to measure which Eagle logo is the favorite among viewers. To participate, visit the WDAM homepage and click on the poll at the top of the page.

History of the Logo

USM's nickname Golden Eagles was adopted in 1972. The first version of an "attack eagle" logo appeared the following year in publications. Since then, seven different "attack eagle" logos have been used by the university.The current Golden Eagles logo was unveiled in 2003, which transformed from the "attack eagle" to the profile of a Golden Eagle.

A mandate forced Southern Miss to change its Golden Eagle logo when the USPTO Trademark Trial and Appeal Board claimed the "overall similarity in appearance" of the logo "creates virtually identical commercial impressions" when compared to the Iowa Hawkeye.

About Rare Design

Southern Miss alum Rodney Richardson ('94), owner of firm Rare Design, helped the university create the new logo.Rare Design has worked with numerous college and professional teams on graphic design and brand identity, including the Houston Texans, New Orleans Pelicans, Memphis Grizzlies and the Charlotte Hornets.