Rocky & Bullwinkle entertained a generation of children way back when, and now the duo is back for a show Amazon thinks kids will really like. Amazon Prime Video will soon unleash The Adventures of Rocky and Bullwinkle onto the world, which will be a modern take on the cartoon duo first introduced to the world back in the late '50s and early '60s. The iconic squirrel and moose combo have certainly changed since then, but much like Bullwinkle never being able to pull a rabbit out of a hat, some things will always be the same.

The Adventures of Rocky and Bullwinkle will obviously have Bullwinkle J. Moose and Rocky the Flying Squirrel in tow, and they won't be the only familiar faces from the original series. Fearless leader will be back to try and conquer the world, and he'll have his cronies Boris Badenov and Natasha Fatale to help his plans along. Of course, the trio's plans will often be foiled by Rocky and Bullwinkle, who often unwittingly save the day amidst their daily activities. No episode count for the upcoming series has been released, but the show is set to premiere on May 11.

Outside of the franchise's original animator Jay Ward's daughter Tiffany serving as executive producer, The Adventures of Rocky and Bullwinkle does not have anyone who was part of the original series on its staff. That's not a huge deal as the team is loaded with talent as legendary voice actress Tara Strong will voice Rocky the Flying Squirrel. As for Bullwinkle, he'll be voiced by newcomer Brad Norman. While Norman's resume is a bit thin compared to Strong's, his Bullwinkle voice is on point as he can be heard all throughout the show's first trailer:

As one can assume from the trailer, The Adventures of Rocky and Bullwinkle is quite a bit different from the original series style and tone wise. That's to be expected, as the things that made children laugh during the Cold War era won't be the same things that make children laugh now. The show's other executive producer is Scott Fellows, who has made a name for himself with shows like Johnny Test, Ned's Declassified School Survival Guide, and many others. With Fellows guidance and a talented cast, this new series seems "primed," to be a hit for Amazon.