BEFORE his retirement, Amar'e Stoudemire shared the court with his other Miami Heat and New York Knicks teammates.

When it comes to his life outside of the NBA, Amar'e is married to fashion designer and podcaster Alexis Welch.

Who is Amar'e Stoudemire's wife Alexis Welch?

Born on February 27, 1983, Alexis Welch is a podcast host and stylist married to Miami Heat alum Amar'e Stoudemire.

On December 12, 2012, Alexis and Amar'e tied the knot and held a small ceremony in their New York City apartment.

On June 29, 2013, the couple held a larger celebration in Miami, which was attended by Carmelo Anthony, Iman Shumpert, and Victor Cruz.

Regarding her marriage to her basketball player husband, Alexis told ESSENCE: "I just feel like he's my rock, I lean on him.

"I actually feel like with us growing up, he helped me to really come into my own as a woman.

"He brought that out of me, that confidence. As the leader of our family, I look up to him to be a great example for our sons and then our daughters for what a man should be."

Amar'e echoed similar sentiments and shared: "Alexis is very charismatic. She's a passionate mother and she's very supportive and encouraging.

"I probably love Alexis' heart the most. She doesn't have a mean bone in her body.

"You want that type of atmosphere around you, you want that same type of character around your children. That's what makes her so special to me."

How did Amar'e meet Alexis?

Amar'e and Alexis met for the first time when they were 19 years old in Phoenix, Arizona.

Following their separate attendance at a Nelly concert, the two crossed paths at a club after-party.

Recalling how they encountered one another, Alexis remembered: "I was at the Nelly concert, and my sister and I went to an after-party.

"Long story short, we were in the back because we were underage.

"I remember seeing him in a Joe Montana jersey and that stood out to me being from Kansas City, Missouri."

On June 2, 2012, the NBA star proposed to Alexis while they were visiting Paris.

"Everybody knew but me, I was a little taken aback," recalled the stylist.

"So long story short, we go to dinner, come back to see the Eiffel Tower and the lights, and there he has the bed of rose petals leading to the balcony.

"It was a beautiful night and we go outside, and we just started talking about our future."

She reflected: "I didn't notice he was nervous either. Basically, he was talking, and then, he got up and got down on one knee.

"He just told me that he wanted to spend the rest of his life with me and our family, I cried."

How many children do they have?

Amar'e and Alexis have four children together, two sons and two daughters.

Their eldest child and daughter Ar'e was born in 2005, while their first son Amar'e Jr was born in 2006.

In 2008, the pair welcomed their third child and second daughter Assata.

On May 21, 2020, the Stoudemires expanded their family further with the addition of their fourth child and second son Alijah.