SUNSET BEACH– Jesse James has issued a public apology to his wife, Sandra Bullock, and his three children.

People magazine obtained a statement from James saying, “the vast majority of the allegations reported are untrue and unfounded. Beyond that, I will not dignify these private matters with any further public comment.”

Bullock, one of Orange County’s best known movies stars, left Sunset Beach after reports surfaced that her marriage may be in trouble.

The Oscar-winning actress has reportedly left her husband of nearly five years and has canceled her appearance at the London premiere of “The Blind Side,” citing “unforeseen personal reasons,” she said in a prepared statement.

In Touch magazine is reporting that while Bullock was filming her award-winning role in Atlanta, James was having an affair with model Michelle “Bombshell” McGee in Los Angeles.

McGee is said to have worked as a stripper in San Diego. Us Weekly reports she worked on an adult Web site called SocalGlamourgirls.com where customers can pay to have Web chats with “beautiful bikini models, sexy school girls and topless glamour models.”

James does not directly address allegations of the affair in his statement, but says he takes responsibility for his family’s pain, People reported.

“There is only one person to blame for this whole situation, and that is me. It’s because of my poor judgment that I deserve everything bad that is coming my way.

“This has caused my wife and kids pain and embarrassment beyond comprehension and I am extremely saddened to have brought this on them. I am truly very sorry for the grief I have caused them. I hope one day they can find it in their hearts to forgive me.”

Us Weekly has posted a photo of James taking his three children to school in Huntington Beach Thursday. James was wearing his wedding ring and a black hat pulled low.

The magazine also reported James, a frequent Twitter use, canceled his account Wednesday.

During the March 7 Oscars, Bullock and James seemed happy. He cried when Bullock gave her speech and afterwards told People magazine, “Nobody deserves this more and works harder. I’m so proud of her.”

Days after her Best Actress Oscar win, Bullock was seen shopping in Old Town Seal Beach with James’ daughters, Sunny and Chandler. She was smiling and buying toys for her youngest stepdaughter. Click here to see a slideshow of Bullock and James in their Sunset Beach home.

Bullock and James have made headlines in recent months — from custody battles with James’ ex-wife and former porn star Janine Lindemulder to a search that turned into a community effort to find the couple’s lost pit bull, Cinnabun and now, a possibly broken marriage.

Bullock married the motorcycle mogul and Monster Garage star in July 2005. Some thought the couple a strange match, including Donald Trump, who said on national television during his show, “Celebrity Apprentice,” that he wondered what Bullock saw in James,” an entertainment blog reported.

Despite all the talk, the couple always seemed a solid pair.

Some are speculating Bullock may have fallen victim to the “Oscar curse” – a legend that actresses who win the award soon lose their relationship.

Hilary Swank, Halle Berry, Reese Witherspoon, Julia Roberts and Kate Winslet are among those who broke up with their significant others shortly after winning best actress, according to CBS News.