Sandra Bullock‘s iconic Hollywood career speaks for itself, but her ex-husband, Jesse James, also knows a thing or two about being a star. The Outlaw Garage host is a TV personality, loving dad and the ex-spouse of one of showbiz’s most beloved actresses, but there is still a lot to learn about Jesse.

The former pair’s love story first began in December 2003. At the time, Sandra took her godson on a trip to tour Jesse’s garage, West Coast Choppers, because he was a fan of the hunk’s show, Monster Garage. During their first meeting, sparks flew between the Blind Side actress and the motorcycle guru.

Just two years later in July 2005, Sandra and Jesse exchanged vows during a private ceremony in Santa Barbara, California. At the time she married the Jesse James is a Dead Man star, Sandra also became the stepmom to his three kids, Chandler, Jesse Jr. and Sunny.

It seemed things were going well for the famous twosome following their nuptials. Aside from the sweet red carpet outings and anniversary celebrations over the years, the Speed alum praised Jesse during her acceptance speech at the Golden Globes in January 2010.

“To my husband, there is no surprise that my work got better when I met you because I never knew what it felt like for someone to have my back,” she gushed on stage while accepting the award for Best Actress for her role in The Blind Side. “So thank you! ”

However, reports of multiple alleged affairs surfaced just two months later in March. Sandra officially filed for divorce in April and it was finalized in June. Fortunately, the Miss Congeniality star turned pain into purpose when she adopted her son, Louis, later that year. Sandra also adopted her daughter, Laila, in 2015.

Although the Proposal star wasn’t looking for love following her 2010 divorce, everything changed when Sandra hired professional photographer Bryan Randall for her son’s birthday party in 2015. The two quickly fell in love and have been dating ever since. Bryan has also filled in the role of Louis and Laila’s stepdad.

“Sandra has been through hell, she never thought she’d get past the heartbreaking and humiliating breakup with Jesse,” a source close to the Bird Box actress revealed to Closer Weekly in December 2019. “But meeting [Bryan] was literally a godsend.”