IBM Maximo Asset Management applications are grouped into modules and sub-modules under the Go To menu except for the Start Center applications. Below are the modules and sub-modules:

Administration

Assets

Change

Contracts

Desktop Requisitions (within Self Service module)

Financial

Integration

Inventory

IT Infrastructure

Migration (within System Configuration module)

Planning

Platform Configuration (within System Configuration module)

Preventive Maintenance

Purchasing

Release

Reporting (within Administration module)

Resources (within Administration module)

Safety (within Planning module)

Security

Self Service

Service Desk

Service Level

Service Requests (within Self Service module)

System Configuration

Task Management

Work Order

Administration Module

You can go to this module and use the applications if you need to do a simple administration tasks such as managing organizations.

Below are the applications and sub-modules that comprise the Administration module.

Sets

Organizations

Calendars

Resources (sub-module)

Bulletin Board

Communication Templates

Reporting (sub-module)

Deployed Assets (sub-module)

Reconciliation (sub-module)

Conditional Expression Manager

Classifications

CI Types

Work View

Change Module

This module contains only one application which is Activities and Tasks. This application can be used to plan, review, and manage activities and tasks.

Contracts Module

The following applications comprise the Contracts module:

Purchase Contracts

Lease/Rental Contracts

Labor Rate Contracts

Master Contracts

Warranty Contracts

Software Contracts

Terms and Conditions

Desktop Requisitions sub-module

You can use this to create and view purchase requisitions, check the status of your order and manage template requisitions such as creating a new template, view, open or draft. Templates can be useful for the items that you frequently order.

The following applications comprise the Desktop Requisitions sub-module:

Create Requisitions

View Requisitions

View Templates

View Drafts

Financial module

When defining and managing currency codes, exchange rates, general ledger accounts and resource codes, and project management costs. Applications in financial module will help you. You can also manage the GL account codes in this application.

The following applications comprise the Financial module:

Currency Codes

Exchange Rates

Chart of Accounts

Cost Management

Integration module

This module contains set of applications that will help you on integration of Maximo with other enterprise applications.

The following applications comprise the Integration module:

Object Structures

Publish Channels

Invocation Channels

Enterprise Services

Web Services Library

End Points

External Systems

Logical Management Operations

Integration modules

Launch in Context

Message Tracking

Message Reprocessing

Inventory module

You can manage item inventory in this module by keeping all items always available for work tasks and prevent excessive inventory balances. This module helps to prevent delays on work tasks due to unavailable materials needed for the work.

The following applications comprise the Inventory module:

Item Master

Service Items

Tools

Stocked Tools

Inventory

Issues and Transfers

Condition Codes

Storerooms

IT Infrastructure module

When managing the configuration items in your IT environment, such as maintaining, identifying, controlling, and verifying all configuration items. This IT Infrastructure module will help you achieve those things.

The following applications comprise the IT Infrastructure module:

Configuration Items

Relationships

Collections

Migration sub-module

This sub-modules is within the System Configuration module and can be used to migrate the configurations from one environment to another.

The following applications comprise the Migration sub-module:

Migration Manager

Migration Groups

Object Structures

Planning module

This Planning module will help you plan on how to perform the work.

The following applications comprise the Planning module:

Job Plans

Routes

Safety (sub-module)

Platform Configuration sub-module

This sub-modules is within the System Configuration module and can be used to perform the initial configuration after an installation, or changing the layout of an HTML panel.

The following applications comprise the Platform Configuration sub-module:

System Properties

Logging

Domains

Database Configuration

Application Designer

Communication Templates

Actions

Roles

Escalations

Workflow Designer

Workflow Administration

Cron Task Setup

E-mail Listeners

Object Structures

Web Services Library

Launch in Context

Preventive Maintenance module

This can be used to manage work that could be executed on a regular basis to keep assets running efficiently. You can also modify the master PMs in this module.

The following applications comprise the Preventive Maintenance module:

Preventive Maintenance

Master PM

Purchasing module

This module can be used to manage the purchasing process such as vendors, purchase requisitions, purchase orders, terms and conditions, invoices and receiving of the purchased items.

The following applications comprise the Purchasing module:

Purchase Orders

Receiving

Invoices

Request for Quotations

Companies

Company Master

Terms and Conditions

Reporting sub-module

This Reporting sub-modules within the Administration module and lets you create and view key performance indicators (KPIs), administer BIRT, Crystal, Cognos or Custom reports for users. You can also use this sub-module to manage the report-based security.

The following applications comprise the Reporting sub-module:

KPI Manager

Report Administration

Resources sub-module

This Resource submersibles within Administration module and lets you create records about the persons in your workforce. This can include internal and external workers.

The following applications comprise the Resources sub-module:

Labor

Qualifications

People

Person Groups

Crafts

Safety submodule

This Safety submodules within the Planning module and contains information of potential dangers in the work environment to protect the workers from those hazards.

The following applications comprise the Safety submodule:

Hazards

Precautions

Lockout/Tagout

Safety Plans

Security module

You can use this Security module when implementing and managing security for users and groups within Maximo.

The following applications comprise the Security module:

Security Groups

Users

Self Service module

This can be used to view a service request for asset repairs, and to request, and search for related information. If given with a proper permission, self-service users can register themselves in the system and use this module.

The following applications comprise the Self Service module:

Create Service Request

View Service Request

Service Desk module

You can create and manage service requests, activities and tasks to give a general description of work that needs to be done on a service request.

The following applications comprise the Service Desk module:

Activities and Tasks

Service Requests

Ticket Templates

Service Requests submodule

This Service Requests submodules within the Self Service module and allows a self-service user to create service request for equipment repair and review existing service request information.

The following applications comprise the Service Requests submodule:

Create Service Request

View Service Requests

System Configuration module

You use the applications in the System Configuration module to configure system and platform settings.

The following applications comprise the System Configuration module:

Platform Configuration

Migration

Task Management module

You can use this module to plan, review, and manage activities and tasks.

The following applications comprise the System Configuration module:

Activities and Tasks

Work Orders module

The applications in the Work Orders module is used to track past and present work and to plan future work. This contains the work order records that include details of work to be performed. These details includes the performed tasks, labor hours, services, materials, and tools required to do the work, the assets and locations where the work was performed.

The following applications comprise the Work Orders module:

Work Order Tracking

Labor Reporting

Quick reporting

Activities and Tasks

Assignment Manager

Service Requests

Magic Quadrant for Energy and Utilities Enterprise Asset Management Software

Energy and utility companies evaluate and procure enterprise asset management (EAM) products to resolve physical asset care requirements — that is, they provide maintenance support for fixed plants (such as power generation plants, water plants, refineries and offshore rigs), for linear distributed assets (such as power lines and pipelines), and/or for fleet assets (such as service equipment, transformers, pumping stations and wind generator towers). (Note: The term "energy and utilities" as used in this document includes oil and gas [upstream, midstream and downstream], power generation [fossil, nuclear, hydroelectric and renewables], electricity transmission and distribution, gas transmission and distribution, and water/wastewater.)

An EAM solution includes planning and scheduling, work order creation, maintenance history, and inventory and procurement, as well as equipment, component and asset tracking for assemblies of equipment. In some instances, the functionality is extended by the addition of basic financial management modules, such as accounts payable, cost recording in ledgers, and HR functions such as a maintenance skills database.

Technically, the EAM applications are designed to scale to larger numbers of users (typically, more than 100 concurrent users) and run on multiple sites from a single central database, thereby catering to whole-of-business requirements, rather than departmental or site requirements. They should also be increasingly able to support cloud and hosted deployments, the use of mobile technology, and analytics.

Magic Quadrant

Magic Quadrant for Energy and Utilities Enterprise Asset Management Software

Source: Gartner (September 2014)

Vendor Strengths and Cautions

CGI

CGI is an approximately $10 billion global business process services and system integration firm with headquarters in Montreal, Quebec, Canada. CGI entered the EAM market through the acquisition of Logica in 2013. Logica's EAM product, the Asset & Resource Management (ARM) Suite, is the result of combining functionality from prior products, the Work Management Information System (WMIS) and STORMS (Severn Trent Operational Resource Management System). ARM is more oriented toward work management than asset management.

Strengths

ARM is particularly well-suited for work-management-centric requirements typically found in transmission and distribution environments.

The product is scalable and suitable for large transmission and distribution utilities.

It has a strong presence in natural gas distribution environments, in addition to its core electrical transmission and distribution business.

It offers integrated asset investment planning (AIP) through its partnership with Seams.

Cautions

CGI has no deployments in power generation or in oil and gas.

ARM has not been adapted for global delivery, and installation resources are not available.

There are limited service provider options (mainly CGI).

The product doesn't have integrated inventory/materials management functionality.

References report lengthy and costly upgrades, although in some cases this reflects a client's preference to skip upgrades.

IBM

IBM is an approximately $100 billion global technology and consulting corporation with headquarters in Armonk, New York. Its Maximo Asset Management product is positioned in the Cloud & Smarter Infrastructure group (formerly Tivoli) within IBM. It is also working with other IBM divisions such as the Cloud Services division (for its Maximo SaaS offering) and its Business Analytics division's SPSS (for predictive maintenance). Maximo is deployed in a broad cross-section of energy and utility subsectors around the globe.

Strengths

Maximo is a highly scalable product that is suitable for very large enterprises.

IBM has a mature and extensive global community of EAM support resources and partners, minimizing implementation risks and support shortfalls.

The product provides a broad range of functionality to support all energy and utilities subsectors.

References rate the product and the value received highly.

Maximo offers several industry solutions with enhanced functionality (such as environmental, health and safety [EH&S] in its Maximo for Oil and Gas solution), as well as extensive product partnerships.

Cautions

References, customers and prospects report that costs to deploy and maintain are at the high end of the EAM market.

Industry solutions are extra cost add-ons.

Customers report significant hardware requirements to run applications.

Mobile strategy has been evolving over the past several years, with the current offering largely unproven in production.

IFS

IFS is an approximately $400 million global enterprise application software vendor based in Linkoping, Sweden. It sells ERP, enterprise service management (ESM) and EAM systems, including delivering the EAM module as a point solution. IFS sells its products to a wide range of industries but focuses on asset-intensive businesses with significant maintenance and construction requirements. It has expanded sales in new geographies; however, its utility industry presence in North America is still very limited.

Strengths

The IFS Applications product can be deployed in most energy and utilities subsectors.

IFS's references report above-average satisfaction with both the product and service levels.

IFS Applications can be — and is often — deployed as a complete ERP solution, including financials.

IFS has a mature mobile strategy, and the product has construction functionality.

IFS is able to offer an in-house reliability-centered maintenance (RCM) module to extend functionality.

Cautions

IFS still has few energy and utilities customers in North America.

Its European customer base is heavily weighted toward the Nordic countries and Poland.

It has a limited presence in oil and gas (predominantly service companies).

There are limited service provider options, though this is improving over time.

Infor (EAM)

Infor is an approximately $3 billion global enterprise application software vendor based in New York. Infor's EAM product (formerly known as Datastream 7i) had been focused mainly on manufacturing. Infor has increased its EAM product focus and closed new business with utility companies, mainly municipal utilities.

Strengths

The product has a strong presence in the water and wastewater subsector.

It has one of the highest user satisfaction ratings among its peers.

Infor EAM is relatively easy and cost-effective to upgrade and maintain.

The product is highly configurable.

Cautions

Its energy and utilities deployments are concentrated among smaller, municipal customers (not unlike Infor's separate Public Sector product described below).

It has a limited presence in oil and gas.

References report limited or no adoption of Infor mobile solutions.

Infor development efforts are diluted by having two products that target the same water/wastewater market.

Infor (Public Sector)

Infor is an approximately $3 billion global enterprise applications software vendor based in New York. Infor Public Sector (originally acquired from Hansen) is focused on client type (the public sector, particularly water authorities) rather than functional process. This means it can deliver a broader government business solution, but overlaps in some EAM functionality with its sibling product, Infor EAM.

Strengths

Public Sector is part of the broader Infor suite of public-sector functionality, including customer service and HR applications.

It has a significant presence in the water and wastewater industries in North America, Australia and New Zealand.

It has above-average customer ratings for service and value received.

Cautions

It is not suitable for EAM deployments other than public-sector utilities.

It does not have a significant presence outside of North America, Australia and New Zealand.

Infor development efforts are diluted by having two products that target the same water/wastewater market.

Mainsaver

Mainsaver is relatively small, independent, stand-alone EAM software vendor based in San Diego. It is privately held by investors who purchased the Mainsaver product from Titan in 2002. Mainsaver is designed specifically for fixed-plant environments such as power generation. It is primarily focused on North American power markets, but has a growing partnership network outside the continent.

Strengths

Mainsaver's references rate its service levels highly.

The product is inexpensive, easy and quick to deploy and upgrade.

It has been widely deployed by independent power producers, including both conventional and renewables.

Cautions

The product is primarily installed at small stand-alone power generation facilities, not enterprise deployments.

Mainsaver has limited presence outside of North America.

The product has limited presence in oil and gas, transmission and distribution.

Mainsaver's references rate its technology and product below its peers.

Oracle (E-Business Suite)

Oracle is an approximately $38.3 billion global technology company with headquarters in Redwood Shores, California. Oracle's E-Business Suite (EBS) is a complete ERP suite solution designed for a broad cross section of industries. The first version of the EBS Enterprise Asset Management (eAM) module was developed a dozen years ago for a manufacturing customer and has more recently been deployed at a variety of energy and utilities companies.

Strengths

The eAM product is preintegrated to the Oracle EBS suite of enterprise applications, including financials, procurement and HR.

Oracle has an extensive global presence minimizing implementation and support risks.

It has an increasing customer base in upstream and midstream oil and gas.

Cautions

Oracle's reference customers rate its product, services and value received below its peers.

Most of its energy and utilities EAM customers have been using the product for less than five years.

Oracle EBS is targeted at many industries and has limited energy- and utility-specific functionality.

Oracle EBS eAM is not designed for integration with enterprise applications from other major ERP vendors.

Oracle (Work and Asset Management)

Oracle is an approximately $38.3 billion global technology company with headquarters in Redwood Shores, California. Oracle's Work and Asset Management (WAM) is an EAM product brought in through the acquisition of SPL WorldGroup (which had acquired the Synergen product) in 2006. WAM is part of a broader set of utility industry functionality such as customer information management (CIS) and outage management systems (OMSs) that is delivered to mainly public-sector utilities.

Strengths

Oracle's references rate its service levels, user satisfaction and overall value near the top of its peers.

The product is particularly well-suited for deployment to support a range of municipal services, including electrical distribution and water/wastewater.

WAM is part of the broader Oracle Utilities product suite, including utility-centric customer service applications.

Cautions

The product is not widely deployed in large, multifaceted utilities.

It is North American-centric, with limited presence in the rest of the world.

The product has no presence in oil and gas and limited presence in generation.

SAP

SAP is an approximately $22 billion global enterprise application software vendor based in Walldorf, Germany. SAP Business Suite is a complete ERP suite designed for a cross section of industries. Its EAM module (formerly called the PM module) is used by a broad spectrum of, mostly large energy and utilities companies. Its EAM customers are located in every major region of the world.

Strengths

SAP EAM is preintegrated to the SAP suite of enterprise applications, including financials, procurement and HR.

SAP has a mature and extensive global community of EAM support resources and partners minimizing implementation risks and support shortfalls.

Business Suite is highly scalable and suitable for large enterprises across the full spectrum of energy and utilities subsectors, especially oil and gas.

SAP has made significant investments in innovation relevant to EAM, including mobile and analytics.

Cautions

SAP EAM is not designed for integration with enterprise applications from other major ERP vendors.

References and customers report costs to deploy and maintain the product are at the high end of the EAM market.

References and customers consistently rate usability of the product as poor (although SAP's investments in simplified user experience [for example, SAP Fiori UX] show promise in addressing this perennial issue).

Schneider Electric (Invensys)

Schneider Electric is an approximately $31 billion electrical distribution and industrial automation company with headquarters in Paris. Schneider Electric's Avantis EAM product has a long history in the EAM market, having come to Schneider through its recent acquisition of Invensys. Although Avantis is found in a large cross section of industries, approximately half of its revenue comes from a diverse set of energy and utilities subsectors. It's too early to assess the impact of Schneider's acquisition on Avantis' future.

Strengths

Avantis is a broadly used best-of-breed EAM solution suitable for most energy and utilities subsectors.

Its references rate its service levels near the top of its peers.

Schneider is primarily an OT provider, and has invested in OT integration with Avantis to support condition-based maintenance.

Cautions

Avantis has a diverse customer base and hence doesn't focus on energy and utilities industry functionality.

The product is not suitable for large, multifaceted energy and utility enterprise deployments.

Its references rate its technology near the bottom of its peers.

It is one of the few business IT applications in the Schneider portfolio.

Ventyx

Ventyx is a wholly owned subsidiary of ABB, an approximately $55 billion power and industrial automation company based in Zurich, Switzerland. Ventyx was acquired by ABB in 2010 but operates independently of the parent company with its own offices around the globe. Ventyx's Asset Suite product has been focused almost exclusively on the EAM market for utilities. Asset Suite is primarily deployed at large utilities in North America, with some deployments in Europe and some recent success in the Asia/Pacific region.

Strengths

Asset Suite has a strong presence in nuclear power generation.

It is a highly scalable solution suitable for large, multifaceted enterprise deployments.

Ventyx investments and partnerships in asset health technologies are utility-specific and target both generation, and transmission and distribution.

Cautions

Asset Suite is one of the highest-cost EAM solutions to deploy and maintain.

It has very limited presence outside of power generation, transmission and distribution.

Its references rate both the product and service levels below average.

Source : Gartner