1. Global IT Industry Business Systems Platforms Presented By: Team Caffeine Maja H. Ahmetovic Gaurab Misra Saahil Goel Gina Ali Rahul Kapoor Alex Kelley

2. ERP is a $25B industry Major players – Oracle and SAP Oracle started in 1977 – first commercial SQL RDBMS In 2006, Oracle had 47% share in worldwide RDBMS market (Gartner 2006)

3. Main competitor in ERP market - SAP Net Income as of May 2007 - $4,274M EPS as of June 2007 - $1.01 Main strategy for growth – via acquisitions

4. Offers SOA/Web-services – increasing demand Growth by acquisitions Siebel: CRM PeopleSoft: HR Retek: Retail – also broke IBM’s partnership Oblix: Identity Management Time Ten: Data Management ProfitLogic: Retail Inventory Management Largest database manufacturer in the world

5. Move towards collaborative/social computing Wiki OpenWorld Conference Can leverage competitive advantage in the database market By retaining big brands such as Siebel and PeopleSoft – they can boost their database sales even more Project Fusion – merging of all acquired technologies and marketing under the Oracle banner

6. Ellison – co-founder of Oracle will retire soon Aggressive acquisition strategy – leads to less in-house innovation All players will eventually be absorbed Gradual move towards SOA and SaaS – still needs to support old systems and traditional software – increase maintenance costs

7. Allowed customers to continue using their rival’s database – shows integrity and security. Also will build customer loyalty and competition would be healthy Positioning itself to become a one-stop shop for all business software needs Eliminates competition by acquiring them IBM lost it’s partners because of Oracle’s acquisitions

8. Broad customer base – opportunities for cross-selling – ERP to database customers and vice-versa By packaging software into bundles offered together like the Fusion Middleware portfolio Oracle clears a path to SOA systems With vast amounts of capital Oracle is positioning itself to have only one competitor, SAP

9. Partnership of the competition: SAP-IBM-Microsoft Joined products (MS Office applications linked to SAP products) Implementation (IBM a partner for SAP implementation, also providing middleware and complementary database software) Changing software industry eco-system Threat from overseas software development companies – India, China and Ireland May launch their own ERP system as Products

10. Uncertain, declining, levels of IT spending Spending lags due to the time difference between the implementation of a new technology and the full exploitation of its features by the organization that is using it Preference towards specific point solutions (SOA, Web Services) Slower sale of the traditional enterprise application packages Will Oracle keep up with the change? Preference of companies to custom-developed solutions

11. Software as a service (SaaS) – Oracle On-Demand Target mid-sized companies also Be part of the open-source movement or they may be left out (with players like Google and recently IBM) Ad based revenue Collaborative software development Focus on recurring revenue Maintenance: more acquisitions SaaS: incrementally higher revenue by increasing usage by customers

12. Re-organize their ERP systems to follow even more modular design Fill the need for customers who need highly customized solutions (custom-developed) Even smaller modules can be sold to small companies Open-source development is easier on smaller modules Makes it easier to test-market innovative strategies Will allow the company to implement SOA – for which there is tremendous growth

13. Questions?