Performed analysis, design, development, testing, and implementation of application batch process scheduling components and management using the CA Autosys, CAWA. Worked with Autosys R4.5, R11.3 on Unix/Red Hat Linux/AIX/Solaris and Windows servers along with GUI to create and monitor automated job processes.

Provided support for over 13 FI’s (Financial Institutions) within Citi for Security Analysis and support. Provided 24X7 support of Global Middle-ware Security Operations.

Manages data, development, reporting and analysis for ongoing Tax Audits for Telecommunication Billing system utilizing Singl.eView, Oracle, PL/SQL,11/10G/8/6, Oracle E-Business, ODI, Oracle Reports, OBIEE, BI Publisher, Neteeza, SQL Loader, WinSQL, SQL Server, MS SQL, T-SQL, MySQL, Toad, Unix, Shell Scripting, ETL (Extract, Transform, Load), Informatica, Cron, HTML/XML, SFTP, SNMP, Linux, Solaris, Autosys, CAWA, SSH, NDM, SCP, SFTP, FTPS, HTTPS, Clarity, Visio. In addition worked with data ana lysis for Line count, circuit, and other Telecom reports for use by Tax and Finance staff.

Performed project management to implement job scheduling automation of Operations Daily Batch Jobs for an ALIS(Access Line Information System) and Telecom Billing system running on an AIX Unix server.

Provided implementation/deployment/expansion of the Alltel data network. Encompasses backup support for other Alltel data markets, as well as network-wide projects of varied scope. Supported data services which include DSL, dial-up, frame relay/ATM to allow DSL customers increased performance with Alltel Internet service.

Performed application support for a Data Migration project from Legacy to CorDaptix (CIS) Retail Energy Services Customer Billing System and Metering application developed by SPL WorldGroup.

Designed and developed new software and enhanced existing software to allow capabilities relating to Systems Interfaces to include data mapping, conversions, data modeling, configuration and extractions to include Tax software mappings, Accounting/Revenue (AR), Finance, Credit and Collections, Charitable Contributions, Credit Score Adjustment, Handling of Taxes for Write-Offs, Customer Contact Letters, Bill Extract/Printing, Reports and Interfaces functions as Bankdraft, General Ledger (GL), Customer Service Orders to include EDI transactions.

Provided application development and support for Oil and Gas systems migrated from an IBM mainframe to client server systems.

Provided application development and operational support for a system migrated from a mainframe to a client server AMDOCS Telegence Wireless Billing System .