Trevor Winer, Chairman of the Board at SPL WorldGroup, has announced the appointment of Harry Debes as President and CEO. Debes comes to SPL from senior positions at J.D. Edwards (recently acquired by PeopleSoft) and at business performance software vendor Geac. SPL is a leading billing and customer care company specialising in the utilities sector.

~To lead SPL into expanding markets worldwide, the Board sought an outstanding and experienced business leader with a global vision,~ said Winer. ~We soon identified Harry Debes as our top candidate. He is a business strategist with a commitment to growth, understands the value of deploying worldwide resources to address customer needs and has an industry-wide reputation for integrity.~

Debes~ career includes time at Arthur Andersen, IBM, Columbus Systems (a company he founded, grew and managed for 9 years before he sold it), Geac Computers (where he was Managing Director of the Asia-Pacific business for 10 years and subsequently managed Geac~s Americas business) and J.D. Edwards (where he was Senior Vice ~President, Americas). Last year, while at J.D. Edwards, he was named to the VAR Business list of 100 top CEOs.

Harry Debes responded: ~Success in any business comes from an unrelenting focus on the customer. Throughout its history, SPL~s proven solutions and outstanding implementation track record have helped dozens of utilities expand their services through better access to customer information. During this time, SPL has established an outstanding reputation for customer commitment and integrity. The company currently has the dominant position in North America and Australia, and a strong base in Europe, Asia and Africa. I believe that we can leverage all of these assets to open a new chapter in SPL~s distinguished history - worldwide growth. I am very excited about the possibilities that lie ahead.~

Information for Editors:

Biography: Harry Debes

Harr y Debes is President and CEO of SPL WorldGroup, the customer care and billing leader for the worldwide energy and services sector.

Debes is joining SPL in November 2003 from J.D. Edwards (now part of PeopleSoft), where he was senior vice president of sales and services for the Americas. He was previously with Canadian business performance software vendor Geac, where he served as president of GES Americas and as managing director of the company~s Asia Pacific business.

Debes also served as vice president of marketing and R&D for Jonas & Erickson, which was acquired by Geac in 1990. From 1979 to 1988, he was founder, CEO, and chairman of Columbus Systems, an IBM MRP/ERP VAR. Prior to that, he was a systems engineer and marketing representative for IBM Canada.

Debes holds a Bachelor~s degree from University of Toronto and an MBA in accounting and finance from McMaster University.

About SPL WorldGroup

As the world leader in customer care and billing software, SPL WorldGroup helps energy and service companies achieve excellence in billing, customer care, sales and marketing. Using outstanding technology and its unparalleled implementation success record, SPL helps its clients attract, nurture and maximize the value of their customers.

From prospect management, billing and customer care through quoting and credit and collections, SPL provides energy, water and service companies with strategic options for managing residential, commercial and industrial customers in both regulated and competitive markets, across multi-product service lines.

Led by an experienced and visionary management team, and in partnership with the world~s leading systems integrators and technology innovators, SPL~s 600 professionals in North America, Europe, the Middle East and Asia Pacific dedicate themselves to providing value to clients by implementing solutions that fit the specific needs of energy, water and service related companies and building long-term relationships based on confidence and trust.

Visit SPL WorldGroup at www.splwg.com or call +61-2-8258-8200 (Sydney), +61-3-9674-8300 (Melbourne).