Sebastian Kehl has travelled to Bad Ragaz as sporting director for the first time. At the training camp, he answered questions about his new role, the squad and the new signings.

Sebastian Kehl on his new role as sporting director:"Not all that much has changed, the transitions were smooth. I've had a long time to prepare for the role. But I'm still in good contact with Michael Zorc. He's interested in what we're getting up to. I'm very grateful for what he passed on to me. But I will go my own way at one moment or another, that much is clear."

OneFootball Videos

…the squad:"We're very satisfied with pre-season. What we've done on the pitch so far creates excitement. The ideas are recognisable, even though we know that the international players still need some time. I'm happy that we were able to strengthen our squad, that we have considerably more options and that we're equipped for what lies ahead for us this season. During the training camp, we only have two friendlies with all the internationals involved, which is relatively few. It all starts up again next week. We will be challenged quickly, we will have to grow together quickly. That's a challenge. Nonetheless, I have the feeling that there's a really good atmosphere here, that the new signings have settled in quickly, that they're keen for Borussia Dortmund and that one or two of them give off the feeling they have already been here for longer than a few days. That makes me very hopeful."

…the new signings:"During the contract talks, it was important for us to get a feel for how the guys think and feel, how they deal with tough situations. Throughout the talks, we had a very good feeling that all the guys we've signed possess the right attitude and a high degree of identification. I'm very confident that the guys who have joined us and those who have been here for a while already will gel together well and that there'll be a good energy. Nevertheless, the guys need the support of Marco Reus and Mats Hummels as captain and co-captain to ensure they settle in well here, to prepare them for what awaits them and to give them support, especially in difficult moments."

…Sebastien Haller:"His challenge will be to score goals and bolster our attacking ranks. The idea behind his transfer was also to add an experienced player, because we have a lot of young players alongside him. I think that he will give us a lot of support up front and that he can show his personality. He wants to score goals and that's what he's here for."

…long-term developments:"If we can manage to keep the squad together for a longer period of time, we'll become more successful in the long run because things will become established and processes will flow into each other. That will be an important task. That said, I can't rule out the possibility of a player leaving. But it is a worthwhile goal to prolong that period."

…Edin Terzic:"He is totally committed, but also focused and clear on the things he wants to drive forward. He has a clear idea of how he wants to play and how to deal with the players. We've now known each other for many years; there's a relationship of great trust. We'll try to support him, he's still relatively young. He knows the club inside out, has a high degree of identification with the club, possesses brutal communication skills and is just really raring to go."

…the philosophy:"Our coach and Borussia Dortmund are synonymous with attacking and attractive football with moments of switch-play and pressing, but also with a certain compactness. We conceded 52 goals last year. One objective will be to concede significantly fewer goals and lose significantly fewer games."

…the objectives: "Borussia Dortmund will always compete for the Champions-League places. It is an absolute must for us to be involved at this level internationally. We will always want to play for titles, that's not going to change either. We want to get through the group phase in the Champions League. We also want to avoid such an early elimination in the DFB-Pokal. What is possible in the Bundesliga also depends on what the others do. I see us taking up the role of challenger. We also have higher-level goals in addition to our sporting ones: we want to wow our spectators again, make our stadium into a fortress again, show a different attitude and show a higher degree of identification so that the people that come to the stadium have the feeling that they're seeing a team that is giving everything, bending over backwards and doing everything in its power to be successful." Transcribed by Christina Reinke

BVB TV by 1&1: Media round with Sebastian Kehl

View publisher imprint