It’s been five years since Sebastian Kehl stopped playing football but he’s never had a more difficult game to prepare for than this week.

As Borussia Dortmund’s head of professional football, the 40-year-old is in charge of the medical department, which is implementing the Bundesliga’s stringent 51-page medical protocol, designed to minimise the risk of COVID-19 infection. And as if making sure players fully understand and follow the endless array of instructions guiding their behaviour both within the club and in private wasn’t enough, the first game back also happens to pit Dortmund against neighbours Schalke in an empty Signal Iduna Park.

“It will be the strangest derby in history,” Kehl tells The Athletic.

By now, Dortmund’s players have become used to some parts of the weirdness, if not all.

Players are tested for Coronavirus twice a week. Every day, the squad have their temperatures taken and their physical wellness is monitored by a special app they have to use every morning to log precisely how they feel. Players who report even minor complaints are immediately seen to, with a view to isolating possible cases. Kehl says the amount of work that has gone into the COVID-19 regime is beyond imagination and certainly challenging for players, coaches, staff and all those involved. In times of great uncertainty, strict routines and a strong framework can offer at least some semblance of comfort.

Thankfully, not everything is an outright novelty. Dortmund have the benefit of having sampled the atmosphere at a high-pressure “ghost game” earlier this season already, even if they ended up losing. They went down rather meekly in France in the second leg of their Champions League last-16 clash with Paris Saint-Germain on March 11 (losing 2-0), two days before the Bundesliga was suspended, having never got going on the night.

The experience taught Kehl that extraordinary circumstances demand extraordinary levels of preparation, especially in terms of adopting the right mindset. “These next few weeks will be down to whoever can deal with this unusual situation best and manage to create a collective energy on the pitch without the help of the fans,” the former Dortmund captain and three-time league winner (2002, 2011, 2012) says. “The attitude will make the difference. Being the better team, football-wise, won’t be enough.”

On Wednesday, Dortmund travelled from their quarantined hotel to Signal Iduna Park to simulate game conditions, including playing the music that usually accompanies the teams onto the pitch. (They won’t file onto the pitch next to each other on Saturday and won’t shake hands either, in line with protocol.) As soon as the club realised how tricky it would be to get players into a suitable frame of mind for the remainder of the season, Kehl also brought forward the hiring of sports psychologist Phillip Laux, a former Bundesliga goalkeeper who had been scheduled to join them next season. Players are free to decide whether they want to use the opportunity to work with him, Kehl explains.

There have been many talks over the past few weeks, with Dortmund taking great care to explain the consequences of the crisis to their squad. A wage cut (of an undisclosed sum) was agreed 10 days after the games had stopped to ensure the club could continue to employ its 880-strong non-playing staff. Financial imperatives, too, were behind the push to return to playing football this month.

Kehl says the players were able to voice their concerns and ask plenty of questions but that they were won over by the measures devised by team doctor Markus Braun, who was also part of the Bundesliga’s medical task force. “You get the sense that players feel safe and trust in our staff and the concept,” Kehl says. As a result, no player has approached them with misgivings about the resumption of the league, not even Thorgan Hazard and Manuel Akanji, whose partners both had babies in recent weeks.

Nevertheless, there’s really no telling how the players will react once the ghost derby kicks off. Dortmund, a relatively young team, have not always dealt well with pressurised situations over the last 12 months. Some big games — against Schalke, RB Leipzig and Bayern Munich — have delivered disappointing results and the way they crumbled in the second half of last season saw people doubt their mental fortitude.

“People have different interpretations of what mentality means,” Kehl says, a little weary of the subject. “But it is a factor. The point is to be unified in your approach as a club and a team, to speak the same language. Words like ‘readiness’, ‘winning mentality’, ‘commitment’, ‘responsibility’, ‘leadership abilities’ — whichever way you want to define it, they do matter in sport. You won’t get past this subject if you want to be successful. We have incredibly talented players, different types of players. We have pace, individual class, and difference-makers. But when it comes down to it, it’s also a quality for a team to be there in the right moment, to score goals, to turn games around, to win games, to play in a commanding manner, and most of all, to perform to their abilities.”

Kehl’s main role is that of a facilitator: he wants to help everyone else reach their potential. Leaving aside the very special circumstances of this spring, he says the challenges faced by the current generation — “social media, big transfer fees, increasing wages” — are a little different from the ones he encountered during his own playing days. “They need to be talked to in a certain way but they are also much more professional in their lifestyles. They certainly devote much more time to nutrition and healthy living than we did.”

A Dortmund staff member told The Athletic he overheard players discussing their respiratory quotient, an indicator of their metabolic function. Is that true? “Yes. They take great interest in their own performance and fitness numbers. We try to measure sleeping patterns, for example, to squeeze out a last few percentage points. We don’t collect this data to use it against players but to make them more stable in their performances. It’s our duty to do so to add value to players, coaches and medical and athletic departments.”

Since Dortmund’s strategy relies on taking many young players to the next level, it involves a strong element of character-building as well, he adds. “If you look at Jadon Sancho’s development, as an example: fantastic player, unbelievable skills at such a young age. Big hype. That’s a lot to deal with. We want to be good travel companions on their journey. They can make mistakes but it’s also good if mistakes don’t get repeated too many times. It’s a learning process.”

Kehl’s responsibilities certainly don’t end there, though. As one for German football’s most eloquent and thoughtful officials, the former central midfielder was invited to help shape the Bundesliga’s plans for the restart and he, too, is sensitive to the amount of criticism that has been directed at the game within Germany. Some have questioned the timing of the Bundesliga’s return, others have decried the game’s focus on securing TV payments at the expense of supporters who can’t attend. In addition, many people are simply too concerned with their own health and livelihood to get truly excited by the prospect of “15:3o”, the traditional local kick-off time, becoming an important part of their weekends once more.

“Football has to win back some of the credibility it has lost,” Kehl admits. “We shouldn’t promise change without being reasonably certain that we can actually deliver on it. But what’s become obvious in this crisis is that football cannot exist without supporters and the backing from society on the whole.”

Dortmund, with their strong sense of local identity and supporter involvement, are well placed to drive that rapprochement. But before they can turn their attention to a better future for football, there’s a season to be finished and a derby to be played. “It won’t be the same without the noise and the emotions in the stands, for sure,” Kehl says. “We will all miss the usual atmosphere. But despite of all that, it’s still a chance to achieve something that’s dear to our fans.”

(Photo: TF-Images/Getty Images)