Dr. Raynor was born and raised in Mansfield, CT, graduating from the Edwin O. Smith High School in 1993. Matt attended Connecticut College and graduated in 1997 as a 4-year letter-winner for the men’s soccer and basketball teams. His next stop was Philadelphia, PA to enroll at the Temple University School of Dentistry. Dr. Raynor received a 3-year scholarship from the United States Air Force while at Temple. Life changed markedly in 2001, graduating from Temple and marrying his Philadelphia-native wife, Susan. After graduation, Dr. Raynor attended an advanced education in general dentistry residency at Keesler Air Force Base, in Biloxi, MS. While earning his certificate, Dr. Raynor furthered his professional career with intensive training in each of the dental specialty fields. Matt and Sue enjoyed a great year in MS with warm weather, tasty southern cuisine, and the blessing of their first child, Allison.

Dr. Raynor spent the next 2 years caring for the dental health of the armed forces as a base dentist at Dover Air Force Base in Delaware. Captain Raynor was a valuable member of the DERT team (Dental Evidence Response Team) at the Dover AFB Mortuary Affairs Operations Center during Operation Iraqi Freedom. During his 2-year stint, he was awarded Officer of the Year for the Medical Group at Dover AFB for his service and dedicated commitment to his duties. The highlight of their Delaware experience was the birth of their son, Brendan.

After an Honorable Discharge from the Air Force, the family returned to Mansfield, CT to join Matt’s father, retired dentist James Raynor at Storrs Family Dentistry. Soon after the move, Matthew and Susan were graced with Paige, their third child.

Matt is very involved with local affairs. He was a founding member of The Edwin O. Smith Foundation and is still an active Director for the Board, he is a Windham Hospital Corporator, and is a co-founder of Mansfield Lacrosse. He thoroughly enjoys coaching his children and others each season.

Dr. Raynor is an active member of the American Dental Association, the Connecticut State Dental Association, and the Northeastern Connecticut Dental Society. He has been distinguished as a “Top Dentist in Connecticut” by Connecticut Magazine multiple times.