Edwin Bennett O’Neill, age 92, died peacefully Thursday, September 28th surrounded by his children and grandchildren. He remained independent until the end and demonstrated quiet grace until his last breath.

Ed was born in Vicksburg, Mississippi on August 31st 1931, the second and most beautiful son of Cornelius John and Edna O’Neill. After graduating from St. Aloysius High School at age 16, he attended Georgetown University graduating in 1952 with a Bachelor of Science in Economics. He went on to attend Naval Officer Candidate School and served three years in the United States Navy. He then attended LSU and graduated with a Bachelor of Aeronautical/Mechanical Engineering. After graduation his career took him to California where he met a blue-eyed California girl who was the love of his life.

Anne and Ed were married October 3rd, 1959. They started their family in California, then relocated to Vienna, Virginia in 1965. Ed had a distinguished career at David W. Taylor Naval Ship Research and Development Center. While working he also somehow found time to coach almost every athletic team in which his children participated. Ed was a life-long devoted Catholic and attended daily mass for years. Even when his health was declining, he continued to minister to family members and remained a role model and father figure to many.

He did not live to win popularity contests, but popular he was for his wisdom and old-fashioned morals. His family believes that one of Ed’s greatest accomplishments was helping Anne in her last few years of life. He also led his family through the devastating loss of his daughter Karen. Ed’s hobbies included his love of researching genealogy utilizing DNA before it was publicly popular and, in the process, he became extremely tech savvy. He was also a life-long Washington Redskins football and Georgetown Hoya basketball fan. He was thrilled when the Hoyas finally won the title in 1984.

Ed leaves behind his three children Kathleen (Todd Smith), Paul (Michele), and Bridget (Al Schmidt). Also grieving his loss are his beloved grandchildren Adam Cadle (Celeste), Griffin (Tayseer), Caroline O’Neill, A.J. Schmidt, Bennett Velasquez, JohnPaul Velasquez, Kathryn Schmidt, and Jennifer Schmidt, plus great-grandsons, Gage Gammon and Lincoln Cadle. He is survived by his brother Bob and many other family members and friends. He was preceded in death by his parents, his brother Jack, and daughter Karen.

As a long-time Catholic, a mass of Christian Burial will take place on Tuesday, October 3rd at 10:30 at Christ our King Catholic Church with burial at Mount Pleasant Memorial Gardens. In lieu of flowers, it is requested that contributions be made to East Cooper Community Outreach (ECCO), 1145 6-Mile Road, Mount Pleasant, SC. Expressions of sympathy may be viewed or submitted online at www.mcalistersmith.com.

Funeral arrangements have been entrusted to McAlister-Smith Funeral & Cremation, Mt. Pleasant, 1520 Rifle Range Road, Mt. Pleasant, SC 29464, (843) 884-3833.