Steve Lavin is set to be the next head men's basketball coach at San Diego, Toreros athletic director Bill McGillis confirmed Wednesday to the Associated Press following reports, including CBS Sports' Jon Rothstein. Lavin, 57, previously served as the head coach at UCLA (1996-03) and St. John's (2010-15) with television-analyst stints between each.

An official announcement has not yet been made by the school as of Thursday morning.

Lavin, for his coaching career, owns a 226-133 mark and has guided teams to the NCAA Tournament eight times. He took UCLA to the NCAA Tournament six times and St. John's twice.

"I just think it’s a great alignment," McGillis told the AP. "I think under his leadership we have a chance to catapult to new heights."

Lavin replaces Sam Scholl, who went 50-67 in four seasons, in an attempt to turn around a program that has posted losing records each of the past three seasons. The Toreros, members of the West Coast Conference, have not reached the NCAA Tournament since 2008, which was the only time the program has advanced past the first round in four tournament appearances.

"Decisions like this are very difficult, especially when it involves people you care so much about," said McGillis of Scholl's departure March 6 in a release. "Coach Scholl is an amazing man, and he has been a tremendous mentor to the young men in our program. Although we have not achieved the competitive progress we expected, Sam has poured his heart and soul into USD basketball, and he has led our program with great integrity from Day 1.

"Both as a student-athlete and as a coach, Sam has represented the university with great class, and no one cares more about the Toreros than he does. We are truly grateful for his leadership and wish him the very best moving forward."

USD marks Lavin's first head-coaching job since 2015, his final season at St. John's. He held that role for six seasons after being hired in 2010. Lavin went 81-53 at the helm before the two parted ways.

Lavin, prior to St. John's, had a run as the head coach at UCLA after beginning as an assistant for the Bruins in 1991. He replaced Jim Harrick after Harrick was fired for a recruiting violation. The Bruins reached the Elite Eight in Lavin's debut season and made the NCAA Tournament in each of his first six seasons guiding the program before missing March Madness in 2003. Lavin was fired that spring, ending his time as UCLA's head coach with a 145-78 mark.

Get the fastest scores, stats, news, LIVE videos, and more. CLICK HERE to download the CBS Sports Mobile App and get the latest on your team today.

Lavin, prior to UCLA, was an assistant at Purdue from 1988-91. He played college basketball at San Francisco State and Chapman in a stretch from 1983-87.