Trying to pick a name for your future little bundle of joy? It can be a difficult task brainstorming names, and then agreeing on one!

Many people are drawing inspiration from things like their favorite Disney movies! Here are some popular baby names that may originally be inspired by well-known and loved Walt Disney movies:

Abigail

The name Abigail is used in the Disney film The Aristocats. Voiced by Monica Evans, Abigale Gabble is a female goose character who (along with her sister) tries to save O’Malley from drowning and befriends him and the Aristocats. The name Abigail means ” father’s joy” in Hebrew.

In the Bible, Abigail is King David’s intelligent and beautiful third wife. Because the biblical Abigail describes herself as King David’s handmaid, it’s a name often given to ladies’ maids in literature. The popularity of the name Abigail is ranked at # 15 in 2018 — down 2 spots from 2017. Most famously known with the name Abigail include: actress, Abigail Breslin and actress, Abigail Spencer.

Alice

Alice is a fictional character and protagonist in Lewis Carroll’s children’s novel Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland and its sequel, Through the Looking-Glass. In the movie, Alice’s character can be described as curious, pedantic, easily flustered, sweet and clumsy. The meaning of the name Alice is: noble, kind — and its origin is English.

The name Alice is ranked at #60 in 2018 — up 1 spot from 2017. Most famously known with the name Alice include: rock singer, Alice Cooper, and actresses Alice Eve and Alice Englert. Alice is also the name of daughters to celebs Tom Cavanagh (actor), Ronan Keating (musician), and Tina Fey (Comedian/Writer/Actress).

Amelia

The name Amelia is used in the Disney film The Aristocats. Voiced by Carole Shelley, Ameliae Gabble is a female goose character who (along with her sister) tries to save O’Malley from drowning and befriends him and the Aristocats. The latin meaning of the name Amelia is: industrious, striving — its teutonic meaning is: defentder.

The name is #6 in 2018 — up 1 spot from 2017. Most well-known Amelia’s include: Amelia Earhart (aviator), Amelia Rose Blair (actress), and title character in the Amelia Bedlia kids’ book series. Amelia is also the name of daughter to celebs Harry Hamlin (actor) and Lisa Rinna (actor/tv/radio host).

Ariel

Ariel is a fictional character and title character of the Walt Disney film The Little Mermaid. The name Ariel means: lioness of God.

The popularity of the name is ranked at #147 in 2018 — down 17 spots from 2017. Most famously known with the name Ariel is actress, Ariel Winter.

Audrey

Audrey (Rocio Ramirez) is the name of a fictional character in the children’s movie Atlantis. From an Old English girls’ name, the meaning of the name Audrey is: noble strength.

Most well-known Audrey’s include: actresses Audrey Hepburn and Audrey Tautou. Audrey is also the name of daughters to celebs Greg Kinnear (actor), Faith Hill (musician) and Tim McGraw (musician), Dominic Purcell (actor) and Steve Zahn (actor). The name is ranked #52 in 2018 — down 8 spots from 2017.

Aurora

Princess Aurora, also known as Sleeping Beauty or Briar Rose, is a fictional character in the Walt Disney film Sleeping Beauty. The Latin meaning of the name Aurora is: dawn.

A possible nick name for little ones with the name is “Rory”. A few celebs have chosen this name for their daughters including Harrold Perrineau (actor) as well as Holy Madison (model). As for the popularity of the name it is ranked at #36 in 2018 — up 9 spots from 2017.

Belle

Belle is a fictional character who appears in the Disney film Beauty and the Beast. The original film was released back in 1991 but was remade into a live action movie staring actress Emma Watson as Belle in 2017. The origin of the name Belle is Latin and means: beauty. Belle is often short form for the names Isabelle or Anabelle.

Most famously known with the name Belle is actress Belle Shouse. Although no celeb has named their child Belle, it is a popular middle name. Celebs Harry Hamlin (actor) and Lisa Rinna (actres/tv/radio host), Laurel Holloman (actress), Rosie O’Donnell (actress.comedian/tv/radio host), as well as Dylan Walsh (actor) have daughters with the middle name Belle. It is ranked at #772 in 2018 — down 206 spots from 2017.

Ben

Ben is a fictional supporting character in the movie Pocahontas. The name Ben is Hebrew in origin and means: son. Ben is short for Benjamin, but some parents choose to keep it short and sweet with just “Ben”.

Most famously known with the name Ben include: actors Ben Savage, Ben Affleck, and Ben Stiller. Celebs with children named Ben include: Gregory Grunberg (actor) as well as Mitt Romney (politician). As for the popularity of the name, Ben ranks #182 in 2018 — down 18 spots from 2017.

Bianca

Bianca, voiced by Eva Garbor is the female protagonist in the Disney animated film The Rescuers. The name Bianca is Italian in origin and means: white.

Most well-known Bianca’s would include: Bianca Lawson (actress), Bianca Santos (actress) and Bianca Ryan (pop singer). The name Bianca is rated #387 in 2018 — up 16 spots from 2017.

Cleo

Cleo is the name of Geppetto’s affectionate and playful pet goldfish in the Disney film Pinocchio. The name is Greek in origin and means: to praise, acclaim.

Most famous Cleo’s include: Cleo King (actress), Cleo Massey (actress) and Cleo Anthony (actor). Cleo is also the name of actor/filmmaker David Lawrence Schwimmer’s daughter, born in 2011. The name Cleo is ranked #984 in 2018 — up 214 spots from 2017.

Daisy

Daisy Duck is a cartoon character created in 1940 by Walt Disney Productions as the girlfriend of Donald Duck. The name Daisy is English in origin and means: Day’s eye, flower name. The name Daisy ranks #159 in 2018 — up 32 spots from 2017.

Famously known with the name Daisy includes: Daisy Ridley (actress), Daisy Fuentes (actress) and Daisy Wood-Davis (soap opera actress). Daisy is also the first name of the daughter to celebs Jon Cryer (actor) and Lisa Joyner (newscaster), Anthony Stewart Head (actor/musician), Lucy Lawless (actress), Gavin Rossdale (musician), Meg Ryan (actress), Roger Taylor (musician), as well as Jamie Oliver (chef) and Juliette Oliver (model).

Flora

Flora alongside fellow fairies Fauna and Merryweather are the protagonists of Walt Disney’s 1959 film Sleeping Beauty. Flora is the name of the good fairy who gives Aurora the gift of beauty. The name Flora is Italian in origin and means: blooming . The name Flora is ranked at #1772 in 2018 — up 49 spots from 2017.

Most famously known Flora’s include: Flora cross (actress), Flora Chan (actress), and Flora Duffy (Triathlete).

Flynn

Flynn (Rider) is a fictional character who appears in Walt Disney’s animated film Tangled — the significant other of protagonist Rapunzel. The name Flynn is Irish in origin and means: red. The name Flynn is rated #749 in 2018 — up 69 spots from 2017.

Most famously known Flynn’s include: Flynn Morrison (actor) and Flynn McHugh (actor). Flynn is also the first name of sons to celebs Gary Oldman (actor), as well as Orlando Bloom (actor) and Miranda Kerr (model).

George

George (Darling) is the name of the father to the Darling children in the 1953 Disney film Peter Pan. The origin of the name George is Greek and means: tiller of the soil or farmer. The name George is ranked #134 in 2018 — down 2 spots from 2017.

Most well-known Georges include: George Cloonie (actor), George Michael (pop singer), George Alexander Louis (prince), George Lucas (director), George Harrison (guitarist), and former US Presidents George Washington, George H.W. Bush, and George W. Bush. The name George is also a popular name among celeb children, including sons to Lauren Holly (actress), George Stevens Hamilton (actor), Eva Herzigova (model), as well as Oliver Platt (actor).

Giselle

Giselle is the name of a young woman from the kingdom of Andalasia and the protagonist of Disney’s 2007 hybrid film Enchanted. The name Giselle is German in origin and means: pure-hearted and naive princess. The name Giselle is ranked #339 in 2018 — up 19 spots from 2017.

Most famously known with the name Giselle include: Giselle Eisenberg (actress) and model, Gisele Bundchen — although she spells her name with one “l”.

Henry

Henry (Fenner) voiced by Jerry Kernion is the name of real estate agent character in the Disney film The Princess and the Frog’s. Although Henry Fenner and his fellow realtor brother Harvey Fenner are not the most loveable characters in the film, many parents are still quite fond of the name Henry! The name Henry is German in origin and means: ruler of the household.

Eight kings of England have been named Henry. Most well-known Henry’s include: Prince Henry (“Harry”) of Wales, Henry Huggins (character in children’s books by Beverly Cleary), Henry Cavill (actor), Henry Ford (entrepreneur), Henry Winkler (actor) — aka “The Fonz”. Henry is also a very popular name for sons to celebrities, including: Rachel Weisz (actress), Julia Roberts (actress), Minnie Driver (actress), Colin Farrell (actor), Meryl Streep (actress) and Julia Louis-Dreyfus (actress) — to name only a few. The name is ranked #22 in 2018 — up 4 spots from 2017.

Jake

Jake is the name of a kangaroo mouse and the tetartagonist from the 1990 Disney animated film The Rescuers Down Under. The name Jake is a form of Jacob and is Hebrew in origin and means: the supplanter. The name Jake is ranked #206 in 2018 — down 11 spots from 2017.

Most well-known Jake’s include: Jake T. Austin (actor), Jake Johnson (actor) and Jake Gyllenhaal (actor). Jake is another popular name among sons to celebrity parents, including: Jason Diamond (reality tv star), Gregory Grunberg (actor), and Niki Taylor (model).

Jane

Jane (Porter) voiced by Minnie Driver, is a major fictional character in the Edgar Rice Burroughts’ series of Tarzan novels that was adapted into film by Walt Disney in 1999. The name Jane is Hebrew in origin and means: god is gracious. The name Jane is ranked #281 in 2018 — up 33 spots from 2017.

Most famously known with the name Jane include: Jane Lynch (actress), Jane Fonda (actress), Jane Seymour (actress), Jane Levy (actress), Jane Krakowski (actress), Jane Leeves (actress), and Jane Austen (novelist).

Jasmine

(Princess) Jasmine is a fictional character who appears in Walt Disney’s animated film Aladdin. The origin of the name Jasmine is Persian and means: jasmine flower. There are a few variations in spelling including: Jasmin, Jasmyn, and Jazzmine. The name is ranked #131 in 2018 — down 6 spots from 2017.

Most famously known with the name Jasmine includes: jasmine Villegas (r&b singer), Jasmine Thompson (pop singer), Jasmine Tookes (model) and Jasmin Guy (actress). Jasmine is also the name of daughter to actor Dwayne “The Rock” Johnson.

Lilo

Lilo (pronounced LEE-loh) is the name of a spunky young Hawaiian girl, and one of the two primary characters of the film Lilo & Stitch. The origin of the name is Hawaiian and means: generous one.

Lilo is one of very few girl names that end with the letter “o” — which is often more found in boys names. The name is ranked #3778 in 2018 — down 76 spots from 2017.

Max

Max is name of the adorable, loyal Old English Sheepdog belonging to Prince Eric in the 1989 Disney film The Little Mermaid. Short for Maximilian (meaning “greatest”) and Maxwell (meaning “great spring”), but now often used on its own as a boys’ name.

Most well-known with the name Max include: Max Greenfield (actor), Max Carver (actor), and Max George (pop singer). The name is Latin in origin and is rated #67 in 2018 — down 1 spot from 2017.

Marie

Marie is a major character in the 1970 Disney film the Aristocats. She is a kind, but some-what spoiled white-furred kitten who is the middle and only female kitten of Duchess, the older sister of Berlioz, and younger sister of Toulouse. The name Marie is a form of Mary and is Hebrew in origin and means: bitter.

Most well-known Marie’s include: Marie Osmond (TV show host), Marie Avgeropoulos (actress) and Marie Antoinette (French queen) . Marie is also the name of daughter to Ronan Keating (musician). The name Marie is rated #579 in 2018 — up 65 spots from 2017.

Michael

Michael is brother of Wendy and John Darling, and is the youngest of the three darling children in Disney’s Peter Pan. The name Michael is Hebrew in origin and means: who is like God. Michael has been a popular U.S. boys’ name since the 1940’s. Currently the name is ranked at #15 in 2018 — up 2 spots from 2017.

There are a handful of well-known Michael’s including: Michael Jackson (pop singer), Michael Jordan (basketball player), Michael Phelps (swimmer), Michael B. Jordan (actor), Michael Buble (singer), Michael Cera (actor), and Michael J. Fox (actor) — to name only a few. It is also name to the son of celebrities: Mark Consuelos (actor) and Kelly Rippa (tv host), Mark Paul Gosselaar (actor), Damon Wayans (actor), as well as Mark Wahlberg (actor) and Rhea Durham (model) — among many others.

Milo

Milo (James Thatch) voiced by Michael J. Fox is the main character in the Disney Movie Atlantis: The Last Empire. The origin of the name is Greek — from Milo of Croton, an extraordinary wrestler who was renowned for his athletic triumphs in ancient Greece. The name is ranked #153 in 2018 — up 51 spots from 2017.

Most well-known Milo’s include: Milo Ventimiglia (actor), Milo Manheim (actor) and Milo Parker (actor). Milo is also the name of the son of celebs: Alysssa Milano (actress), Craig Ferguson (actor/comedian/tv host), Mel Gibson (actor), Camryn Manheim (actress) as well as Liv Tyler (actress) and Royston Langdon (musician).

Minnie

Minnie Mouse is a cute cartoon character that was created by Ub Iwerks and Walt Disney back in 1928. The famous other half to Mickey Mouse, Minnie is a sweet, stylish well-known and recognized Disney character. The name Minnie is Teutonic in origin and means: loving memory.

Most famously known with the name Minnie is actress Minnie Driver. The name is ranked #2795 in 2018 down 668 spots from 2017.

Nala

Nala, voiced by Niketa Calame is the most significant female character in Disney’s The Lion King. Nala is first introduced as childhood best friend to Simba, and ultimately becomes his wife in the end. In African languages the name Nala means successful or beloved. In certain Latin cultures the name relates to a fruit or sweetness.

Most famously known Nala’s include: Nala Macherey (daughter of actress Laurel Holloman), and Nala Wayans (daughter of actor Keenen Ivory Wayans). Halle Berry (actress) and Gabriel Aubry (model) also chose the name for their daughter but spelled with an ”h” — Nahla. The name Nala is ranked #551 in 2018 — down 192 spots from 2017.

Oliver

Oliver is the name of the main protagonist of the 1988 Disney movie, Oliver and Company. From the French name Olivier, the name was probably derived from the Latin word olivarius (olive tree).

Most well-known Oliver’s include: Oliver Hudson (actor), Oliver Cromwell (politician) and the main character in Oliver Twist. The name Oliver ranked #3 in 2018 — up 3 spots from 2017.

Tiana

Tiana is a fictional main character who appears in Disney’s 49th animated feature film, The Princess and the Frog. She is the first African-American Disney Princess (2009). The name Tiana is Latin in origin and means: follower of Christ. In Turkish however, the name Tiana means: princess!

Most well-known with the name Tiana is daughter to actor Dwayne “The Rock” Johnson. The name Tiana is ranked #447 in 2018 — down 43 from 2017.

Congratulations! You’re going to have a baby! It’s natural to be excited about the birth of a child, and it’s a good idea to be financially prepared too. According to the USDA, the total cost of raising a child born in 2013 until age 17 is $245,340. The average cost of the first year is right […]

Every baby is different, but most parents find it’s best to establish some kind of sleep schedule or routine during those early months. This will help set the stage for a better night’s sleep down the road for both you and your baby. Sleep training is the best way to do this. While it can […]

One of the most common struggles for parents, especially new parents, is to help create good sleep habits for their baby. Sometimes parents get lucky and it just happens naturally. But most of the time, it does take a little bit of work by creating a routine, setting up structure, and being consistent. A lot […]