INTRODUCTION

The genus Cercospora Fresen. first was described in 1863 by Fresenius (CitationFuckel 1863) and currently is one of the largest and most heterogeneous genera of hyphomycetes (CitationCrous and Braun 2003). Species belonging to this plant pathogenic genus are distributed worldwide and cause Cercospora leaf spot on most of the major plant families (CitationCrous and Braun 2003). Since the description of the genus, the taxonomy of its species has become difficult because Cercospora for many years has been a dumping ground for all dematiaceous hyphomycetes with filiform conidia (CitationPons and Sutton 1988). CitationJohnson and Valleau (1949) stated that most of the morphologically uniform Cercospora isolates belong to a single Cercospora species that occurs on a wide host range and morphologically is indistinguishable from C. apii Fresen. Cercospora apii is the oldest available name for this large complex of morphologically indistinguishable Cercospora taxa. This approach was questioned by CitationChupp (1954), who stated in his monograph that species of Cercospora are generally host specific. Chupp subsequently formulated the concept of “one host species, genus or family equals one Cercospora species”. Chupp’s concept led to the description of a large number of species based on host substrate, with more than 3000 names being listed by CitationPollack (1987). CitationCrous and Braun (2003) revised these species and redisposed many of them. A total of 659 Cercospora species were recognized, with a further 281 being referred to synonymy under C. apii s.l. This decision was substantiated by the various inoculation experiments that have been conducted on the C. apii complex (CitationVestal 1933, Johnston and Valleau 1949, CitationFajola 1978) and that raised doubts whether host specificity existed within this complex.

To date only a few species belonging to C. apii s.l. have been cultured, and molecular data addressing host specificity within this complex is still lacking (CitationCrous et al 2004). Three scenarios are possible when examining the host-species association of taxa belonging to the C. apii complex. The first scenario is that a single species of Cercospora occurs on a wide host range; the second is that several species exist with overlapping host ranges; the third is that some Cercospora species are host specific whereas others are not.

The first evidence that distinct species exist within the C. apii morphotype recently was published by CitationGroenewald et al (2005). The latter study focused on Cercospora species isolated from sugar beet (Beta vulgaris) and celery (Apium graveolens). Characteristics examined for these isolates included morphology, cultural characteristics and cardinal temperature requirements for growth. These data were supplemented with amplified fragment length polymorphism analyses and phylogenetic analyses with five different genes. CitationGroenewald et al (2005) showed that three distinct Cercospora species exist on sugar beet and/or celery, namely C. beticola on sugar beet, C. apii on both celery and sugar beet and a third that was isolated from celery in Venezuela and Korea.

The ability to infect different hosts during artificial inoculation is of questionable value as a character in species delimitation. For instance, a recent study revealed that C. beticola could infect safflower during artificial inoculation experiments (CitationLartey et al 2005). However C. beticola has yet to be isolated from this host in the field. Only a few taxa that belong to the C. apii complex have been studied in the past in an attempt to elucidate the relationship between fungal species and host. The first objective of this study, therefore, was to name the new Cercospora species from celery. The second objective was to use DNA sequence data to examine the host range of this species, including C. apii s.s. and C. beticola s.s. as defined by CitationGroenewald et al (2005).

DISCUSSION

During a recent study in which we circumscribed C. apii and C. beticola s.s., we collected isolates of several Cercospora spp. that are part of the C. apii s.l. species complex. A whole population of “C. apii ” collected on celery from Venezuela was revealed to be a distinct species. Several months later we isolated the same species on celery collected from Korea. At that time it was thought that this species had not yet invaded European celery fields because it was absent from European Cercospora isolates from this crop (CitationGroenewald et al 2005). However in the present study we report the presence of this species on celery from Greece and describe it as C. apiicola sp. nov. Cultural and morphological examination of the C. apiicola strains support the observation made by CitationGroenewald et al (2005) that this new Cercospora species is distinct from the two closely related species, C. beticola and C. apii, that previously have been isolated from celery. The isolation of this new Cercospora species on a well known crop such as celery is an indication that there may still be many other undescribed cercosporoid species on well known crops and ornamental plants awaiting description.

CitationChupp (1954) associated Cercospora leaf spot on sugar beet with infections of C. beticola, and that of celery with C. apii. CitationEllis (1971) discussed the C. apii s.l. isolates in detail and described a wide host range for this species, but five years later he changed his opinion and narrowed the host range of C. apii to celery and C. beticola to sugar beet (CitationEllis 1976). CitationCrous and Braun (2003) linked 83 host genera to C. apii and nine host genera to C. beticola infections. CitationGroenewald et al (2005) again cast doubt on the purported wide host ranges of these species. In the present study a survey of Cercospora isolates from 10 host genera identified several additional hosts for both C. apii s.s. and C. beticola s.s. From these data we can confirm four additional host genera for C. apii (Helianthemum, Moluccella, Plantago, Plumbago) and five additional host genera for C. beticola (Apium, Chrysanthemum, Limonium, Malva, Spinacia). According to CitationCrous and Braun (2003) several Cercospora species (listed in parentheses) are associated with these hosts: Apium (C. apii), Beta (C. beticola), Helianthemum (C. cistinearum, C. helianthemi), Moluccella (C. molucellae), Plantago (C. pantoleuca, C. plantaginis), Plumbago (C. apii, C. plumbaginea), Limonium (C. apii, C. insulana, C. statices), Malva (C. althaeina, C. beticola, C. hyalospora, C. malvae, C. malvarum) and Spinacia (C. bertrandii, C. beticola, C. spinaciicola). In the treatment of CitationCrous and Braun (2003) neither Apium, Chrysanthemum or Limonium are listed as hosts of C. beticola nor Beta, Helianthemum, Moluccella and Plantago as hosts of C. apii. This study provides the first molecular evidence that these two species have wider host ranges than had been accepted by CitationChupp (1954) and CitationEllis (1976). However from the present study it appears that both species have narrower host ranges than that proposed by CitationCrous and Braun (2003), but this has to be investigated further by conducting pathogenicity studies on all the hosts previously listed for these species.

The host range data obtained in the present study illustrate that C. beticola s.s. and C. apii s.s. are not entirely host specific and that it is not possible to identify these two species solely based on host. Despite of the additional host genera that were found for C. apii and C. beticola, it is clear that C. apii s.s. is mainly isolated from celery, whereas C. beticola is mainly isolated from sugar beet, even though both of these species have been isolated from the other’s primary host in the past.

CitationCrous and Groenewald (2005) introduced the pogo stick hypothesis to explain the colonization of necrotic Mycosphaerella lesions by other species of Mycosphaerella that jump hosts in the process of reaching their real hosts. The possibility that this process of substrate colonization and host jumps also occurs in asexual Mycosphaerella species could explain the isolation of specific Cercospora species from “atypical” hosts and needs to be investigated further. It would be especially interesting to determine whether Cercospora species occurring on “atypical” hosts are able to cause disease on these hosts or not.

As illustrated in this study, morphology, host specificity and geographic location are not suitable characters for the identification of species of the Cercospora apii complex. CitationGroenewald et al (2005) used sequence data in combination with other features such as growth rate to establish species boundaries for C. apii, C. apiicola (as Cercospora sp.) and C. beticola. From these established species boundaries, species-specific primers were designed in polymorphic areas of the calmodulin gene for the three species. This combined approach probably represents the most reliable way to characterize and identify species within this complex.

Five loci were used in this study for phylogenetic analyses, although all five loci sequenced were not congruent and therefore could not be used in a combined phylogenetic analysis. Two separate analyses thus were performed, the first combining ITS, EF, ACT and CAL sequences and the second using only HIS sequences. The first analysis separated the C. apii s.s., C. beticola s.s. and C. apiicola isolates. Although the second analysis also was able to separate the C. apiicola isolates from the C. apii s.s./C. beticola s.s. isolates, it was unable to distinguish between C. apii s.s. and C. beticola s.s. isolates. Using HIS data a small cluster representing seven C. beticola s.s. and one C. apii s.s. isolate grouped separately from other C. apii s.s./C. beticola s.s. isolates. The unique polymorphisms (10 in total) observed in the histone H3 sequences of these isolates were identical and were not present in the other isolates or in our Cercospora sequence database. A possible explanation might be host jumping by the Helianthemum isolate, followed by recombination with the Beta isolates. However more Helianthemum isolates need to be studied to confirm whether this allele is unique to Helianthemum before one can address this issue. Caution therefore should be taken when using histone H3 sequence data for Cercospora phylogeny because variation in the histone H3 sequence may not indicate species differences.

It can be concluded from this study that strains belonging to the C. apii s.s. and C. beticola s.s. clades can be isolated from other hosts and, although these species are mainly isolated from celery and sugar beet, they are not host specific. It seems that the new species from celery described in this paper (viz. C. apiicola) is host specific because no other Cercospora strain isolated from other hosts and available in our sequence database has similar sequences. The reasons why host jumping by C. apii and C. beticola is so common remains unknown. However it is not unlikely that under stress—a shortage of host tissue or unsuitable weather—the new species might be able to jump from celery onto other hosts.