Table of contents :

Policy analysis in Germany

Contents

List of tables and figures

Tables

Figures

Notes on contributors

1. Policy analysis in Germany: past, present and future of the discipline

The past: policy analysis as a discipline in Germany

The present: exemplary findings

The future: German policy analysis on its way towards further professionalisation

2. Historical forerunners of policy analysis in Germany

Introduction

The discovery of policy and the heritage of Aristotle

‘Reason of state’ and ‘sovereignty’ as new concepts in political theory

The special German development of a Polizei-Staat (police state)

Conclusion

3. The development of policy analysis in Germany: practical problems and theoretical concepts

Introduction

Policy: the missing concept

Planning and the organisation of government

Comparative policy analysis

Implementation and policy instruments

Policy fields and networks

Arguments and ideas

Institutions and governance

Conclusion

4. Professionalisation of policy analysis in Germany: on the way or faraway?

Introduction

Academic and applied policy analysis

Professionalisation of academic and applied policy analysis

Conclusion

5. Methods and study types in German policy analysis

Introduction

Analysis of single cases

Comparative case studies

Qualitative comparative analysis

Macro-quantitative comparisons

Policy network analysis

Conclusion and outlook

6. Policy analysis in the German-speaking countries: common traditions, different cultures, in Germany, Austria and Switzerland

Introduction

Shared traditions

Policy analysis in Germany

Policy analysis in Austria

Policy analysis in Switzerland

Conclusion

7. Federal government: permanent in-house capacities – life within the ‘apparatus’

Introduction

Reform policy, planning and political administrative capacities: a short history since the mid-1960s

Institutional basis of federal policy-making

Strengths and weaknesses: policy-making in the information society

8. Statist policy advice: policy analysis in the German Länder

Agenda-setting and policy analysis under institutional restrictions

Decision-making processes

Policy instruments

Policy innovation

Conclusion

9. Local policy processes: economisation, professionalisation, democratisation

Local policy processes: a complex institutional framework1

Between consociational and competitive democracy

Trends and constraints

Summary and perspectives

10. Federal government in Germany: temporary, issue-related policy advice

Introduction: increasing policy advice in Germany

Background: developments and debates on policy advice in Germany

Bündnis für Arbeit2 and think tanks as components of the Berliner Räterepublik

Opportunities and limits of policy advice from the perspective of organisational sociology and political theory

11. Parliamentary in-house research services and policy-making in Germany – Sancho Panza or David’s sling?

German Bundestag: ‘parliament’ and/or ‘legislature’?

In-house services of the German Bundestag: a systematic overview

Genesis and development of the research services

Specific logic of parliamentary in-house research services

Parliamentary research services: a remedy for ‘deparliamentarisation’?

12. The German Bundestag and external expertise: policy orientation as counterweight to deparliamentarisation?

(How) do parliaments analyse policy?

External expertise: the instruments of the Bundestag

External expertise: instruments of the individual member of parliament

External expertise as counterweight to ‘deparliamentarisation’

13. From hand to mouth: parties and policy-making in Germany

Policy-making as a challenge for political parties

Parties as organised anarchies

Party policy-making: arenas of action and conflicting objectives

Perspectives: strategy-making for organised anarchies

Conclusion

14. Policy analysis by trade unions and business associations in Germany

Introduction

State of research

Changing role of trade unions and employers’ associations within the policy process

Structure of policy-related activities

Conclusion

15. Public interest groups and policy analysis: a push for evidence-based policy-making?

Introduction

Public interest groups as emerging policy actors in Germany

Resources and restrictions of policy analysis: core differences between environmental and consumer groups

What kind of policy analysis? Breaking the boundary of academia

More evidence needed? The ambiguous case of evidence-based policy-making

Policy analysis or policy framing? Strategies of political communication by public interest groups

Facing the different worlds of German policy analysis: the limited use of political science to public interest groups

16. Think tanks: bridging beltway and ivory tower?

Introduction1

An overview of the landscape of German think tanks

Academic think tanks, mainly financed by the state: Wissenschaftszentrum Berlin (WZB)

Academic think tanks – privately financed: Bertelsmann Foundation

Advocacy think tanks – classical pattern: Wirtschafts- und Sozialwissenschaftliches Institut (WSI)

Advocacy think tanks – recent innovation: Initiative Neue Soziale Marktwirtschaft (INSM)

Conclusion

17. Non-university research institutes: between basic research, knowledge transfer to the public and policy analysis

Introduction

Extramural research landscape in Germany

Research institutes and policy advice: recent developments and the current situation

Conclusion

18. The role of policy analysis in teaching political science at German universities

Introduction

Personal resources for teaching policy analysis: chairs for policy analysis

Policy analysis in study programmes

Identifying and explaining change: teaching policy analysis before and after the Bologna process

Conclusion

19. Academics and policy analysis: tension between epistemic and practical concerns

Introduction

Policy analysis

Epistemic robustness versus practical usefulness

Scientific advisory councils

Impact of policy analysis

Index

Citation preview