Founded in 1946, the University of the East is a for-profit private higher education institution located in the urban setting of the metropolis of Manila (population range of 1,000,000-5,000,000 inhabitants), National Capital Region. This institution also has a branch campus in Caloocan City and Quezon City. Officially recognized by the Commission on Higher Education of the Philippines, University of the East (UE) is a very large-sized (uniRank enrollment range: over-50,000 students) coeducational Philippine higher education institution. University of the East (UE) offers courses and programs leading to officially recognized higher education degrees such as pre-bachelor's degrees (i.e. certificates, diplomas, associate or foundation), bachelor's degrees, master's degrees and doctorate degrees in several areas of study. See the uniRank degree levels and areas of study table below for further details. This 78-year-old Philippine higher-education institution has a selective admission policy based on entrance examinations. The acceptance rate range is 50-59% making this Philippine higher education organization an averagely selective institution. International students are welcome to apply for enrollment. UE also provides several academic and non-academic facilities and services to students including a library, sports facilities, financial aids and/or scholarships, as well as administrative services.

Gender Admission

This institution admits Men and Women (coed).

Admission Selection

Has University of the East a selective admission policy? Yes, based on entrance examinations.

Admission Rate

University of the East's acceptance rate range is 50-59% making this institution an averagely selective higher education institution.

Student Enrollment

University of the East has an enrollment range of over-50,000 students making it a very large-sized institution.

Academic Staff

This institution has a range of 2,500-2,999 academic employees (Faculty).

Control Type

University of the East is a private higher education institution.

Entity Type

University of the East is a for-profit higher education institution.