In June 1954, a new campus was opened on a 4.86-hectare (12.0-acre) lot along Samson Road, Caloocan, then it was known as UE Tech. With the Technical School as a junior college offering liberal arts courses and training technical subjects, and a complete secondary course with both academic and vocational curricula, this brought the university into compliance with the 2-2 Plan of the Department of Education.

School year 1957–1958 marked the offering of general courses leading to the Associate of Arts, Bachelor of Arts and Bachelor of Business Administration degrees and a one-year course leading to a Certificate in Secretarial Science. The next six years saw the construction of the High School Building, the Gymnasium, the Applied Industrial Training Building, the Home Economics Building, the block-long Shop Buildings, the Cement Products Shop and the Woodworking and Construction Building.

By school year 1960–1961, first and second year Liberal Arts, first and second year Commerce and pre-Law courses were offered. By August 1964, the UETS started phasing out its technical offerings. The elementary and the high schools as well as Secretarial courses were also phased out but, in their place, Engineering courses and a complete Business Administration program were offered starting in 1977. Thus, began the campus shift from being a vocational-technical school to becoming an academic extension of UE Manila.

In 1976, when extension programs began to be offered, the Caloocan Campus adopted the name University of the East Caloocan.

The School of Fine Arts was relocated to the Caloocan Campus before the opening of the 1981–1982 school year. The SFA, established on July 15, 1964, and incorporated in October of that year, started as a unit of the UE Manila School of Music and Arts under the UE Research Center for Sciences, Humanities and Culture. The other units were the School of Music and the Ballet School. The school used to be in what was then the College of Dentistry building on Aurora Boulevard across from the UE Ramon Magsaysay Memorial Medical Center.

In 1977, Dean Oscar Limlingan of the College of Engineering was appointed officer-in-charge of UE Caloocan. Later, he became assistant vice president, then vice president and the first chancellor of UE Caloocan.

The UE Caloocan grounds have been used for ROTC and CAT instruction since 1986.

UE Caloocan enhanced its own infrastructure and that of Caloocan with the Tan Yan Kee Academic Building, which was opened in the second semester of the 2003–2004 school year and was inaugurated in December 2003.

At present, UE Caloocan houses the Colleges of Arts and Sciences (CAS), Business Administration (CBA), Fine Arts (CFA) and Engineering (CoE). They have counterpart colleges at UE's Manila campus, except for the college of Fine Arts.