Sydney Pollack was a multihyphenate long before the term became part of the Hollywood lexicon.

Pollack, who died May 26 at 73, had a career like no one else’s. Even after he was established as one of the most in-demand directors in town — an Oscar winner with a string of box office hits — he became a prolific producer and actor.

In the past eight years, he was producer or exec producer on 17 films for other directors. And he pursued supporting roles in films and on TV shows (including “Will & Grace” and “The Sopranos”) because he enjoyed acting and liked the opportunity to be on the set and observe other helmers at work.

Robert Towne, who lived across the street from Pollack, agreed that the helmer harbored an unparalleled curiosity that prompted him “to know about everything related to his craft.”

Popular on Variety

“Sydney was extremely disciplined, and he was a student of different disciplines,” says Towne, who wrote two Pollack directing vehicles: “The Yakuza” and “The Firm.” “He was knowledgeable about every facet including the technical end of it, the acting end and the writing end.”

Meryl Streep, who starred in “Out of Africa” — Pollack’s crowning achievement for which he received twin Academy Awards, as director and producer — remembered his reputation on set.

“A sound guy told me no one knew more about every department than Sydney,” she says. “As an accomplished actor, he understood deeply the job we all had to do, and he was funny, respectful and impatient with bloat or bull. I loved him and was grateful that I was lucky enough to work with him and am sad to think of the world without his wonderful smile.”

At the time of his death, Pollack was working on a number of projects through his Mirage Enterprises, which had a first-look deal at the Weinstein Co. The fate of that company and its slate has been thrown into question in the aftermath of the deaths of Pollack last week and partner Anthony Minghella in March.

Pollack had shown no signs of slowing down, despite being in what some might consider the twilight of one’s career. At age 71, he branched out in a new direction by helming “Sketches of Frank Gehry” — his first documentary about a subject that he admitted he knew nothing about: architecture.

But he seemed to know a lot about a lot.

Though Pollack never penned a screenplay, he understood the art of a good script better than anyone. Last year, he served as a guest lecturer during an AFI class for first- and second-year writing fellows. Sandi Berg, who taught the class, recalled the camaraderie that Pollack enjoyed with the scribes-in-training.

“He had a real bond with writers,” she says. “He totally understood the process. He discussed character, plot, tone. That’s rare for someone who is not a writer.”

Although the class was only open to students, faculty members and industryites snuck in. Pollack treated the packed auditorium to his personal print of “Three Days of the Condor,” sent over from the Academy of Motion Picture Arts & Sciences. Berg says members of the AFI community tout it as the best evening ever. “And we’ve had some very big names here.

“When someone asked him a question, he talked to them as if he was a writer,” says Berg, who had no trouble booking Pollack for the assignment despite his very busy schedule. “He totally understood the process. He didn’t talk down to them. He talked as if they were working on a project together.”

Friend and fellow filmmaker Jon Avnet says Pollack was drawn to acting because “it was relatively painless for him, unlike directing.”

During a 1999 interview, Pollack said acting was much easier for him than directing. “I don’t particularly like acting or dislike it,” he said. “I can take it or leave it. My real reason for doing it is because directors don’t get a chance to see other directors work … I’ve worked with very good directors, so it’s hard to say no” to such talents as Woody Allen, Stanley Kubrick or Robert Altman.

Towne found Pollack had unique ability to multitask, even around the house.

“He would be working through a script and cooking a big dinner for us at the same time,” he said. “Then there was the time that I thought he was coming over to ask me for some help on his yard, and it turned out that he was asking me to help him with ‘The Firm.’ I don’t think there’s another director out there who would do that.”

Friends and contemporaries viewed Pollack as the consummate Renaissance man, whose body of work was infused with his varied interests — particularly politics — and harkened back to cinema’s heyday.

“I always viewed Sydney as being part of the great Hollywood tradition,” says Martin Scorsese. “All of his work — as a director, as a producer, as an actor — exude the best qualities of classical filmmaking.

“His movies have emotional power, often rooted in stellar performances from his actors, whom he clearly loved. And Sydney was a passionate idealist, something to which we can all aspire. He leaves an important legacy, and he will be deeply missed.”