Tre Mitchell is taking his talents to Germany. The former Kentucky Wildcat has signed with Basketball Löwen Braunschweig in the Basketball Bundesliga, the top tier of German professional basketball. Mitchell, who finished his college career at Kentucky after stints at West Virginia, Texas, and UMass, went undrafted in April and played for the Oklahoma City Thunder in the NBA Summer League.

“I have worked towards becoming a professional all my life and now the time has come,” Mitchell said in a press release from the club (via Google Translate). “I am moving to a great location and will start my professional career as a Lion in Braunschweig. I am very excited and at the same time grateful for the opportunity to be part of the Lions. I am looking forward to showing everyone what I am capable of and want to make my contribution to a successful season.”

Mitchell joined Kentucky’s 2023-24 roster last summer following Bob Huggins’ DUI and dismissal at West Virginia. He appeared in 27 games, starting 24, for last year’s squad, averaging 10.7 points and a team-high 7.2 rebounds per contest. Mitchell battled injuries during SEC play, missing six games in February with shoulder and back issues. While he struggled the rest of the regular season, he and Antonio Reeves carried Kentucky in the NCAA Tournament first-round loss to Oakland. Mitchell was the lone Cat with a double-double that game, finishing with 14 points and 13 rebounds.

Although Mitchell’s time with the Thunder in the NBA Summer League didn’t land him a deal in the NBA or G-League, he did catch the eye of Löwen managing director Nils Mittmann, who was in Vegas for the games.

“After his appearances in the Summer League, I didn’t think we would have a chance of signing Tre,” Mittmann said in Löwen’s release. “We were looking for a mobile, athletic, and rebounding big man who can keep up with our high tempo of play. Tre brings all of that. He is a versatile player with very good skills who will give us many opportunities defensively, but also offensively on the board and with his shot.

“For a player from a US college, Tre already has a lot of experience and seems very composed. I am convinced that he will adapt to European basketball very quickly and bring a lot of joy to the spectators and us.”

Congrats to Tre. Maybe we’ll see him back in the Bluegrass next summer with La Familia for The Basketball Tournament?