Margaret Illman is an Australian ballerina with an international career as a prinicpal dancer and principal guest. She was born in Adelaide, studied at the Australian Ballet School, before dancing with the Australian Ballet and then progressing to the Paris Opera Ballet School on scholarship. She joined the National Ballet of Canada in 1989. In 1993 she was offered the leading role in the Broadway Musical, "The Red Shoes" where she won three awards: the Theatre World Award for Best Actress, the Fred Astaire Award for Best Dancer on Broadway and a Drama Desk nomination. She has danced with the New York City Ballet, English National Ballet, La Scala Milan, Hamburg Ballet, Dresden Ballet, and the Bavarian State Ballet Munich and Zurich. Illman represented Australia at the Wedding Gala of Prince Fredrik of Denmark and Mary Donaldson. She returned to Australia in 2006, and coordinated/lectured for the Ballet department (West Australian Academy of the Performing Arts), obtained a degree in Teaching/Assessment and Business/Marketing and then a Bachelor of Physiotherapy from Notre Dame University, Perth 2012. She then worked as a Dance Physiotherapist, Anatomy and Nutrition lecturer and guest adjudicator and coach, before joining the Perth School of Ballet as the Elite program teacher and advisor. [information from Margaret Illmann's website, 2018]

In Copyright

You may copy under some circumstances, for example you may copy a portion for research or study. Order a copy through Copies Direct to the extent allowed under fair dealing. Contact us for further information about copying.

Reason for copyright status:

Until 2063 [Created/Published Date + 70 Years]

Copyright status was determined using the following information:

Material type:

Artistic

Published status:

Published

Publication date:

1993

Copyright status may not be correct if data in the record is incomplete or inaccurate. Other access conditions may also apply. For more information please see: Copyright in library collections.