September Dance Challenge: Tango & Cha Cha

September Dance Challenge: Tango & Cha Cha When: Saturday 14th September 2024 Where: QuickSteps Dance Studio, 255 Gouger St Who: Open to all levels, compete with a teacher or with each other. Click here to go straight to the Entry Form and Good Luck! Click here to purchase spectator tickets or pay Heat Entry Fees […]

Everything You Need to Know About Dance Shoes

If clothes, as Shakespeare contended, make the man, then shoes certainly do make the dancer. It doesn’t matter whether you’re a competing professional or a total beginner, good dance shoes are an absolute necessity if you want to perform to your best and progress as a dancer. Dance floors come in many shapes, sizes and […]

Dance Class Rules You Should Follow

Nothing is more nerve-wracking than going to a dance lesson for the first time. There is always the worry that you might accidentally break some unspoken dance class rules or ruin the class’s flow. Besides the usual first-day jitters, we also understand how difficult it can be to attend adult dance lessons in the first […]

Why Take Ballroom Dance Classes: Discover the Multiple Benefits

Why Take Ballroom Dance Classes? Curious about why take ballroom dance classes? Discover the myriad benefits that await you on the dance floor. From improving coordination to boosting confidence, explore the transformative power of ballroom dance. Anyone who has seen Fred Astaire and Ginger Rogers do their thing knows how complicated dance can be. It […]

Experience the Joy of Bachata Dancing – Why You Should Try It

Bachata Dancing – Adelaide is bursting with culture and creative energy. The city could pull you in so many new and interesting directions. If you ever find yourself bored, which I doubt happens often, all you have to do is join a class or participate in one of the city’s numerous events and festivals. One […]

A Look Into the Exciting World of Social Dancing: From History to Benefits

Social Dancing – Social media, zoom, and work-from-home setups mean that for the average Adelaidian, relationships are made and developed online. You could have a riveting conversation with friends across the world or your roommate on the other side of the couch at the same time. While that’s all well and good, sometimes you have […]

Find Out What is the Most Romantic Dance Style To Share With Your Partner

Keeping romance alive in a relationship takes work. You and your partner need to carve out time to enjoy activities (Romantic Dance) together. Sometimes it can be as simple as a dinner and a show. Other times it’s best to build intimacy with partnered activities. Dancing has always been a top choice. As Elizabeth Bennet […]

Master the Dance Floor: Tips and Tricks for Club Dancing Success

By now, we all know that Adelaide is the place to be for ballroom and Latin club dancing. With events every weekend, Adelaidians are never short of dance opportunities once they know how to partner dance. Even if you are more of a solo dancer, Adelaide has plenty of boutique clubs where you can strut […]

Where Can I Dance Bachata In Adelaide?

In the last couple of years Bachata has become the new ‘it’ dance so it’s no wonder you’re looking for places to go and shake your Bachata groove thang! Here is a list of all the places so that you can get your – Bachata dance in Adelaide whenever you need it. Where Can I […]

Salsa And Latin Dance Venues and Events Around Adelaide

Salsa And Latin Dance Venues and Events Around Adelaide 1. Wednesdays – Little Havana (nightclub) 268 Morphett St, Adelaide This cosy little club has had a facelift in the last 6 months and that facelift has a Latino flavour! On Wednesday nights it’s all about salsa & Latin Dance. Doors open at 6pm but the […]

The Great Debate: Is Dance a Sport or an Art?

Explore the great debate: Is dance a sport or an art? Dive into perspectives, arguments, and insights on the intersection of athleticism and creativity in dance. There has long been a great debate raging within the dance community. Is Dance a sport or an art? At QuickSteps, we think it’s both! To decide whether dance […]

Ideal Time To Launch Your Dancing Journey: What Is the Best Age to Start Dance?

What Is the Best Age to Start Dance – Dancing is as simple as moving rhythmically to music. It is also a form of expression and art that should be fun. If you are not yet learning to dance, you should. Dancing has an immense impact on your emotional, mental and physical health. Dance improves […]

How To Dance With Confidence: Tips To Boost Your Skills

How To Dance With Confidence – People often ask their teacher how to become a better dancer or how to be a good dancer. There are three parts to being a good dancer: Etiquette, Proficiency, and Confidence. Etiquette and Proficiency when you dance are two whole topics on their own! So, of course, we expect […]

Am I Ready for Specialist?

Are you contemplating whether you’re prepared for specialized training or services? Dive into our blog as we unravel the considerations and insights to help you answer the question, “Am I Ready for Specialist?” So you think you might be ready to head into Specialist? Great! Members are required to do a ‘progress check’ with a […]

Am I Ready For Dance Level 2?

Generally, after 3-6 months in Level Dance 1, members will start to ask themselves, ‘Am I ready for Dance Level 2’? Am I Ready for Dance Level 2? Guidelines for Progression and Evaluation If you’re attending private lessons, your teacher is the best person to answer this! If you’re not doing private lessons, you will […]

Salsa Bachata Party With Mutati: Flower Power!

Salsa Bachata Party With Mutati: – Exciting news! Our beloved teacher and Adelaide’s renowned Salsa/Bachata DJ, Mutati, is back! Join us at QuickSteps HQ for his fabulous Flower Power party on Saturday, November 5th. Dust off your most vibrant, 60’s-inspired attire and let’s groove on the dance floor! It’s an event you won’t want to […]

Sundays Rock November Edition

Sundays Rock November – Rock n Roll at the QS Studio with the Rhythm Cats live! Sunday 20th November 5:30pm-7:30pm at the QS studio, 255 Gouger St, Adelaide Tickets are $10 pre purchased or $15 on the day so get in early! Buy here

Ballroom Blitz November Edition

Ballroom Blitz is back! This will be the final Ballroom Blitz November in 2022 so make sure you come along! Sunday November 13th 5:30pm-7:30pm 2 hours of elegance, grace and poise…. Dress code: Neat/cocktail fancy – Think cocktail dress or dress slacks and a nice top for the ladies and fellas can be in anything […]

Self Levelling – Am I ready for Dance Level 3?

Are you considering leveling up your dance skills to Level 3 but unsure if you’re ready? Dive into our latest blog post where we explore self-levelling techniques to gauge your readiness and take your dance journey to the next level. When am I ready to move to Level 3? This is a common question! Here […]

Glow In the Dark – Bachata & Salsa Party

QuickSteps Dance Studio & Mutati want to welcome you to this amazing party… bring on the Neon Colours outfits. Let’s glow… Warm up and start your night with a great Bachata Fusion workshop by Emily & Mutati, the amazing tunes by our great DJs & yes that amazing atmosphere too… you know how we do […]

Sundays Rock With GETBACK

Sundays Rock with GETBACK are ….back! Playing al of your favourite 50’s and 60’s rock n roll treats live at the QuickSteps studio. These events are open to everyone so feel free to bring along your dancing co-hort. The bar will be open (card payments only please) and the good times will be rolling. Sunday […]

Sundays Rock with The Rhythm Cats

Sundays Rock with The Rhythm Cats 2022 – If you love rock n roll and swing you cannot miss our next Sundays Rock featuring the wonderful Rhythm Cats. Sunday September 4th from 5:30pm-7:30pm here at the QuickSteps Dance Studio on Gouger St. With their eclectic mix of classic hits and modern favorites, the Rhythm Cats […]

Ballroom Blitz 2022

Ballroom Blitz 2022 – Back due to popular demand. Ballroom Blitz makes a return! Join us on Sunday 21st August from 5:30pm-7:30pm for 2 solid hours of Ballroom classics in Adelaide’s favourite ballroom- the QuickSteps studio. Waltz, Viennese Waltz, quickstep, foxtrot and tango will be playing and the bar will be open. Dress code: cocktail […]

Christmas Dance Party 2022

It’s just not Christmas with out some dancing. Head to the QuickSteps studio and help us celebrate the year that was and signing off for another fabulous year! Saturday 17th December from 5:30pm – 8:30pm. Feeling festive? Why not wear your favourite Christmas inspired clothes? Red, Green, tinsel, reindeer antlers, whatever you like! As always […]

Halloween Dance Party

QuickSteps’ Halloween Dance Party is one of the biggest events on the Adelaide dance calendar and you CANNOT be ‘too dressed up’! Come and waltz with the witches, foxtrot with the Frankensteins and dance with the devils on Saturday October 29th at our studio. Grab a cocktail from our cauldron, bar open! Saturday October 29th […]

October Dance Party

Join the QuickSteps Team from 5:30pm-8:30pm on Saturday October 8th dancing a variety of ballroom, Latin and swing styles including salsa, tango, bachata, rock n roll and more! The bar is open and the good times are rollin’! All welcome, bring friends.

Elvis – QuickSteps Goes To The Movies

Elvis: QuickSteps Goes to the Movies – Experience the Cinematic Magic! Well it’s been a long time since QuickSteps has gone to the movies. The new Elvis movie is the perfect movie to see as a group of dance enthusiasts! Who better to teach us hip movement than the King himself?! Yah hubba hubba, thank […]

Summer Ball 2023: Vegas!

Summer Ball 2023 Vegas – February is heating up… cos we’re off to Vegas baby! Join us for dinner, drinks and dancing at the National Wine Centre on Saturday 18th Feb. Not only will you be well fed but you’ll be entertained as well! Teachers and members will be teaming up to dazzle you with […]

Why Is Bachata So Popular?

Let’s start with bachata facts , what Bachata is and Why Is Bachata So Popular? Bachata is a dance in the street Latin family along with merengue, salsa, kizomba, and cha cha cha. It has often been taught alongside salsa and, for the last 15 years or so, has somewhat been in salsa’s shadow. Always the […]

Winter Ball 2021

Get Ready to Move Your Feet with Mini Dance Groups at QuickSteps

What are Mini Dance Groups? A Mini Group is a 6-week course of one certain style and level of dance. For example; Foundations 1 Rock n Roll – Monday nights at 7:45 pm (May 10th-June 14th). There are only 8 members in each group dance class, and this is divided into 4 leads, and 4 […]

What is the difference between salsa freestyle dancing and choreographed salsa routines?

As with most style opf partner dance, salsa comes in two forms; Freestyle (lead & follow) Choreographed The video above is Michelle and Francesco dancing a ‘freestyle’ salsa. This means they are using small body movements and arm positions to communicate to each other and make the dance come to life. The steps are not […]