THE A-Z OF BING’S MOVIES

Prepared by Keith Parkinson and published in instalments in BING magazine from 1989 to 2011.

Keith offers his personal opinions on the various components of Bing’s career on the silver screen.

Amendments should please be notified to Malcolm Macfarlane.

Click on a letter.

A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W Y Z

A

ABEL, WALTER (1898-1987) Actor. He appeared in three Crosby movies in the early forties: Holiday Inn (1942) Star Spangled Rhythm (1942) and Duffy’s Tavern (1944). He was not a Paramount contract player but when he worked for that studio, he was cast as a figure of authority. In Holiday Inn, he was Fred Astaire’s manager, in Star Spangled Rhythm he was Frisbee, the studio head and in Duffy’s Tavern he was a film director. His screen career as a character actor embraces five decades. He made his debut in Liliom in 1930 and in the mid-seventies he was still adding authority to films like the thriller Silent Night, Bloody Night (1974).

ABIE’S IRISH ROSE Released at the end of 1946, this was Bing’s second foray into movie production. In 1944, he formed ‘Bing Crosby Producers’ with other financiers with the intention of releasing feature films through United Artists. Abie’s Irish Rose followed The Great John L., which was released in 1945. Joanne Dru and Richard Norris co-starred and Bing appointed John Scott Trotter to compose the film’s score. The most accurate review of the film I have found is that written by Leonard Maltin: “Outdated when written in 1920s and even worse now.”

ABRAHAM Song. Music and lyrics were written by Irving Berlin and it featured in two of Bing’s films. In the 1942 Holiday Inn it was used to celebrate Abraham Lincoln’s birthday in a sequence featuring Bing in black face supported by Marjorie Reynolds (with Martha Mears’ voice), Louise Beavers and Joan Arnold and Shelby Bacon. The latter two played the children of the cook, played by Beavers. The music only was used for a tap dance by Vera-Ellen and George Chakiris (then known as George Kerris) in White Christmas (1954).

ACADEMY AWARDS Bing won one such award, commonly known as an Oscar, for his part as Father O’Malley in Going My Way (1944). He sang four songs that won Oscars. These were “Sweet Leilani from Waikiki Wedding (1937) “White Christmas” from Holiday Inn (1942), “Swinging on a Star” from Going My Way (1944) and “In the Cool Cool Cool of the Evening” from Here Comes the Groom (1952). He sang the following Oscar nominated songs: “Love In Bloom” from She Loves Me Not (1935) which lost to “The Continental”, “Only Forever” from Rhythm on the River (1941) which lost to “When You Wish Upon A Star”, “Ac-Cent-Tchu-Ate the Positive” from Here Come The Waves and “Aren’t You Glad You’re You” from The Bells of St. Mary’s both 1946 and losing to “It Might As Well Be Spring”. These were followed by “You Keep Coming Back Like A Song” from Blue Skies (1947) which lost to “On The Atcheson Topeka And The Santa Fe”, “Zing A Little Song” from Just for You (1955) which lost to “Do Not Forsake Me”, “Count Your Blessings Instead of Sheep” from White Christmas (1955) which lost to “Three Coins In The Fountain”, “True Love” from High Society (1957) which lost to “Que Sera Sera” and “The Second Time Around” from High Time (1961) which lost to “Never On Sunday”. Other Oscar winners connected with Crosby films were:

·Herman Rosse for Art Direction, King of Jazz (1930)

·Barry Fitzgerald for Supporting Actor, Leo McCarey for Direction, Frank Butler and Frank Cavett for Screenplay, Leo McCarey for original story and also for best film, all for Going My Way(1944)

·Stephen Dunn for Sound Recording, The Bells of St. Mary’s (1946). Bing was also nominated as Best Actor for The Bells of St. Mary’s but failed to win the award.

Grace Kelly for Best Actress and George Seaton, Screenplay, for The Country Girl (1954). Bing was also nominated as Best Actor for The Country Girl but failed to win the award.

AC-CENT-TCHU-ATE THE POSITIVE Song. This Johnny Mercer (lyrics) - Harold Arlen (music) number was written specifically for the Paramount picture Here Come the Waves but was also sung in the 1944 short film Sing with the Stars made for the U.S. Coast Guard as part of the Army-Navy Screen Magazine series. In the first film, Bing duets with Sonny Tufts when they both appear in black face as part of a show mounted for service personnel. In the short film, Bing sings the song solo, accompanied by the Band of the 11th Naval District Coast Guard. The song was nominated for an Academy Award but lost.

ACCIDENTS WILL HAPPEN Song. It is untypical of a Crosby song to begin with an opera singer practising scales but this happens when the song has its main showcase spot in Paramount’s Mr. Music (1950). Bing sings the song twice before he duets with Dorothy Kirsten at a show which is staged in order to attract financial backers. The writers were Johnny Burke and James Van Heusen who saw their royalties boosted when Bing recorded the song twice for Decca. In April 1950, Jay Blackton accompanied him duetting with Dorothy Kirsten and two months later he soloed the song accompanied by the Victor Young Orchestra.

ADAMS, ERNIE (1885-1947) Actor. By no means an actor of prominence. Ernie Adams was one of those reliable sub-character actors willing to accept assignments involving one or two days' work. The best measure of the man can be gained from parts he played in his two Crosby movies: he was ‘A Sailor’ in We’re Not Dressing (1934) and ‘A Citizen’ in The Princess and the Pirate (1944) although his part in the latter was no briefer than Bing’s own fleeting appearance. His film career began in silent pictures and he died after a brief appearance in The Pretender, made in the same year as his death. In between times, he also appeared in stage musicals and such series ‘B’ pictures as the Hopalong Cassidy westerns.

ADAMSON, HAROLD (1906-1980) Lyricist. Bing sang just one of his songs on screen. That was “We’ve Got Another Bond to Buy” which was featured in the short Hollywood Victory Caravan (1945). The music for the song was provided by regular collaborator Jimmy McHugh, who worked on 19 movies with Adamson. Some of the songs he wrote that became standards include “I Couldn’t Sleep a Wink Last Night”, “A Lovely Way to Spend an Evening” and “My Resistance is Low”.

ADESTE FIDELES Song. This traditional Christmas carol had been associated with Bing for ten years by the time he sang it in The Bells of St. Mary’s (1945). In the film, Bing sings it with a children’s choir. Together with “White Christmas” and “Silent Night” it is one of a trio of Crosby songs that became regularly featured on Bing’s radio and television shows each Christmas until the time of his death.

ADVENTURES OF ICHABOD AND MR. TOAD, THE Film. Made in 1949 for Walt Disney, Bing narrated the story of Ichabod Crane in the first part of this animated feature. Since its theatrical release, the Disney Organisation separated the two segments, which have since appeared on television as part of the Disneyland series. The Ichabod story was written by Washington Irving as ‘The Legend of Sleepy Hollow’ and Decca released the story on two 78s with Bing singing the three songs from the film: “Ichabod”, “Katrina” and “The Headless Horseman” .The original concept of the film was to be a combination of animation and live action along the lines of Song of the South which had been a popular success for the Disney Organisation two years previously. Early publicity for the film was under its working title of Two Fabulous Characters.

AFRICAN ETUDE Song. This was one of the five songs Johnny Burke and James Van Heusen wrote especially for the second ‘Road’ picture Road to Zanzibar (1941). It was never commercially recorded by Bing and to hear it you will have to seek out the “Going Hollywood” album series for the soundtrack version. It features twice in the picture, its strong jungle rhythm benefiting from the support the native bearers provide for Bing’s rendition.

AFTER ALL, YOU’RE ALL I’M AFTER Song. This was written for the film She Loves Me Not by Edward Heyman and Arthur Schwartz but was not used.

AFTER SUNDOWN Song. Nacio Herb Brown (music) and Arthur Freed (lyrics) were commissioned by M.G.M. to write the songs for Going Hollywood (1933) and “After Sundown” comes in the second half of the movie when Bing sings it off camera during a montage of romantic scenes involving himself and leading lady Marion Davies.

AFTER YOU Song. Towards the end of the Paramount film Double or Nothing the plot is heading towards a happy ending with a show which will raise money towards an “All lived happily ever after” conclusion. A scat version of this Sam Coslow - Al Siegel composition is rendered by Bing (as orchestra leader Lefty Boland), Martha Raye, France Faye and Harry Barris. Bing did not record the song for commercial issue.

AGER, MILTON (1893-1979). Composer. Ager was credited for original music together with Mabel Wayne for Universal’s King of Jazz (1930). It was his second film assignment coming shortly after he had written his most famous song: “Happy Days Are Here Again”. That song, written at the time of the Wall Street stock market crash, was a collaboration with Jack Yellen, who collaborated with Ager on all his major hits, including the King of Jazz score. Those songs, on which Bing performed, were “Music Hath Charms”, “A Bench in the Park” (Rhythm Boys) and “Happy Feet” (Rhythm Boys). In addition Bing recorded the Ager-Yellen composition “Song of the Dawn” for Columbia in 1930. Specifically written for King of Jazz it was sung in the film by John Boles because Bing was under-going a brief residence in the slammer following a drink-driving offence. The other film song by Ager came in 1932 in the Sennett short Blue of the Night. This was “Auf Wiedersehen, My Dear” which Ager co-wrote with Ed Nelson, Al Hoffman and Al Goodhart and which Bing sings at the beginning of the film in a nightclub setting. Bing also sang the song in the Paramount short Hollywood on Parade (No. 2 – 1932)

AHLERT, FRED E. (1892-1953) Composer. Ahlert’s main claim to fame was as part composer of Bing’s signature tune “Where the Blue of the Night”. It was sung by Bing in the Sennett short Blue of the Night (1932). Ahlert shared composer credit with Bing and Roy Turk.

AIN’T GOT A DIME TO MY NAME Song. One of four songs provided by Johnny Burke and James Van Heusen for Road to Morocco (1942). Bing sings it whilst wandering through the streets of a North African town.

AKST, HARRY (1894-1963) Composer. In Paramount’s The Big Broadcast (1932), Bing sings one of Akst’s most famous compositions, “Dinah” to the accompaniment of Eddie Lang’s guitar. Akst usually collaborated, and in the case of “Dinah”, composer credits are shared with Sam Lewis and Joe Young. This one song is Akst’s only film association with Bing. He was mainly employed by Fox and Warner Bros. to provide songs for their contract vocalists such as Ted Lewis and Tony Martin.

ALADDIN’S DAUGHTER Song. Johnny Burke and James Van Heusen wrote this number for the 1942 Road to Morocco but it was not used.

ALBERGHETTI, ANNA MARIA (1936 - ). The fifteen-year-old singer/actress had a key role as a blind classical singer in Here Comes the Groom. She had arrived in the U.S.A. a year previously for a Carnegie Hall Concert and made her film debut in The Medium that same year. Her movie career lasted just ten years with her final appearance being in the Jerry Lewis comedy Cinderfella. The films in the intervening years are not memorable.

ALBERNI, LUIS (1887-1962). Ten years separated the two appearances this Spanish born actor made in Crosby films. He had the important part of the Marquis in the Sennett short I Surrender Dear (1931) but when he was in the more prestigious Road to Zanzibar (1941), he was seventh billed as ‘Native Shop Proprietor’. Alberni came to Hollywood in the silent era and he was appearing in small parts, usually as an excitable Latin, until his big screen retirement in 1952.

ALGAR, JAMES (1912-1998) Director. Algar was one of the three main animators on Disney’s cartoon feature The Adventures of Ichabod and Mr. Toad (1949) for which Bing narrated the Ichabod Crane segment. Algar spent his entire career with the Disney Organisation and was the Director of many of the acclaimed “True Life” Adventure nature features. His animation skills were used on such everlasting cartoon favourites as Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs (1937), Fantasia (1940) and Bambi (1942). He was also a screenwriter on such Disney films as The Legend of Lobo (1962) and The Incredible Journey (1963).

ALIAS JESSE JAMES (1959). Bing was one of many celebrities making fleeting appearances in a gun battle at the climax of this Bob Hope film made for United Artists. Those more qualified to tote a gun and who helped Hope in the final shoot-out alongside Bing, were Roy Rogers, Gary Cooper, Ward Bond, James Arness and Hugh O’Brian. The film had a title song, which was recorded by Guy Mitchell.

ALL BY MYSELF Song. In Blue Skies Bing and Joan Caulfield sing this Irving Berlin composition whilst dancing at a party. Bing recorded the song solo for Decca in July 1946 to tie in with the film’s release.

ALL STAR BOND RALLY This was a short film made and released in 1945. It was produced by 20th Century-Fox on behalf of the U.S. Treasury Department. Its purpose was to promote the sale of the seventh issue of War Bonds and it is hardly surprising that Bing’s vocal contribution was the song “Buy, Buy Bonds”. Entertainers gave their services freely but also sparingly, as will be deduced from the roster of celebrities crammed into a running time of eleven minutes. Those appearing included Frank Sinatra (singing “Saturday Night Is the Loneliest Night of the Week”), Bob Hope, Betty Grable and husband Harry James, Harpo Marx and Linda Darnell. The short was supplied to cinemas free of charge for showing as a public service and Bonds could then be purchased at the cinema

ALL THROUGH THE NIGHT Song. One of the least hummable of Cole Porter’s compositions. It was sung by Bing in English and French to Zizi Jeanmaire in Paramount’s 1956 remake of Anything Goes.

ALL YOU WANT TO DO IS DANCE Song. The title of this song sums up Bing’s amorous frustrations at Mary Carlisle his leading lady who prefers the ballroom to his more romantic intentions in Paramount’s Double or Nothing (1937). It was written by Arthur Johnston (music) and Johnny Burke (lyric) especially for the film.

ALLEN, GRACIE (1902-1964). As far as Bing’s films are concerned, Gracie Allen was always one-half of the Burns and Allen comedy partnership. Burns and Allen functioned as a team and they were always extra to the plot as far as their comedy film appearances were concerned. Remove Burns and Allen and the story would still develop. Between 1932 and 1935, Gracie was in five Crosby pics:

·The Big Broadcast (1932) as a receptionist

·Hollywood on Parade No. 2 (1932) A short for Paramount

·College Humor (1933) as a caterer

·We’re Not Dressing (1934) as a naturalist

·The Big Broadcast of 1936 (1935) co-inventor with husband George of a “Radio Eye”

George married Gracie in 1926 when both were popular in vaudeville. Radio, movies and television kept the team popular with Gracie appearing in only two films without her husband. In television’s first flush of greats in the 1950s the Burns and Allen Show will be in most top five lists for comedy.

ALLEN, JUDITH (1913-1996). Miss Allen shows us how fickle love can be. In Too Much Harmony (1933), she starts the movies as Jack Oakie’s fiancée and ends with Bing as husband to be. The following year, in She Loves Me Not, she begins the film as Bing’s betrothed and abandons him midway through the plot. Her adequate singing voice can be heard assisting Bing in Too Much Harmony with “Thanks” and “Buckin’ the Wind”. She was near her popularity peak when appearing with Bing, having been discovered by Cecil B. DeMille for his 1933 epic This Day and Age. By the end of that decade, she was playing in cheap melodramas and westerns.

ALLEN, STEVE (1921-2000). When Bing’s Mack Sennett shorts were knitted into the compilation film Down Memory Lane, Steve Allen provided linking dialogue in the guise of a disc jockey presenting a television programme. This was type-casting at its best because Allen’s fame as a radio DJ turned to greater things in the mid-fifties when he presented the highly rated Steve Allen Show on American television. He has had occasional film parts, the most notable seeing him cast in the title role in The Benny Goodman Story (1956).

ALLISTER, CLAUDE (1893-1970). Bing’s early film appearance in Reaching for the Moon (1930) did not involve him in the plot of the film. The film’s story had Claude Allister playing Sir Horace Partington Chelmsford, and that character’s name tells us all we need to know about Allister. He was always the British accented dandy, probably most memorable as Ronald Colman’s sidekick Algy in Bulldog Drummond. His last film of any consequence was Kiss Me Kate (1953).

ALTON, ROBERT (1897-1957). As choreographer, Alton staged the musical numbers on two consecutive Crosby pictures of the mid-fifties - White Christmas and The Country Girl. His career began on Broadway in the thirties but his most memorable career phase was his tenure at M-G-M between 1944 and 1953. That saw him contributing to some of Hollywood’s greatest ever musicals including The Harvey Girls (1946), Ziegfeld Follies (1946), Till the Clouds Roll By (1947), Good News (1947), The Pirate (1948) Easter Parade (1948), Annie Get Your Gun (1950), Show Boat (1951) and The Belle Of New York (1952). His brief stint with Paramount embraced the Bing assignments at a time when large-scale M-G-M musicals were in decline.

ALWAYS Song. This strong Irving Berlin ballad was given scant Crosby treatment in the 1946 Blue Skies. Bing sang a few lines and then waited until the 1960s before committing it to wax.

AMOR (also known as Amor Amor) Song. This popular 1940s song was featured in a 1944 Pathe Gazette, which featured the opening of the Stage Door Canteen in London. Jack Buchanan introduced Bing to the servicemen assembled there on August 31, 1944 and Bing then proceeded to sing “Amor Amor”. The composer credits go to Ruiz, Mendez and Skylar.

AMOS ‘N’ ANDY Bing was in two films which featured this comedy duo, but never the trio shall meet because Bing played a guesting role in each. In Check and Double Check (1930) he was one of the Rhythm Boys whose voices were used in the “Three Little Words” number and in The Big Broadcast of 1936 (1935) his four minute vocal sequence was spliced into the movie. Amos ‘n’ Andy were two white men, Freeman F. Gosden and Charles Correll, who appeared in blackface as two Negro comedians. They enjoyed enormous popularity on American radio and successfully transferred their humour to television in the 1950s for a series of 25-minute situation comedy shows. Their media popularity is spoken of in hushed tones in the 21st century because of the political incorrectness of their act.

AND YOU’LL BE HOME Song. In the film Mr. Music (1950) Bing sits on the edge of a stage and sings this accompanied by a chorus of students. In the plot, this is a Paul Merrick (played by Crosby) composition. In reality it was written by the reliable Johnny Burke and James Van Heusen.

ANDERSON, EDDIE “ROCHESTER” (1905-1977). “Rochester” taught Mary Martin how to “sing jazz” in Birth of the Blues (1941). He appeared in two other Crosby films: Star Spangled Rhythm (1942) and You Can Change the World (1951) but he did not share the screen with Bing in either. Born to show business parents, he started his career in all-black revues and graduated to small roles in films in the early thirties when he was usually cast as a raspy-voiced banjo-eyed comic. Fame came in a big way on Easter Sunday 1937 because that was when he debuted on Jack Benny’s radio show. He was in a number of films with Benny (The Horn Blows at Midnight, Buck Benny Rides Again, The Meanest Man in the World) but his most significant appearance was playing the lead in the 1943 Cabin in the Sky. He followed Benny into television and was a mainstay in “The Jack Benny Show” as Benny’s manservant.

ANDERSON, JOHN MURRAY (1886-1954). Ignored by film reference works, Anderson was an early ‘talkies’ pioneer who worked on Bing’s first feature, King of Jazz as Director. It was his one cinematic moment of glory. Previously a stage director it was his lavish conceptions that have made King of Jazz timeless viewing in entertainment terms. At the time, Anderson’s apparent disregard of budgetary controls caused concern at Universal Studios and removed any prospect of the film making money for the studio.

ANDERSON, ROLAND (1903-1989). Art Director. Anderson worked exclusively for Paramount Pictures and always in collaboration. Up until 1950, he shared art direction credits with Hans Dreier, thereafter with Hal Pereira. His Crosby film credits are:

·Paris Honeymoon (1939)

·Holiday Inn (1942)

·Here Come the Waves (1944)

·Road to Utopia (1946)

·A Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur’s Court (1949)

·Just for You (1952)

·White Christmas (1954)

·The Country Girl (1954)

ANDRE, LONA [Laura Anderson] (1915-1992). Miss Andre began her supporting player career in 1933, the year in which she made brief appearances in her two Crosby films. In College Humor she was Ginger and in Too Much Harmony a chorus girl. She progressed through to the late forties as a minor leading lady and then retired to be a businesswoman. She was married for four days to actor Edward Norris, which probably provided a more interesting scenario than that offered by such of her films as Under the Pampas Moon (1935), Ghost Valley Riders (1940) and The Case of the Baby Sitter (1947).

ANDREWS SISTERS, THE (LaVerne, Maxene and Patty). Although frequent vocal companions to Bing during the 1940’s, the sisters made only one film appearance with him. That was in Road to Rio (1948) when they sang, “You Don’t Have to Know the Language” with Bing at a ship’s concert. Their film career began in 1940 in Argentine Nights and they then made appearances in several Abbott and Costello comedies. The Poverty Row Studios claimed their services in the mid-forties for the likes of How’s About It (1943) and Moonlight and Cactus (1944). They were effective in providing the voices for two Disney cartoon features: Make Mine Music (1946) and Melody Time (1948). When LaVerne died in 1967, Maxene and Patty enjoyed a brief nostalgic revival with a ‘borrowed’ third sister.

ANDREWS, STANLEY (1892-1969) Character actor. You can tell the sort of parts Stanley Andrews played by his billing. He was in three Bing pictures. In Dixie (1943), he played Mr. Masters. He was “an official” in Road to Utopia (1946) and Captain Harmon in Road to Rio (1948). All could have been played by hundreds of similar bit part actors registered with central casting during Hollywood’s prolific 1940s decade. He ended his show business career with the sort of regular employment most actors strive for but never achieve: he played the old ranger host of television’s “Death Valley Days” from 1952 to 1965.

ANGELS IN THE OUTFIELD An M.G.M. movie released in 1951 featuring the Pittsburgh Pirates Baseball team. Bing is seen on a golf course and he speaks briefly about angels.

ANGELS OF MERCY Both a one reel short film and its title song sung by Bing. It was released on all of America’s major film circuits at the end of 1941 to draw attention to the work of the American Red Cross. Irving Berlin wrote the song.

ANN-MARGRET (1941- ) Born Ann-Margret Olsson, this Swedish-born actress, singer, dancer was well established as an entertainer when she played the part of Dallas in the 1966 remake of Stagecoach. It was Bing’s last major film appearance. A-M’s first film was Pocketful of Miracles (1961) and she then made three musicals: State Fair (1962) Bye Bye Birdie (1963) and Viva Las Vegas (1964). Her strongest role was in the 1971 Carnal Knowledge and that film and the 1975 musical Tommy both resulted in Oscar nominations. She was married to TV actor Roger Smith until his death in 2017, and he, as her personal manager, guided her career with an increasingly strong bias towards a night club act and TV series.

ANSARA, MICHAEL (1922-2013). Ansara’s only appearance in a Crosby picture saw him eleventh billed as a guard in Road to Bali (1953). This probably tells us all we need to know about him. He is a swarthy character actor normally found halfway down the cast list. Although of Lebanese extraction, he is often in Westerns as an American Indian. His career began in 1944 in the adventure film Action in Arabia. Highlights since have been in The Robe (his best part, as Judas), Julius Caesar, The Greatest Story Ever Told and Guns of the Magnificent Seven.

ANY BONDS TODAY (Song). One of the many American patriotic songs written by Irving Berlin. Bing sang this in Blue Skies (1946). The plot finds the Crosby character on a World War Two Bond raising tour and this song is aimed at boosting sales.

ANYTHING GOES (1936). The first of two versions filmed by Paramount and musically superior because of its strong score by Cole Porter, Leo Robin, Frederick Hollander, Richard Whiting, Edward Heyman and Hoagy Carmichael. The latter was added to the team because Bing was impressed by the song “Moonburn” and wanted it in the film. All the Porter songs were from his successful Anything Goes stage musical to which Paramount bought the rights in February 1935, when the show had been running for four months on Broadway. Filming commenced in September 1935, whilst the show was still playing at the Alvin Theatre. Ethel Merman was in the stage production and she was signed to reprise her role of Reno Sweeney after Paramount producer Benjamin Glazer negotiated a release from her theatre commitment. The original plot and dialogue were the work of P. G. Wodehouse and Guy Bolton. Paramount assigned Howard Lindsay and Russel Crouse to revise the show. Changes were necessary because the criminal element in the stage production was too sympathetic. Once that duo had toned down the glorification of crime Walter De Leon, Sidney Salkow, John Moffitt and Francis Martin worked on the film script. Jerry Tucker played Junior in the film and in a 1998 interview, he explained that he was aged nine at the time of filming. His one lasting memory of making Anything Goes was tossing a football with Bing whilst waiting for the director to call action. The film casts Bing as Billy Crocker an accidental passenger on a ship bound for England. A series of mishaps involving gangsters, mistaken identities, disguises and Bing being jailed lead to the mandatory happy ending with enough opportunities along the way for Bing to sing five songs. The film has been retitled Tops is the Limit to avoid confusion with the 1956 re-make.

ANYTHING GOES (1956). Cole Porter’s score for this Technicolor remake was supplemented by three mediocre numbers from Sammy Cahn and James Van Heusen. The start of shooting was delayed whilst Bing was hospitalised for the removal of a kidney stone and this enabled co-star Donald O’Connor to reschedule his own commitments in order to be in the movie. The plot of the 1936 version was totally rewritten with the one remaining similarity being the shipboard setting. In this one Bing plays Bill Benson, a musical comedy star travelling to England via Europe and back and singing five songs in the process. This film ended an association between Bing and Paramount, which had lasted almost a quarter of a century.

ANYTHING GOES Song. A Cole Porter standard not sung by Bing in either of the film versions. This honour went to Ethel Merman (1936) and Mitzi Gaynor (1956). The latter version had uncredited lyrical alterations by Ted Fetter.

APALACHICOLA, FLA Song. Hope and Crosby sang this one in a carnival setting in Road to Rio (1948). Its purpose was to draw the crowds and it worked. Johnny Burke and James Van Heusen wrote the song and Bing and Bob interpolated a few bars from “Swanee River” and “Carry Me Back to Old Virginny” when they delivered it in the movie.

APPLE FOR THE TEACHER, AN Song. This Johnny Burke - James V. Monaco composition was featured in two consecutive Crosby films. In The Star Maker (1939) it is part of a Broadway Revue with Bing duetting with Linda Ware and receiving support from a children’s’ chorus. The following year Bing, Bob Hope and Dorothy Lamour sing a few lines in Road to Singapore in order to gather an audience for the sale of ‘Spotto’ (a miracle liquid cleanser). The song surfaced again in 1947 when Gene Autry sang it in The Last Roundup.

APRIL PLAYED THE FIDDLE Song. A song about springtime romance is sung at a restaurant as part of a floor show to boost business in If I Had My Way (1940). Bing is supported on stage by The Six Hits and a Miss. Johnny Burke and James V. Monaco wrote the song along with most of the film’s vocal numbers.

A PROPOS DE RIEN Song. My schoolboy French tells me this song is about nothing. It is certainly less than memorable even though composed by those Crosby song tailors Johnny Burke and James Van Heusen. Nicole Maurey introduces the song in Little Boy Lost (1953) when she treats it as a nonsense number to amuse her son. It is crucial to the plot because its composer in the film is Bing who hopes it will trigger his son’s memory when he hears it crooned by Crosby. It does no such thing, even though Bing tackles it twice.

AREN’T YOU GLAD YOU’RE YOU Song. Although Burke and Van Heusen only composed one song for the film The Bells of St. Mary’s (1945), “Aren’t You Glad You’re You” received an Oscar nomination. Bing the philosopher sings it to teenager Joan Carroll in the film and we feel as uplifted as she does from the experience.

ARLEDGE, JOHN (1906-1947). In King of Jazz (1930), John put his vaudeville experience to work when he sang “Has Anybody Seen Our Nelly” as part of a quartet and danced “Rhapsody In Blue” together with assorted others. This early film role led to second lead and character parts. The latter embracing Gone with the Wind (1939), The Grapes of Wrath (1940) and I Wonder Who’s Kissing her Now (1947), his last film.

ARLEN, HAROLD (1905-1986) Bing sang songs by Arlen in eight films spanning his main movie career years. They were:

·Sing Bing, Sing (1932)

·We’re Not Dressing (1934)

·Star Spangled Rhythm (1942)

·Sing with the Stars (1944)

·Here Come the Waves (1944)

·Out of This World (1945)

·The Country Girl (1954)

·Pepe (1960)

Arlen wrote beautiful melodies and these attracted the most talented of lyric writers. His collaborators have included Johnny Mercer, Leo Robin, Dorothy Fields and Ralph Blane. Singing the songs on the big screen was a Hollywood’s Who’s Who of vocal talent such as Judy Garland, Fred Astaire, Dinah Shore and Tony Martin. To keep this entry to a manageable length I will select what I consider to be his five most prominent non-Bing movies:

·Babes in Arms (1939)

·The Wizard of Oz (1939)

·Blues in the Night (1941)

·Cabin in the Sky (1943)

·A Star is Born (1954)

To prove he was no singer of his own compositions he made an album for CBS in the early 1960s: “Harold sings Arlen”. His movie career petered out at about the same time but by then Hollywood musicals had left their golden years far behind.

ARLEN, RICHARD (1899-1976). Arlen acted in just one film with Bing when he played “Mondy” Mondrake, a student to Bing’s drama professor Frederick Danvers, in the 1933 College Humor. By then Arlen had been in films for ten years and had taken lead roles as well as providing major support, as in College Humor. His peak as a silent star was in Wings (1927). From the 1930s onwards, he alternated between hero parts in ‘B’ pictures and supporting roles in ‘A’ productions. In the latter category The Mountain (1956) and The Best Man (1964) stand out. He married and divorced Jobyna Ralston, his co-star in Wings. He worked in films up to the year of his death.

ARMETTA, HENRY (1888-1945). Halfway down the cast list of Too Much Harmony (1933) we find the part of Gallotti played by Henry Armetta. This is where he was usually found, invariably playing a comic, excitable, thickly accented Latin. He only made one film with Bing, finding most of his film opportunities away from Paramount. He is best remembered for his later film roles in The Big Store (1941) with the Marx Brothers, and Anchors Aweigh in the year of his death.

ARMSTRONG, LOUIS (1900-1971). One of the best-known musicians of the twentieth century, Louis was instantly recognised vocally or visually. His career involvement with Bing extended beyond film work, although he left a lasting impression of his artistry on celluloid with his Crosby pictures. The first was Pennies from Heaven in 1936, followed fifteen years later with a guest spot in Here Comes The Groom as an airplane passenger joining Bing and others in singing “Misto Cristofo Columbo”. His last movie with Crosby was his most memorable, when he played himself in High Society (1956). He was born on Independence Day in New Orleans, the birthplace of Jazz. His trumpet playing made him famous long before his screen debut in Pennies from Heaven. Some twenty-two films followed, the last being Hello Dolly in 1969. During the last twenty years of his life, his appearance in a film usually lifted its entertainment quotient immediately he appeared. Parts in The Glenn Miller Story (1954) and The Five Pennies (1959) attest to this. A CBS TV documentary he made in 1957 sums him up quite well - it was called Satchmo the Great.

ARNHEIM, GUS (1897-1955). Bandleader/composer. It is in his capacity as bandleader that Arnheim is generally associated with Bing. He was active both on record and radio in the early years of Bing’s career. In that same era, he also made one contribution to Crosby on film. That was as co-composer, with Harry Barris and Gordon Clifford, of “It Must Be True”, a song featured in the Mack Sennett short Dream House (1931). Bing enjoyed singing it sufficiently to record it on three separate occasions: 1930, 1939 and 1954. Two of his better known compositions are “I Cried for You” and “Sweet and Lovely”. It is interesting to note that he was employed by Stan Kenton as a pianist-arranger because Kenton’s music was far removed from the conventional style of Arnheim.

ARNT, CHARLES E. (1908-1990). For three consecutive years, this small part character actor appeared in Paramount pictures with Bing. He will be best remembered as the lunatic Benny the Goof in Two for Tonight (1935) when he initiated a soda water fight with Bing in a scene at the Purple Cafe. Flanking that appearance were bits in Here Is My Heart (1934) and Rhythm on the Range (1936). He played a steward in the latter and then proceeded to be typecast for the next twenty-five years as a meek busybody. He began his character role appearances in Hollywood movies in the early thirties and never made a major impact. Two of his bigger box office films prior to his retirement in the early sixties were Sitting Pretty (1948) and Wild in the Country (1961).

ARTHUR, JOHNNY (1882-1952). Jerry Colonna’s sidekick in Road to Singapore (1940) was Johnny Arthur in character as the aptly named Johnny Willow. Arthur was a small whining comedian in character roles from the early 1920s. His bread and butter acting came from numerous Our Gang shorts but he secured parts in ‘A’ pictures like Twenty Million Sweethearts (1934) and Stage Struck (1936), as well. Singapore was his only Crosby pic.

AS LONG AS I’M DREAMING Song. “The Doctor’s as good as Frank Sinatra” said a passenger on the sleigh on which Bing serenaded Joan Caulfield when he sang this song in Welcome Stranger. A Johnny Burke-James Van Heusen composition so typical of the work they wrote to order for Bing’s movies.

ASKIN, LEON (1907-2005). As Chief Ramayana, Head of the Headhunter Tribe in Road to Bali, Leon Askin was embarking on a Hollywood career which saw him typecast as the unpleasant foreigner well into the 1990s. As a nine year-old boy, he had recited a 17-stanza eulogy for Emperor Francis Joseph in front of the city hall of Vienna’s ninth district and he later emigrated to the USA. Not normally seen in black face, he was usually the heavyweight slavic type in movies such as Knock on Wood (1954), One, Two, Three (1961), The Perils of Pauline (1967) and Young Frankenstein (1974). He makes a contribution to some memorable “Road” confusion in Bali when Bing and Bob Hope both expect to be married to Dorothy Lamour. What the boys don’t know is that Ramayana intends marrying Dottie and killing his two American rivals. Leon Askin went on to be active in TV as General Burckhalter in the Bing Crosby Productions series Hogan’s Heroes.

ASTAIRE, FRED (1899-1987). Actor, dancer, vocalist, composer and choreographer, although it’s the first two which concern us here in the context of Bing’s films. He took top billing with Bing in two of the biggest grossing musicals of the 1940s - Holiday Inn (1942) and Blue Skies (1946). In Holiday Inn he played Ted Hanover, part of a show business trio with Bing and Virginia Dale. His duets with Bing were “I’ll Capture Your Heart” and “Let’s Start the New Year Right”. In Blue Skies, he was Jed Potter, an ex-vaudeville partner of Bing’s, with whom he sang “A Couple of Song And Dance Men”. It was as a result of carrying out a little on-screen hoofing with Crosby that he could tactfully answer “Bing Crosby” when asked to name his favourite dancing partner. He was born Frederick Austerlitz and built his career on a dancing partnership with his sister Adele, which held together until the early thirties when she retired to marry Lord Charles Cavendish. That provided the spur to move into movies and it was in that medium that he found his greatest success. Adele was replaced by Ginger Rogers who was paired with him in ten films. Not wildly successful at the box office when they were released, they are now regarded as classics. The film Dancing Lady (1933) introduced him to picturegoers when he partnered Joan Crawford. That same year he began an unbroken run of fine films which took him to the end of that decade: Flying Down to Rio (1933), The Gay Divorcee (1934), Top Hat (1935), Roberta (1935), Follow the Fleet (1936), Swing Time (1936), Shall We Dance (1937), A Damsel in Distress (1937), Carefree (1938) and The Story of Vernon and Irene Castle (1939). There is a theory that an entertainer’s peak years never extend beyond seven, and in Astaire’s case, they are probably the 1930s. However, the 1940s and 1950s saw him partnering such ladies as Rita Hayworth, Eleanor Powell and Cyd Charisse. In 1946, he announced his retirement but two years later he was enticed back with the opportunity to team with Judy Garland in Easter Parade. Some memorable movies from this twenty year time span include: You Were Never Lovelier (1942), Yolanda and the Thief (1945), The Barkleys of Broadway (1949), Royal Wedding (1951), The Band Wagon (1953), Daddy Longlegs (1955), Funny Face (1957) and On the Beach (1959). On the Beach was his first dramatic role and it signified the end of his musical career, with one minor exception. That exception was Finian’s Rainbow (1968) when he proved he couldn’t dance like his old self. In 1974, he took a more sedate turn round the dance floor with Jennifer Jones when he had a character part in The Towering Inferno. A tenuous link with Bing came with That’s Entertainment, also in 1974. He was one of the narrators for this assembly of notable musical items from M-G-M vaults, which featured some Bing clips from that studio. His last films included the forgettable Purple Taxi (1977) a French, Italian, Irish production and Ghost Story (1981). The last ten years of his life were devoted to public appearances and interviews, which dwelt on his peak years and the magnificent contribution he made to the art of dancing in the twentieth century.

AT YOUR COMMAND Song. Bing sings the song over the radio in the Mack Sennett featurette I Surrender Dear (1931). It has special meanings for Marion Sayers, who has been kissed by Bing earlier in an episode of mistaken identity. When she hears the song, she is re-united with Bing and a happy ending is provided in the last two minutes of this one-reeler. The 1946 compilation Road to Hollywood also featured the song. Bing composed the song with ex-Rhythm Boy Harry Barris and established tunesmith Harry Tobias.

ATES, ROSCOE (1892-1962). Pronounced R-R-R-Roscoe Ates, because Ates’ movie career was built round his comic stutter combined with his rubber face and bulging eyes. In Hollywood on Parade No. 4 (1933), Bing is given the opportunity to sing “Boo-Boo-Boo” to girls on exercise machines because Ates’ stuttering puts them out of rhythmic-sync. His other bit in a Crosby picture was as the horse cab driver who over-charges in Birth of the Blues (1941). Ates entered films in 1929 following 15 years as a concern violinist with stage and vaudeville experience. He put his comic talents to work in Hollywood mainly as a sidekick to screen cowboys, although bigger budget efforts included Alice in Wonderland (1933) and The Errand Boy (1961), which was also his last film. He was in three serious dramas, which proved he could turn his hand to less obvious comic parts: Gone with the Wind (1939), Chad Hanna (1940) and Come Next Spring (1956).

AUER, MISCHA (1905-1967). An alphabetical coincidence places Mischa after our previous entrant and serves to highlight a number of similarities. Both entered films in the late twenties, both were regarded as comic character actors and both made capital of a possible thyroid condition, which gave them bulging eyes. Auer’s maternal grandfather was also a violinist and it was he who brought him to the States from Russia in 1920. His only Crosby film was East Side of Heaven (1939), when he was fourth billed as Nicky, Bing’s friend and room-mate. It was a cue from Auer that provides Bing with the opportunity to sing “That Sly Old Gentleman” to Baby Sandy, because Auer’s attempt at a Russian song has the opposite effect as a lullaby. Around this time Auer was also a guest on Bing’s weekly ‘Kraft Music Hall’ broadcasts. Mischa Auer appeared in more than sixty Hollywood films before settling in Europe in the late forties. His first truly memorable part was in the 1936 My Man Godfrey, which won him an Oscar nomination and bigger supporting roles. His long, sad face and droll delivery enlivened such films as Three Smart Girls (1937), You Can’t Take It With You (1938), Destry Rides Again (1939), Hellzapoppin (1941), Lady In The Dark (1944) and Brewster’s Millions (1945). The European movies were no match for the Hollywood comedy production line and only Mr. Arkadin (1955) remains in the memory.

AUF WIEDERSEHEN, MY DEAR Song. In the early thirties Bing sang this Milton Ager, Ed Nelson, Al Hoffman, Al Goodhart composition in two shorts. In the Mack Sennett featurette Blue of the Night it wraps up his last appearance in a nightclub and in Hollywood on Parade No. 2 he sings it to Gracie Allen on learning she is married to George Burns. The Blue of the Night sequence was re-used in the 1949 compilation Down Memory Lane.

AVALON BOYS Only rarely do we find a Crosby film song not issued commercially. Such a one is “There’ll Always Be a Lady Fair”, a Cole Porter composition used in the 1936 Anything Goes movie. Bing sings this with the Avalon Boys and what superb harmonies ensue. The Avalon Boys were a quartet led by Chill Wills, a Hollywood character actor whose only Bing movie link is here.

AVE MARIA Song. One of those lump in the throat compositions that hits the soundtrack when the going gets simultaneously serious and sentimental. Written by Franz Schubert and sung by Father O’Malley and Genevieve Linden (Bing and Rise Stevens) in Going My Way (1944). The Robert Mitchell Boys choir adds a suitably celestial choral backing.

AYLMER, SIR FELIX (1889-1979). Actor in Bing’s only British movie, The Road to Hong Kong (1962). This oh so typically English actor played the Grand Lama in the sequence set in Tibet where Crosby and Hope are sent for a memory potion. Aylmer had distinguished himself as a stage actor in the twenty or so years preceding his film debut in The Wandering Jew (1933). His first love remained the theatre even when he was in demand for well-written character parts. He also wrote plays and adapted several of them for the cinema. His main cinematic output has been in British productions, some of the better known being: Victoria The Great (1938), Night Train to Munich (1940), The Life And Death Of Colonel Blimp (1943), Henry V (1944), The Way Ahead (1945), The Wicked Lady (1945), Hamlet (1948), So Long At The Fair (1950), Quo Vadis (1951, Anastasia (1956), Separate Tables (1958) and Exodus (1960). The last four were made in the USA. His final picture was the British made Decline and Fall in 1968.

B

Back to top

BABCOCK, EDWARD CHESTER (1913-1990). The real name of songwriter James Van Heusen, where a full entry will be found. In The Road to Hong Kong he was the name of Bob Hope’s character, as an in-joke.

BABY SANDY (1938 - ). If Sunday press exposes were short of copy in the late thirties they could have run the story “Baby Sandy is a Girl” because the baby boy character in the 1939 East Side of Heaven was the thirteen month old Alexandra Lee Henville. The film refers to him throughout and baby Sandy plays a pivotal role in the film’s plot. The film’s fade out shot is of Baby Sandy cradled in Bing’s arms as he sings East Side of Heaven. When a film career starts at the top, it can only move in one direction. East Side of Heaven was followed by four ‘Baby Sandy’ films and then four indifferent features, the last one being Johnny Doughboy in 1942. She was a spent force by the age of five and went on to become a legal secretary.

BABY SITTER, THE Cartoon. Paramount’s cartoon unit quiet frequently promoted their own contract players. In the mid-forties the “Saturday Evening Post” strip “Little Lulu” was brought to the big screen and in 1947 the cartoon The Baby Sitter was made. The story shows how Lulu is assigned as baby sitter and her attempts to keep baby in his cot leads to a dream sequence. This finds Lulu at the Stork Club [a nightclub for babies!] where the stage show features nappified versions of W.C. Fields, Bing, Bob Hope and Jerry Colonna.

BACON, IRVING (1893-1965) Character actor. Bacon lent his doleful simpleton-like presence to seven Crosby films. He popped up in minor roles in Crosby pictures over a twenty-year period. He is seen first in the Mack Sennett short Sing, Bing, Sing (1932) when he is the disapproving father of Bing’s girl (Florine McKinney). He has bit parts as an announcer in Rhythm on the Range (1936) and as a lecturer on seals in Sing You Sinners (1938). He plays the taxi driver Gus in Holiday Inn (1942) and is next seen selling hamburgers in Riding High (1950). Also in 1950 he could be found selling jewellery in Mr. Music before bowing out of the Crosby film world the following year when he played Bates, the butler, in Here Comes the Groom. There was nothing flashy about the comic support Bacon provided in the thirty plus years he spent in films. He contributed to over 200 movies and was probably never out of work for more than a few hours.

BAGGOT, KING (1874-1948). Actor-director. A good example of how the mighty can fall. He popped up as a gambler in Mississippi (1935). He was a much in demand handsome leading man in silent films from 1911 (The Scarlet Letter) until 1923 (The Thrill Chaser). Then he became a director and in 1925 made Tumbleweeds, a critically admired western. Yet by the end of the 1920s, he was all but forgotten and ended his career playing bit parts.

BAILEY, PEARL (1918-1990). Primarily a singer, Pearl Bailey made two strong impressions on me as a television performer. In the late 1950s, she appeared drunk on a live “Sunday Night at the London Palladium” broadcast and in the mid-seventies contributed to that fateful Pasadena concert being recorded for television and at the end of which Bing fell. The celluloid link with Crosby was at the very beginning of her Hollywood career when she sang “Tired” in that compendium of Paramount talent, Variety Girl (1947). Her subsequent film output is not too lengthy to list in its entirety. 1948 - Isn’t It Romantic 1955 - Carmen Jones 1956 - That Certain Feeling 1958 - St. Louis Blues 1959 - Porgy and Bess 1960 - All the Fine Young Cannibals 1970 - The Landlord. Best known as a jazz singer she won a Tony Award as Dolly in the all-black production of “Hello Dolly!”

BALL, ERNEST R. (1878-1927) Composer. The Oxford Companion of Popular Music described him thus: “He is remembered best for a number of sham Irish (but unforgettable) songs”. Bing sang two of them in films. The first was “A Little Bit of Heaven” from I Surrender Dear (1931). The other was “When Irish Eyes Are Smiling” from Top o’ the Morning (1949). Ball’s songs were favourites of John McCormack, who in turn was admired by Bing. He will go down in musical history as a founder member of ASCAP.

BARBIER, GEORGE (1865-1945) Character actor. He was Mr. Clapsaddle, the sponsor of the radio show in The Big Broadcast (1932), J. Thorval Jones, the film producer in She Loves Me Not (1934) and J.P. Todhunter, the company president in Waikiki Wedding (1937). From that trio of pictures we know he was often cast as an important personage with a slightly funny name. He was training for the priesthood when he was smitten by the acting bug. A successful ten-year career on Broadway led to twenty years in films.

BARNES, GEORGE (1893-1953). American director of photography. He was the regular cameraman on Bing’s films from the late forties until the time of his death. The eight Bing films he photographed were: The Bells of St. Mary’s (1945), The Emperor Waltz (1948), Riding High (1950) [co-director of photography with Ernest Laszlo], Mr. Music (1950), Here Comes the Groom (1951), Just For You (1952), Road to Bali (1953) and Little Boy Lost (1953). In addition, he was co-photographer on The Greatest Show on Earth (1952). He began his film career in 1919 and made the transition from black and white to colour successfully in the 1940s. The Technicolor richness of The Emperor Waltz attests to this. If you have seen some of the more popular films Barnes photographed you will have a memory of the impact his visuals made. A few with still lingering images for me are Rebecca (1940), Jane Eyre (1944), Spellbound (1945), Sinbad the Sailor (1947), Samson and Delilah (1949) and The War of the Worlds, his last film, shot in 1953. Trivia buffs need to know that he was married seven times, once to Joan Blondell from 1932 to 1936.

BARRAT, ROBERT (1891-1970) Tall, imposing character actor in over 150 screen roles. He was often cast as a foreigner and a heavy. He was in two consecutive Road films with Bing, Bob and Dottie: Utopia in 1946 and Rio in 1948. In the first, he was Sperry who, together with colleague McGurk, is at odds with Hope and Crosby for most of the story. In Road to Rio, he is Johnson of Johnson’s Mammoth Carnival where Bing and Bob perform their “Apalachicola” routine. Like all bit part players, he had to take the rough with the smooth and go where the work lay. This is why the ‘A’ pictures like The Life of Emile Zola (1937) and Joan of Arc (1948) rub shoulders with such dross as King of the Jungle (1933) and Son of Ali Baba (1952).

BARRETT, JUDITH [Lucille Kelley] (1909-2000) Leading lady in 1930s ‘B’ pictures. Examples are Flying Hostess (1936) and Television Spy (1939). When she was offered the occasional bigger budget film, she was lower down the cast list. Her one film with Bing was Road to Singapore (1940). She played Bing’s girlfriend Gloria Wycott. It was made as her career came to a sudden halt. She disappeared from the public eye, making no further films after 1940.

BARRIS, HARRY (1905-1962). For the purpose of tracing Harry Barris’ contribution to Bing’s celluloid career we need to put in three separate compartments. As a Rhythm Boy, he appeared with Bing and Al Rinker in four films over a fifteen month time span. They were:

a) King of Jazz (1930)

b) Two Plus Fours (1930)

c) Check and Double Check (voice only) (1930)

d) Confessions of a Co-Ed (1931)

In b) they were augmented Rhythm Boys with Ed Deering and Spec O’Donnell joining the trio to receive billing as “The College Boys”. The songs from the four Rhythm Boys films were:

a) “Music Hath Charms”, “Mississippi Mud”, “So the Bluebirds and the Blackbirds Got Together”, “A Bench in the Park” and “Happy Feet”.

b) “The Stein Song”

c) “Three Little Words”

d) “Ya Got Love”

Phase two of the Crosby/Barris movie association is the use of songs co-written by Barris and featured by Bing in five films made between 1931 and 1933. The songs Barris helped write are:

i) “I Surrender Dear”

ii) “At Your Command”

iii) “It Must Be True”

Bing sang “I Surrender Dear” in the film I Surrender Dear (1931), One More Chance (1931), The Big Broadcast (1932) and College Humor (1933). He sang “At Your Command” in I Surrender Dear and “It Must Be True” in Dream House (1931).

The final phase of the association is the involvement of Barris in about one Crosby picture a year from 1937 to 1944. There is a strong probability that it was the Crosby muscle that secured these small acting assignments for Harry Barris and the studio played safe by casting him as a musician of sorts in all but one film. He also had the chance to sing once more with Bing in the first of these. It was Double or Nothing (1937) and he played an orchestra leader who joins Bing, Martha Raye and Francis Faye on the song “After You”. The other appearances are:

·Sing You Sinners (1938). A band leader.

·Rhythm On The River (1940) A saxophone player.

·Birth Of The Blues (1941) Suds, A jazz musician.

·Holiday Inn (1942) A musician.

·Dixie (1943) A drummer.

·Here Come The WAVES (1944) A club announcer.

BARRYMORE, ETHEL (1879-1959). Actress. In Just for You (1952), Miss Barrymore is cast as Allida De Bronkhart, the headmistress of St. Hilary’s School for Girls. It was a relatively small part for “The First Lady of the American Theatre” but she was past her acting peak. Bing observed: “I noticed that when Ethel was rehearsing for scenes apparently she was not concerned with her lines, the business or the props. But when Elliot Nugent, the director, finally said, “Let’s take it” her first take was perfect.” Nugent was unprepared for such perfection and kept requesting retakes, with Barrymore’s reading of the part deteriorating. Bing remarked, “Like any true champion she’d built herself up for one major effort and that was it.” Ethel Barrymore was a Crosby fan. “He doesn’t know it,” she said, “but the family and I love his stuff. We’ve got practically all of his records back to the time he was with Paul Whiteman.” In fact, Bing was aware of her feelings towards him. On August 15th, 1949, she had celebrated her seventieth birthday, which conveniently coincided with her fiftieth year as an actress. The Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences had arranged their most ambitious taped radio programme up to that time. At 10.30 p.m., one hundred and fifty colleagues paid tribute to her, with Bing singing “Happy Birthday”. Ethel Barrymore had been in films since 1914 and saw films as a way of filling in time between theatrical engagements. She made her last silent film in 1919 - The Divorcee, and her talkie debut did not come until 1933 when she played the Czarina in Rasputin and The Mad Empress. Between that film and Just For You she managed to land solid parts in better movies, such as None But The Lonely Heart (1944), The Spiral Staircase (1946), The Farmer’s Daughter (1947), The Paradine Case (1948), Portrait of Jenny (1949) and Pinky (1949). After her Crosby picture she made only four more films, the best remembered of which is Young At Heart (1955).

BARTLETT, SY (1909-1978) Screenwriter/producer. Sydney S. Bartlett devised the story of Road to Zanzibar (1941) along with Don Hartman. It was his only involvement in a Crosby film although he was responsible for the story of The Princess and the Pirate (1944), a Bob Hope comedy in which Bing made a brief appearance. He wrote some good stuff once he left lightweight comedy assignments behind. Critical and box-office triumphs included Twelve O’ Clock High (1949), The Big Country (1958) and Cape Fear (1962). He wrote the first two and produced the third. All of them starred Gregory Peck, with whom he formed a production company. He wrote and produced Che in 1969 and then retired.

BARTON, JAMES (1890-1962) Actor. He was in one Crosby movie, Here Comes the Groom (1951). He played Pa Jones, the father of the Jane Wyman character. He was pleased when Bing married her because he was not happy having Franchot Tone (her other suitor) as his son-in-law. Although he was usually cast as a rough diamond, his background equipped him to play just about any character part that came along. He’d been a straight actor in stock, played in vaudeville and burlesque as part of an act with his parents, tap danced and been cast in Broadway musicals. His film career began in the silent era and he continued appearing in Hollywood movies until the time of his death. His last part was in The Misfits (1961).

BE CAREFUL, IT’S MY HEART Song. Written for Holiday Inn (1942) by Irving Berlin, Bing sings it in a scene when he is rehearsing with Marjorie Reynolds for a St. Valentine’s Day nightclub appearance.

BEACH OF DREAMS. This was a story written by Harry Hervey about missionaries on a tropical island. It was a serious tale owned by Paramount and it became the basis for the first Road film, Road to Singapore (1940). Frank Butler and Don Hartman re-worked it into a comedy classic.

BEAUTIFUL GIRL Song. If you want to know how easy it is to record a song, watch Bing at the beginning of Going Hollywood (1933) as he casually puts “Beautiful Girl” in the can before departing for Hollywood. Written by Nacio Herb Brown (music) and Arthur Freed (lyrics) it turned up later that year in the film Stage Mother and again in Singin’ in the Rain (1952) when Jimmie Thompson sang it. It was common for M-G-M and Freed to re-use compositions in this way.

BEAVERS, LOUISE (1902-1962) Actress. Typecast as usual as a cook, she played Mamie in Holiday Inn (1942) and joined in the singing of “Abraham” with other cast members. If she wasn’t playing a cook she was playing a housekeeper or maid. Her best performance came in 1934 when she played Aunt Jemima in Imitation of Life. She obviously did not object to the type of acting jobs she was given because a late career highlight was playing the title role in “Beulah”, a popular television show. Her Hollywood film career came to an end after appearing in the Bob Hope comedy The Facts of Life (1960)

BELASCO, LEON (1902-1988). Character actor. He was in two consecutive 1942 Bing films: Holiday Inn, as the owner of a flower shop and Road to Morocco as Yusef. The latter role was typical of the way Hollywood treated him because of his Russian origins. If a bit part player was needed to play an ethnic type, Belasco was the man. He came to films from being a bandleader and must have been in at least a hundred films, which allowed him to exercise his excitable personality in comic roles.

BELLS OF ST. MARY’S, THE Film. This was the Christmas, 1945, attraction at New York’s Radio City Music Hall, and Bing was at the premiere. The film was the most profitable film RKO ever made and took $8 million on its initial American release. It went on to make more money than its ‘inspiration’, the 1944 Going My Way. It would be unjust to refer to it as a remake of that film but Bing was still Father O’Malley and plot similarities were not too well hidden. The audience did not mind. It was a popular success in its own right and director Leo McCarey knew exactly what he was doing when he wrote it as soon as he had measured the success of Going My Way. As it is readily available to buy for home viewing it seems pointless reviewing the plot of this 126 minute sentimental drama. A one-line attempt could read “Bing goes to the run down parish of St. Mary’s and Ingrid Bergman disapproves of his relaxed approach until he solves a few problems and converts a sourdough into a benefactor”. Ingrid Bergman was released from her David O. Selznick contract to make the film in return for the remake rights to A Bill of Divorcement and Little Women plus $175,000. She never really warmed to her leading man even though the atmosphere on the set become more friendly as shooting progressed. “I didn’t get to know Bing at all”, she wrote. “He was very polite and nice, and couldn’t have been more pleasant, but he was always surrounded by a little group of three or four men chattering away and protecting him from everybody else.” The clever critics disliked it. The one on the ‘New York Times’ wrote: “The whole storyline developed towards the wheedling of a building for the school is unconvincing and vaguely immoral.” James Agee, writing in ‘The Nation’, said, “I find very objectionable the movies increasing recognition of the romantic-commercial values of celibacy.” Bing’s contract with Paramount was due for renewal at the time of the film’s initial release and brother Everett was in a strong position to negotiate a new deal with them that guaranteed Paramount Bing’s exclusive acting services for the next seven years.

BELLS OF ST. MARY’S, THE Song. This title song from the film was a 1917 composition by Douglas Furber and A. Emmett Adams. It was written for a musical comedy of the time. It is placed at the end of the film and Bing is accompanied by a chorus of nuns. As a piece of music, it has been tackled in extremely different ways. Clyde McPhatter provided a soul interpretation in the fifties and Australian bushranger Slim Dusty did it his way in the sixties. Ice Cream van chimes and music box abbreviations confirm it is now out of copyright.

BELOIN, EDMUND (1910-1992) Writer of comedy screenplays. He had a hand in four that involved Bing. My Favourite Brunette (1947) was a Bob Hope script he co-wrote with Jack Rose that involved Bing in a gag sequence. He collaborated with Rose again for Road to Rio (1948) but took full credit for A Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur’s Court (1949). His final Crosby effort was a collaboration with Richard Breen for Top o’ the Morning (1949). His skill in developing comedy material was honed between 1936 and 1943 when he wrote for “The Jack Benny Show” on radio. Benny then used him as writer on a couple of his films. Most of Beloin’s work was for Paramount and he tailored later scripts for Jerry Lewis (The Sad Sack in 1957 and Don’t Give Up the Ship in 1959) and Elvis (G.I. Blues in 1960).

BENCHLEY, ROBERT (1889-1945). It was at the end of Benchley’s career that he brought his humorous style to bear on a couple of Crosby pictures. He played himself in Duffy’s Tavern (1945) when he is in a scene narrating a bedtime story to the four Crosby boys. The story happens to be about their dad, who makes a brief appearance. The following year he is used to great advantage in Road to Utopia (1946) which he introduces and then acts as occasional narrator. He is also glimpsed in the short Hollywood Victory Caravan (1945) in which Bing sings one song. Benchley was a literary man and pre-Hollywood he was a newspaper editor. He became Managing Editor of “Vanity Fair” and later on drama editor of “Life” and theatre critic for the “New Yorker”. He made his mark in films as writer/narrator/actor in a series of shorts made between 1928 and 1945. These were nothing more than ten-minute lectures with self-explanatory titles like The Sex Life of the Polyp (1928), How to Sleep (1935), The Courtship of a Newt (1938) and Keeping in Shape (1942). At the time, they seemed very funny. By the early thirties producers were conscious that Benchley could add value to their feature products, particularly as he often wrote his own material. This led to appearances in such as China Seas (1935), Foreign Correspondent (1940), The Major and the Minor (1942) I Married a Witch (1942) and Weekend at the Waldorf (1945). For many years, he coped with an alcohol problem.

BENDIX, WILLIAM (1906-1964). Actor. Like Bing, a Paramount contract player, but it seemed as though the two were destined to appear in the same film without meeting. They avoided being in the same scene in three of Paramount’s all-star compendium films, Star Spangled Rhythm (1942), Duffy’s Tavern (1945) and Variety Girl (1947). When they were cast together, it was perfect casting. It happened just once, in A Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur’s Court (1949). Bing is Hank Martin who finds himself waking up in the year 582 AD by being prodded with the lance of Sir Sagramore (Bendix). Bing later prevents the execution of his friend and the good humour positively bubbles when they are joined by Sir Cedric Hardwicke for the “Busy Doing Nothing” sequence. Bendix made his Broadway acting debut as an Irish Cop in 1939. In 1942, he moved to Hollywood and was soon churning out a film every two to three months. He was one rung above character actor although type-casting usually saw him as a simpleminded soul. He proved a good foil for Alan Ladd in The Glass Key (1942) and The Blue Dahlia (1946). Whilst his film career was taking hold, he went to the heart of the listening public with his weekly sit-com The Life of Riley. This was filmed in 1949 and then became a successful television series in the fifties. He was most at home in action/adventure pictures, hence Two Years Before the Mast (1946), Streets of Laredo (1949), Submarine Command (1951) Macao (1952) and The Deep Six (1958). He decided to transfer his film career to England in the late fifties and cheap but popular films like Idol on Parade (1958) and Johnny Nobody (1961) kept him in the public eye. His last film, released the year after his death, was Young Fury.

BENNETT, JOAN (1910-1990). Actress and leading lady to Bing in two consecutive 1935 movies, Mississippi and Two for Tonight. As is to be expected, Bing wound up with Miss Bennett in both films. Joan was the younger sister of actress Constance. She entered films at the age of six and became a “star” in 1929 when she was cast opposite Ronald Colman in Bulldog Drummond. By the time she was acting with Bing, she was a box-office draw. She was acting in films until the late seventies and appeared in a fair number of clinkers. The few redeeming movies she made after the 1930s included The Woman in the Window (1944), Father of the Bride (1950) and We’re No Angels (1955). Towards the end of her career she was enticed to what was then the land of Hollywood has-beens (Italy) where she made a fairly impressive horror picture, Suspiria (1977). I do not know of any film in which she appeared which had a plot more intriguing than her own potted biography. The bare bones are this. She married at 16, became a mother at 17 and divorced at 18. Her second husband was producer-writer Gene Markey (married 1932, divorced 1937). Her next producer was Walter Wanger whom she married in 1940. That marriage lasted for a quarter of a century but had a strange interlude mid-way when Wanger was jailed for shooting Jennings Lang, Miss Bennett’s agent, when he was in a jealous rage. Her fourth marriage was in 1978 to movie critic David Wilde.

BERGMAN, INGRID (1915-1982). Actress who made one film with Bing, but it burnt itself into the cinematic memory. She was Sister Benedict in The Bells of St. Mary’s and although relationships on set were generally professional rather than overly friendly, the screen relationships of Father O’Malley and Sister Benedict were warm and endearing. Her film career began in Sweden and it was Hollywood producer David O. Selznick who was confident that he could make a lot of money out of her that resulted in her English-speaking screen debut in Intermezzo (1940). There were more hits than misses in the early Hollywood years: Doctor Jekyll and Mr. Hyde (1941), Casablanca (1943), Gaslight (1944), Spellbound (1945) and Notorious (1946). It was notoriety that saw her popularity instantly plummet when she left her husband for Italian director Robert Rossellini in 1949. It was not until she made Anastasia in England in 1956 that she began to prove her worth as a box-office draw once more. The successes were not as thick on the ground as during her Hollywood hey-day however, with only The Inn of the Sixth Happiness (1958), Cactus Flower (1969) and Murder on the Orient Express (1974) standing out. By the 1970s she was in demand by directors for the art house cinema market and she was nominated for an Academy Award as best actress for her performance in Ingmar Bergman’s Autumn Sonata. She died of cancer.

BERLE, MILTON (1908-2002) Comedian. In Let’s Make Love (1960), he was one of the three tutors employed by Yves Montand to turn him into a polished entertainer. Bing was Montand’s vocal coach. Gene Kelly gave dancing lessons and Berle dispensed the finer art of comic delivery. Berle was treading the boards at the age of four and in silent movies at the age of eight. Adult movie roles began in 1937 but nothing memorable came out of Hollywood. It was television that made him famous. He hosted variety shows in the States from 1948 and when he was at his TV peak in the mid-fifties, he was known as “Mr. Television”. However, by the late fifties America’s television love affair with ‘Uncle Miltie’ was on the wane and he took another stab at the big screen. By and large the parts were small but the films themselves had better production values than earlier. Titles such as The Bellboy (1959), It’s A Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad, World (1963), The Loved One (1965) and The Oscar (1966) are respectable contributions to his filmography.

BERLIN, IRVING (1888-1989). Composer who wrote the songs for three of Bing’s most popular films. His contribution to Crosby pictures is detailed below together with the songs, which were sung by Bing:

1.Reaching for the Moon (1930). When The Folks High up Do the Mean Low Down (with Bebe Daniels and June McCloy)

2.Angels of Mercy (1941): Angels of Mercy

3.Holiday Inn (1942): I’ll Capture Your Heart (with Fred Astaire and Virginia Dale and reprised with Astaire, Dale and Marjorie Reynolds). Lazy; White Christmas (with Marjorie Reynolds); Happy Holiday (with Marjorie Reynolds); Let’s Start the New Year Right (sung twice, on the second occasion with Fred Astaire, Marjorie Reynolds and Virginia Dale); Abraham (with Marjorie Reynolds, Louise Beavers, Joan Arnold and Shelby Bacon); Be Careful, It’s My Heart; Easter Parade; Song of Freedom; I’ve Got Plenty to Be Thankful For

4.Blue Skies (1946); I’ve Got My Captain Working for Me Now (with Billy de Wolfe); All by Myself (with Joan Caulfield); I’ll See You in Cuba (with Olga San Juan); A Couple of Song and Dance Men (with Fred Astaire); You Keep Coming Back Like a Song (sung twice); Always; Blue Skies; The Little Things in Life; Not For All the Rice in China; Russian Lullaby; Everybody Step; How Deep Is the Ocean; Getting Nowhere; Any Bonds Today; This Is the Army Mr. Jones; White Christmas

5.White Christmas (1954): White Christmas (sung twice, the second time with Danny Kaye, Rosemary Clooney and Gloria Wood); The Old Man (with Danny Kaye); Heat Wave (with Danny Kaye); Let Me Sing and I’m Happy (with Danny Kaye); Blue Skies (with Danny Kaye); Snow (with Rosemary Clooney, Danny Kaye and Gloria Wood); I’d Rather See a Minstrel Show (with Danny Kaye and Rosemary Clooney); Mandy (sung twice, first with Danny Kaye, then with Rosemary Clooney); Count Your Blessings Instead of Sheep (with Rosemary Clooney); What Can You Do with a General; Gee, I Wish I Was Back in the Army (with Danny Kaye, Rosemary Clooney and Gloria Wood)

If it were necessary to have a claim to place Berlin amongst the top popular composers of the twentieth century, it would be supported by these incontestable facts:

a) He wrote both words and music

b) His success spanned half a century

c) His songs had durability - many are now standards.

To see the man in action (he could only play and compose in the key of f) he was a most unassuming type. His singing talent was better left in the bathroom. Bing tellingly said: “You have to hug him to hear him.” His contributions to non-Crosby films provide a list of hit musicals including: The Jazz Singer (1927), Kid Millions (1934), Top Hat (1935), Follow the Fleet (1936), On the Avenue (1937), Carefree (1938), Alexander’s Ragtime Band (1938), This is the Army (1943), Easter Parade (1948), Annie Get Your Gun (1950), Call Me Madam (1953) and There’s No Business Like Show Business (1954). There was talk of a movie to be based on his life, appropriately titled Say It with Music. Berlin had little enthusiasm for the project and despite a proposed strong cast, including Bing, Sinatra, Dean Martin and Louis Armstrong, nothing materialised.

BESSER, JOE (1907-1988) Broad comedian who made occasional films. His one Crosby film link was as Joe Greb in Say One For Me (1959). He played the part of Robert Wagner’s theatrical agent. As an ex-vaudevillian, Besser’s characterisations lacked subtlety. For that reason, he was an ideal late addition to membership of the Three Stooges comic team when the death of one of the original Stooges created a vacancy in their act.

BEST, WILLIE (1916-1962). Black actor who played a steward in Dixie (1943). We could leave it there because Best was in films at a time when most black actors were stereotyped as wide-eyed comic dimwits. Like Stepin Fetchit and Mantan Moreland, Best was invariably found in self-demeaning roles. Thankfully, there has been no place on screen for such performances since the middle of the last century.

BETWEEN THE DEVIL AND THE DEEP BLUE SEA Song. Shoe-horned into the Sennett short Sing, Bing, Sing (1932) for no reason other than that it is a good song. Bing waited a quarter of a century before committing it to wax. Written by Ted Koehler and Harold Arlen, the song is rightly regarded as a standard for all middle of the road singers to tackle at some stage in their careers.

BEVAN, BILLY [William Bevan Harris] (1887-1957). There is a sequence in Too Much Harmony (1933) where a rehearsal for a Broadway show is taking place. Billy Bevan is seen directing the performers. It was a tiny part for an actor who had been starring in two-reel comedies some five years earlier. He made about 70 of them for Mack Sennett between 1920 and 1929. By the time of Too Much Harmony, he was taking any bit part that kept him in the film business. For the next twenty years, he popped up in character parts for most of the Hollywood studios. He retired from the screen in 1952.

BEWARE (I’M BEGINNING TO CARE) Song. Written by Johnny Burke and James V. Monaco as part of their score for East Side of Heaven (1938). It was recorded as a demo with Bing’s vocal being supported by John Scott Trotter, piano and Perry Botkin, guitar, but it was not subsequently used in the film.

BICKFORD, CHARLES (1889-1967). Actor. He was the tycoon J. L. Higgins in the Crosby picture Riding High (1950). As Bing’s boss in the film, he orders Bing to get rid of the racehorse Broadway Bill. Of course, Bing refuses, thereby rescuing the plot! Bickford arrived in Hollywood from Broadway at a time when stage actors were needed to cope with the demands of clear diction for the newly arrived talkies. He rarely starred in films, but his powerful screen presence meant that he quite often brought dignity to a part that wasn’t always worthy of his talents. I have indulged myself in selecting my personal favourite Bickford films from his output covering nearly forty years: The Farmer Takes a Wife (1935), High Wide and Handsome (1937), Of Mice and Men (1940), The Song of Bernadette (1943), The Farmer’s Daughter (1947), Johnny Belinda (1948), A Star is Born (1954), The Big Country (1958) and Days of Wine and Roses (1962).

THE BIG BROADCAST Film released in 1932 and the first in the Paramount series. It was whilst filming this one in the summer of 1932 that Bing was signed to his initial Paramount contract. The plot capitalised on the current popularity of radio, the studio assuming that listeners would welcome seeing their favourites on the big screen. The action takes place at Station WADX, which meant that Paramount cut costs and managed with one basic set. Top billed, Bing played himself and provided the vocal on “Where the Blue of the Night”, “I Surrender Dear”, “Dinah”, “Here Lies Love”, “I’ve Got Five Dollars” and “Please”. In the film, his job is on the line because of his persistent unpunctuality. He is sacked and it is George Burns, the radio station manager, who persuades the station’s main sponsor to take Bing back. Speciality acts in the film included Kate Smith, The Mills Brothers, The Boswell Sisters and Arthur Tracy. Because so many of those acts were resident on America’s East Coast, Paramount re-opened its New York Astoria studio, situated on Long Island. Bing’s contribution was filmed in Hollywood, however. When the film was released in October, 1932, the critic for the “Hollywood Citizen News” summed it up nicely when she wrote: “(Frank) Tuttle has taken a weak romantic story, a rather appealing array of stars.....and produced an amusingly entertaining picture. By dint of his ingenuity and high appreciation of satire, Tuttle has made The Big Broadcast good film fare.” The film did only average business in the big cities. However, its lack of sophistication made it a hit in the sticks and overall Paramount was satisfied with its performance.

THE BIG BROADCAST OF 1936 Paramount’s second big broadcast film released in September 1935. In this one, Bing had a guest spot, singing “I Wished on the Moon”. It was the only Big Broadcast film to show a loss even though costs were kept down by director Norman Taurog. During the thirteen months the picture was being ‘assembled’ Taurog photographed stage acts as and when they passed through California. Amongst those captured on film are Richard Tauber, singing “Melody In F”, The Vienna Boys Choir, singing “Tales From The Vienna Woods” and Bill Robinson, dancing “Miss Brown To You”. The Ethel Merman performance of “It’s the Animal in Me” was a song sequence cut from the 1934 picture We’re Not Dressing.

BILLBOARD GIRL 1931 Mack Sennett short. The title refers to Margie ‘Babe’ Kane with whom Bing falls in love when he sees her picture on a billboard. Although she is in love with someone else, Bing wins her over in the closing minutes of this two-reel comedy. In 1935, Astor pictures acquired the rights to the Sennett library and issued an edited version of the film under the title “Bring on Bing”. In 1946, the same company used two Crosby vocals from the film in the feature compilation Road to Hollywood (1946).

BINDER, MAURICE (1925-1991) Title designer. You will only find one title designer in this A-Z. It was the credit Binder received for his work on The Road to Hong Kong (1962). His work on that one went unnoticed. That same year he was receiving plaudits for his opening credit sequence on the first James Bond film. The graphics for Dr. No let you know there was something a little special about the film that was about to unfold. The producers of the Bond films wisely employed Binder for the opening graphics on subsequent Bonds until his death at age 66.

BING CROSBY’S WASHINGTON STATE 1968 documentary short. The film was commissioned to promote the tourist attractions of Washington State. It was a 28-minute travelogue concentrating on the more scenic elements of that State. Bing was an obvious choice as narrator because it was the State of his birth. At the end, Tacoma is visited and Bing refers to it as his birthplace.

BINGO CROSBYANA Cartoon. Warner Bros., the studio that first introduced Bing to animation enthusiasts, represented him in more than half a dozen cartoons. Not what you would expect of a rival studio to Paramount but cartoon Crosby was frequently in the company of Warner stars. The first Warner’s cartoon short I have traced is Bingo Crosbyana, directed by Friz Freleng for the “Merrie Melodies” series and released in the summer of 1935. The Bingo character is a bug who takes the part of a crooner-guitarist.

BING PRESENTS ORESTE Paramount trailer. At least I regarded it as a trailer when I saw it in 1956 as a ten-minute promotion for The Vagabond King which was shown at my neighbourhood cinema the following week. The film turned out to be a bore and its star, Oreste Kirkop, went into instant retirement from movies. Paramount probably knew they had a dud on their hands when they prevailed on Bing’s goodwill to help give it some clout at the box-office. Filmed when Bing was making Anythng Goes in June 1955, his assignment was to introduce Oreste to an eager public and then the maltese operatic star was seen singing “Vesti La Giubba”, “Cara Mia” and “Begin the Beguine” accompanied by Victor Young and the Paramount Orchestra. A previous lost cause of a film was The Great John L. But when Bing contributed to radio promotional material for that box-office flop at least he had a good excuse - he was one of its backers when it was made in 1945.

BINYON, CLAUDE (1905-1978). Although Binyon directed films for five years from 1948 to 1953, it is as a screenwriter that he became involved with Crosby movies. His Crosby half dozen are:

·College Humor (1933). Screenplay with Frank Butler.

·Mississippi (1935). Adapted for the screen with Herbert Fields.

·Sing You Sinners (1938). Story and screenplay

·Holiday Inn (1942). Screenplay

·Dixie (1943). Adapted for the screen

·Pepe (1960). Screenplay with Dorothy Kingsley.

He signed with Paramount in 1932 and the first five films on the above list are typical of his work. Other so-so work includes If I had a Million (1932), Accent on Youth (1935), True Confession (1937), This is the Army (1943) and Incendiary Blonde (1954). His flirtation with directorial chores produced forgotten Paramount A-minus movies like Family Honeymoon (1953). He wisely returned to writing and rounded off his career with such films as Rally ‘Round the Flag Boys (1958), North to Alaska (1960) and Satan Never Sleeps (1962).

BIRDS OF A FEATHER Song. Written by Johnny Burke and James Van Heusen as part of the score commissioned by Paramount for the 1941 Road to Zanzibar, it was then used for its musical content only in a sequence where Hope and Crosby do impressions of two orchestra leaders meeting. The song itself was recorded by Bing in December of 1940 when it was part of a Decca recording session covering the songs from the film.

BIRTH OF THE BLUES Film. This 1941 Paramount production stands up well in the 21st century. At 85 minutes, it is as compact as possible, it brims over with songs (fifteen, of which Bing sings on eight) and because it is set in the early jazz era it retains its period feel. The story covers the development of New Orleans Jazz at the turn of the century. Bing plays Jeff Lambert who leads the band, thwarts a gang of villains led by J. Carrol Naish and conducts a romance with Mary Martin. Things were less than comfortable with Miss Martin at the time as she was pregnant, and director Victor Schertzinger scheduled the shooting of the film in such a way that her contributions were filmed as hastily as possible. The musical content of the film is as strong as in any Crosby movie. As well as having a hit song written by Johnny Mercer - “The Waiter and the Porter and the Upstairs Maid” - it relied heavily on tried and tested jazz standards like “Birth of the Blues” and “St. Louis Blues” as well as evergreen standards such as “By the Light of the Silvery Moon” and “Wait till the Sun Shines Nellie”. Buddy de Sylva, the film’s producer was co-lyricist of the title song. The film can be said to be roughly based on the formation of Nick LaRocca’s Original Dixieland Jazz Band and supposedly the first white group to play black music.

BLACK MOONLIGHT Song. Stanley Green was right first time when he described this song as “a dolorous dirge of a suicidally inclined Harlem resident.” Although we closely associate this song with Bing it was introduced in the Paramount film Too Much Harmony by Kitty Kelly, who mimed to Barbara Van Brunt’s vocal. The film was made in June and July 1933 and Bing recorded it the following month. It would be reasonable to assume that he felt the song fitted him like a glove and committed it to wax at the first opportunity. The song’s composers, Sam Coslow and Arthur Johnson, wrote all the songs for Too Much Harmony.

BLACKMER, SIDNEY (1895-1973) Actor. Blackmer played the father of Grace Kelly in High Society (1956). In that film, his arrival on the scene required him to masquerade as “Uncle Willie” to mask an earlier deception. His first recorded role was in the silent serial The Perils of Pauline (1914). He was rarely off the screen for very long thereafter. He was a leading man who eventually settled for character parts in films like High Society. These supporting roles were quite substantial as evidenced by his last big screen appearance in Rosemary’s Baby in 1968.

BLAKELEY, JAMES E. (1910-2007). Film actor turned editor. It is Blakeley the actor that interests us here. He had been in films for a couple of years when he was cast as Buster de Costa in Two for Tonight (1935). Together with actor Douglas Fowley, he played one of Bing’s half-brothers in that film. When America entered World War II he joined the Army Air Corps. He married Mary Carlisle in 1942. She had been one of Bing’s leading ladies and she was his only link with show business until the end of the decade. In 1950, he returned to films as an editor and served a further half century in Hollywood.

BLONDELL, JOAN (1909-1979). Actress who was in one Crosby film as his leading lady: East Side of Heaven (1939). She plays Bing’s fiancé Mary Wilson, to whom he is always about to get married but ... A bright, bubbly actress, Joan Blondell enlivened many a routine picture from her debut in the 1930 film Office Wife to her retirement half a century later with The Woman Inside. Joan Blondell made her name in the thirties as a wise cracking broad with a heart of gold. Her part in East Side of Heaven was untypical. At the time, she was reaching the end of her Warner Bros. heyday where she had scored in such films as Gold Diggers of 1933 (1933), Footlight Parade (1933), We’re in the Money (1935) and Gold Diggers of 1937 (1936). The next decade saw memorable performances in the likes of Topper Returns (1940), A Tree Grows in Brooklyn (1945) and Nightmare Alley (1947). In the nineteen fifties, she concentrated on stage work. Her more memorable later films saw her assigned character parts in such as The Cincinnati Kid (1965) and Grease (1978). On the personal side, she tried three show business marriages. They were to cameraman George Barnes (1933-35), actor Dick Powell (1936-45) and producer Mike Todd (1947-50). All failed, but provided her with a rich vein of material to mine for her semi-autobiographical novel ‘Center Door Fancy’, which came out in 1972.

BLORE, ERIC (1887-1959) British born actor specialising in playing haughty characters. His part in his sole Crosby picture was as Charles Kimble in Road to Zanzibar (1941). He’s the swindler who sells the boys a diamond mine. Prior to that film appearance, he was a regular in the Astaire-Rogers musicals made at RKO. And before he arrived in Hollywood in the 1920s he had worked as an insurance agent until show business claimed him for revues in London’s West End. It must have been quite a comedown for him to end his career by appearing in the Bowery Boys film Bowery to Bagdad (1955).

BLUE, BEN (1901-1975) Sad faced comic actor. He played the dim-witted Sitska in Paris Honeymoon (1939), whose drugging of Akim Tamiroff’s drink towards the end of that picture brought about a happy ending. He arrived in Hollywood from vaudeville where his speciality was eccentric dancing. Astute producers used him to provide comedy highlights in dozens of shorts and features. His last big screen appearance was in Where Were You When the Lights Went Out in 1968. Around the time of making that film, he was forced to close down his California based nightclub because he couldn’t meet the tax demands of the Internal Revenue.

BLUE, MONTE (1890-1963) Romantic lead in the 1920s who settled for character roles in a couple of hundred films before deserting the movies all together in the 1950s to join a circus. He had minor roles in a couple of Road films. In Singapore (1940), he played a high priest and in Morocco (1942) he was one of Anthony Quinn’s henchmen. It is significant that his last film part was in Apache (1954) because he was part Cherokee Indian.

BLUE HAWAII Song. This song from Paramount’s 1937 Bing movie Waikiki Wedding was written by Leo Robin and Ralph Rainger. After an earlier solo, Bing is joined by Shirley Ross for vocal honours in a sequence in the film where both are on a boat trip to a volcanic island. Lyric writer Robin had to persuade Rainger to write music to fit the words. Even when the composing task was completed Rainger thought it inferior and protested at its publication. Of course, it went on to become a standard and Paramount got their money’s worth by using it as the title for a 1961 Elvis Presley vehicle with the star singing the song over the opening credits.

BLUE OF THE NIGHT (1932). One reeler made as part of a job lot for producer Mack Sennett in 1931/32. Six were shot in all, starting in the spring of 1931, and released by Educational Pictures over the next two years. Blue of the Night was the penultimate in the initial release pattern. In the twenty-minute running time we have a great deal of plot plus four Crosby vocals. Bing plays himself, a famous radio singer. Leading lady Margie ‘Babe’ Kane boasts she is engaged to Bing, failing to recognise him when they both take a trip by train. Her husband to be, played by Franklin Pangborn, is annoyed at this betrayal/deception before denouncing Bing as an impostor. The film’s famous ending has Bing driving off with the girl and singing “Where the Blue of the Night Meets the Gold of the Day” as conclusive proof that he is that well-known baritone. Bing’s other vocals are “Auf Wiedersehen, My Dear”, “My Silent Love” and “Ev’ry Time My Heart Beats”, none of which were recorded for issue on record. Various clips from this Sennett short were included in the 1949 compilation film Down Memory Lane.

BLUE SKIES Film. This 1946 Paramount Picture was stuffed with songs written by Irving Berlin, so it should come as no surprise that the idea for the picture was also his. Arthur Sheekman wrote the screenplay about two former song and dance men (Bing and Fred Astaire) who vie for the attentions of leading lady Joan Caulfield. You could say that Bing was undisputed winner as the plot allows him to marry her twice. The time span of the movie covers 1919 to 1946 and uses 17 old and 4 new Berlin songs in a series of settings of “theme” nightclubs. It was never intended that Fred Astaire should co-star with Bing. Dancer Paul Draper was signed up and then dropped when the studio discovered his acting skills were not on a par with his dancing technique. The film’s budget was $3 million and its world-wide rentals tripled that figure on its initial release.

BLYTH, ANN (1928- ). Bing’s leading lady in Top O’ the Morning (1949) who also appeared in the short film You Can Change The World, released the following year. She played Barry Fitzgerald’s daughter in the former, and as such was on the receiving end of a couple of love ballads from Bing. The question we have to answer is whether she is a singer turned actress or vice versa. Certainly, her early career channelled her into light opera where she was a soprano with the San Carlo Opera Company. She played juvenile roles in Hollywood movies, making her presence felt in the Oscar nominated part of Joan Crawford’s daughter in Mildred Pierce (1945). Musical films which followed Top O’ the Morning include some memorable M-G-M starring parts in The Great Caruso (1951), Rose Marie (1954), The Student Prince (1954), Kismet (1955) and The Helen Morgan Story (1957). The last film marked her retirement from Hollywood. The movies had no further use for leading ladies with trained singing voices. Since then she has made infrequent forays into musical stage productions.

BOLAND, MARY (1880-1965) Actress. She was in two 1935 Paramount pictures which featured Bing. In Two for Tonight, she was third billed as Mrs. J.S.K. Smythe, the debt ridden mother of the Crosby character. She followed that with a guest appearance in The Big Broadcast of 1936. Mary Boland made a name for herself playing tragic roles on the Broadway stage. Only when she entered films did she find her true forte playing scatter-brained wives and mothers. Her most famous role came the year before she filmed with Bing when she played opposite Charlie Ruggles in Ruggles of Red Gap. She retired from films when she reached her seventieth birthday.

BOLTON, GUY (1885-1979) Playwright, novelist and screenwriter. It is his skill as a playwright, which earns him an entry in this A-Z. Along with P. G. Wodehouse he wrote the play “Anything Goes” which Bing filmed in 1935 and 1955 when it was revised for the screen by Howard Lindsay and Russell Crouse on the first occasion and Sidney Sheldon for the 1956 release. “Girl Crazy” and “Lady Be Good” are two of his works that will withstand revival for many years to come.

BONANOVA, FORTUNIO (1893-1969) Operatic baritone who turned to playing mainly comic supporting roles in Hollywood films. He made two appearances in Bing films. He had a bit part as a waiter in Dixie (1943) and a slightly more substantial part as Tomaso Bozanni in the following year’s Going My Way. Fortunio Bonanova flitted from film to film throughout the 1940s and 1950s. He’d frequently appeared on Broadway before making his first big screen appearance in 1932. However, it wasn’t until 1941 that he made an impact with audiences when he played the part of a singing tutor in Citizen Kane. Between film assignments, Bonanova found time to write operettas, novels and plays.

BONNE NUIT Song. This was one of three Ray Evans-Jay Livingston compositions written for Bing to sing in Here Comes the Groom (1951). It won’t take a lot of guesswork to conclude that it is a lullaby. In the film, Bing croons it to send a couple of children to dreamland.

BOO-BOO-BOO Song. A song tailor made for Bing by Sam Coslow and Arthur Johnston who were obviously capitalising on the myth that such phrasing cropped up in most of Crosby’s vocals. It was first tried out on audiences in a 1933 Paramount Hollywood on Parade short when the song’s two composers accompanied Bing, Jack Oakie and Skeets Gallagher. That appearance served as a publicity taster for Too Much Harmony, released later that year, when it became a Crosby solo. Bing never made a commercial recording of the song, presumably because it was not his type of material.

BOX OFFICE TOP TEN: PERSONAL & FILM RANKINGS. The true measure of any Hollywood film star has nothing to do with critics and everything to do with audiences. The more often people visit a cinema to see an actor in a film the more popular he or she is in the eyes of the cinema owner. Every year in the U.S.A from 1915 to 2013, Quigley publications asked exhibitors to name box office stars based on ticket sales. Obviously, a star who has three movies released in a year has an advantage. But in Hollywood’s peak years, when actors were on a roll the studios made sure they were never far away from the cameras. The list of the annual box-office top ten moneymakers is the best available measure of who pulls in the crowds. John Wayne appeared on these lists more often than any other star. Between 1949 and 1976 there were only three years he wasn’t cited. These are the full top ten listings, which included a Crosby ranking:

1934: Will Rogers, Clark Gable, Janet Gaynor, Wallace Beery, Mae West, Joan Crawford, Bing Crosby, Shirley Temple, Marie Dressler, Norma Shearer

1937: Shirley Temple, Clark Gable, Robert Taylor, Bing Crosby, William Powell, Jane Withers, Fred Astaire/Ginger Rogers, Sonja Henie, Gary Cooper, Myrna Loy

1940: Mickey Rooney, Spencer Tracy, Clark Gable, Gene Autry, Tyrone Power, James Cagney, Bing Crosby, Wallace Beery, Bette Davis, Judy Garland

1943: Betty Grable, Bob Hope, Abbott & Costello, Bing Crosby, Gary Cooper, Greer Garson, Humphrey Bogart, James Cagney, Mickey Rooney, Clark Gable

1944: Bing Crosby, Gary Cooper, Bob Hope, Betty Grable, Spencer Tracy, Greer Garson, Humphrey Bogart, Abbott & Costello, Cary Grant, Bette Davis

1945: Bing Crosby, Van Johnson, Greer Garson, Betty Grable, Spencer Tracy, Humphrey Bogart/Gary Cooper, Bob Hope, Judy Garland, Margaret O’Brien

1946: Bing Crosby, Ingrid Bergman, Van Johnson, Gary Cooper, Bob Hope, Humphrey Bogart, Greer Garson, Margaret O’Brien, Betty Grable, Roy Rogers

1947: Bing Crosby, Betty Grable, Ingrid Bergman, Gary Cooper, Humphrey Bogart, Bob Hope, Clark Gable, Gregory Peck, Claudette Colbert, Alan Ladd

1948: Bing Crosby, Betty Grable, Abbott & Costello, Gary Cooper, Bob Hope, Humphrey Bogart, Clark Gable, Cary Grant, Spencer Tracy, Ingrid Bergman

1949: Bob Hope, Bing Crosby, Abbott & Costello, John Wayne, Gary Cooper, Cary Grant, Betty Grable, Esther Williams, Humphrey Bogart, Clark Gable

1950: John Wayne, Bob Hope, Bing Crosby, Betty Grable, James Stewart, Abbott & Costello, Clifton Webb, Esther Williams, Spencer Tracy, Randolph Scott

1951: John Wayne, Martin & Lewis, Betty Grable, Abbott & Costello, Bing Crosby, Bob Hope, Randolph Scott, Gary Cooper, Doris Day, Spencer Tracy

1952: Martin & Lewis, Gary Cooper, John Wayne, Bing Crosby, Bob Hope, James Stewart, Doris Day, Gregory Peck, Susan Hayward, Randolph Scott

1953: Gary Cooper, Martin & Lewis, John Wayne, Alan Ladd, Bing Crosby, Marilyn Monroe, James Stewart, Bob Hope, Susan Hayward, Randolph Scott

1954: John Wayne, Martin & Lewis, Gary Cooper, James Stewart, Marilyn Monroe, Alan Ladd, William Holden, Bing Crosby, Jane Wyman, Marlon Brando

Now to look at the box-office performance of the films in which Bing appeared. The following list shows every film in which Bing appeared which featured in the top ten money-makers in the year of its release. It covers North America and the U.K. The sources of information are ‘Variety’ (USA) and ‘Kine Weekly’ (U.K.). Sixteen different movies registered. They are:

Year UK Ranking USA Ranking

1940 Road to Singapore *

1941 Road to Zanzibar *

1942 Holiday Inn 5 *

1943 Star Spangled Rhythm *

1944 Going My Way 4 Going My Way 1

1946 Bells of St. Mary’s 2 Bells of St. Mary’s 1

Blue Skies 3

Road to Utopia 4

1947 Blue Skies * Welcome Stranger 7

1948 Road to Rio 4 Road to Rio 1

Emperor Waltz 7

1953 Road to Bali 2

1954 White Christmas 1

1955 White Christmas 2 The Country Girl 6

High Society 4

1957 High Society 1

1962 The Road to Hong Kong *

Now and then films were not ranked according to box office takings. They were listed alphabetically and * indicates a place in the top ten.

If a comparison is made between Bing as a box-office draw and his films, the films cover a later time span. Bing first registered at the U.S.

box-office in 1934 and made h