HICKORY – The sons of recently deceased WHKY owner Tom Long Sr. are remembering their father for his dedication to the station, technical mastery and concern for the community.

WHKY has been a family tradition for the Long family since Ed Long founded it in 1940.

Tom Long Sr., who died Friday at age 90, began his involvement in the station by helping his father assemble equipment at the age of 13.

Jeff and Tom Long Jr., Tom Long Sr.'s sons, hold key positions at the station.

Tom Long Sr.’s aptitude for the technical aspects of radio was demonstrated early on.

At 14 years old, Tom Long Sr. became one of the youngest people to pass the rigorous test required to obtain an FCC operator’s license, WHKY Station Manager Jeff Long said.

Tom Long Sr. spent nearly all of his life in his hometown of Hickory, except for a two-year stint in the U.S. Navy and time at N.C State University studying electrical engineering, WHKY Director of Engineering Tom Long Jr. said.

For much of his time in the Navy, Tom Long Sr. was training as a radar technician in Detroit and Chicago.

Tom Long Sr. had been training for the planned invasion of Japan, and if it were not for the dropping of the atomic bombs, his sons believe he likely would not have survived the war.

Throughout his career at WHKY, Tom Long Sr.’s engineering knowledge and skill helped WHKY be a pioneer in a number of areas, Jeff Long said.

Tom Long Sr. spearheaded the creation of the WHKY TV station which began broadcasting in 1968.

“It was the next step in broadcasting to go into that,” Jeff Long said.

While Ed Long had established radio, television was Tom Long Sr.’s project.

“He took charge,” Jeff Long said.

The station also was ahead of many others in moving into HD broadcasting, being among the first 200 stations in the country to make the transition, Jeff Long said.

FM radio was another important medium for Tom Long Sr.

Listen now and subscribe: Apple Podcasts | Google Podcasts | Spotify | RSS Feed | SoundStack | All Of Our Podcasts

The station ran an FM station early on that was discontinued in 1952, and then revived in 1958, Tom Long Jr. said.

The FM channel was eventually sold off in the 1980s.

Tom Long Sr. had felt the loss of the FM station and toward the end of his life was heavily involved in acquiring a FM translator for the station, his sons said.

The FM broadcast began in January.

“I think (he) felt like he had completed what he needed to do in getting AM, FM, TV all back now,” Jeff Long said.

As a broadcaster, Tom Long Sr. was mindful of the need for community service, giving air time to local civic organizations, Tom Long Jr. said.

Tom Long Sr. had become an owner of the station at 21 and became majority shareholder following the deaths of his parents in the late-1980s, his sons said.

Up until his death, Tom Long Sr. was involved with the day-to-day operation of the station.

“He came every day, put his shirt and tie on, drove himself to work,” Jeff Long said.

He was known around town, particularly at the Hickory Café & Arcade where he would frequently eat lunch.

For his 90th birthday in October, Tom Long Sr. was given a Little Debbie cake with a candle, employees at the café said.

“We’re all going to miss him and everything,” café employee Diane Himes said. “He was a nice guy.”

In the wake of his father’s death, Jeff Long said he heard a recurring theme in the comments he received from people about his father.

“The common denominator seems to be, he had a lot of knowledge and he shared that, and that he was a very sharp man that was a very kind person,” Jeff Long said.

“And he probably has forgotten more than any of us will ever know.”

While things will go on as usual at the station, the loss is being felt by those who worked with Tom Long Sr. for many years.

“So he’s going to be missed, but as he would say, ‘Business as usual, the show’s got to go on,’” Jeff Long said.

Be the first to know

Get local news delivered to your inbox!

* I understand and agree that registration on or use of this site constitutes agreement to its user agreement and privacy policy.

Kevin Griffin

Reporter

Get email notifications on {{subject}} daily!

Your notification has been saved.

There was a problem saving your notification.

{{description}}

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.

Followed notifications

Please log in to use this feature

Log In

Don't have an account? Sign Up Today