For nearly two decades, Mike Herrera has fronted the Bremerton, Wash.-based punk-pop outfit MxPx, which has sold more than a million albums throughout its history.

Herrera, 34, has also broadened his fan base in recent years with a country-punk band called Tumbledown and a 1950s and '60s-flavored melodic rock project called Arthur.

The music of all three groups will be featured when Herrera gives a solo acoustic performance Wednesday at Fatso's in Greenville.

The show is part of an East Coast tour with his good friend Louis DeFabrizio of the New York-based rock outfit Gasoline Heart.

“I'll play pretty much whatever people want to hear,” Herrera said. “It's a different show. It will be obviously more intimate because it is just me and the guitar.

“But, at the same time, it's not just like, ‘Everybody, sit down and be quiet because we're going to do a poetry reading.' It will be a good time.”

Stylistic differences are likely to be most noticeable in MxPx songs, which will be stripped down from blistering punk-pop anthems to fit the acoustic format.

“Most of the songs I do write, even for MxPx, I write on the acoustic guitar,” Herrera said. “So, I'm kind of bringing it back to that.”

Herrera has just released a limited-edition solo acoustic album, “Live from the Basement,” which was recorded at his home.

“Literally, the reason I decided to put it out was because of this tour,” Herrera said. “Over the last couple of years, I've been doing some solo shows here and there, and I've never had any (CDs) that really represented exactly what I was doing that night.

“I'd always have full-band stuff for sale — the new MxPx or the new Tumbledown. So, this time, I wanted to have something that sounds exactly like what you'll hear from me live.”

While MxPx — the band that he started while still in high school — draws from such influences as the Descendents, the Sex Pistols and the Clash, Tumbledown is inspired by Herrera's interest in classic country music.

“The first song I learned to sing as a kid was ‘On the Road Again' by Willie Nelson,” Herrera said.

When: 7 p.m. Wednesday Where: Fatso's, 24 Laurens Rd., Greenville Tickets: $10 Info: 864-242-0294

Mike Herrera with Louis DeFabrizio