Two of the brightest and biggest stars of the 1980s are teaming up with a horror legend for an upcoming new movie.

By Nathan Kamal |

Dan Aykroyd and Chevy Chase, two of the biggest comedic stars of the 1980s are teaming up for a new horror movie. According to The Hollywood Reporter, Dan Aykroyd and Chevy Chase will be starring in the upcoming Hulu film Zombie Town, based on a novel by the mega-best-selling author R.L. Stine. The film will also star Henry Czerny, Brenna Coates, Scott Thompson, and Bruce McCulloch. This will be the fifth movie that Dan Aykroyd and Chevy Chase have starred in together and their first pairing in over 30 years.

Zombie Town is a standalone novel first published in R.L. Stine, who is most famous for his Goosebumps and Fear Street series. Both of those series have dozens of entries, but as one of the most prolific authors in the world, R.L. Stine has a lot of material to work with. This particular book involves two youths (portrayed in the movie by Marlon Kazadi and Madi Monroe) who attend a screening of a movie titled Zombie Town and are shocked to find monsters leaving the screen and entering the real world, like a more terrifying version of The Purple Rose of Cairo. The movie is reported to be getting a theatrical release before streaming on Hulu.

Both Dan Aykroyd and Chevy Chase first came to prominence as part of the original cast of Saturday Night Live and swiftly shot to comedic superstardom in films like Fletch, Ghostbusters, and The Blue Brothers. Their most famous film pairing is 1985’s comedy Spies Like Us, which saw Dan Aykroyd and Chevy Chase portraying dopey, incompetent U.S. intelligence agents tasked with a covert mission to the Soviet Union. They also starred together twice in 1988, first in Caddyshack II and The Couch Trip (which primarily starred Dan Aykroyd but included a cameo by Chevy Chase). The two also co-starred along with John Candy and Demi Moore in the infamously bizarre Nothing But Trouble in 1991, which proved to be their last for quite some time.

In addition to comedy icons Dan Aykroyd and Chevy Chase, Zombie Town boasts another pair from a classic comedy troupe. Scott Thompson and Bruce McCulloch are both members of The Kids in the Hall, a legendary group of comedians including Dave Foley, Mark McKinney, and Kevin McDonald. Their eponymous television show first ran from 1989 to 1995 and has been revived a number of times, including for an upcoming Amazon Prime Video series.