Biography of 'DONALD, James'

Cinema manager

The Donald family played a prominent role in the cinema industry in Aberdeen. James F. Donald the founder of the family business was born in Newhills in 1870, and moved to Aberdeen as a young boy. He worked with John F. Clark coach-builders and the Great North of Scotland Railway Company before setting up his own electro-plating and cycle business in Rosemount. A keen cyclist and dancer, and an active member of the Temperance Movement, he soon began to take an interest in the cinema.

After managing to acquire some projection equipment, he entered the cinema business in November 1915 with West End. It was poorly heated – there was a dairy below it – and was affectionately known as the ‘tuppenny freezer’. Donald’s lease for the cinema expired in September 1920, and Aberdeen Picture Palaces became the new proprietors. In 1924, however, Donald acquired the lease for another cinema in the city, the Picturedrome. He changed the name to Cinema House and eventually became the owner of the premises, after buying them outright. By this time, Donald also owned other cinemas in the city, and controlled his business interests through his own company.

James Donald died on Sunday 4 March 1934, at his home in North Silver Street in Aberdeen, as a result of a serious illness. Subsequently, the task of managing his company, "James F. Donald (Aberdeen Cinemas) Limited", was passed to his sons, James R. Donald, Peter J. P. Donald, Richard M. Donald and Herbert M. Donald. Richard already had experience of the cinema business, having been appointed to the position of manager at the Grand Central in 1926, at the age of only fifteen.

The Donald brothers were responsible for a number of significant developments in the company. Land was purchased for the construction of a new cinema, the Kingsway, and the company gained control of the Majestic and Belmont cinemas after it purchased over half the shares of its owner, Caledonian Theatres. Messrs Donald also gained control of their rival company, Aberdeen Picture Palaces in 1941.

The Beach Pavilion closed in 1954 because of financial difficulties, and the summer variety shows that were held were transferred to the Capitol. The Kingsway ceased to be used as a cinema after February 1963, although it was still used as a bingo hall. Herbert W. G. Donald – the eldest son of Herbert M. Donald – joined the firm in a managerial capacity in 1977, shortly before his father retired.

This biographical account was compiled with reference to: Thomson, Michael Silver Screen in the Silver City: A History of the Cinemas in Aberdeen 1896-1987 Aberdeen University Press, 1988.

Researcher: Richard Fry

Films associated with 'COCOZZA, Enrico'