Prince Gundakar is a ... cousin of fürst Hans-Adam, his wife, princess Marie is the eldest daughter of the former Count of Paris and therefore, the eldest sibling of the current Count of Paris (former Duke of Vendome).

Prince Gundakar and princess Marie have 5 children.

Princess Léopoldine Eléonore Thérèse Marie of Liechtenstein (b. 27 June 1990), Vienna), her godparents are Prince Eudes, Duke of Angoulême and Princess Eleonore of Liechtenstein. She is godmother to her first cousin Princess Antoinette of Orléans, eldest daughter of the Count and Countess of Paris.

Princess Marie Immaculata Elisabeth Rose Aldegunde of Liechtenstein (b. 15 Dec 1991), Vienna), her godparents are Prince Jean, Count of Paris and Princess Aldegunde of Liechtenstein. She is godmother to her first cousin Princess Jacinthe of Orléans, youngest daughter of the Count and Countess of Paris.

Prince Johann Wenzel Karl Emmeran Bonifatius Maria of Liechtenstein (b. 17 Mar 1993, Vienna), his godparents are Princess Blanche of Orléans and Prince Emmeran of Liechtenstein. He is godfather to his first cousin Prince Joseph of Orléans, younger son of the Count and Countess of Paris. He is married to Countess Felicitas von Hartig (30 April 2023 - civil / 10 June 2023 - religious).

Princess Marguerite Franciska Daria Wilhelmine Marie of Liechtenstein (b. 10 Jan 1995, Vienna), her godparents are Prince François, Count of Clermont and Princess Daria of Thurn und Taxis. She is godmother to her first cousin Princess Louise-Marguerite of Orléans, middle daughter of the Count and Countess of Paris.

Prince Gabriel Karl Bonaventura Alfred Valerian Maria of Liechtenstein (b. 6 May 1998, Vienna), his godparents are Prince Alfred of Liechtenstein and Madame Gilles Lambotte, née Maria-Edla de Rambuteau.

Today's groom's LinkedIn page: Johann Wenzel Liechtenstein

He works in the family business and attended Sandhurst in 2016-2017 together with prince Sebastien of Luxembourg and crown prince Hussein of Jordan.

His bride/wife Felicitas works for the Austrian Ministry of the Interior, see her LinkedIn-page.

Maria Immaculata just started a new job as Business Development Officer at PMCG, see her LinkedIn-profile; previously she did a 6 month stint at the Liechtenstein representation at the UN.

Marguerite seems to be the creative one in the family; see her LinkedIn profile.