Prince Johann-Wenzel of Liechtenstein has wed his blushing bride, Countess Felicitas von Hartig, in a lavish religious ceremony in Vienna.

The son of Princess Marie of Liechtenstein and Prince Gundakar of Liechtenstein, 30, and the daughter of Count Lukas von Hartig and Claudia Toperczer, 29, were reportedly married in a civil service in April in Vaduz, the capital of Liechtenstein.

But today, the couple went all out for their religious ceremony, which took place in Austria's capital, where they both live and work.

Guests to the glamorous occasion included Prince Sébastien of Luxembourg and Heinrich Donatus, Hereditary Prince of Schaumburg-Lippe.

For the occasion, the bride, who works for the Austrian Ministry of the Interior, is thought to have worn a custom ensemble by Spanish brand Jesus Peiro.

The bride's ruffled dress featured a billowing floor-length skirt, as well as statement shoulder detailing and a modest neckline.

Adding some glitz to her white ensemble, the radiant bride opted for a slim silver necklace and dainty diamond earrings to complete her elegant look.

Keeping her blonde locks in loose curls, Countess Felicitas opted for a stylish half-up and half-down do, finished off with a beautiful floral headpiece nestled into her tresses.

The bride held a bouquet of vibrant red and white flowers, which matched her husband's red waist coat.

Her sophisticated husband - who works in the family business alongside his father - also opted for a light blue tie with his suit and crisp white shirt.

Following the service, the couple left the church to a cheering crowd. They stopped to share a sweet kiss outside.

The pair - who first met each other at a party in 2012, before reuniting five years later - became engaged on August 25, 2022 during a 'wonderful' holiday in Sicily, according to Eurohistory.

Countess Felicitas - who has also lived in Paris and Lisbon - studied law in Vienna, Austria, before also gaining an Art History degree.

Meanwhile, Prince Johann-Wenzel studied Politics and Economy in Montreal, Canada, followed by one year at Royal Military Academy Sandhurst in the UK.

Founded more than 300 years ago, the Princely House of Liechtenstein gives its name to the tiny European nation.

All living members are descendants of its founder, Prince Johann I, who was granted admission to the Confederation of the Rhine in 1806 by Napoleon, in a move that laid the foundation for sovereignty.

The issue of sovereignty remains important to the nation, which has a population of just 39,039 and measures just 15 miles from east to west.

The reigning Prince Hans-Adam II is particularly committed to Liechtenstein's independent foreign policy. Under his leadership, Liechtenstein joined the United Nations Organisation (UNO) in 1990 and the European Economic Area (EEA) in 1995.

He has three sons and a daughter. The eldest, Prince Alois is heir to the Liechtenstein throne.