KERNAVĖ

The annals of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania and Samogitia state that Duke Kernius not only founded the first capital of Lithuania around 1040, but also invented the name, Lithuania. Kernavė, which translates as “Kernius family estate,” is the place where Lithuania began. It was the cradle of the ancient Baltics and pagans, and perhaps even served as the capital of King Mindaugas himself. The hillfort mounds of Kernavė are steeped in legend. It is said that somewhere nearby there is an underground road from Kernavė to Trakai and Vilnius. The entrance to the tunnel is guarded by iron doors in Kernavė, silver doors in Trakai, and gold doors in Vilnius. In 2004, the archaeological site of Kernavė was included as a Cultural Site on the UNESCO World Heritage List.

Video about Kernavė in Lithuanian: https://youtu.be/HQ2LimmnCsc

Video about Kernavė in English: https://youtu.be/JjJdIvPFrZM?list=PLT9964WmoqNgCYojxLYb7y7vdNlnc-3bx

VILNIUS

Legend has it that the Grand Duke of Lithuania Gediminas stayed in the Šventaragis Valley for one night while hunting. In a dream, Gediminas saw a single iron wolf howling with the voice of a hundred. When he awoke, he sought out the wizard Lizdeika to explain the strange dream. The wizard explained that the howling wolf symbolizes a capital city that would stand there and whose renown would be recognized around the world. And so, in 1323, Gediminas began sending letters to European cities inviting merchants and artisans to visit the future city and capital of Lithuania – Vilnius.

Video about Vilnius in English: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KdPCxj1Yd2U&t=40s

KAUNAS

The status of Kaunas as a temporary capital has not been established by any official document. That being said, Kaunas became the de facto capital of Lithuania on January 2nd, 1919, after the interim government moved from Vilnius to Kaunas and remained there until 1939. In fact, the first President of Lithuania Antanas Smetona was elected in Kaunas on April 4, 1919. Kaunas became an important political, economic, and cultural center as many state institutions, universities, museums, and theaters were established there.

Video about Kaunas in English: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qHc6HVWQgGc&t=75s