Kernavė is a town in the territory of Širvintos district municipality, on the right bank of the Neris River. Kernavė was a medieval capital of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania and today is a tourist attraction and an archeological site. It is located in the Širvintos district municipality located in southeast Lithuania. A Lithuanian state cultural reserve was established in Kernavė in 1989.

The town is famous for its Kernavė mounds which are named as Castle Hill, Aukuras Hill, Mindaugas Hill or Mindaugas Throne Mound, Lizdeika Hill and Kriveikiškis Mound.

Kernave was one of the most significant centers of formation of the Lithuanian state in the 13th century. A powerful five-mound defensive complex was located in the area. During the 12th-14th cent. at its foot, in the Pajauta Valley, grew a medieval city with a population of about 3-4 thousand. It had a fairly orderly street system, dwelling houses and artisan workshops. The hypothesis is raised that the capital of Mindaugas may have been here.

The name of the town is probably hydronymic, which originates from the right tributary of the Neris River Kernavė. Its form dates from the 13th century and has hardly changed. There are almost 5 aquatic names in Lithuania with the same or similar root. The name of the stream itself is difficult to explain, as there are almost no identical words to explain the kernave now. B. Kviklys thought that the word kernavė means “viscous place in meadows, forests”, but this word is found only in Panevėžys district. Some authors believe the town is named after the legendary founder Kernius.

The Kernavė Cultural Reserve was designated a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 2004, recognizing the importance of the site according to the UNESCO World Heritage List criteria. Archaeological site status granted.

The exhibited archaeological excavation and the moments recorded from the archaeological research conducted since 1979 convey the responsible, thorough and interesting work of pre-written archaeologists.