My search for the historical context of Hugh‘s life has led me down some long rabbit holes. In trying to pin down the locations of his great-grandfather’s machine shops in Syracuse, I’ve embarked on a historical mapping project. In scrutinizing old maps, I’ve learned a lot about the history of Syracuse that I never would have noticed otherwise.

While working on the 1886 Boyd’s Syracuse Directory map, I got curious about the “DRIVING PARK” over on the eastern edge of the city.

The image below shows my approximation of the previous location of that oval. It occupied the space between Westcott and Allen, and between Clarke and a line extended east from Dell.

A quick peek on FultonHistory.com confirmed my guess that it was a horse racing track. After some more digging, I was delighted to be able to pin down the opening and closing dates of the facility to the day. It seems to have been a pretty big deal from 1868 through 1889.

July 17, 1868: The Syracuse Driving Park opens. The following day, the Syracuse Courier publishes a puff piece.

August 13, 1868: The Daily Standard publishes an advertisement for the Syracuse Driving Park Association’s “FIRST ANNUAL EXHIBITION”.

August 21, 1868: The Syracuse Daily Standard publishes an exhaustive account of the second day of the fair races. This one is notable because it puts the attendance at over three thousand. This seems like a lot of people for a sporting event in 1868 on the outskirts of Syracuse.

October 5, 1868: The Courier and Union publishes an advertisement for the Syracuse Driving Park Association’s “First Annual COUNTY FAIR”.

February 5, 1889: The Syracuse Standard publishes one of many copies of the same notice published around this time. It’s an announcement that the Genesee & Water Street Railroad Company will be building a new line, one branch of which will terminate at the driving park. I haven’t found any articles showing that demand for transportation to the driving park influenced this construction, but I assume that it was a factor.

October 17, 1889: If the owners of the Genesee & Water Street Railroad Company were counting on attendance at the driving park to drive train riders, they were sorely disappointed. The horses had taken their “last trot” around the track on October 12th.

The moment I looked at this page, a familiar sight jumped out at me. There on the right is one of the advertisements for the sewing machine business run by Hugh’s grand-uncle Robert Charles Yeman and his business partner James Rheubottom. They had just started advertising about six weeks previously.

December 29, 1909: Twenty years later, the driving park has been reduced to a “Do You Remember” side-by-side with inter-town chicken fights and unseasonably warm weather in January of 1874.