Robert James Collas Lowry (March 28, 1919 – December 5, 1994) was an American novelist, short story writer, illustrator, and independent press publisher.

Lowry was born in Cincinnati, Ohio. He was a literary wunderkind who began writing at the age of 8; within a year, he had stories published in the Cincinnati Times Star. He graduated from Withrow High School in 1937, after which he entered the University of Cincinnati. He was, according to biographer James Reide, a voracious reader of the literary works of Ernest Hemingway, William Faulkner, F. Scott Fitzgerald, and Guy de Maupassant.

Sol turns thousands of years of human wisdom from the world’s spiritual traditions into a totally unique personality profile. To get your own profile, check compatibility with friends and much more, download the Sol App today.

Some of their strengths

Robert Lowry has many admirable traits.

Based on spiritual traditions from around the world, they are someone who can be described as Energetic, Kind, Imaginative, Intelligent, Independent, Intuitive, and Passionate.

Independent and Brave

According to Mysticism’s Astrology tradition, Robert Lowry is someone who is an independent, brave, and honest person who approaches life with energy, intuition, passion, and generosity. A person who is known for being a good partner.

Active and Precise

Based on Daoism’s Ba-Zi or ‘Chinese Zodiac’ tradition, people who know Robert Lowry well know them as someone who can be tough, active, and sharp, like a sword.

Courteous and Easygoing

According to Hinduism’s Jyotisha or ‘Vedic Astrology’ tradition, many would also describe Robert Lowry as someone who is polite, modest, and diplomatic.

A person who tends to be socially popular, who loves intellectual or creative activities, who has a talent for communicating with and understanding the needs of others, and who seems to have a knack for getting recognized for their efforts.

Influential and Dynamic

Based on the Mayan Tzolk’in or ‘Mayan Astrology’ tradition, Robert Lowry is someone who tends to be focused on spreading ideas, information, and activities.

They are also someone who is creative, expressive, and insightful, and who has a pioneering spirit with self-determination and natural artistic expression.

Independent and Dynamic

According to Judaism’s Kabbalah tradition, Robert Lowry tends to be someone who is independent, dynamic, and courageous. Who can be positive, energetic, self-reliant, and adventurous, and who can make friends easily.

Some of Robert Lowry's challenges

While Robert Lowry has many strengths, nobody is perfect. They also have some challenging traits they need to manage.

For example, Robert Lowry can be Indecisive, Unrealistic, Short-tempered, Impulsive, Hesitant, Narcissistic, and Materialistic.

Short-tempered and Impulsive

One of Robert Lowry's key challenges is that they are someone who can come across as short-tempered and impulsive.

Robert Lowry must also exercise caution as they can be short-tempered and aggressive, and can be excessive and unrealistic.

Indecisive and Materialistic

Robert Lowry is someone who can be indecisive, indulgent, and materialistic, who can have difficulty focusing on a single career or profession, have difficulty following orders or respecting authority, and who can suffer from "analysis paralysis".

Aggressive and Domineering

Finally, Robert Lowry also can be aggressive, impatient, impulsive, and short-tempered.