Located at Offutt Air Force Base near Omaha, Nebraska, U.S. Strategic Command is one of eleven unified combatant commands in the Department of Defense.

General Anthony J. Cotton is the commander, USSTRATCOM, and serves as the senior commander of unified military forces from all five branches of the military assigned to the command. The USSTRATCOM commander is the leader, steward and advocate of the nation's strategic capabilities.

USSTRATCOM integrates and coordinates the necessary command and control capability to provide support with the most accurate and timely information for the President, the Secretary of Defense, other national leadership and combatant commanders.

The mission of USSTRATCOM is to deter strategic attack through a safe, secure, effective, and credible, global combat capability and, when directed, is ready to prevail in conflict. The command enables Joint Force operations and is the combatant command responsible for Strategic Deterrence, Nuclear Operations, Nuclear Command, Control, and Communications (NC3) Enterprise Operations, Joint Electromagnetic Spectrum Operations, Global Strike and Missile Threat Assessment.

USSTRATCOM combines the synergy of the U.S. legacy nuclear command and control mission with responsibility for global strike operations. This dynamic command gives national leadership a unified resource for greater understanding of specific threats around the world and the means to respond to those threats rapidly.

The Global Operations Center, or GOC, is the nerve center for USSTRATCOM. The GOC is responsible for the global situational awareness of the Commander, USSTRATCOM, and is the mechanism by which he exercises operational command and control of the Nation's global strategic forces.

History ICommand Video I Command Emblem I USSTRATCOM Headquarters

J1 - Human Capital - Colonel Jason Schmidt: Develops and administers command manpower and personnel policies, human resources, and personnel assignment programs.

J2 - Intelligence - Brigadier General Ricky Mills: Responsible for delivering all-source intelligence while enabling the execution of assigned strategic deterrence, space and cyberspace operations. Directs all intelligence-related support for the Commander and ensures unity of intelligence effort across the Command.

J3 - Global Operations - Major General John J. Nichols: Coordinates the planning, employment and operation of DoD strategic assets and combines all current operations, intelligence, and global command and control operations. Subdivisions within J3 include Combat and Information Operations, Current Operations, Logistics, and Joint Electromagnetic Spectrum Operations (JEMSO).

J4 - Logistics - Captain John French: The Logistics Directorate plans, coordinates and executes joint logistics functions, and provides capability-based readiness assessments and facilities management in support of U.S. Strategic Command's global mission.

J5 - Plans and Policy - Rear Admiral Anthony C. Carullo: Responsible for coordinating the development and implementation of national security policy as it applies to the command and the execution of its mission. Develops future plans, policy and strategy across all mission areas as outlined in the Unified Command Plan.

J6 - C4 Systems - Ms. Elizabeth M. Durham-Ruiz, SES: Coordinates, facilitates, monitors and assesses systems, networks and communications requirements.

J7 - Joint Exercises, Training and Assessments - Mr. Jeffery B. "JB" Miller, SES: Manages the USSTRATCOM Commander's Joint Exercises, Training, and Assessments programs in order to ensure readiness to perform the Command missions. Provides modeling and simulation support for exercises and training events to the Joint Chiefs of Staff (JCS), Combatant Commands, and other Major Commands (MAJCOM). Manages the Joint Lessons Learned Program. Augments the battle staff during a crisis.

J8 - Capability and Resource Integration - Mr. Robert S. Taylor, Jr., SES: Conducts force management and analysis to include integrating, coordinating, prioritizing, and advocating USSTRATCOM future concepts, mission capability needs, weapons system development, support for emerging technologies, and command and control architecture across the mission areas. Responsible for all command requirement processes, and ensures appropriate decision support tools and assessment processes are in place to enhance operational capabilities.

NEC - NC3 Enterprise Center - : Oversees and manages the NC3 enterprise to ensure full mission readiness through data-driven, risk-informed operations, while directing development and delivery of threat-relevant, next generation NC3 enterprise capabilities in support of nuclear deterrence operations and national security objectives.

Joint EMSO Center Major General AnnMarie K. Anthony: advances the joint force's ability to operate and prevail in contested, congested, and constrained EMS environments through focused training, education, and assessment. Vision: A joint force ready to prevail in a contested or congested electromagnetic spectrum.

History ICommand Video I Command Emblem I USSTRATCOM Headquarters