The abandoned Lincoln Masonic Temple in Aurora has been destroyed by a fire that broke out after 10 p.m. Monday night. The structural integrity of the building was a challenge as the building quickly began to crumble. Some of the building collapsed onto power lines knocking out power for some homes.

The longtime historic landmark in downtown Aurora hasn’t been used in over 10 years. The Masonic Temple built in 1922 was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1982. The 50,000 square foot building has been empty since 2008 when it was being used as a banquet hall. Neighbors say homeless people and teenagers often break in the building. The old structure continues to present challenges for firefighters.

Just after 9:30 p.m. Friday, Aurora’s 911 Center received a report of a woman spotted floating downstream in the Fox River near the New York Street bridge. Multiple police officers responded, along with the Aurora Fire Department, positioning themselves on bridges downstream as they attempted to catch a glimpse of the woman.

The Aurora police department’s drone team was also deployed, hoping that a bird’s eye would aid in the search.

Approximately 11 minutes after the initial 911 call, an Aurora police officer saw the woman floating in the water in the 100 block of South River Street.

Aurora Police Officer Shane Leadbetter, Officer Jason Contreras, Sgt. Jeff Talley, and Aurora Fire Lt. Steve Buono were able to run down to the bank of the river and pull the woman out of the quick-moving current. Aurora Fire Department paramedics transported the woman, who was conscious and breathing, to an area hospital.

The Illinois Department of Natural Resources closed the Fox River through Aurora to recreational boats on Friday until further notice due to the high water and increased current following recent rainfall.

Around 4:30 p.m. on July 9, 2019, the Aurora Fire Department responded to a structure fire in the 600 block of Spruce Street on the near West Side of the City. Upon arrival firefighters found a 1-story brick building with heavy smoke showing from all sides. The business located in the building was a scrap metal recycling company. Due to the rapid spread of fire throughout the front half of the building, a 3rd Alarm was requested brining a total of 38 firefighters to the scene where an exterior defensive operation was established.

The building was divided into three sections and firefighters were able to contain the fire to the front section preventing a total loss of the entire structure. As the fire progressed the roof and an exterior wall collapsed. There were no injuries to firefighters or civilians and the fire is under investigation at this time. The estimated total dollar loss is $400,000.

Fire Service, Inc. congratulates Chief Gary Krienitz and the Aurora Fire Department on the recent delivery of their latest Wheeled Coach Type 1 Ford F450 4×4 ambulance. This is the 8th Wheeled Coach Type I purchased by Aurora, finalizing the conversion of the entire AFD front line EMS fleet. The consistency of their custom interior design is enhanced with the Stryker Power Load system, and the conversion of the interior cabinetry to be CN-10 compliant. The IMMI Per4Max restraints offer fully retractable straps without sacrificing comfort and restriction. With the patented Cool Bar HVAC system and Whelen LED interior and exterior lighting and warning systems, Aurora remains prepared to offer their community consistent and safe EMS transportation for all missions. We are thankful that the City of Aurora places their trust in Fire Service, Inc for their EMS and fire apparatus needs. We remain committed to Aurora and all of our Fire Service, Inc. current and future family members.

An Aurora City Council committee Tuesday recommended moving ahead with buying bulletproof vests for firefighters who are part of special tactical units, less than two weeks after they were involved at the scene of a mass shooting.

The move comes less than two weeks after firefighters moved into the Henry Pratt Co. building with police to confront an active shooter who had killed five Pratt workers and was shooting at the first responders police officers and firefighters. As it happens, plans were already underway for purchase of the vests, but those plans did not materialize in time for the Feb. 15 incident.

The firefighters involved were part of a police and fire tactical unit during the incident. It was the first time the city had used the combined units. The idea is that paramedics are on the scene to quickly help with injuries during an incident, such as the mass shooting at Pratt.

Aldermen voted to recommend spending $86,349 to buy 60 bulletproof vests, as well as helmets, accessories, goggles and medical supplies. At one time earlier in 2018, fire officials applied for a grant for the purchase.

Originally, officials planned to spend $70,000 on the purchase, but had upped that in the budget to $110,000, so the final price was about $30,000 under the budgeted amount.

The City Council Committee of the Whole will consider the purchase next week, and move it to the full council to discuss on March 12.