Bouncing between the stage and the silver screen throughout his career, Yul Brynner was one of the most versatile actors of the fifties, sixties, and beyond. A Russian-born thespian, Brynner immigrated to the states in 1940, but his career really took off in 1951 when he took the stage as King Mongkut of Siam in The King and I, a performance that would come to define his legacy as an actor. From there, he appeared in such films as The Ten Commandments, The Magnificent Seven, and Anastasia, racking up over forty credits in his four-decade career.

Similarly to his character in The King and I, much of Brynner's appeal was situated in the juxtaposition between his hard outer shell and the softer, more sympathetic character that lay at his core. The actor was known for his imposing figure as well as his sophisticated air, and the above photo serves as a nice example of his overall style: strongman in a suit.

But not just any suit. Brynner had to wear a suit that was as striking and dynamic as he was, which is why this suit is adorned not only with jetted hacking pockets (a rare detail in and of itself) and wide lapels, but also dramatic roped shoulders. The exact origins of the roped shoulder — so named because it looks like the sleeve fabric could have been laid over a piece of rope at the shoulder seam — are up for debate. But what is certain is that the style was embraced by some of Italy's finest tailoring houses to complement the more casual, soft-shouldered style popular in the region, and add a period, so to speak, to that overall look.

See how the sleevehead that sits just a bit higher than the actual shoulder on Brynner's suit in the photo above, making him appear even broader? That's the roping. It's a detail that's big and bold, but also refined and classic — much like the man wearing the suit himself.

Get the Look: Slim fit Donnegal tweed blazer ($995) by Richard James, mrporter.com

Jake Gallagher is a writer living in Manhattan. He writes the blog Wax Wane.

---

More lessons from style icons

Wes Anderson's Casual Suit

Hugh Hefner's Single-Button Jacket

Gay Talese's Pocket Square and Tie Combo

Steve Martin's Belt Buckle

Andy Warhol's Field Jacket

David Byrne's Panama Hat

Bob Dylan's Sunglasses

Arthur Miller's Sport Coat

Dean Martin's Shorts

Gary Cooper's Socks

Sam Cooke's Trousers

Jack Lemmon's Slippers

Errol Flynn's Watch

David Hockney's Bengal Stripe Shirt

Cary Grant's Tie Dimple

Douglas Fairbanks Jr.'s Belt

Marlon Brando's Perfect White T-Shirt

Dustin Hoffman's Unbuttoned Collar

Vittorio de Sica's shirt cuffs

Mick Jagger's Popover

Ralph Lauren's Contrast Waistcoat

Gordon Parks' Trench Coat

Steve McQueen's Collar Pin

Miles Davis' Perfectly Proportioned DB Suit

Jack Nicholson's Peak Lapels

Woody Allen's Cardigan

Gianni Agnelli's Spread Collar

JFK's Polo Shirt

Robert Redford's TV Fold

John Lennon's Patch Pockets

Gregory Peck's shirt cuffs

Warren Beatty's Side-Tab Trousers

Frank Sinatra's Hat

Sean Connery's Pant Cuffs

Michael Caine's Gorge Height