Zhytomyr (Житомир in Ukrainian) - Ukrainian city located at the Teterev River, approximately 130 km west of Kiev, the administrative seat of the Zhytomyr region and district. Founded in 884, one of the oldest cities in Ukraine with the largest Polish diaspora . In 1989, the Zhytomyr Regional Branch of the Union of Poles in Ukraine was established as an independent organisation. There are other Polish organisations, including the Association of Polish Youth in the Zhytomyr Region, the Union of Polish Teachers in the Zhytomyr Region and the University of the Third Age.

Until the aggression of Russian Federation on Ukraine, Zhytomyr had over 265,000 inhabitants and was an important industrial hub, as well as a cultural centre with theatres and museums and academia centre. Moreover, it is an important transport hub with an airport.

Zhytomyr is also a place of Polish patriotic celebrations and Polish festivals (including Polish Culture Days, International Festival of Polish Culture). Polish language lessons take place in some public schools and weekend public schools. Polish Saturday and Sunday School at the Zhytomyr Oblast Union of Poles in Ukraine is one of the largest public schools. Since 2004, there has been a Polish studies centre at the University of Zhytomyr.

A unique historical site is the old Catholic cemetery, one of the most beautiful Polish borderland necropolises. The parents of Ignacy Jan Paderewski - one of the Fathers of Polish Independence – are buried there.

There are 5 universities in Zhytomyr. The main industries are: food, light, metallurgical and machinery industries. Zhytomyr has a great tourist potential, including architectural monuments, museums, a rock mass that is a hub for climbers and mountaineers, including the historical centre – Castle Hill.

On February 23-26, 2023, a study visit of a group of councillors from the Zhytomyr Oblast took place in Lublin. The councillors brought photographic exhibitions: «рускій мір» ("Russian world"?) in Zhytomyr", authored by Leonid Shevchuk, Press Secretary of Mayor of Zhytomyr, professional photographer, photography teacher. He travelled around the Zhytomyr Oblast for a long time and documented after-effects of war. In his photographs, the author reflects human moods and changes taking place in Ukrainian society due to the war. The second exhibition "Pain of War. Zhytomyr Oblast 2022" commemorated the first anniversary of the Russian attack on Ukraine. The authors of the photos are Denis Motsny and Leonid Shevchuk.