1934-2024

Kenneth Steer, 89. Our beloved father passed away on July 25, 2024 in Damascus, Ohio. Kenny was born on October 19,1934 in Salem to the late Frank and Lela (Hoopes) Steer.

Kenny lived a life of service to others, living out I Thessalonians 4:11, “Make it your goal to live a quiet life, minding your own business and working with your hands…” He loved God, his family, his church and his community and served them all well.

Kenny was a graduate of Goshen High School. He proudly served in the United States Army in Anchorage, Alaska. When he and his wife, Joyce, moved back to Damascus they built a strong business at Damascus Nursery and Landscaping, which served the community with plants, trees and Christmas trees to help families make memories. He was a bus driver for West Branch Schools. He was an active member of Damascus Friends Church, serving in many roles through the years and in his last years, arranging fresh flower vases weekly for the tables in the church cafe. As a member of the Damascus Ruritan Club, he served in various roles with 65 years of perfect attendance. He was also a member of the Damascus Historical Society and West Branch Alumni Association.

Kenny loved to garden. He and Joyce were known for creating beautiful flower gardens and water features, which included unique and specialty plants. They took pleasure in opening their home and gardens for others to enjoy.

But most of all, Kenny enjoyed spending time with his family – his children, grandchildren and great-grandchildren.

Kenny is survived by his children, Judy (Craig) Wheeler of Damascus, Beth (Jim) Grimm of Damascus and John Steer of Damascus; seven grandchildren Sarah Miller, Jessica Wallace, Rachel Jones, Nathan Steer, Julie Wheeler, Nicholas Steer and Chelsea Corrill and 13 great-grandchildren and a brother Gerald Steer. Besides his parents, he was preceded in death by his wife, Joyce (Davis), whom he married July 6, 1955, and three sisters, Elizbeth Workman, Wilda McGowen and Lois Swetye and a brother, Melvin Steer.

A Memorial service will held Saturday, August 3, 2024 at 11:00 a.m. at Damascus Friends Church with Pastors John Ryser, Rick Brendlinger and Bruce Bell officiating. A time of visitation will take place one hour prior to the service from 10:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. Memorial contributions can be made in Kenny’s honor to the Damascus Friends Church, P.O. Box 205, Damascus, OH 44619 or the Damascus Ruritan Club, P.O. Box 94, Damascus, OH 44619. The service will be live streamed for those unavailable to attend via the funeral home obituary link. Friends and family may send condolences and sign the guest register online at www.grfuneralhome.com. Arrangements have been entrusted to Gednetz-Ruzek-Brown Funeral Home, Sebring, Ohio (330) 938-2526.

7/29/24