Kenneth (Kenny) Allen Rush (82) passed away April 25, 2024 surrounded by family at Ascension-Providence Hospital in Waco.

A celebration of life service will be held at 11:30 on Friday, May 10, 2024 at The First United Methodist Church of Mart.

Kenneth was born August 12, 1941 in Almont, Michigan to parents Erwin & Ruth Rush. He grew up on the family cattle ranch in Romeo, MI until moving to Kathleen, Georgia in 1960. In 1958, Kenny won Grand Champion Steer in the Detroit Livestock Show. Kenny loved showing cattle, driving the tractor and working with his hands. He could fix anything and loved teaching his nephews and sons all of his little fixes.

In August of 1965, He graduated from Reppert School of Auctioneering in Decatur Indiana.

He married Rhonwyn Cheek on June 22,1968. Kenny and his brothers operated The Rush Brothers’ Hereford Farm in Kathleen Georgia, until the summer of 1981, when they relocated the ranch to Mart, Texas. After many years of being a rancher, Kenneth became a truck driver working for many different companies. He also worked with Joe Frerich using his auctioneer license to rattle off verbiage not many understood.

Kenneth always stood up for what was right and didn’t mind pointing out when things weren’t. He drew national attention when fighting for his cattle were overvalued for taxes by taking a load of cattle to the courthouse to pay them. During the late 70s, he also participated in the Tractor Cade, driving his old 4020 tractor to Washington.

Kenneth was a dedicated and enthusiastic member of The First United Methodist Church of Mart from the time he arrived in Texas until his passing. Kenny loved spending time with his family, especially his great-grandchildren. He loved to share his love for cattle and agriculture with the next generation.

He was preceded in death by his wife of 53 years, Rhonwyn Rush; his parents Erwin & Ruth Rush; his brother Robert “Bob” Rush; his sister-in-law Brenda Cheek Rush Mallow; and two of his great nephews, Braeden Freeman and Cannon Rush.

Kenneth is survived by his daughter, Carrie Kennedy and husband Glenn, son, Jeremy Rush and wife Julie, and son Blake Rush; his grandchildren, Ashley Dawson, Hunter Dawson and wife Morgan, Bryton Rush, Teagan Venegas and husband Tony, Taragan Kennedy, Josh Gill, Paige Gill, and Ashlee Myntti. He is also survived by his great-grandchildren, Evelyn Guyton, Hagen and Emersyn Dawson, Riley, Reece and Ryker Venegas, Madyson Bolieu, Zayden, Makynlee and Laney Myntti. Kenny is also survived by his brother Lee Rush and wife Pat, his sister Mary Rush Waters and husband Mike, and his sister-in-law Evelyn Chiarello and husband Thomas; six nieces and three nephews; 14 great-nieces and four great-nephews and 1 great, great nephew.

In lieu of flowers, memorials can be made to The Braeden Freeman Memorial Scholarship, Cannon Rush Memorial Scholarship; The First United Methodist Church of Mart Breakfast Club, or the Mart Ag Boosters.

Addresses below:

The Braeden Freeman Memorial Scholarship – First National Bank of Central Texas Mart Branch 501 E. Texas Ave. Mart, TX 76664

Cannon Rush Memorial – 790 Kubitza Dr. Mart, TX 76664

FUMC- Breakfast Club – 701 E. Texas Ave. Mart, TX 76664