1948—2017

Kenneth Wayne Anderson, 69, went to be with his Lord on July 28, 2017. Ken was born in Alexandria, Minnesota on March 1, 1948, to Wales and Joyce (Scholten) Anderson.

When Ken was five, his family moved to Anaheim, California. Upon graduation from Anaheim High School in 1966, he enlisted in the Army and served two tours in Vietnam. After an honorable discharge, he met and married the love of his life and wife of 46 years, Pamela Sue Wilson, on June 26, 1971.

Ken and Pam moved to Caldwell in 1971, where he managed restaurants with Red Steer. Leaving Red Steer after 14 years, he was then employed by the Army and Air Force Exchange Service, where he served faithfully for 21 years, retiring in 2007.

During his AAFES years, the family resided in Washington, Idaho, California, Korea, Georgia, and then Idaho again.

Ken and Pam were blessed with three daughters: Michelle, Jennifer and Heather, who brought great joy to his life.

Ken was an active member of First Southern Baptist Church in Mountain Home for the last 16 years. He was an avid student of the Bible, with a servant's heart.

He was ordained as a deacon in 2004, and served as church treasurer for many years. Working with the Gideon ministry, as well as serving as a chaplain for Truckstop Ministries at the Stage Stop, which brought him great satisfaction.

He enjoyed working in the yard, especially designing and cultivating his spectacular rose garden.

Ken had a loving, servant spirit. He had a loving, caring heart and a listening ear. He most always wore a smile and was never far from a laugh.

Ken was preceded in death by his father, infant daughter Jennifer, and his grandson Paxten.

He is survived by his widow, Pam, as well as daughters Michelle (Rick) Thill of Puyallup, Washington, and Heather Anderson, Seattle, Washington. He is also survived by his mother, Joyce Radding, of Hemett, California. Surviving grandchildren are Madysen Privatsky, Jackson Privatsky, Hannah Thill, and Hayden Thill.

Memorial services for Ken will be held at Rost Funeral Home, McMurtrey Chapel in Mountain Home on Friday, August 4, 2017 at 10:00 a.m., with Pastor James Gregory officiating.

In lieu of flowers, please consider donating to Ken’s favorite ministries: The Gideons (https://www2.gideons.org/donate) or Truckstop Ministries (https://www.truckstopministries.org/).