Arjun Rampal, who was recently seen in 'Crakk', credits 'Om Shanti Om' for being a transformative moment in his acting career. Released in 2007, the Farah Khan-directed blockbuster not only marked a significant milestone in Rampal's career, but also contributed to shaping his perception as an actor.

In a recent interview with IndiaToday.in, Rampal reflected on five transformative films that significantly impacted his life and career. Arjun said, "The first film that changed my life was obviously 'Moksha' when I signed it, I was modelling, and I was quite a famous model at that time. Akshok Mehta (director) came to me and I remember shooting in the Chambal valleys with Manisha Koirala, who is a phenomenal actor. This one scene and I saw the rushes of it, and I just hated myself when I saw it. I realized the reason I hated myself was because every time the camera came on, I was performing like a model and not as an actor. So I decided that I was not going to model again. I officially retired from modelling that day. But that film took six years to get paid, so I was broke for six years. It was a big sacrifice."

advertisement

He continued, "Rajiv Rai (director) saw rushes of Moksha and he signed me for his film 'Pyaar Ishq Aur Mohabbat'. So I got this top commercial director who signed me and that opened the gateways to a lot of other filmmakers, who signed me before even my film was released. So that was the second film, which kind of happened three years into the making of 'Moksha' and that became my first release. After that film was released, I got more offers."

His role as Mukesh Mehra, a suave and charismatic film producer with shades of grey, showcased his versatility and ability to delve into complex characters. The film brought Rampal into the spotlight in a way that his previous films had not. The film's impact on his career trajectory influenced the types of roles he chose thereafter. Rampal became more selective, opting for roles that allowed him to showcase his acting prowess and explore the depth of characters: "Then I would say a turning point would be definitely 'Om Shanti Om', where I was given this negative character to play, and I was very uncomfortable doing that. But I took it on and that's where I always say if you come out of your comfort zone, you'll always find something exciting to do, and it did wonders for me. People started seeing me in a very, very different way," Rampal said.

Arjun added, "'Rock On' where I got the role of Joseph Mascarenhas (Joe), who I really, really related to as an artist, because of the struggles that I had gone through and the passion you have for something and when you don't get the kind of opportunities or breaks, which was kind of similar to what Joe went through. So I could put all that emotion into Joe. Then I won a National Award for it."

He concluded, "The fifth film that changed my life was 'Daddy', which I produced or Raajneeti, it will be neck-to-neck between the two of them. Both absolutely fantastic characters to play."