LAS VEGAS, NV - Petroglyph Games, Inc. (Petroglyph) today announced Rise of Immortals, an online, free-to-play PC game that expands on the hit Multiplayer Online Battle Arena (MOBA) genre with new, innovative features designed to appeal to both core and casual players.

Rise of Immortals is set in the world of Graxia, 300 years after the events of "Guardians of Graxia," Petroglyph's fantasy-based PC game released last year. Rise of Immortals features the popular action-strategy gameplay of traditional MOBA games, but adds enhanced socialization features, along with persistent character progression – a first for the MOBA genre. Instead of an account-based leveling system, players can advance their Immortals through a diverse, persistent skill tree, customizing and upgrading the characters to unlock unique abilities that persist from match to match.

In addition, Rise of Immortals features a social hub where players can show off their enhanced Immortals, chat, emote, browse leaderboards, shop, manage friend and guild lists and more. Players also have the option of taking their Immortals through cooperative Player versus Environment (PvE) scenarios to learn the game, try out new abilities, and earn persistent experience before jumping into Player versus Player (PvP) matches online.

"Many people at Petroglyph are huge fans of MOBA gameplay, so developing Rise of Immortals was truly a passion project for the studio," said Steve Wetherill, executive producer of Rise of Immortals for Petroglyph. "We recognize that there can be a high barrier to entry in current MOBA games on the market, and we wanted to expand the genre with a title that offers new features that will appeal both to current fans, as well as those who are new to this type of game."

In addition to today's unveil of Rise of Immortals, Petroglyph also announced that signups are now open for the game's upcoming closed beta test. Players interested in trying this innovative and enhanced MOBA-style game can apply today to be part of the online testing by visiting https://www.riseofimmortals.com. Petroglyph will continue to expand the beta test over the next several weeks, prior to the game's official launch in the spring of 2011.

Features of Rise of Immortals:

12 unique Immortals at launch with additional Immortals released on a regular basis

Persistent per-Immortal level progression and skill trees

Persistent artifacts for stat enhancements

Player versus Environment instances with collectable items

Player versus Player instances with up to 5v5 multiplayer

Persistent experience and leveling in both PvP and PvE instances

Collectible pets for combat and vanity

Account and Immortal statistics tracking

Player hub instances for socialization

Rise of Immortals is a free-to-play, micro-transaction-based online game that will be available via direct download. The game will launch with a dozen distinctive Immortals that players can further customize as they progress through the game. Items that can be purchased from the in-game store include new Immortal skins and consumable items like in-game boosters and elixirs. Post-launch, Petroglyph plans to release new content on a regular basis, including additional Immortals, arenas, skins, sound packs, pets and more.

Links:

Rise of Immortals Website: https://www.riseofimmortals.com

RoI on Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/riseofimmortals

RoI on Twitter: https://www.twitter.com/riseofimmortals

RoI on Flickr: https://www.flickr.com/riseofimmortals

RoI on YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/riseofimmortals

About Petroglyph Games, Inc.

Founded in 2003, Petroglyph Games, Inc. is an award-winning, independent game development studio located in Las Vegas, Nevada. The Petroglyph team specializes in Multiplayer Online Battle Arena (MOBA), Online Real-Time Strategy (RTS) and Action/RPG games, leveraging the experience gained from developing original hit franchises for PC and consoles. Petroglyph uses their proprietary GLYPHXSMOnline game engine, tools and technology to power their next-generation titles.

For more information about Petroglyph, please visit www.petroglyphgames.com.