100 miles from Summitville, OH

Map of local cities around Summitville, OH

Major cities near Summitville, OH

This is a list of large cities closest to Summitville, OH. A big city usually has a population of at least 200,000 and you can often fly into a major airport. If you need to book a flight, search for the nearest airport to Summitville, OH. You can also look for cities 4 hours from Summitville, OH (or 3 hours or 2 hours or 1 hour) or just search in general for all of the cities close to Summitville, OH.

43 miles to Akron, OH

49 miles to Pittsburgh, PA

71 miles to Cleveland, OH

121 miles to Columbus, OH

154 miles to Toledo, OH

160 miles to Windsor, Canada

161 miles to London, Canada

161 miles to Detroit, MI

185 miles to Buffalo, NY

186 miles to Hamilton, Canada

More trip calculations

Hotels near Summitville, OH

Airports near Summitville, OH

Location of Summitville, Ohio

Airports in Ohio

Cities in Ohio

Airports in the United States

Cities in the United States

Local towns near Summitville, OH

This is a list of smaller local towns that surround Summitville, OH. If you're planning a road trip or exploring the local area, make sure you check out some of these places to get a feel for the surrounding community. You can also search for cities 100 miles from Summitville, OH (or 50 miles or 30 miles).

Millport, OH

Five Forks, OH

Norristown, OH

Diamond Valley, OH

Salineville, OH

Gavers, OH

East Salineville, OH

Mechanicstown, OH

Kensington, OH

Hanoverton, OH

Haysville, OH

Specht, OH

Augusta, OH

Watheys, OH

Highlandtown, OH

Wattsville, OH

Pine Hill, OH

Summitville, Ohio

City: Summitville

State: Ohio

Country: United States

Category: cities

Nearest cities

Travelmath helps you find cities close to your location. You can use it to look for nearby towns and suburbs if you live in a metropolis area, or you can search for cities near any airport, zip code, or tourist landmark. You'll get a map of the local cities, including the distance and information on each town. This can help in planning a trip or just learning more about a neighboring city so you can discover new places.