Harnam Singh Kamari (Baba)

He was born at village Kahari-Sahari of District Hoshiarpur and was son of Sardar Labh Singh. After passing the Middle examination at the age of 16, be joined military service in Risala No. 30 at a salary of eleven rupees per month. While in service he carne in close contact with Balwant Singh Shaheed and the two became fast friends. After serving in the army foe about a year and a half be resigned his service and came beck to his village to partake of his father’s burden. In 1907 he decided to go abroad and actually left for Canada the same year in December. On the completion of his course he got employment in the India Trading Company which had floated by some Indian settlers over there. The Ghadr movement was yet to start in America when he took up the work of promoting national consciousness among his countrymen. For this purpose was brought out an English newspaper called Hindustan. The Government of Canada disapproved of his political activities and ordered him to quit Canada within 48 hours failing which he was threatened with immediate deportation. So, he had to leave the country but after sometime. when the orders of externment were rescinded by the Canadian Government, he returned to Canada.

From there he proceeded to California and got admitted in the Berkeley University for higher studies in 1911. In 1913 when the Ghadr paper was brought out, he completely identified himself with its aims and objects and frequently contributed articles to it. liabu Ilarnam Singh was one of those people who worked actively to help the passengers of Komagata Maru in their distress and was taken in custody along with some of his friends while holding secret parleys with them. Immediately, he was sentenced to deportation under Emigration Laws. At this critical time his countrymen in California came to his rescue and got him released on bail by making a deposit of 2,500 dollars as security money. Later on. when it appeared that the case was going against him, the security money was quickly withdrawn and he was sent off to India with a view to helping the cause of revolution in his own country. On his way back, after passing through Japan, China, Siam (now Thailand) and Burma he reached India. Here he resumed his national work enthusiastically and tried to win over Indians. both in the army and outside, to the cause of revolution. In this work he was helped by one Sham Lal Pathak. While working for a revolt against the British in Burma, he was suddenly arrested and detained in the Mandalay Jail. A special court was created to try the case, which sentenced him to death. Before he could be executed, he managed to run away from the Jail but only to be recaptured soon after. He was hanged on July 14, 1914.