The fourth installment in my ReDeus: Divine Tales interview series is a discussion with former US Marine now software developer, Dayton Ward. In addition to his impressive volume of original and media tie-in works, Dayton has contributed articles to Star Trek Magazine and as well as Tor's website and StarTrek.com. As a media tie-in writer, Dayton has penned stories in such universes as Star Trek and The 4400. He writes both solo and in collaboration with longtime friend Kevin Dilmore. Does Dayton's military experience influence his fiction? Let's find out!

First, tell us where we can find you online.

That’s easy enough: DaytonWard.com. It’s basically a splash page, with links to my blog (“The Fog of Ward”), my Facebook page, and my Twitter account. It’s your one-stop shop for all of my internet banality!

What inspired you to write fiction and what was the first story you ever completed (published or not)?

As trite as I know this sounds, I started writing fiction because I thought it would be a fun thing to try, and I realized this was the creative outlet I’d been missing. As a kid, I drew a lot, thinking I might one day want to be comics or cartoon artist. Even though I enjoyed drawing and still do some on occasion, I lack the real talent (or speed, frankly) to hope for any sort of success in that world.

Writing, on the other hand? I came to it much later, but realized that I just simply enjoyed doing it. The first story I ever completed was likely something for a school assignment, but I don’t remember much about it, and I can almost guarantee you that it was horrible.

You’ve written an impressive body of media tie-in work in the Star Trek universe. Prior to becoming published with Simon & Schuster, did you write Star Trek or other fan fiction?

I did write Star Trek stories, just for the fun of it or for enjoyment by friends. It was my interest in writing Star Trek fiction that led me to enter Pocket Books’ first-ever Star Trek: Strange New Worlds writing contest. Pocket bought one of the stories I submitted to that contest, and after doing that again for the second and third contests, the editor overseeing the contest, John Ordover, asked me to write a Star Trek novel for him, and we were off and running after that.

You’ve also co-written a number of Star Trek stories with Kevin Dilmore. How did you two meet and decide to collaborate?

Kevin and I became friends as a consequence of his writing for the Star Trek: Communicator magazine. Back in 1998, he’d been given the job of writing about that first Strange New Worlds contest, interviewing the winners, and so on. He found out that we lived 45 minutes or so apart from each other, so I agreed to meet him and he’d conduct my interview over a beer. We figured out that we shared a lot of the same interests and started hanging out, and I even collaborated with him on an article for the Communicator back in 2000. Later that year, we started collaborating on the fiction side of things after Kevin asked John if he could pitch a story to the then very brand-new Star Trek: Corps of Engineers series of e-Books. When John agreed, Kevin realized he didn’t know how to proceed, so he called me and we hatched a story. That ended up being a two-part story for the e-Book series, and the beginning of our full-on writing partnership.

I recently interviewed Scott Pearson who has a story in Full-Throttle Space Tales #3: Space Grunts (Flying Pen Press, 2009). In addition to contributing to this anthology, how did you come to be the editor?

I was approached by Flying Pen Press to assemble the anthology, because it was thought that my military background might make for a good fit with this book’s theme, which was to be “space soldiers.” You know, Grunts. I’d never done anything like this before, and so I thought it would be a great learning experience and another skill I might one day be able to offer to other publishers. I invited a whole boatload of writers to submit stories for consideration, from established pros to “up-and-comers.” I’m still very proud of the anthology we put together, and I think we came away with a nice balance of stories in terms of subject matter as well as the diversity of the contributing writers. I was even able to give one writer, Nayad Monroe, her first publication credit, which was a true highlight of the entire experience for me.

Of course, you also have a healthy volume of short stories under your belt across a diverse selection of publications. One of which includes ReDeus: Divine Tales (Crazy 8 Press, August 2012) in which you and I are both contributors. I would imagine that your time in the Marines was an inspiration for your story, “Conscript”. In what ways has your experience in the military manifested in your writing?

Well, how’s that saying go? “Write what you know?” Yeah, I milk that for all it’s worth. My military service—personal experiences, the people I served with, the culture, all of it—definitely informs my writing. I just like writing about those types of characters. The trappings, language and mindset are all second nature to me. I tend to prefer writing for lower-ranking enlisted types rather than generals or other higher-ups, and showing how such characters are affected by the larger stories of alien invasion, genetic engineering gone wrong, war on another planet, or whatever. A general talking about attacking aliens in a situation room can be engaging, but to me the real fun is with the bullets and death rays whizzing past the head of some trooper in a hole somewhere.

That was the case with my main character in “Conscript.” He was a Marine in a war zone who ends up becoming paralyzed and losing an arm in a fire fight, but later has his body restored by the goddess Athena. There’s a cost for this act of “kindness,” of course, and my character isn’t so sure he likes the price tag. It’s essentially an “origin story” for this guy, and whether I get to revisit him in a future story remains to be seen, but I certainly hope to do so, one day.

What can readers expect next from you?

In October, I have a Star Trek novella being published in the various e-Book formats, titled In

Tempest’s Wake. It’s something of a coda to the Star Trek: Vanguard series of novels Pocket

published starting in 2005, and which ended with something of a monstrous bang earlier this

year. It was a “spin-off” of sorts, with a cast of largely new characters involved in a storyline that

unfolds in parallel to the events of the original Star Trek television series. I was one of four authors

who wrote stories for that series, along with its creators, David Mack and Marco Palmier, as well as

my writing partner, Kevin. It was some of the most fun I’ve ever had writing Star Trek, and I’m

definitely going to miss it now that we’ve put it to bed in proper, explosive fashion.

What does Dayton Ward do when he isn’t writing or editing?

Sleep?

When I’m not doing that, I like spending time with my wife and daughters. I also like to

read, watch old movies and TV shows along with football. I still like going to the movies, but lately I

seem to be going just so I can watch films that are 30 or more years old.

And yeah, that sleep thing. Sleep is good.