Thank you for your answer, looking at these forums

I have a question, would you be kind to answer me?

Why st peterbusrg didn't let laktha being built when they use the waterfront to do modern commie blocks?

I don't get it, the western part of st petersburg, the island where they have the new marina doesn't look pretty and why they keep making squary buildings on the waterfront? Is this island resolved to be a commie block island only? It's strange.

First of all let me answer to your previous question about moving the tower from the old location.

The outcry was because: 1. the old location is much closer to the historic centre of the Saint-Petersburg and 2. (also because of 1) the old location would create lots of angles where the tower would not just be seen from, but compete with the architectural dominant buildings of the historic city centre.

For example consider these renderings:

More on russian wikipedia article about the complex at the old location: https://ru.wikipedia.org/wiki/Охта-центр#Предполагаемое_влияние_на_городские_панорамы

In the new location of the complex it ofc is still visible from the city centre, but: 1. doesn't look that huge and isnt radically contrasted to it; 2. there are not so many angles, where the tower and some historic ensemble are visible together.

Just an example of how it is visible from the Hermitage now:

(https://www.instagram.com/p/BvO5kw-Ad3_/)

This is a recent pic. There are ofc much more examples in the web, but I'm lazy to look for them

Ofc this is, perhaps, not a bullet-proof reason for everyone. The one can say, looking at these old renderings above, that it is nothing wrong there and that the difference between how the tower is visible from the old location and from the new location is very minor. But, well, this is a Saint-Petersburg specific story. The relationship between the new and the historic architecture is a very sore point here. First of all because the modern architecture level is very poor (because there was a significant demand on a market for a cheap housing and government did nothing with it); Second because it is connected very close to the general views to a history (because of russian revolutions and different attitude to them) so this is really a very painful story. And because the politics is a right to interpret the past, this is also a political question (very specific thing of Saint-Petersburg).

And these commieblocks don't annoy anyone, they are stand still and nobody cares, the point in this particular situation is not what surrounds the newly built tower, but mostly how it is seen, and where it is seen from. Btw, these commieblocks around the old location are not that bad, this is a nice modernist ensemble:http://www.citywalls.ru/photo209237.html

Compare it to the building at the right of the image and you can see the level of architecture in the Saint-Petersburg in the middle of 2000s. But nobody cared because this building isn't visible from the center.

Yes, I agree, this is not how a healty and good architectural and urbanistic atmosphere looks like. Compare it with the european cities after the WW2, when the debates about modern architecture took place: whether the demolished building should be rebuilt, what buildings should be rebuilt, should we build buildings in the so-called 'International Style', should we build skyscrapers and so on. This debate was one of the sources of the postmodernism movement, including the postmodern architecture; and it has become actual in Continental Europe in recent years again (Berlin for example). We got something similar in Saint-Petersburg, except (as I've already said above): 1. it is more painful (imo) than in Europe, and 2. the architectural debate is a political debate between modernity and history (with a special meaning of the building height).

BUT, I also think the new location is better because also because it has an important set of meanings from this point of view: the tower (dominating vertical line) and a water horizontal kinda resembles the iconic view of Saint-Petersburg: The Saint Peter and Paul Fortress.

(Source)

Some meanings are indeed gone, for example, the pentagonal shape of the tower originally resembled the pentagonal shape of the Nyenschantz fortress historically located in the old location of the tower: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nyenschantz But it is not a very big deal losing it, imo, because almost noone remembers it

The set of new landmarks are also being created, which includes the newly built Gazprom Arena stadium and the Western High-Speed Diameter. Altogether it creates a new waterfront view for Saint-Petersburg, which is also important. And the number of city trunk streets are also end with the tower at the new location.

So, I think, the one should treat the moving of the tower from the old location to the new as a 'genius loci' action

Thank you for your answer, looking at these forums

I have a question, would you be kind to answer me?

Why st peterbusrg didn't let laktha being built when they use the waterfront to do modern commie blocks?

I don't get it, the western part of st petersburg, the island where they have the new marina doesn't look pretty and why they keep making squary buildings on the waterfront? Is this island resolved to be a commie block island only? It's strange.

And now, the second part of your question, why they are building such things in these new lands. I'll try to be short

This is because the city public administration has failed with the project of this alluvial area.

Why? I don't know. Actually, nobody knows here. The city management was poor in the recent decade, however it was not an obstacle to run another large development projects, for example the "Baltic Pearl" project: https://www.skyscrapercity.com/forumdisplay.php?f=3906 (looks more solid) or such a big infrastructure projects like Western High-Speed Diameter. Then why have they failed the Marine Facade?

Probably it is because many powers would like to take part in the project, because of its potentially great location. With the corrupted government the large number of sides creates an interest conflict and development becomes total disaster.

Let me explain. When they have started the project more than 10 years ago, they haven't adopted any complex architectural planning. The government have sold rights for some parts of the new lands to different developers, not a single one. After a few years (as a consequence of a 2008 financial crisis) they have completely dropped project development with partically reclaimed land and NO infrastructure on it, but some the developers have started to build their projects, and so the whole thing have stalled for a few years. As I have said above, there was a high market demand for a very cheap housing. Together with the absense of the infrastructure it moved the developers to downgrade the architectural level of the projects. But the situation have changed recently: the market demand shifted towards architectural quality and the government decided to complete the project. The new developer have bought the most of it and have worked out the comprehensive project plan.

So what is being built now is the already improved and reworked project We might had all buildings like this in the worst scenario: https://lidgroup.ru/objects/spb/kapitannemo/

Well... If you thinks the buildngs currently under construction would still look like commieblocks a bit, because the new developer cares about EBITDA more than about architectural quality, and city management isn't effective to do something with it.

Btw, I wouldn't blame the high corruption levels too much. As I've already said in the previous post, the overall architectural level in the Saint-Petersburg isn't that high. The nice projects are indeed built, but they are few (Lakhta-Center is great example). The main reason is because the historic centre with the architectural heritage and very strict constructural limitations from the one side, and the new high-tech architecture in the architectural-leading cities from the other create an overwhelming challenge for the new architects in context of a post-soviet era. IMHO.

So, to sum up. 1. There are too much limitations for the new projects in the city; 2. There is a great architectural heritage from the recent times; 3.But there was a large market demand for a cheap housing, which has shifted only recently; 4. And the city management was poor the recent decade to do something with the points 1,2,3; 5. And the city management was especially ineffective in the 'Marine Facade' project for some reason.