Treasury of Scripture

Let no man therefore judge you in meat, or in drink, or in respect of an holy day, or of the new moon, or of the sabbath days:

judge.

Romans 14:3,10,13 Let not him that eateth despise him that eateth not; and let not him which eateth not judge him that eateth: for God hath received him…

1 Corinthians 10:28-31 But if any man say unto you, This is offered in sacrifice unto idols, eat not for his sake that shewed it, and for conscience sake: for the earth is the Lord's, and the fulness thereof: …

Galatians 2:12,13 For before that certain came from James, he did eat with the Gentiles: but when they were come, he withdrew and separated himself, fearing them which were of the circumcision…

in meat, etc.

Leviticus 11:2-47 Speak unto the children of Israel, saying, These are the beasts which ye shall eat among all the beasts that are on the earth…

Leviticus 17:10-15 And whatsoever man there be of the house of Israel, or of the strangers that sojourn among you, that eateth any manner of blood; I will even set my face against that soul that eateth blood, and will cut him off from among his people…

Deuteronomy 14:3 Thou shalt not eat any abominable thing.

in respect.

Leviticus 23:1-44 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, …

Numbers 28:1-29:40 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, …

Deuteronomy 16:1-17 Observe the month of Abib, and keep the passover unto the LORD thy God: for in the month of Abib the LORD thy God brought thee forth out of Egypt by night…

the new.

Numbers 10:10 Also in the day of your gladness, and in your solemn days, and in the beginnings of your months, ye shall blow with the trumpets over your burnt offerings, and over the sacrifices of your peace offerings; that they may be to you for a memorial before your God: I am the LORD your God.

Numbers 28:11,14 And in the beginnings of your months ye shall offer a burnt offering unto the LORD; two young bullocks, and one ram, seven lambs of the first year without spot; …

1 Samuel 20:5,18 And David said unto Jonathan, Behold, to morrow is the new moon, and I should not fail to sit with the king at meat: but let me go, that I may hide myself in the field unto the third day at even…

or of the sabbath.

Leviticus 16:31 It shall be a sabbath of rest unto you, and ye shall afflict your souls, by a statute for ever.

Leviticus 23:3,24,32,39 Six days shall work be done: but the seventh day is the sabbath of rest, an holy convocation; ye shall do no work therein: it is the sabbath of the LORD in all your dwellings…

Jump to Previous