No man can come to Me unless the Father who hath sent Me draw him; and I will raise him up at the Last Day.

No man can come to me, except the Father that sent me draw him: and I will raise him up in the last day.

No one can come to Me unless the Father who sent Me draws him [giving him the desire to come to Me]; and I will raise him up [from the dead] on the last day.

No one is able to come to Me unless the Father Who sent Me attracts and draws him and gives him the desire to come to Me, and [then] I will raise him up [from the dead] at the last day.

No man can come to me, except the Father which hath sent me draw him: and I will raise him up at the last day.

No one can come to me unless the Father who sent me draws him, and I will raise him up on the last day.

No one can come to me unless they are drawn to me by the Father who sent me, and I will raise them up at the last day.

No one can come to me unless the Father — the One who sent me — draws him. And I will raise him up on the Last Day.

No one can come to me, unless the Father who sent me makes them want to come. But if they do come, I will raise them to life on the last day.

No one can come to me except the Father who has sent me draw him, and I will raise him up in the last day.

No one is able to come to Me unless the Father having sent Me draws him. And I will raise him up on the last day.

No man can come to me, except the Father, who hath sent me, draw him; and I will raise him up in the last day.

The Father is the one who sent me, and he is the one who brings people to me. I will raise them up on the last day. Anyone the Father does not bring to me cannot come to me.

The Father has sent me. Nobody can come to me unless the Father brings them to me. I will raise those people up on the last day, so that they have life for ever.

No one can come to me unless the Father who sent me draws him. And I will raise him up on the Last Day.

No one can come to me unless the Father who sent me draws him. And I will raise him up on the last day.

No one can come to me unless the Father who sent me draws him. And I will raise him up on the last day.

The Father is the One who sent me. No one can come to me unless the Father draws him to me, and I will raise that person up on the last day.

No man can come to me, except the Father, which hath sent me, draw him: and I will raise him up at the last day.

People cannot come to me unless the Father who sent me brings them to me. I will bring these people back to life on the last day.

People cannot come to me unless the Father who sent me draws them to me; and I will raise them to life on the last day.

No one can come to Me unless the Father who sent Me draws him, and I will raise him up on the last day.

The Father is the One who sent me. No one can come to me unless the Father draws him to me. And I will raise him up on the last day.

No one can come to me unless the Father who sent me draws him, and I will raise him to life on the last day.

So Jesus answered them, “Do not grumble among yourselves. Nobody comes to me unless he is drawn to me by the Father who sent me, and I will raise him up when the last day comes. In the prophets it is written—‘And they shall all be taught by God,’ and this means that everybody who has heard the Father’s voice and learned from him will come to me. Not that anyone has ever seen the Father except the one who comes from God—he has seen the Father. I assure you that the man who trusts in him has eternal life already. I myself am the bread of life. Your forefathers ate manna in the desert, and they died. This is bread that comes down from Heaven, so that a man may eat it and not die. I myself am the living bread which came down from Heaven, and if anyone eats this bread he will live for ever. The bread which I will give is my body and I shall give it for the life of the world.”

No one can come to me unless the Father who has sent me draws him, and I will raise him up in the last day.

No man can come to me, except the Father which hath sent me draw him: and I will raise him up at the last day.

No man can come to me, except the Father which hath sent me draw him: and I will raise him up at the last day.

No one can come to Me unless the Father who sent Me draws him; and I will raise him up on the last day.

No one is able to come to me unless the Father who sent me draws him, and I will raise him up on the last day.

For no one can come to me unless the Father who sent me draws him to me, and at the Last Day I will cause all such to rise again from the dead.

Jesus said, “Don’t bicker among yourselves over me. You’re not in charge here. The Father who sent me is in charge. He draws people to me—that’s the only way you’ll ever come. Only then do I do my work, putting people together, setting them on their feet, ready for the End. This is what the prophets meant when they wrote, ‘And then they will all be personally taught by God.’ Anyone who has spent any time at all listening to the Father, really listening and therefore learning, comes to me to be taught personally—to see it with his own eyes, hear it with his own ears, from me, since I have it firsthand from the Father. No one has seen the Father except the One who has his Being alongside the Father—and you can see me.

No one can come to Me unless the Father who has sent Me draws him. And I will raise him up on the last day.

No one can come to me unless the Father who sent me draws him; and I will raise him up on the last day.

People cannot come to me unless the Father who sent me brings them to me. I will bring these people back to life on the last day.

No one can come to me unless the Father who sent me draw him, and I will raise him on the last day.

No one can come to Me unless the Father who sent Me draws him; and I will raise him up on the last day.

No one can come to Me unless the Father who sent Me draws him; and I will raise him up on the last day.

“No one can come to me unless he is drawn by the Father who sent me, and I will raise up that person on the last day.

The Father is the One who sent me. No one can come to me unless the Father draws him to me, and I will raise that person up on the last day.

No one can come to me unless the Father who sent me draws him, and I will raise him up at the last day.

“No one can come to me unless the Father who sent me brings them. Then I will raise them up on the last day.

“No one can come to me unless the Father who sent me draws them, and I will raise them up at the last day.

‘No one can come to me unless the Father who sent me draws them, and I will raise them up at the last day.

No one can come to Me unless the Father who sent Me draws him; and I will raise him up at the last day.

The Father sent Me. No man can come to Me unless the Father gives him the desire to come to Me. Then I will raise him to life on the last day.

For no one can come to me unless the Father who sent me draws them to me, and at the last day I will raise them up.

No one can come to me unless the Father who has sent me draws him. And I will raise him up at the last day.

No one can come to me unless drawn by the Father who sent me; and I will raise that person up on the last day.

No one can come to me unless drawn by the Father who sent me; and I will raise that person up on the last day.

No one can come to me unless drawn by the Father who sent me; and I will raise that person up on the last day.

No one can come to me unless drawn by the Father who sent me, and I will raise that person up on the last day.

“No one can come to me unless the father who sent me draws them—and I will raise them up on the last day.

No one is able to come to me unless HaAv Who sent me should draw him, and I will raise him up on the Yom HaAcharon. [Jer 31:3; Hos 11:4]

“No one can come to Me unless the Father, Who has sent Me, draws him. And I will raise him up at the last day.

No one can come to me unless the Father who sent me draws him; and I will raise him up at the last day.

No one can come to me unless the Father who sent me draws him; and I will raise him up at the last day.

No one can come to Me unless My Father who sent Me draws him—and I will raise him up on the last day.

If the Father who sent Me does not draw you, then there’s no way you can come to Me. But I will resurrect everyone who does come on the last day.

No one can come to me unless the Father who sent me draws him, and I will raise him up in the last day.

No one can come to me if my Father does not draw him. He sent me. I myself will raise up the one who comes to me. I will bring him back to life on the last day.

No man may come to me, but if the Father that sent me, draw him [no but the Father that sent me, draw him]; and I shall again-raise him in the last day.

no one is able to come unto me, if the Father who sent me may not draw him, and I will raise him up in the last day;