The FCC has rejected Sound of Hope Radio NFP’s 98.3 WQEG-LP Chicago’s Application for Review and Motion for Stay filed in February against the modification application filed by 99.1 W256CL Park Forest IL to relocate to the Willis Tower on procedural gorunds. The FCC noted that the CP for the now Ohana Del Sol, LLC owned translator expired on June 5 although a new, similar modification application was filed on June 16. Sound of Hope Radio petitioned to the FCC to deny the application originally made by Edgewater Broadcasting as being the fourth in a series of hops to move W256CL forty miles into Chicago, seeking the denial to to allow itself to submit a modification closer to “the Chinese community in Chicago”.

Walco Enterprises “Boss Hogg Radio” 1170 WKFL Bushnell FL has been issued a Notice of Violation for operating outside of its licensed parameters. WKFL, a daytimer, was logged by FCC agents on both March 22 and 23 as operating at 8:16pm after the local sunset time of 7:30.

The FCC has entered into consent decrees with the following licensees over failing to maintain their public files and/or online political files:

DJRO Broadcasting LLC licensee of WLGZ-FM Webster NY

Enrico Brancadora licensee of WIBG Avalon and WWAC Ocean City-Somers Point NJ

Radio Amor, Inc. licensee of WADS Ansonia CT

Sea-Mar Community Health Center licensee of KKMO Tacoma WA

Sunbury Broadcasting Company licensee of WVLY-FM Milton, WEGH Northumberland, and WKOK and WQKX Sunbury PA

Deletions

Endurance Broadcasting turned in the license of 1220 KLBB Stillwater MN. Northpine.com reports that the station, which rimshotted Minneapolis, sold its tower site in 2018 and has been running NOAA Weather Radio programming from a temporary site.

After ceasing operations at the end of 2021, Radford Media Group turned in the license of 1280 KDKD Clinton MO.

Hispanic Family Christian Network surrendered the license of 90.3 KBAL-FM Alpine TX.

The Pomfret School’s 91.1 WBVC Pomfret CT was deleted after being silent for over one year.

25/7 Media turned in the licenses of News/Talk 920 KLMR and Hot AC “93.5 The Heat” KLMR-FM Lamar CO after their studio building and AM transmission facilities were destroyed by a microburst on July 23.

Family Stations has turned in the licenses of the two New York City boosters for 92.7 WFME-FM Garden City NY. WFME-1 operated with 99 watts vertical from 10th Avenue and 33rd Street in Manhattan. WFME-2 operated with 1.2kW vertical from right across from JFK Airport in Queens.

Silent Notifications

Townsquare Media’s 790 KOSY Texarkana AR (Transmitter failure)

Unity Broadcasting’s 1410 WQBQ Leesburg FL (Transmitter damage from lightning strike)

Hispanic Family Christian Network’s 1550 WAZX Smyrna GA (Acquired station without transmitter site)

Hispanic Family Christian Network’s 105.5 KZOB-FM O’Brien TX (Loss of tower site due to financial difficulties)

FM Changes