lou_reed_velvet_underground.jpg

The Velvet Underground founder and Syracuse University alumnus Lou Reed gives the keynote at the SXSW Music Conference in Austin, Texas on Thursday, March 13, 2008.

(Jack Plunkett | The Associated Press)

The Velvet Underground's principal songwriter, rock legend Lou Reed, passed away Sunday of an ailment related to his recent liver transplant. He was 71.

The iconic punk poet got his start at Syracuse University, where he studied creative writing under Delmore Schwartz and met VU guitarist and back-up vocalist Sterling Morrison. Reed also hosted a late-night radio show on WAER called "Excursions On A Wobbly Rail," playing a mix of doo wop, R&B and jazz music on the campus station.

Reed graduated from SU's College of Arts and Sciences with a B.A. in 1964, and was honored in 2007 with the school's highest alumni recognition, the George Arents Award. The university released a statement Sunday night mourning the musician's death:

According to the Village Voice, Reed received Syracuse's George Arents Pioneer Medal "for excellence in the arts" at a ceremony in New York attended by Bono, David Bowie, novelist Oscar Hijuelos, SU professor Mary Karr, and 75 other friends, alumni and executives.

"Who would've believed this one?" Reed told the audience during his acceptance speech. He also fondly recalled Schwartz, whom he said he hoped to join in the "part of heaven reserved for Brooklyn poets."

Lewis Allan Reed, born March 2, 1942, in Brooklyn, never achieved commercial success with the Velvet Underground but had a top 20 hit as a solo artist with 1972's "Walk on the Wild Side." His raw lyrics and simple guitar-playing inspired generations of punk, new wave and indie rock musicians with songs he wrote like "Heroin," "Sweet Jane," "Rock & Roll," "Perfect Day," "Who Loves the Sun" and "Oh! Sweet Nuthin'."

"The first Velvet Underground record sold 30,000 copies in the first five years," producer Brian Eno once said. "I think everyone who bought one of those 30,000 copies started a band!

Reed was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1996 with his VU bandmates but also earned acclaim as a playwright, poet and photographer. His many memorable collaborators include Andy Warhol, Nico, David Bowie, Metallica and his wife of the past five years, Laurie Anderson.

"The world has lost a fine songwriter and poet," the Velvet Underground co-founder John Cale wrote on Facebook Sunday. "I've lost my 'school-yard buddy.'"