The Mad, Mad, Mad Comedians is a 1970 animated television special produced by Rankin/Bass Productions. It is a tribute to early vaudeville, and features animated reworkings of various famous comedians’ acts.

Plot[]

The majority of the special is an animated vaudeville-style show featuring numerous comedians performing the greatest skits at the palace.

In between the skits, various comedians including Henny Youngman, Jack E. Leonard, George Jessel, and Phyllis Diller tell a few funny jokes as the TV special progresses. Also making silent cameos in the crowd are Dean Martin, Jerry Lewis, Ray Charles, Charlie Chaplin (in silhouette form), The Beatles, Queen Elizabeth II, Ronald Reagan, the Munsters, Jed and Granny Clampett, and even cartoon stars including Popeye the Sailor, Charlie Brown, Tom Cat, Jerry Mouse and Yogi Bear.

Flip Wilson[]

The first sketch is Flip Wilson’s “Columbus” sketch (with audio taken directly from his 1967 Atlantic Records album Cowboys and Colored People), as Queen Isabel Johnson sends Christopher Colombus (Wilson) to the New World to find, among other things, Ray Charles.

Jack Benny and George Burns[]

The next sketch involves real-life friends Jack Benny and George Burns, driving in Jack’s infamous Maxwell over a toll bridge. To Jack’s surprise, the toll has been raised to 50¢. He won’t stand for this and George promises to back him up all the way. As they approach the traffic cop, Jack refuses to pay the toll, with no help from George, who sings one of his songs every time he is asked for support from Jack. The sketch ends with them winding up driving the Maxwell through the water under the bridge.

Groucho Marx and the Marx Brothers[]

The third sketch features Groucho Marx and the Marx Brothers, parodying the Napoleon parody act from the Brothers’ 1925 Broadway revue I’ll Say She Is, with Groucho reprising his role as Napoleon, and Chico, Zeppo, and Harpo playing his advisors Alphonse, Francois, and Gaston respectively. The other Marx Brothers are running around with his girl, Josephine. Groucho alludes to her unfaithfulness with lines like “When I returned last, you had all of France with you and a slice of Italy too.”

W. C. Fields[]

The fourth sketch presents W. C. Fields (voiced here by voice actor Paul Frees). He is on a ski slop with his future mother-in-law, but he has trouble trying to prove that he is a sportsman and impress her to marry her daughter, while at the same time he also has a comical encounter with a Saint Bernard.

The Smothers Brothers[]

The fifth and final sketch features the Smothers Brothers, playing traveling minstrels in medieval times. They sing a song about a nightingale up in a tree, trying their best to cooperate in singing to woo a princess, but their attempt doesn’t go as planned. Dick cannot get Tom to perform it in a delicate manner. Ultimately, the nightingale has the last word by dropping an egg on each of their heads.

Songs[]

“He’s a Mad, Mad, Mad Comedian”

Cast[]

Jack Benny—Himself

George Burns—Himself

Phyllis Diller—Herself

George Jessel—Himself

Jack E. Leonard—Himself

Groucho Marx—Napoleon/Himself

The Smothers Brothers—Themselves

Flip Wilson—Himself

Henny Youngman—Himself

Paul Frees—Chico Marx, Zeppo Marx, W. C. Fields, Traffic Cop, additional voices

Joan Gardner—Josephine Bonaparte, additional voices

[]