The species is one of the basic units of biological classification. Both species concepts and recognition are essential topics in taxonomic studies and other biological research. In the first part of this review, we briefly discuss the taxonomic history of the class Dothideomycetes. In the second part of the paper, we review four commonly used species concepts, focusing on morphological, ecological, biological and phylogenetic criteria and their applicability in the taxonomy of Dothideomycetes. The application and utility of the four criteria is discussed with examples in the genera Ascochyta, Cercospora and Neofusicoccum. Some problems and challenges of studying Dothideomycetes are analyzed and basic guidelines for classifying species under the above criteria are provided.

Kenaf (Hibiscus cannabinus) has been widely grown in Malaysia because of its fiber content and economic value. In October 2019, blight symptoms were observed on kenaf leaves in a plantation in Chuping, Perlis, Malaysia. The symptoms appeared as irregular, yellowish to brownish water-soaked lesions, which expanded and are accompanied by pycnidial formation in concentric rings. At severe stage, the blighted leaves became dried and defoliated. This study aimed to investigate the causal pathogen of the leaf blight of H. cannabinus. Overall, 20 fungal isolates recovered from the blighted leaves of H. cannabinus were identified as Coniella javanica based on their morphological characteristics and DNA sequences of the internal transcribed spacer (ITS) region and translation elongation factor 1-α (TEF1-α) gene. Phylogenetic analysis of combined dataset of the ITS and TEF1-α, congregated the fungal isolates with the reference isolates of C. javanica (CBS 455.68 and GUE-29). The pathogenicity of C. javanica isolates was confirmed through pathogenicity tests. To our knowledge, this is the first report of C. javanica causing the leaf blight of H. cannabinus in Malaysia.

In recent years, common bean (Phaseolus vulgaris) and cowpea (Vigna unguiculata) plants in the north of Iran exhibit symptoms resembling Cercospora leaf spot (CLS) disease. This study was initiated to elucidate the taxonomy and pathogenicity of cercosporoid taxa associated with leaf spot diseases of these two legume crops in Iran. A total of 138 samples with CLS symptoms were collected from cultivated bean species in the north of Iran and subjected to microscopic examination, resulting in a total of 98 Cercospora and 59 Pseudocercospora samples. A six‐locus phylogenetic analysis (ITS, actA, tef1, gapdh, his3 and cmdA) coupled with morphology of 42 representative isolates revealed that several cercosporoid fungi occur on common bean and cowpea in Iran. Five Cercospora species including C. iranica, C. cf. flagellaris, Cercospora sp. G, Cercospora sp. T, and C. vignigena, and two Pseudocercospora species including P. griseola f. griseola and P. cf. cruenta were found associated with legume crops in Iran; of these, C. cf. flagellaris was the dominant species, occurring on both common bean and cowpea. Pathogenicity tests confirmed that all seven species could infect leaves of common bean and/or cowpea. This is the first report of C. iranica, Cercospora sp. G and Cercospora sp. T associated with common bean and/or cowpea in the world. In addition, C. vignigena is recorded for the first time in Iran. Results achieved in this study will assist the management strategies of the CLS disease of common bean and cowpea.

Phytopathogenic cercosporoid fungi have been investigated comprehensively due to their important role in causing plant diseases. A significant amount of research has been focused on the biology, morphology, systematics, and taxonomy of this group, with less of a focus on molecular or biochemical issues. Early and extensive research on these fungi focused on taxonomy and their classification based on in vivo features. Lately, investigations have mainly addressed a combination of characteristics such as morphological traits, host specificity, and molecular analyses initiated at the end of the 20th century. Some species that are important from an economic point of view have been more intensively investigated by means of genetic and biochemical methods to better understand the pathogenesis processes. Cercosporin, a photoactivated toxin playing an important role in Cercospora diseases, has been extensively studied. Understanding cercosporin toxicity in relation to reactive oxygen species (ROS) production facilitated the discovery and regulation of the cercosporin biosynthesis pathway, including the gene cluster encoding pathway enzymes. Furthermore, these fungi may be a source of other biotechnologically important compounds, e.g., industrially relevant enzymes. This paper reviews methods and important results of investigations of this group of fungi addressed at different levels over the years.

This is a continuation of a series focused on providing a stable platform for the taxonomy of phytopathogenic fungi and fungus-like organisms. This paper focuses on one family: Erysiphaceae and 24 phytopathogenic genera: Armillaria, Barriopsis, Cercospora, Cladosporium, Clinoconidium, Colletotrichum, Cylindrocladiella, Dothidotthia,, Fomitopsis, Ganoderma, Golovinomyces, Heterobasidium, Meliola, Mucor, Neoerysiphe, Nothophoma, Phellinus, Phytophthora, Pseudoseptoria, Pythium, Rhizopus, Stemphylium, Thyrostroma and Wojnowiciella. Each genus is provided with a taxonomic background, distribution, hosts, disease symptoms, and updated backbone trees. Species confirmed with pathogenicity studies are denoted when data are available. Six of the genera are updated from previous entries as many new species have been described.