Corynespora cassiicola was first described as Helminthosporium cassiicola by Berkeley and Curtis (1868) and was reclassified to its current nomenclature by C. T. Wei (1950). Although it shares morphological characteristics with Helminthosporium, ongoing phylogenetic studies by Schlub et al. (2007) have elucidated a closer relationship with Pyrenophora. Goh et al. (1998) found that C. cassiicola was genetically distinct from several representatives of the Helminthosporium complex, although it appeared to be more closely related to the helminthosporoids than to Cercospora apii. This ascomycetous fungus belongs to the class Dothidiomyceta, of which many members are plant pathogens, epiphytes, endophytes, or saprophytes.

C. cassiicola is common to the tropics, subtropics, and greenhouse production around the world, existing as a pathogen, saprophyte, and endophyte that has only been observed as an anamorph (Schlub et al. 2007). As a pathogen, C. cassiicola can infect many economically important plants such as rubber tree (Hevea brasiliensis), tomato (Solanum lycopersicum, Lycopersicon esculentum), cucumber (Cucumis sativus), cotton (Gossypium hirsutum), tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum), and soybean (Glycine max) (Blazquez 1967; Chee 1988; Conner et al. 2013; Fajola and Alasoadura 1973; Koenning et al. 2006; Schlub et al. 2007). It was recently reported on blueberry (Vaccinium corymbosum) in central Florida in 2014 (Onofre et al. 2016) and sweet potato (Ipomoea batatas) in China in 2015 (Xu et al. 2016). The fungus has been reported to infect 380 plant genera and 530 species of plants (Smith et al. 2007) including monocots, dicots, ferns, and one cycad (Alfieri 1984).

C. cassiicola has a necrotrophic lifestyle and is a broadly adapted saprophyte that can survive on crop debris for up to 2 years (Boosalis and Hamilton 1957). Isolates collected from plant debris of papaya (Carica papaya), tomato, and cucumber were evaluated, and all isolates were pathogenic on tomato and cucumber, although the papaya isolate was nonpathogenic on papaya, demonstrating the saprophytic capability of C. cassiicola (Kingsland 1986). The fungus has also been isolated from healthy host plants on which it is nonpathogenic (Onesirosan et al. 1974), revealing epiphytic tendencies. Dixon et al. (2009) collected isolates from healthy tissue of several hosts that were pathogenic on the hosts of isolation, revealing a potential for latent infections.

Symptoms caused by C. cassiicola are common on leaves, although stems, fruits, and roots are also susceptible to disease (Jones and Jones 1984). In Illinois, C. cassiicola was isolated from cysts of the soybean nematode (Heterodera glycines), which proved to be pathogenic to soybean (Carris et al. 1986). Two cases of subcutaneous infection in humans have also been recognized (Huang et al. 2010; Yan et al. 2016), both of which were related to immunocompromised individuals. Environmental parameters for spore germination and disease development are prolonged humidity and leaf wetness for a duration of 16 to 44 h (Pernezny et al. 2000). C. cassiicola disease severity in Florida tomatoes was shown to be highest from 28 to 32°C (Pernezny et al. 2000), but in the case of Florida hydrangea isolates severity was highest at 24°C (Sobers 1965), indicating adaptations to warmer and cooler temperatures. Isolates vary greatly in colony color and morphology, growth rate, spore production, spore morphology, and production of survival structures (Ellis 1957; Schlub et al. 2007).

Spore morphology will differ depending on the substrate from which spores are collected. Typically, those that are recovered from plant tissue exemplify quintessential characteristics noted in mycological references (Ellis 1957). Ellis described the conidia as developing from the apex of conidiophores with an indeterminate growth habit that may branch or flex to a small extent. Conidiophores are distinctively melanized, appearing subhyaline to dark brown, smooth, and septate. Conidia may be solitary or connected in series, subhyaline to greenish-black, 400 to 500 μm long, 10 to 20 μm thick, and 4 to 20 pseudoseptate. Conidial shapes may include obclavate, cylindrical, or oval and may be curved or straight (Qi et al. 2011). A highly distinctive feature of conidia is the hilum, or the point of conidiophore attachment, typically appearing thicker and darker than the rest of the spore (Ellis 1957).

Although C. cassiicola elicits symptoms on a wide range of hosts, some isolates are host specific, whereas others possess a more generalized infectivity. For example, isolates collected from papaya were only pathogenic to papaya, whereas various isolates from common weeds and economically important crops elicited some level of pathogenicity on tomato (Onesirosan et al. 1974; Smith et al. 2007). Another study identified 50 isolates from nine distinct crop species that all caused disease on cucumber (Dixon et al. 2009). Some isolates have only attained pathogenicity in association with wounding (Chase 1982; Kingsland 1986; McRitchie and Miller 1973), whereas the infectivity of other isolates is exacerbated by it (Sobers 1965; Volin et al. 1989).

Although C. cassiicola is reported to have a wide host range, specific isolates may infect only one or a few hosts. Previous studies (Kingsland 1986; Onesirosan et al. 1974; Pereira et al. 2003) indicate limited host ranges of specific C. cassiicola isolates. Moreover, a few studies have addressed the phylogenetic diversity and host specialization of C. cassiicola. Dixon et al. (2009) screened 143 C. cassiicola isolates and six outgroup taxa (C. citricola, C. melongenae, C. olivacea, C. proliferata, C. sesamum, and C. smithii) with four loci (ga4, caa5, act1, and rDNA internal transcribed spacer [ITS]) that separated isolates into six distinct phylogenetic lineages (PLs). Outgroup taxa were well supported as sister taxa to C. cassiicola based on rDNA-ITS. The determined PLs correlated to host range and pathogenicity, identifying certain groups of C. cassiicola isolates pathogenic to a limited range of host plants. For example, pathogenic papaya isolates clustered in PL1 were pathogenic only to papaya, indicating host specificity. Most tomato isolates belonged to PL3 and PL4, which were primarily constructed of cucumber and basil isolates in PL3 and cucumber, bean, and sweet potato isolates in PL4. Conversely, many tomato isolates pathogenic to tomato also appeared pathogenic to various other hosts, indicating a broad host range.

Sumabat et al. (2018) genotyped 53 C. cassiicola isolates from eight crops and ornamentals from the southeastern United States with four loci described by Dixon et al. (2009). All cotton isolates from the southeastern United States were identical and formed a distinct supported clade, whereas soybean isolates were more diverse. All isolates from cotton and soybean in the southeastern United States were grouped within PL1, whereas all tomato isolates were clustered within PL4. In pathogenicity assays, cotton and tomato were more likely to be infected by nonhost isolates. However, isolates generally tended to be more aggressive on hosts they were collected from than nonhost isolates, indicating a level of host specialization. Differing population structure and diversity within and among populations of C. cassiicola in both studies by Dixon et al. (2009) and Sumabat et al. (2018) indicate a need for differing management strategies to effectively control target spot in different pathosystems.

Target Spot of Tomato

In Dixon’s work in 2009, isolates from nine crops, 12 weed species, and 18 ornamentals had some level of pathogenicity on tomato, illustrating the potential of many hosts to harbor isolates infective to tomato. This is especially important in Florida, where tomato production encompasses 33,000 acres with an estimated value of $437 million in 2014. Fresh market tomato production accounted for over a third of U.S. production based on yields (33.9%) and market value (38.5%) in the same year (NASS 2015). Given that Florida is principally subtropical and tropical in the South, the disease can be prolific, causing extensive defoliation and fruit rot if not detected early (Bliss et al. 1973).

Target spot of tomato was first described in Sierra Leone in 1936 (Deighton 1936). In 1972, the fungus was discovered in Florida, where it is now among the most destructive diseases of fruit and foliage (Blazquez 1972; Schlub et al. 2007). The pathogen is polycyclic, infecting multiple times throughout the growing season via secondary inoculum. Primary inoculum are air-disseminated conidia that have a primary release period in midmorning (Pernezny and Simone 1993) and land to infect aerial regions of the plant. Tomato plants are most susceptible at the seedling stage and just before and during fruiting (Bliss et al. 1973).

Initial target spot symptoms can easily be confused with infection by bacterial spot (Xanthomonas spp.) as dark-colored pinpoint lesions. Over time the lesions develop outward, leaving the lesion’s center a light-brown to grayish color with dark-brown margins that often develop chlorotic haloes in the case of tomato (Schlub et al. 2007). Under suitable environmental conditions, lesions can coalesce, forming large blighted areas on the leaves that cause them to drop prematurely. Target spot fruit lesions initially appear as small sunken brown flecks that progressively enlarge, becoming darker and more concave. As the fruit matures, lesions become deeply sunken, with a targeted appearance that eventually cracks in an X or star pattern (Schlub et al. 2007). Not only are infected fruit unmarketable but they can also cause significant damage via postharvest fruit rot if not detected and removed (Fajola 1979). Although the disease can infect both new and old leaves, it is more commonly found on mature leaves. It is especially prevalent in the inner canopy and can cause blighting and defoliation that goes undetected by growers, leaving them vulnerable to unperceived crop damage (Schlub et al. 2007).

Target spot has been shown to occur at temperatures as low as 20°C, with high disease severity at 28 to 32°C (Pernezny et al. 2000). Prolonged humidity and leaf wetness are the most important factors for disease development and sporulation (Schlub et al. 2007). In Florida, storms may facilitate wind-blown soil particles to cause widespread wounding of the aerial portions of the plant, increasing disease severity and development (Pernezny et al. 1996).

Yellow haloes surrounding tomato leaf lesions are thought to be caused by a host-specific toxin called C. cassiicola of tomato (CCT) toxin. Methods were described by Onesirosan et al. (1974) to purify CCT toxin, and tomato inoculations performed with the toxin revealed target spot symptoms. CCT toxin was also found to detoxify α-tomatine, a constitutively produced fungal inhibitor in tomato (Oka et al. 2006). Other documented examples of toxin production by C. cassiicola exist, including cassiicolin, a toxin produced by rubber tree (H. brasiliensis) isolates that has been purified and characterized as a small cysteine-rich glycoprotein that directly correlates with virulence (Déon et al. 2012) and lacks sequence homology with any other described toxins (de Lamotte et al. 2007).

Although host resistance is often the best method for disease suppression, there is no commercial resistance currently available for target spot. Two wild tomato accessions (L. esculentum and L. pimpinellifolium) were identified as tolerant in the past (Bliss et al. 1973), although no further breeding efforts have been afforded to target spot until recently. With only partial host resistance identified in wild tomato, difficulty lies in traditionally breeding this into commercial lines because the tolerance is contained in two wild varieties for which undesirable traits such as low yield, small fruit size, and late maturity may be associated with the transfer of genes of interest.

Rubber plantations in Sri Lanka, Malaysia, India, Thailand, and China (Jinji et al. 2007; Nghia et al. 2008; Romruensukharom et al. 2005; Saha et al. 2000; Silva et al. 1998) struggle with Corynespora leaf fall (CLF) disease and rely on resistance breeding as the most economical and environmentally friendly solution. CLF disease can result in complete defoliation of susceptible rubber trees, and all dead plant material must be uprooted and burned for inoculum suppression (Silva et al. 1998), which can be devastating to large latex-producing countries owing to investment of time on perennial trees. What is now known as the most susceptible rubber clone (RRIC 103) was almost entirely wiped out by the disease in widely cultivated areas of Asia (Chee 1988), which was intensified by a lack of management strategies (Liyanage 1987).

In Japan, where cucumber is widely cultivated year-round in greenhouses, it is economically feasible to rely on fungicidal treatments. C. cassiicola causes Corynespora leaf spot of cucumber and is among the most significant foliar diseases in Japanese greenhouses (Miyamoto et al. 2009). Fungicides are typically applied at intervals of 7 to 10 days during the growing season after the first disease incidence or seedling transplant, lasting an average of 4 to 5 months (Miyamoto et al. 2010).

Fungicide Resistance

Controlling target spot of tomato relies heavily on continuous weekly spray regimes of protectant fungicides. At times of high disease pressure and conducive environmental conditions, growers may spray up to twice a week. Disease control is typically in an integrated program with bacterial spot, which is among the most common tomato diseases in Florida. Without the use of protective fungicides, target spot has been reported to cause fruit spotting, decreasing marketable yields by 33% (Pernezny et al. 1996). Based on the 2014 tomato acreage and dollar value, this translates to losses of $4,370 per acre. The average tomato farm in Florida is roughly 800 acres, which equates to just under $3.5 million in potential revenue lost to target spot without the use of protectant fungicides.

The Fungicide Resistance Action Committee (FRAC) formed in 1981 with the goal of bringing fungicide producers together to provide farmers with durable disease control. FRAC reviews contemporary resistance knowledge to determine probabilities of resistance development in any new fungicides. FRAC aims to generally prolong fungicidal effectiveness and coordinate antiresistance strategies (Staub 1991). In the last 4 to 5 years, growers have seen greater target spot severity and incidence, and evidence is mounting to imply fungicide resistance as a key component.

C. cassiicola is listed as at high risk for development of fungicide resistance (FRAC 2014), and resistance to C. cassiicola has been elucidated in numerous crops and ornamentals, including cucumber (Ishii 2010; Miyamoto et al. 2009, 2010; Takeuchi et al. 2006), papaya (Vawdrey et al. 2008), tomato (Adkison et al. 2012), and African violet (Clark et al. 2011). Altogether, these studies tested fungicides including quinone outside inhibitors (QoI) azoxystrobin and pyraclostrobin; succinate dehydrogenase inhibitors (SDHI) boscalid, penthiopyrad, and fluopyram; demethylase inhibitors difenoconazole and tebuconazole; methionine biosynthesis inhibitors pyrimethanil, fludioxonil, and cyprodinil; and finally, the multisite/multicontact fungicides chlorothalonil and mancozeb. All products listed are labeled for use on tomato in Florida, although some are regularly used and are of greater concern for resistance development in the state.

QoIs or strobilurin-like fungicides are known to bind to the cytochrome b gene of complex III (bc1 enzyme complex) at the Qo binding site in the electron transport chain. Simply put, they inhibit normal respiration and have a very specific target site (Avenot and Michailides 2010). Fungicide resistance typically results from an alteration at the target site in the pathogen; a single site of action rather than multisite action can present greater risk in resistance development (Brent and Hollomon 1998), and QoIs in particular are considered high risk in terms of resistance development (Ishii 2010). Resistance to azoxystrobin in C. cassiicola has been elucidated in cucumber (Ishii et al. 2007; Kataoka et al. 2004), tomato (Paret et al. 2013), soybean (Basso et al. 2015), and papaya (Vawdrey et al. 2008) isolates.

Three mutations in the cytochrome b gene have been identified as responsible for reduced sensitivity to QoI fungicides. A single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) that substitutes the amino acid glycine to alanine at position 143 (G143A) confers complete resistance in multiple pathogen species (Ishii 2010). The other two mutations are driven by amino acid substitutions from phenylalanine to leucine at position 129 (F129L) and from glycine to arginine at position 137 (G137R) that elicit quantitative forms of resistance (Sierotzki et al. 2007).

These mutations may be present in resistant populations of C. cassiicola, and primers have been developed to monitor the cytochrome b gene for such SNPs by way of reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (PCR) (Banno et al. 2009), pyrosequencing (Stammler et al. 2007), allele-specific PCR (Ma and Michailides 2004), and restriction fragment length polymorphism PCR (Sierotzki et al. 2000). These techniques have been of great use in rapid detection of resistance for many pathogens (Ma and Michailides 2005), yet some techniques can present difficulties in interpretation of the results. Owing to the cytochrome b gene having multiple copies encoded by the mitochondrial genome, instability can result, decreasing the precision of such techniques in certain pathogens (Ishii 2010). Fernández Ortuño et al. (2008) reported strobilurin resistance in Podosphaera fusca that could not be determined by mutations in the cytochrome b gene, indicating pathogen specificity and a need for complete elucidation before relying solely on these techniques for detection of QoI resistance.

Another class of respiration inhibitors, originally called carboxamides, are the SDHIs. These fungicides target the mitochondrial succinate dehydrogenase enzyme in the electron transport chain (complex II). All SDHIs bind to the same ubiquinone binding site of the SDH enzyme, consisting of three subunits (B, C, and D) in the mitochondrial complex. SDHIs effectively block the tricarboxylic acid cycle from succinate to fumarate oxidation, which ultimately leads to inhibition of respiration (Avenot and Michailides 2010). These fungicides have been readily adopted by the market owing to their high level of activity and insufficient alternative controls (Sierotzki and Scalliet 2013). This has rightfully augmented the worry of high selection pressure on various pathogens.

Upon initiation and marketing of carboxamide fungicides in 1966 (Von Schmeling and Kulka 1966), all were considered narrow spectrum. In 2003, boscalid, a carboxamide with true broad-spectrum activity, was released (Glättli et al. 2011); boscalid resistance became apparent in 2007 for Alternaria alternata on pistachio (Pistacia vera L.) in California (Avenot and Michailides 2007) and has since merited attention. FRAC currently lists 18 SDHI fungicides and regards them as requiring medium-high resistance management, noting 12 pathogen species eliciting resistance in the field on 11 crops in the United States and Japan, and C. cassiicola on cucumber is among them (FRAC 2015). Binding affinity and location in Sdh subunits are thought to be integral to the inhibitory activity of a given fungicide (Avenot and Michailides 2010). SNPs in the Sdh B, C, and D subunits conferring resistance to SDHI fungicides have been identified, although it seems that pathogen species and the compound applied can cause variance in the level of resistance (Sierotzki and Scalliet 2013).

In Japan, where Corynespora leaf spot has become one of the most important foliar diseases of cucumber in year-round greenhouse production, Miyamoto et al. (2009) initially analyzed a total of 651 cucumber isolates to determine baseline sensitivity ranges to boscalid from 24 commercial greenhouses in Japan. They defined moderately resistant (MR), highly resistant (HR), and very highly resistant (VHR) isolates based on mycelial growth inhibition assays coupled with greenhouse fungicide trials. Later work by Miyamoto et al. (2010) identified amino acid substitutions in the Sdh subunits B, C, and D responsible for boscalid resistance. All 23 VHR isolates contained a substitution from histidine to tyrosine at position 278 in subunit B (B-H278Y). Also at position 278 in subunit B, a substitution of histidine to arginine (B-H278R) correlated to four HR isolates. Isolates in the MR category showed several mutations including serine to proline at position 73 in the C subunit (C-S73P) and two substitutions in subunit D at position 89 from serine to proline (D-S89P) and at position 109 from glycine to valine (D-G109V), and no commonalities were reported for mutations in MR isolates.

Several other closely related fungi in the order Pleosporales, including Alternaria on pistachio and potato and Didymella of cucurbits, have been reported as resistant to boscalid (Avenot and Michailides 2007; Gudmestad et al. 2013; Stevenson 2008). Further studies have elucidated the mutations responsible for resistance in Sdh subunits of pistachio, potato, and cucurbit isolates (Avenot et al. 2008, 2012; Mallik et al. 2014). Interestingly, the position of one of the amino acid substitutions in the Sdh gene of all three hosts was the same at subunit B, exchanging a conserved histidine residue at position 277 to either a tyrosine or arginine (B-H277Y/R). This substitution is nearly identical to what was found in Corynespora leaf spot of cucumber for VHR and HR isolates (B-H278Y/R).

Some fungicide classes elicit cross-resistance within the same chemical class (Brent and Hollomon 1998), and the constant development of new chemistries requires screening for cross-resistance to inform growers and refrain from selecting for resistance in the field. Preliminary work demonstrated cross-resistance with azoxystrobin and pyraclostrobin, as well as boscalid and penthiopyrad, in multiple tomato isolates (Adkison et al. 2012). Earlier work elucidated cross-resistance in cucumber isolates to boscalid and penthiopyrad but found that fluopyram provided excellent control of all aforementioned resistant isolates (Ishii et al. 2011). This is thought to be owing to greater intrinsic activity of fluopyram, or the strength and affinity to bind to a specific site (Yamaguchi and Fujimura 2005). However, research conducted in Florida on Botrytis of strawberry characterized mutations responsible for multifungicide resistance to boscalid, penthiopyrad, fluxapyroxad, and fluopyram (Amiri et al. 2013, 2014).

Reliance on fungicides for C. cassiicola control could lead to cross-resistance of the respiration inhibitor fungicides, which make up almost 75% of noncontact fungicides available for target spot of tomato in Florida (Vallad et al. 2017). Limiting the development of multifungicide resistance is critical to prolonging the efficacy of labeled fungicides. Unfortunately, fungicide resistance to target spot of tomato is relatively understudied and will require characterization of C. cassiicola tomato isolates to elucidate sensitivity to various fungicides.

Survivability

Controlling C. cassiicola in tomato production involves more than timely applications of fungicides. It also requires knowledge of pathogen survivability, which can uncover sources of primary inoculum. A wide host range and documented survival in crop debris of C. cassiicola (Almeida et al. 2001; Sarma and Nayudu 1971) raise concern for overseasoning isolates on nonhost plants and/or crop debris as saprophytes. Chlamydospore production by C. cassiicola as a method of overseasoning has been discovered in several host plants and isolates including cowpea (Olive et al. 1945) in vitro, eggplant (Sarma and Nayudu 1971) and cucumber (Demidova 1962) in vivo, and cucumber, Lantana camara, Malpighia glabra, and Vernonia cinerea in vivo and in vitro (Oliveira et al. 2012).

Chlamydospores can be simply defined as thick-walled, sometimes melanized, swollen hyphae. These resting structures may be found aggregating (Ellis 1971), forming within the single cells of conidia (Basu 1971; Meronuck and Pepper 1968), or develop in chains, intercalary, and terminally from vegetative hyphae (Oliveira et al. 2012). Other research has shown that chlamydospores can be important for survival in the soil (Chinn 1976), where many root pathogens produce them (Garrett 1970). Although C. cassiicola is mostly an aerial plant pathogen, it is important to explore the ability of the fungus to persist in the absence of a living host. Of even greater importance is to identify potential sources of primary inoculum, which has been well documented in other pathogens (Agrios 2005).

Little work has been done to uncover the presence of chlamydospores among tomato isolates of C. cassiicola. Oliveira et al. (2012) included one isolate from tomato that failed to produce chlamydospores in vitro by way of successive transfers described by Olive et al. (1945). In vivo testing also failed to produce chlamydospores, by analyzing hyphal growth from dead, infested plant tissue. There are currently no studies that have provided evidence for production of chlamydospores by C. cassiicola tomato isolates or their relevance in epidemiology. Thus, additional studies are needed to advance our understanding of survival, identify a potential primary inoculum source, and most importantly aid in the development of effective control strategies.

Conclusions

C. cassiicola on tomato was reported in Florida in 1972 (Blazquez 1972) and occurred sporadically but was often severe until the mid-1990s to early 2000s (Pernezny et al. 1996, 2002). The disease has since flourished in Florida’s subtropical/tropical climate (Pernezny et al. 2000; Schlub et al. 2007), and in the past decade, especially within the last 5 years, the disease has become more destructive and increasingly resilient to fungicides labeled for target spot of tomato. Increased observation of the disease in Florida has raised concerns among Florida tomato growers, who have allowed isolate collection on private farms. If we can understand the statewide distribution of fungicide resistance, we can better adapt spray recommendations to limit selection of resistance to target spot in the state.

Although many field trials have been conducted regarding fungicide efficacy (Paret et al. 2013; Pernezny et al. 1996, 2002, 2004; Vallad and Burlacu 2011), control of target spot relies on more than the application of fungicides. The increasing incidence of target spot in Florida has raised questions involving the disease’s ability to survive and potential primary inoculum sources. C. cassiicola has been reported to survive up to 2 years on soybean debris (Boosalis and Hamilton 1957), and in many areas of central and southeast Florida where large tomato production occurs, seasonal temperatures rarely drop below freezing and could facilitate overseasoning of survival structures. Other possible sources of primary inoculum could be from wind- and rain-dispersed airborne spores. However, it may be more likely that crop and weed species are harboring C. cassiicola isolates pathogenic to tomato, as has been discovered in pathogenicity assays conducted with C. cassiicola (Dixon et al. 2009; Kingsland 1986; Onesirosan et al. 1974; Shimomoto et al. 2011).

Chlamydospores have proven to be important for survival in the soil (Chinn 1976) and have been identified as sources of primary inoculum in other pathogens (Agrios 2005). Chlamydospore production has not been recorded in target spot of tomato, although understanding the survival of this disease in the soil and in plant debris will help to develop epidemiological frameworks and prevent primary inoculations in the field.