The best 90s movies do more than just deliver laughs or put you on the edge of your seat during a high-stakes adventure. They also evoke nostalgia for a period when the Cold War had recently ended, Gen X slackers made headlines, and the latest technology consisted of beepers and answering machines. The best movies of the 90s celebrate this time with stories that celebrate friendship, family and the occasional dinosaur (real or toy versions). Classic 90s movies stars and directors kept the era feeling fresh with original ideas and new approaches. This list of top 90s films includes can’t-miss titles that have become some of the most popular films ever made.

Top Films From The 1990s

This list spans genres including horror, comedy, adventure and sci-fi. The highest-grossing movie of the 90s—in fact, the No. 4 movie of all time—is Titanic, director James Cameron’s epic historical romance. Cameron joins other iconic directors on the list, including Steven Spielberg, Penny Marshall, Spike Lee and Jon Singleton.

Many of the top stars of these 1990s films, such as Tom Hanks, Brad Pitt, Reese Witherspoon, Jennifer Lopez and Angela Bassett, continue to produce fantastic work today. The oldest film is Goodfellas, the Martin Scorsese film about organized crime that came out in 1990. Enjoy exploring this list of amazing 90s films.

40. Supercop (1992)

No list of epic 90s films would be complete without Jackie Chan, the gifted martial artist who’s also a fantastic comic actor. He goes undercover and teams up with future Oscar winner Michelle Yeoh in the buddy cop film set in Hong Kong.

Directed by Stanley Tong, the R-rated film was such a critical and box office success that it spurred a sequel, First Strike. You can watch Supercop on AppleTV+, Amazon Prime Video, Google Play Movies & TV and Vudu.

39. Se7en (1995)

A young Brad Pitt and Gwyneth Paltrow star alongside Morgan Freeman in this R-rated film about a serial killer (Kevin Spacey) whose murders pay homage to the seven deadly sins. It features one of the most shocking endings of the 90s.

David Fincher’s movie was a huge box office and critical winner. You can watch Se7en on Max, YouTube, AppleTV+, Amazon Prime Video, Google Play Movies & TV and Vudu.

38. Saving Private Ryan (1998)

Spielberg’s first film on the list features a group of soldiers led by Hanks on a mission to find Private Ryan and send him home after his brothers have been killed in World War II. The R-rated movie has a strong cast, including Matt Damon, Vin Diesel, Tom Sizemore and Edward Burns.

You can watch Saving Private Ryan on Paramount+, Roku Channel, YouTube, AppleTV+, Amazon Prime Video, Google Play Movies & TV and Vudu.

37. Silence of the Lambs (1991)

“Hello, Clarice.” Those words reverberated through the thriller and horror genres, introducing a man so utterly evil (and so perfectly played by Oscar winner Anthony Hopkins) that all movie villains since have been measured against him. A brilliant Jodie Foster plays Clarice Starling, a young FBI profiler using Hopkins’ Hannibal Lecter to help stop another serial killer.

Jonathan Demme directed the R-rated film based on Thomas Harris’ bestselling book. You can watch Silence of the Lambs on Philo, Sling, YouTube, AppleTV+, Amazon Prime Video, Google Play Movies & TV and Vudu.

36. Fight Club (1999)

Pitt makes multiple appearances on this list, including in this R-rated movie also starring Edward Norton about an underground fight club with the motto, “The first rule of Fight Club is: you do not talk about Fight Club. The second rule of Fight Club is: you do not talk about Fight Club!”

The David Fincher film based on the Chuck Palahniuk novel received strong critical acclaim and earned an Oscar nod for sound editing. You can watch Fight Club on Sling, YouTube, AppleTV+, Amazon Prime Video, Google Play Movies & TV and Vudu.

35. Forrest Gump (1994)

Hanks, who’d already become an 80s movie icon, won his second consecutive Best Actor Oscar for Forrest Gump, playing the slow but kind and loyal Forrest as he bumps in and out of some of the biggest moments in 20th century history while pining for troubled childhood friend Jenny (Robin Wright).

Director Robert Zemeckis’ PG-13 film also spurred tons of famous quotes, from “Run, Forrest, run!” to “Life is like a box of chocolates.” and “That’s all I have to say about that.” You can watch Forrest Gump on Paramount+, Sling, YouTube, AppleTV+, Amazon Prime Video, Google Play Movies & TV and Vudu.

34. Boyz n the Hood (1991)

Jon Singleton’s Oscar-nominated drama about a Black young man (Cuba Gooding Jr.) coming of age while dodging neighborhood gangs and trying to meet the high expectations of his father (Laurence Fishburne) is a gem. Strong directing, writing and acting made this one of the best-reviewed films of the decade.

You can watch the R-rated Boyz n the Hood on Netflix, Sling TV, Amazon Prime Video, Vudu, Google Play Movies & TV and Apple TV+.

33. Fargo (1996)

“Oh geez!” Ethan and Joel Coen were already well known before the R-rated Fargo, but this cemented them as two of Hollywood’s most talented and creative directors, writers and producers. It stars William H. Macy as a man who pays to have his wife kidnapped to get her dad to pay ransom. Oscar-winner Frances McDormand co-stars as a local police chief trying to piece together Macy’s crimes.

Of course, none of it goes as anticipated, leading to lots of Midwest intrigue and an unforgettable finale with a wood chipper. You can watch Fargo on Hulu, Roku Channel, Max, YouTube, AppleTV+, Amazon Prime Video, Google Play Movies & TV and Vudu.

32. Election (1999)

Teenage overachiever Tracy Flick (Reese Witherspoon) is determined to win her high school election for class president, and depressed teacher Jim McAllister (Matthew Broderick) is equally bent on making her lose in Alexander Payne’s black-comedy satire. The R-rated film had modest box office success but has become a cult smash.

You can watch Election on Hulu, Max, Roku Channel, YouTube, AppleTV+, Amazon Prime Video, Google Play Movies & TV and Vudu.

31. Waiting to Exhale (1996)

The first of two Terry McMillan adaptations on the list (and one of four Bassett films), Waiting to Exhale follows close friends, including Bassett, Whitney Houston and Loretta Devine, who can’t seem to find good men—and learn why they’re so much more than their relationships. Forest Whitaker directed the R-rated film.

You can watch Waiting to Exhale on Hulu, Sling, YouTube, AppleTV+, Amazon Prime Video, Google Play Movies & TV and Vudu.

30. The Matrix (1999)

The first film in the hugely successful franchise starring Keanu Reeves, Carrie-Anne Moss and Fishburne, Matrix follows Neo (Reeves) as he tries to figure out what the Matrix is while fighting in the underworld. Lana and Lilly Wachowski directed the R-rated sci-fi blockbuster that introduced the concept of blue and red pills.

You can watch The Matrix on Max, YouTube, AppleTV+, Amazon Prime Video, Google Play Movies & TV and Vudu.

29. The Truman Show (1998)

Jim Carrey’s first significant dramatic role became more prophetic than anyone could have imagined back then. He plays a young man whose entire life is, unbeknownst to him, a popular reality show. He and Laura Linney navigate scenarios set up by the TV show’s director Ed Harris.

Director Peter Weir’s PG-rated film was a commercial and critical success. You can watch The Truman Show on Philo, Roku Channel, Paramount+, Sling, YouTube, AppleTV+, Amazon Prime Video, Google Play Movies & TV and Vudu.

28. Selena (1997)

Jennifer Lopez plays the young Tejano singer on the cusp of mega-stardom when she’s murdered by a fan. It marked Lopez’s breakout role, earning her a Golden Globe nod. Director Gregory Nava brings a nuanced hand to the family dynamics (Edward James Olmos plays Selena’s dad) in the PG film.

You can watch Selena on YouTube, AppleTV+, Amazon Prime Video, Google Play Movies & TV and Vudu.

27. My Family (1995)

Lopez and Olmos star in this movie, too, alongside Jimmy Smits, about a family’s generational journey from Mexico to America and how they deal with the social and political upheaval around them. Nava also directed this indie film, rated PG.

You can watch My Family on YouTube, AppleTV+, Amazon Prime Video, Google Play Movies & TV and Vudu.

26. The Joy Luck Club (1993)

This beautifully shot R-rated film, based on Amy Tan’s bestselling novel, traces the relationship between four Chinese immigrant women and their daughters. Director Wayne Wang’s talented cast includes Kieu Chinh and Ming-Na Wen.

You can watch The Joy Luck Club on YouTube, AppleTV+, Amazon Prime Video, Google Play Movies & TV and Vudu.

25. Menace II Society (1993)

Generational talents Albert and Allen Hughes made their directorial debuts with this R-rated coming-of-age film about a teen (Tyrin Turner) who tries to escape the life of crime and gangs around him, amidst unexpected tragedy. The cast also includes Jada Pinkett Smith and Samuel L. Jackson.

You can watch Menace II Society on Hulu, Roku Channel, Paramount+, Sling, fuboTV, YouTube, AppleTV+, Amazon Prime Video, Google Play Movies & TV and Vudu.

24. What's Love Got to Do With It (1993)

Bassett’s second film on the list is the R-rated Tina Turner biopic that follows the singer’s early years crooning in church to her superstardom under the tutelage of Ike Turner (Fishburne)—who also physically and emotionally abuses the gifted young woman. Brian Gibson directed the film, which earned Bassett an Oscar nomination.

You can watch What’s Love Got to Do With It on YouTube, AppleTV+, Amazon Prime Video, Google Play Movies & TV and Vudu.

23. Jurassic Park (1993)

“Welcome to Jurassic Park!” With that introduction, Sam Neill, Laura Dern and Jeff Goldblum discover that — surprise! — reanimating long-deceased dinosaurs may not be the best idea in Spielberg’s stylish and fun take on the classic Michael Crichton novel. The huge PG-13 commercial hit spawned more than two decades of sequels and reboots.

You can watch Jurassic Park on Netflix, YouTube, AppleTV+, Amazon Prime Video, Google Play Movies & TV and Vudu.

22. The Usual Suspects (1995)

Bryan Singer’s low-budget mystery features a stellar cast, including Benicio del Toro, Gabriel Byrne and Spacey, who utters the famous line, “The greatest trick the devil ever pulled was convincing the world he didn't exist.” The R-rated film follows a detective trying to pin down criminal mastermind Keyser Soze—who may not exist.

You can watch The Usual Suspects on Philo, Pluto TV, Roku Channel, tubi, Sling, YouTube, AppleTV+, Amazon Prime Video, Google Play Movies & TV and Vudu.

21. The Big Lebowski (1998)

The Coen brothers’ second film on the list is a classic tale of mistaken identity, where The Dude (perfectly cast Jeff Bridges) is mistaken for a millionaire, who later gives The Dude and his loser pals (John Goodman and Steve Buscemi) an assignment they bungle spectacularly.

The R-rated film has become a cult classic with quotes like, “The Dude abides.” You can watch The Big Lebowski on YouTube, AppleTV+, Amazon Prime Video, Google Play Movies & TV and Vudu.

20. Groundhog Day (1993)

Cynical weatherman Phil (Bill Murray) has covered enough Groundhog Days for a lifetime—so he’s dismayed to find himself stuck in a loop, reliving the same day over and over again. It isn’t until he starts to see the bright side that he escapes the Punxsutawney nightmare.

Famous lines of the Harold Ramis-directed PG film include, “Okay, campers, rise and shine, and don't forget your booties 'cause it's cooooold out there today.” You can watch Groundhog Day on Philo, Roku Channel, Sling, YouTube, AppleTV+, Amazon Prime Video, Google Play Movies & TV and Vudu.

19. The Sixth Sense (1999)

Yet another film with a fantastic final twist, Sixth Sense stars Haley Joel Osment as Cole, a child who can see dead people. Bruce Willis plays his psychologist, who has troubles of his own, and Toni Collete is featured as his mom. M. Night Shyamalan earned a Best Director Oscar nod for the PG-13 movie.

You can watch The Sixth Sense on YouTube, AppleTV+, Amazon Prime Video, Google Play Movies & TV and Vudu.

18. A League of Their Own (1992)

There’s no crying in baseball, but there is a lot of laughter in this PG-rated movie about the women’s pro baseball league that started during World War II while the male pros were overseas. The based-on-a-true-story film was one of director Penny Marshall’s biggest hits.

The superlative cast includes Geena Davis, Lori Petty, Rosie O’Donnell, Madonna and Hanks—his third film on the list so far. You can watch A League of Their Own on YouTube, AppleTV+, Amazon Prime Video, Google Play Movies & TV and Vudu.

17. Casino (1995)

Scorsese’s first film on the list adapts Nicholas Pileggi’s book about a mobster in 1970s Las Vegas whose operation gets more and more out of control. Robert DeNiro, Joe Pesci and Sharon Stone star in the critically acclaimed R-rated film.

As the narrator says, “In the casino, the cardinal rule is to keep them playing and to keep them coming back. The longer they play, the more they lose.” You can watch Casino on Hulu, Roku Channel, Philo, YouTube, AppleTV+, Amazon Prime Video, Google Play Movies & TV and Vudu.

16. Men in Black (1997)

Few movies are as fun as Men in Black, the PG-13 film pairing an exuberant young Will Smith and a perfectly reserved Tommy Lee Jones as unlikely partners tracking down extraterrestrials while keeping their adventures quiet.

The Barry Sonnenfeld-directed movie sparked a lot of good quotes, such as: “You are a rumor, recognizable only as déjà vu and dismissed just as quickly. You don't exist; you were never even born.” And: “A person is smart. People are dumb, panicky, dangerous animals and you know it.” You can watch Men in Black on Hulu, fuboTV, Sling, YouTube, AppleTV+, Amazon Prime Video, Google Play Movies & TV and Vudu.

15. How Stella Got Her Groove Back (1998)

Bassett returns to the list with this steamy R-rated romance, based on the Terry McMillan novel, about a successful fortysomething businesswoman who has a vacation fling with a much younger man (Taye Diggs). When she brings him home, they struggle to make their love work off the island.

Kevin Rodney Sullivan directed the film. You can watch How Stella Got Her Groove Back on Roku Channel, Hulu, YouTube, AppleTV+, Amazon Prime Video, Google Play Movies & TV and Vudu.

14. Jerry Maguire (1996)

“Did you know the human head weighs eight pounds?” Jerry Maguire (Tom Cruise) learns that fun fact and so much more in this movie about a sports agent whose crisis of conscience leaves him with one client and one employee—single mom Renee Zellweger, with whom he falls in love.

Cameron Crowe wrote and directed the R-rated film. You can watch Jerry Maguire on tubi, Roku Channel, YouTube, AppleTV+, Amazon Prime Video, Google Play Movies & TV and Vudu.

13. Set It Off (1996)

Jada Pinkett, Queen Latifah, Vivica A. Fox and Kimberly Elise play friends struggling with their finances who become bank robbers. John C. McGinley plays the cop on their tails. F. Gary Gray directed the R-rated film.

You can watch Set It Off on tubi, YouTube, AppleTV+, Amazon Prime Video, Google Play Movies & TV and Vudu.

12. The Fugitive (1993)

Dr. Richard Kimble (Harrison Ford) makes a daring escape from custody after being convicted of murdering his wife. Kimble claims he’s innocent and sets out to prove it as U.S. Marshals (led by Oscar winner Tommy Lee Jones) close in. Ford famously says, “I didn’t kill my wife,” and Jones replies, “I don’t care.”

Andrew Davis directed the PG-13 picture, which spawned a Jones-led sequel. You can watch The Fugitive on AppleTV+, Amazon Prime Video, Google Play Movies & TV and Vudu.

11. Scream (1996)

Wes Craven’s snappy satire starring Neve Campbell and Skeet Ulrich scrambled the horror genre, sparking new life in tired tropes like the deranged killer. The murderer targets Sidney (Campbell) and her friends on the anniversary of her mom’s murder.

Courteney Cox plays a newswoman in the R-rated film, and Drew Barrymore makes a cameo as an ill-fated babysitter. You can watch Scream on AppleTV+, Amazon Prime Video, Google Play Movies & TV and Vudu.

10. GoodFellas (1990)

Henry Hill (Ray Liotta) works his way up the mafia chain, dealing with drug arrests, infidelity, hits and an amazing soundtrack, in Scorsese’s classic, which earned Joe Pesci an Oscar for Best Supporting Actor. Paul Sorvino, DeNiro and Lorraine Bracco also star in the critically acclaimed R-rated movie.

You can watch GoodFellas on Sling, Philo, Roku Channel, AppleTV+, Amazon Prime Video, Google Play Movies & TV and Vudu.

9. Hoop Dreams (1994)

The only documentary on the list, Steve James’ PG-13 film was a sensation upon its release. It follows Black teens Arthur Agee and William Gates, who seemed headed for basketball stardom, as they balance their home lives in inner-city Chicago and their school lives at a basketball powerhouse in the white suburbs.

It took five years to shoot the low-budget film, which won the Audience Award for Best Documentary at Sundance. You can watch Hoop Dreams on Philo, Crackle, fuboTV, Max, Paramount+, Sling, Hulu, Roku Channel, AppleTV+, Amazon Prime Video, Google Play Movies & TV and Pluto TV.

8. Titanic (1997)

Titanic tells the doomed love story of Rose (Kate Winslet) and Jack (Leonardo DiCaprio). At the time, it was the highest-grossing movie ever (director James Cameron’s next big-budget movie, Avatar, eventually passed Titanic).

It gave birth to a slew of famous quotes, from, “Jack, I want you to draw me.” to “Promise me you’ll survive.” to “I’m the king of the world!” and “A woman’s heart is a deep ocean of secrets.” You can watch Titanic on Sling, Hulu, Roku Channel, Paramount+, fuboTV, YouTube, AppleTV+, Amazon Prime Video, Google Play Movies & TV and Vudu.

7. Good Will Hunting (1997)

Matt Damon and Ben Affleck rose to stardom by writing and starring in this film about the troubled genius Will (Damon), who attacks a police officer and must get treatment from a therapist (Oscar winner Robin Williams, doing his best work) to make the trouble go away. Gus Van Sant directed the R-rated film.

You can watch Good Will Hunting on Hulu, Max, YouTube, AppleTV+, Amazon Prime Video, Google Play Movies & TV and Vudu.

6. Malcolm X (1992)

No list of top films is complete without a Spike Lee picture, and this is one of the director’s best. An inspired Denzel Washington plays Malcolm X, whose complicated and controversial life pushing for Black liberation ended in an assassination. Bassett plays his wife.

You can watch the PG-13-rated Malcolm X on Sling, Max, YouTube, AppleTV+, Amazon Prime Video, Google Play Movies & TV and Vudu.

5. There’s Something About Mary (1998)

You can’t beat directors Bobby and Peter Farrelly for flat-out hilarity, and this R-rated film about Ted (Ben Stiller), who still pines for his perfect high school prom date, Mary (Cameron Diaz), who has a line of suitors out the door.

It inspired loads of hilarious scenes (one involving “hair gel”) and the quote, “We’ve got a bleeder!” You can watch There’s Something About Mary on Philo, Hulu, Roku Channel, Sling, YouTube, AppleTV+, Amazon Prime Video, Google Play Movies & TV and Vudu.

4. Toy Story (1995)

Arguably the best animated film of all time, Toy Story proposes a world where toys come to life when kids aren’t playing with them. The G movie follows the tension that emerges when longtime alpha toy Woody (voiced by Hanks) must make way for a new toy, Buzz (Tim Allen).

The soundtrack includes the classic song “You’ve Got a Friend in Me,” and it’s the origin of the catchphrase, “To infinity and beyond.” You can watch Toy Story on Disney+, YouTube, AppleTV+, Amazon Prime Video, Google Play Movies & TV and Vudu.

3. Thelma & Louise (1991)

Thelma (Davis) and Louise (Susan Sarandon) go on a girls’ trip and then hit the lam after Louise kills a man who tries to rape Thelma. Pitt plays the sexy young man who restores Thelma’s faith in men ... at least at first. The Ridley Scott film is another with a can’t-forget ending.

You can watch the R-rated Thelma & Louise on Roku Channel, YouTube, AppleTV+, Amazon Prime Video, Google Play Movies & TV and Vudu.

2. Schindler's List (1993)

Spielberg’s affecting masterpiece follows Oskar Schindler (Liam Neeson), who goes from capitalist to lifesaver as a businessman in World War II-era Germany. Schindler insists on keeping his Jewish workers in his factory, effectively keeping them safe. Ralph Fiennes is brilliant as an SS officer.

You can watch the R-rated Schindler’s List on YouTube, AppleTV+, Amazon Prime Video, Google Play Movies & TV and Vudu.

1. The Shawshank Redemption (1994)

Andy (Tim Robbins) is sent to prison for murdering his wife and her lover—but like Dr. Richard Kimble, he swears he didn’t do it. While doing time, he meets Red (Morgan Freeman) and establishes a lifelong friendship as Andy struggles to redeem his life.

Frank Darabont directed the movie based on the Stephen King novella. You can watch The Shawshank Redemption on Sling, Roku Channel, Philo, YouTube, AppleTV+, Amazon Prime Video, Google Play Movies & TV and Vudu.

Bottom Line

From wrongly convicted murders to women putting their lives back together to hilarious rom-coms, this list has it all. The best 90s movies continue to entertain three decades after their release, and you will enjoy whatever genre you choose.