UD Melilla live scores, players, season schedule and today’s results are available on Sofascore.

UD Melilla next match

UD Melilla will play the next match against Real Murcia on Aug 14, 2024, 5:00:00 PM UTC in Club Friendly Games.

When the match starts, you will be able to follow Real Murcia vs UD Melilla live score, standings, minute by minute updated live results and match statistics.

We may have video highlights with goals and news for some UD Melilla matches, but only if they play their match in one of the most popular football leagues.

UD Melilla previous match

UD Melilla previous match was against Xerez CD in Club Friendly Games, the match ended with result 1 - 2 (Xerez CD won the match).

UD Melilla fixtures tab is showing the last 100 football matches with statistics and win/draw/lose icons.

There are also all UD Melilla scheduled matches that they are going to play in the future.

UD Melilla performance and form graph is a Sofascore unique algorithm that we are generating from the team's last 10 matches, statistics, detailed analysis and our own knowledge.

This graph may help predict future UD Melilla matches.

Current UD Melilla players

Forward: Jeisson Martínez, Beka Kavtaradze, Carlos Bravo, Iván Fernández Tamayo, Ivan Ramos, Victor Morillo Midfielder: Adria Arjona Marin, Armando Corbalán, Manu Galan Defender: Isma Armenteros, Diego Ceballos, Jose Manuel Alonso, Daniel Hernández Cabeza, Sergio Mendinueta Goalkeeper: Eduardo Loscos, Adrián Romero

The current UD Melilla roster, stats and player performance can be found on this page.

There are also statistics for each player in all competitions with all total played and started matches, minutes played, number of goals scored, number of cards and much more.

UD Melilla top scorers list is updated live during every match.

You can click on players from the roster above and see available personal information such as nationality, date of birth, height, preferred foot, position, player value, transfer history etc.