The Dugong (Dugong dugon), or sea cows, are marine mammals which can grow to about three metres in length and weigh as much as 400 kilograms.1.

The name sea cow refers to the fact that they graze on seagrass.

As dugongs feed, whole plants are excavated and telltale grazing trails are left behind.

Dugong are more closely related to elephants than to other marine mammals such as whales and dolphins, but their closest living aquatic relatives are the manatees. Manatees are aquatic mammals that live in freshwater rivers and coastal waters of West Africa, the Caribbean, South America and the southern United States (Florida)1.

Dugongs are globally classed as “Vulnerable to Extinction” by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) Red List of Threatened Species, but it is recognised that data are often insufficient for making an accurate status assessment across much of the dugong’s range2.

The largest populations are found in Australia, followed by the United Arab Emirates (UAE), but the range stretches across some 40 countries in tropical and sub-tropical zones where seagrass is abundant.

Seagrass meadows are a major food source for a number of grazing animals (including Dugongs) and are considered very productive pastures of the sea. An adult dugong eats about 28 to 40 kilograms (wet weight) a day. As dugongs graze on seagrass, whole plants are excavated and grazing trails are left behind.

Although dugongs will feed on any seagrass species within their range, if a range of species is available, they select seagrass species for food which are high nitrogen, high starch and low fibre.

Dugongs expand their diet opportunistically when seagrass meadows are seriously depleted by natural or human-induced seagrass loss. Dugongs may also change their diet on a seasonal basis especially when their access to some seagrass meadows is limited by water temperature.2.

Dugongs are globally classed as “Vulnerable to Extinction” by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) Red List of Threatened Species.

The close association between dugongs and seagrass is likely to have contributed to their status as an endangered species in some parts of the world. As dugongs must often come near to the shore to graze, they are left vulnerable to unfavourable human interactions, including death or injury from vessel strikes. In developed countries, the key threat is often degradation and loss of habitat through coastal development with its associated dredging and pollution, as well as incidental catch by gill net fisheries and damage to seagrass from fishing by trawling.

The situation differs in developing nations: in some areas, dugong hunting still takes place even when it is illegal and a dugong can represent a valuable catch to be sold or to provide protein for communities struggling with insufficient food resources. Incidental catch in artisanal fisheries is another negative impact. Dugongs are often worth more dead than alive, and accidentally catching a dugong in a net can represent a windfall of meat (and money) for a fisher and their family. As the majority of dugong range states are developing nations, effective conservation measures need to take this into account and work the needs of the local population to achieve results2.