TRACY GRAMMER rose to acclaim as half of the “postmodern, mythic American folk” duo, Dave Carter & Tracy Grammer. From 1998-2001, the duo released three internationally celebrated, folk chart-topping albums and toured with Joan Baez, both as featured artists and Baez’s band members. Called “the new voice of modern folk music,” the duo was clearly in its ascendancy when in July 2002, Carter suffered a fatal heart attack while the duo was on tour in Massachusetts. He was 49; Grammer, 34.

Determined to honor the duo’s journey and bring Carter’s award-winning songs, and those of other favorite writers, to broader audiences, Grammer kept to the road and now tours internationally, releasing solo albums as well as recovered and reclaimed Dave Carter & Tracy Grammer material.

Grammer is Renowned for her springwater-clear alto, perfectly intoned violin, and guitar playing that is by turns percussive and delicate, Grammer has also become a masterful storyteller with an ease and charisma on stage -accompanied by a great sense of humor. Today Tracy visits with us about how her creative process has changed over the years along with her identity, stories of frightening and delightful performances and more!

On this episode of the Live Feed, KQAL’s Juan Galarza and Robert Pack visit with the frontman of Trampleed by Turtles. The three discuss touring, writing, what it feels like being on stage and more. You’re listening to The Live Feed.

Thanks again to Dave Simmonette for visiting with us on The Live Feed. More information on Dave can be found at trampledbyturltes.com

You’re listening to The Live Feed and our coverage of Dave Simmonette with Erik Koskinen, Timmuy Saxlar and JT Bass. We now turn it back to Juan Galarza and Robert Pack and their interview with Dave.

You have been listening to the sounds of Dave Simmonett on The Live Feed. We now return to our interview with Dave hosted by Juan Galarza and Robert Pack

Today on “The Live Feed” we take you back to Live at the Levee Holiday Edition, with the “String Ties Band.” The tight harmonies, powerful instrumentals, and good natured fun of this dynamic group have delighted audiences of all ages for more than a decade at parties, festivals, weddings, and every where the joy of great music is celebrated. We’ll interview a couple members of the band, including one that has an interesting story about being on television. And we will hear part of their set from the holiday edition of Live at the Levee.