Richard Davies, Emeritus Archivist, Leeds Russian Archive, writes 22nd October 2020, is the 150th anniversary of the birth of Ivan Bunin, the first Russian writer to be awarded the Nobel Prize for Literature (1933). The occasion is being marked in Russia by exhibitions and conferences and also in Paris, where Bunin lived in exile from Soviet Russia from 1920 until his death in 1953. Bunin’s papers and books were donated to the University of Leeds in 1983 by their last private owner and are one of the most important and heavily used collections in the Leeds Russian Archive. The University also owns and administers the Bunin literary estate.

The combined ownership by the University of manuscripts, photographs, books etc and literary rights is unusual and has practical advantages. For instance, many scanned items from the Leeds Russian Archive are currently on display in the main Bunin anniversary exhibition at the House of Russia Abroad in Moscow, and the University has encouraged the publication for the anniversary of 8 volumes of selected prose and poetry by Bunin translated into Armenian, Bulgarian (2), Danish, French (2), German and Portuguese.

The nature of Bunin’s writing makes it particularly difficult to translate him well. In spite of this his reputation as a classic of Russian literature before the Revolution and the public prominence given him by his Nobel Prize meant that his works were translated, in his lifetime and since, into all the main European languages and also others.

The award of the Nobel Prize to Bunin was preceded by a long campaign. His candidature was not unanimously supported in Russian émigré circles and the newspapers they published. The Soviet Union did everything possible to sabotage the award of the prize to an émigré. Gradually, however, positive opinions of Bunin’s worthiness accumulated in the relevant Swedish circles and committees, all the other essential factors came together and Bunin was announced as the laureate for 1933.

After the collapse of the Soviet Union 30 years ago, Bunin and other Russian émigré writers attracted wide public and scholarly attention as alternatives to discredited Soviet ideology and culture. Thanks to the undisputed high quality of his works endorsed by his Nobel Prize, and as a member of the dispossessed Russian landed gentry who became the dean of Russian émigré literature, Bunin soon achieved “iconic” status in post-Soviet Russia.