Norway House Foundation (NHF) funds programs promoting educational and cultural exchange between Northern California and Norway. We support fellowships for Norwegian students to study in Northern California, scholarly exchange between Norway and Northern California, and programs of Norwegian cultural interest.

NHF is dedicated to honoring and preserving the memory of the Norwegian seafarers who risked their lives for the Allied cause in World War II.

“We hope that in a small way we are returning to Norway the assistance that the seamen from Norway received from the original Norway House, established by Mr. Christensen’s gift and funded in part for many years by the Norwegian government.”

Grant Programs Offered

To support its mission, Norway House Foundation is offering two grant programs.

NHF Gradute Fellowships may be used for tuition, room and board, books, and travel expenses. Awards may be renewable, depending upon the candidate’s academic progress, program requirements and performance.

NHF Cultural, Charitable, and Professional Grants supports cultural, charitable and professional development programs that further the Norway House Foundation’s mission.

Learn more about our grant programs >>

History of Norway House Foundation

The foundation has its origin in the Second World War when Norwegian sailors were stranded in San Francisco between ship assignments. Lars Christensen, Sr., a Norwegian shipowner, agreed to purchase a house in the city to serve as a temporary residence for sailors.

Norway House was established as a California non-profit, charitable corporation in 1942, and title to the property was transferred to the corporation. When shipping changed, and Norwegian sailors stopped coming to the San Francisco Bay area, the property was sold, and the funds formed the basis for Norway House Foundation.

Learn more about our history >>

Partner Organizations

Organizations aligned with our mission of promoting educational and cultural exchange between Northern California and Norway and honoring and preserving the memory of the Norwegian seafarers who risked their lives for the Allied cause in World War II.