Have you throught through what would happen if everyone across your company had access to redirecting payments from your largest customers to another bank account, for example their own? Does your organisation have a structured approach to how digital identities are provisioned, reviewed and offboarded and does it align with the risk exposure that the company is willing to tolerate? In this webinar Pål Myren of ZTL, Anna-Karin Østlie from Kantega SSO and Andy Fernandez from HYCU, Inc. discuss the importance of strong digital identity access management routines and share examples of how companies can reduce exposure to unintentional business risks and improve their compliance position with a well thought through approach to IAM. https://lnkd.in/d6Exz587 Marit Collin Frode Standal Jon Espen Ingvaldsen, PhD Simen Burhol Elias Brattli Sørensen Ksawery Buczkowski Dave Rosenlund Skule Johansen Mari Helene Fuglem Erik Turøy Midtun Gløer Langslet Espen A. Fossen Martin (高馬丁) Skarsaune Michael Svendsen Andrea Kristine Lysgaard Erland Rustebakke Camilla E. Wadseth Audhild Kårstad Tormod Skåle

Time is running out for European financial institutions to ensure compliance with the Digital Operational Resilience Act (DORA). Identity Access Management plays an important role in achieving compliance with this important regulation designed to protect our financial ecosystem and to make sure it stays resilient in the event of severe operational digital disruption. In this article our CEO Anna-Karin Østlie explains how Identity Access Management, Single Sign On and Automated User Offboarding can help companies throughout the sector achieve DORA Compliance. https://lnkd.in/dQ2GHZj8 Kantega Marit Collin Frode Standal Camilla E. Wadseth Audhild Kårstad Erland Rustebakke Tormod Skåle Abid Ali Teepo Steinar Line Elias Brattli Sørensen Ksawery Buczkowski Simen Burhol August Heltne Skule Johansen Mari Helene Fuglem Gløer Langslet Erik Turøy Midtun Jon Espen Ingvaldsen, PhD Bogdan V. Dave Rosenlund Andy Fernandez Pål Myren Kirsti Merethe Tranby

Designed to protect around 22 000 financial institutions and ICT providers across Europe. 7 months left to make sure you are compliant. We in Kantega SSO are looking forward to sharing our perspective on DORA (the Digital Operational Resilience Act) and a practical guide on how to ensure compliance in time before January 2025 together with Pål Myren and Andy Fernandez on June 19th. Come join us! Registrations are now open on https://lnkd.in/gc48DxXX Anna-Karin Østlie Simen Burhol Steinar Line Elias Brattli Sørensen Marit Collin Skule Johansen Frode Standal Frode Wærnes Dave Rosenlund Jon Espen Ingvaldsen, PhD Erik Turøy Midtun Gløer Langslet Mari Helene Fuglem August Heltne Ksawery Buczkowski Mats Johan Pedersen Bogdan V. HYCU, Inc. ZTL

Please, welcome Ksawery! Ksawery Buczkowski, a Systems Architect and Developer at Kantega SSO in Norway, stands out for his expertise in Java, focusing on delivering high-performance, scalable, and secure authentication systems with a keen attention to user experience. Passionate about good user experience and features for power users, striking a balance between usability and extensive configuration options. Ksawery with Simen will try to answer all your questions. Join them on Kantega SSO – Much more then effortless security. Join us on More Than Jira 2024 https://wiecejnizjira.pl/ Kantega SSO Almarise Atlassian #Jira #confluence #workmanagment #bestpractise

The beautiful capital of Hessen. The gate to the Rheingau wine district. We are delighted to be in #Wiesbaden at the #SeibertMedia Camp Mars Edition together with 20 great teams working on exciting innovations based on Forge. Thank you so much for your hospitality Martin Seibert Thamara Adler Karolin Kutter Julian Wolf Gabriele Rusch Paul Herwarth von Bittenfeld and all your great colleagues! 🙏 Elias Brattli Sørensen Erik Turøy Midtun Gløer Langslet Simen Burhol Anna-Karin Østlie