Joyalukkas hosted brand ambassador, Sherya Ghoshal at Joyalukkas Al Rai showroom located in Lulu Hypermarket on 26th July, 2013. The visit was a part of a special Middle-East road-show planned by Joyalukkas with Brand Ambassador to give her a first hand experience of a couple of Joyalukkas Middle-East showrooms and get her to meet & interact with the Joyalukkas customer base.

“The association with Shreya the princess of melody has been wonderful and hence we thought it would be great if we get her to the Middle-East and let her experience some of our showrooms here. Also we feel it’s a great idea for her to meet & greet our customers who are her big fans. This trip also commences our mission to achieve the ‘100 jewellery showrooms across 10 countries’ milestone and the announcement of the opening of 3 showrooms in Panasonic Tower, Kuwait i.e. Joyalukkas Jewellery, Joyalukkas Money Exchange & Jolly Silks”, said Joy Alukkas, Chairman, Joyalukkas Group.

The Joyalukkas showroom located in Lulu Hypermarket, Kuwait is currently the flagship showroom of the brand in Kuwait and is one of the favourite destinations for jewellery shoppers in the country. The showroom features over a million choices in gold, diamond, platinum, precious stone, polki, platinum and pearl.

“We are associated with Shreya, thanks to her immense popularity and we thought we should use the association and give our customers and her fans an opportunity to meet her live. She received a fantastic response both is Dubai and Kuwait and thoroughly enjoyed her trip,” said John Paul Joy Alukkas, Executive Director, Joyalukkas Group.

During Shreya Ghoshal’s visit, Joyalukkas also announced mega expansion plans of their money exchange business. Joyalukkas Money Exchange will see rapid expansion during the current year with 8 new outlets to be opened soon in Kuwait, 4 new outlets in Oman, 4 outlets in India and 2 more outlets in UAE. “The plan for Joyalukkas Money Exchange is to also make it a 100 outlet chain within the next 3-4 years” said Antony Jos, Director, Joyalukkas Money Exchange.

Other than this the Group plans to expand the presence of its Fashion & Silks chain ‘Jolly Silks’ to Kuwait & Qatar this year. Joyalukkas also launched their refreshed JGR – Joyalukkas Golden Rewards Card by handing over the first card to Shreya Ghoshal in Dubai. The newly refreshed JGR card has a refreshed new design and comes with loads of additional benefits for customers.

The Joyalukkas Group brand has an impressive list of brand ambassadors who are popular celebrities and superstars in India who endorse their various businesses. The list includes Vidya Balan, R Madhavan, Suresh Gopi, Allu Arjun, Kiccha Sudeep, Jayaram and the music diva Shreya Ghoshal. “Breathtaking is how I would like to describe my visit to Joyalukkas. The choice, the collections the exquisite designs, made me want to wear and own everything. I am incredibly proud to be associated with Joyalukkas the ‘Superbrand’ and whenever I see their jewellery, my heart breaks into a song,” said Shreya Ghoshal during her visit at Big Joyalukkas.

“We would like to thank Shreya for this visit and also thank our valuable customers for their overwhelming and warm response at our 2 showrooms during her visit,” concluded John Paul Joy Alukkas, Executive Director, Joyalukkas Group.