The premise of the novel is simple: on extremely rare occasions, evolution of humanity coughs up an immortal, a human who remains apparently 25 years old, forever. In the course of the novel, which spans about 3,000 years of world history, we meet some 20 of these ageless and deathless individuals. “Deathless” in that age will not kill them. Accident, war or assassination can. We meet several who die.

We follow the lives of just eleven. We meet Hanno, the closest thing to a protagonist in the novel, born in the time of Hiram in Phoenicia c. 950 B.C., when he is some hundreds of years old, living in ancient Greece in 310 B.C. And Anderson presents an accurate, enthralling story of a Greek expedition to ancient Scandanavia. (Hanno didn’t meet Jesus; he explains he was in Phoenicia at the time.) We meet Rufus, a barbarian in Gall in the Roman Empire, c. 19 A.D. Anderson’s description of life in Roman Gaul is detailed and fascinating. We meet Aliyat, a Syrian woman, who has outlived far too many husbands, children, grandchildren and great-grandchildren. Her culture, and in particular, its treatment of women, are beautifully described. Across a range of dozens of cultures over 2,000 years, spread around the world, we meet people who, other than being immortal, are utterly ordinary. None of them are “nice.” The medieval Russian immortal woman has worked as a prostitute for centuries; that kind of life experience doesn’t leave you “nice.” What they have all learned, painfully, is that immortality brings a profound loneliness as they outlive their families, and great terror as they are hounded by their non-immortal neighbors for simply failing grow old.

Anderson mostly resists any temptation to bring in famous characters from history, to create an historic version of Forest Gump. With one exception: an interview between Hanno and Armand Jean du Plessis, Duke of Richelieu, known to history at Cardinal Richelieu. In a nerve-wracking scene, Hanno reveals himself to the powerful Cardinal. It’s very well done.

The immortals’ stories are necessarily told in vignettes. Not until the 19th Century do most of them really begin to meet and trust each other. When Anderson has carried his story forward beyond the 1970s, it switches to an explicit science fiction novel, with the immortal characters off on a voyage of interstellar exploration and an effort to find and contact alien cultures. Who better, after all?

They find those aliens and they are, indeed, alien. Anderson demonstrates his skill at alien world-building is as strong as his skill at historic reconstruction. Our immortal characters conclude that their purpose in life is just that: to meet and understand intelligent species across our part of the galaxy. As well-written as that long, last chapter is, it’s a pale shadow of the amazing historic fiction that precedes it.

This is easily Anderson’s most ambitious novel. The sheer scholarship alone is very impressive. It’s also an excellent, even wrenching story of the painful consequences of being Methuselahs living among the brief lives of mortals. It’s not Anderson’s best novel, but it’s nonetheless very good.

Recommended.