Hi guys!

I have one of the latest Enchanted Polishes to show you today : Hot Chocolate For Unicorns.

I don't think I could ever get tired of EP holos so of course when I learned that a new color was in the making for Halloween, I just couldn't wait to see it. Talking about mystery colors, today just happens to be a restock day, the 3 news monthlies August 2014, September 2014 and October 2014 are going live today at 12PM PDT and you'll have one full hour to snag them (newsletter). I figured there couldn't be a better time to share my swatches of all the 2014 monthlies so far so I also included these as well :D

*Hot Chocolate For Unicorns is a deep chocolate brown holo. It's deliciously creamy and very wearable. Application was nice and easy, it was a tad thicker due to the cream consistency but it went on smoothly. I used 2 coats and no topcoat in my swatches.

And now January 2014 to July 2014 :

January 2014 is a dark blue with a strong grey tone infused with a subtle pinkish shimmer and blue sparkles.

February 2014 is a deep pink plum with a tiny touch of pink sparkles. It's just a tad more muted and yellow based than December 2012 so if you missed on that unicorn, Feb. will do the trick.

March 2014 is a bright spring green holo with blue sparkles running through. It's one of the most linear holos this year. If you're looking for a strong flame, you'll love this one.

April 2014 is a pale blue toned lavender holo. The rainbow is much more subtle in this one, making it a rather delicate pastel.

May 2014 is a vivid red based orange holo with extra pink sparkles. It's bright but not completely in-you-face despite the strong linear holo.

June 2014 is a warm purple holo with a strong blue shimmer that shift to pink and orange. I don't think I have anything else like it, especially with such a strong holo and fully opaque in 2 coats.

July 2014 is a bold red holo with a touch of icy blue sparkles. It has a metallic finish but the smooth, brush-stroke free kind with a lot of glow, almost glass like.

So what do you think about these? Did you buy any of them?

I personally love the mystery behind this year's monthlies even if I usually can't resist the spoilers either... That totally makes sense, right? LOL

Enchanted Polish can be purchased on enchantedpolish.com or through the brand's stockists :

Femme Fatale Mei Mei Signaures Nail Polish Canada Pshiit Boutique

Hot Chocolate For Unicorns (as far as I know) and the monthly colors are only distributed via the brand's official store.

Don't forget about today's restock of August 2014, September 2014 and October 2014 at 12PM PDT!

Thanks for looking and commenting guys!

* denotes a Press Sample