When it comes to winter nail polish colors, one can argue that anything goes. Whether a little bit glam or a little bit goth, winter nail colors are always a striking signal of the season. Some match their dusk-by-five surroundings with a navy blue or a vampy bordeaux, while others reflect a certain attitude or emotional expression. For example, a vinyl midnight manicure is a timeless classic in the fashion and music worlds.

“I started doing my own nails and wearing black and dark blue colors when I was 12 years old,” says Desire frontwoman Megan Louise, who we caught stepping off a flight from Paris after DJ’ing Chanel’s store reopening on Rue Saint Honoré this week. At the time, her mother disapproved, and now, “I still think it makes me feel a bit rebellious going on 37,” says Louise. “The dark nail is your little black dress, after all.” She has worn Chanel’s Le Vernis in Rhythm, a celestial blue, for as long as she can remember, and the Hermès polish in Brun Bistre that hasn’t left her mind since she stumbled on it during her European tour: “My Berlin friend Ava Vegas had it on her coffee table, and I just had to try it—the brown metallic color appears really lush and rich, the perfect combo for a moody winter look.” For nail artist Holly Falcone, who keyed New York Fashion Week shows for Sandy Liang, Batsheva, and Susan Alexandra this season, the look is a fashion staple. “A dark nail is like a great leather accessory,” says Falcone. “It’s especially chic in the winter and translates through all the different holidays and events the season brings.”

Then there are the optical tricks that dark nails perform. According to New York City editorial pro Jin Soon Choi, cold weather has the potential to “render skin tones toward the cool side of the light spectrum, but some unexpected hues can enhance and bring out your skin’s natural warmth,” says Choi, who frequents Dior Vernis Nail Lacquer in Nuit, a deep red, and her own Absolute Black polish for the season. “Darker colors are also always flattering to every nail shape, short or long,” says nail artist Sonya Belakhlef, who works with clients like Maggie Gyllenhaal, Michaela Jae Rodriguez, and Natasha Lyonne. They point to the dark-wave, Matrix-centric, and emo-revival moments happening on runways and red carpets as proof that it’s more than a seasonal shift. “Fashion is getting ‘edgier,’ so dark nails have been in,” says Belakhlef. “But it’s easy to justify it in the winter!”

But the winter months don’t always call for something deep and moody. There are a couple of bright sleeper hits that always make their way into our nail rotations. (Think classic whites and iridescent metallics). You can’t really go wrong this winter season, but if you need some nail ideas to get those creative juices flowing, you’ve come to the right spot. Here, the pros share the winter nail colors they’re wearing and using on clients.

Deep Reds

Think of you classic red and go a shade or two darker for your winter nail look. “These iconic deep reds never go out of style,” says Soon. “They are the most recognized color in fashion among models and fashionistas.” Falcone adds: “A deep, vampy red is always in for a sultry winter," and is even better when “used for a moody French manicure.” To play off of changing temperatures, Belakhlef likes Cirque Colors polish in Rothko Red, which “changes to dark oxblood red when cold and bright crimson red when warm.”

Absolute Blacks

Pushing red carpet ensembles to the very edge, black digits have recently been spotted on everybody from Olivia Rodrigo to Diane Keaton. Falcone describes the short onyx nail as “a clean look with a slightly rebellious edge” and likes an ultraglossy finish with a top coat like Orly’s Shining Armor quick-dry formula “so the black looks creamy and shiny rather than dull.” Soon notes that black nails work for everyone—like a tailored suit. “They are so rich that they starkly contrast with many skin tones, much like a black wardrobe does,” she says.

Midnight Blues

Navy and night-sky blues are the choice of new romantics—like Louise’s favorite Chanel polish in Rhythm, a shade the musician is unabashedly obsessed with. Belakhlef describes Les Mains Hermès Nail Enamel in Bleu Encre as “the dark and intense blue of the receding night at the break of dawn.” And for the season, Falcone points out that “midnight blues always reflect the cold weather and are somewhat expected for winter.” But in the spirit of adding a touch of heat, she pays close attention to the undertones. “I like a royal blue with a slight warm undertone to it, so the look isn’t so chilly,” she adds.

Glassy Evergreens

Not too far off from the classic jewel tone emerald green, mossy evergreen nails are what Falcone describes as “midnight greens”; they look best in intensely pigmented shades with a glassy finish. (Interestingly, Midnights queen Taylor Swift has been wearing the hue on- and offstage for years.) “Midnight greens are perfect for the cold weather,” says Falcone. “It’s actually really earthy, like the forest outside a winter cabin.” For wet-look shine, Orly’s Glosser top coat creates a protective barrier with a salon finish at home.

Chocolate Browns

The cocoa shade of Les Mains Hermès Nail Enamel in Brun Bistre that drew in Louise and fellow musician Vegas is setting the tone. “Richly pigmented chocolate metallic shimmer is the perfect nail color to evoke the coziness of the season,” says Belakhlef. They describe Orly’s metallic Stop the Clock lacquer as “a perfect luxurious neutral for those looking to add some interest without straying too far from the classics.” And for those who prefer a sparkle-free finish, there’s power in its depth. “I love a grayish brown as a dark neutral shade for winter,” says Falcone. “It’s like a dark taupe that reads neutral and is flattering when we lose our summer tans.” Plus, there’s just something so warm about a chocolate brown to bring on all the cozy winter vibes.

Metallic Charcoals

There’s something a bit sci-fi about the metallic charcoal nail that feels particularly relevant this season—blame the Beyoncé Renaissance world tour or Rabanne's beauty launch. Belakhlef calls a “near-black holo a must” and dubs KBShimmer’s Stark Raven Mad a favorite. “In the light, the linear holo comes through, adding a pop of rainbow goodness,” they promise.

Winter White

A white nail is a winter classic—and can also can help warm up your skin tone. “By winter, many of us have lost our summer glow. Wearing white nail polish can add a tiny bit of color back into our skin,” says celebrity manicurist and educator Mimi D. “Plus, it’s a shade that looks good on everyone.” Her favorite shades include Orly’s Snow Angel or OPI’s Chill ‘Em With Kindness. To make sure your white mani stays intact for as long as possible, she recommends capping the edges of your nails when polishing.

Glitter Gold

What better way to brighten a gloomy winter day than with a bright shiny gold nail? “I love gold and other shimmery colors because when the light hits it, it instantly boosts my mood,” says Mimi D. “There are so many levels to gold. You can do a chunky gold glitter or a chrome look to add some sparkle to your outfit.” She recommends polishes like the CND Vinylux in It’s Getting Golder or the OPI Nail Lacquer in Five Golden Rings to get that sparkly yellow—either light or deep-toned—for some added glamour to your winter nail this holiday season.

Silver Chrome

Beyoncé’s influence is everywhere at all times, but Renaissance silver especially makes for the perfect nail color this wintertime. “I love this on short and long nails,” says celebrity manicurist Brittney Boyce, “Silver chrome is bold for a color choice, but very in style.”