Press Sample

Good afternoon, readers. I’m a new member of the Salon Perfect blogging team! I am excited to be able to share these affordable polishes with you that are sold exclusively at Walmart. I have a few collections to show you over the next couple of weeks, but today we will focus on the Rockin’ the Red, White, and Blue Collection. Since the Fourth of July is right around the corner, I’ve created some looks using all of the colors found in the display. There are 4 colored polishes, three striper nail art polishes, 6 glitter toppers, and a top coat. Continue reading to see the simple nail art that you can easily recreate on your own below.

Let’s take a look at the different polishes you will find in the Rockin’ the Red, White, and Blue display at your local Walmart:

Core colors: Salsa Dance, Sugar Cube, Indigo-go, and Titanium.

Promotional glitters: Liberty Bubbles, Let Freedom Bling, Pa-tri-otic, and Rockets’ Red Glare.

Promotional glitters: Boom Boom Boom and Speck-Tacular. Core top coat: Crystal Clear

Core striping nail art polishes: Black Ink, White Out, and Silver Plated.

(Below: a closeup of the striper polish brushes.)

1.) My first patriotic nail art look is one step up from having a single color on all of your nails: skittles! Want to rock red, white, and blue without added nail art? Then this is for you! Simply paint each nail a different color.

Index: 2 coats of Salon Perfect Salsa Dance. This is the perfect red creme, and it really only needs ONE COAT. I added a second out of habit, and topped with one coat of Salon Perfect Crystal Clear top coat.

Middle: 2 coats of Salon Perfect Sugar Cube. This white creme applies well and has good coverage with two coats. Topped with a coat of Crystal Clear.

Ring: 2 coats of Salon Perfect Indigo-go. This blue is squishy and goes on sheer with the first coat. However, a second coat covered completely. Topped with a coat of Crystal Clear.

Pinky: 3 thin coats of Salon Perfect Titanium. This sheer, pearly silver is thin but builds up with the third coat. The brushstrokes are visible because of it’s pearl formula. Topped with a coat of Crystal Clear.

2.) Want to keep it simple, but with some added fun? Try my second Fourth of July nail art look by adding a festive glitter topper to your mani! I’m showing 4 different glitter toppers below over the previous skittles, but feel free to just use one on the entire mani. These are just examples to show you the different shapes of glitters you can find in the display.

Index: 1 dabbed coat of Salon Perfect Liberty Bubbles over Salsa Dance with Crystal Clear top coat. This is a clear base filled with large red, white, and blue dots plus smaller hex glitters of the same colors. I had to dab these in place onto the nail after fishing out of the bottle, but the dots are so fun.

Middle: 2 coats of Salon Perfect Let Freedom Bling over Sugar Cube with Crystal Clear top coat. This applied much easier than the previous glitter and it is so festive! The clear base is full of metallic red, blue, and silver bar glitter. The glitters remind me of fireworks.

Ring: 1 dabbed coat of Salon Perfect Pa-tri-otic over Indigo-go with Crystal Clear top coat. This is a clear base with red, blue, and white triangle shaped glitter. I had to apply this like Liberty Bubbles, the heavier glitter shapes are super fun but hard to get out of the bottle.

Pinky: 1 coat of Salon Perfect Rockets’ Red Glare over Titanium with Crystal Clear top coat. This applied beautifully and is a clear base filled with micro hexes in metallic red, blue, and black.

Here are some closeups of those glitter toppers for you:

3.) My third Fourth of July nail art look is a step higher than the previous. This time, I chose a solid color for all of the nails and then used a makeup sponge to dab two similar glitters on the tips to create a gradient effect.

All of my nails got one coat of Salon Perfect Salsa Dance.

Once they were dry, I grabbed the smaller of the two hex glitter toppers (Salon Perfect Boom Boom Boom– clear base filled with tiny red, white, and blue hex glitter) and painted it onto a makeup sponge. I then dabbed the sponge onto the tips of the nails, moving about half way down toward the cuticle. I repeated this step again mostly on the tips alone for a more dense look.

Next, I grabbed our bigger glitter topper (Salon Perfect Speck-Tacular– clear base filled with medium sized red, white, and blue hex glitter) and painted it onto a makeup sponge. I then dabbed the sponge only on the tips of the nails and repeated once or twice more until I was happy with the coverage.

I completed the mani with two coats of Salon Perfect Crystal Clear top coat to smooth out the glitter and seal in the mani.

The two different hex glitter toppers create the illusion of a gradient effect and it is so simple to do!

4.) Not a fan of glitter? No problem! My fourth mani is representative of the American flag and you can recreate it with a little patience and the use of some striper polishes.

Index and Middle fingers: 2 coats of Salon Perfect Indigo-go. Once the base is dry, I used the Silver Plated striper nail art polish to create some simple star shapes. I layered a “plus sign” and an “x” for a star burst shape.

Ring and Pinky fingers: 2 coats of Salon Perfect Salsa Dance. Once that was dry, I used the White Out striper nail art polish to do three vertical lines on the nails.

I carefully topcoated each nail with Salon Perfect Crystal Clear. This is a thick and glossy top coat that dries fairly quickly! I did notice that it pulled up some red so be very cautious when using this over nail art. It smeared a tiny bit onto the white, but if my stripes went horizontally across the nails (and not in the direction of how I apply the top coat) I fear it may have smeared through them.

5.) Are you ready for my last, and most difficult patriotic nail art design? This uses all three striper nail art polishes overlapping in flowing, curved lines to give the appearance of fireworks.

I started out with two coats of Salon Perfect Indigo-go on all of my nails and let them dry.

Next, I painted one long curved line from the tip of the nail up toward the cuticle using the Black Ink striper nail art polish. I then made tons of curved swipes from the top of that line (or center of the firework!) outward until it was a circular shape.

I repeated those curved lines with the White Out striper nail art polish and then again with the Silver Plated striper nail art polish.

Once I was happy with my fireworks, I grabbed Salon Perfect Rockets’ Red Glare glitter topper and dabbed some all over the fireworks on the nails. This added sparkle and color and really was a fun addition to the theme.

I used one coat of Salon Perfect Crystal Clear top coat to seal everything in.

There you have them! 5 Fourth of July themed manis using the Salon Perfect Rockin’ the Red, White, and Blue Collection. Which is your favorite? Do you plan on trying any of these for your holiday weekend nails? I’d love to see so please share on my Facebook or tag me on Instagram and Twitter!

These Salon Perfect polishes are available exclusively at Walmart stores for $3.98 each. The ones I listed as “promotional” are limited edition and aren’t available year round. Thanks so much for reading, let me know your thoughts in the comments below!

Salon Perfect Links

Website: http://www.salonperfect.com

Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/SalonPerfectLashes

Twitter:@Salon_Perfect

Instagram:@SalonPerfect

*The polishes in this post were sent for me to review with my honest opinion.

If you enjoyed this post, please Sign Up for email updates and you will have the latest news, reviews, nail art, and tutorials delivered right to your inbox! Never miss a post from Adventures In Acetone again. Thank you so much for reading.

– Let’s paint something amazing! –