IT IS a week of honours for Craig Silvey: his second novel is on the longlist for the Miles Franklin Literary Award and he is among 50 finalists for Cleo magazine's Bachelor of the Year.

Which is more exciting for the 27-year-old writer from Perth?

''Well, the Cleo nomination was always in the bag,'' he said. (Yes, he's joking.) ''The Miles was the surprise.''

Silvey has already won the 2009 Indie Book of the Year for Jasper Jones, a coming-of-age story about three teenage boys and a murdered girl in a mining town in 1965.

Jasper Jones will be published in a dozen more countries this year, and Silvey is writing the screenplay for a planned film version.

''I can't believe the run of support this book has got,'' he said.

''Everywhere it goes it seems to have touched somebody. It seems to be the honesty and the characters - those three boys - that are bringing people to it.''

For his first novel, Rhubarb, Silvey was one of the Herald's Best Young Australian Novelists in 2005.

He is on a diverse longlist for the Miles Franklin, the country's major fiction award, which is given to a novel that ''presents Australian life in any of its phases''.

The 12 nominees include previous Miles Franklin winners Peter Carey for Parrot and Olivier in America, David Foster for Sons of the Rumour, Thomas Keneally for The People's Train and Alex Miller for Lovesong.

They are joined by The Bath Fugues by Brian Castro, Boy on a Wire by Jon Doust, Butterfly by Sonya Hartnett and Truth by Peter Temple, which is a rare ''crime novel'' to be considered for this most literary award.

''Everyone acknowledges that Peter Temple has busted the genre open,'' said Morag Fraser, a writer and academic who chairs the judging panel.

''It is very fine writing and tough fiction.''

Three debut novels also made the longlist: Figurehead by Patrick Allington, The Book of Emmett by Deborah Foster and Siddon Rock by Glenda Guest, who last week won the Commonwealth Writers' Prize for best first book in South East Asia and the Pacific.

''I'm stunned,'' said Guest, who is in her 60s and wrote her novel for a PhD in creative writing then put it in a drawer until a friend urged her to try and publish it.

Siddon Rock draws on Australian myths from the child lost in the bush to Aboriginal stories and those of European immigrants.

Fraser said the Miles Franklin judges always look carefully at emerging writers but this time ''they sat up and waved at us''.

The shortlist will be announced next month and the $42,000 prize will be announced at a dinner in Sydney on June 22.

As for the Bachelor of the Year, where Silvey is up against chefs, musicians and footballers, he said, ''I'm confident I'll be placed in the top 50.''