Butterfly

Paperback / softback

Main Details

Title Butterfly Authors and Contributors By (author) Sonya Hartnett Physical Properties

Format:Paperback / softbackPages:224Dimensions(mm): Height 196,Width 132

Category/GenreModern and contemporary fiction (post c 1945) ISBN/Barcode 9780143203056 ClassificationsDewey:A823.3 Audience

Teenage / Young Adult General

Publishing Details

Publisher Penguin Random House Australia Imprint Penguin Random House Australia Publication Date 28 September 2009 Publication Country Australia

Description

On the verge of her fourteenth birthday, Plum knows her life will change. But she has no idea how. Over the coming weeks, her beautiful neighbour Maureen will show her how she might fly. Her adored older brothers will court catastrophe in worlds that she barely knows exist. And her friends - her worst enemies - will tease and test, smelling weakness. They will try to lead her on and take her down. Who ever forgets what happens when you're fourteen?

Author Biography

Sonya Hartnett's work has won numerous Australian and international literary prizes and has been published around the world. Uniquely, she is acclaimed for her stories for adults, young adults and children. Her accolades include the Commonwealth Writers' Prize (Of A Boy), The Age Book of the Year (Of A Boy), the Guardian Children's Fiction Prize (Thursday's Child), the Children's Book Council of Australia Book of the Year for both Older and Younger Readers (Forest, The Silver Donkey, The Ghost's Child, The Midnight Zoo and The Children of the King), the Victorian Premier's Literary Award (Surrender), shortlistings for the Miles Franklin Award (for both Of a Boy and Butterfly) and the CILP Carnegie Medal (The Midnight Zoo). Hartnett is also the first Australian recipient of the Astrid Lindgren Memorial Award (2008). In 2014, Hartnett published a new novel for adults, Golden Boys, and her third picture book, The Wild One. True Stories- Close to Home featuring Sonya Hartnett