Go Home, Cat!

Hardback

Main Details

Title Go Home, Cat! Authors and Contributors By (author) Sonya Hartnett Illustrated by Lucia Masciullo Physical Properties

Format:HardbackPages:32Dimensions(mm): Height 286,Width 218

ISBN/Barcode 9781760899493 Audience

Children / Juvenile

Publishing Details

Publisher Penguin Random House Australia Imprint Puffin Publication Date 1 February 2022 Publication Country Australia

Description

A delightful story about the special bond between a boy and his cat, from the multi-award-winning team, Sonya Hartnett and Lucia Masciullo, celebrating friendship, courage and the value of those we love. A delightful picture book from multi-award-winning author Sonya Hartnett and acclaimed illustrator Lucia Masciullo that celebrates friendship, courage and the value of those we love. When Nicholas finds a silver coin in the garden, he tells his cat, 'I can buy liquorice with this!' Nicholas loves liquorice more than almost anything. 'Stay home, cat,' he says, and sets out for the shop. But as Nicholas walks down the street he hears a voice he knows . . . 'An understated, well-told tale about a small adventure that inspires big emotions.' Frances Atkinson, The Age, Best Picture Books to Delight Young Readers This Christmas

Author Biography

Sonya Hartnett (Author) Sonya Hartnett's work has won numerous Australian and international literary prizes and has been published around the world. Uniquely, she is acclaimed for her stories for adults, young adults and children. Her accolades include the Commonwealth Writers' Prize (Of A Boy), The Age Book of the Year (Of A Boy), the Guardian Children's Fiction Prize (Thursday's Child), the Children's Book Council of Australia Book of the Year for both Older and Younger Readers (Forest, The Silver Donkey, The Ghost's Child, The Midnight Zoo and The Children of the King), the Victorian Premier's Literary Award (Surrender), shortlistings for the Miles Franklin Award (for both Of a Boy and Butterfly) and the CILP Carnegie Medal (The Midnight Zoo). Hartnett is also the first Australian recipient of the Astrid Lindgren Memorial Award (2008). Golden Boys, Sonya's third novel for adults, was shortlisted for the 2015 Miles Franklin Literary Award. She also published her fourth picture book, Blue Flower, illustrated by Gabriel Evans, in 2021 and it was shortlisted for the CBCA Picture Book of the Year Award. Lucia Masciullo (Illustrator) Lucia Masciullo grew up in Livorno, Tuscany. She moved to Australia in 2007 and since then she has been happily working as an illustrator. She has illustrated more than 20 books, among which are the CBCA Honour Book and Prime Minister Award short-listed Come Down, Cat! by Sonya Hartnett, and the Our Australian Girl series. She now lives on the Gold Coast.