The 1936 presidential election was known as one of the most lopsided presidential elections in the history of United States in terms of electoral votes since Monroe’s in 1820 (Boller, P.249). In this election, Franklin Delano Roosevelt also known as FDR campaigned on his New Deal programs against the Kansas Governor Alf Landon. Governor Alf Landon argued that the New deal programs were unconstitutional and it would affect the business (Kelly).

FDR enters the election with a strong, but not unbeatable, hand. The measures that FDR took during his first term in the White House didn’t produce prosperity. But they were able to pull the country out of depression and made sure that millions of people were better off than they had been when he …show more content…

He also had a reputation as a progressive who has supported Theodore Roosevelt from 1912 to 1916 and battled monopolies in his home state. At the Republican convention that occurred in Cleveland, Landon was the first runner for the presidential nomination. Landon won the nomination on the first ballot with 984 votes to 19 (Lakeside Publishing Group). Landon was a moderate conservative and notoriously lackluster public speaker who the party hoped could take votes from FDR in the rural Midwest (American President: A Reference Resource). The businessmen were really happy to hear that Landon was selected for the presidential candidacy. He was their favorite because he was an oil man and a fiscal conservative and had balanced his state’s budget. Even the Republican progressives liked him too because he was a former Bull Mooser who had sponsored for the New Dealish measures as a Governor. Landon was from a farm state which also showed that he had the chances of winning back the Western farmers who had gone for FDR in 1932. Another plus point of Landon was that he was an up-front and simple man who was called the “Kansas Lincoln.” The vote for Landon’s running mate, Chicago publisher Colonel Frank Knox was undivided (Boller, P.241). Knox had a reputation as a conservative and could point to service in the Rough Riders of Theodore Roosevelt in the Spanish-American war of 1898 (Lakeside Publishing Group). Knox representing