Christel Khalil is actress who is well known because of how she played in the role of Lily Winters Ashby at CBS Soap Opera called The young and The Restless. She won A Daytime Emmy Award in the category of Outstanding Younger Actress in the Drama series. It was on the 39th Daytime Emmy Award. She is the only actress coming from the minority group who achieved this.

Christel Khalil appeared in small roles in some movies like White Like The moon, Interview with the Assassin, Matilda and Dragon Fury. She is the voice in the W.I.T.C.H, for Cornelia Hale. She also in Malcolm in the Middle and that’s So Raven. Before getting the role in The Young and The Restless, she performed in the Los Angeles Theater production. This was in the year 2012. She appeared in the music video called Beautiful Queen of Johnny Britt.

In the year 2008, Christel Khalil married a musician called Stephen Hensley. Elizabeth Hendrickson, a co-star at The Young and the Restless was the bridesmaid and Bryton James served as groomsman. She gave birth to a son in the year 2010 and it was through water birth. Bryton became the godfather of her son while the godmother became actress Fadhia Carmelle Marcelin. She separated from her husband in the year 2011 and the divorce was guaranteed the same year. The two share the custody of the child. She had bewen in relationship with Ray Wicks but the relationship ended after four years.

In 2016, she started a relationship with Sam Restagno, a venture capitalist based in Toronto. She is a best friend to Bryton James who played like the character of her brother in The Young and The Restless. She is also a friend to Nadine Heimann, Michael Morgan and Tammin Sursok.

Christel Khalil likes to travel because it gives her a chance of seeing other cultures and travel helps her to connect with the inner self. She is known to support the same sex marriages. When she is not acting, she plays a guitar.

Her acting interest started at young age and she appeared in Dragon Fury and in The Sinbad Show when she was only 5 years old. She attended high school and acting studies when she was in University.