The American actress, Christel Khalil was born on 30th November in Los Angeles, according to his biography. Her star sign is Sagittarius. Christel was born to a Pakistani father and an African American mother. Khalil belongs to a mixed race. Christel has three brothers named Chris, Adam and Alex. She belongs to American nationality. Khalil is the daughter of Belita Edwards and Adnan Khalil. Christel pursued acting since she was 5 years old. The talented artist Khalil is fond of playing the guitar.

Don't Miss: Steelo Brim

Christel Khalil was married to musician Stephen Hensley from 2008 to 2011. She has been blessed with a kid named Michael Caden Hensley. Christel was in a romantic relationship with Ray Wicks. She has been in a love relationship with a Toronto based businessman Sam Restagno since 2016, according to her biography. In 2015, Christel and Stephen sought a divorce and the custody of the son is with both parents. Khalil is now in a relationship with Ray Wicks, who is a bar runner.

Career

The gorgeous actress, Christel Khalil has been famous for playing Lily Winters on a CBS TV soap opera The Young and The Restless. She was a lead in Johnny Britt's music video Beautiful Queen. Khalil played a flirty girl in a comedy TV series 2 Broke Girls. She was known as Angela in a family comedy TV series Family Matters. Her film credit includes Matilda, White Like the Moon and Dragon Fury. Her TV credits include Malcolm in the Middle, WITCH, 2 Broke Girls and That's So Raven.

She portrayed a babysitter in a drama Interview with the Assassin. Khalil lent her voice for Cornella Hale in a French-American animated TV series W.I.T.C.H. She played Young Claire in a horror film Milo in the year 1998. She has been ambitious enough to reach the climax of her acting career. Khalil has been the name and fame of the industry. Christel has risen to fame in the industry because of her acting skills. In 2018, Christel announced her decision to quit from 'Young and Restless' on social media. Since 2002, Christel has been playing the role of Lily Winters.

Khalil has 80.2k followers on Twitter. She has 77.2k followers on Instagram. The followers love and admire her performances much. The dynamic actress has earned a Net worth of around $17 million and an annual Salary of around $2 million.

Awards

The charming actress, Christel Khalil was awarded the Daytime Emmy award for Outstanding Younger Actress in Drama Series for the soap opera The Young and The Restless. She was nominated five times for the NAACP award. Khalil was nominated for a Young Artist award for Best performance in a TV series for leading Young Actress. Khalil has won 2 awards and 12 nominations. Christel has been nominated 7 times for the Image awards.

Last Modified: Mar 6, 2020

Related Biographies