Generous, loving, and intelligent, Helena Schaafsma had a personality that lit up the room. She herself was filled with joy and happiness, and her jokes, stories, and laughter inspired everyone around her to share in this joy. Helena was happiest when surrounded by her beloved family, and was always there when they needed her. Although she will be deeply missed, loved ones will find solace in the reflection that Helena’s life was truly blessed, and rich in love, laughter, family, and memories.

Helena was born on October 20, 1931, to proud parents Joseph and Emilia (Merkneris) Toliusis. The Toliusis family lived in Lithuania, where Helena grew up with ten siblings: Emelia, Gertruda, Bruno, Aldona, Algis, Alma, Erika, Irene, Betty, and Vytautas (Vete). Later, Joseph and Emilia moved their family to Germany, where they were living when World War II broke out. During the war, Helena and her family were sent to a displaced persons camp in Germany, on the coast of the Baltic Sea. Helena had vivid memories of her time in the camp, and witnessed the fires from the bombings of Lubeck.

After the war, Helena’s family immigrated to Mississippi. Without speaking a word of English, Helena, Aldona, and Bruno moved to Chicago, where they hoped to earn enough money to send for the rest of their family. They found jobs at Hart Shafner and Marx, and started picking up English from co-workers and television programs. Through their efforts, they eventually made enough money to bring the rest of their family to Chicago, where they stayed for a few years. In the early 1950s, they moved to Paw Paw, Michigan, where they were finally able to put down some roots.

In June of 1961, Helena met the man who would be the love of her life: Sam Schaafsma. They were introduced through Helena’s sister, Erika, and their friendship soon deepened into romance. Helena and Sam shared many interests, including a love of dancing, and often went out dancing at German clubs. The happy couple was married on June 9, 1962, at St. Mary’s Catholic Church, beginning a loving and committed relationship that would last for fifty years.

As the years went by, Helena and Sam were blessed with the births of three children, whom they named Deborah, Thomas, and Brenda. Helena was a wonderful mother, who supported her children in all their endeavors. She kept the household running smoothly, and was an excellent, if reluctant, cook (she was often heard to complain that she hated cooking). She made delicious pies, desserts, and Lithuanian dishes, and the whole family looked forward to her homemade kugulis. Helena was also a talented seamstress, and made many of the children’s clothes herself, even elaborate Halloween costumes and Brenda’s wedding dress (as well as 3 bridesmaid dresses and her own mother-of-the-bride dress). Helena loved finding deals, and had a great eye for seeing potential in garage sale items – many of her most beautiful creations were clothes purchased at garage sales and then altered at home.

In her free time, Helena loved traveling with her husband, Sam. She also liked following her daily soaps, and enjoyed curling up with a good book. Her favorite times of the year were the holidays, and she hosted many Christmas, Easter, and New Year’s parties at her home over the years. Helena loved hosting these get-togethers, and was always at the heart of the party, laughing and having fun. In recent years, Helena became a proud grandmother, who loved her grandchildren to pieces.

Generous, smart, and fun-loving, Helena was a devoted wife, a loving mother and grandmother, and a loyal friend. She will be deeply missed and lovingly remembered by her many friends and family members.

Helena Schaafsma died on October 23, 2012, at the age of 81. She was preceded in death by her daughter, Deborah Schaafsma; and by her siblings, Emelia, Bruno, Algis, Alma and Irene. Helena’s family includes her husband of 50 years, Sam Schaafsma; her children, Tom (Lora) Schaafsma and Brenda (Jeffrey) Kolodziejczyk; her grandchildren, Adam, Benjamin and Caitlin; her siblings, Gertruda (John) Zabukas, Aldona Gabro, Erika Toliusis, Betty (Cliff) Rierson and Vytautas (Linda) Toliusis; and many nieces, nephews and cousins.

Learn more about Helena, view her Life Story film, and share in some refreshments with her family and friends on Friday from 4 to 8 p.m. at the Life Story Funeral Home, Betzler & Thompson – Paw Paw; 60900 M-40, 657-3870, where a prayer service will be held at 7 p.m. A Mass of Christian Burial will be celebrated at 10 a.m. on Saturday at St. Mary Catholic Church, Paw Paw, with burial at St. Mary’s Cemetery. A luncheon will follow in the church hall. Memorial donations may be directed to St. Mary Catholic Church. Please visit Helena’s personal memory page at www.lifestorynet.com, where you can learn more about her life, share a favorite memory or photo, and sign the online guestbook.