It was the richness of soul, more than material wealth and prestige, that characterized the actions of Saint Helena, and that even before her conversion as an adult. Humility, generosity, and dedication to her neighbor emerge from the scant information we have available about her life.

Humble origins, marriage, and the birth of Constantine

Helena was probably born in the middle of the third century, in the town of Drepanum in Asia Minor. Later, after her son had become Emperor, the town was renamed Helenopolis in her honour. According to St Anselm, as a young woman she worked as a stable maid. Helena’s modesty and virtue attracted the attention of a young Roman official, Constantius Chlorus, who took her as his wife in spite of the difference in their social status. She accompanied Constantius to Balkans, and sometime after the year 270, gave birth to her only son, Constantine.

Divorce and obscurity

Constantius continued to rise through the ranks of the Roman military, and eventually received the title of “Caesar” in the political system known as the Tetrarchy, under the co-emperors Diocletian and Maximian. At that time, for political reasons he was forced to repudiate Helena, and marry Maximian’s daughter. Far from her family, and from the son she had raised with dedication and love, Helena nonetheless never lost hope. She remained in the shadows as her son rose to a place in the court of Diocletian.

Augusta, mother of the Emperor, humble protector of the poor

Constantius Chorus became Augustus (senior emperor) in 305, and Constantine followed him to Britain, where he took part in the campaign against the Picts. When his father died unexpectedly at York, Constantine was acclaimed as emperor by his army. One of the new emperor’s first actions was to recall his mother Helena, and confer on her the honorary title of Augusta.

It was shortly after her son’s accession that Helena converted to Christianity. Her newfound faith caused her native virtues to flourish, and she used her position to care for the poor, providing for their needs through generous almsgiving; and to liberate prisoners, and those sent to the mines or into exile. Her faith likely provided inspiration to Constantine, who in 313 promulgated the Edict of Milan, which allowed Christians to worship freely. During the celebrations that followed, it was said that Helena dressed in modest clothing in order to join the crowds, and that she fed the poor with her own hands

The discovery of the True Cross