This time the Allaboutroyalfamilies series of royals and World War II, stays in

Scandinavia. The new post will talk about Princess Märtha of Sweden.

Her family

Märtha Sofia Lovisa Dagmar Thyra of Sweden was born on 28 March 1901

as the second child of Prince Carl of Sweden, Duke of Västergötland and

Princess Ingeborg of Denmark. Her father was the younger brother of

King Gustaf V of Sweden. Her mother was the younger sister of

King Christian X of Denmark and of King Haakon VII of Norway. What's

all in the family?

There were even more family ties! Märtha had an elder sister who became

Princess Margaretha of Denmark and a younger sister who became Queen

Astrid of Belgium.

Love and Marriage?

Princess Märtha of Sweden became engaged to Olav of Norway, who was

her first cousin. The engagement took place during the Olympic Summer

Games of Amsterdam (The Netherlands) in 1928. This news was well

received in both the countries. It was an excellent match in terms of

strenghtening the ties. However this match was based on love!

On 21 March 1929, Princess Märtha married Olav in the Olso Cathedral.

This was the first royal wedding in Norway for 340 years! It was attended

by many guests.

Märtha soon became a popular and respected member of the royal family.

She made a lot of official engagement and she even gave many speeches.

In 1935, Princess Märtha's sister, Astrid died in Küssnacht. The siblings

always had been very close and Märtha's husband later said that it took

his wife for more than ten years to come to terms with it. Together with

her elder sister, Margaretha, she became a support for her sister's children

in Belgium.

In 1938, Crown Princess Märtha became the senior lady of the court after

the death of her mother-in-law, Queen Maud.

The Crown Prince and his wife, princess Märtha visited in 1939, the

United States of America. There she became friends of Franklin Roosevelt,

the president, and his wife Eleanor Roosevelt.

World War II

On 26 January 1940, Princess Märtha made a public announcement in

which she encouraged Norwegian women to take part in the mobilization

work.

When Germany invaded Norway in April 1940, the Crown Princess and

her children fled to Sweden, however her native country didn't receive

her well!

Following an invitation by Franklin Roosevelt, she went to the United

States on the United State Army transport, American Legion.

In the US she and her children initially stayed at the White House.

Crown Prince Olav, Märtha's husband however, and his father went to

the United Kingdom. Thus the couple was separated for much of the war.

In 1942, the US presented the exiled Norwegian forces with a gift of the

submarine chaser HNoMS King Haakon VII, which was officially

received by Crown Princess Märtha.

Her impressive work to assist the American Red Cross and on behalf

of the Norwegian interests greatly impressed Roosevelt and influenced

his Look to Norway speech in 1942.

Princess Märtha spent much of World War II in the United States of

America. She tried to keep up support for Norway among the American

public and government.

In 1942, she visited London to take part in the birthday celebrations of

her father-in-law. When she returned to Norway after the war, in 1945,

she received a hero's welcome and was called the "Mother of the Nation".

After World War II

Princess Märtha died of cancer at the National Hospital in Oslo on

5 April 1954. At the time of her death, her elder daughter Ragnild

was expecting her first child. She never became Queen of Norway.

Her death was a great loss for her husband, the future King Olav,

for her children and for Norway as well.

People and things named after her

There were things called in her honor inter alia:

* the Princess Märtha Coast in Antartica

* A ship Kronprinsesse Martha was named after her.

* in Sweden the Princess Cake was named for Märtha and her two

sisters when they were chidren.

And perhaps the most loviest of all:

King Harald V of Norway, her son, named his daughter Princess

Märtha Louise after her grandmother.

Source pictures: Wikipedia

Who is who? de Liedekerke family!

Only a few noble families are intertwined with the history of a country. The de Liedekerke family has it all: a long and interesting history and close ties to the rules of their country. Let's take a closer look! History It was in 1301 that the history of the family de Liedekerke started. Then Knight Raas of Herzele signed an official document in Beveren. His son was Raas of Herzele of (de) Liedekerke. His descendants called themselves de Liedekerke. But there were many interesting people in the family de Liedekerke. connections with the Duke of Burgundy Raas of Liedekerke, lord of Nieuwerkerken (+/- 1421 - 1494/1495) was married to a certain Johanna. Due to his marriage he became Lord of Heestert and Zulte. In 1476 he went on a military campaign with Charles the Bold. Duke of Burgundy. In 1477, Mary of Burgundy, appointed him as bailiff of Aalst and Geraardsbergen. Charles the Bold Mary of Burgundy Connections with the House of Habsburg Steven of Liedekerke (+/- 1457 - 1530

House of Wittelsbach - Between crazyness and excellence

Plate with the coat of arms of Bavaria, Germany own picture taken in Munich With this blog post about the House of Wittelsbach I take you on a trip to Bavaria (Bayern) in Germany. Since 1996, the royal family's head is: Franz, Duke of Bavaria. So far is the situation nowadays but this royal familie has a very nice history. Own picture taken of the Coat of Arms of Bavaria The House of Wittelsbach: the origin Otto II, Count of Scheyern (who died on 31 October 1120) could acquire the castle of Wittelsbach near Aichach. Later the Counts of Scheyern left the castle in 1119 for Wittelsbach Castle and the former was given to monks to establish Scheyern Abbey. From 1180 till 1918 the Wittelsbach dynasty ruled several German territories in Bavaria and the Electorate of the Palatinate (till 1805). In 1329 under the Treaty of Pavia, the House of Wittelsbach split in two branches. Emperor Louis IV granted the Palatinate including the Bavarian Upper Palatinate t

Who was Sheikh Khalifa bin Zayed bin Sultan Al Nahyan?

On 14 May 2022 Sheikh Khalifa bin Zayed bin Sultan Al Nahyan passed away at the age of 73. Family Khalifa was born on 7 September 1948 at Qasr Al-Muwaiji, Al Ain, in Abu Dhabi (then part of the Trucial States), the eldest son of Zayed bin Sultan Al Nahyan and Hassa bint Mohammed bin Khalifa Al Nahyan Education He was a graduate of the Royal Military Academy Sandhurst. Crown Prince When his father, Zayed, became Emir of Abu Dhabi in 1966, Khalifa was appointed the Ruler's Representative in the Eastern Region of Abu Dhabi and Head of the Courts Department in Al Ain. Zayed was the Ruler's Representative in the Eastern Region before he became the Emir of Abu Dhabi. A few months later the position was handed to Tahnoun bin Mohammed Al Nahyan. On 1 February 1969, Khalifa was nominated the Crown Prince of Abu Dhabi, and on the next day he was appointed Head of the Abu Dhabi Department of Defense. In that post, he oversaw the build up of the Abu Dhabi Defense Force, which after 1971