by Scott Mehl © Unofficial Royalty 2014

Princess Märtha Sofia Lovisa Dagmar Thyra of Sweden was born March 28, 1901, at the Hereditary Prince’s Palace in Stockholm, Sweden. She was the second daughter of Prince Carl of Sweden, Duke of Västergötland, and Princess Ingeborg of Denmark. Her grandfathers were King Oscar II of Sweden and King Frederik VIII of Denmark. For the first four years of her life, she was also a Princess of Norway. Sweden and Norway were in personal union under the sovereigns of Sweden. This union ended in 1905.

Märtha had three siblings:

Princess Margaretha of Sweden (1899–1977), married her cousin Prince Axel of Denmark, had two sons

Princess Astrid of Sweden (1905–1935), married King Leopold III of Belgium, had two sons and one daughter

Prince Carl Bernadotte, born Prince Carl, Duke of Östergötland (1911–2003), married (1) Countess Elsa von Rosen, morganatic marriage – had to relinquish his succession rights and his royal titles, had one daughter, divorced (2) Ann Margareta Larsson, no children, divorced (3) Kristine Rivelsrud, no children

On March 21, 1929, Märtha married her first cousin, Crown Prince Olav of Norway at the Oslo Cathedral. She was once again a Princess of Norway.

Unofficial Royalty: Wedding of King Olav V and Princess Märtha of Sweden

The couple took up residence at the Skaugum Estate in Asker, Norway. They had three children:

Princess Ragnhild (1930 – 2012), married Erling Lorentzen, had three children

Princess Astrid (born 1932), married Johan Ferner, had five children

King Harald V of Norway (born 1937), married Sonja Haraldsen, had two children

In 1940, Princess Märtha and her children fled Norway when the Germans invaded, traveling to her native Sweden. However, they were not well received by the Swedish people, feeling that their presence would threaten Sweden’s neutrality. Shortly after, at the invitation of President Franklin D. Roosevelt of the United States, the family sailed for America. After brief stays at Roosevelt’s private estate in Hyde Park, New York, and then the White House, the family leased (and later purchased), an estate in Bethesda, Maryland, just outside of Washington DC. Her husband had stayed with his father, King Haakon VII, establishing a government-in-exile in London.

Princess Märtha remained very active in supporting the Norwegian people during the war, working extensively with the Red Cross, and speaking to groups throughout the country to promote the resistance. She developed a very close friendship with President Roosevelt, and the family was often included in both public and private functions at the White House.

The work Crown Princess Märtha did in the United States had a lasting impact on U.S.-Norwegian relations. Her advocacy on her country’s behalf during World War II influenced President Roosevelt’s famous “Look to Norway” speech. In September 2005, the United States erected a statue of Crown Princess Märtha on the grounds of the Norwegian Embassy in Washington, D.C. as a symbol of the enduring friendship between the two nations. The statue was unveiled by her three children.

In 1945, with the war finally over, Princess Märtha and the children returned to Norway and were reunited with Crown Prince Olav and King Haakon. She continued her work with the many patronages and charities in Norway, focused on doing everything possible to restore Norway and the Norwegian people.

Sadly, the Crown Princess suffered ill health over the next few years. On April 5, 1954, she died at the National Hospital in Oslo, Norway following a long battle with cancer. She is buried in the Royal Mausoleum at Akershus Castle. Her husband would go on to become King Olav V in 1957 until his death in January 1991. He is buried alongside his wife.

This article is the intellectual property of Unofficial Royalty and is NOT TO BE COPIED, EDITED, OR POSTED IN ANY FORM ON ANOTHER WEBSITE under any circumstances. It is permissible to use a link that directs to Unofficial Royalty.

Kingdom of Norway Resources at Unofficial Royalty