Princess Ragnhild of Norway, who has died aged 82, was the first child and elder daughter of King Olav V of Norway and his wife, Princess Märtha of Sweden.

Although not well known in Britain in recent years, she was a great-granddaughter of Edward VII through her English grandmother, Queen Maud, the King’s youngest daughter. At the time of her birth, Ragnhild was 17th in line to the British throne, though by the time of her death she was 75th. Her father was a frequent visitor to Britain.

Princess Ragnhild was born on June 9, 1930, and was the first Norwegian princess to born on home soil for 629 years; her younger siblings were Princess Astrid and the present King Harald V of Norway, and she was brought up at Skaugum, near Asker, her parents’ home 20 miles west of Oslo .

After the invasion of Norway by the Nazis, in 1940 Crown Princess Märtha took her young family to Sweden, and thence to the United States. They spent the rest of the war in exile in Washington, DC; meanwhile, Ragnhild’s grandfather, King Haakon, was living at a house near Windsor, and her father was also in Britain, advising the Norwegian government-in-exile. When the family was able to return to Norway in 1945, they were greeted with unstinted enthusiasm .

On May 15, 1953 Princess Ragnhild married, at Asker parish church, a shipping multi-millionaire called Erling Sven Lorentzen. The match was controversial, as Lorentzen was not only a commoner and a businessman, but also a former bodyguard to the princess, and Ragnhild’s mother had to plead with King Haakon to allow the marriage. None the less, it was a popular occasion: 200,000 Norwegians crowded the streets to watch the processions. Princess Margaret represented the Queen at the wedding; the King and Queen of Denmark also attended.

At the ceremony Princess Ragnhild wore a dress of ivory satin and carried a bouquet of white orchids and lily of the valley. The groom wore white tie and evening tails, as is customary on the Continent. The honeymoon was spent in Italy.

Soon after the wedding the couple moved to Rio de Janeiro, ostensibly for two years as Lorentzen pursued his many business interests. As it turned out, they settled there for good. On her marriage, Ragnhild dropped the title of Royal Highness, becoming known as HH Princess Ragnhild, Mrs Lorentzen. Flags were no longer flown in Norway on her birthday.

Furthermore, she undertook no official duties in Norway, though she frequently visited her native country and was often present at family occasions. She was patron of a Norwegian organisation for the hard of hearing. A 540,000 sq km area of Antarctica was named Princess Ragnhild Coast.

In 1995 she published an autobiography, My Life as a Princess, which chronicled her royal upbringing and her life in Brazil.

In 2004 the Princess attracted some controversy when, in an interview with Norway’s TV2 station, she declared that she disapproved of the spouses chosen by Crown Prince Haakon Magnus and his sister Princess Märtha Louise, believing that they could herald the end of the Norwegian monarchy. Haakon Magnus’s wife, Mette-Marit, had led a wild early life and had given birth to a son out of wedlock – while Princess Martha Louise married a Norwegian author called Ari Behn.

Princess Ragnhild thought that the young royals had been badly advised, and went so far as to say that she hoped she would be dead before Mette-Marit became Queen. Her husband tried to have his wife’s comments moderated, but in vain.

Princess Ragnhild is survived by her husband and by their son and two daughters.

Telegraph, London