Let’s get one thing straight: Contrary to the title, Chris Rock’s “I Think I Love My Wife” isn’t really about the emotional ambivalence and diplomatic grind of marriage. Unmistakably, this Americanized remake of Eric Rohmer’s “Chloe in the Afternoon” is a crass and patently unfunny fetish piece about adultery. A more apt title might have been “Should I Nail This Hot Chick?”

Even when he’s on his game, Rock is a deliberate, oratorical kind of performer – a style that plays effectively in his comedy stand-up acts but often undercuts his dramatic work. To put it succinctly, he’s stiff, and he delivers a stiff performance as Richard Cooper, a good guy, a chipper voice-over kind of guy, who makes a comfortable living as a securities manager and appears to relish his role as father and provider.

Ah, but for the dreaded wandering eye. Richard can’t take the train to work without mentally undressing every comely female commuter who crosses his sightline. (A visual gimmick that might have been a bit funnier if he undressed the less-comely ones, too.)

As director (and co-screenwriter, along with fellow comic Louis C.K.), Rock perhaps makes too good a case for marital dissolution. Richard’s partnership with wife Brenda (Gina Torres) is such a mechanical, sexless, moribund thing, divorce hardly seems like the worst fate that could befall him. “I Think I Love My Wife” lacks what film critics like to call a “rooting interest.”

Enter the absurdly named Nikki Tru (Kerry Washington), the proverbial Old Female Acquaintance who shows up at Richard’s office one day looking for a job reference. Nice guy that he is, Richard gives it to her, which prompts more favors, more afternoon visits, more furtive lunch dates and more wagging of tongues. (Steve Buscemi chips in a sly performance as Richard’s energetically adulterous, yet oddly disapproving, co-worker.)

As Nikki’s sexual grip on Richard becomes more onerous, one begins to suspect that Rock might have misjudged the potential of Rohmer’s original 1972 drama to translate across cultures. “I Think I Love My Wife” is flip where it should be whimsical and mawkish where it should be sincere.

Consider the scene where Nikki tosses dollar bills out of Richard’s office window to pedestrians below. It’s so much more disarming when the French do that kind of thing.

One must also question Rock’s wisdom in casting ESPN blowhard Stephen A. Smith in a brief, nonsports cameo. Confronted by Smith’s shrill, beady-eyed persona, my first instinct was to do what I always do: change the channel.