I Think I Love My Wife is a TV program that debuted in 1970 . I Think I Love My Wife completed its run in 1970.

It features Chris Rock as producer, Marcus Miller in charge of musical score, and William Rexer as head of cinematography.

I Think I Love My Wife is recorded in English and originally aired in United States. Each episode of I Think I Love My Wife is 93 minutes long. I Think I Love My Wife is distributed by Fox Searchlight Pictures.

The cast includes: Edward Herrmann as Mr. Landis, Chris Rock as Richard Cooper, Gina Torres as Brenda Cooper, and Kerry Washington as Nikki Tru.

I Think I Love My Wife Quotes

Gina Torres as Brenda Cooper

(Gina Torres) "Are you talking to some little bitch? Are you talking to some whore? In my house?"

(Chris Rock) "No no no, it's George, it's George."

(Gina Torres) "George? What kind of down low s*** is that?"

Chris Rock as Richard Cooper

(Chris Rock) "Chicken again? I'm losin' my finger-lickin' mind over here."

(Gina Torres) "Where you goin'?"

(Chris Rock) "To get some duck."

(Chris Rock) "Life is about choice. We are the sum of our choices. And most of them are made for us. You can't choose when you're born. You can't choose where you are born. You can't choose your family. You can't even choose who you love. But you can choose how you love."

(Chris Rock) "When two people admit that they are attracted to each other, they are no longer in control. Their relationship has to play itself out. For better or for worse."

(Chris Rock) "You know, some people say life is short and that you could get hit by a bus at any moment and that you have to live each day like it's your last. Bulls***. Life is long. You're probably not gonna get hit by a bus. And you're gonna have to live with the choices you make for the next fifty years."

(Chris Rock) "Before you get married you get calls like --"

(Gina Torres) "I can't wait to suck your dick."

(Chris Rock) "After you get married you get calls like --"

(Gina Torres) "I can't wait for you come home to see these drapes."

Kerry Washington as Nikki Tru

(Kerry Washington) "Hi it's Nikki. Sorry I missed your call but remember, "Love is God. God is Love." Peace."

Edward Herrmann as Mr. Landis

Add or Update Quotes

If you have a quote to add or change and want to let us know, please fill in the form below. Include the time in the film/video if possible so we can find it.