It looks as if you are viewing PalmTalk as an unregistered Guest.

Please consider registering so as to take better advantage of our vast knowledge base and friendly community. By registering you will gain access to many features - among them are our powerful Search feature, the ability to Private Message other Users, and be able to post and/or answer questions from all over the world. It is completely free, no “catches,” and you will have complete control over how you wish to use this site.

PalmTalk is sponsored by the International Palm Society. - an organization dedicated to learning everything about and enjoying palm trees (and their companion plants) while conserving endangered palm species and habitat worldwide. Please take the time to know us all better and register.

Guys:

There appear to be two spp. involved in what is commercially known as "Blue seed". I have quite a few seedlings and young palms from both RPS and an Oz friend's collection (who collected them in N Borneo) and there is quite a bit of variation between the two accessions. Amongst the dozen or so three year-old palms that I have from RPS, the new leaf color varies quite a bit, both at emergence and when they harden off. IMO, the very best clones are extremely handsome plants...buyer beware, however, since it is common knowledge amongst dealers that these pinangas invariably lose their vivid leaf color as they grow past the meter mark (3'+). One nurseryman urged me to blow them all out the door when they're about 75 cm (30") tall and still very showy.

Tweaking the pH of their growing media towards neutral and a steady feed at low contrations of NPK seems to visibly improve vigor and contrast in the mottling. Very acid media (<5.50) and starvation tend to leave them distinctly "white" and susceptible to frond die-back. Have never trialed them in bright sunlight, but would assume that it would not do much to enhance their leaf color.

Cheerio,

Jay

I don't have a great photo of the specimen isolated, but you can see it making things real jungle like in my teeny yard.... (Excuse the cold burn spots and the brown tips - I planted this in December)

The younger leaves have the mottling...

And so do older ones...

The largest spike has yet to open... It is just doing so currently, I t reaches to about 4.5 feet overall... I can already see it is emerging with a hint of pinkish coloration and a slight mottling... I will try to remember to catch a series of photos as it does....

:cool:

At best (when the sun is highest in the sky) it will recieve about 2 hours of morning sun and 3-4 as the sun sets...

Edit: Oh and for the record this one came from Searle also... When it seeds, I will grow it!