Blue Seed is an animation series created by Production I.G. and Ashi Productions. It was directed by Jun Kamiya and Takao Kato in 1994. The anime was based on the homonym manga series written and illustrated by Yuzo Takada. The plot is based on the Izumo cycle of Japanese mythology. The main character, Momiji Fujimiya, is a descendant of the mythical Princess Kushinada. When Japan is menaced by Aragami spawned by Yamato-no-Orochi, Momiji is intended to be sacrificed to appease the Aragami. Instead, she becomes a member of the Terrestrial Administration Center (TAC), a secret agency charged with fighting them. The pictures on this page are a collection of artworks created for this series and were collected by Settei Dreams, you can download it in high definition HERE.

THE STORY

Momiji Fujimiya thought she was just an ordinary middle school student. One day, she is confronted on her way to school by a cat-eyed man with blue magatama beads embedded in his hands, who then attempts to kill her. Momiji is confused and terrified this strange man's sudden desire to kill her; he also refers to her as Kushinada, confusing her even further. Momiji is saved by the sudden appearance of two government officials, one of whom shoots the man in the arm and sends him fleeing. Momiji is intrigued as to why she was referred to as "Kushinada". She discovers that "Kushinada" refers to an ancient princess whose blood holds the power to stop the ancient monsters known as Aragami by sending them to an eternal sleep. Momiji dismisses the idea that she could be such a person, despite the fact she lives with her mother and grandmother in a shrine in Izumo. However, she soon changes her mind after vines begin to appear from every crack and opening attempting to capture her as they whisper "Kushinada". Momiji tries to escape, not knowing that the vines are being employed by a powerful Aragami known as Orochi. She is saved by the man with the magatamas embedded into his hands, who introduces himself as Mamoru Kusanagi. He confronts Orochi using Momiji as bait. The plan fails and the government officials appear again. They reveal themselves to be members of the Terrestrial Administration Center…