It cost the Missouri Valley Bridge & Iron Company $180,000 to build the Eleventh Street Arkansas River Bridge in 1916.

The bridge had a rail line running down the middle, and single lanes on either side for motor vehicles. Next to the roadways were sidewalks.

It was a monumental structure, another link between the east side of town and the west side. And by the mid-1920s its import had grown, thanks to Cyrus Avery, who was instrumental in getting the bridge built and later included in an audacious plan to build a national highway.

Perhaps you’ve heard of it — Route 66.

Now, a century later, Tulsa’s Route 66 Commission has an audacious idea of its own: to reopen the bridge.

“It’s important to save this bridge because this bridge is the reason Route 66 came through Tulsa,” said Amanda DeCort, chairwoman on the Route 66 Commission’s Preservation and Design committee. “And it’s a big part of our history.”

But the bridge hasn’t been a living part of the city landscape since 1980, when it was closed to vehicular traffic, and eventually, to foot traffic as well. Today the Route 66 Cyrus Avery Memorial Bridge, as it has since been renamed, is gated closed and sits in disrepair, weeds piercing through the many cracks in the pavement.

DeCort and her fellow Route 66 Commission members envision a different look.

Listen now and subscribe: Apple Podcasts | Google Podcasts | Spotify | RSS Feed | SoundStack | All Of Our Podcasts

“It originally had wide pedestrian walkways and trolley tracks down the middle,” she said. “It would be amazing to return it to that, even if it just had a fun little trolley that scooted back and forth to get people across the river.”

An open, active pedestrian bridge would be a natural fit for the area, DeCort said. The east side of the bridge abuts Cyrus Avery Plaza, extends above the River Parks trail, and is just across the street from the future home of the Route 66 Experience.

“We could program this (bridge),” she said. “We could have food trucks out there, people could watch the fireworks from the bridge, and it would really be a much more pleasant strolling experience.”

The Route 66 Commission’s push to reopen the bridge is timely for another reason. Next year, the city is scheduled to complete Avery Plaza Southwest, at the west terminus of the bridge. It will include three slightly smaller replicas of neon signs that once attracted visitors to motor courts along Tulsa’s 24 miles of Route 66: Tulsa Auto Court, Oil Capital Motel, and Will Rogers Motor Court.

When the 11th Street Arkansas River Bridge was built, it was a marvel of engineering, a multispan concrete arch bridge that stretched 1,470 feet. Originally designed in a Victorian style, it was later given an Art Deco makeover, in keeping with many of the city’s other landmark structures.

It was the first concrete and steel-reinforced bridge to cross the Arkansas River, according to the Route 66 Commission. Today, it is listed in the National Register of Historic Places.

“Now is the time to resurrect this bridge and make it an asset to Tulsa,” DeCort said.

That won’t be easy. The bridge has been examined and re-examined. As part of Vision 2025 sales tax package, approximately $540,000 was spent to make cosmetic improvements, but the city’s latest cost estimate to build something like the Route 66 Commission has in mind is $21 million.

DeCort said one place the commission might begin to look for funding is in the Improve Our Tulsa renewal package, which the Mayor’s Office and City Council will be putting together this year.

“I don’t know if that is a possibility,” she said. “We haven’t begun that conversation yet, but I would think it’s time to get it started.”

Kevin Canfield

918-645-5452

kevin.canfield@tulsaworld.com

Twitter: @aWorldofKC

Be the first to know

Get local news delivered to your inbox!

* I understand and agree that registration on or use of this site constitutes agreement to its user agreement and privacy policy.

Kevin Canfield

Tulsa World Staff Writer

Get email notifications on {{subject}} daily!

Your notification has been saved.

There was a problem saving your notification.

{{description}}

Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new matching items.

Followed notifications

Please log in to use this feature

Log In

Don't have an account? Sign Up Today