Jamie this is a completely different classification from the plant I know as Opoponax.

Opopanax chironium is a herb.

I have only known Opoponax referring to the Commiphora Erythraea in the Burseraceae family. This Opoponax you mention is in the Apiaceae family. (Apiaceae or Umbelliferae, commonly known as the celery, carrot or parsley family, are a family of mostly aromatic plants with hollow stems)

According to wiki: Opopanax, also known as opobalsam, refers to a number of gum resins.

According to Bo "the term "opopanax", meaning "all healing juice", is a source of confusion, since it is also used for the gum latex from several umbellifers, e.g. from Opopanax chironium (Pastinaca opopanax) (Umbelliferae), indigenous to the Mediterranean area"

I am not finding any reference for Opopanax chironium in Good Scents.

Does it have a similar camphorous odour?

From the Good Scents site, Bill has indicated for commiphora erythaea that "Opopanax Resinoid can be prepared by extraction of the crude botanical material with petroleum ether or other hydrocarbons. If ethyl alcohol is used directly, an alcohol resinoid or resin absolute is produced. The commercial resin absolute of opopanax is not a true absolute, extracted with alcohol from a hydrocarbon solvent extracted resinoid. Resinoid of opopanax is not pourable at room temperature. It is almost hard, although slightly plastic due to the content of essential oil. No essential oil should be removed from the opopanax when it is transformed into a resinoid or an absolute."

You indicated you wanted a resin... not an absolute or oil?

What I do with resins is to simply weigh and place into weighed alcohol, let dissolve, shake, repeat, then freeze and filter. I usually work at about a 25-75% ratio of resin to alcohol, or at 50-50. depending upon either need, or desire. Some resins dissolve almost completely, like Frankincense, others less. Alcohol has seemed to work best for what I've used in the past, Myrrh, Frank, Galbanum, Mastic, and Sandarac resins.

It will be quite sticky though, likely, and so use it judiciously. Just have to see what it does. Try and pick out any darker colored woods or dirt, or sand and the like first, to keep the color light as possible. As a last resort, you could quickly wash in water problematic portions. (Likely some aromatics are water soluble, and so you would like to keep them of course.) You could experiment with 90-95% alcohol, vs 100% alcohol, to see if any water soluble aromatics change the profile of the tincture.

You could also experiment with hot or even boiling alcohol. This would certainly liquefy the waxes even more, temporarily, until it cools, but may release more volatiles too.

Sorry, I have only this experience with alcohol, not other processes like using hexane or something else.

PK