Kim Kardashian’s fleeting husband Kris Humphries — to whom she was hitched for just 72 days — can still get attention from the ladies.

The retired basketball player, 38, was spotted amid a scrum of women at Montauk hotspot the Surf Lodge this weekend during a performance by R&B group Emotional Oranges.

“He was surrounded,” says a spy. “It was random, but girls seemed excited to see him.”

The baller played for the Utah Jazz and Brooklyn Nets before retiring in 2019, but became a household name when he linked up with Kardashian and appeared on season two of “Keeping Up With the Kardashians” spin-off “Kim and Kourtney Take New York.”

They tied the the knot in a two-part E! News special in August 2011 that drew an astonishing 10.5 million viewers.

Humphries and Kardashian famously spit just 72 days later.

“Everyone was talking about him being there,” says a spy. “He was at a back table on the deck where the VIPs tend to congregate, but you noticed him right away anyway because he was so much taller than everyone.”

The easy-to-spot (or hard to hide from photo-sneaking partygoers) Humphries stands at an imposing 6’9″ tall.

In a 2019 article in the Player’s Tribune, Humphries wrote that, “One thing that really bothers me is whenever people say that my marriage was fake. There’s definitely a lot about that world that is not entirely real. But our actual relationship was 100% real. When it was clear that it wasn’t working … what can I say? It sucked.”

He also called going through a public spit “brutal” and said he suffered from anxiety.

“There was about a year where I was in a dark place. I didn’t want to leave my home,” he said. “The whole world hates you, but they don’t even know why. They don’t even know you at all.”

Humphries seems to be doing just fine though. He currently owns fast food joint Dave’s Hot Chicken in Minnesota and a number of Five Guys in the state with his family.

Skims star Kardashian talked about the doomed marriage during a reunion special in 2020, saying that she “handled it the wrong way.” She said, “I fully broke up with him in the worst way, and I just didn’t know to deal.”

Kardashian also said she tried to apologize, but never heard back.