On March 2nd, a judge ruled Kim Kardashian, 41, legally single amidst her ongoing divorce proceedings from Kanye West, 44, TMZ reported. This change was granted in a bifurcation hearing almost three months after Kim requested to amend her marital status. As a result of this change, Kim can now restore her maiden name back to Kim Kardashian.

This ruling comes one year after Kim filed for divorce from the rapper. The couple began dating in 2012, married in 2014, and share four children together: North, Saint, Chicago, and Psalm. West, also known as Ye, is now legally single too, though he originally opposed Kim's request. His lawyers said that changing their marital status before topics like child custody and shared property were ironed out could have "a risk of adverse consequences."

Kim appeared at the hearing via video call, and Kanye was not present, though his lawyer did not oppose Kim's marital status change request at the meeting. Kanye's team had three conditions, the first of which was granted: the judge agreed to the request to preserve any right to reimbursement of money that's supposed to be divided up between the couple in case of death.

However, the judge rejected the condition that Kim not transfer assets she has in trust, and also rejected the request that Kim should waive "marital privilege" if she remarries. The latter means that a new spouse would not have to testify about communications he had with her.

In a recent interview with US Vogue, Kim explained her reasons for divorcing Kanye. She told the publication, "For so long, I did what made other people happy. And I think in the last two years I decided, I’m going to make myself happy. And that feels really good. And even if that created changes and caused my divorce, I think it’s important to be honest with yourself about what really makes you happy. I’ve chosen myself. I think it’s okay to choose you."

Fans think that Kanye, who was recently linked to Julia Fox in a whirlwind romance, might have just gone "Instagram official" with Chaney Jones. And overnight, Twitter became alarmed by Ye's "disturbing" new claymation music video in which an animated Kanye decapitates the head of Kim's current boyfriend, Pete Davidson. But as recently as last month, Kanye apologised for harassing Kim online, and this week released a statement to Hollywood Unlocked seemingly in agreement with the divorce. He said, "I’ve asked my team to expedite the dissolution of my marriage to Kim so I can put my entire attention into our beautiful children” — YE.

Protecting their family is Kim's priority too, according to her US Vogue interview. She said, "Make sure you are your co-parent’s biggest cheerleader, no matter what you’re personally going through."

You Might Also Like