Kim Kardashian has been in the spotlight since her teen years and was always in the upper echelon of celebrity society. While she was growing into the mom and mogul she is known to be today, Kardashian had a number of very public relationships. Luckily, it made for good TV! A lot of her experiences have been documented on her shows Keeping Up With the Kardashians and now Hulu’s The Kardashians, so there’s plenty of public records pertaining to her love life and three marriages.

Here’s her full relationship history so far.

Damon Thomas: 2000–2003

Kardashian got married for the first time in 2000 at only 19 years old, eloping with 29-year-old music producer Damon Thomas. Thomas was known for his work with artists like Babyface, Faith Evans, and Tyrese. The marriage actually lasted for three years before they filed for divorce in 2003. It was finalized in 2004.

She later claimed that the day they got married, she was on ecstasy, but Thomas has denied this. He says they were only high on “young love.”

But after their divorce, Kardashian suggested Thomas was a controlling husband, alleging he made her quit her job as a shop assistant at a clothing boutique.

“He did not want me to have contact with my old boyfriends, who would be able to reach me at the clothing store,” she explained in her divorce proceedings. “He said he wanted to know where I was at all times.”

Thomas denied those allegations.

Ray J: 2005–2006

In 2005, Kardashian was working for Ray J’s older sister, Brandy. In his book Death of a Cheating Man: What Every Woman Must Know About Men Who Stray, the musician seemingly refers to Kardashian via the moniker “KK” and describes how their relationship started.

“To be honest, the whole thing started off wrong,” he wrote. “We’d known each other for a while before we dated, and there was a mutual attraction, but she was married … She let me know she wanted to get with me. She left her husband for me as soon as we started having sex, and things between us got intense really fast. After that, I felt obligated to be with her.”

He added more accusations of cheating, but it seemed like the couple were on-off before breaking up in 2006. In 2007, the former couple’s notorious sex tape was leaked by Vivid Entertainment, who Kardashian then sued.

In a 2018 episode of Keeping Up With the Kardashians, she again mentioned ecstasy in relation to the tape.

“I did ecstasy once, and I got married. I did it again, I made a sex tape. Like, everything bad would happen,” Kardashian said. “Absolutely. Everyone knows it. Like, my jaw was shaking the whole time.”

That same year, Ray J started talking about his former flame again, and she responded on X, formerly known as Twitter, calling him a “pathological liar.”

Nick Lachey: 2006

Nick Lachey broke up with Jessica Simpson, and six months later, his first documented date was with Kardashian. They were photographed on an outing to a matinee showing of The Da Vinci Code.

“She left about halfway through and went to the restroom, and then shockingly, there were 25 paparazzi when we left the theater,” Lachey said on Watch What Happens Live in 2019. “I think there were other things in play on our little rendezvous. Couldn’t be a nicer girl, we had a great time.”

Nick Cannon: 2006–2007

In 2014, during an interview with radio host Big Boy, Nick Cannon recalled that he briefly dated Kardashian in 2006 when asked about previous “famous” partners.

“Mariah Carey,” he began. “Christina Milian, Nicole Scherzinger, Selita Ebanks … oh, Kim Kardashian!”

“I didn’t know that Kim Kardashian thing,” Big Boy replied. “I just forgot.”

“You just forgot because it’s been a lot of people since me,” Cannon answered at the time, somewhat ironically considering his current dating history. “She’s a great girl though! Her and her family are some of the most incredible people I’ve ever met in my life.”

It’s not clear why they split, but The Post shared a story in 2007 that they avoided one another at a fashion event.

Reggie Bush: 2007–2010

Kardashian and Reggie Bush were together off-and-on from 2007 to 2010, breaking up first in 2009 because of mismatched schedules. They then reconciled and even began house-hunting, but schedules intervened again, and they broke up. However, Life & Style reported that he was still interested in her right up until her marriage in August 2011 to Kris Humphries. The outlet alleged he was sending her texts and leaving voicemails “telling her she’s making a mistake and that he’s the one for her.”

Cristiano Ronaldo: 2010

In April 2010, Page Six reported that soccer star Cristiano Ronaldo and Kardashian met up when the reality star was vacationing in Madrid, and then again during an event at the Beverly Hills Hotel. It didn’t last long, and he was soon seen with model Irina Shayk.

Miles Austin: 2010

Dallas Cowboys wide receiver Miles Austin seemingly had a more serious relationship with the TV star, beginning in early 2010. A source told People, “She’s really supportive of him. Kim and Miles have purposely tried to keep their relationship quiet and low-key.”

“Kim and Miles looked pretty happy together,” Page Six reported of a sighting in July that year. “They were canoodling all night. He’s a pretty shy and low-key guy, so he’s perfect for her.”

But things had fizzled out by September. A source told People it was “mutual” and mostly due to distance.

“There’s no huge reason except their distance apart,” the source said. “With his season and Kim’s filming Keeping Up with the Kardashians, it just slowly split them apart.”

Shengo Deane: 2010

In 2010, Kardashian went on a few dates with her bodyguard Shengo Deane after meeting in his home country of Australia. They met up again in New York City, and their dates were a plot point in Kourtney and Kim Take New York.

Gabriel Aubry: 2010

In late 2010, Kardashian and Gabriel Aubry were dating, according to a report from People, and were photographed at a Lakers game. Aubry had recently broken up with actress Halle Berry.

“They started seeing each other in the last few weeks,” said a source. “They have been out a few times, he’s visited her house in L.A. Sunday’s game was the first time they were comfortable enough to be seen in public together. It’s early days, but they’re getting on well.”

They dated for a short while, and he supposedly even met her family over the Thanksgiving holiday. They broke up in December.

“They still talk. They were getting to know each other, but realized they might be better off just being friendly,” a source told People.

Kris Humphries: 2010–2011

Kardashian’s relationship with Kris Humphries was one of her most publicized. She began dating the basketball player in December 2010, and he ended up proposing to her in front of the cameras on Keeping Up with the Kardashians. They were married in August 2011 after less than a year together, and the wedding was a huge event in Montecito, California.

In later episodes of Keeping Up with the Kardashians, it was revealed that in the days leading up to their wedding, their relationship was already experiencing some conflict. Only 72 days after their marriage, Kardashian filed for divorce. She cited “irreconcilable differences,” and offered a statement to fans that read, “I hope everyone understands this was not an easy decision. I had hoped this marriage was forever, but sometimes things don’t work out as planned. We remain friends and wish each other the best.”

Humphries, however, wanted the marriage annulled and claimed fraud. They eventually settled in April 2013 and were officially divorced in June 2013.

Kardashian later said in an interview with Andy Cohen that she knew the marriage wouldn’t work by the time she was on her honeymoon, but she felt pressured to go through with the ceremony.

“I just thought, ‘Holy shit, I’m 30 years old, I better get this together. I better get married,’” she said.

For his part, Humphries said in 2019 that their relationship was real despite rumors of the production being for the show.

“Look, I should have known what I was getting into,” Humphries explained. “I was definitely naive about how much my life was going to change. But the one thing that really bothers me is whenever people say that my marriage was fake.”

He added, “There’s definitely a lot about that world that is not entirely real. But our actual relationship was 100 percent real. When it was clear that it wasn’t working… what can I say? It sucked.”

Kanye West: 2012–2021

Rapper Kanye West was interested in Kardashian long before they got married. He met her early in the 2000s while she was working with Brandy and they met on a music video shoot. They allegedly spent more intimate time together in 2008 after working on the pilot episode of a show called Alligator Boots that never aired. They became friends, but he supposedly always kept tabs on her relationships—and even told her not to marry Humphries.

“I got a phone because somebody decided they wanted to marry Kris Humphries,” he said in the finale of Khloé Kardashian’s former talk show, Kocktails with Khloé. “I wasn’t up to anything, and I looked on the Internet, and there was Kim with some extremely tall person, and I was like, ‘I need to call her or something.’”

He continued, “I started sending her pictures of certain basketball players that used to be cool, but now they wear their pants like all the way up here...‘This is your future!’’

After she and Humphries split, she flew to Paris to see West’s fashion show and they soon began dating. They announced that they were expecting a child at the end of 2012, and welcomed North West in June 2013. West proposed at San Francisco’s AT&T Park in October, renting out the whole place. They were married in May 2014 at Forte di Belvedere in Florence, Italy.

They went on to have three more children: Saint, Chicago, and Psalm.

In 2020, their relationship began to crumble, and they were reportedly living apart by December of that year. In February 2021, Kardashian filed for divorce, and she was declared legally single in March 2022 as they worked out the details of their shared property. It was finalized in November 2022 with an agreement to joint physical and legal custody of their kids. West was also ordered to pay Kardashian $200,000 a month in child support.

“If people knew what my relationship really was like, I think they would be like, ‘How did this last this long?’ But I can live with myself knowing that I tried everything humanly possible to make a situation work and so I can walk away feeling absolutely guilt-free,” the SKIMS founder said on an episode of The Kardashians.

In October 2021, Kardashian and West still appeared to have a friendly relationship, and he accompanied her in New York City when she appeared on Saturday Night Live as a host.

However, that is where she connected with comedian Pete Davidson, whom she dated for a little less than a year afterwards. West’s attitude towards his ex devolved in public, with threats made to Davidson in his music and on social media. He openly admitted to wanting to reconcile with Kardashian, but has since moved on and married his wife, Bianca Censori.

Pete Davidson: 2021–2022

After her appearance on SNL, Kardashian was seen with Pete Davidson at Knott’s Scary Farm in Los Angeles, holding hands on a roller coaster. They made more appearances around New York together, and he traveled to Los Angeles to celebrate his 28th birthday. They attended a number of public events, including the Met Gala in 2022.

In July 2022, Davidson had to work on a film in Australia, and while Kardashian visited, it seemed like the differences in their schedules and location made it too difficult to keep dating.

“Part of the reason they split was because of their busy schedules. They both travel all the time, and it was hard,” an insider told People. A second source added, “They really hit it off and had a ton of fun together, but it feels like it ran its course.”

In a June 2023 episode of The Kardashians, Kardashian discussed the attention they got from the media.

“You obviously learn from every situation, and the one thing I learned from last situation was the media made me feel like I was in a very serious relationship so quickly,” Kardashian said. “I just want to sneak around a little bit. There’s nothing wrong with wanting to sneak!”

Odell Beckham Jr.: 2023–2024

In September 2023, an insider told People that Kardashian and Baltimore Ravens wide receiver Odell Beckham Jr. were seen “hanging out” after his split from Lauren Wood. She was seen at his birthday in November.