BEFORE Kanye West, Kim Kardashian was married to Kris Humphries.

After the fashion mogul's divorce from Kanye West and recent split from boyfriend, Pete Davidson, Kim is once again, a free agent.

Who is Kris Humphries?

Born Kristopher Nathan Humphries on February 6, 1985, the 37-year-old is a former professional basketball player.

He played in the NBA for teams like the Utah Jazz, Toronto Raptors, Dallas Mavericks and Brooklyn Nets.

Kris played college basketball for the Minnesota Golden Gophers of the University of Minnesota.

He was also part of the US men's national basketball team.

What is Kris Humphries' net worth?

Kris has an impressive bank balance thanks to his time as an NBA player.

He has a whopping $35million in his bank account and an impressive portfolio of houses.

After being cut from the Philadelphia 76ers roster in 2018, Kris has returned to a quieter lifestyle in his native Minnesota.

He is single and now works in real estate and fast-food franchising.

A source told Us Weekly: "Kris tries to stay as far out of the spotlight as possible. He's enjoying the single life."

It was reported in 2018 that Kris became a franchise partner for Crisp & Green and opened up numerous Five Guys restaurants in Minnesota and Wisconsin.

Kris has also become a real estate agent, according to the Daily Mail.

When did Kim Kardashian and Kris Humphries get married?

Kris is best known for his 72-day marriage to Kim Kardashian, 41.

They were together for less than a year before he proposed and on August 20, 2011, the pair officially tied the knot in a two-part E! News special showing the preparations and the wedding itself.

But despite being touted as "Kim's fairytale wedding" things did not last.

On October 31, 2011, it was announced that Kim had filed for divorce from Kris.

On December 1, 2011, Kris filed his response to Kim's petition, requesting an annulment on the grounds of fraud or a decree of legal separation rather than the requested divorce.

After a lengthy legal battle, the former couple reached a divorce settlement which was finalized on June 3, 2013.

What did Kim say about Humphries?

During the Keeping Up with the Kardashians reunion episode on June 17, 2021, Kim said she owes Humphries an apology, saying she handled the split "totally the wrong way."

Kris Jenner explained that the night before Kim and Kris' rehearsal dinner, she tried to talk her daughter out of tying the knot.

"What you said to me is: 'I'm going to put you in a car, no one will find you, just leave and I'll handle it,'" Kim recalled her mom saying.

"And I thought, 'Okay, we're filming this for a TV show. If I leave, I'm going to be known as the runaway bride forever and it's going to be a huge joke, and I think I just have cold feet.'

"So I was like, 'Okay guys, it's just cold feet, I got this, it's cold feet, we're filming the show.'"

Kim then ridiculed rumors that her wedding to Kris was a publicity stunt.

"The show paid us, obviously, a fee to film the show. I took my entire fee and probably Kris' because I wanted a bigger wedding than what they were going to pay for," she said.

"So I used all of our production money on the wedding, right. So, if that was fake, I would have saved my money."

"Would you say you partially went through with the wedding because of the show?" host Andy Cohen asked.

"Yes," Kim said.

"Because I felt pressured, I felt like I was going to let everyone down."

Kim then admitted that she handled their breakup "the wrong way," and owes him an apology.

"I was so nervous to break up with someone, I handled it totally the wrong way," she shared.

"I fully broke up with him in the worst way, and I couldn't, I just didn't know how to deal, I learned so much from it."

"Do you think you owe him an apology?" Cohen asked, to which Kim replied, "Absolutely, and I tried to, I tried calling him for months."

Kim revealed that Kris wanted an annulment of their marriage rather than a divorce, but she insisted on the divorce.

Looking back, she wishes she had gone ahead with the annulment.

"I wish I was only married once," she said.