Before there was Kanye and Kim, there was Kim and Kris. Between 2011 and 2013, Kim Kardashian West was married to former professional basketball player Kris Humphries, who played with the Atlanta Hawks and several other teams during his tenure on the court. And compared to Kim's current husband, Humphries doesn't keep himself in the public eye quite as often. The details of his short-lived marriage weren't as well-known from his perspective. But now they've each moved on by now, Kris Humphries feels comfortable coming forward with his side of the story.

In the article Kris Humphries penned for The Players' Tribute, the basketball player discussed his short-lived marriage to Kim Kardashian West, which wasn't necessarily a secret given that it was covered on Keeping Up with the Kardashians. But the professional athlete wanted to address criticisms made against him saying that his marriage was fraudulent and only for show. Humphries claims that, while it wasn't ultimately a successful marriage, it was a real one. And while it "sucks" that it didn't ultimately work out for the couple, Kris Humphries claims it wasn't fake.

While the autobiographical article was meant to discuss Kris Humphries' career and his announcement that he was retiring from the NBA, it was ultimately his introspective and clarifying comments about his high-profile marriage to Kim Kardashian West that got the most notice. The basketball player admits that, away from his accomplishments as an athlete, he's often known and semi-recognized in the public eye as "That Guy" or, more explicitly, "That Fucking Guy" due to his previous marriage to Kim Kardashian. And while that's "brutal," Humphries has learned to work past these insecurities and hopefully move on as best as he can.

Kris Humphries admits that he should've known what he was getting into when he got into such a media-friendly marriage with a major celebrity, but he wasn't thinking about the bigger picture stuff at the time since he was young and "naive." But the public nature of their relationship did hinder his life after he signed the divorce papers, and Humphries claims he wasn't able to live out his life in a normal fashion for a span of time due to the high profile nature of this relationship.