A source close to Kim Kardashian has said her marriage to Kris Humphries is over.

"I don’t know when they’ll announce the split or why they got married in the first place but they are done," the source told The Daily Mail.

The source has also said that Kardashian's agent at William Morris Endeavor Entertainment had dropped Humphries and that there are no plans to spotlight the couple on a reality show.

Get Our Latest News for FREE

Subscribe to get daily/weekly email with the top stories (plus special offers!) from The Christian Post. Be the first to know.

"They are divorcing. They haven’t been together for a month and while Kim has been staying in New York she has been staying in a hotel room which Kris has failed to visit."

Star magazine has said that Kardashian may have already contacted a top divorce lawyer.

The magazine also claims that Humphries has been seen partying in Miami and New York without his wife, "acting like a single man."

A producer of "Kourtney & Kim Take New York" told Life & Style magazine: "Kim's mapping out 2012, including holidays, and Kris isn't a part of it. Any itineraries for the future don't include Kris very much."

The couple hasn't had much time together since the wedding due to Kardashian's busy schedule.

Kardashian and Humphries were married in late August in one of the biggest celebrity events of the year.

The reality television star celebrated her nuptials with 450 guests including singer Ciara, tennis star Serena Williams and actress Lindsay Lohan. Her sisters Kourtney and Khloe were bridesmaids at the event, in which Khloe called perfect.

According to Kim’s stepfather who walked her down the aisle, Bruce Jenner, the event was more than just a wedding. It represented the union of the Humphries and Kardashians.

“Tonight is really about family- joining two families,” Jenner said.

The couple said they would put off a real honeymoon until 2012 but took a weekend trip to the Italian island of Capri just days after their wedding.