Carmit Bachar (Hebrew: כרמית בכר‎; born September 4, 1974) is an American singer, dancer, model, actress and showgirl. She was a member of the successful pop/R&B group, the Pussycat Dolls and one of the main vocalists of the group, along with Nicole Scherzinger and Melody Thornton. Bachar left the group in February 2008. She is currently engaged and gave birth to a baby girl named Keala Rose on September 18, 2011. She is currently a member of electro/pop duo called LadyStation.

image credit

Carmit Bachar by lukeford.net, is licensed under cc-by-sa-2.5, resized from the original.

You can think of the planets as symbolizing core parts of the human personality, and the signs as different colors of consciousness through which they filter.* Sidereal Planetary Positions enabled in settings.* Because the birth time information is missing for this chart, the Moon may range up to 6° before or after this position.

Create Your Astrology Birth Chart

Create your free, personalized, and highly customizable birth chart (natal chart) by filling in the form below. Using our tools you can hide/show planets and asteroids, choose a house system, customize orbs, show declinations, sidereal charts and more...

Fill in your details

My name is:

I was born in:

The section describes some additional features of this chart. Note the inner planets refer to Sun to Jupiter, as well as the Ascendant and MC, and represent the core parts of the personality.

Parallels occur when two planets are at the same declination, both in the north or south. They are considered to have the same effect as conjunctions. Contraparallels are when one star in the north and another in the south are at the same declination. They are considered to have the same effect as oppositions.

Daylight Savings Time:

Our system detects whether DST was applied using the Olson timezone database. However, DST was not applied consistently before the 70s. Manually set DST if you believe it is not applied correctly.

Auto-detect Apply Don't Apply