Carmit Bachar, known professionally as Carmit, is an American-Israeli singer, dancer, model, actress and showgirl. She was part of the original Burlesque group and was the longest standing member until her departure in 2008. She, along with Nicole Scherzinger, Kaya Jones and Melody Thornton, were made the four primary vocalists in the group. Carmit was mostly recognized with her signature red hair. She was nicknamed "Foxy Doll".

Early years[]

Carmit was born in Los Angeles, her father is of Jewish Israeli descent and her mother is of Indonesian, Dutch and Chinese descent. She was born with a cleft lip and cleft palate. She was raised in Encino, California. Both parents were dancers; her mother worked as a dance teacher at Bancroft Middle School of Performing Arts and her father worked with Elvis Presley and Marcel Marceau. Carmit competed internationally as a rhythmic gymnast for 10 years, and placed 5th in the U.S. Olympic trials in 1992. During her career competing on the U.S. National Team, she attended Hamilton Academy of Music in Los Angeles, studying music, dance, piano and viola.

Career[]

Bachar has appeared in several films, including 13 Going on 30, Along Came Polly, The Scorpion King and 2003's Charlie's Angels: Full Throttle featuring The Pussycat Dolls.

In 1997, Bachar was credited as a dancer in the Nickelodeon Movies film, Good Burger.

As a freelance dancer she has toured or appeared live with several rock/pop acts. In 1999 and 2000, she was the "Livin' La Vida Loca" woman in Ricky Martin's world tour. In 2003 No Doubt's world tour, and appears on stage with Gwen Stefani during "Bathwater" in No Doubt's DVD Rock Steady Live. In 2001, she was a dancer for Aaliyah's music video "Rock the Boat". In 2004 she was a back-up dancer for Janet Jackson during the infamous Super Bowl half-time show. In 2004, she was a dancer for Beyoncé's tours and appears on Her 2004 DVD Live at Wembley. She appeared in more than 21 music videos including Macy Gray's "Sexual Revolution", Jennifer Lopez's "Ain't It Funny", Wyclef Jean's "Perfect Gentleman", the Black Eyed Peas's "Shut Up", Michael Jackson's "Blood On The Dance Floor", Aaliyah's "Rock the Boat", the Offspring's "Why Don't You Get a Job?", and also Beyoncé's "Crazy in Love" and "Baby Boy".

The Pussycat Dolls[]

Bachar joined The Pussycat Dolls in 1995 while they were a burlesque show. In 2002, she brought her friend Gwen Stefani to perform at the Pussycat Dolls show. Stefani brought along Interscope's Ron Fair and Jimmy Iovine. Later, the Dolls got signed at Interscope Records.

Bachar was a member of the Dolls longer than any other performer being that she started in 1995 with the Burlesque show and left in 2008 after five years with the recording group. She was also the first doll to be signed into the recording group. Most of the then members, including lead singer Nicole Scherzinger and singer Melody Thornton, were cast by co-founder Robin Antin in 2003, when the group was being transformed into pop recording artists.

In 2006 and 2007, she toured with the Dolls in support of their multi-million selling album PCD. She was one of the three lead vocalists in the group, and had lead parts in the songs "We Went as Far as We Felt Like Going", "Beep", "Buttons", "I Don't Need a Man", "Hot Stuff (I Want You Back)", "Right Now" and "Tainted Love / Where Did Our Love Go". She also sung lead in live performances of "Fever", "Whole Lotta Love and among others.

In February 2008, reports surfaced that she was leaving the group to pursue solo projects. On March 8, 2008, Bachar officially announced her departure from the Pussycat Dolls on the group's official website.

Thornton gave Bachar special thanks in the 'Thank You' section of the Pussycat Dolls' second album Doll Domination.

In November 2019, it was announced that the group had reformed and were going on a reunion tour in 2020, with Bachar officially returning. On December 5, she and Jessica Sutta announced during an interview with Entertainment Tonight that a new album was in the works.

On February 7, 2020, the group's comeback single, "React" was released, which Bachar provided background vocals to. The reunion tour was put on hold due to the COVID-19 pandemic. After numerous setbacks and an ongoing lawsuit between Scherzinger and group founder, Robin Antin, the tour was officially cancelled in January 2022. According to a joint statement made by Bachar and Sutta, they were unaware of the cancellation until they saw Scherzinger’s Instagram post.

Solo discography[]

Extended plays[]

Detroit Diamond Feat. Carmit (2010)

Voices (2015)

Songs[]

This is a list of songs Carmit can be heard in.

From PCD:

"Beep"

"Bite the Dust"

"Buttons"

"Don't Cha"

"Flirt"

"Hot Stuff (I Want You Back)"

"How Many Times, How Many Lies"

"I Don't Need a Man"

"Right Now"

"Sway"

"Stickwitu"

"Tainted Love / Where Did Our Love Go"

"We Went as Far as We Felt Like Going"

Other:

"Don't Cha" (Sims version)

"React"

"Santa Baby"

Unreleased:

"Impressed"

"Supernatural"

Gallery[]

Main article: Carmit Bachar/Gallery

Personal life[]

Carmit has one daughter, Keala Rose, who was born September 18, 2011. She is married to Kevin Whitaker.

Trivia[]

Carmit was born with a cleft lip and palette. This caused her to go through many surgeries and was teased for it.[1]

She wants to create a non-profit organization called "Smile With Me": "I want to have my own charity for children and adults who are born with a cleft palate. I was born with one and I want to educate and inspire people by saying that inner beauty is more important than looks."

She is an ambassador of "Operation Smile", a worldwide children's medical charity that helps improve the health and lives of children and young adults born with facial deformities.

She attended Jessica's wedding.

She appeared as a dancer for Beyoncé's "Crazy in Love" music video.

She gives really good advice according to the Dolls.

She is the oldest member of the group.

In 2002, she brought her friend Gwen Stefani to perform at a Pussycat Dolls show.

Melody gave her a special thanks in the "Thank You" section of Doll Domination.

Her favorite snack food are chips.