Friday, November 07, 1997 Page:

Bloomsburg’s Hale nears hardy record

After four years away from the sidelines, Danny Hale found himself longing

for a coaching comebackHe never thought his return would challenge the most

famous name in Bloomsburg football history.

But by the time Bloomsburg ends its battle with West Chester on Saturday,

Hale could find himself alone at the top.

The soft-spoken head coach needs just one more victory to raise his career

total at Bloomsburg to 39, which would be the most attained by a Huskies coach

in the 1900s. A.K. Aldinger amassed 51 victories in 10 years coaching

Bloomsburg, but worked there from 1894 to 1898 and again from 1901 to 1905.

Currently, Hale shares the modern record with Robert B. Redman, the man

after whom the school’s football stadium is now named.

Redman coached Bloomsburg to 38 victories from 1947 to 1951.

“Pretty good name there to be associated with,” Hale said.

Don’t expect Hale to start doing cartwheels when he attains the record,

though. He’ll be too busy looking ahead.

“I really haven’t thought about it,” Hale said. “Don’t even want to think

about it. That’s something you want to think about when you look back.”

A look into his past shows it would be ironic if Hale accomplishes the feat

Saturday.

A West Chester graduate, Hale coached the school to five winning seasons in

the 1980s, winning the PSAC East championship in 1986 and 1987 and leading the

Golden Rams to the 1988 NCAA Division II playoffs.

“That was a program where if you do things the right way, you should win

some games,” Hale said.

But after the NCAA playoff berth, Hale had personal differences with the

West Chester administration. He left the program, and promised his wife he’d

stay away from the college sidelines.

For four years, Hale kept it, until she urged him to grab the headsets

again.

“I guess after she had me for four years, she told me, `Go back to

coaching!’|” Hale laughed.

He did, and Bloomsburg’s been better off for it. What’s more, he’s guided

Bloomsburg to victory in all four meetings with his old West Chester team.

“I do love it here,” Hale said. “It’s been a great school for me. I feel

fortunate.”

* * *

CONFERENCE QUEST: With two losses, this year is highly unlikely to include

a postseason for Bloomsburg.

But the Huskies can accomplish an impressive goal.

No team has ever won four consecutive Eastern Division championships in the

PSAC, and Bloomsburg could become the first by beating division rivals West

Chester Saturday and East Strousburg next week.

“That’s our goal as a team, to go for that,” Hale said.

That’s helped the Huskies overcome a disheartening 34-29 loss at

Shippensburg on Oct. 25, which crushed Bloom’s hopes for an NCAA Division II

playoff bid.

Actually, the Huskies’ fall was set up by an 18-13 loss to Indiana (Pa.)

Sept. 13- Bloomsburg’s only loss at home in two seasons.

“That gave us no margin for error,” Hale said. “Even at that, had we

finished 9-1, it was going to be difficult, as the season’s unfolding. With a

second loss, you’re going to be out.”

* * *

STILL CHASING: Speaking of milestones, King’s College’s dazzling tailback

Jim DeMaise still needs four yards to break the school’s modern era

single-season rushing record.

DeMaise entered last week’s loss to Widener with 790 yards this season. But

he was still nursing an ankle sprain, and didn’t play in that game because

torrential downpours and muddy conditions in Chester weren’t conducive to his

recovery.

Against FDU-Madison this weekend, DeMaise should easily break the school

record of 793 yards, set by current teammate Mike Conaghan last year.

With two games remaining, DeMaise (who averages 112 rushing yards per game)

also has an excellent shot to become the school’s first 1,000-yard rusher

since King’s returned to varsity football in 1993.

* * *

RETURN OF NOSEY NATE: King’s received a big boost last week when freshman

Nate Houston reassumed his familiar spot at nose guard.

Houston, a 6-foot, 250-pound lineman from Philadelphia, missed two games

because of injury before he returned against Widener. He is part of a

defensive unit that struggled early, while allowing its first three opponents

over 455 offensive yards per game, but has held its last five foes to an

average of 305.2 yards.

The Monarchs are hoping Houston doesn’t pack in his physical prowess when

football season ends a week from Saturday. He won the national prep school

heavyweight wrestling championship at Cardinal Dougherty High School last

year, and King’s would like to see him pin down a few more victories on the

mat.

Paul Sokoloski