LinkedIn and 3rd parties use essential and non-essential cookies to provide, secure, analyze and improve our Services, and to show you relevant ads (including professional and job ads) on and off LinkedIn. Learn more in our Cookie Policy.

Select Accept to consent or Reject to decline non-essential cookies for this use. You can update your choices at any time in your settings.

The very first team to take the field with numbers on the back of their uniforms were the NY Yankees in 1929. Since then, the franchise has retired 22 numbers (excluding Jackie Robinson’s 42). It makes sense. I have written, at length, about requirements needed for having a number retired in past articles. I am not going to revisit that enigma (please refer to my previous works). The short answer is to honor the player. The Bombers have been doing it the longest, they should have the most. Nine of the 22 are not in the Hall of Fame.

Jersey numbers one through ten are all retired. Yes, no single digit will be worn again in a Yankee uniform. The last one was Derek Jeter’s number two. Has any player worn a “0”? Yes, two players have, Adam Ottavino and Jordy Mercer in 2019 and 2020. Strangely enough, Sam Gibson and Roy Schalk were the last two players that didn’t wear any number. Gibson pitched only for one season for the Yankees, 1930. In 1932 he was given the number 17 while playing the NY Giants. Another lesser-known Yankee, Roy Schalk, played only three games during the 1932 season. Schalk moved on to play for the White Sox and worn numbers six and seven. Other oddities include Spud Chandler being the first player to wear number 13 in 1937. Number 14 was issued to George Pipgras in 1929. Eight years of no one wearing the number 13. Triskaidekaphobia, perhaps? Furthermore, Aaron Judge is not the first to wear number 99. Charlie Keller in 1952 was. In fact, Judge is the fourth player to wear number 99 for the Yankees. Most used number is 26 worn by 77 players. Here is a current list of retired numbers:

It is a common misconception that Babe Ruth’s number three was the first number retired. Lou Gehrig’s number four was. Ruth’s number three was retired in 1948; less than two months before his death. But during Ruth’s absence, Yankees made what can now be viewed as a scandalous and outrageous move by continuing to assign the number three. Seven other players wore Ruth’s three after his departure. How dare they!

During rookie seasons, it is unknown if a players will reach their potential. Numbers are assigned without a reason. Its their rookie season and I’m sure they are glad just to make the team. Certain players are known by their number, like Ruth’s three. Other players weren’t as lucky. Long time Yankee captain and first baseman Don Mattingly wore number 46 for his first two seasons. Icon Joe DiMaggio wore number nine in his 1936 rookie season. The catching duo of Bill Dickey and Yogi Berra didn’t start their Yankees career with their double retired number eight. Dickey began with 10 and Berra started with 38. Even the mighty Mickey Mantle started with number six in 1951 and switched to seven. Conversely, Derek Jeter, Ron Guidry, and Bernie Williams, all home-grown talent, wore only one number.

There are 88 unretired numbers left for the Yankees to use. It seems like a lot but consider one number for every player on a 40-player roster. Leaving 48 numbers left for the coaching staff. That brings it down to roughly 40 numbers remaining. How long will those numbers last? Will the organization reevaluate what standards are required to retire a number? Could a third digit be seen on a jersey in our lifetime?