NEW YORK - The lowest, unissued number available on the New York Yankees now belongs to Anthony Volpe.

The homegrown rookie from Watchung, New Jersey, will trot out to shortstop for Thursday's Opening Day start at Yankee Stadium wearing No. 11, having traded in his No. 77 from spring training.

YES Network analyst Jack Curry was first to report Volpe's number change via Twitter.

New at Yankee Stadium: If you're going, check out the specialty fried chicken, 99 Burger & more

With Domingo German wearing No. 0, and Nos. 1 through 10 retired by the Yankees, the No. 11 - last worn by Brett Gardner during the 2021 season - was claimed by Volpe.

A career Yankees outfielder, Gardner had a long and productive career that is worthy of a plaque in Monument Park.

Yankees Predictions: Here are the best-case and worst-case scenarios for 2023 season

Volpe, 21, will be making his MLB debut Thursday against the San Francisco Giants at Yankee Stadium, and he'll be the Yankees' first rookie shortstop in the Opening Day lineup since Derek Jeter in 1996, the first Yankees rookie to make his MLB debut on Opening Day since Hideki Matsui in 2003, and the first Yankees rookie in their Opening Day lineup overall since Aaron Judge in 2017.

Yankees add an outfielder

On the eve of Opening Day, the Yankees agreed to terms with lefty-hitting outfielder Franchy Cordero on a split contract worth $1 million in the majors, according to ESPN's Jeff Passan.

Cordero, 28, had been in spring training with the Baltimore Orioles, who released him after batting .413 (19-for-46) in 18 Grapefruit League games, with four doubles, a triple, two home runs, zero walks and 11 strikeouts.

A day earlier, the Yankees released non-roster center fielder Rafael Ortega, optioned right-handed reliever Greg Weissert to Triple-A and reassigned veteran outfielder Willie Calhoun and reliever Ian Hamilton to minor league camp.

Cordero's presence suggests that Yankees lefty-hitting outfielder Estevan Florial, who is out of minor league options, might be involved in a trade for pitching help. Otherwise, he's a candidate for release.

Over parts of six big-league seasons with San Diego, Kansas City and Boston, Cordero has flashed power but owns just a .290 career on-base percentage in 227 games.

The Yankees will open the season with center fielder Harrison Bader (strained left oblique) on the injured list. He might be ready to return by mid-to-late April.

Cordero spent the last two seasons with the Red Sox and batted .219 (53-for-242) in 84 games, with eight homers and 29 RBI.

Defensively last season for Boston, Cordero made starts at first base (47), right field (11), left field (8) and center field (1).