The plot blurb mentions the incestuous relationship between daughter Isabelle Huppert and mother Hanna Schygulla and sure, there is some of that. The scene that stuck out to me the most however, was the one in which father Marcello Mastroianni (!!) asks his daughter to show him her legs, tells her they're not as pretty as her mother's, to which she flashes him her impressive bush and asks him if it is as pretty as her mother's. They both laugh and Huppert rest her hands on Mastroianni's crotch.

Interesting family dynamics to say the least.

I am not at all familiar with director Marco Ferreri but I am intrigued to find out what more he did!

I´ve heard that Marco Ferreri was a provocateur filmmaker and yeah, I can see that. “The Story of Piera” is a bizarre coming of age film that follows a girl/young woman with a……let´s say complicated and eccentric relationship with both her parents. Either relationship has strong incestuous overtones, and both parents eventually end up in a mental asylum. I don´t quite know what to think about this film, since I don´t fully understand the symbolism and themes, but I enjoyed the dreamy, off-kilter vibe. Also, with Isabelle Huppert, Marcello Mastroianni, and Hanna Schygulla, the movie stars royalty of European arthouse cinema. I guess what I take home from this is that if you have a complicated relationship with your mother, maybe you two need to hug it out naked on a beach.

So this is a film which is built around a family and their relationship over the years, with that family played by an impressive multinational cast - legendary actor Marcello Mastroianni, still trouping on at this late date, as the father; Hanna Schygulla still fresh off the back of her successes with Fassbinder and continuing to star in important European films as the mother; and Isabelle Huppert as their daughter, the eponymous Piera. There's only about 10 years age difference between Schygulla and Huppert but given that Isabelle has always looked substantially younger than she is it doesn't pose as much of a problem as it might seem at first.

Now add in the fact that this family are completely…

I always knew that Hanna Schygulla had won a Best Actress prize in Cannes at one point in the 80s, but for some reason, I never bothered to seek the film out until now, or even tried to find out what it is about until now. Turns out it's quite a strange one.

In The Story of Piera, Hanna Schygulla and Marcello Mastroianni are husband and wife, and their daughter grows up to be Isabelle Huppert, which is a combination of actors that makes this film worth seeing already. In the course of the film, Schygulla goes increasingly mad, and both she and Mastroianni share scenes with Huppert that the plot description here on Letterboxd accurately describes as incestuous. In addition to that, there is not a single relationship between any two characters on the screen that I wouldn't describe as "seriously fucked up".

It's.... well, something.

Marco Ferreri films ranked

Going further down the Ferreri rabbit hole one begins to see recurring themes and while that may be true they never fail to surprise me in his provocative ways and always create a conflicting experience. The Story Of Piera is no exception, delivering a very literal Freudian perspective on the potential pitfalls of parent/child relationships. Ferreri takes the Oedipus Complex out of the realm of unconscious fantasy and turns it into conscious reality, creating a nightmarish landscape of repressed desires becoming realized, wreaking havoc on a family of damaged souls. Ferrari gives us his own example of art imitating life through this highly symbolic work.

It's indeed a film full of humanity, love, feelings and perversion. Here, Ferreri occupies beautiful images to create, recreate and deconstruct a family structure. Where there is no cultural or social taboo and every taboo is being shown as a casual and free gesture. It certainly knows how to film and capture the essence of these three European stars. It's bleak, but elegant and captivating.

If I had a nickel for everytime I've seen a film where Isabelle Huppert has the most toxic relationship known to man with her mother, her father "dies" in a mental institution, she asks a man to masturbate in front of her then proceeds to give him a blowjob, AND where at least one actress clearly doesn't speak the language of the film so all her lines are dubbed : I'd have two nickels.

Which isn't a lot but it's weird that it happened twice.