Some time back, Joe Jonas voiced an interest in doing another Camp Rock, the hit Disney Channel Original Movie that starred himself, his brothers (who were still The Jonas Brothers back then) and Demi Lovato. But the twist was that he wanted to do something interesting with it, and make it an R-rated film. We all had our chuckles at the thought of a Disney movie with swears and went on our merry way, but Joe isn't the only Jonas who'd be down for an R-rated return. Nick Jonas has now echoed a similar interest as well.

Nick Jonas spoke with People about the possibility of ever making one more Camp Rock movie, and the singer is definitely not against the idea. But if you're going to return to a movie series as beloved by its fanbase as Camp Rock, then Jonas proposes that you need to move in a creative direction to make it worthwhile. In this case, one of those directions is to go for an R-rating, which is an odd choice for a TV movie that aired on Disney Channel and was aimed at teens, tweens, and everything inbetweens.

For those who you who didn't watch the Disney Channel in 2008 and 2010, Camp Rock and its sequel, Camp Rock 2: The Final Jam, were Disney Channel Original Movies (DCOM) that followed a group of teenagers who attended a musical summer camp called -- you guessed it -- Camp Rock. The movies were a platform for then teenaged Joe, Nick, and Kevin Jonas, as well as Demi Lovato -- all of whom would go on to have successful careers in music. To date, Camp Rock is the third highest rated DCOM of all time, behind High School Musical 2 and Wizards of Waverly Place: The Movie.

The idea for an R-rated Camp Rock 3 was first proposed by Joe Jonas, who told Marie Claire that they could do the "graduating days" and "make it kinda dark." Apparently, it's an idea he, his brothers and Demi Lovato have talked/joked about for some time. Lovato herself further explained the idea on The Ellen DeGeneres Show, elaborating that fans of the film had grown-up by now, so it makes sense to make a film that reflects that. That's a solid point, and now Nick Jonas is further backing it up.

Is an R-rated Camp Rock 3 on the way? My guess would be an emphatic no. Hell, they'd be lucky if they got a PG-13 rating, but certainly crazier things have happened in this world. What do you all think? Is Camp Rock coming back for more singing, dancing, swearing, and perhaps mild nudity? Sound off in the comments below.