THIS IS FOR THE CAMP ROCK CAST.

Camp Rock is a 2008 Disney Channel Original Movie starring the Jonas Brothers and Demi Lovato. The music is written by Julie Brown, Paul Brown, Regina Hicks and Karen Gist. The film debuted on the Disney Channel on June 20, 2008. The film was watched by 8.9 million viewers on the night of its premiere, making it the second highest viewed DCOM behind High School Musical 2, at the time. After the premiere of Wizards of Waverly Place: The Movie, Camp Rock was displaced to the third highest viewed film premiere.The Camp Rock soundtrack debuted at #3 on the Billboard charts, selling over 188,000 units in its first week. The album was certified Platinum by the RIAA and sold over 1,257,000 copies to date. In Brazil the album was certified Platinum by the ABPD and sold over 60,000 copies until 2009.Camp Rock premiered on the Disney Channel on June 20, 2008 with 8.86 million viewers. Its June 21 showing on ABC had 3.47 million viewers, and its June 22 showing on ABC Family had 3.73 million viewers.Its Disney Channel Italy premier received 1.14 million viewers on September 2008.

Plot

The story follows Mitchie Torres (Demi Lovato), an aspiring young musician who is hoping to become a professional singer. Mitchie wants to go to a music camp named "Camp Rock". Since the family can't afford the tuition, Mitchie's mother arranges to cater food for the camp, thus allowing Mitchie to attend. Mitchie tries to conceal this from her friends at camp. She is shy to sing in front of people.

Spoiled brat/pop star Shane Gray (Joe Jonas) has been assigned to be in charge of dance classes for one month at Camp Rock by his bandmates Jason (Kevin Jonas) and Nate (Nick Jonas). Shane hears Mitchie singing and falls in love with the voice, but does not know the identity of the singer. Shane spends much of the film searching for the girl with the voice. Shane and Mitchie have various interactions, and, when Shane learns her identity, a romance between the two blossoms.

Characters and cast

* Mitchie Torres (Demi Lovato) is a girl who hopes to be a singer some day. Her dream is to go to Camp Rock, but her family cannot afford the expensive camp. The only way she could go was if her mother would be the cook, and she tries to hide that fact in fear of rejection.

* Shane Gray (Joe Jonas) is the famous lead singer of the band "Connect 3". He is sent to Camp Rock, in hopes that it would help him, and get rid of his cocky and arrogant attitude. At the camp, he hears a terrific voice, and spends most of his time trying to find the girl who sang (who is really Mitchie.) Later, he meets Mitchie and they become friends, yet he doesn't know it is the girl with the voice. He eventually finds out she is the girl with the voice towards the end of the film.

* Tess Tyler (Meaghan Jette Martin) is the daughter of the famous T.J. Tyler, and one day wishes to be a singer, like her mother. She is a diva and often gets her way, even if she has to hurt people. She craves attention and is always hoping to impress Shane; the reason for her behavior is because her mother was often too busy with her career to care for or even pay attention to her. Upon meeting Mitchie, Tess immediately sees her as competition and makes several plots to get her out of the way, ranging from casting Mitchie as a backup singer in her group to framing her for the theft of Tess's charm bracelet. However, during the Final Jam, Tess receives poetic justice when she trips upon seeing her mother distracted by a cell phone call; thinking about what she has done, Tess subsequently congratulates Peggy for winning the Final Jam and personally apologizes to Mitchie for her actions.

* Caitlyn Gellar (Alyson Stoner) is Mitchie's best friend at camp, and is one of the few people who stick by her side when Tess reveals Mitchie's secret. She wants to be a music producer, and is often seen composing music on her laptop.

* Ella Pador (Anna Maria Perez de Taglé) is Tess' so-called friend and is a little air-headed. Ella abandons Tess when she pushes her too far and instead sings with Barron and Sander at Final Jam, revealing herself to be a good singer.

* Peggy Warburton (Margaret Dupree) (Jasmine Richards) is Tess' other "friend", and often follows Tess, even when her own opinion is different. In the end, she finally rebels, and sings on her own at Final Jam, winning the contest, and surprising everyone with her voice.

* Connie Torres (Maria Canals Barrera) is Mitchie's mom, and also runs a family catering service called "Connie's Catering." Mitchie was, at first, embarrassed that her mother was the Camp Cook.

* Barron James (Jordan Francis) and Sander Lawer (Roshon Fegan) are break-dancers, and are best friends. They also rap, and sang at Final Jam with Ella. They are of the few that stayed on Mitchie's side.

* Lola Scott (Aaryn Doyle) is a singer, and sometimes raps. She is great friends with Caitlyn, and she is a talented singer, although she was not seen performing at Final Jam. She stuck with Mitchie when her secret was revealed.

* Brown Cessario (Daniel Fathers) is Shane's uncle and also runs Camp Rock. He also said he was the guitarist of a band called the "White Crows" and he toured with Areosmith.

* Nate (Nick Jonas) and Jason (Kevin Jonas) are members of "Connect 3".

Soundtrack

Camp Rock (soundtrack)

1. "We Rock" (Cast of Camp Rock)

2. "Play My Music" (Jonas Brothers)

3. "Gotta Find You"(Joe Jonas)

4. "Start the Party" (Jordan Francis)

5. "Who Will I Be" (Demi Lovato)

6. "This is Me" (Demi Lovato, Joe Jonas)

7. "Hasta La Vista" (Jordan Francis, Roshon Fegan)

8. "Here I Am" (Renee Sandstrom)

9. "Too Cool" (Meaghan Jette Martin)

10. "Our Time Is Here" (Demi Lovato, Aaryn Doyle, Meaghan Jette Martin)

11. "2 Stars"(Meaghan Jette Martin)

12. "What It Takes"(Aaryn Doyle)

Merchandise

Merchandise of the film is sold at Target, Claires, and Limited Too. They include clothing (such as pajamas, T-shirts, and underwear), bags (tote bags, backpacks, etc), bedding collection, toys, and dolls of the characters. Play Along Toys, so far, has only released dolls of Mitchie and Shane. On May 13, 2008, Disney published Camp Rock: the Junior Novel, by Lucy Ruggles, the novelization of the film. It has been released to some Scholastic Book Fairs beforehand already. Target retail stores sell "special editions" of the novel. They are hardcover books that include photos.

Sequel.Gary Marsh, the president of Entertainment, Disney Channel World, confirmed that a script was almost complete for Camp Rock 2. According to The Hollywood Reporter, all the principal cast was expected to return, with a special appearance by the Jonas Brothers' young brother, Frankie Jonas.According to a blog in myspace, shooting will begin as soon as the Jonas Brothers complete their North America leg on their world tour and before their next leg in Europe and also when Demi Lovato finishes her tour. Production on the film titled Camp Rock 2: The Final Jam began on September 3, 2009 and is scheduled to premiere in 2010.According to Popstar online.com, Chloe Suazo is expected to become a new camper as Dana Alee. According to Hollywood Reporter.com, the official plot is that Shane Gray and Mitchie Torres return to Camp Rock, only to discover that some of the students and instructors have abandoned it for nearby rival Camp Star. Also joining the cast for Camp Rock 2: The Final Jam is popular hip-hop artist Matthew "Mdot" Finley. Mdot will play the reigning hot-shot singer across the lake at Camp Star who challenges Camp Rock to a musical showdown. There's even a romance moment between Nate and Dana, the daughter of Camp Star's owner. The film is a Disney Channel Original Movie.

Other media

In an episode of Demi Lovato's show Sonny With a Chance, a parody of Camp Rock was made. The episode guest-starred Selena Gomez as herself, auditioning to play the role of "Sonny" in a film directed by Sonny's rival, Chad Dylan Cooper. As Sonny and Gomez fought to earn the role of "Sonny", Gomez eventually storms off the set, proclaiming that she didn't need the role, as she had been in "Camp Hip-Hop". The episode later showed Gomez performing a parody of Camp Rock, herself as Mitchie, as she hip-hop danced with fake Jonas Brothers and Big Rob dancing in the background.

http://www.disneychannel.com/CampRock

THIS IS FOR THE CAMP ROCK STARS