Amersham (previously Agmondesham) is a market town 27 miles north west of London, in the Chiltern Hills, England. It is part of the London commuter belt.

Amersham↑ is widely known because of a multinational pharmaceutical company, Amersham plc (previously known as Amersham International and originally known as The Radiochemical Centre, and acquired in 2004 by the American company General Electric), that took its name from the town.

Amersham is split into two distinct areas: Amersham on the Hill, which is close to the railway station, and Old Amersham, which contains St. Mary's, a 13th century church, and several old inns.

History[]

Records of Amersham date back to pre-Saxon times, when it was known as Agmondesham, and by the time that the Domesday book was written at around 1086 it became known as Elmodesham. The Domesday entry is as follows:

Geoffrey de Mandeville holds Amersham. It answers for 7½ hides. Land for 16 ploughs; in lordship 2 hides; 3 ploughs there. 14 villagers with 4 smallholders have 9 ploughs; a further 4 possible. 7 slaves; meadow for 16 ploughs; woodland 400 pigs. The total value is and was £9; before 1066 £16. Queen Edith held this manor.

Queen Edith was the wife of Edward the Confessor and sister of king Harold, and after her death in 1075 the land passed to William the Conqueror who granted it to Geoffrey de Mandeville. Amersham is linked to London by the Metropolitan Line of London Underground and is the last station on its branch of this line. Much of this line is shared with the mainline railway service, which runs from Marylebone to Aylesbury.

Amersham sent two MPs to the Wikipedia:unreformed House of Commons from 1625, and was considered a rotten borough until the Reform Act 1832 stripped it of its representation. See Amersham (UK Parliament constituency) for more details.

Education[]

Primary Schools in the town include Chestnut Lane Primary, Elangeni School, Chesham Bois Church of England School, St. Mary's Church of England School, St. George's Church of England School and Woodside Junior School.

Secondary schools in the town include Dr Challoner's Grammar School (a grammar school, as the name suggests) and the Amersham School.

Amersham & Wycombe College is the only Further Education establishment in Amersham.

Sport[]

Amersham has a King George's Field in memorial to King George V.

See also[]

Amersham↑

Amersham Museum, in the High Street

River Misbourne, which passes through the town

Shardeloes, a local 18th century↑ country house

Roger Moore, attended Dr Challoner's Grammar School

Tim Rice, born in Amersham

[]

Amersham News, Views & Information

Amersham Town Council

The Best of Amersham ... Find local Businesses, News and Events for Amersham

Saint Mary's Church, Old Amersham

Amersham Field Centre

The old coaching towns of Amersham and Beaconsfield

About Amersham

Amersham Deanery : in the Diocese of Oxford

References[]