Hoboken, NJ Basement Waterproofing Company

Your Top Basement & Foundation Expert

Blue Umbrella is Hoboken’s specialist in basements, crawl spades, and foundations. If you are dealing with water or damage in these spaces, we are the ones to call. When you choose to work with Blue Umbrella, you receive:

Free inspection & estimates

A lifetime warranty

Quality products

Respect for your home

Decades of experience

An Umbrella Maintenance Plan

Does your home need waterproofing?

We provide free inspections so you can find out.

Basement Waterproofing

Does your home need waterproofing?

Before waterproofing your Hoboken basement, you first need to know the cause of the water and the proper steps to correct it. Give Blue Umbrella a call, and we will send over one of our basement specialists for a thorough inspection, creating a customized basement waterproofing plan and answering any questions you may have.

How Does Our Basement Waterproofing Work?

Waterproofing your Hoboken home can be accomplished with exterior or interior waterproofing methods, but interior waterproofing is often the more inexpensive and less intrusive option.

In interior waterproofing, weep holes are drilled along the base of the wall around the interior perimeter of the basement.

The water is collected in a french drain below the weep holes and then channeled to a sump pump. With tough basement water issues, we use Blue Angel sump pumps.

The sump pump pumps the water up and out of the basement, where it is safely dispersed via an exterior drainage system.

A basement dehumidifier is added to control the humidity level, preventing mold growth and rot from occurring.

Benefits of Basement Waterproofing

Basement waterproofing offers more than just a dry basement.

Improved health and a safer environment – A dry basement means no mold growth and none of the allergy problems that can result.

Home value protection - Keeping your basement dry prevents mold damage and rot that could destroy your home’s value.

Extra space - A dry basement offers a whole floor of extra space in your home.

Reduce stress levels - With a properly waterproofed home, you no longer need to worry when heavy rainstorms are in the forecast because you know that your basement will stay dry.

Crawl Space Repair / Encapsulation

If you have a crawl space in your Hoboken home rather than a basement, Blue Umbrella can still waterproof the space, keeping out water, mold, rodents, and insects.

How the Crawl Space Repair Process Works

Waterproofing the crawl space is similar to waterproofing the basement. Crawl space waterproofing is similar to the basement waterproofing process.

Drying the Space: Before waterproofing begins, debris must be cleaned out and water removed from the space.

Sump Pump Installation: With the crawl space clean, the ground is graded to create a slope down to one corner of the area where a crawl space sump pump is installed. The pump collects and removes any water that enters in the future.

Crawl Space Encapsulation: With the sump pump installed, a thick vinyl liner is laid out on the floor and against the crawl space walls. The vents and the entrance are closed off, completely sealing the space from the outside.

Crawl Space Dehumidifier: A crawl space dehumidifier is added to control the humidity preventing mold growth.

Basement Foundation Repair

Besides basement waterproofing and crawl space encapsulation, Blue Umbrella offers professional foundation repair services correcting cracked, damaged and bowing basement walls in Hoboken, NJ. If you believe that you may have a foundation issue, the type of cracks you see offer a sign of the underlying foundation issue.

Vertical: Vertical wall cracks generally do not signify a foundation issue. As concrete ages it naturally forms these vertical cracks. But, these cracks can allow water to seep into the basement, and epoxy injections can be used to keep water out of the space.

Horizontal: Horizontal wall cracks likely are a sign of a foundation issue and are caused by soil pressing on the basement walls causing them to bow inwards and, if not fixed, eventually collapse.

Stair-Step: Like horizontal wall cracks, stair-step cracks are also a problem. When the foundation settles unevenly, it stresses the basement walls, producing stair-step cracks.

Minimally Invasive Foundation Solutions

Blue Umbrella uses long-lasting foundation repair solutions to fix damaged basement walls in your Hoboken home.

Steel I-Beam Installation One option is to install steel I-beams which are placed flush against the basement walls. The I-beams strengthen the walls and prevent any further damage. I-beams are usually the go-to when the basement walls have bowed inwards over two inches.

Carbon Fiber Reinforcement Carbon fiber strips are an alternative in more minor cases of basement wall bowing and damage. Carbon fiber strips are similarly laid flush against the basement walls strengthening the walls and preventing further damage.

Serving Greater Hoboken, NJ

We serve Hoboken, NJ, and surrounding areas offering basement waterproofing, foundation repair, and crawl space encapsulation.

Get a Free Inspection & Estimate

Blue Umbrella is your go-to expert for permanent warranties solutions if you live in Hoboken and have basement water problems, crawl space issues, or foundation damage. Reach out to us today for a free inspection and estimate.

Let's Get Started!

Don't wait until the rain is pouring in to get an appointment!

Get My FREE Estimate

Schedule a free inspection today!

Name*

Email*

Phone*

Your Town*

I Need Help With*

Name

This field is for validation purposes and should be left unchanged.

OUR BASEMENT SERVICES

BASEMENT WATERPROOFING

FRENCH DRAIN INSTALLATIONS

SUMP PUMP BACKUP SYSTEMS

BASEMENT FOUNDATION REPAIR

CRAWL SPACE REPAIR

DEHUMIDIFIERS

TESTIMONIALS

We used Blue Umbrella to put in French drains and a sump pump and had a fantastic experience. Tony did a great job explaining their methodology during the sales process and it was a no brained to move forward with them. They completed the work quickly and with the highest quality.

-Dan Hennes

Had an excellent experience with Blue Umbrella. Workers were very neat and professional. Would highly recommend.

-Barbara Buttelmann

Great service! On time, effective and appropriate pricing. The owner is in contact at all times, and offers clear and honest information about the work. The crew is very respectful and efficient. After about five estimates we chose them as they were very clear, honest and professional.

-Angela Lis

Steve and Tony at Blue Umbrella were very knowledgeable and helpful with remediating the water we found in our basement. They were extremely honest, fair and thorough. We highly recommend this company.

-Ashley Pagelow

Steve and Tony at Blue Umbrella were very knowledgeable and helpful with remediating the water we found in our basement.

-Ashley Pagelow

OUR PAST PROJECTS

Subscribe to our newsletter for the latest tips, tools & news!

First Name*

Last Name*

Email*

Blue Umbrella Waterproofing Proudly Serves These Areas

Bergen County, NJ

Essex County, NJ

Hudson County, NJ

Hunterdon County, NJ

Middlesex County, NJ

Monmouth County, NJ

Morris County, NJ

Passaic County, NJ

Somerset County, NJ

Sussex County, NJ

Union County, NJ

For more information about basement waterproofing services or to find out if Blue Umbrella serves your area, see our complete service area.