The Kamil Kubik Foundation, a non-profit 501C3 public charity, was incorporated in 2012. We know that many non-profits are vying for your support, however, the KKF needs your help to continue our mission and to move the Foundation into the future.

To donate to the KKF, please mail us a check, made out to the Kamil Kubik Foundation, 604 Hudson Street, Suite #2, Hoboken, NJ 07030.

If your company offers a matching gift program, you can double your gift to the KKF. Please include your company's information with your payment, or email us at mb604hob@yahoo.com.

Donations are tax-deductible to the full extent allowed by the IRS.

Madeline Boyd, Director and President

After a 26-year career in the lower Manhattan financial and non-profit communities, Madeline is now a partner at B+B Properties. After clerking on the trading floor of the New York Mercantile Exchange, she became a member, started her own firm, served two terms on the NYMEX Board of Directors, and became an Officer of NYMEX responsible for Government, Community, and Philanthropic Affairs. Madeline was President of the NYMEX Foundation, a private charity, and the NYMEX Assistance Fund, a public charity, formed after the tragedy on September 11, 2001. She is involved in local non-profit causes in Hoboken, NJ; Fort Myers Beach, FL, and the NYS community of Yankee Lake.

Christina Delfico, Director and Secretary

In addition to her two prime time Emmy Award nominations as Executive Producer of shows hosted by Katie Couric, Cuba Gooding, Jr., Queen Latifah, John Mayer, Al Roker, Deborah Roberts, and Elmo, Christina has garnered over 40 awards in media production. She has served as Vice President and Executive Producer with Sesame Workshop, collaborated with CBS, PBS, and others. Christina produced concerts with Hollywood Bowl, fundraising events in New York, and international productions in China, Germany, Spain, and Greece and promotional campaigns with original video and digital web presence in multiple languages. She is actively involved in the Czech community and is married to the known American Czech artist, Franta Nedved.

Sharon Lyew, Director

Since 1985, Sharon has been a music rights executive with experience in music publishing, licensing, copyrighting, and contract administration. She manages one of the most established music publishing catalogs in children's television for Sesame Street and The Electric Company. Lyew has overseen worldwide rights for an active music library of more than 16,000 compositions; a skill that will guide the KKF BOD in archiving artwork, historical photos and letters from presidents. She is a Berklee College of Music Alumni, who paid her tuition expenses by working as a professional musician, playing piano, and singing in a jazz trio throughout the New England area.

Viera Pecha, Director

Since 1995 Viera has served as Executive Director of the Jan & Betka Papanek Foundation responsible for the organization’s mission of carrying out the vision of the Slovak-American diplomat, Dr. Jan Papanek, through educational and cultural programs in the Czech Republic and Slovakia. She is the Admissions Counselor for the First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University working closely with the faculty and North American students. Viera also brings vast experience from her careers at the American Fund for Czechoslovak Refugees and at Nitrotec Corporation, a natural gas company. She has represented Kamil Kubik’s art since 2003 and organized art exhibitions across the country.

Susan Vaccaro, Director and Treasurer

In addition to having had held numerous managerial positions in the Financial Services Industry, Susan is heavily involved in charitable and civic organizations. Susan serves on the Board of Directors of the Sapienza Gardens as Treasurer and on the Zoning Board of the Township of River Vale.

Joanna Kubik, Advisor 2012-2018

Before marrying Kamil Kubik in 1955, Joanna was a dancer with the Australian Borovansky Ballet Company, which toured Australia and New Zealand. While working in forestry for the Australian National University, Kamil designed Christmas cards which became a successful artistic venture. After their marriage, Joanna started a ballet company in Canberra. They moved to the United States in 1960 and collaborated on promoting Kamil’s original works of art and limited edition lithographs. Kamil suffered from a stroke in 2004 and Joanna devoted herself to his care until he passed away in 2011.

Our beloved Joanna passed away in 2018.