Our Company

As an independent insurance agency located in Hoboken, New Jersey, Muller Insurance proudly serves Northern New Jersey and 30 other states throughout the United States. Our insurance policies include coverage for individuals, businesses, and landlords with options that protect your most important assets. The agency’s customers can access policies from more than 25 insurance companies for fully customized solutions regardless of their individual requirements.

Areas We Serve

Muller Insurance is trusted both locally and nationally. In addition to our home state of New Jersey, our agents are licensed in the following states:

Our Purpose

Our agency’s purpose is to provide exceptional service and savings to protect the things that matter most to our clients.

Our History

With more than 118 years of dedicated service and the best insurance coverage available, Muller Insurance is trusted by individuals, families, and businesses. Our agency was founded in 1906 when our great-grandfather, John Muller, went into business in Hoboken. After years of success and lasting client relationships, John entrusted the agency to the capable hands of his son, Roger Muller, Sr.

The business continued to grow under Roger’s leadership, becoming the thriving entity it is today. Upon his father’s retirement, Roger Muller, Jr., continued our agency’s legacy of excellence. Today his daughter, Erika, joins the firm as a minority partner to carry on the family tradition.

The Benefits of an Independent Insurance Agency

As an independent agency, our team is never committed to a single provider. Instead, we work with more than 25 top insurance companies to offer the most diverse range of coverage available. Doing so ensures customers are our top priority. Our team is always available to review your coverage and suggest the best policies for your needs. Plus, our client center makes it simple to submit claims, make payments, and more no matter what type of insurance policy you require.

Trusted Local Business

Community has been a priority for our agency since its founding. From giving back through volunteerism to partnerships with area small businesses, our team works hard to support all those who live, work, and play together in Hoboken and the Tri-State region. At the same time, our lasting relationships with tens of thousands of area clients reflect our ongoing commitment to helping local families and businesses thrive.

Learn More About Our Family-Owned and Operated Insurance Agency

With the third generation of our family leading the way, Muller Insurance continues to meet and exceed the expectations of clients in New Jersey and across the nation. To learn more about insurance for your business, contact us today or request a quote online.