The American Legion was chartered and incorporated by Congress in 1919 as a patriotic veterans organization devoted to mutual helpfulness. It is the nation’s largest wartime veteran’s service organization, committed to mentoring youth and sponsorship of wholesome programs in our communities, advocating patriotism and honor, promoting strong national security, and continued devotion to our fellow service members and veterans.

In the heart of Hoboken, where aspiration meets opportunity, Community Lifestyle has taken root as a beacon of hope, a platform where dreams are not just nurtured but realized. With deep-rooted ties in the community, our journey started with a simple yet profound vision: to create a nurturing, inclusive, and vibrant ecosystem where the youth and teens can thrive, far away from the adversities that mar their path to growth.

The Fund for a Better Waterfront (FBW) was founded on the belief that the waterfront belongs to the people. Since 1990, we have been dedicated to our vision of a contiguous public park along the Hudson River. We have achieved a large portion of that goal and are committed to its completion through a process of planning, advocacy and partnerships. We believe that Hoboken can be a beacon of smart urban design and inspiration for waterfront renewal worldwide.

The Hoboken Community Center Pantry is a community resource for supplemental food, hygiene and pet supplies in Hoboken, NJ as well as surrounding communities. The Pantry supports residents of the Hoboken Community Center Affordable Housing program as well as community members experiencing food insecurity or other hardships. The Pantry is a member agency of the Community Food Bank of NJ.

Our mission is to provide free water sport programs and access to local waterways for all to enjoy. We are an all-volunteer based non-profit 501 (c)(3) organization made possible by your donations.

Maxwell Place Park: Hoboken waterfront near the intersection of Frank Sinatra Drive and Maxwell Place.

The Hoboken Community Center has provided housing to low income men in the City of Hoboken since the building opened in 1927 at 1301 Washington Street. In December 2012, a renovation of the housing units was completed and a total of 96 units opened with single room occupancy furnished rooms with shared central bathrooms.

The Hoboken Elks have raised funds and awareness for wide array of programs for over 125 years. We support special needs programs in our community and through New Jersey, provide college scholarships, promote youth athletics, support our seniors, honor of veteran, and much more.

HFHA is a non-profit organization established in 2009 to fight special interest groups who continually try to destroy our rent control protections. They threaten to weaken our hard-won protections by adding vacancy decontrol to Hoboken’s Rent Control ordinance, as well as attempting other deceptive tactics to push their agendas forward. But, thanks to our dedicated volunteers, we have fought and won 3 referendum elections, thus keeping our protections in tact.

Hoboken Family Planning first opened its doors for service on March 1, 1972. For over 40 years we have gained the trust and confidence of our patients and community by providing quality care to people with a wide range of backgrounds; from the uninsured to the underinsured, to Medicaid recipients and the fully insured in Hoboken and neighboring communities.

The Hoboken Historical Museum welcomes visitors six days a week to view our exhibits, explore our books and gift shop, and participate in educational programs for all ages. Admission is just $5 (children and members admitted free). The Museum is a 501c3 nonprofit organization, founded in 1986.

The Hoboken Public Library connects people with each other, ideas, and opportunities to support lifelong learning, personal growth, and community development.

Main Branch

500 Park Avenue, Hoboken

The Grand Street Branch

124 Grand Street Second Floor of the Multi-Service Center

201.420.2346 [email protected]

Currently we have 10 EMS vehicles and 6 bicycles capable of breaking up into 3 teams used in the summer at special events. The Hoboken Volunteer Ambulance Corps has grown and changed over the years, however our motto has remained the same. "We Care. We'll be There."

As a Community Action Partner, HOPES is committed to addressing the barriers and causes of poverty as we empower individuals and families toward self-sufficiency. We have diverse programs for the entire range of our community.

Follow the link for the various locations around Hoboken.

Providing access to the arts is an integral part of our mission. As a 501 (c)(3) non-profit, we rely on donations from generous people such as yourself to keep our ticket prices and class tuition accessible for all. Your donation goes toward keeping the arts alive in our community. In turn MST is able to educate, entertain, and inspire our audiences and students with professional productions and high-quality performance classes.

We all have busy lifestyles...we work hard, we play hard. But if you're wanting to give back to your community, then look no further than Party with Purpose. We do all that, right here in Hudson County.

St Mary Advocates Thrift Store has been proudly serving our community as a local non-profit thrift store since 1976. Our wide range of offerings includes gently used clothing, housewares, bedding, footwear, coats, jewelry, art, small appliances, and much more. Run entirely by volunteers, we channel all proceeds back into the local community, aiding both local and global causes. Additionally, we're proud to operate a scholarship fund that supports students pursuing studies in health and sciences.