Synopsis

Britannia Industries (BRIT), a Wadia Group company is primarily a biscuits company, based inBangalore.

Axis Securities has given buy rating to Britannia Industries with a target price of Rs 4300. The share price moved up by 1.11 per cent from its previous close of Rs 3934.15. The stock’s last traded price is Rs 3977.90.

Britannia Industries (BRIT), a Wadia Group company is primarily a biscuits company, based inBangalore. The company’s principal activity is manufacture and sale of biscuits, bread, rusk, cakes anddairy products in the domestic and international markets. BRIT has brands like TIGER, Good-Day, 50:50under its fold with an estimated market share of 33% in the Indian biscuits industry. Biscuits contributemore than 80% of the company’s turnover.

Financials

For the quarter ended 30-06-2020, the company reported a Consolidated sales of Rs 3384.46 Crore, up 20.54 % from last quarter Sales of Rs 2807.78 Crore and up 26.41 % from last year same quarter Sales of Rs 2677.32 Crore. The Company reported net profit after tax of Rs 542.58 Crore in latest quarter.

Investment Rationale

Strong demand momentum to sustain: Management expects healthy double digit category growth to sustain in the near term given COVID uncertainty and rising cases/localized lockdowns leading to increase in in-home consumption. Further, brand stickiness to continue even post COVID-19 normalization given consumers loyalty towards trusted brands. Distribution expansion especially in the Hindi heartland to further drive volumes in the medium term.

Rural growth to outpace urban growth: Rural market to continue growing ahead of urban as it has been relatively less affected by the pandemic. Besides, BRIT is well placed to gain market share from small/regional players owing to liquidity constraints impacting their business operations. BRITs direct distribution reach improved esp in rural areas and added to the company reporting share gains. Key growth focus besides volume growth is on expansion of rural distribution and BRIT’s direct reach going ahead.Benign RM outlook supportive for margins: Q1FY21, input cost inflation was moderate at 3% and expected to remain benign given good monsoons. During Q1FY21, RMs like RPO and Sugar saw prices going up by 23%/4% YoY while flour and milk price stood lower by 3%/7% respectively in Q1FY21. Low ticket price of the product and consumers preference for trusted brands will continue to drive in-home consumption and market share gains for BRIT in the near to medium term. Additionally, healthy growth in adjacencies business, sustained product launch momentum, distribution penetration (esp in rural areas), RM tailwinds in near term to drive a healthy growth momentum. We believe, Britannia provides the most visibility on earnings front in FY21 vs some of the other consumer stocks and thus remains one of our top picks in the FMCG-staples space.

(What's moving Sensex and Nifty Track latest market news, stock tips, Budget 2024 and expert advice, on ETMarkets. Also, ETMarkets.com is now on Telegram. For fastest news alerts on financial markets, investment strategies and stocks alerts, subscribe to our Telegram feeds .)

Subscribe to The Economic Times Prime and read the Economic Times ePaper Online.and Sensex Today.

Top Trending Stocks: SBI Share Price, Axis Bank Share Price, HDFC Bank Share Price, Infosys Share Price, Wipro Share Price, NTPC Share Price

...moreless

(What's moving Sensex and Nifty Track latest market news, stock tips, Budget 2024 and expert advice, on ETMarkets. Also, ETMarkets.com is now on Telegram. For fastest news alerts on financial markets, investment strategies and stocks alerts, subscribe to our Telegram feeds .)

Subscribe to The Economic Times Prime and read the Economic Times ePaper Online.and Sensex Today.

Top Trending Stocks: SBI Share Price, Axis Bank Share Price, HDFC Bank Share Price, Infosys Share Price, Wipro Share Price, NTPC Share Price

...moreless

The known and unknown unknowns of Ola Electric IPO

The Ola Electric story: What makes Bhavish Aggarwal India's most impatient man?

Warren Buffett is selling Apple shares to hold on to cash. What does he see that others don’t?

As US gears for a rate cut, Indian equities stand to gain the most. Here's why

The Japanese market collapse kills yen-carry trade. What’s in store for investors?

5 real-estate stocks with an upside potential of upto 39%

1

2

3