Britannia Industries is among India’s leading fast-moving consumer goods (FMCG) companies. The company is headquartered in Bengaluru, Karnataka. The FMCG Company is actually a part of the Indian multinational conglomerate, Wadia Group. Britannia Industries is over a century old. The story of the company dates back to 1892 when a group of businessmen came together and formed a company for the purpose of manufacturing biscuits in Kolkata. 1910 was the year when manufacturing operations were mechanised as electricity became more widely available in India. Eight years later in 1918, the firm was incorporated and Britannia Industries became a public limited company. Three years later, the company started using industrial gas in a bid to expand production. For the next three decades, Britannia Industries expanded its portfolio outside of biscuits and would increase production substantially. In 1954, Britannia Industries helped pioneer the development of wrapped and high-quality sliced bread in India. Britannia Industries launched Bourbon biscuits in 1955 which would go on to become one of the company's signature products. 1963 was the year when Britannia Industries ventured into the cake market. 1979 was the year when the company rebranded to better suit its expanded portfolio and changed its name from Britannia Biscuit Co. to Britannia Industries Limited. The company launched another signature biscuit brand, Good Day in 1986. 1993 was the year when Britannia Industries introduced biscuit brands, Little Hearts and 50:50 to the Indian market. 2002 was the year when Britannia Industries formed a joint venture with New Zealand-based firm Fonterra Co-operative Group. 2014 was the year when the company entered into an exclusive partnership with Amazon for the introduction of a new premium chocolate chip cookie, Good Day Chunkies. Britannia Industries set up a R&D facility in Karnataka in 2016. 2017 was the year when Britannia Industries formed a JV with Greece based firm Chipita S.A in order to manufacture and sell croissants. In 2019, the company launched Britannia Marie Gold My Start-up initiative in a bid to promote new and small businesses. In 2021, Britannia Industries relaunched its popular brand Good Day with new variants. Britannia formed a JV in 2022 with France based company Bel SA to produce and market cheese products in the country.

Products and service

Britannia Industries produces and markets multiple food products. However, the company is primarily known for its various biscuit brands. Some of popular biscuit brands are Bourbon, Good Day, Marie, Tiger and Jim Jam. Apart from biscuits, Britannia Industries is also known for its dairy products such as Britannia Cheese, Butter and Ghee. The company also manufactures and markets a variety of cakes and rusks. The company also offers white bread, gourmet bread and wheat flour bread to its customers.

Listing

Shares of Britannia Industries are listed on BSE, NSE, Madras Stock Exchange, Calcutta Stock Exchange, etc. The company is a part of multiple indices like Nifty 50, Nifty 500, S&P BSE Sensex 50 etc.