Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander cultures are a critical part of our national identity.

As Australians, we can all be proud to be the home of one of the oldest continuous civilisations on Earth, extending back over 65,000 years. Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people’s strong connection to family, land, language, and culture forms the foundation for social, economic, and individual wellbeing. This is integral to efforts to close the gap.

Our work contributes to improving respect and appreciation for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander culture, support cultural identity for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples, and social cohesion for all Australians.

Through the Culture and Capability Programme of the Indigenous Advancement Strategy, we provide funding to support the maintenance and strengthening of Indigenous cultural expression and conservation. Projects funded are designed to increase Indigenous Australians’ participation in the social and economic life of Australia, through healing, and strengthening existing capabilities.

View more details about:

The Australian Government is working in a new way with First Nations leaders and communities, one that supports First Nations ownership, enables true partnerships with Government and recognises the diversity of cultures and circumstances of First Nations Australians. This aligns with the Government’s commitment to ensure First Nations communities are involved in local and regional decision making under the National Agreement on Closing the Gap, particularly Priority Reforms One, Two and Three, Formal Partnerships and Shared Decision Making, Building the Community Controlled Sector and Transforming Government Organisations.

One example is the First Nations-designed and led Empowered Communities initiative.

Empowered Communities involves First Nations communities and governments working together to set priorities, improve services and apply funding effectively at a regional level. It aims to increase First Nations ownership and give First Nations people greater influence over decisions that affect them.

Empowered Communities is about governments backing First Nations leaders who want to introduce positive changes in their communities and regions by putting First Nations culture and participation central to government decision-making.

Empowered Communities is active in 10 urban, rural and remote regions across Australia:

Cape York, QLD

Central Coast, NSW

Inner Sydney, NSW

Goulburn- Murray, NSW and VIC

East Kimberley, WA

West Kimberley, WA

Ngaanyatjarra Pitjantjatjara Yankunytjatjara Lands, WA, NT and SA

Ngarrindjeri Ruwe, SA

North-East Arnhem Land, NT

Far West Coast, SA.

The Australian Government provided $5 million to support the Empowered Communities leaders to complete a detailed design of the model outlined in the Empowered Communities design report.

The Australian Government responded to the design report in December 2015. It strongly supported local First Nations led action to address priorities and aspirations identified by communities, in partnership with First Nations people.

The regional implementation of Empowered Communities is underway with support from the Australian Government and Jawun Indigenous Corporate Partnerships. A number of state and territory governments are also involved.

Implementation - Progress to date

The Australian Government has provided $47 million from 2016 through 30 June 2024 to fund ‘backbone organisations’ in the 10 Empowered Communities regions. This supports critical capability for First Nations leaders as they work with their communities and partner organisations to identify and progress local priorities.

As part of its commitment to greater transparency, the Government is providing Empowered Communities regional data and funding information to help inform joint planning and identifying community priorities.

In the early stages of implementation, Empowered Communities leaders and their communities focused on establishing governance and engagement structures, identifying first priorities and long term regional development agendas that address social, economic and cultural development.

Since then, Empowered Communities regions have moved to action on initial priorities, including through joint decision making with Government on Indigenous Advancement Strategy funding and co-designing initiatives to address community priorities. The National Indigenous Australians Agency Regional Offices are supporting this effort on the ground.

More information is available on the Empowered communities website or by contacting NIAA.

View more details about:

The Australian Government has committed to implement the Uluru Statement from the Heart in full.

The Statement calls for:

a First Nations Voice to be permanently included in the Constitution

the establishment of a Makarrata Commission to supervise agreement-making and truth-telling about our history.

On 14 October 2023, a referendum was held on whether to change the Constitution to recognise the First Peoples of Australia by establishing an Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Voice. The referendum did not pass.

Referendum on an Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Voice

On 14 October 2023, Australians voted in a referendum about whether to change the Constitution to recognise the First Peoples of Australia by establishing a body called the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Voice. It was the first referendum of the 21st century.

The referendum did not pass.

The question that was put to the Australian people at the 2023 referendum was:

"A Proposed Law: to alter the Constitution to recognise the First Peoples of Australia by establishing an Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Voice.

Do you approve this proposed alteration?"

The proposed law Australians were asked to approve at the referendum would have inserted a new section into the Constitution:

"Chapter IX Recognition of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples

129 Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Voice

In recognition of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples as the First Peoples of Australia:

I. There shall be a body, to be called the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Voice;

II. The Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Voice may make representations to the Parliament and the Executive Government of the Commonwealth on matters relating to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples;

III.The Parliament shall, subject to this Constitution, have power to make laws with respect to matters relating to the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Voice, including its composition, functions, powers and procedures.”

The referendum question and constitutional amendment were announced by the Prime Minister on 23 March 2023, and were settled following consultation with the First Nations Referendum Working Group.

The referendum question and constitutional amendment were set out in the Constitutional Alteration Bill that was passed by both Houses of Parliament on 19 June 2023.

More information

Constitutional recognition

The Voice design principles

The referendum groups who assisted government in the lead up to the referendum

Resources

Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Voice website on the Trove archive

Joint Select Committee (2018) Final Report – Joint Select Committee on Constitutional Recognition relating to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples

Joint Select Committee (2018) Interim Report – Joint Select Committee on Constitutional Recognition relating to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples

Joint Select Committee (2018) Appointment of Resolution - Joint Select Committee on Constitutional Recognition relating to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander People

Referendum Council on the Trove archive

Joint Select Committee website