Social Justice Report 2004

Appendix 1: Chronology of events relating to the introduction of new arrangements for the administration of Indigenous affairs, 2002 - 2004

back to contents

This appendix provides an overview of the main events leading up to the introduction of the new arrangements for the administration of Indigenous affairs on 1 July 2004, as well as the key events which have occurred since that time to implement the new arrangements.

It commences with a table which summarises the main events. This is followed by more information on each event.

Summary - Chronology of events relating to the introduction of new arrangements for the administration of Indigenous affairs, 2002 - 2004

Date

Event / summary of issue

5 April 2002

COAG

Commitments

The Council of Australian Governments (COAG) agrees to trial a whole of government cooperative approach in up to ten communities or regions across Australia. Eight trial sites are subsequently agreed upon.

COAG also agrees to commission the Steering Committee for Government Service Provision to develop a reporting framework on key indicators of Indigenous disadvantage.

These decisions follow from the agreement of a reconciliation framework by COAG in November 2000. The framework commits governments to work in partnership to improve the economic and social wellbeing of Indigenous people.

12 November 2002

ATSIC Review announced

The Government announces a three-member panel will review the role and functions of the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Commission (ATSIC). The terms of reference require that the review examine and make recommendations to government on:

How Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people can in the future be best represented in the process of the development of Commonwealth policies and programmes to assist them;

The current roles and functions of ATSIC; and

The appropriate role of Regional Councils in ensuring the delivery of appropriate government programmes and services to Indigenous people.

24 December 2002

Conflict of interest directions issued for ATSIC

The Minister for Immigration, Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs issues general directions to ATSIC to address potential conflicts of interest by preventing ATSIC from funding organisations of which full-time ATSIC officeholders are directors or in which they have a controlling interest.

The ATSIC Board provided its support for the directions on 24 January 2003.

17 April 2003

ATSIS created to address ongoing concerns about potential conflicts of interest in ATSIC

The Minister for Immigration, Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs announces that a new Executive Agency, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Services (ATSIS), will be established under the Public Service Act to manage ATSIC's programmes and to make individual funding decisions. This removes the powers of ATSIC's National Board to make such decisions.

The Minister states that this action follows from continuing concerns about ATSIC's operations leading the Government to the conclusion that further action was needed. The creation of ATSIS is announced as an interim measure, pending the outcomes of the ATSIC Review.

13 June 2003

ATSIC Review Discussion Paper released

The ATSIC Review team release a discussion paper outlining the main themes from their consultations to date and setting out a number of proposals for a revised ATSIC. The Review states that there continues to be 'overwhelming support' for a national body to represent the interests of Indigenous peoples, 'but very little support for ATSIC's current performance' with the ATSIC Board not having 'discharged its advocacy and representation functions effectively'. Accordingly, they stated that 'ATSIC has reached a crisis point in respect of its public credibility and with its Indigenous constituency'.

1 July 2003

ATSIS commences operations

ATSIS commences operations. The Minister for Immigration, Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs issues directions to ATSIS' Chief Executive Officer requiring it to:

Conform to the policies and strategies set by ATSIC and also have regard to Government policy;

Focus on addressing relative need between regions in implementing programs;

Ensure best practice in engaging service providers, including through competitive tendering and performance- based contracts; and

Comply with the conflict of interest directions for ATSIC.

22 August 2003

National reporting framework for Indigenous disadvantage is endorsed by COAG

The Prime Minister writes to the Steering Committee for Government Service Provision on behalf of COAG and endorses the proposed national reporting framework for Indigenous disadvantage.

The framework seeks to present statistics on Indigenous disadvantage strategically by measuring progress against indicators in the short, medium and long term. It acknowledges the inter-relationship between different factors in contributing to Indigenous disadvantage, and that holistic solutions are required, involving whole of government activity, to achieve lasting improvements.

13 November 2003

First report to COAG on Indigenous disadvantage is released

The first report against the National Reporting Framework for Overcoming Indigenous Disadvantage is released by the Steering Committee for Government Service Provision. It confirms that Indigenous disadvantage is broadly based, with major disparities between Indigenous people and other Australians in most areas. The report also identifies gaps in data collection which need to be addressed to improve the quality of the information contained in the report.

It is subsequently agreed that the report will be published every two years rather than annually, as originally intended.

28 November 2003

ATSIC Review Panel releases final report

The ATSIC Review Panel releases its final report, In the hands of the regions.

The report recommends that ATSIC should be the 'primary vehicle to represent Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples' and that its role and functions should be strengthened. In strengthening ATSIC, the report proposes a range of reforms and principles to create, and underpin, a 'new ATSIC'.

15 January 2004

Reform of the Aboriginal Councils and Associations Act announced

The Government announces that it intends to reform the Aboriginal Councils and Associations Act. The proposed reforms are intended to improve corporate governance standards for Indigenous organisations.

The amendments are not presented to Parliament in 2004. They are anticipated to be introduced in mid-2005.

4 March 2004

Government announces Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Legal Services to move from grant to tender process

The Government announces that from 1 July 2005, funding of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Legal Services (ATSILS) will begin to shift from a grant funding process to a competitive tender process. Successful tenderers will be engaged by the Government under contract for a three-year funding period.

The Government also releases an Exposure Draft of the proposed purchasing arrangements and calls for public feedback on the proposed tendering process.

The Minister for Indigenous Affairs announces on 30 June 2004 that following public comment on the proposed tendering process the government has amended the criteria for funding.

On 31 August 2004, the Attorney General announces that requests for tenders in Victoria and Western Australia will be released in November 2004, with other states and territories to follow progressively over the following eighteen months. The successful tenderers are expected to start delivering services on 1 July 2005.

30 March 2004

Federal Opposition announces will abolish ATSIC if wins federal election

The Australian Labor Party announces that if elected at the forthcoming federal election it will put into place a new framework for Indigenous self-governance and program delivery. This would involve abolishing ATSIC and replacing it with a new Indigenous representative structure.

15 April 2004

Government announces that ATSIC to be abolished and new arrangements introduced from 1 July 2004

The Government announces that ATSIC and ATSIS are to be abolished and that new arrangements for the administration of Indigenous affairs will be introduced from 1 July 2004.

Changes to be introduced include:

Introduction of legislation to abolish ATSIC;

The appointment of a National Indigenous Council;

Devolution of Indigenous-specific programmes to mainstream departments;

Establishment of a Ministerial Taskforce on Indigenous Affairs;

Establishment of a Secretaries Group on Indigenous Affairs;

Creation of a new Office of Indigenous Policy Coordination (OIPC);

Movement to a single budget submission for Indigenous affairs;

Creation of Indigenous Coordinating Centres (ICC's); and

Adoption of Shared Responsibility Agreement (SRA) and Regional Partnership Agreement (RPA) approaches

20 April 2004

Connecting Government report outlines whole of government challenge for public service

The Management Advisory Committee to the Australian Public Service Commission releases its report, Connecting Government: Whole of government Response to Australia's Priority Challenges. The report outlines the challenges in implementing a whole of government approach to the public service. The Secretary of the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet launches the report and describes the new arrangements for Indigenous affairs as 'the biggest test of whether the rhetoric of connectivity can be marshalled into effective action... It is an approach on which my reputation, and many of my colleagues, will hang'.

27 May 2004

ATSIC Amendment Bill 2004 introduced to Parliament

The ATSIC Amendment Bill 2004 is introduced to Parliament. The Bill proposes the abolition of ATSIC in two stages - the National Board of Commissioners to be abolished from 30 June 2004 and the Regional Councils from 30 June 2005.

The House of Representatives passed the Bill on 2 June 2004.

28 May 2004

Ministerial Taskforce on Indigenous Affairs is created

The Government announces the creation of the Ministerial Taskforce on Indigenous Affairs. The Taskforce will provide high-level direction on Indigenous policy development.

The Taskforce is chaired by the Minister for Immigration, Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs and comprised of Ministers from portfolios relevant to improving outcomes for Indigenous Australians.

11-14 June 2004

National Indigenous Leaders Conference calls for national representative body

The National Indigenous Leaders Conference is held in Adelaide. Participants call for a new national representative structure for Indigenous peoples and propose a range of principles for such a body.

16 June 2004

Senate Inquiry into ATSIC Bill established

The Senate establishes the Select Committee for the Administration of Indigenous Affairs and refers the ATSIC Amendment Bill 2004 to it for inquiry.

16 June 2004

Ministerial Taskforce Charter adopted

The Ministerial Taskforce adopts a Charter which outlines the Australian Government's 20-30 year vision for Indigenous affairs. It aims to ensure Indigenous Australians 'make informed choices', 'realise their full potential' and 'take responsibility for managing their own affairs'. The Charter also identifies early childhood intervention, safer communities, and reducing welfare dependency as the priority areas for attention in Indigenous affairs.

21 June 2004

Report into Capacity Building and Service Delivery in Indigenous communities released

The House of Representatives Standing Committee on Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Affairs releases Many Ways Forward, Report of the inquiry into capacity building and service delivery in Indigenous communities.

The Report finds that there is an urgent need for a new approach to be adopted by the government sector as well as the need to build the capacity of Indigenous communities and organisations.

The Report presents a series of recommendations that aim to ensure:

basic data collection is nationally consistent and comparable, and focussed on outcomes;

the Government institute a coordinated annual report to parliament on its progress in achieving agreed outcomes and benchmarks;

a comprehensive evaluation is made of the COAG Trials, and a regular report on progress is made to Parliament;

improved integration, coordination and cooperation within and between levels of government in consultation with Indigenous Australians occurs;

a strong commitment is made to improving the capacity of government agencies; and

the development of partnerships between the private/corporate/philanthropic sectors and Indigenous organisations is encouraged and supported.

25 June 2004

COAG principles for new arrangements in Indigenous affairs endorsed

COAG endorses a National framework of principles for government service delivery to Indigenous Australians as well as confirming its commitment to the whole of government trials and practical reconciliation. The National Principles will inform the Taskforce and Secretaries Group when developing and monitoring strategies to address Indigenous disadvantage.

The National Principles relate to six issues:

Sharing responsibility;

Harnessing the mainstream;

Streamlining service delivery;

Establishing transparency and accountability;

Developing a learning framework; and

Focussing on priority areas.

1 July 2004

New arrangements in Indigenous affairs commence

Under the new arrangements, 'more than $1 billion of former ATSIC-ATSIS programs was transferred to mainstream departments'. These departments will be required to 'accept responsibility for Indigenous services' and be 'held accountable for outcomes'. The transfer of Indigenous service to mainstream departments aims to ensure that departments will 'work in a coordinated way' and 'to make sure that local families and communities have a real say in how money is spent'.

31 August 2004

Senate inquiry interim report and dissenting reports released

The Senate Select Committee on the Administration of Indigenous Affairs releases its interim report and Government Senators release a dissenting report. The Committee report lists the number of public hearings held and submissions received by the Committee and states that due to the federal election it will be unable to complete its inquiry.

The dissenting interim report notes 'little support [was] expressed for ATSIC' in submissions received.

The Senate Committee was reconvened on 17 November 2004 and is due to report in March 2005.

6 November 2004

The National Indigenous Council is appointed

The Minister for Immigration, Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs announces the membership of the Government-appointed advisory body, the National Indigenous Council (NIC). The NIC is not intended to be a representative body or to replace ATSIC. Members of the NIC are appointed based on their 'expertise and experience in particular policy areas'.

Mrs Sue Gordon is appointed as the Chairperson of the NIC. The NIC will meet four times per year and advise the Ministerial Taskforce on Indigenous Affairs.

8-9 December 2004

NIC conducts inaugural meeting

The National Indigenous Council holds its' inaugural meeting. The Terms of Reference for the NIC are agreed with the Government. The NIC agrees that the priority policy areas for Indigenous affairs are:

early childhood intervention;

safer communities; and

reducing passive welfare.

Further information about events relating to the introduction of new arrangements for the administration of Indigenous affairs, 2002 - 2004

In its' Communique of 3 November 2000, the Council of Australian Governments (COAG) agreed on a reconciliation framework through which all governments committed to an approach based on partnerships and shared responsibilities with indigenous communities, programme flexibility and coordination between government agencies, with a focus on local communities and outcomes.

The Reconciliation Framework establishes three priority areas for government action:

Investing in community leadership initiatives;

Reviewing and re-engineering programs and services to ensure that they deliver practical measures that support families, children and young people. In particular, governments agreed to look at measures for tackling family violence, drug and alcohol dependency and other symptoms of community dysfunction; and

Forging greater links between the business sector and Indigenous communities to promote great economic independence.(1)

In its' Communique of 5 April 2002, COAG reaffirmed its commitment to this framework and agreed further to:

Trial a whole of government cooperative approach in up to ten communities or regions across Australia; and

Commission the Steering Committee for Government Service Provision to develop a reporting framework on key indicators of Indigenous disadvantage.

The aim of the whole of government community trials is to:

improve the way governments interact with each other and with communities to deliver more effective responses to the needs of indigenous Australians. The lessons learnt from these cooperative approaches will be able to be applied more broadly. This approach will be flexible in order to reflect the needs of specific communities, build on existing work and improve the compatibility of different State, Territory and Commonwealth approaches to achieve better outcomes.(2)

It was subsequently agreed to conduct the trials in eight different Indigenous communities and regions. The trial sites are located as follows:

Murdi Paaki Region (New South Wales);

Wadeye (Northern Territory);

Shepparton (Victoria);

Cape York (Queensland);

Anangu Pitjantjatjara Lands (South Australia);

East Kimberley region (Western Australia);

Northern Tasmania; and

Australian Capital Territory.(3)

COAG also agreed to commission the Steering Committee for the Review of Government Service Provision to produce a regular report against key indicators of indigenous disadvantage. This report is to 'help to measure the impact of changes to policy settings and service delivery and provide a concrete way to measure the effect of the Council's commitment to reconciliation through a jointly agreed set of indicators'(4).

Date

Event / summary of issue

12 November 2002

ATSIC Review announced

The Government announces a three-member panel will review the role and functions of the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Commission (ATSIC). The terms of reference require that the review examine and make recommendations to Government on:

How Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people can in the future be best represented in the process of the development of Commonwealth policies and programmes to assist them;

The current roles and functions of ATSIC; and

The appropriate role of Regional Councils in ensuring the delivery of appropriate government programmes and services to Indigenous people.

The Government announces a three-member panel will review the role and functions of the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Commission (ATSIC). The Review Team is comprised of the Hon John Hannaford, Ms Jackie Huggins AM and the Hon Bob Collins.

The Terms of reference for the review are as follows.

The reassessment will examine and make recommendations to government on how Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people can in the future be best represented in the process of the development of Commonwealth policies and programmes to assist them. In doing so the reassessment will consider the current roles and functions of ATSIC including its roles in providing:

Advocacy and representation of the views of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people;

Programmes and services to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people; and

Advice on implementation of legislation.

In particular the reassessment will consider the appropriate role for Regional Councils in ensuring the delivery of appropriate government programmes and services to Indigenous people.

The reassessment will also consider and report on any potential financial implications.(5)

On 23 February 2003, the Minister for Immigration, Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs also asked the Review Team:

to give particular attention to the structure of the relationship between the government and the Commission. This should include the adequacy of the Minister's powers and the merits of a possible Ministerial veto in relation to specific ATSIC decisions.(6)

On 24 December 2002, the Minister for Immigration, Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs issues general directions to ATSIC to address potential conflicts of interest by preventing ATSIC from funding organisations of which full-time ATSIC officeholders are directors or in which they have a controlling interest.(7) The directions were made under section 12 of the ATSIC Act which allows the Minister to issue general directions to ATSIC about the performance of its functions and the exercise of its powers.

The Minister stated that:

The directions will help minimise perceptions of conflicts of interest which arise when ATSIC officeholders are also members of bodies which ATSIC funds. It will allow ATSIC elected officials to focus on their duties and not be distracted by criticisms about possible conflicts of interests.

The directions will also assist ATSIC to distinguish more clearly between its representative functions and its role in providing services. In particular, it will clearly separate those making funding decisions and the recipients of funding under the ATSIC Act.(8)

The ATSIC Board of Commissioners indicates their support for the conflict of interest directions on 24 January 2003.

On 10 April 2003, the Minister for Immigration, Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs foreshadows that the Government 'would be taking action in the forthcoming Budget to separate the roles undertaken within ATSIC'(9).

On 17 April 2003, the Minister announces that an Executive Agency, to be called Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Services (ATSIS), will be established under the Public Service Act to manage ATSIC's programmes and to make individual funding decisions. This removes the powers of ATSIC's national Board to make such decisions. This is described as an interim measure, pending the outcomes of the ATSIC Review.(10)

The Minister stated that:

From 1 July 2003, all individual funding decisions concerning programmes delivered by ATSIC will be made by officers of the administrative arm... ATSIC Commissioners and Regional Councillors will continue to determine policies and priorities for the spending of the money, in line with the original intention behind the establishment of ATSIC...

This interim measure will promote good governance and accountability by removing the potential for conflicts of interest in decision making over funding.

In the Westminster system of government, Ministers normally decide policy and officials implement it. ATSIC is unique in that it effectively exercises Ministerial policy powers. However, there has been no separation between this role and decisions to enter contracts or allocate funds to particular organisations or individuals, resulting in the potential for perceived or actual conflict of interest.

This is contrary to good governance. The micro-management focus on ATSIC's own spending has also distracted the elected arm from more significant policy issues. While I took steps late last year to reduce conflicts of interest within ATSIC, continuing concerns about ATSIC's operations have led the Government to the conclusion that further action was needed...

I recently asked the ATSIC Board to advise me what action it would take to address this issue. Its final position was supportive in principle but entailed too many qualifications and no guarantees. That is why the Government has decided to act now, rather than wait another year until the next budget or any changes to the ATSIC Act following the current Review.(11)

The agency, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Services (ATSIS), will be headed by the ATSIC CEO and will be required to operate in conformity with policies and priorities established by the ATSIC Board and Regional Councils and to report on performance to the ATSIC elected arm. The Minister noted that:

(This) decision did not entail 'mainstreaming' ATSIC's programmes, nor their transfer to a department, as happened with ATSIC's health programme under the previous government. The new Executive Agency will be independent and required to operate in conformity with the Board's policies and priorities.

There will be very little change for ATSIC's elected arm, its staff, and the organisations who receive funding or services from ATSIC. In particular:

ATSIC will remain the Government's chief Indigenous source of policy advice

Regional Councils will continue to play a central role in this process

the overall budget will remain unchanged, and

existing funding for organisations will continue subject to normal conditions.(12)

On 13 June 2003, the ATSIC Review Team releases a discussion paper outlining the main themes from their consultations to date and setting out a number of proposals for a revised ATSIC.

In the discussion paper the Review Panel noted that:

There was overwhelming support among key stakeholders for a National body to represent the interests of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders, but very little support for ATSIC's current performance.

The consensus was that the Board had not discharged its advocacy and representation functions effectively. A disconnect was seen between the Board and Regional Councils, the Regional Councils and their communities, and even more of a gap between communities and the Board.

After more than twelve years, ATSIC has reached a crisis point in respect of its public credibility and with its Indigenous constituency. Great concern is being expressed that this is spilling over from ATSIC and adversely impacting on other areas such as the reconciliation movement. A concerted effort is required to reposition ATSIC as a positive force for Indigenous advancement; otherwise it will become irrelevant or face abolition.(13)

Preliminary findings of the Review Panel were that an effective regional structure should:

be based on local Indigenous communities;

assist with establishing effective local community structures;

assist with establishing effective community governance;

assist with the identification of community needs, their priorities and the measures to address those needs;

identify community needs that have regional significance;

prepare regional plans to address the regional and local needs;

advocate regional needs; and

assist local, state and national agencies to implement the regional needs plan.(14)

Overall the Review Panel noted that, 'State and National programs should be informed by the regional plans and undertake activities consistent with those plans'.(15)

The Review Panel identified a range of model options for a restructured ATSIC.

Status Quo or 'Parliamentary' model involves ATSIC's elected representatives setting policy and priorities, but removes from the elected arm any involvement in determining funding to reflect those policies and priorities, including in relation to the delivery of services.

Regional Authority model replaces the existing 35 Regional Councils with 16 Regional Authorities which would prepare needs-based Regional Plans, establish criteria for funding decisions and programs, and report on outcomes. The National Board would comprise the 16 Chairs and a Torres Strait Regional Authority (TSRA) Commissioner.

Regional Council model incorporates the same roles and responsibilities for the elected arm as the Regional Authority model. It retains the existing 35 Regional Councils with full-time chairs elected by each Council. Instead of Zone Commissioners, members of Regional Councils in each 'zone' elect one of 16 National Board members (in addition to the TSRA member).

Devolution model proposes structural changes that could be implemented as a means of delivering more effectively the outcomes that Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians are seeking through this current review. In particular, it would involve the Commonwealth delivering appropriate Indigenous-specific programs and services through State/Territory agencies.(16)

Date

Event / summary of issue

1 July 2003

ATSIS commences operations

ATSIS commences operations. The Minister for Immigration, Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs issues directions requiring ATSIS to:

Conform to the policies and strategies set by ATSIC and also have regard to Government policy;

Focus on addressing relative need between regions in implementing programs;

Ensure best practice in engaging service providers, including through competitive tendering and performance- based contracts; and

Comply with the conflict of interest directions for ATSIC.

Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Services (ATSIS), a new executive agency to administer ATSIC's programs, commences operations on 1 July 2003. The Minister for Immigration, Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs issues the following directions for ATSIS to comply with in its operations.

In implementing programs and arranging services for Indigenous peoples, the CEO will take all reasonable steps to ensure that ATSIS:

conforms to the policies and strategic priorities set and promulgated by the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Commission (ATSIC)

reflects the priorities set by Regional Councils in their regional plans as the critical guide for interventions and services within a region, giving due emphasis to addressing needs

facilitates linked approaches with other government agencies (both Commonwealth and State/Territory) to optimise outcomes for clients

coordinates its activities to achieve effective synergies with overall Government policies and priorities, and

has appropriate regard to overall Government policies and priorities.

Having appropriate regard to functional priorities and strategies for addressing relative need determined by the ATSIC Board, the CEO will take all reasonable steps to ensure that resources are apportioned between regions and communities according to demonstrable relative need, taking into account of the availability of alternative services in those areas and the supplementary intent of Indigenous specific services.

The choice of and relationship with individual service providers should be based on best practice, including:

outcome-based funding and performance-based contracts for services delivery

market testing and competitive tendering wherever appropriate

assessment based on comparative efficiency and effectiveness, including demonstrated capacity to deliver, and

management structures that reflect principles of sound governance and leadership by fit and proper individuals with a record of effective management.

The CEO of ATSIS will take all reasonable steps to ensure that ATSIS does not make grants or loans or offer contracts or provide guarantees to organisations in circumstances where such grant or provision would be precluded by my Conflict of Interests Directions issued 24 December 2002 and amended 3 February 2003.

The CEO of ATSIS will take all reasonable steps to ensure that ATSIS operates in partnership with ATSIC and Regional Councils.

Where any dispute arises as to ATSIS's interpretation of ATSIC policies and Regional Council priorities, ATSIS should make every effort to resolve these matters, raising any unresolved matters with me where necessary.(17)

On 22 August 2003, the Prime Minister writes to the Steering Committee for Government Service Provision on behalf of COAG to formally endorse the Committee's proposed national reporting framework for Indigenous disadvantage. The framework had been developed as a result of COAG's decision of 5 April 2002 to commission the Committee to develop a regular report against key indicators of indigenous disadvantage. The Committee had conducted consultations with governments, Indigenous organisations and other stakeholders during 2002 and 2003 on the draft framework.

This framework establishes a three tiered framework to measure the actual outcomes for Indigenous people as opposed to the operation of specific policy programs. The framework is contained in Diagram 1 below.

Diagram 1 - COAG Framework for reporting on Indigenous disadvantage

The first tier of the framework outlines the three priority outcomes of:

Safe, healthy and supportive family environments with strong communities and cultural identity;

Positive child development and prevention of violence, crime and self-harm; and

Improved wealth creation and economic sustainability for individuals, families and communities.

The framework acknowledges that areas such as health, education, employment, housing, crime and so on are inextricably linked. Disadvantage or involvement in any of these areas can have serious impacts on other areas of well-being. It is also premised on a realisation that there are a range of causative factors for Indigenous disadvantage. This necessitates reporting on progress in addressing both the larger, cumulative indicators (such as life expectancy, unemployment and contact with criminal justice processes) which reflect the consequences of a number of contributing factors, as well as identifying progress in improving these smaller, more individualised factors.

To reflect these strategic considerations, the framework seeks to present progress in addressing Indigenous disadvantage at two levels (the second and third tier of the framework). The second tier of the framework is a series of twelve headline indicators that provide a snapshot of the overall state of Indigenous disadvantage.

These headline indicators are measures of the major social and economic factors that need to be improved if COAG's vision of an improved standard of living for Indigenous peoples is to become reality. As it is difficult to measure progress in change in these indicators in the short term, the framework also has a third tier of indicators. There are seven strategic areas for action and a number of supporting strategic change indicators to measure progress in these. The particular areas and change indicators have been chosen for their potential to respond to policy action within the shorter term and to indicate intermediate measures of progress while also having the potential in the longer term to contribute to improvements in overall Indigenous disadvantage (as reflected through the 'headline indicators'). The seven strategic areas and related indicators are set out in the following table.

Table 1: COAG Overcoming Disadvantage framework: Strategic areas for action and strategic change indicators

Strategic areas for action

Strategic change indicators

1. Early child development and growth (prenatal to age 3)

Rates of hospital admission for infectious diseases

Infant mortality

Birth weight

Hearing impediments

2. Early school engagement and performance (preschool to year 3)

Preschool and school attendance

Year 3 literacy and numeracy

Primary school children with dental caries

3. Positive childhood and transition to adulthood

Years 5 and 7 literacy and numeracy

Retention at year 9

Indigenous cultural studies in school curriculum and involvement of Indigenous people in development and delivery of Indigenous studies

Participation in organised sport, arts or community group activities

Juvenile diversions as a proportion of all juvenile offenders

Transition from school to work

4. Substance use and misuse

Alcohol and tobacco consumption

Alcohol related crime and hospital statistics

Drug and other substance use

5. Functional and resilient families and communities

Children on long term care and protection orders

Repeat offending

Access to the nearest health professional

Proportion of indigenous people with access to their traditional lands

6. Effective environmental health systems

Rates of diseases associated with poor environmental health (including water and food borne diseases, trachoma, tuberculosis and rheumatic heart disease)

Access to clean water and functional sewerage

Overcrowding in housing

7. Economic participation and development

Employment (full-time/part-time) by sector (public/private), industry and occupation

CDEP participation

Long term unemployment

Self employment

Indigenous owned or controlled land

Accredited training in leadership, finance or management

Case studies in governance arrangements

On 13 November 2003, the first report against the National Reporting Framework for Overcoming Indigenous Disadvantage is released by the Steering Committee for Government Service Provision. Titled Overcoming Indigenous Disadvantage, the report confirms that Indigenous disadvantage is broadly based, with major disparities between Indigenous people and other Australians in most areas.

The Chairman of the Steering Committee has commented on the findings of the report that it:

confirms the pervasiveness of Indigenous disadvantage. It is distressingly apparent that many years of policy effort have not delivered desired outcomes; indeed in some important respects the circumstances of Indigenous people appear to have deteriorated or regressed. Worse than that, outcomes in the strategic areas identified as critical to overcoming disadvantage in the long term remain well short of what is needed.(18)

A summary of the main findings of the report in relation to the twelve headline indicators is provided in Table 2 below. These headline indicators are measures of the major social and economic factors that need to be improved if COAG's vision of an improved standard of living for Indigenous peoples is to become reality.

Table 2: Summary of findings of the Overcoming Disadvantage report - headline indicators(19)

Headline Indicator

Key Message

Life expectancy at birth The life expectancy of Indigenous people is around 20 years lower than that for the total Australian population. Rates of disability and/or core activity restriction Nationally comparable data on the prevalence of disability with the Indigenous population are currently not available. Years 10 and 12 retention and attainment

Indigenous students have a tendency to leave school once they reach the age when attendance is no longer compulsory.

Nationally in 2002, non-Indigenous students were twice as likely to continue to year 12 as Indigenous students.

From 1998 to 2002, Indigenous apparent retention rates increased slightly.

Post secondary education - participation and attainment

While TAFE participation among Indigenous people in 2001 was typically higher than for the rest of the population, university attendance was lower, with other Australians being 1.8 times more likely to attend university than Indigenous people.

Indigenous post secondary attainment in 2001 was significantly lower, with 12.5 per cent of Indigenous people having attained a level 3 certificate or above, compared to 33.5 per cent of non-Indigenous people.

Labour force participation and unemployment

Labour force participation for Indigenous people in 2001 was 50.4 per cent of the population aged 15 years and over, compared to 62.6 per cent for non-Indigenous people.

Unemployment in 2001 was 2.8 times higher for Indigenous than for non-Indigenous people.

CDEP participation significantly reduces recorded Indigenous unemployment rates.

Household and Individual income

In 2001, both household and individual incomes were lower on average for Indigenous than non-Indigenous people across all regions, and they are much lower in remote locations.

Home ownership

Indigenous individual home ownership rates in 2001 were much lower than those for non-Indigenous people in all regions.

Suicide and self-harm

In 2001, the suicide rate for Indigenous people was considerably higher than the rate for other Australians.

Suicide death rates for the Indigenous population were particularly high in the 25-34 year age group.

Substantiated child protection notifications

In most jurisdictions, the administration rate for Indigenous children was higher than for non-Indigenous children in 2001-02.

Deaths from homicide and hospitalisations for assault

During 1999-2001, homicides as a proportion of total deaths, were far greater in the Indigenous population (2.1 per cent) than the non-Indigenous population (0.2 per cent).

The main category for hospitalisation for Indigenous people was assault by bodily force.

Victim rates for crime

Indigenous people were much more likely to be victims of murder, assault, sexual assault and domestic violence than non-Indigenous people.

Imprisonment and juvenile detention rates

On 30 June 2002, Indigenous people were 15 times more likely than non-Indigenous people to be in prison.

The Report notes that the existence of data sets or ease of developing them was a practical consideration that influenced the choice of indicators in the framework:

In many cases, the selected indicators are a compromise, due not only to the absence of data, but also to the unlikelihood of any data becoming available in the foreseeable future... In some cases, however, an indicator has been included even when the data are not available on a national basis, or are substantially qualified. These are indicators where there is some likelihood that data quality and availability will improve over time. In two cases where there were no reliable data available, the indicators were nevertheless considered to be so important that qualitative indicators have been included in the report.(20)

In reporting against each of the headline indicators and strategic change indicators in the first report, the Steering Committee has noted limitations in data availability and quality. Each chapter of the report contains a section titled 'future directions in data' which notes current developments which will contribute to addressing the difficulties in data availability and quality in future years, and how exactly specific initiatives will do this. It also identifies major deficiencies and areas where there is an urgent and outstanding need for improved statistical collection methods.(21)

The ATSIC Review Panel releases its final report, In the hands of the regions. The report concludes that, 'the existing objects of the ATSIC Act should be retained'(22) and that:

ATSIC should be the primary vehicle to represent Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples' views to all levels of government and be an agent for positive change in the development of policies and programs to advance the interests of Indigenous Australians.(23)

The review also identified reforms required to ATSIC's role so that ATSIC:

Enables Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people to build a future grounded in their own histories and cultures within the broader Australian framework;

Represents and promotes the views of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people, including their diversity of opinion;

Vigorously pursues the interests of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people through partnerships with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities, governments and other sectors of Australian society;

Influences priorities, strategies and programs at the national, State/Territory and regional level;

Minimises and streamlines the government interface with Indigenous communities;

Promotes good Indigenous governance;

Recognises the complexity of relationships between Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander individuals, communities, organisations and governments and the values and limitations created by this;

Is an equal partner in all negotiations, resourced adequately to achieve this equality, and commands goodwill and respect;

Increases women's participation and expression of views;

Ensures that there is transparent accountability of all organisations that are funded to provide services for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people;

Maintains its unique status; and

Recognises that ATSIC is a key player, but not the only player, that seeks to advance the interests of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Australians with government and others.(24)

The Review Panel also offered a number of principles to underpin a 'new ATSIC':

ATSIC should be the peak state/territory and national body, which advocates for the development of Indigenous communities;

The Chairs of the Regional bodies (and relevant Commissioners) should provide the State/Territory policy interface with the governments co-coordinating regional activities;

Representatives from each State/Territory should then constitute the national body, achieving a direct relationship between the regional, state and national levels;

The national body should provide the policy interface for the commonwealth government setting and advocating a national strategic direction; and monitoring against ATSIC's national plan to reinforce the accountability of program and service providers;

ATSIC's primary focus should be on building strong local communities through development and implementation of a needs-based Regional Plan;

State/Territory and national programs should be informed by, and undertake activities consistent with, Regional Plans;

Strengthening Indigenous communities must not be based solely on the provision of welfare services;

Indigenous Australians should be provided with equal access to health services and there should be an appropriate balance of preventative, environmental and public health policies, programs and services;

Health, education, training skills development and employment are integral to building the local and regional economy on a long term sustainable basis;

Housing should be provided on the basis of ensuring access is available to those who need it and ownership is available to those who desire it;

All government funded programs should be subject to an independent assessment of outcomes; and

The role of elected officials should be clearly delineated from that of the administration.(25)

During the review the panel received a consistent message that 'Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people see ATSIC as an important stepping stone to a desired future, and believe its role is to assist them get where they want to go'(26).

On 15 January 2004, the Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs announces that, 'the Government intends to introduce legislation to reform the Aboriginal Councils and Associations Act to improve the effectiveness of Indigenous organisations for the benefit of their communities.'(27)

The proposed legislative reforms respond to conclusions made in the Final Report of the Review of the Aboriginal Councils and Associations Act 1976 (Cth) (28), as well as findings from subsequent research undertaken by the Office of the Registrar of Aboriginal Corporations (ORAC).(29)

The Minister stated that:

The need for reform is clear. The ACA Act was enacted more than 25 years ago as a method of incorporating mostly not for profit Indigenous organisations. However, it has failed to keep pace with subsequent developments in company law and accountability requirements given the size and numbers of Indigenous corporations today.

The reforms will deliver:

Rationalisation of the number of corporations through a focus on pre-incorporation scrutiny and support for alternatives to incorporation;

Conferencing opportunities to encourage agencies to resolve co-ordination issues;

Accreditation training for Directors of Corporations and members;

Expanded dispute assistance in the form of an improved members' complaint service, information and opinion service and supported referrals for mediation;

Improvements to existing information about Indigenous corporations and their 'health' to support better regulation, and also assist members and funding bodies; and

A rolling program of 'healthy corporation' checks tailored to Indigenous corporations, coupled with more streamlined responses to critical problems, in order to fully protect critical assets and funds held by corporations.(30)

As at January 2005, ORAC is working with the Office of Parliamentary Counsel to prepare a draft Bill. ORAC is aiming to have the Bill prepared by June 2005 and anticipates it will be introduced to Parliament shortly thereafter.

On 4 March 2004, the Minister for Indigenous Affairs announces that, 'Indigenous legal services are set for a shake-up under proposed reforms that will focus on the delivery of services rather than just block grants to organisations.'(31)

The Minister continues, 'These important reforms will ensure that legal services are tendered in a competitive environment thereby ensuring that Indigenous people get value for money. A larger emphasis will also be out on allocating the services to those most in need.'(32)

The government simultaneously released the Exposure Draft of the Request for Tender and invited comments regarding the proposed tendering process.(33)

Under previous/current arrangements ATSILS apply to the funding program for funding and receive funding in annual block grants. Under the new arrangements ATSILS are required to competitively tender for funding.

On 30 June 2004 the Minister for Indigenous Affairs announces that in response to public feedback from the Exposure Draft, the Government will amend the criteria for tenders. In addition to the criteria amendments, the tendering process would be staged progressively, rather than a simultaneous process.(34)

On 28 July 2004 the Attorney General announced details of the amendments to the tender arrangements as well as the modified timeline for the release of the requests for tender. The proposed tender arrangements would be modified to:

Reinstate addressing Indigenous incarceration as a priority of the provision of legal services;

Remove directions that would have allowed successful tenderers to refuse to provide legal services relating to public drunkenness and to repeat offenders for violent offences; and

Include in the selection process requirements that prospective tenderers demonstrate their ability to provide Indigenous leadership and culturally-sensitive legal services.(35)

The Attorney-General announces that the tendering process will commence with Victoria and Western Australia, followed by Queensland. The Attorney-General announced that:

All three processes are to be completed in time for the successful tenderers to commence operations from 1 July 2005. The tendering process in other States and the Northern Territory will start after that date.(36)

On 31 August 2004, the Attorney-General announced that the request for tenders for Victoria and Western Australia will commence in November 2004. The Attorney-General's Department advised that it will be conducting tender information sessions and tender assistance workshops for potential Indigenous tenderers only. The closing date for lodgement of tenders is 17 December 2004.(37) The selected tenderers are expected to start delivering services on 1 July 2005.(38) Successful tenderers will be funded for the period 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2008. The Attorney-General announces that the tender process will commence for Queensland in March 2005.(39)

The Australian Labor Party announces that if elected at the forthcoming federal election it will abolish ATSIC and put into place a new framework for Indigenous self-governance and program delivery. This new framework would be based on five principles.

Make Indigenous service delivery a national priority. This would be achieved by listing Indigenous services and governance on the COAG agenda;

Partnerships. Will work more closely with communities which would involve the devolution of services and creating pooled funding arrangements;

Regional governance. Regional and community partnerships are the best way to ensure services and resources are getting to the people who need them;

Combination of opportunity and responsibility. Opportunity will be created by providing extra and improved government services; and

Advocacy, advice and accountability. Indigenous participation in policy-making will be increased by the formation of a new directly-elected national Indigenous body.(40)

Date

Event / summary of issue

15 April 2004

Government announces that ATSIC to be abolished and new arrangements introduced from 1 July 2004

The Government announces that ATSIC and ATSIS are to be abolished and that new arrangements for the administration of Indigenous affairs will be introduced from 1 July 2004.

Changes to be introduced include:

Introduction of legislation to abolish ATSIC;

The appointment of a National Indigenous Council;

Devolution of Indigenous-specific programmes to mainstream departments;

Establishment of a Ministerial Taskforce on Indigenous Affairs;

Establishment of a Secretaries Group on Indigenous Affairs;

Creation of a new Office of Indigenous Policy Coordination (OIPC);

Movement to a single budget submission for Indigenous affairs;

Creation of Indigenous Coordinating Centres (ICC's); and

Adoption of Shared Responsibility Agreement (SRA) and Regional Partnership Agreement (RPA) approaches

On 15 April 2004, the Prime Minister announced that as a result of the examination by Cabinet of the ATSIC Review report, and also an extensive examination of Indigenous affairs policy:

when Parliament resumes in May (2004), we will introduce legislation to abolish ATSIC...

Our goals in relation to Indigenous affairs are to improve the outcomes and opportunities and hopes of Indigenous people in areas of health, education and employment. We believe very strongly that the experiment in separate representation, elected representation, for Indigenous people has been a failure...

we've come to a very firm conclusion that ATSIC should be abolished and that it should not be replaced, and that programmes should be mainstreamed and that we should renew our commitment to the challenges of improving outcomes for Indigenous people in so many of those key areas.(41)

In its place, the Government announced that it would introduce new arrangements for the administration of Indigenous affairs. The new arrangements are comprised of the following elements:

Introduction of legislation to abolish ATSIC - Legislation will be introduced to abolish ATSIC. As an interim measure Regional Councils will remain operational until 30 June 2005, mainly in an advisory capacity;

Support for regional Indigenous representative structures - The Government will maintain a network of Indigenous Coordination Centres in rural and remote areas to help coordinate programme design and service delivery at a regional and local level;

Devolution of Indigenous specific programs to mainstream government departments and agencies - all relevant functions, programmes, assets and appropriations of ATSIC and ATSIS will be transferred to mainstream government departments;

Movement to a single budget submission for Indigenous affairs - Funding for government Indigenous-specific programmes will continue to be quarantined for use for Indigenous-specific purposes and separately identified in budgets and annual reports. Under the new arrangements, all departments will contribute to a single, coordinated Budget submission for Indigenous-specific funding that supplements the delivery of programs for all Australians;

The establishment of a Ministerial Taskforce on Indigenous Affairs - Chaired by the Minister for Immigration, Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs and consisting of Ministers with program responsibilities for Indigenous Affairs. The taskforce is intended to provide high-level direction to the Government on Indigenous policy;

Government appointment of a National Indigenous Council - the Government will appoint a non-statutory National Indigenous Council as a forum for Indigenous Australians to provide policy advice to the Government at a national level;

The establishment of a Secretaries Group on Indigenous Affairs - the Ministerial taskforce will be supported by heads of government departments as members of a Secretaries Group on Indigenous Affairs, which will prepare a public annual report on the outcomes of Indigenous-specific programmes. Secretaries will be accountable to their portfolio Ministers; and

The creation of an Office of Indigenous Policy Coordination (OIPC) - Located within the Department of Immigration, Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs, it will provide policy advice to the Minister; coordinate Indigenous policy development and service delivery across the Government; oversee relations with state and territory governments on Indigenous issues; and monitor the performance of government programmes and services for Indigenous people, including arrangements for independent scrutiny.(42)

Adoption of Shared Responsibility Agreement (SRA) and Regional Partnership Agreement (RPA) approaches - SRAs will set out clearly what the family, community and government is responsible for contributing to a particular activity, what outcomes are to be achieved, and the agreed indicators to measure progress. Under the new approach, groups will need to offer commitments and undertake changes that benefit the community in return for government funding. RPA's provide a mechanism for guiding a coherent government intervention strategy across a region, eliminating overlaps or gaps, and promoting coordination to meet identified priorities for the region.(43) ICC's will be involved the negotiating SRA's and RPA's.

On 20 April 2004, the Management Advisory Committee to the Australian Public Service Commission releases a report titled Connecting government: Whole of government responses to Australia's priority challenges. The Report observes:

Making whole of government approaches work better for ministers and government is now a key priority for the APS... Ministers and government expect the APS to work across organisational boundaries to develop well-informed, comprehensive policy advice and implement government policy in a coordinated way.(44)

Whole of government is defined in this report as:

[P]ublic service agencies working across portfolio boundaries to achieve a shared goal and an integrated government response to particular issues. Approaches can be formal and informal. They can focus on policy development, program management and service delivery.(45)

The Connecting Government report identifies a number of challenges in implementing a whole of government approach. The Secretary of the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet acknowledges that the new arrangements for the administration of Indigenous affairs constitute 'the biggest test of whether the rhetoric of connectivity can be marshalled into effective action... It is an approach on which my reputation, and many of my colleagues, will hang.'(46)

In reference to the new arrangements, the Secretary states:

the vision is of a whole-of-government approach which can inspire innovative national approaches to the delivery of services to Indigenous Australians, but which are responsive to the distinctive needs of particular communities.(47)

The Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Commission Amendment Bill 2004 is introduced to Parliament. The Bill proposes the abolition of ATSIC in two stages - the National Board of Commissioners to be abolished from 30 June 2004 and the Regional Councils from 30 June 2005. It also provides for matters consequential to the abolition of ATSIC, including the transfer of the Regional Land Fund to the Indigenous Land Corporation and ATSIC's Housing Fund and Business Development Program to Indigenous Business Australia.

The Torres Strait Regional Authority, which provides a range of Indigenous specific services to Torres Strait Islanders living in the Torres Strait Islands region, will continue to perform its current role.(48)

Minister Hardgrave notes that the Bill, along with the Government's proposed new arrangements, 'seek to address the failings of the recent past in providing equality in service provision and equality in opportunity to our first people, the Indigenous people of Australia'.(49)

The Government announces the creation of the Ministerial Taskforce on Indigenous Affairs. The Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs notes that:

This taskforce will be responsible for driving, through the Government agencies represented, the delivery of improved services and outcomes for Indigenous Australians...

It will coordinate the Government's Indigenous policies and report to Cabinet on directions and priorities in Indigenous policy. The Prime Minister has asked that as a first step, the Taskforce provide him with a Charter, with a focus on making the mainstream work better for Indigenous people. The Ministerial Taskforce will report annually to the Expenditure Review Committee of Cabinet on the performance of Indigenous specific programs and the allocation of resources across agencies...

A Secretaries Group, chaired by the Secretary of the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet will support the Ministerial Taskforce. It will also report annually on the outcomes of Indigenous specific services.

The Ministerial Taskforce will be advised by the National Indigenous Council when formed. The taskforce will meet directly with the council at least twice a year.(50)

The Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs will chair the Taskforce. Other members are:

Minister for Transport and Regional Services;

Attorney General;

Minister for Health and Ageing;

Minister for Family and Community Services;

Minister for Employment and Workplace relations;

Minister for Education, Science and Training;

Minister for Communications, Information Technology and the Arts;

Minister for the Environment and Heritage; and

Minister for Justice and Customs.

Over 200 Indigenous participants attend the National Indigenous Leaders Conference from 11-14 June in Adelaide. The conference declares its support for the existence of a National Indigenous Representative Body. The participants called for any future national representative body to be based on the following principles:

We the Indigenous People of Australia and we alone have the right to determine who represents us locally, regionally, nationally and internationally;

We are determined to establish a sustainable independent National Indigenous Representative Body (NIRB) that reflects the aspirations and values of our peoples;

The NIRB needs to gain its legitimacy from our people;

Any process to establish a NIRB must acknowledge who we are, honour our diversity and commit to inclusive processes for all our people;

Our NIRB must be open, transparent and accountable to the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples;

We respect and are committed to the right of our peoples to make free and informed choices for them, their families and communities;

We have an obligation to respect and protect our right to self-determination, our human rights, our humanity, our First Peoples' status and our inherent rights that flow from that status;

We have a duty to pursue social justice and economic development for all Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples; and

Our duty is to leave a lasting legacy for our grandchildren's grandchildren.(51)

On 16 June 2004, the Senate agrees that a Select Committee, to be known as the Select Committee on the Administration of Indigenous Affairs be appointed to inquire into the following matters:

the provisions of the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Commission Amendment Bill 2004;

the proposed administration of Indigenous programs and services by mainstream departments and agencies; and

related matters.(52)

The Committee is due to report by 31 October 2004.

The new Ministerial Taskforce on Indigenous Affairs (see above) met on 16 June 2004 where they agreed on the need for a 20-30 year vision for Indigenous Affairs.

The Taskforce agreed that:

Indigenous Australians, wherever they live, have the same opportunities as other Australians to make informed choices about their lives, to realise their full potential in whatever they choose to do and to take responsibility for managing their own affairs.(53)

The Federal Minister for Indigenous Affairs stated that:

The Government has allocated $2.9 billion to Indigenous programmes in 2004-05... While there have been real improvements the rate of progress is not good enough, and the Ministerial taskforce will play a vital role in driving the Government's reforms to Indigenous affairs.(54)

The Minister added:

A key part of developing a 20-30 year agenda will be testing Indigenous peoples aspirations: where do they want their communities (their children, grandchildren, old people) to be in 20-30 years time?(55)

In agreeing to the 20-30 year vision the Taskforce identified three areas for priority attention:

early childhood intervention and improving primary health and early education outcomes, to head off longer term problems;

safer communities; and

reducing dependency on passive welfare and boosting employment and economic development in Indigenous communities.'(56)

The 20-30 year vision for Indigenous Affairs is set out in the Ministerial Taskforce on Indigenous Affairs Charter. (57)

Table 3: Ministerial Taskforce Charter on Indigenous Affairs

Date

Event / summary of issue

21 June 2004

Report into Capacity Building and Service Delivery in Indigenous communities released

The House of Representatives Standing Committee on Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Affairs releases Many Ways Forward, Report of the inquiry into capacity building and service delivery in Indigenous communities.

The Report finds that there is an urgent need for a new approach to be adopted by the government sector as well as the need to build the capacity of Indigenous communities and organisations.

The Report presents a series of recommendations that aim to ensure:

basic data collection is nationally consistent and comparable, and focussed on outcomes;

the Government institute a coordinated annual report to parliament on its progress in achieving agreed outcomes and benchmarks;

a comprehensive evaluation is made of the COAG Trials, and a regular report on progress is made to Parliament;

improved integration, coordination and cooperation within and between levels of government in consultation with Indigenous Australians occurs;

a strong commitment is made to improving the capacity of government agencies; and

the development of partnerships between the private/corporate/philanthropic sectors and Indigenous organisations is encouraged and supported.

On 19 June 2002 the Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs referred to the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Affairs an inquiry into capacity building and service delivery in Indigenous communities. The terms of reference are as follows.

The committee will inquire into and report on strategies to assist Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders better manage the delivery of services within their communities. In particular, the Committee will consider building the capacities of:

community members to better support families, community organisation and representative councils so as to better deliver the best outcomes for individuals, families and communities;

Indigenous organisations to better deliver and influence the delivery of services in the most effective, efficient and accountable way; and

government agencies so that policy direction and management structures will improve individual and community outcomes for Indigenous people. (58)

On 21 June 2004, the Committee releases its' report, titled Many Ways Forward, Report of the inquiry into capacity building and service delivery in Indigenous communities. The report found that:

... for there to be real change in the effectiveness of service delivery, and ultimately improvements in the outcomes for Indigenous Australians, a significant change in the approach of governments needs to occur.(59)

The report states:

Though many Indigenous organisations successfully apply for funding to deliver government services to their communities, the overwhelming evidence received by the Committee suggests that the way in governments deliver funding often compromises the ability of Indigenous organisations to appropriately or sustainably address their needs. These criticisms include the length of funding cycles; the complex reporting requirements; the piecemeal nature of funding; the focus for 'trials', but not for ongoing, successful programs; and the lack of government integration resulting in duplication over funding areas and intended outcomes.(60)

The report contains 15 recommendations relating to the above concerns. In brief, the report recommends focus be placed on issues such as data collection and annual reporting to Parliament on progress on addressing Indigenous disadvantage, with an emphasis on the COAG Trials. The recommendations also stress the importance of benchmarks and headline indicators as outlined in Overcoming Indigenous Disadvantage.

With respect to the new arrangements, Recommendation 7 is particularly noteworthy:

The report also recommends that improvements be made to the funding models including the development of a 'single budget with a single reporting regime and the building of a governance training and mentoring component into funding provisions as well as a continued development of training and mentoring programs in partnership with Indigenous communities and organisations. (61)

Date

Event / summary of issue

25 June 2004

COAG principles for new arrangements in Indigenous affairs endorsed

COAG endorses a National framework of principles for government service delivery to Indigenous Australians as well as confirming its commitment to the whole of government trials and practical reconciliation. The National Principles will inform the Taskforce and Secretaries Group when developing and monitoring strategies to address Indigenous disadvantage.

The National Principles relate to six issues:

Sharing responsibility;

Harnessing the mainstream;

Streamlining service delivery;

Establishing transparency and accountability;

Developing a learning framework; and

Focussing on priority areas.

At its meeting of 25 June 2004, COAG also endorsed a National Framework of Principles for Government Service Delivery to Indigenous Australians. This framework confirms, at the inter-governmental level, the principles which underpin the new administrative arrangements at the federal level. The framework is set out in Table 3 below(62).

Table 4: National Framework of Principles for Government Service Delivery to Indigenous Australians

In its' communique, COAG also:

reaffirms its commitment to the whole of government trials, stating that governments would, 'continue to work through the processes agreed at each site and to improve cooperation between all levels of government';(63)

agrees to commence negotiations between State and Commonwealth agencies to reduce the extent of family violence and child abuse in Indigenous communities in accordance with the National Framework on Indigenous Family Violence and Child Protection (as agreed at the meeting); and

resolved that senior officials would report annually on the progress of practical reconciliation against the action priority areas of: investment in community leadership initiatives; reviewing and re-engineering government programmes and services to ensure they deliver practical support to Indigenous Australians; and the forging of closer links between the business sector and Indigenous communities to help promote economic independence.(64)

On the 30 June 2004, the Minister advised that as of 1 July 2004,

More than $1 billion of former ATSIC-ATSIS programmes have been transferred to mainstream government agencies and some 1300 staff commence work in their new Departments as of tomorrow.

We want more of the money to hit the ground. We are stripping away layers of bureaucracy to make sure that local families and communities have a real say in how money is spent...

A small number of programmes, subject to specific references in the ATSIC Act, will remain with a remnant ATSIS body pending the passage of the Bill to abolish ATSIC.(65)

All programs and services formerly delivered by ATSIC-ATSIS have continued.(66)

Table 4 below shows which government departments each ATSIC-ATSIS program has been transferred to.

Table 5: Transfer of ATSIS-ATSIC functions from 1 July 2004(67)

Program

Portfolio

Community Development and employment; business development and assistance; home ownership Employment and Workplace Relations Community Housing and infrastructure; Indigenous women Family and Community Services Art, culture and language; broadcasting services; sport and recreation; maintenance and protection of Indigenous heritage Communication, Information Technology and the Arts Legal and preventative; family violence prevention; legal services Attorney-General Access to effective family tracing and reunion services Health and Ageing Indigenous rights; international issues; native title and land rights; repatriation; Indigenous Land Fund; community participation agreements; Torres Strait Islanders on the mainland; planning and partnership development; public information Immigration, Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs

Table 6: Transfer of agencies to new portfolios

Agency

Portfolio

Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Services Disbanded: programs taken over by mainstream agencies; coordination functions taken over by Office of Indigenous Policy Coordination within Department of Immigration, Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs Australian Institute of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Studies Education, Science and Training Aboriginal Hostels Ltd Family and Community Services Indigenous Business Australia Employment and Workplace Relations Indigenous Land Corporation; Torres Strait Regional Authority; Registrar of Aboriginal Corporations Immigration, Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs Office of Evaluation and Audit Finance

The Senate Select Committee on the Administration of Indigenous Affairs was due to report its findings on 31 October 2004. The Committee released an interim report on 31 August 2004 which noted that it had conducted seven public hearings and received 89 submissions, but was unable to complete its final report due to the prorogation of Parliament.(68)

In response to the absence of a final report and any preliminary findings, the Government Senators of the Committee released a dissenting report. This report noted that, 'in the submissions and hearing there has been little support expressed for ATSIC'.(69)

The Senate Select Committee on the Administration of Indigenous Affairs was reconvened on 17 November 2004 for its inquiry into the ATSIC Amendment Bill. It will report in March 2005. (70)

The Minister for Immigration, Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs announces the membership of the Government-appointed advisory body, the National Indigenous Council (NIC). It is composed of Government appointed Indigenous Advisers (which comprises both Torres Strait Islander and Aboriginal members). The Government advises that the NIC has been:

appointed based on members' expertise and experience in particular policy areas. Members of the Council will provide advice on policy and service delivery to the Ministerial Taskforce.

The NIC will meet at least four times a year and directly with the Ministerial Taskforce at least twice a year. The Council or its members may also meet with the Secretaries' Group and individual departments on issues in their areas of expertise.

The NIC will advise on priority areas for funding, and alert the Government to emerging issues. It will also promote constructive dialogue and engagement between government and Indigenous people and organisations. (71)

Members of the NIC are: Mrs Sue Gordon AM (Chair), Mr Wesley Aird, Dr Archie Barton, Professor Mary Ann Bin-Sallik, Ms Miriam Rose Baumann OAM, Mr Joseph Elu, Mr Robert Lee, Mr Adam Goodes, Dr Sally Goold OAM, Dr John Moriarty AM, Mr Warren Mundine, Mr Joe Procter, Mr Michael White and Ms Tammy Williams. They are appointed for an initial terms of 2 years. They are not paid for the role, though will receive sitting fees for meetings.

The NIC met in Canberra for its inaugural meeting from 8-9 December 2004. During this meeting the NIC's Terms of Reference for the NIC are agreed as follows:

Provide expert advice to the Government on how to improve outcomes for Indigenous Australians in the development and implementation of policy affecting Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people;

provide expert advice to government on how to improve programme and service delivery outcomes for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people including maximising the effective interaction of mainstream and indigenous-specific programmes and services;

Provide advice on Indigenous Australians' views on the acceptance and effectiveness of Commonwealth and State and Territory Government programmes;

Provide advice on the appropriateness of policy and programme options being considered to address identified needs;

Provide advice to government on national funding priorities;

Alert government to current and emerging policy, programme and service delivery issues;

Promote constructive dialogue and engagement between government and Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people, communities and organisations;

Provide advice on specific matters referred to it by the Minister; and

Report to the Minister as appropriate on the NIC's activities and achievements.(72)

The Terms of Reference also states that the NIC will not advise the government on specific funding proposals.

In addition to the Terms of Reference, the NIC and Ministerial Taskforce identified three priority areas to be addressed. These are: 'early childhood intervention; safer communities; and overcoming passive welfare with improvements in employment outcomes and economic development for Indigenous Australians'.(73)

Endnote