Diverse Agenda for Queensland Police

Additional policing staff, better training for officers, and targeted programs for diverse communities are delivering results for the thousands of Queenslanders within the multicultural community. Police Minister Jack Dempsey said Queensland’s multicultural community was being better served by the Government’s continued drive to revitalise frontline services. “The former Labor Government did not make any effort…

ResourcesQ Partnership Agreement to drive resources sector

Queensland’s resources sector will have a strong plan for future growth with a landmark partnership agreement between the Queensland Government and resource industry leaders. Premier Campbell Newman and Minister for Natural Resources and Mines Andrew Cripps said the agreement would set out key actions to help drive economic growth and to create jobs in Queensland’s…

Register now for the 2014 DestinationQ Forum

Queensland tourism representatives now have the opportunity to share their views on further boosting the state’s tourism sector, with registrations for the 2014 DestinationQ Forum on the Sunshine Coast now open. DestinationQ is a key election commitment of the Newman Government, underpinning our goal to make Queensland Australia’s number one tourism destination. Minister for…

Locals to celebrate the power of volunteering

Maroochydore Fiona Simpson will celebrate this year’s National Volunteer Week with Sunshine Coast volunteers at a sausage size in Cotton Tree Park on Friday 16th May. (NOW CWA HALL, MEMORIAL AVE, MAROOCHYDORE DUE TO RISK OF RAIN). Fiona Simpson and Cr Stephen Robinson will join with Volunteering Sunshine Coast to honour local volunteers for the…

Renew your driver’s licence online

Queenslanders can now renew their driver’s licences via the internet, with the Queensland Government providing more than 50 new services online. IT and Innovation Minister Ian Walker said the government was streamlining bureaucratic processes and making life quicker and simpler for Queenslanders and more was to come. “This one online service will save drivers time…

Sweeping reforms improve justice for Queenslanders

The Government’s commitment to revitalise frontline services and make Queensland the safest place to raise a family has taken a major step forward with a raft of ground breaking criminal law reforms introduced in Parliament today. Attorney-General and Minister for Justice Jarrod Bleijie said the Criminal Law Amendment Bill 2014 tackled cut and run sex…

Life’s a beach for Queenslanders

Public access to the beach has been secured under new legislation introduced by the Queensland Government into State Parliament. Minister for Natural Resources and Mines Andrew Cripps said amendments to the Land Act 1994 would address issues surrounding public access to areas of beach which, due to erosion, had fallen under private ownership. “The Newman…

Encouraging employment growth for Queensland

Today’s ABS labour force figures underline the importance of the Queensland Government’s efforts to grow the economy, reduce debt and invest in infrastructure for the future. Treasurer Tim Nicholls said Queensland had created more jobs than any other state over the past year. “The latest ABS figures again show encouraging employment growth in the Queensland…

Time to recognise cultural diversity champions

Queenslanders who have contributed to our state’s cultural diversity have the opportunity to be recognised by the Premier’s Cultural Diversity Awards 2014. Minister for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander and Multicultural Affairs Glen Elmes announced that nominations for the 2014 Awards are now open. “Our culture and lifestyle is made all the more vibrant by…

Vegetation management reforms deliver major savings

Landholders have been saved up to 86 years in productive time and almost $200,000 thanks to the Newman Government’s self-assessable vegetation management codes, according to the latest quarterly update released this week. Minister for Natural Resources and Mines Andrew Cripps said since the codes were introduced in December 2013, the Department of Natural Resources and…