Sir Paul McCartney invoked the spirits of John Lennon and George Harrison as he returned to the birthplace of Beatlemania for a surprise gig.

In the darkened basement of The Cavern Club in Liverpool, he told adoring fans: “You know, when we first played here, we didn’t know if we would have a future. I think we did okay.

”I love coming back to Liverpool and The Cavern particularly,” he added. “Coming here was a big gig for us.

“John was on the left of me, George on the right, Pete Best on drums and then Rinvgo. It just all came together. Let’s here it for John and George.“

You know, when we first played here, we didn’t know if we would have a future. I think we did okay.

Sir Paul McCartney

Around 200 people had packed into the underground club at 2pm today after free tickets were made available only four hours earlier as part of a promotional campaign for the star’s new solo album Egypt Station.

The Beatles played almost 300 times at The Cavern in the early 1960s. The original club closed in 1973 but reopened a short distance away. Sir Paul last performed there in 1999.

Fans were soaked in sweat as they danced in the black walled and low ceilinged club as Sir Paul, 76, poured through his back catalogue of Beatles, Wings and solo hits.

One man could be seen with his head held high singing along to Magical Mystery Tour before gingerly looking around to make sure he was really there.

A woman in a floppy hat stood wafting a fan against the intense heat and three middle-aged men at the front could been seen linking arms and dancing like teenyboppers.

Read more:

Paul McCartney’s Carpool Karaoke was a golden TV moment

Sir Paul was clearly enjoying the moment too, telling fans how they had paid £5 to record a demo in the city and the first time the band had played at The Cavern, when the manager had passed up a note saying: ”This is a blues club, not a rock and roll club.“

‘See you next time’

The biggest cheers were for Lady Madonna, Love Me Do and Helter Skelter, with Sir Paul telling a fan ”this is an afternoon gig, you know“ after he urged him to play all night.

”It was just absolutely fantastic,“ said Paul Killen, 59, who first saw Sir Paul in 1979. ”I’ve seen him six times, but it was amazing to see him play so close.“

”See you next time,“ Sir Paul shouted as a fan handed him some white roses before he left the stage. And then he was gone.