Paul McCartney was born in Liverpool on 18th June 1942. He was raised in the city and educated at the Liverpool Institute.

Since writing his first song at the age of 14, Paul McCartney has dreamed and dared to be different. In the sixties, as the writer and co-author of their greatest songs, he changed the world of music with The Beatles. Legendary albums include: Please Please Me, Revolver, Help!, Sgt. Pepper’s Lonely Hearts Club Band and The White Album.

Paul has continued to push boundaries over the last 30 years, first as a solo artist, then with Wings (with albums that included Band On The Run and Wings at The Speed Of Sound) and following that as a solo artist again, with recent highlights including 2007’s Memory Almost Full. In 2008 he received high critical acclaim as The Fireman (a collaborative project between Paul and revered producer Youth) with their Electric Arguments album, which topped the Billboard Independent Album Charts.

Paul McCartney is also an accomplished award winning classical composer. His most recent classical album Ecce Cor Meum (Behold My Heart) was released in September of 2006 and won the 2007 Best Album Award at the Classical Brit Awards.

Paul was awarded with a special Outstanding Contribution Award at the 2008 BRIT Awards at Earls Court in London. He was given a standing ovation by the UK music industry as he received his award and closed the prestigious ceremony with an incredible performance. Months later, Yale University presented Paul with an honorary doctorate of music. As he received his diploma, President Richard C. Levin told him, “Your songs awakened a generation, giving a fresh sound to rock, roll, rhythm and blues. We admire your musical genius and your generous support of worthy causes.”

Equally renowned as a live performer as he is a songwriter, Paul McCartney has spent much of the last five years performing sold out concerts to millions of people all over the world including places he’d never previously visited, winning rave reviews along the way. Stand out moments have included 2003’s performance to over 500,000 people outside the Coliseum in Rome and Paul’s first show in Red Square, Moscow. In 2004 he gave the Glastonbury Festival its most legendary moment to date. 2005 saw him making history again as he performed live to the International Space Station to wake-up NASA astronauts. Paul performed a string of secret and surprise gigs in intimate venues in London, New York, LA and Paris throughout 2007.

2008 was a year to remember with Paul performing a series of special one off event concerts. He started by headlining the Liverpool Sound concert at Anfield Stadium, then gave the Ukraine its largest ever outdoor music event in Kiev with over 400,000 people lining the street to watch his ‘Independence Concert’. He found time to join Billy Joel on stage for the ‘Last Play At Shea’ show in July, marking the last concert ever at New York’s famous Shea Stadium, then travelled to the city of Quebec for yet another huge headline-making event as he performed to 300,000 people in the city’s national park, The Plains Of Abraham, to help celebrate Quebec’s 400th anniversary. The final special one-off event concert took place in September, when he played his ‘Friendship First concert in Tel Aviv, Israel. This was Paul’s first ever visit to Israel. The Beatles were banned from performing there at the height of Beatlemania in the 60s. Paul kicked off 2009 by teaming up with Dave Grohl to perform “I Saw Her Standing There” at the Grammys, where Paul was nominated for two awards. In April, Paul performed in New York at the David Lynch Foundation’s benefit concert, “Change Begins Within”. He was joined on stage with Ringo Starr for a special finale. Paul also headlined the Coachella Festival (his first US festival appearance) and performed a show to mark the opening of The New Joint at the Hard Rock Hotel & Casino in Las Vegas, a gig which sold out in seven seconds, setting a new sales record with tickets selling at a rate of 600 a second! July 11th took Paul to Halifax, Nova Scotia for his first ever concert there, which took place on the Halifax Common. The mayor of Halifax described the show as the largest and most exciting concert in its 260 year history.

Following Halifax, Paul embarked on a five-week tour of the US; ‘Summer Live ‘09’. The tour commenced with the inaugural run of shows at New York’s Citi Field Stadium, which was the site of the former Shea Stadium where The Beatles made history in 1965 when they played a concert that set the precedent for the modern day stadium rock show. Critics hailed the Citi Field performances, seen by over 100,000 people, as the concert experience of a lifetime. The tour concluded in Dallas on the 19th of August.

The Citi Field show was immortalised on the multi disc CD/DVD special package ‘Good Evening New York City’, which was released in November in the US and December in the UK.

After returning from his summer in the US it was announced that Paul had specially written and recorded the title track, ‘(I Want To) Come Home’, to the Miramax movie ‘Everybody’s Fine’, starring Robert De Niro and Drew Barrymore. The track was later nominated for a Golden Globe Award and a Critics Choice Award in their Best Song categories. Paul wrote the song after being asked by director Kirk Jones. The film ends with '(I Want To) Come Home' starting up before the final credits and provides the perfect backdrop to a film that explores many different areas of family life and relationships.

On October 22nd Paul announced he was bringing his tour home. He announced a special December 8-date European tour entitled ‘Good Evening Europe’. The tour began in Hamburg, a place that Paul originally visited with The Beatles almost 50 years ago, putting it on the map as a musical Mecca for millions of music pilgrims over the years. The tour came to a climactic and memorable finale at London’s O2 Arena, his only UK show of 2009. Reviews for the show were phenomenal and prove that Paul McCartney is a live experience that no-one should miss. “The man is living history and the way he continues to bring new energy to his past is incredible,’ reported the UK’s largest Sunday paper, News Of The World. The Telegraph exclaimed, “Paul McCartney used his only UK concert of 2009 as a showcase for an epic display of back-to-back basics music-making. Armed only with his four-piece band and the greatest collection of hits in pop history, he travelled back and forth across the decades like the Dr Who of rock and roll. Whatever elixir the 67-year-old Macca is running on remains a mystery, but he seems to get a huge charge from performing to an audience, especially one that is bombarding him with waves of adoration.”

Just before Paul’s 02 extravaganza, he set tongues wagging when he and the band performed ‘Drive My Car’ and ‘Live And Let Die’ live on the final of The X Factor, with viewers of almost 20 million tuning in. TV’s Mr Nasty, Simon Cowell described Paul’s performance as the best thing the show had ever seen.

2010 started with Paul announcing his ‘Up and Coming 2010’ tour, which commences in Phoenix on March 28th.

A freeman of The City Of Liverpool and Lead Patron of The Liverpool Institute Of Performing Arts, Paul McCartney was appointed Fellow of The Royal College of Music in 1995 by The Prince Of Wales. In 1996 Paul McCartney was knighted by H.M. The Queen for his services to music.

Paul McCartney is also committed to a number of charities including PETA, LIPA, One Voice, The Vegetarian Society, Nordoff Robins and Adopt-A-Mine-Field.