Paul McCartney’s childhood home is now a National Trust property in Allerton in south Liverpool. This is the house in which Paul McCartney lived for several years before he rose to fame with the Beatles, and it is labelled by the National Trust as "the birthplace of the Beatles". It was also the home of his brother Mike and the birthplace of the trio the Scaffold, of which Mike was a member.

The house was built and owned by the local authority, and the McCartney family moved in here in 1955 when Paul was at secondary school. The house has been in the ownership of the National Trust since 1995. The Trust calls the house "the birthplace of the Beatles" since this is the place where the Beatles composed and rehearsed their earliest songs.

The property has been meticulously restored to the appearance that McCartney would recognize from his younger years. When he was 14, Paul sat at the family piano and composed the tune for what would eventually be "When I'm 64". John wrote "I Saw Her Standing There" with Paul in this house.

In February 2012, both this house and Lennon's childhood home on Menlove Avenue were Grade II listed by Historic England.

Beatles Tour in Liverpool, Part III

Now that you have been to a good number of spots around Liverpool associated with The Beatles, it is high time to explore the “early days” of the Fab Four in their hometown and see where it all started.

One such place is Strawberry Field, immortalized in their song "Strawberry Fields Forever." It was a Salvation Army children's home, and although the original building no... view more

Tour Duration: 2 Hour(s)

Travel Distance: 5.3 Km or 3.3 Miles

Beatles Pub Crawl

Alright, so you're in Liverpool, the hometown of The Beatles, and you're thirsty. There are lots of pubs in Liverpool, all different in character, with some claiming that The Beatles drank or played there at some point.

Indeed, the lads performed in many small venues throughout the city, but the joints they usually played were not the ones they liked for their drinks. Now, if... view more

Tour Duration: 1 Hour(s)

Travel Distance: 1.8 Km or 1.1 Miles

Beatles Tour in Liverpool, Part II

Liverpool is permeated with The Beatles who seem to be everywhere! There are so many places associated with the band in the city: childhood homes, schools, bars... Some of them are rather unassuming, at a glance, and thus can be easily overlooked.

George Harrison's Birthplace, located at 12 Arnold Grove, is where the lead guitarist of The Beatles was born on February 25, 1943. Despite its... view more

Tour Duration: 2 Hour(s)

Travel Distance: 4.1 Km or 2.5 Miles