Paul McCartney has returned home to Liverpool, the birthplace of The Beatles.

Liverpool welcomed back its most famous son last night as Sir Paul McCartney closed out his World tour with a sell out performance at the Echo Arena. There was fire, snow, pyrotechnics, a youth choir, a full scottish pipe band oh… and the small matter of three hours worth of some of the best pop music ever written. Rich Denton joined those lucky enough to get a ticket for the show of the year.

Macca rolled back the years with a three hour set of musical wonderment, jam packed with songs from across his vast repertoire. Opening the final show of the 19 date World tour with Hello Goodbye and Junior’s Farm, Sir Paul got the party started and brought the crowd to their feet straight from the off.

Switching between piano and a multitude of guitars Paul and his band played over thirty classic Beatles and Wings songs along with some of McCartney’s more recent solo work. In between, Paul took time to reminisce of his days growing up in Speke, his friendship with George and his love of the city. Penny Lane was added into the set especially for the night’s performance.

The party atmosphere was enhanced by the many fans who had made a special pilgrimage from across the globe to see the legend perform in his hometown. There were cheers for John and George and panto style boos for the Royal Family and Cilla Black, thank goodness he never mentioned Ringo.

The highlights were too plentiful to mention. There was of course the fireworks and flame accompaniment to the Bond theme Live and Let Die that never fails to impress. The haunting Eleanor Rigby and the simplicity of Dance Tonight getting every foot stomping in the arena. Festive cheer came in the way of Wonderful Christmastime with falling snow, backed with LIPA’s 4-19 choir and a rendition of Wings’ Christmas number one Mull of Kintyre complete with Scottish pipe band.

After three hours and two encores it was time to go home. If the crowd had their way we would have been dancing ’till dawn.

The set list:

Main Set

Hello, Goodbye

Junior’s Farm

All My Loving

Jet

Drive My Car

Sing the Changes

Night Before

Let Me Roll It

Paperback Writer

Long and Winding Road

Come and Get It

Nineteen Hundred and Eighty Five

Maybe I’m Amazed

I’ve Just Seen a Face

I Will

Blackbird

Here Today

Dance Tonight

Mrs. Vandebilt

Eleanor Rigby

Something

Penny Lane

Band on the Run

Ob La Di Ob La Da

Back In The USSR

I’ve Got A Feeling

A Day in the Life/Give Peace a Chance

Let It Be

Live and Let Die

Hey Jude

Encore 1

The Word/All You Need Is Love

Wonderful Christmastime

Day Tripper

Get Back

Encore 2

Yesterday

Mull of Kintyre

Helter Skelter

Golden Slumbers/Carry That Weight/The End