In the context of the increased interest on integrating the complex spatial and temporal response of fluvial systems to human impacts into the process of assessing the ecological state of the rivers and in promoting a sustainable river management European countries have developed a multi–scalar, hierarchical, process based hydro–morphological framework focused on understanding the river functioning and evolution as a basis for interpreting current conditions. In this context, the goal of this paper is to demonstrate the usefulness of systematic historic and present day geomorphic analysis along channel reaches with distinct typologies in order to generate a better image of river morphology as a background for assessing its present morphological state. The historical geomorphic analysis of Someșul Mic River’s channel dynamics during the past 250 years has shown that the main controlling factor is climate through its centennial – decadal scale variations in magnitudes and amplitudes o...

The morphology of river channels results from the genetic and dynamic characteristics imposed by internal and external morphogenetic forcings. We studied reaches of river courses cutting across the contact area between the Romanian Plain (Carpathians foredeep) and the Curvature Subcarpathians, where active faults are located. In this area a wide monocline of tilted foredeep deposits generated a glacis-like macro-landform at the mountain front that connects the Subcarpathians with the Romanian Plain. The headwaters of studied rivers are located in the Subcarpathians (Cricovul Dulce River) and in the Carpathians (Prahova, Buzău and Milcov rivers). More in detail, we investigated river channels in plan view by morphometric and multi-temporal air-photo analysis to define the general trends of channel evolution. The results of this study indicate a spatial and temporal variability in the intensity of fluvial dynamic processes. The braided courses crossing the Subcarpathians and the piedm...

One of the most important hydraulic mega structures in Romania, classified as the third largest in Europe, its Stânca Costești reservoir, on Prut River. After Stânca Costești reservoir construction, hydrological parameters of Prut river (for example liquid and solid discharges) were severely modified. This study quantifies some of the geomorphic effects on the river’s active channel and plan form, in the context of the overall changes occurring in the last century (1915-2005 period ) The analysis was based on the different editions of the available topographic maps and aerial photos, which have recorded historical configurations of the Prut river channel. For each time period, several morphometric indices, such as minor riverbed width, major riverbed width, sinuosity index and meander curvature, were measured using GIS and further interpreted.. The preliminary conclusion, indicate’s that once Stânca Costești reservoir was constructed, the morphometric indices, evolved in different mode, downstream to Stânca Costești reservoir.

Representing a direct response of hydrologic, hydrogeologic, geomorphologic, and anthropic factors, the dynamic of river channels has a useful scientific and practical importance, especially for the regions where the rivers play the role of state border. This article presents a detailed analysis of the dynamic of the Prut River channel for the last 125 years, concerning a 26 km sector of the river, which correspond to Prisacani territorial (local) administrative unit (LAU 2 nd order), Iaşi County. This segment can be considered as a representative natural border between Romania and Republic of Moldavia along the middle Prut River course, downstream the Stânca-Costeşti anthropic lake. The work consisted in digitization of a large series topographic maps (1893-1894 edition at 1:50,000 scale, 1940 edition at 1:20,000 scale, the 1949, 1960 and 1985 editions at 1:25,000 scale), various remote sensing images: LANDSAT images for the 1990 and 2000 decades, SENTINEL 1A and 2A images for the year 2015 and 2016, LiDAR DEM (acquired in 2012), and Google Earth® high resolution optical satellite images collection. For the last two years, the channel dynamic was validated and completed using GPS measurements.