BRIC Foundation’s AME-HRTP will target high-skill, high-wage jobs in Arts, Media & Entertainment industries and address challenges around building and sustaining a more diverse and inclusive workforce.

Led by BRIC with oversight from an Advisory Committee that’s inclusive & representative of the different sectors of entertainment, the AME-HRTP will support a network of Registered Apprenticeship Programs (RAP) and Community-based organizations to facilitate paid on-the-job training, mentorship, career coaching, and ongoing support for participants. AME-HRTP will also support the establishment of entertainment industry union training and mentorship programs leading to union work.

These services will focus on career pathways in Film/Television, Animation, VFX, Games, Music/Audio, Live Entertainment, and Design.

For an AME-HRTP Glossary of Terms, please click here.

The BRIC Foundation was awarded with a historic $3.5 Million, 3-year contract by the California Workforce Development Board to establish the first large-scale, multi-year initiative to shape a more inclusive and diverse Arts, Media, and Entertainment industry.

Born from BRIC’s work with the California Department of Education AME Advisory Board and the establishment of the Entertainment Equity Alliance, this initiative is a true collaboration to unite workforce intermediaries, Registered Apprenticeship Program sponsors, county & state government partners, research & policy partners, community-based organizations, and labor partners. Together, the AME-HRTP will institute a collaborative system for the recruitment, mentorship, on-the-job training, and retention of diverse talent.

Members of Entertainment Equity Alliance include BRIC Foundation, Arts2Work, Music Forward Foundation, Event Vocational Entertainment Network, Handy Foundation, Group Effort Initiative, Television Academy Foundation, Women in Animation, IATSE Local 80, CVL Economics, Manifest Works, Academy Gold, California Department of Education (AME), California Film Commission (Career Readiness and Pathways), Better Youth, South Bay Workforce Investment Board, and more.

Related Supplemental Instruction (RSI) is a form of instruction designed to provide apprentices with knowledge including the theoretical and technical subjects related and supplemental to the skill(s) involved.

As part of an AME-HRTP Apprenticeship Program, apprentices are required to complete 144 hours (minimum) of RSI/academic training. Registered Apprenticeship Program Sponsors will work with the apprentice to establish a unique lesson plan for them that aligns with their performance and career interests.

The RSI curriculums were developed by industry professionals for industry and are intended as classroom guidance for education partners.

BRIC RSI (View BRIC’s RSI Partners here.)

EVEN RSI

Handy Foundation RSI

Keycode RSI

Music Forward Foundation RSI