Position

Opinion Editor

Graduation

Class of 2024

Ella Creane is a Berkeley High student who is passionate about journalism and exploring the world around her. She’s an editor for the Jacket, President of her Jewish youth group, and in her free time, she loves to be outside.

My first community, second home, and third-favorite newspaper

I joined the Jacket in my freshman year during online school. “Jacket” was synonymous with zoom calls in the kitchen with my sister, both of us crammed into one small square on the screen; with getting my mom to drive me 20 minutes across town to talk to strangers; with the first community I ever

BHS students walk out in support of Palestine

On Wednesday, Oct. 18, 2023 at 10:30 a.m., over 150 Berkeley High School students walked out in support of Palestine in regards to the recent events in Israel and Gaza.

People’s Park must remain crucial pillar of Berkeley community

Berkeley’s very foundation as a city is rooted in activism on behalf of marginalized people. Since it’s revolutionary protests surrounding the anti-War, Free Speech, and Civil Rights movements of the 1960s, Berkeley has remained a haven for those fighting for a more equitable and peaceful world.

Receiving schedules late has detrimental effect on BHS students

At a school as big as Berkeley High School, it’s easy to get overwhelmed. With thousands of students, hundreds of class choices, and a wide array of classrooms, the task of preparing for a new year on campus can be highly stressful.

Career Path Freedom Is Essential for Youth

What should I do with the rest of my life? This is a question that high school students at Berkeley High School and across the world wrestle with. At an age punctuated by growth and uncertainty, planning for the future can feel like an insurmountable task.

Reclaiming Derogatory Terms for Women

To be bossy, demanding, and unapologetic makes a leader out of a man and a c*nt out of a woman. Women should aspire to have those attributes and the title that comes with them, unlearning everything they’ve been taught about how to act and who to be.

BUSD Considers Public Input in Search for New Superintendent

“It’s been an intense three-year period. I’m really proud of all of the things the district has accomplished during this time, and it’s also been exhausting,” said Brent Stephens, the superintendent of Berkeley Unified School District.

BUSD Superintendent Brent Stephens to Leave at End of School Year

On Wednesday, February 9, Superintendent Brent Stephens of Berkeley Unified School District announced that he will not extend his contract with BUSD past June 30 of 2021.

District Purchases 2,300 Chromebooks for Student Use at Home

Berkeley Unified School District recently purchased 2,300 Google Chromebooks that are now available for students to check out through their school libraries. In the most recent newsletter from December 2021, BUSD shared that approximately 2,300 students in Berkeley schools didn’t have access to a personal device for distance learning, which led them to apply

BHS Brings On New VPs Gabriel Fredman and Thom Reinhardt

Gabriel Fredman Gabriel Fredman, born and raised in Berkeley, was recently hired as one of Berkeley High School’s vice principals. A BHS graduate from the class of 1997, Fredman said his deep ties to the Berkeley community have inspired his dedication to building a collaborative and unified BHS environment. Fredman began his career in

BUSD Students Five and up to Receive Pfizer COVID-19 Vaccine

The Pfizer COVID-19 vaccine was officially approved by the Food and Drug Administration for use among children aged five to 11 on October 29. The first COVID-19 vaccine to be approved was the Pfizer vaccine, for which the FDA issued an Emergency Use Authorization for those aged 16 years and older on December

Administration Cancels Spirit Week, Citing Safety Concerns

Berkeley High School Spirit Week, one of the school’s longest-standing traditions, has been cancelled until further notice. In the past several months, disruptions of many forms have taken place on campus, including fights, vandalism, the frequent pulling of fire alarms, and an incident with an adult coming on to campus with a gun.

BHS Bridge Program Builds Support for Students of Color

The racial achievement gap in the US is a problem with deep roots in many of today’s current issues. Largely owing to socioeconomic disparities between Black, Latinx, and white families, statistics show that Black and Latinx students are more likely to drop out of high school, receive lower grades, score lower on standardized tests, and

Standards-Based Grading System Seeks to Reimagine Learning

For many students, their grades in school are seen as a measurement of self-worth, and in a society that values certain types of intelligence over others, this can lead to a feeling of inadequacy.

BHS 'Jacket' Alum Becomes New Editor-in-Chief of 'Berkeleyside'

Pamela Turntine, longtime Bay Area resident and the new editor-in-chief of Berkeleyside, has had an extensive past in journalism. Born in San Francisco and primarily raised in different parts of Oakland and Berkeley, Turntine’s work has taken her all over California throughout a career spanning over 40 years.

BHS Students Navigate Intricacies of Paying for Higher Education

“I’m on the wealthier side of people. We live in Berkeley, in the Bay Area, and if my family still feels like we can’t afford 90 percent of colleges, then there’s a problem with the system,” remarked Felix Mousigian, a senior at Berkeley High School in Berkeley International High School.

Who Are The Teens Who Have Been Vaccinated?

“After getting the vaccine, I felt really excited that something that I had been so scared of for a year was finally coming to an end,” reflected Eva Bradman, a Berkeley High School senior in Academic Choice. Bradman’s sentiments are shared by many who have received the vaccine, as over 13.5 percent of

Lacking Sufficient Pay, Female Basketball Players Look Overseas

Although many Americans would like to believe we live in a perfectly equal utopia, sexism and discrimination are still very much an issue. One of the main places this inequality shines through is within the sports world.