Ulaganayagan Kamal Haasan, has turned a year older today. He celebrates his 65th birthday and fans across the globe have showered adorable birthday wishes for him on social media platforms.

Best Wishes to Kamal Haasan On His 65th Birthday.

Inside Kamal Haasan's birthday trip to Paramakudi with Charu, Shruti and Akshara: All pics

On Kamal Haasan's 65th birthday, his entire family has taken a trip to their hometown Paramakudi to unveil the statue of Kamal's father D Srinivasan.

Kamal Haasan is celebrating his 65th birthday today (November 7). A three-day celebration has been organised by his team commemorating his 60th year in films. On his birthday, Kamal with his entire family headed to their hometown Paramakudi to kickstart the three-day celebration.

As reported earlier, Kamal will be unveiling his dad D Srinivasan's statue in his hometown amid his family and the villagers. D Srinivasan was a lawyer and a freedom fighter as well.

Kamal's daughters Shruti and Akshara are accompanying him on this trip. Also, his elder brother Charu Haasan can also be seen taking this trip. Akshara took to Instagram to share the pictures of the Haasan family from the airport.

…………………………..

After unveiling the statue, Kamal and his family will head back to Chennai. Tomorrow (November 8), a statue of his guru, legendary filmmaker K Balachander, will be unveiled at his office in Eldams Road in the city. Following this, Kamal will attend the screening of Hey Ram at Sathyam Cinemas and will take part in a Q and A session with the audience.

On November 8, a musical tribute headlined by composer Ilaiyaraaja will take place in Nehru Stadium. Kamal's friend Rajinikanth will attend the celebrations and it is said that they have invited actor Ajith as well.

Read more at: https://www.indiatoday.in/movies/re...hruti-and-akshara-all-pics-1616475-2019-11-07

In photos: Kamal celebrates his 65th birthday with family

His brother Charuhasan, niece Suhasini Maniratnam, daughters Shruti and Akshara Haasan and actor Pooja Kumar can be seen in the photos.

Kamal Haasan who is celebrating his 65th birthday on Thursday has been receiving warm wishes from his friends and fans. In what seems to be a low-key beginning, Kamal has been spending time with family on his birthday morning.

Photographs of Kamal celebrating his birthday with family have now been shared on the internet. His brother Charuhasan, niece Suhasini Maniratnam, daughters Shruti and Akshara Haasan and actor Pooja Kumar were present for the celebrations.

Read more at: https://www.thenewsminute.com/article/photos-kamal-celebrates-his-65th-birthday-family-111882