It appears 2019 has saved the best for last for Mike 'The Situation' Sorrentino.

Sorrentino, 37, and wife Lauren Pesce, 34, are moving into a seven-bedroom, 10-bathroom mansion in Holmdel, New Jersey, TMZ reported Monday.

The home spans 9,800 sq. feet, according to Zillow, and is valued at $1,800,591. It has four stories, according to the real estate site, and was designed by renowned architect Rui A. Ponte.

Among the home's amenities include a courtyard, an observation deck that boasts views of the New York skyline, an elevator, a garage that holds four cars and vaulted ceilings.

The home's master suite has double walk-in closets, and other features include a bar, a fireplace and a basement.

The Staten Island, New York native and his spouse are recovering from a difficult year in which they suffered a miscarriage following Sorrentino's eight-month prison stint in his 2018 tax evasion conviction.

Appearing last month on Good Morning America, the celeb couple spoke about the family tragedy.

Pesce said that upon Sorrentino's release from prison in September, they 'actually conceived ... and then at about six-and-a-half, seven weeks [she] miscarried.'

She added: 'I didn't want to hold this in. I wanted to share it for other people going through it and just be honest so I can kind of heal through the process.'

Sorrentino, in the wake of his release from Otisville, New York's federal correctional facility, must finish two years of a supervised release and do 500 community service hours.

He told Page Six Monday that he and Pesce will be with family on Christmas, which he'll appreciate that much more this year.

'Christmas is that much sweeter because I am home - last year, I believe I was about to go to into prison at that particular time period,' he said. 'So as much as I was trying to be my best self, I had to put my head down and handle something.

'So this year I feel like we put that chapter behind us and now we can move forward and enjoy some of the beautiful chapters in our life.'