Magnificent seashore lodgings highlight city glory …

I’m endlessly fascinated by the magnificent seashore hotels that sprawled along the Long Branch coastline. These grand resorts that once blanketed the city’s oceanfront provide fabulous imagery — mostly from around the turn of the 20th century.

A natural “Bluff” along the Atlantic Ocean provided the spectacular setting for these massive wooden public palaces. The bigger, the better. It was an age when Long Branch was the nation’s greatest vacation destination and “mecca for the elite of the nation.” But all classes of citizens — presidents to peasants — enjoyed the shore scene back then.

The first hotel at Long Branch was opened before the 1776 Revolutionary War. “Fish Tavern” — located at Ocean and Cooper Avenues — was a simple two-story building offering food and lodging. It mostly hosted seashore visitors from Philadelphia who came by stage-coach. By 1792, it had new owners (Herbert and Chandler) and a new name (“The Shrewsbury”). According to The Story of the Jersey Shore by Harold F. Wilson (1964), The Allegheny House — a converted farmhouse at Broadway and Liberty Street — was the city’s largest hotel when it opened in 1846. James D. Wardell was the owner. It burned in 1866.

At the peak of the Long Branch resort craze, a visitor could get a room including four large meals for $4 per day at the best hotels. “Social, financial, industrial, political, and theatrical stars of the first magnitude swarmed” to the hotels, according to the Long Branch Daily Record. But then things changed like they always do. Many city hotels fell victim to declining patronage and sadly to devastating fire and storm damage. By June 1909, Daily Record publishers worried that a “lack of sufficient hotels is Long Branch’s one great deficiency.”

In their prime Long Branch hotel owners were powerful men — among them were Cooper, Howland, Price, Leland, Laird, and Hildreth. They were city mayors and commissioners, leaders in local commerce and pioneers in the hospitality business. Among the lost Long Branch lodging legends were the: Ocean Hotel, Stetson House hotel, West End Hotel, Metropolitan Hotel, Howland Hotel, Mansion House hotel, Hollywood Hotel, Price’s Hotel, Clarendon Hotel, United States Hotel, Elberon Hotel, Takanassee Hotel, Brighton Hotel, Scarboro Hotel, Pannaci Hotel, Vendone Hotel and Atlantic Hotel and many others.

It’s the sheer size of some of these places I can’t get over. Have a look:

In the beginning …

Long Branch Hotels Still Operating …

Ocean Place Hotel

Bungalow Hotel

Wave Resort & Hotel

Remembering Long Branch Hotels?

The place was “hotel city” in its day. While researching the history of Long Branch hotels, I found reference to many for which I could not locate images and or more info. These include the: Abbotsford Hotel, Hotel Abbett, Alleghany House, Allen’s Hotel, American Hotel, Avenel Hotel, Bath Hotel, Bennett’s Hotel, Broadway Hotel, Casino Hotel, Cavanagh’s Hotel, Commercial Hotel, Columbia Hotel, Continental Hotel, Colter House, Conover House, Dalton’s Hotel, Denyse’s Hotel, Dunbarton House, Dalton Hotel, Fern’s Hotel, Eagle Hotel, Eureka Hotel, Grand View Hotel, Germania Hotel, Globe Hotel, Hathaway House, Henderickson Hotel, Hertz Hotel, Keystone Hotel, Imperial Hotel, Italian Hotel, Kolb’s Hotel, Lawn House, Lawler’s Hotel, Liberty Hotel, Long Branch Hotel, McElhinney’s Hotel, Madison Hotel, Monmouth House, Murray’s Hotel, National Hotel, Nassau House Hotel, Park Hotel, Rhineland Hotel, Rohbeck Hotel, Sanger’s Hotel, St. Charles Hotel, St. Cloud Hotel, St. James Hotel, Senate Hotel, Suburban Hotel, Surf House, Stratton Hotel, Hotel Trenton, Third Avenue Hotel, Third Ward Inn, Trenton Hotel, Redmond House, Rhineland Hotel, Rockwell Hotel, Union Hotel, VanWoert’s Hotel, Victoria Hotel, Versailles Hotel, Waldorf Hotel, Wilson’s Hotel, Windsor Hotel. I’m certain there are many others!

Hotel Norwood

Avenel Hotel

Garfield-Grant Hotel

Takanassee Hotel

Howland Hotel

Price’s Hotel

Scarboro Hotel

United States Hotel

Ocean Hotel

Stetson House

West End Hotel

Mansion House Hotel

Clarendon Hotel

Victoria Hotel

Elberon Hotel

New York Hotel

Metropolitan Hotel

Brighton Hotel

Central Hotel

Venetian Inn

Hotel Pannaci

Hollywood Hotel

Atlantic Hotel, East End Hotel, and Arlington House

Florence Hotel

Greene’s Hotel

Lenox Hotel

Dalton Hotel

Manahassett Hotel

Hotel Phelando

Hotel Ocean Plaza

Newing’s Hotel

St. James Hotel

Imperial Hotel

Hotel Garofalo

Manhattan Hotel

Fucci’s Hotel

Atlantic Hotel

Taft Hotel

Rothenberg’s Hotel

Hotel Milborne

Vendome-Plaza Hotel

Bridgewater Inn

Wardell’s Hotel

American Hotel

Landmark Hotel

Long Branch Motels …

North End Motel

Fountains Motel

Nautilus Motel

Adventurer Motel

North View Motel

Stef’s Court Motel

Ocean Court Motel

Beachcomber Hotel