Instagram

On the latest episode of his Bachelor Nation podcast, “Talking It Out,” Bryan Abasolo explained why the absence of jealousy is paramount in his marriage with Rachel Lindsay.

The topic came up while reflecting on the interview he and co-host Mike Johnson conducted with this week’s guest, Nigel Barker. During their chat, the famed photographer shared his secrets to a long-lasting marriage with wife Crissy and emphasized the importance of trust, as he is constantly surrounded by gorgeous supermodels.

“I think I can relate to what Nigel was saying, especially from his wife’s side. He is the one who’s around all the supermodels, so that’s a comparison to Rachel where she’s interviewing celebrities,” Bryan said of the former Bachelorette, who once worked as correspondent for ESPN and now serves as an on-air host for “Extra.”

“When she worked for ESPN, she was interviewing athletes and whatnot. At the end of the day, me as the partner, I do nothing but encourage,” he continued. “I’m not a burden on her where I’m like, ‘Oh, you got too close to that person,’ or, ‘I didn’t like that question that you asked.’ I’m not a burden. When she’s doing her job, I want her to be the best at her job as she can be. So I’m not going to do that. I’m not going to be that jealous [spouse].”

Bryan and Rachel met and fell in love with each other on Season 13 of “The Bachelorette” in 2017. The pair later wed in a gorgeous August 2019 ceremony in Mexico. Bryan said that having confidence in his union with Rachel is particularly important as they currently live on opposite sides of the country. While Bryan is based in Miami because of his chiropractic practice, Rachel resides in Los Angeles.

“At the end of the day, I feel like if she’s going to step out on me or someone’s going to step out on someone else, then it’s going to happen,” the doctor said. “All I can do is be secure, love her as much as possible — and like Nigel said — be in love with her, show her that loyalty, show her that trust that I have in her, and watch her flourish.”

He added, “That’s all you can do. If you’re the opposite and this jealous person, always nagging and being a burden, that could lead to the deterioration of a relationship.”

Listen to this week’s entire “Talking It Out with Mike & Bryan” episode below.