GoldenSource, the leading independent provider of Enterprise Data Management (EDM) and Master Data Management (MDM) solutions has been Great Place To Work® Certified™ in India (November 2023 – November 2024). This achievement recognizes GoldenSource’s unwavering commitment to creating a consistent and overwhelmingly positive employee experience. Qualification is assessed, and the certification presented, based on the responses from GoldenSource’s own employees.

Commenting on the certification, John H. Eley, CEO, said, “It’s gratifying to be recognized for the outstanding workplace culture we’ve built, but that the certification comes from our own employees is a true honor. This doesn’t mean we’re done – this gives us a good benchmark to continue to make GoldenSource a great place to work in the future and around the globe.”

About Great Place to Work

Great Place To Work® is the global authority on workplace culture. Since 1992, they have surveyed more than 100 million employees worldwide and used those deep insights to define what makes a great workplace: trust. Their employee survey platform empowers leaders with the feedback, real-time reporting, and insights they need to make strategic people decisions. The Institute serves businesses, non-profits and government agencies in more than 60 countries and has conducted pioneering research on the characteristics of great workplaces for over three decades.

The Institute’s research shows that great workplaces are characterized by great leadership, consistent employee experience, and sustainable financial performance. These organizations can deliver a consistent experience to all their employees irrespective of their role, gender, tenure, or level. Their leaders believe in the vision of creating and sustaining a great place to work for all and role models being for all leaders.

About GoldenSource

GoldenSource’s software, services and expertise enables firms in the financial markets to manage risks, comply with regulatory requirements, and control costs in the middle and back office with a trusted source of complete, consistent information. Its products source, standardize, validate and deliver mission critical market, reference, customer, position and transaction data to the people and systems that need it, such as trading, compliance, risk management, settlements, and accounting. GoldenSource provides automated, enterprise-level processing delivered through a single hosted or on-premise platform, to achieve the highest levels of data quality and operational efficiency.

Visit www.thegoldensource.com to learn more, and follow us on Linkedin