GoldenSource, the leading independent provider of Enterprise Data Management (EDM) and Master Data Management (MDM) solutions, announced today the appointment of Swati Tyagi as Chief Product Officer.

Based in New York, Tyagi will lead the product team at GoldenSource, overseeing product strategy to ensure this continues to evolve and serve the needs of the firm’s global client base.

As part of the role, Tyagi will also join the Management Team. Her experience of integrating applications brought together by acquisition comes at an important time for the company, as GoldenSource looks to incorporate acquisitions into its growth strategy following its acquisition by private equity firm Gemspring Capital in 2022.

Beginning her career as a Product Manager, Tyagi brings product strategy, business analysis and management skills to the role, on top of 20 years of marketplace apps, governance risk & compliance, financial services and investment research experience. Tyagi joins GoldenSource from financial intelligence platform Sentieo (recently acquired by Alphasense), where she was Vice President, leading product management.

Commenting on her appointment, Tyagi said: “The role of data in financial markets is constantly evolving, influenced by technology innovations and regulatory developments, and GoldenSource leads the way in providing data management solutions for the broadest range of market participants, so it’s great to be working with the market leader. I look forward to scaling the suite of GoldenSource products with the wider product team and growing our global client base of financial firms looking to get the most from their investment in data.”

John Eley, CEO at GoldenSource added: “We are very excited by Swati’s appointment, adding valuable skills to our accomplished product team. Her experience will be incredibly valuable for GoldenSource in the next phase of our growth, with the investment in our product offering and backing of Gemspring for future acquisitions, both areas in which Swati will play a key role in shaping decisions.”