Memphis Grizzlies general manager Chris Wallace, who joined the organization in the summer of 2007 and quickly established the core group of Mike Conley, Marc Gasol, Zach Randolph and Tony Allen, joined USA TODAY Sports' Sam Amick on the most recent NBA A to Z podcast to discuss a move he made in 2008 that drastically altered the future of the franchise.

A move that, as luck would have it, set the Grizzlies up for a level of success still felt today, as the team is right in the thick of things in the West yet again, with the same core group of guys intact, on pace for a seventh straight postseason appearance.

“I think the deal that set us up for the future was the Pau Gasol trade," said Wallace, who described the atmosphere surrounding the team at that time as "non-electric."

" … We didn’t really do anything dramatic in the (2007) offseason, we go into the season, and I could just tell with Pau Gasol that his candle had been doused. He really didn’t want to be with us anymore. His spirit wasn’t there, wasn’t in it. And we had a couple more years with him.”

MORE NBA:

The trade — Pau Gasol and a 2010 second-round pick (Devin Ebanks) to the Kobe Bryant-led Los Angeles Lakers for Kwame Brown, Javaris Crittenton, Aaron McKie, first-round draft picks in 2008 (Donte Green) and 2010 (Greivis Vasquez) and the draft rights to Pau's younger brother, Marc — was widely criticized at the time by both media members at league executives, as it handed the Lakers an All-Star big man capable of pushing the team over the championship hump in return for ... not as much.

“I felt we set ourselves up for the future, and if the Lakers win a championship, so be it," Wallace said. "Both teams are supposed to, in theory, profit in a trade. That’s not my problem what the Lakers got out of it or what issues it caused competitors of the Lakers. I’m working for the Grizzlies and trying to set our franchise up for the future, and I think as time has proven, nobody had a deal that put us in a position to chart a new course for the future like that deal did, and it worked out."

Pau went on to win two championships with the Lakers before he signed with the Chicago Bulls in 2014 and then the San Antonio Spurs last summer. Marc is in the midst of a career-year in Memphis, averaging 19.9 points, 6.2 rebounds and 1.5 blocks for the Grizzlies.

"Not only did we pick up Marc, that salary cap room was later used to trade into with the Clippers for Zach Randolph. At one time when we first got into the playoffs, the 2010-11 season, we had seven to nine players on the team that, if you traced their roots how they got to Memphis, you could trace to that deal."