Former NBA player Kwame Brown has blasted Ja Morant after the Memphis Grizzlies star's second gun incident in two months.

Morant, 23, appeared in an Instagram video with a friend over the weekend waving a pistol in his hand, two months after he filmed himself doing the same thing in a Denver strip club.

He was suspended for eight games after that incident and attended a counselling course, later admitting that his behavior had been a distraction for his Memphis Grizzlies team in the NBA.

Now, he is facing a lengthier NBA ban and Brown, who was the No. 1 NBA Draft pick in 2001, did not hold back in his criticism of Morant, who has been suspended by his team.

'I've heard of NBA YoungBoy, but you are NBA Dumb Boy,' he said in a nine-minute clip uploaded to his YouTube page 'Kwame Brown Bust Life' on Monday.

WARNING - EXPLICIT LANGUAGE

'You got to be the dumbest motherf***er in the league. You've got $231million promised to you and you want to be a f***ing thug.

'Yeah, it's OK for you to have a gun. You have a Second Amendment right to have a gun. But what the f*** you keep pulling it out menacing for?

'What is all this music you keep listening to? Is this music keep putting you in a trance? Because this music is about to cost you your f***ing career.'

Brown was selected by the Washington Wizards in the draft and then went on to play 12 seasons in the NBA.

He was arrested for a DUI and a disorderly conduct in separate incidents during his career, which saw him represent seven different teams until 2013.

Brown continued on YouTube: 'Your friends ain't your goddamn friends because I've done dumb s*** before and you know when I noticed a real friend, they are going to tell you when you're wrong and they ain't going to argue with you but they just ain't going to go with you and participate with the bulls***.

'Thank god you can shoot a basketball and you can jump, because that's about all you can do. Your brain is f***ed up.

'All you're doing is making yourself look stupid. You're lowering yourself to the level of your motherf***ing friends and they're not your friends.'

The Grizzlies, who lost to the Los Angeles Lakers in the first-round playoffs, have suspended star Morant 'from all team activities' after he was seen brandishing a gun on Instagram again.

Morant was seen on Instagram Live in the driver's seat of a car holding a pistol while singing along to the song '1.5' by rapper YoungBoy NBA.

After revealing the firearm, the person recording the video immediately turned the camera away from Morant for the remainder of the clip that has surfaced.

It's unclear if this incident will result in any criminal charges or an investigation for Morant's behavior.

In a statement to DailyMail.com, the NBA says: 'We are aware of the social media post involving Ja Morant and are in the process of gathering more information.'