Remember Kwame Brown? He was the No. 1 pick of the 2001 draft straight out of high school, and it was even more of a big deal because Michael Jordan selected him to help turn around the Washington Wizards team he was running at the time. Jordan would soon after return to the court from the front office and essentially destroy the confidence of his young teammate as the preps-to-pros youngster struggled to adapt to the NBA.

Brown hasn't played in the NBA since 2013, but logged 12 years overall in the association. If you thought he was done and gone forever, think again. Interperformances is a sports agency that just announced they've signed Kwame to be one of their clients. They also announced that a "comeback can be the road to glory for a team that believes in him." That sound you hear is confidence oozing out of your mobile viewing device! They called him a "great intimidator" and said he's capable of exploding in "devastating dunks." Oh by the way, he's back for the love of the game.

Interperformances is proud to announce that the NBA star Kwame Brown decided to sign with our agency. The #1 overall pick of the 2001 draft is ready for a new life. His comeback can be the road to glory for a team that believes in him. Kwame is back, physically healthy and ready to be the outstanding player he was on several NBA teams. A great intimidator that can block shots , rebound consistently and explode in devastating dunks. No longer the young man that entered the NBA, Kwame is now an experienced and mature player and man. And he's back, for the love of the game.

That love of the game bringing him back to the court just happens to coincide with the biggest salary boom in league history and big men always tend to get overvalued or overpaid in free agency. What a time to be alive!

Now it doesn't exactly mention an NBA comeback specifically, but we can assume that's what his agency means. It could also mean a comeback to basketball in general like the Chinese Basketball Association where he could join former NBA standouts Stephon Marbury and Jordan Crawford. It could mean a comeback like that Lisa Kudrow television series in which Kwame plays a B-List celebrity trying to re-establish himself in the entertainment world. The possibilities are endless.

While Brown didn't live up to the hype of a No. 1 overall pick, he still had a solid enough career. For his career, he averaged 6.6 points and 5.5 rebounds in 22.1 minutes. Not earth shattering numbers but he managed over 600 games and 13,000 minutes with the Wizards, Los Angeles Lakers, Memphis Grizzlies, Detroit Pistons, Charlotte Hornets, Golden State Warriors, and Philadelphia 76ers. His best season was his third season in which he averaged 10.9 points and 7.4 rebounds. He's estimated to have made over $60 million in his career.

Maybe this will galvanize his NBA career and give him one more chapter in which he can be a rotation big man for some team. Or maybe you just wasted three minutes reading a Kwame Brown post in late August. Either way, let's just keep him away from Charlotte, who is owned by Jordan.