Dick Cecil was vice president when the Atlanta Chiefs captured the 1968 NASL title. (Photo courtesy of Kaizer Motaung)

By Michael Lewis

FrontRowSoccer.com Editor

Dick Cecil, one of the shakers and movers of the early days of the North American Soccer League, has passed away.

He was 88.

Cecil died at his home in Atlanta on Aug. 15.

A member of the Atlanta Braves organization, Cecil took up the responsbilities as vice president with a new team in the fledgling National Professional Soccer League in 1967 – the Atlanta Chiefs.

The Chiefs went on to capture the first North American Soccer League championship that year in 1968.

“It was a product of an awful lot of work from a lot of people,” Cecil told this writer in 2018, for a story in The Athletic. “The 1968 North American Soccer League was probably one of the most unique leagues ever put together in any sport in the U.S. It was probably the strongest ownership group of any time because every top city had had the top people in sports owning the club. We played in every major facility. Everyone had the big stadiums in capacities and we had CBS. A lot of people said it wasn’t big league soccer. It was about as big league as you could get. It was good soccer. It was tough.”

Kaizer “Boy-Boy” Motaung, a South African soccer legend, was one of the first players signed by Cecil.

“Dick Cecil gave me the opportunity to play professional football with players from all over the world,” Motaung wrote to Cecil’s son Terry on his father’s death. “I still feel very honored to have been part of the first team from Atlanta to win a championship in any sport in 1968. I held him in very high esteem. He was a kind gentleman. Atlanta Chiefs is the reason there is a Kaizer Chiefs today in South Africa. When I left Atlanta, it was with the inspiration of your father that I decided to pursue this journey of forming a club in South Africa.”

Terry Hanson was a senior executive with the Chiefs, and a Turner Sports vice president from 1980-84.

“Ted Turner sent him to Washington to hire me,” Hanson said in an email. “Such a very nice man! We became life long friends. Had I not gone to Atlanta, I sure would have had a whole different career. So, I owe them much.”

Nick Vehr, the Owner, founder, CEO and Executive Counselor of Vehr Communications, added on Linkedin: “I will miss my friend Dick Cecil. A consultant, confidant and close friend died last week. I wrote a short blog about how important he was to the growth and development of Vehr Communications and to me. He introduced me to Hank Aaron, Vernon Jordan and Dr. LeRoy Walker, the first black president of the USOC. He was part of the beginning of soccer in America and a partner with Ted Turner in doing so. He helped run the men’s World Cup in 1994 and did the same for the 1996 Atlanta Olympic Games. A giant of a man. A gentle and thoughtful soul. A close friend.”

Cecil’s influence in sports was not limited just to soccer.

He played baseball for the University of Nebraska while pursing a Bachelor of Arts degree before becoming the school’s freshman baseball coach in 1956. Cecil eventually joined the Milwaukee Braves as a scout and moved up the lader. He was assisttant farm system director, administrative assistant, business manager, assistant to the chairman of the board of director and eventually vice president.

When the Braves decided to own a pro soccer team inn 1967, Cecil led that organization. He recruited Phil Woosnam as head coach and general manager. Both men scouted players in France, Sweden, South Africa, France, Zambia and Ghana.

In 1972, the Chiefs were forced to drop out of the NASL.

The team returned in 1979, and Cecil was club president and co-owner of the Chiefs, until the franchise’s second demise in 1981.

Cecil, whho was inudcted into the Georgia Soccer Hall of Fame in 1997, also was chairman of the NPSL’s players committee, founding director of the NASL, a member of the International Games Committee of U.S. Soccer, consultant to Coca-Coca USA on domestic soccer programs, director of the east coast soccer venues for the Los Angeles Olympic Organizing Committee, producer of the 1986 FIFA/UNICEF World All-Star Games, consultant to the 1994 World Cup USA and consultant to the 1996 Atlanta Committee for the Olympic Games.

According to legacy.com, Cecil was actively working on several movie and documentary projects, including from his days as a baseball scout and with the early days of modern professional soccer. The family will work to bring these projects to fruition, the website said.

Cecil is survived by his wife of 40 years, Pam; his children, Will, Kip, Terry, and Kelly, as well as nine grandchildren and several great-grandchildren.