This story is from May 23, 2014

Prakash Karat should show the way by stepping down: Somnath Chatterjee

Heads should roll beginning with CPM general secretary Prakash Karat, said former Lok Sabha Speaker Somnath Chatterjee on Thursday.

KOLKATA: Heads should roll beginning with CPM general secretary Prakash Karat, said former Lok Sabha Speaker Somnath Chatterjee on Thursday. His statement comes a fortnight ahead of the CPM Politburo's review meeting on June 6 followed by the party CC meet on June 7 and 8. Chatterjee is pained with the continuous slide of Left parties, particularly CPM, that have made themselves irrelevant as evident from the 2014 Lok Sabha polls.

"Heads should have rolled after the Left's poor show in the 2009 Lok Sabha polls. But that was not to be. Instead, leaders stayed on, taking the plea of collective decision. If they take this plea this time then it is better that they resign collectively, making way for fresh blood. It should begin with CPM general secretary and go downward. It is already overdue. Such drastic action is necessary if Left parties want to play a meaningful role for the working people, the common man," Chatterjee said.

Even after the CPM showed him the door for opposing the party's pulling the plug on the Congress-led UPA I government at the Centre in 2009, Chatterjee shared his concern for the "hapless Left activists and supporters" whom their leaders failed to give protection. "Voted out of power in the 2011 Assembly polls, Left workers and supporters had to face violent attacks and discriminatory treatment from the ruling Trinamool. But the party failed to discharge the role of Opposition. The Left rank and file didn't get any protection from the leaders. The Left support base in rural areas started shrinking because the ranks were completely alienated from the party. They were left defenceless without leaders standing by their side," the former Lok Sabha Speaker said. He pointed out how Left supporters have been shifting loyalties making way for a communal force in Bengal.

Donning a photograph of his mentor Jyoti Basu at his Raja Basanta Roy Road residence in Kolkata, Chatterjee held that the alienation began since 2009. "It appears that the Left are yet to analyze the reasons behind the debacle. We shall wait for that. But the obvious seems to have gone unnoticed. People had rung the alarm bell five years ago during the Lok Sabha polls in 2009. Results in Bengal and Kerala were far from satisfactory, leave aside other states. People had not appreciated the Left's withdrawing support from the Congress-led government. They started moving away from CPM even if it was in government in Bengal," Chatterjee said, adding that at that time, the party general secretary propped up a third front. "The move had few takers among Left supporters. Instead, many felt that the CPM CC under the influence of the present general secretary did a wrong by preventing Jyoti Basu from becoming prime minister. A government formed by the Left then would have been a real government of the people, by the people and for the people," Chatterjee argued.

The octogenarian, however, has firm faith in Left politics. He insisted on the relevance of Left voice to save the country's economy from the grip of the corporate and the divisive politics that has come up as a danger for the nation. But Chatterjee believes that the old style of centralized functioning under the garb of the principles of "democratic centralism" isn't working.

"I am sure a proper review of the Left downslide will leave the leaders with no option but to quit. Let the young comrades take over and play their due role," the former Lok Sabha leader said. When asked who all are fit to take charge, Chatterjee said: "There are many capable leaders in Left parties who have links with common people. Leaders should start visiting places, build up movement and agitation to earn people's confidence. Seldom in these three years from May 2011 did the party supporters see any leader coming to their place at a time when people need them the most. The situation calls for a resurrection among the Left for the sake of the common man."

End of Article

FOLLOW US ON SOCIAL MEDIA