Synopsis

What can and must be done by 2047 is focusing on rurban (rural-urban) development, meaning the creation and sustenance of a cluster of villages relatively proximate to each other and which house a robust economic driver.

As India’s urban spaces get more crammed, it’s time to craft new policies around ease of living. One out of every three Indians now dwells in a city or a town, a number that is bound to rise as long as urban habitats continue to lure villagers with the bait of elevated earnings. If that trend is sustained, the nation’s urban hubs will turn utterly unliveable.

The answer does not lie in randomly picking out rural areas and showering basic amenities to create ‘model towns’.

After all, facilities such as an airport, a railway station or a university, can’t be replicated in every rural pocket.

What can and must be done by 2047 is focusing on rurban (rural-urban) development, meaning the creation and sustenance of a cluster of villages relatively proximate to each other and which house a robust economic driver.

Once developed, such a cluster will own an urban equivalent infrastructure and woo investment. Since 2016, the Centre has been running a rurban mission, investing Rs 27,700 crore for developing 298 such clusters. Such a mission will have a limited impact as long as it gets squeezed by the government’s binary approach of rural and urban development.

Instead, the government should create a separate department for rur-ban development and arm it with sufficient funds to have an impact. That will not only alleviate the pressure on our crowded cities but equip many rural habitats with robust urban features.

(You can now subscribe to our Economic Times WhatsApp channel)

(Catch all the Business News, Breaking News, Budget 2024 Events and Latest News Updates on The Economic Times.)

Subscribe to The Economic Times Prime and read the ET ePaper online.

...moreless

(You can now subscribe to our Economic Times WhatsApp channel)

(Catch all the Business News, Breaking News, Budget 2024 Events and Latest News Updates on The Economic Times.)

Subscribe to The Economic Times Prime and read the ET ePaper online.

...moreless

Tata Consumer Products needs a Starbucks ‘shot’ to increase its market value exponentially

Ports to power, what companies facing insolvency mean for Adani Group

A list of 20 large-cap stocks where you have lost money big time.

The challenges dotting India’s push for 6G leadership

Are Yamaha dealer IPO investors and Sir Isaac Newton on the same page?

The many gaps in conflict of interest allegations against Sebi chief, other Indian regulators

1

2

3