Sensational

Unique

Man of masses

Action Hero

Navarasu Nayukudu

In the midst of the enormous count of men who have thought fit to write down the history of their own lives, some have achieved stunning success. Suman is one such name: A Real Hero, as his fans would like to call him. A man who has always believed that nothing is impossible in life if you have Patience, Hard work, and Sincerity as your backbone. For he is far ahead of the dominion of languages, and if you are an authentic show lover, then this is something you'll be keen on...

Suman's full name is Mangalore Suman Talwar. Suman was born on 28th of August 1959 at Chennai. His mother Late Smt. Kesari Chander was the Principal of the prestigious Ethiraj College for women in Chennai. His father Sri. Susheel Chander worked for I.O.C. Chennai. He is now residing at Hyderabad, with his Wife Smt. Sirisha (grand-daughter of well known Play-Wright Sri. D. V. Narasa Raju), his eight-year-old daughter Akilaja Prathyusha, his mother-in-law Smt. Kavita Raju and Sri. D.V. Narasaraju. His mother tongue is Tulu (Mangalore, Karnataka).

Suman did his kinder-garden at Church Park Convent, Chennai. He completed his schooling at The Besant Theosophical High School, Chennai. He joined the Pachayappas College to do his B.A. in English Literature. Suman can converse fluently in Tulu (His Mother Tongue) Tamil, Telugu, Kannada, and Hindi.

Suman learnt Sanskrit from Sri. H.A.S. Sashtri. Suman also learnt playing the Veena and the Guitar.

He is a Black belt in karate (Shotokan Style). He also learnt Kalari Payiut (Martial Arts of Kerala) from Sri. Gopal Gurukkal.

Suman started his career as a Sensei (Master) in Karate. His family friend Mr. Kittu introduced him to a Tamil producer. He thus started off his film career in the year 1977. In his final year he acted in his first Tamil movie "Neechal Kulam" produced by well-known producer in Tamilnadu Late Sri. T. R. Rammanna. His first role was that of a Police officer.

Suman is a South Indian film actor. He played the romantic hero in Tamil and Telugu films during the 1980s. He acted as Rajini's brother in Thee. After a long while away from Tamil cinema, he returned to acting in Tamil films in 2007, starring in S. Shankar's Sivaji: The Boss with Rajinikanth. He has also appeared with Joseph Vijay in Kuruvi and is currently acting with Ajith Kumar in Aegan. He was a stylish star of the 1980s and 1990s. He acted in many action and romantic movies in Telugu, including Sitara, Tharangini, and Neti Bharatham. He appeared as the villain in Malayalam Megastar Mohanlal's megaproject, Sagar Alias Jackie.

Suman has emerged as a true survivor. A Real Hero, as his fans would like to call him, from real life conspiracy that shattered a career but not his heart. He rose like a Phoenix to make a comeback, resurrecting belief in the minds of his fans and well wishers that nothing is impossible in life if you have Patience, Hard work, and Sincerity as your backbone.

Suman attributes his Patience and Endurance to Martial arts. He is known for his famous stunts in movies, which got him the title of an Action Hero, due to his martial arts background. His film career was thanks to Martial arts, as his potential to be different and trend setting, was noticed by his producer in a Dojo (School), where Suman was teaching Karate.

A Black Belt 1st Dan in karate, from Shotokan Karate Association (affiliated to Japan Karate Association), Suman, is the Chairman of the Andhra Pradesh Karate Association. Suman takes an active part in all demonstrations and promotions, in Andhra Pradesh, to popularize martial arts as an effective way of striking a perfect balance, mentally and physically, to defend one's self, with harmony, patience and restraint. Sumun Budokan Karate Association is an extension of his involvement in promoting Martial Arts.

As an ardent admirer & inspired by TDP Supremo Sri. N. Chandra Babu Naidu’s Dynamic administrative and Leadership qualities, as well as his qualities of hard-work and perseverance, Suman joined as a supporter in the year 1999, with the Telugu Desam. Suman saw in Sri N Chandra Babu Naidu a path to give back to those people who gave him a place in their hearts, and to the society at large.

Suman seeks to follow his ideals of - "Dare to Dream, Care To Achieve."

iend cheated on me