Suman, daughter of Dr. Venkatagiriyappa and Smt. Geeta was born in Shimoga on 9th September 1974. Her father, a renowned General Surgeon at Shimoga, had a profound influence on her. Parents encouraged her not only in the field of studies but also in extracurricular activities.

During primary and secondary education at Shimoga, along with the studies,she took active participation in cultural activities, sports and won several prizes at district and state levels.

At 9 years, her songs were aired in Akashawani, Bhadravati. At the age of 12 she passed junior and at 15 senior exam in Carnatic classical music. Later she pursued Vidwat in music. At 14 tears she was the vice president of state level children's conference held at shimoga in 1988.

After the early education, Suman joined Medical course in General Merit at prestigious Karnatak Institute of Medical Sciences in Hubballi by getting 161st rank in the state Entrance Exam and got MBBS degree in 1998. Also got a merit seat to pursue her MD in PATHOLOGY at Kasturba Medical College, Mangalore, topped her exams and secured her Master Degree in 2002. Ever since she is in the field of diagnosing diseases and tumors with her private lab set up at Manorama Diagnostic Centre,C/o Mahalaxmi Memorial Hospital, Devikere Road, Sirsi.

Dr. Suman has given lectures on Adolescent issues, AIDS, swine flu, blood donation, etc., at schools, colleges, IMA Sirsi and Siddapur. She has conducted several blood donation camps and public awareness programs.

Dr. Suman started 1st ever Blood storage Centre in 2004 at Sirsi to cater patients in need of blood at times of emergency. In 2010 Dr. Suman became the Blood Bank Officer of a unique project, Blood Bank -PG HOSPITAL'S IMA LIFELINE Blood Bank.

Dr. Suman, a lover of music, is continuing her music studies presently in Hindustani style. She has given concerts in Shimoga, Hubli and Sirsi as well, has sung in many public functions and got 1st place in open Bhaktigeeta and Bhavageeta competition held at Marigudi at Dasara this year.Dr. Suman is keen interest even in sports, won several trophies in State Shuttle Badminton tournament in mixed doubles and Doubles held by Indian Medical Association.

She is happily married to Dr. Dinesh Hegde, a pediatrician, Owning Mahalaxmi Memorial Hospital at Devikere, Sirsi. He has always been a strong source of inspiration and encouragement. They are blessed with 3 children, Sparsha, twins Deeksha and Raksha.

Presently Dr. Suman is the Joint Secretory of Indian Medical Association Sirsi.