Full Biography of Actor Suman

Suman is an Indian film actor from Karnataka, India. However, known for his works predominantly in Telugu cinema, known for essaying the roles of mythological characters like, Venkateswara, Shiva and Rama in Telugu, Suman has also starred in Tamil, Malayalam and Kannada films. Recently, he has enacted the historic character Pazhayamveedan Chandhu in the biopic Malayalam film, Pazhassi Raja.

Suman was born to a Famous Billawa family in Mangalore, on 28 August 1959 and later moved to Chennai. He did his schooling from The Besant Theosophical High School, Chennai and joined the Pachayappas College for his B.A. in English Literature. His mother, (Late) Kesari Chandra, was the Principal of the Ethiraj College for women in Chennai. His father, Susheel Chandra, worked for I.O.C. Chennai. Suman learnt Music and Sanskrit from Sri. H.A.S. Sashtri.

He was married to Sirisha, grand daughter of Telugu writer D. V. Narasaraju. They have a daughter, Akilaja Prathyusha. Suman is an accomplished 6th Dan, Black Belt in Karate, from Shotokan Karate Association of Japan and Martial Arts of Kerala. He has also serves as the Chairman of the Andhra Pradesh Karate Association.

Suman started his film career as a police officer in Tamil movie Neechal Kulam (1977) produced by T.R.Rammanna. Then he gave a power packed performance in the remake of classic Hindi movie Deewar made into Tamil as Thee(1981). He played a sincere police officer with the upcoming superstar rajinikanth. In more than 3 decades, he acted more than 150 films as a hero in Telugu, Tamil, Kannada, and English language films. After a break, he returned to acting by playing the villain in Kollywood movies Sivaji and Kuruvi. He was casted as the main antagonist, in the Malayalam movie Sagar Alias Jacky.

Suman started his career as a Sensei (Master) in Karate. His family friend Mr. Kittu introduced him to a Tamil producer. He thus started off his film career in the year 1977.In his final year he acted in his first Tamil movie \"Neechal kulam\" produced by well-known producer in Tamil Nadu Late Sri.T.R.Rammanna. His first role was that of a Police officer. Today, Suman has to his credit more than 250 films, in Tamil, Telugu and Kannada.

He is also the first actor from Telugu Film Industry to act in a Hollywood movie--\"Death And Taxis\" produced by Clear Water Pictures and directed by Kevin Mukherji. He has been rechristened as Kevin Sumunt in this movie.