***** This is a preorder for a new release item that is not yet released. The release date for this item is 21-11-22. This item will be shipped from our Melbourne Warehouse within 5 days of the release date *****

This is a Region 2 (England and Europe) DVD and will only play in Australia and New Zealand if you have a MULTI-REGION DVD player or a Region 2 DVD player. It will NOT play on a Region 4 only (Australia and New Zealand) DVD player.

Please note image may vary

During the late 18th century, smuggling has become standard practice for fishermen around the British coast. When a band of pirates, led by Black John (Bernard Lee), begin luring ships to their doom at Smuggler's Bay, the local community beg squire Trevenyan (Peter Cushing) to bring an end to the wanton pillaging and murder. The squire, however, has issues of his own, not least of all Black John, who has knowledge of Trevenyan's past that could be used against him should he attempt to bring the pirate to justice.

Zone/Region: 2

Region 2: Region 2 titles are suitable for England and Europe and will only play in Australia and New Zealand if you have a MULTI-REGION DVD player or a Region 2 DVD player.

We offer a 60 day returns policy on all items. We will exchange any item or give you a full refund if:

» Your item is defective i.e. a manufacturing fault

» You have been sent the wrong item.

Return postage costs will be refunded in full upon receipt. Please contact us prior to returning an item.

Change of mind within 60 days is accepted as long as the item is unopened and returned in original condition. (Return Post to be paid by buyer)

Satisfaction Guarantee

We want to make sure that your online shopping experience with Kish Kash Entertainment is a pleasant one. If you are not completely satisfied with your order or any part of your dealings with Kish Kash Entertainment please contact us so that we can rectify any problems.

Contact us: webstore@kishkash.com.au

or via the telephone 9am-3pm Mon-Fri :

Australian Customers Telephone: (03) 9349-1118

International Customers Telephone: +61-3-9349-1118