Pembrokeshire looks likely to be back starring on the silver screen soon as the set for a Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer film production of British author JoJo Moyes’ best selling novel, “Me Before You”.

Location Manager, Richard George, from the world famous Pinewood Studios is looking to start shooting the film in the town of Pembroke in May.

Pembrokeshire is renowned as the location for many major Hollywood films. The association between the County and movies started many years ago when Fishguard became the setting for “Moby Dick”, starring Gregory Peck. This was followed by “Fury at Smugglers’ Bay” filmed at Abereiddy.

Fishguard was also the set for “Under Milk Wood”, starrring Richard Burton whilst the most recent version, filmed last Summer and starring Rhys Ifans and Charlotte Church, had Solva posing at Llareggub.

Marloes beach hosted Peter O’Toole in “Lion in Winter” and, more recently, starred in “Snow White and the Huntsman” featuring Kristen Stewart, Charlize Theron, and Chris Hemsworth; whilst Barafundle Bay was one of several locations in Pembrokeshire used in the film “Third Star” starring Benedict Cumberbatch and Hugh Bonneville.

Pembroke Castle was the set of the Monty Python film “Jabberwocky”. One of Pembrokeshire’s castles also feature in “I Capture the Castle” with Bill Nighy and Henry Cavill, shot on location at Manorbier Castle, while Tony Hawkes went surfing on Manorbier beach in “Round Ireland with a Fridge”, before heading into the Preseli mountains; also featured in “I’ll Sleep When I’m Dead”.

Perhaps the most famous scene in recent years has been Dobie’s burial in the sand dunes at Freshwater West behind the Shell House, home to Helena Bonham-Carter in “Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows”. The glorious expanse of Freshwater West beach also hosted the battle scene in Ridley Scott’s epic, “Robin Hood” starring Russell Crowe.

The beautiful Georgian town of Tenby, with its pastel coloured houses, starred in “The Edge of Love” with Keira Knightley and Sienna Miller.

Numerous television productions have also been shot here including Vanity Fair (Tenby), Richard II (Marloes, Carew Castle and Whitesands) and The Lion, The Witch & The Wardrobe (Manorbier Castle).