Cornwall's historic and illustrious connection with smuggling is something that has seduced, inspired and bewitched locals and tourists alike.

This has led local author Terry Townsend to publish his new book West Cornwall: Smugglers' Pubs'. We have been speaking with him about the area's criminal past.

Cornishmen and women had little regard for central Government during the golden age of smuggling, thought to be between 1750 and 1830 - or for the central Government and a remote King who imposed massive import taxes in order to fund foreign wars.

Duties were levied on a vast range of goods including tea, brandy, silks, muslins, handkerchiefs and 'salt', essential for the Cornish fishing industry.

The tax on tea rose to 110%, and there were 18 different duties on brandy and gin, totalling about a mammoth 250%. Needless to say, the tax burden on the ordinary population was enormous.

With this in mind, Cornish people generally had no qualms about turning to smuggling to survive and support their families.

Cornish smugglers came from the ranks of diligent fishermen and impoverished labourers.

By the 1780s, however, what had begun as a poor people struggling to survive grew into a much bigger enterprise, with the general realisation that plentiful fortunes could be created.

This set the scene for a "smuggling exposition" - or as the locals called it, Cornish Free Trade.

Thanks to a clear run from the southern coast of Cornwall, the island of Guernsey and the French port of Roscoff soon became the main contraband suppliers, helping Cornwall to transform into one of the leading centres of 'free trade' in Britain.

"The nerve centre of smuggling operations was predominantly the local pub," said Mr Townsend, who has provided an in-depth story of this crime wave in his new publication.

"Here plots were hatched, arrangements for transportation agreed and runs commissioned. The smugglers' pub served as a meeting place, recruitment centre, secret storage facility, distribution depot and valued customer.

"The book is a journey of discovery round Cornwall's southern coast from St Ives all the way to Falmouth. It is a guide to a significant number of authentic pubs patronised over two centuries ago by Cornish smugglers.

"These wonderful old buildings with low-beamed ceilings, flag stone floors, inglenook fireplaces and secret hiding places are where, with a little imagination, one can sense the desperate days of the free traders."

Mr Townsend stops off at no less than 17 pubs and hopes that readers will enjoy his guide as much as he has enjoyed researching and writing it.

Here are just some of the fascinating pubs which feature in the book:

The Admiral Benbow, Penzance

The Benbow for many will be the first to mind when it comes to smuggling pubs. A local smuggling gang, known as the 'Benbow Brandy Men', operated from the Chapel Street pub.

As many will know, today a carved wooden figure can be seen lying astride the roof. But do you know who it is?

It represents smuggling chief Octavius Lanyon, who is believed to have climbed onto the roof to create a diversion during a Revenue raid. It is thought that he was shot down and seriously injured.

Court records show that a few of the Benbow Brandy Men were captured. John Martin, alias Shelly, was indicted together with Walter Cross, James Bell, John Williams, William Bell, William Stone alias Quin and Benjamin Savory.

This was for "being persons of malicious minds and dispositions" after they were found guilty of being on board the Happy-go-lucky vessel about two miles from Penzance while it cannon-fired the Hawk Lugger, then in service of the King.

The Star Inn, St Just

One of the innkeepers of St Just, Thomas Hicks, set off in an open boat with seven crew and £100 in bank notes and bills.

Hicks collected the money to purchase goods from a smugglers' lugger lying offshore at Priest's Cove.

He and four of the crew drowned when returning with the contraband as his boat capsized in the heavy surf. On a later occasion spirits and tobacco were found concealed in mine workings at St Just and on a subsequent search one of the preventive men fell down a shaft to his death.

The Blue Anchor, Helston

A considerably prosperous Helston attorney, Christopher Wallis, frequently orchestrated the affairs of local smugglers and privateers. Wallis acted for the salvors in many wreck cases, and as the local agent for a number of the Guernsey merchant houses.

Despite being a qualified lawyer, Wallis was once prosecuted for a smuggling related offence.

Like many of his standing he enjoyed the finer elements of life and entertained others of the Helston gentry. Some of the well-to-do he met at the pub were Collectors of Customs, while others were magistrates, merchants, agents and bankers not completely divorced from smuggling.

Halzephron Inn, Gunwalloe

Gunwalloe is today widely associated with Poldark land, probably because it possessed several good beaches and coves for landing contraband.

Caves on the main beach were rumoured to be linked by a tunnel to St Winwalloe's belfry, while another passage joined the Halzephron Inn to 'Fishing Cove', the home of a fascinating local smuggler Henry Cuttance.

By the 1840s Cuttance was landlord of the inn and running a small but profitable smuggling operation on the side – acting as a smuggler, seller and distributor of contraband.

Cuttance was once seized by a press gang and taken away to a man-of-war but escaped by throwing his hat off one side of the ship and shouting 'man overboard'.

As everyone rushed to help, he quietly slipped over to the other side and swam the three miles back to shore. Seems like the actions of a Cornish Captain Jack Sparrow.

The Lamorna Wink

Lamorna Cove was a favourite landing beach for smugglers due to being set among granite cliffs at the western side of Mount's Bay.

The late eighteenth-century Lamorna Wink Inn still stands at the head of the smugglers' trail, leading up from the cove.

The 'Wink' part of the pub's name comes from kiddlywink, an old name for a Cornish beer shop or beer house, which became popular after the 1830 beer act.

Local free traders concealed their contraband in a hiding place under the floor in front of the fireplace.

Kiddlywinks were licensed to sell beer or cider by Customs & Excise rather than by a magistrate's licence which was required for traditional public houses and inns.

Wink taverns were haunts of smugglers and landlords or landladies would use a kettle to keep smuggled brandy hidden from the law. As Mr Townsend points out, customers in the know would wink at the kettle when they desired something stronger than beer.

The Old Inn, Mullion

Mullion Cove was also a favourite landing place for contraband with virtually the whole population involved, as local historian Reverend EG Harvey, referenced in Townsend's book, confirmed when writing in 1875:

'During the last century, and the early part of this, it is said there was hardly a family in these parts that was not more or less concerned in the trade; and men living may even now, so far from considering it a disgrace, be heard to speak proudly of the day when they were engaged in the smuggling service.'

The Mundays, who ran the Old Inn, were one of the foremost smuggling families of the area. John Munday, together with accomplice Bobo George, stored their contraband in a cavern at the cove, accessible only at low tide. It is rumoured a tunnel led from the cave to a cliff-top farm.

West Cornwall Smugglers' Pubs from St Ives to Falmouth was published by Halsgrove Press and retails for £9.99. Mr Townsend not only tells of each pub's intriguing past but also of how it looks today and its current attractions.

St Ives' Sloop Inn, Sennen Cove's The Old Success Inn and The First and Land Inn, Mousehole's The Ship Inn, Newlyn's The Tolcarne Inn, and Falmouth's The Chain Locker are just some of the other 17 that feature.

Townsend has written six other 'Smugglers' Pubs' books for Halsgrove, featuring Kent, Hampshire, Isle of Wight and two for Dorset.

His latest book, published in June, continues the journey into east Cornwall, travelling from Falmouth to the Devon border.