Although primarily known for their horror output, Hammer Studios did a handful of pirate/smuggling/swashbuckling movies back in the early '60s, and this is one of the most well-known. Unfortunately, it's an exceedingly dull affair, that never really becomes exciting – even during some acceptable fencing and sword-fighting bouts. Why is the film so dull? Well, it's a mystery, not least because John Gilling is the man who bought us the excellent and atmospheric PLAGUE OF THE ZOMBIES.

FURY AT SMUGGLERS' BAY retains the same kind of rugged, wild settings on the Cornish coastline, so at least the scenery is very easy on the eye. And another plus is the casting – Hammer have amassed a bunch of dependable, believable actors for all the parts, top-lined of course by Cushing's indomitable Squire Trevenyan. Although Cushing is a good guy this time around, he's just as cold and ruthless as Baron Frankenstein, even more so in some instances! Cushing is ably supported by Bernard Lee, chewing the scenery as the wrecker, Black John. Lee would, of course, go on to great fame as 'M' in the James Bond films, and he's just as good here.

The young, dashing, romantic males are played well by John Fraser and William Franklyn, who both bring charisma to their parts, and they in turn are supported by some engaging love interests – especially Michele Mercier (AVENGER OF THE SEVEN SEAS), who has got to be one of the finest French women in existence! Liz Fraser is thoroughly alluring as the buxom blonde waitress. There are lots of familiar faces lower down in the cast list, including Miles Malleson in yet another amusing cameo (after Dracula), Maitland Moss, and George Coulouris. For my money, though, all these guys have their thunder stolen by two ethnic actors – the first is Christopher Carlos, whose hulking pirate is a real brute, the second is a young Indian lad known only as 'Juma', who's pretty handy with a knife.

The film's storyline is a little convoluted, but bolstered by plenty of action, from shoot-outs to fist-fights, to fencing bouts. There are some twists and turns that are quite engaging and the music is, as always for a Hammer film, spot on. Nevertheless, the entire movie seems devoid of excitement, even during the climax; it just seems routine rather than engaging.

0 out of 2 found this helpful. Was this review helpful? Sign in to vote.

Permalink