I am not familiar with Jacques Feyder’s silent work. He was revered as an early master, but his reputation seems to have faded over time. He lives on more for his films with Garbo and Dietrich than on those early works. But on the basis of Le Grand Jeu, his first sound film – his rank seems to have receded a little prematurely as this is a skilled, innovative and highly engaging piece of cinema.

Pierre (Pierre Richard-Willm) is a flapper – well the male equivalent. He is idle rich, hell-bent on enjoyment at all costs. He speeds along the road at break-neck speed; not a care for anything, certainly not the law. But it seems that embezzlement has the…

Note:The film is currently on YouTube.

Play Your Cards Right.

10/10.

Taking a look around Amazon UK for French films from 1934 (in 2015!),I spotted a title from DVD company Masters of Cinema,which looked like an excellent psychological Drama,which led to me getting ready to see the "grand jeu" (great game) take place.

View on the film:

Centering the first half of the title on Muller's experiences in the Foreign Legion,the screenplay by co-writer/(along with Charles Spaak)director Jacques Feyder surprisingly keeps away from opening Muller dark psychological troubles,to instead focus on the deserted location.Despite allowing for a slight lonely atmosphere to be built,the desert setting feels like it is holding the title back from investigating Muller.

Entering the brothel,the writers…

Brilliant in places, but also very clunky in others, Le Grand Jeu ultimately left me a little underwhelmed. What holds me back in really embracing it is the role of the main character, Parisian playboy Pierre. I don't think he's ever interesting enough to hang the movie on. And that's a shame, because the supporting characters are all quite excellent (and maybe I should focus more on them instead of on him on a rewatch).

The film mainly plays in a brothel and it's surprising to see how different the sexualilty is from for example the thinly disguised pre-code films of Hollywood. Here, we see prostitutes accepting money for their services, but apart from one belly shot, nothing is ever…

I must conclude that I find LE GRAND JEU to be a terribly overrated and rather boring film. The underlying story may be progressive if you look at the timeline of French cinema - it pretty much predates the realist era - but that doesn't make it very interesting and despite Feyder's very certain hands (this was a great director and he perfectly plays a sombre tone) he can't make rabbits out of hats as the film (despite a playful storyline) isn't really about anything in particular.

It's possible that it's the main character is what does it in for me. Or I should say the melodramatic and utterly fake Pierre Richard-Willm. He does nothing for me and I felt…