OLDENBURG – If it weren't for the McDonald's four miles down the road, it would be easy to mistake this little town north of Batesville for a community in rural Germany.

The street signs that read "Haupt", "Wasser" and "Maulbeerfeigen" may only further intrigue an outsider to Oldenburg, known as the "Village of Spires" nestled into a hilly plot of land in Franklin County. The clapboard houses, soaring church steeples and businesses with German names add to the Old World feel.

It is also home to the "Graveyard Boys", a delightfully spooky tradition and no doubt one of the most unique athletic settings of any Indiana High School Athletic Association program – a fitting Halloween tale.

With an enrollment of 200 students, Oldenburg Academy is one of the smallest high school schools in the state. It began in 1851 as Academy of the Immaculate Conception, a Catholic boarding school for young women in the region surrounding Oldenburg and taught by nuns. By the late 1990s, the boarding school was closed and, in 2000, the school was opened to boys for the first time.

As the school has evolved, so has its sports programs for both boys and girls. But the space available for playing fields did not.

"We play next to a graveyard," said Matti Hurm, a senior on the soccer team. "We have a graveyard on one side, a softball field next to it, a sewage plant on the end and a cornfield on one side."

Not that they are complaining. The boys soccer team – the self-titled "Graveyard Boys" – advanced all the way to the Class A semi-state last week before losing to Tri-West to finish 17-4-1. Ken Getz coaches the boys team and his daughter, Kendra, a former player at Oldenburg, coaches the girls.

To get to the field, a patch of somewhat uneven land donated by the Holy Family parish, the team must walk downhill on a path through two cemeteries. The first is a cemetery on the academy where more than 1,200 Sisters of St. Francis are buried and the second is the Holy Family cemetery.

For conditioning work, Getz has the team run the path uphill through the two cemeteries. When it plays on the road, the team brings a few "graveyard" grass clippings to spread on the opposing field.

"It's a place unlike anywhere any other soccer teams play," Hurm said. "You come up over the hill and all you see is a graveyard. The other teams are like, 'Is this really where we play?' But we embrace it. We don't see it as spooky, even when it gets dark at night. We don't see it as scary. We have to make 'cemetery runs' up and down, so you can't be scared. It's the opposing teams that might be a little skeptical."

Yes, they've heard it before – the fans at Oldenburg Academy are dying to get in. Hardy har. But there is a real home cemetery advantage at play. That's why the teams have continued to use the field instead of moving games to Batesville.

"You hear other teams laugh and snicker when they pull in," Getz said. "But they usually aren't snickering when they leave. I don't know what it is but we win at least 90 percent of the time here."

It's not just the soccer team that uses the grounds. The cross country teams also have a path that runs around and through the cemetery. Merle Hines has been coaching the teams for 25 years and has two runners this year – Curt Eckstein and Ashley Sedler – who will be competing at the cross country state meet on Saturday in Terre Haute.

"I think our course here might be the hilliest one we see all year," Eckstein said. "The footing isn't too great so if you can get used to that, you can run on about anything."

Hines is adamant that the hilly course has helped to prepare her teams for success later in the season. It may also help that, on average, people are more likely to run fast through a cemetery.

Oldenburg Academy has also added a football team, which will be eligible for the tournament for the first time next season. It practices on a parcel of land north of the school that is roughly half the size of a full-size field. Oldenburg Academy president Diane Laake said there are not currently any plans to build a game field.

With back-to-back regional championships and a tradition starting to take hold in soccer, the "Graveyard Boys" don't plan on going anywhere, although Getz would like to at least even out the field at some point. He jokes that the cows in the adjacent field would probably miss watching practice if they did leave.

Maybe others, too. Those that don't count in the official attendance.

"Right there," Getz said, nodding to the first row of tombstones, "the best seats in the house."