Annette Hunger fills the vacancy left by Diane Laake's retirement.

Annette Hunger. Photo provided.

(Oldenburg, Ind.) – Oldenburg Academy of the Immaculate Conception has a new president.

The Board of Trustees announced Thursday the unanimous selection of Annette Hunger as the school’s next president.

Hunger currently serves as the Dean of Enrollment Management and a member of the administration team. She also has 19 years of experience in Catholic high school education at Oldenburg Academy.

In the interview process, Hunger received extremely strong support from every constituent group, including faculty and staff, current parents, trustees and community members, according to the Board of Trustees.

“Annette is a dynamic leader and a thoughtful listener whose values and vision mirror those of Oldenburg Academy and the school’s sponsor, Sisters of St. Francis,” said Chair of the Board of Trustees Keith Moenter. “She believes that student learning and growth should be at the center of every decision and that instruction, learning experiences, and educational expectations should be academically, intellectually, and personally challenging.”

Hunger fills the president vacancy left by Diane Laake, who announced her retirement in March.

“Seeing first-hand the impact Oldenburg Academy has had on the lives of so many students and families has been a blessing and a point of pride for me the past 19 years,” said Hunger. “I’m truly grateful and honored for this incredible opportunity to continue to serve alongside all the members of the OA family and enthusiastically look forward to engaging with all who share the passion, value, and vision of Oldenburg Academy today and beyond.”

Oldenburg Academy will celebrate Laake’s retirement and welcome Hunger to her new role as President of Oldenburg Academy during an open house on Tuesday, August 16 in the Hillenbrand Family Feldhaus.

The event will run from 4:00 to 6:00 p.m. All community and business partners, school families, alumni, and friends of OA are invited to attend.

RELATED STORIES