(Božo Koprivica, Vježbanka Danilo Kiš, ZUNS, Podgorica 2019.)

The book Vježbanka Danilo Kiš is completely unique and in a noble way lonely among books and texts about Kiš. Because there was a lot and variety written about Danilo Kiš both in our country and in the world, lucid and learned, dull and smarant, written with sincere admiration and even more sincere hatred, that enviable hatred of the ungifted, to whom Kiš was both during his lifetime and was later a favorite target, it was written in all kinds of ways - only no one had written like Božo Koprivica: "as in the rib", and as in the rib, the way Boris Davidovič Novski would write the text of his confession, the way he would write about Danilo Kiš as a literary hero Danilo Kish.

The life of every true writer is found primarily, if not exclusively, in his works. Therefore, the story told in Vježbanka finds its strength and truth above all in the monumental work left behind by its protagonist - and therefore this story is a very special biography and an even more special critical study. In it, Božo Koprivica from the very beginning measures Kiš exclusively against his equals, that is, against the highest reaches of literature and the human spirit. The author of Vježbanka persistently and convincingly points out to us the subtle, often invisible threads that connect Kiš's work with its most significant literary relatives. Some of them, whose names are often routinely and thoughtlessly mentioned alongside the name of Danilo Kiš, are seen here in a very special way and brought to life not as artists who influenced him, but as protagonists of the same story, in which everyone - including, of course, and Rain - play the main roles. Thus, Borges is the master of symmetry, that terrible broken symmetry of Blake's tiger, in which everything written by the hand of one writer forms an indivisible whole, based on latent or completely hidden "rhyming" (an excellent, ambiguous metaphorical-theoretical term introduced by Božo Koprivica) between individual works, rhyming on which the monolith of Kiš's oeuvre is based. But Kish's work also rhymes with the work of Vladimir Nabokov: they are linked above all by homelessness, which, dignified above any thought of literary revenge against those who had to go into exile, is sublimated into refined nostalgia for all lost paradises from the beginning of the world to the present day. Exile is Kish's significant link with Joyce as well; the only one more significant than her is the one that has its root in the motive of the search for the father. Kish's family trilogy, The Family Circus consisting of Rani jadi, Bašta, peeo and Peščanik, could, says Koprivica, be entitled In search of a father; the same title could be Ulysses, as well as much else written by Daedalus' double.

There are, therefore, many signposts in the Exercises (sometimes hidden in just one word or in an apparently incidental parenthesis) that lead from Kiš to other writers from the pantheon of world literature, and vice versa. But every great writer is first and foremost a measure of himself. And every such writer forever writes exclusively about his life - only that with the greatest ones it is either not seen, or it is seen, but in a way that transcends both the writer's and any other individual destiny. And Danilo Kiš mostly talks about his life when he talks about death; he, says Božo Koprivica, also wrote about that death in his songs, when he translated Goethe, Gumilyov, Tsvetajeva or Radnoti, he actually "translated his own death".

Great literature, however, knows how to play not only death, but also other, perhaps even greater horrors, such as atrocities that people do to each other. Kish's entire work testifies to this, as a monumental symphony of suffering and suffering in which there is no consolation, but which is all made of cathartically painful and sublime beauty. That's why Božo Koprivica writes about that work and its creator in the only way that should be written about it: uncompromisingly and somewhat belligerently gently, as if he is ready to fight and cry at any moment, Božo writes about his Danilo with the gift of an incredibly lucid critic. and the love of a close friend, and above all he writes with passion, because, as he says himself, Kiš's books should be approached "with more joy and passion, more commitment and openness". "The real text," says Kish, "is the one that the writer writes because he has to write it." In this book, that "must" is felt on every page, in every sentence.

From such an approach, the most complete portrait of Kiš's life and work in our literature has emerged so far. The Exercise Bank is an outstanding example of a total book, which speaks about its subject with the synesthetic unity of words, images, music and that mysterious something "that needs to be grasped with the nails", that something that surpasses any possibility of rational understanding and materialization in words: The Exercise Bank breathes Kiš's breath. Two manuscripts insensibly and naturally flow into one: Kish's passages become an organic part of Bož Koprivica's text so that one often does not know where one ends and the other begins - and that is another feature that makes this book unique among all other books about Kish.

The author of Vježbanka says at one point that he would like to photograph all the doors through which the main character of his story has ever passed. It is not certain whether he will actually succeed, but one thing is certain: when writing Vježbanka, Božo Koprivica went through not one, but several, actually many doors through which only Danilo Kiš went before him. If he follows their path, the reader will certainly find some of his own doors of perception in this book.