DANILO KIŠ (1935-1989) is one of the most important Yugoslav writers of the 20 th century. His collected works include novels Psalm 44; The Garret; Garden Ashes: Hourglass; A Tomb for Boris Davidovich ; a book of polemical essays A Lesson in Anatomy-, collections of prose works Early Sorrows and The Encyclopaedia of the Dead were published in fourteen volumes and translated into all major languages. He is the winner of many important awards including the Italian Premio delrevere, German Preis des Literaturmagazins, French "Grand aigle dor de la ville de Nice”, Bruno Schulz Prize of the American PEN Centre, NIN Award, Andrić Award, Ivan Goran Kovačić Award, Skender Kulenović Award and many others. He translated from Serbian, Russian, French and Hungarian and worked as lecturer at the universities in Bordeaux and Lille. Kiš was a correspondent member of the Serbian Academy of Science and Arts since 1988. He is considered the author who performed a poetical revolution in the Yugoslav literature.

VARJA ĐUKIĆ is an actress born in Zagreb. She graduated from the Faculty of Dramatic Arts in Belgrade and worked there as an assistant professor teaching acting. From 1998 to 2005 she lived and worked in Podgorica as a free-lance artist and then founded the Karver bookshop which she still runs. She joined the Montenegrin National Theatre in 2008 but acted also in various productions of the Yugoslav Drama Theatre, Atelje 212, Dah Theatre, Montenegrin National Theatre, Zetski Dorn, CZKD Barski Ljetopis, Budva City Theatre... She authored the production Tebi iz jučerašnje (1998, CZKD, Belgrade). Varja Đukić appeared in TV dramas produced by JRT and RTS and in films Variola Vera. Stears for Hevaen, In the name of Father and Son... She wrote a book of essays Theatre Ghetto (CDNK, 2000) and is the winner of a number of acting awards.

BOŽO KOPRIVICA is a dramaturgist born in Nikšić. He is one of the highly appreciated essayists, dramaturgists and literary critics in the former Yugoslav territories. Koprivica graduated in world literature from the Faculty of Philology in Belgrade. He is the author of Dribble - 1001 night-, Volley and Hearing-, Klš, Borges, Maradona-, Only Gods Can Promise. Koprivica was the dramaturgist of many productions staged by Belgrade and Montenegrin theatres. He lives in Belgrade.

110

MAIN PROGRAMME

47 BITEF 13