There is one photo from the stand that says a thousand words. It shows the start of a fight, everyone is facing the new center of the action because two big guys are holding each other's necks. Only one man still carefully follows what he came for, follows sports, watches the game like a gentleman. That man in an ironed white shirt with a Russian collar is Božo Koprivica. He is not interested in what is behind, no matter how dangerous or interesting it is, he is only interested in what he came for, what brought people together, only sport, only game!

Božo doesn't watch the movie because of the popcorn, he didn't come to the game because of the fight. The atmosphere is important, but the game is the most important. Hence the white shirt in the stands, because the match is a celebration first and foremost! But that does not mean that Bozo is less of a fan than those who fight behind him. On the contrary, Božo is a fan, the others fight and "cheer"!

If you call Bož on a "landline" phone, because he doesn't have a cell phone, you will hear a voice message on the answering machine: "If you support Partizan, leave a message, and if you support these others, then hello."

Uncompromising in his views, it's not that he didn't raise dust with his statements about Partizan as an inviolable deity, it's not that literary and sports evenings weren't interrupted due to his provocations at the expense of interlocutors and rival clubs, but it was all with style, everything was in the service" ethics and aesthetics". He proved that sports and literature are perfectly compatible, he wrote essays as if he were a cousin of Eduardo Galeano, and maybe he is a sibling in the spirit of football and revolution.

Whenever I see a failed or tasteless attempt at provocation from the stands, I remember Bož. Not everyone can be a fan. It can only be a "self-proclaimed" fan. Just how unfounded the title "big fan" is. It would be really easy to go to the stands, wave a flag, yell and swear and declare yourself a fan. As if that is enough proof to love the club, city, national team or country?

If someone regularly goes to matches, if he also goes to away games, even takes his children to matches, that person can be called a fan. One of them did this even before he sat down in the director's chair, but recently he has been criticized for everything and anything, and his access to the podium is restricted, and he also receives curses, name-calling and a rhyming banner.

If we weigh it up, Boris Raonic is still a bit bigger fan. By whom? Of those who claim to be great. "Ardent fans" do not exist, nor do small and large ones. Someone is either mislead or led. Long ago Salinger explained that someone had to set the grain on fire.

Every man who comes to the game is equally important. Until the last one! If he comes with children, then it is an even bigger mission, spreads the spirit, creates a tradition. Everyone is part of a mechanism called a match. It would be really nice if we got used to it, if we didn't suffer from big complexes of small leaders, big and small. Mangupluk is one thing, and saliva is another. "It's not aesthetic to whine!".

I guess the job of a fan is to cheer, not to fight other people's battles. The photo said it all. Let's focus on the game, not the games!