U.S. Army Careers

Enlisting in the U.S. Army can be a great opportunity for individuals to gain specialized skills and leadership experience that will prepare them for our complex and globalized economy. While there are many options, some U.S. Army Careers include: Infantry Officer, Cyber Officer, Armor Officer, Aviation Officer, Military Intelligence Officer, Engineer Officer, Field Artillery Officer, Finance Officer, Medical Service Officer, Military Police Officer, Ordnance Officer, Quartermaster Officer, Transportation Officer, Signal Officer, Chemical Officer, Air Defense Artillery Officer, Adjutant General Officer, Physician Assistant, Special Forces, PSTOP, Veterinary Officer, Dental Corps Officer and Chaplains Corps.

Infantry Officer

An Infantry Officer is responsible for leading Infantry Soldiers at all levels of command and combined armed forces during missions on the ground.

Cyber Officer

A U.S. Army Career in Cyber Officers means being responsible for carrying out cyber security operations in conjunction with an organized plan.

Armor Officer

Armor Officers are responsible for tank and cavalry operations on the battlefield.

Aviation Officer

Aviation Officers command flight platoons and lead operations using Army helicopters.

Military Intelligence Officer

A Military Intelligence Officer commands and coordinates Military Intelligence Soldiers and combined armed forces, assesses risks and acts to neutralize intelligence threats.

Engineer Officer

An Engineer Officer will manage a wide range of crucial engineering projects, including constructing roads, bases, bridges and airfields, supporting disaster relief and civilian rescue efforts and researching alternative engineering technology.

Field Artillery Officer

Field Artillery Officers will lead the field artillery branch that neutralizes the enemy by cannon, rocket and missile fire. You must be an expert in tactics, techniques and procedures.

Finance Officer

A Finance Officer uses expertise in math to provide financial advice and recommendations for units looking to purchase services and supplies for their mission, as well as other supervision duties.

Medical Service Officer

The most diverse branch of the Army’s Medical Service Corps, a Medical Service Officer treats and helps Soldiers and their families in a variety of areas.

Military Police Officer

A Military Police Officer protects peoples’ lives and property on Army installations by enforcing military laws and regulations.

Ordnance Officer

An Ordnance Officer will make sure that weapons systems, vehicles and equipment are ready and available, and in perfect working condition.

Quartermaster Officer

Responsible for making sure equipment, materials and systems are available and functioning, a Quartermaster Officer provides supply support for Soldiers and units in field services, aerial delivery and material and distribution management.

Transportation Officer

Transportation Officers manage all elements of distribution related to the planning, operation, coordination and evaluation of all modes of transportation.

Signal Officer

A U.S. Army Career as a Signal Officer means you will plan and execute all aspects of communication on a mission and is critical to the Army’s continued success.

Chemical Officer

As a Chemical Officer, you specifically defend against the threat of biological and chemical weapons, ‘dirt bombs’ and Weapons of Mass Destruction.

Air Defense Artillery Officer

An Air Defense Artillery Officer leads the air defense artillery branch at all levels of command, protecting U.S. forces from aerial attacks, missile attacks and enemy surveillance.

Adjutant General Officer

Adjutant General Officers are responsible for providing personnel support that affects Soldiers’ overall well-being, while assisting commanders by accounting for and keeping Soldiers combat-ready.

Physician Assistant

A Physician Assistant in the U.S. Army will carry out a broad range of diagnostic and therapeutic services for Soldiers and their families.

Special Forces

Special Forces lead teams on missions, including counter-terrorism, direct action, foreign internal defence, intelligence gathering and unconventional warfare.

PSYOP

Psychological Operations (PSYOPS) Soldiers intelligence, interpersonal skills, cultural sensitivity and foreign language proficiency help sway opinions and actions of foreign governments, groups and individuals.

Veterinary Officer

As an Army Veterinary Officer, you specialize in animal medicine, veterinary public health, and research and development.

Dental Corps Officer

Dental Corps Officers will treat Soldiers suffering from diseases, injuries and defects of the teeth, jaw and mouth, and practice across the field of general dentistry to ensure that each Soldier is in optimal oral health.

Chaplains Corps

Chaplains provide ministry worldwide, accompanying Soldiers and families as they carry out their units’ missions in both peace and war.

Learn more about U.S. Army Careers