The Army calls their enlisted jobs military occupational specialties (MOS). When a soldier graduates from boot camp, they get their first job, their primary MOS. They then head to advanced training. During their career, they may get an additional MOS, indicating special skills or duties performed on tours or in training programs.

There are about 190 MOSs available for enlisted soldiers to choose from. Comparable specialties are grouped into branches or fields. The Army MOS is three digits. The first two digits indicate the field, and the last digit is the specific job in that field. For example, the basic career field of a soldier in the Army special forces is 18 – Special Forces. A medic in the special forces has a MOS of 18D (eighteen delta), special forces medic.

A Guide to All Army Enlisted MOSs

Here are the different occupational fields for enlisted soldiers:

09 – Interpreter/Translator

Soldiers in this career field are proficient in at least one foreign language. They interpret and translate communications from a foreign language into English or vice versa.

11 – Infantry Branch

Members of the infantry are the main combat force on the ground. Their job includes fighting enemy ground forces on land. They train at Fort Benning, Georgia, to use small arms, anti-armor or indirect-fire weapons such as mortars during combat missions.

12 – Corps of Engineers

There are 22 enlisted jobs in the corps of engineers branch. Members are responsible for building structures, developing civil works programs and providing combat support on the battlefield.

13 – Field Artillery

Soldiers in this field provide firepower during combat operations. Duties include neutralizing or suppressing the enemy by using cannon, rocket and missile fire.

14 – Air Defense Artillery

This career field includes seven MOSs. These soldiers implement tactics, techniques and procedures in the engagement of air defense systems. Their primary job is to stop enemy long- and short-range missiles.

15 – Aviation

There are 21 jobs included in the aviation field, including. avionics mechanics, aircraft power plant repairers and RQ-7 operators. These soldiers are responsible for operating and maintaining helicopters, planes and unmanned aerial vehicles.

17 – Cyber

Soldiers in the cyber operations career field conduct offensive and defensive operations to protect data and networks. They also disrupt enemy network systems

18 – Special Forces

Special forces soldiers are highly trained to engage the enemy in special operations missions around the world.

19 – Armor

Soldiers in this field are part of a crew conducting ground combat operations using armored vehicles like the M1 Abrams tank and the Bradley fighting vehicle. They are responsible for all the tank and cavalry/forward reconnaissance operations on the battlefield.

25 – Signal Corps

Soldiers in this field provide secure communications between troops on the ground, by helicopter over a combat zone and on the ground.

27 – Judge Advocate General’s Corps

These paralegal specialists assist judges, Army lawyers and unit commanders with legal matters and perform judicial work.

29 – Electronic Warfare

Soldiers in the electronic warfare field carry out military actions using electromagnetic energy to employ and prevent hostile use of the electromagnetic field.

31 – Military Police

Members of the military police protect the lives and property on Army bases and posts. They control traffic, help prevent crime and respond to emergencies. They also enforce military laws and regulations.

35 – Military Intelligence

Soldiers in this field collect and share vital information to combat soldiers regarding targeting, enemy manpower and capabilities. They use various methods (electronic, communications, human and counterintelligence) to collect information to save soldiers’ lives.

36 – Financial Management

Financial management technicians receive and post funding documents to accounting and budget systems.

37 – Psychological Operations

Psychological operations specialists influence the local population not to join insurgencies. They are also sources of information to assist soldiers on the ground.

38 – Civil Affairs

Civil affairs specialists identify critical requirements needed by local citizens in combat or crisis situations. They must be culturally aware and sensitive to the customs of the people in the region where they’re deployed.

42 – Adjutant General’s Corps

Soldiers in the adjutant genera’s corps may choose between being Army musicians (they must audition and get selected) or working in the human resources field.

46 – Public Affairs

Soldiers in this field assist in the administration of public affairs programs through news releases, newspaper articles, web-based material and photographs for use in military and civilian news outlets.

51 – Acquisition

Soldiers in this field provide contracting support for brigades, battalions and post contracting offices.

56 – Chaplain

Religious affairs specialists act as counselors for their fellow soldiers and provide support to Army chaplains. They do everything from preparing spaces for worship to managing supplies.

68 – Medical

There are various enlisted jobs in the medical field. These soldiers provide medical care to military members and their families. They can choose from careers as medics, pharmacy assistants, dental specialists, operating room specialists and animal care specialists.

74 – Chemical, Biological, Radiological and Nuclear

Soldiers in this field protect nations against the threat of chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear weapons of mass destruction. They are responsible for decontaminating hazardous material spills or accidents.

79 – Recruiting and Retention

Recruiting and retention specialists attract and keep high-quality soldiers in the Army, Army Reserves and National Guard.

88 – Transportation Corps

Soldiers in this field operate, repair and maintain all transportation vehicles in the Army arsenal. They are also responsible for moving supplies, troops and equipment anywhere around the world.

89 – Explosive Ordnance

In this field, soldiers focus on ammunition, explosives, weapons and all of their components.

91 – Mechanics and Equipment Maintenance

There are 16 fields in mechanics and maintenance equipment. Duties include maintenance on vehicles such as trucks, Jeeps and tanks, as well as mechanical engines and other equipment.

92 – Quartermaster Corps

Members of the quartermaster corps provide soldiers with food, water, petroleum, supplies, parts and other services during the operation. Their main job is to make sure equipment, materials and systems are available and operational for missions.

94 – Combat Electronic Systems Repair/Maintenance

Soldiers in this field maintain and repair combat electronic systems.

ADVERTISEMENT

The U.S. Army Officer MOS

Just like enlisted personnel MOSs, Army commissioned officer jobs are listed by a code. They are grouped into different career management fields (the first two digits) and then by a specific job in that field (the last digit). For example, 36A refers to financial management officers, while 36B refers to a financial management technician, an enlisted position.

A Guide to All Army Officer MOSs

Here are the different occupational fields for Army officers:

11A – Infantry Officer

These officers lead the infantry and combined armed forces during land combat.

12A – Engineer Officer

Engineer officers provide full support to the wide range of engineering duties in the Army. They assist in building structures, developing civil works programs and providing combat support.

13A – Field Artillery Officer

Officers in this field lead the field artillery branch. They neutralize the enemy by cannon, rocket and missile fire.

14A – Air Defense Artillery Officer

Officers in this field lead the air defense artillery branch at all levels of command. They manage military computers on complex networks, communications equipment systems and radars to provide warning, detection and protection from aerial attack, missile attack and aerial surveillance.

15A – Aviation Officer

Aviation officers coordinate and lead operations using Army helicopters like the UH-60 Black Hawk, CH-47 Chinook and the AH-64 Apache. They lead efforts to transport troops and carry supplies, as well as provide quick-strike and long-range target engagement.

19A – Armor Officer

Armor officers are responsible for tank and cavalry/forward reconnaissance operations on the battlefield. They lead operations specific to the armor branch.

25A – Signal Officer

These officers lead the signal corps. They are responsible for the Army’s entire systems of communication by planning and executing all parts of communication on a mission.

27A – Army Judge Advocate General’s Corps Attorney

Judge advocates (Army lawyers) offer legal support to all Army personnel and their families.

31A – Military Police Officer

Military police officers are responsible for leading soldiers who protect lives and property on Army Installations. They oversee the five military police battlefield functions: Maneuver and mobility support operations, area security operations, law and order operations, internment/resettlement operations and police intelligence operations.

35A – Military Intelligence Officer

Officers in this field collect intelligence during Army missions. They specialize in six specific areas: Imagery intelligence, all-source intelligence, counterintelligence, human intelligence, signals intelligence/electronic warfare and all-source intelligence.

36A – Financial Manager

Finance managers are in charge of the Army’s finance corps and are responsible for supporting missions through purchases of services and supplies.

37A – Psychological Operations Officer

Psychological operations officers use their knowledge of social psychology and individual and group dynamics to impact individuals, groups and populations.

38A – Civil Affairs Officer

Civil affairs officers act as liaisons between the Army and civilian authorities and populations.

42C – Band Officer

Officers must audition and apply to be band officers. During their careers, they rotate through various positions, such as associate conductor, administrator and instructor at the Armed Forces School of Music.

56A – Chaplain

Chaplains are responsible for the spiritual care and well-being of soldiers and their Families. Officers must apply to be Army chaplains.

63 – Dental Corps Officer

These officers are responsible for the dental health of soldiers and their families. During combat, they assist in the emergency medical management of casualties. They must have dental degrees and apply to be Army dentists.

64 – Veterinary Corps Officer

Veterinary corps officers practice in three primary areas: Animal medicine, veterinary public health and research and development. They are responsible for treating government-owned animals and the pets of service members and their families. They are also responsible for programs ensuring the safety and security of Department of Defense food supplies. They may also be involved in research and development, from basic breast cancer research to vaccine development.

66 -Nurse Corps Officer

Officers in this field lead nursing teams caring for soldiers and their families. They must have nursing degrees and apply to be Army nurses.

67 – Medical Service Corps Officer

These officers are leaders in the medical service corps who treat and help soldiers and their families in a variety of areas, such as family practice, surgery, behavioral sciences, health administration, lab sciences, optometry, pharmacy, preventive medicine sciences and medical science officers. Officers must have medical degrees and apply to be Army doctors.

74A – Chemical, Biological, Radiological and Nuclear (CBRN) Officer

Officers in this field defend against the threat of chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear weapons and weapons of mass destruction (WMD).

88A – Transportation Officer

Transportation officers are responsible for moving troops, supplies and equipment worldwide. During wartime, they use trucks, boats and airplanes to provide fast support to the combat teams on the battlefield.

91A – Ordnance Officer

Ordnance officers ensure weapons systems, vehicles and equipment are ready, available and operational at all times. They also manage the development, testing, handling, storage and disposal of munitions.

92A – Quartermaster Officer

Quartermaster officers are responsible for ensuring equipment, materials and systems are available and functioning for Army operations. They provide supply support for soldiers and units in field services and aerial delivery and manage the distribution of material.