Field 09 -- Native Language Speaker

Field 09 -- Native Language Speaker, includes only one MOS (09L), Interpreter/Translator. These soldiers are recruited for their native language abilities, and perform translation and interpreter duties in many foreign languages and cultures.

Field 11 -- Infantry

The Infantry Field includes two Army enlisted jobs: MOS 11B, Infantryman or 11C Indirect Fire Infantryman (note that despite the somewhat outdated term, women are now eligible for these roles).

Infantry soldiers train at Fort Benning in Georgia. Infantry is the oldest and largest branch in the US Army combat arms, with its soldiers trained to use small arms, anti-armor or indirect fire weapons such as mortars during combat missions.

Field 12 -- Corps of Engineers

There are 22 enlisted jobs included in the Corps of Engineer branch. Soldiers in this branch help the Army and the nation in building structures, developing civil works program, working with natural resources, and provide combat support on the battlefield. These aren't jobs where you'll spend all your time reading blueprints and schematics; Corps of Engineers soldiers often conduct their work under combat conditions.

Field 13 -- Field Artillery

The Field Artillery field consists of 8 MOSs. The Army's Field Artillery Branch is responsible for neutralizing or suppressing the enemy by using cannon, rocket, and missile fire and helps to integrate all fire support assets into combined arms operations. The motto of this field used to be "dropping lead from above" but it's become much more sophisticated in recent years with the addition of technology to complete missions.

Field 14 -- Air Defense Artillery

Air Defense includes seven Army enlisted jobs. Soldiers in this field implement tactics, techniques, and procedures for the employment of air defense systems. These soldiers oversee and launch Patriot missiles and other artillery systems, and need a secret security clearance to be able to perform most of the jobs in this field.

Field 15 -- Aviation

There are 21 Army enlisted jobs included in the Aviation Field. Mechanics, avionics technicians, and other vital skills are learned in this career field. Army flight training takes place at the Army Aviation Center of Excellence at Fort Rucker in Alabama.

Field 17 - Cyber Operations Specialist (COS)

Cyber Operations Specialists conduct offensive and defensive operations to protect data, networks, and cause disruption to enemy network systems. Most of these jobs require 10 weeks of basic combat training and two phases of advanced individual training (AIT). Phase one includes 25 weeks of training in Corry Station, Florida. Phase two lasts 20 weeks, and takes place in Fort Gordon, Georgia.

Field 18 -- Special Forces

Famously known as the "Green Berets," Army Special Forces Soldiers are the elite of Army Special Operations. There are seven Army enlisted jobs included in this branch. To qualify, you have to pass the special forces assessment and selection course, then take the 18-month special forces qualification course.

Special Forces soldiers are trained in a variety of combat skills including unconventional warfare, escape training, air operations, shooting, maneuvering and depending on the MOS, language training.

Field 19 -- Armor

The Army's Armor Branch is responsible for all the tank and cavalry/forward reconnaissance operations on the battlefield. There are three Army enlisted jobs included in this field. Soldiers in this field learn how to operate and maintain a variety of armored vehicles.

Field 25 -- Signal Corps

Sixteen enlisted jobs make up the Army Signals branch. The Army's Signal Corps is responsible for all systems of communication for the entire Army. On every mission, communications and data management (handled by the Signal Corps) have become increasingly critical for the Army and its continued success. These soldiers are trained at the Army Signal Center at Fort Gordon in Georgia.

Field 27 -- Judge Advocate General's Corps

There is only one Army enlisted job under this field, MOS 27D - Paralegal Specialist. They assist judges, Army lawyers and unit commanders with legal matters and judicial work.

Field 29 -- Electronic Warfare

In the Electronic Warfare field, soldiers oversee and carry out military actions that involve the use of electromagnetic energy to manipulate and prevent hostile use of the electromagnetic spectrum. Ever see a science fiction movie where one side jams the other side's signals? That's the idea behind electronic warfare (and those kinds of tactics are used both by and against the U.S.)

Field 31 -- Military Police

The Military Police field includes four Army enlisted jobs. The Army's Military Police are called into action for offensive operations, defensive operations, stability operations, and civil support operations.

Field 35 -- Military Intelligence

The Intelligence Branch includes 13 Army enlisted jobs, responsible for all intelligence gathered or learned during Army missions. Timely and accurate information is critical to the combat troops on the battlefield.

Field 36 -- Financial Management

The Finance field includes only one enlisted MOS, 36B - Financial Management Technician. Soldiers in this MOS are responsible for receiving and posting funding, commitment and obligations documents to accounting and budget systems.

Field 37 -- Psychological Operations

Field 37 includes 37F - Psychological Operations Specialist. A Psychological Operations Specialist can assess the information needs of a target population and develop and deliver the right message at the right time and place to create the intended result. It's similar to public relations, but with more psychological and cultural knowledge to back it up.

Field 38 -- Civil Affairs

The Civil Affairs field includes MOS 38B - Civil Affairs Specialist, soldiers who identify critical requirements needed by local citizens in combat or crisis situations. Being culturally aware and sensitive to the customs of the people in the region where you're deployed is a requirement in this job, and having knowledge of a foreign language is a huge plus.

Field 42 -- Adjutant General's Corps

There are three Army enlisted jobs included in the Adjutant General's Corps, including band members and human resources specialists.

Field 46 -- Public Affairs

There are three Army enlisted MOS's included in the Public Affairs field. The Army Public Affairs Specialist participates in and assists with the supervision and administration of Army public affairs programs primarily through news releases, newspaper articles, Web-based material and photographs for use in military and civilian news media.

Field 51 -- Acquisition Corps

There is one MOS in the Field of Acquisition Corps: 51C noncommissioned officers serve as contingency contracting officers in support of a headquarters, principal assistant responsible for contracting, contracting support brigades, contingency contracting battalions, and/or installation contracting offices for training and mission support.

Field 56 -- Chaplain

Chaplain Assistants (the only enlisted MOS assigned to this field) provide support to chaplains during missions and everyday activities. A chaplain assistant primarily provides support for the Unit Ministry Team programs and worship services.

Field 68 -- Medical CMF

The 24 enlisted jobs in the medical field provide medical care to members of the U.S. military and their family members. They include medics, pharmacy assistants, dental specialists, operating room specialists, preventive medicine specialists and even animal care specialists. This is an excellent way to receive training in a medical profession if you don't have a medical degree.

Field 79 -- Recruiting and Retention

The four jobs in the Recruiting and Retention field are responsible for attracting and keeping high-quality enlisted soldiers in the active duty Army, Army Reserves, and Army National Guard.

Field 88 -- Transportation

There are nine enlisted jobs in the Transportation Field. The Transportation Corps is responsible for moving supplies, troops and equipment anywhere around the world the Army has a presence.

Field 89 -- Ammunition

There are three enlisted jobs assigned to the Ammunition Field. Ammunition, explosives, their components, and weapons are known within the Army as 'ordnance' and require proper care and handling. These are jobs that require a high degree of focus and attention to detail, and most soldiers in these roles need to qualify for secret or top secret security clearances.

Field 91 -- Mechanical Maintenance

The Mechanical Maintenance field includes the 16 jobs that are responsible for mechanical maintenance on Army vehicles such as trucks, Jeeps and tanks, as well as mechanical engines and other equipment. They're the grease monkeys of the Army, keeping things (literally) running smoothly,

Field 92 -- Quartermaster Corps

There are 10 Army enlisted jobs in the Supply and Logistics field. They are responsible for making sure equipment, materials and systems are available and functioning for missions.