Nathaniel Gorham: A Strong Politician

633 Words | 2 Pages

Nathaniel Gorham was born in Massachusetts on May 27, 1738. His family was descendants of John Howland, who was a founder of the Plymouth colony, hence the reason he was raised in Massachusetts. He married Rebecca Call in his mid-20s and together they had nine kids. His father was a packet boat operator, and he a merchant. He received an insufficient education growing up, but always seemed to nudge his way into political affairs. Gorham accomplished much with his career before the convention

The Scarlet Letter

967 Words | 2 Pages

The Scarlet Letter A Critical Analysis of Hester Prynne The Scarlet Letter by Nathaniel Hawthorne was written in 1849. This novel won him much fame and a good reputation as a writer. In writing The Scarlet Letter, Hawethorne was creating a form of fiction he called the psychological romance. A psychological romance is a story that contains all of the conventional trappings of a typical romance, but deeply portrays humans in conflict with themselves. The Scarlet Letter won Hawthorne great

Life Outside of Life in Hawthorne’s Wakefield

893 Words | 2 Pages

respectively) to demonstrate Scrooge’s and George Bailey’s significance to the lives of others. Differently, however, is the desire of Mr. Wakefield, himself, to actually step outside and beyond the boundaries of his existence to see his own significance in Nathaniel Hawthorne’s short story Wakefield. Furthermore, the characters of the two aforementioned works are enlightened through the importance of their actions and their lives. Wakefield is altered through his experience, but has no such consciousness of

Comparing Women in Rappaccini's Daughter, Prophetic Pictures, Lady Eleanor's Mantle, and Birth-Mark

1290 Words | 3 Pages

men are afraid of the power of women. We can't know what's going on in the minds of these men, but it certainly is interesting to look at the relationships they have with the main female characters. Works Cited: Hawthorne, Nathaniel. " Rappaccini's Daughter." Nathaniel Hawthorne's Tales. Ed. James McIntosh. New York: W. W. Norton and Company, 1987.

Stylistic Features in Hawthorne's Young Goodman Brown

3823 Words | 8 Pages

lack of consistence between the scorn that our younger critics shower upon Hawthorne’s moral creations and their respect for his style. They admit a dignity in the expression that they will not allow to the thing expressed” (62). The style found in Nathaniel Hawthorne’s “Young Goodman Brown” has not only a “dignity in the expression” as stated above, but also many other interesting aspects, discussed in the following essay. Canby continues: Hawthorne’style has a mellow beauty; it is sometimes

Hester and the Puritans in The Crucible by Arthur Miller

1179 Words | 3 Pages

org/user/billb/hutch.html. Crawford, Deborah. Four Women in a Violent Time. New York: Crown Publishers, Inc., 1970. Geree, John. "The Character of an Old English Puritan, or Non-Conformist" http://www.cet.com/ -mtr/GereeChar.html. Hawthorne, Nathaniel. The Scarlet Letter. Logan, Iowa: The Perfection Form Company, 1979. Rollmann, Hans. "Anglicans, Puritans, and Quakers in Sixteenth- and Seventeenth-century Nefoundland" http://www.mun.ca/rels/ang/texts/ang 1.html.

Biblical and Classical Interpretations of the Witches of The Scarlet Letter

2723 Words | 6 Pages

Biblical and Classical Interpretations of the Witches of The Scarlet Letter The theme of witchcraft is woven into the fabric of The Scarlet Letter. The introductory "Custom-House" chapter includes an appeal by the author to remove any witches' curses on his family. Once he takes us back to the Boston of the 1640's, he frequently hints about the cohorts of the "Black Man" who meet in the woods beyond the town. But if the reader understands the classical meaning of the word witchcraft such as

Romanticism in Scarlet Letter, Minister's Black Veil, and Young Goodman Brown

2086 Words | 5 Pages

American Romanticism in The Scarlet Letter, The Minister's Black Veil, and Young Goodman Brown Nathaniel Hawthorne took elements of the European romanticism and reshaped them into a new literary form that is called American Romanticism. "The American Romanticists created a form that, at first glance, seems ancient and traditional; they borrowed from classical romance, adapted pastoral themes and incorporated Gothic elements" (Reuben 22). Some of the definable elements of romanticism combined

Essay on the Transformation of Hester in Scarlet Letter

683 Words | 2 Pages

her life into coils of torment and defeat. In The Scarlet Letter, by Nathaniel Hawthorne, Hester is publicly recognized as an adulteress and expelled from society. Alongside the theme of isolation, the scarlet letter, or symbol of sin, is meant to shame Hester but instead transforms her from a woman of ordinary living into a stronger person. The purpose of the scarlet letter is not fulfilled according to the author, Nathaniel Hawthorne. It was put upon Hester’s bosom to claim her unholiness but

Noble Love in The Birthmark

1723 Words | 4 Pages

Noble Love in The Birthmark Often billed as a story of an unsuccessful attempt to beat Nature at her own game, “The Birthmark” by Nathaniel Hawthorne certainly lends itself to a somewhat deeper interpretation. Over the years many scholars have noted that the story of Aylmer and Georgiana is riddled with traditional Hawthorne themes such as the evils of selfishness and pride, coupled with an element of solitariness (Arvin xvi). However, we are want to consider whether Aylmer’s motives in this

Free College Essays - Allegory and Symbolism in Hawthorne's Young Goodman Brown

1487 Words | 3 Pages

Nathaniel Hawthorne is a nineteenth-century American writer of the Romantic Movement. Hawthorne was born is Salem, Massachusetts, and this is the place he used as the setting for some of his works: such as "The Scarlett Letter", "the Blithedale Romance" and "Young Goodman Brown". In writing, Hawthorne was known for his use of allegory and symbolism, which made his stories a joy for everyone to read. Hawthorne was said to be the first American writer who was conscious of the failure of modern man

Romanticism in Hawthorne's Young Goodman Brown, The Birthmark, and Rappaccini's Daughter

1062 Words | 3 Pages

Romanticism in Young Goodman Brown, The Birth-Mark, and Rappaccini's Daughter Nathaniel Hawthorne gives his own definition of romanticism in the preface to The House of Seven Gables. According to Hawthorne, the writer of a romance may "claim a certain latitude" and may "deepen and enrich the shadows of the picture," as long as he does not "swerve aside from the truth of the human heart." The writer of a romance "will be wise...to mingle the Marvelous" as long as he does it to a "slight," however

Poe's Theory and Practice Reflected in The Cask of Amontillado

1093 Words | 3 Pages

However, Poe was a critic as well as an acclaimed author. By observing the talents that Poe admired in the writings of others, one may better understand the inner workings of Poe's infamous short stories. In 1854, Poe wrote a review of the works of Nathaniel Hawthorne entitled "The Importance of the Single Effect in a Prose Tale" (854). In this essay I will compare the strengths Poe champions in Hawthorne's works with those that accentuate Poe's well known short story "The Cask of Amontillado." According

The Significance of the Letter in The Scarlet Letter

1821 Words | 4 Pages

has been around almost as long as people. It has maintained a harsh punishment, from banishment to death, but in the Puritan world of colonial America (from about 1620-1640), its punishment may have been worse than either. In The Scarlet Letter by Nathaniel Hawthorne, Hester Prynne is a lonely Puritan woman who commits infidelity with a preacher and has a son from the untruthful union. To punish her for this act, the council of leaders forces her to wear a large “A” on her bosom, to let all know what

Free College Essays - Symbols of Her Crime in Hawthorne's The Scarlet Letter

556 Words | 2 Pages

The Scarlet Letter - Two Symbols of Her Crime “It lies not in the pleasure of the magistrates to take off this badge,” calmly replied Hester. “Were I worthy to be quit of it, it would fall away of its own nature, or be transformed into something that should speak a different purport.” (163) Hester Prynne, the central character in the Scarlet Letter, realizes and accepts the consequences of the adulterous act she committed against her husband, Roger Chillingworth, as Hawthorne shows in this

Free Essay on Plant Imagery in Hawthorne's The Scarlet Letter

724 Words | 2 Pages

The Scarlet Letter: Plant Imagery Throughout the novel, Hawthorne uses plant imagery to symbolize both the negative and positive character traits and to set the mood of the novel. The Scarlet Letter, by Nathaniel Hawthorne takes place during the age of Puritanism in Boston where a young and attractive Puritan woman, Hester, commits adultery with the Reverend Mr. Dimmesdale. Chillingworth, Hester’s husband, who had been captured by Indians, comes to town, but only Hester knows his true identity

The Cowardly Rev. Arthur Dimmesdale in Hawthorne's The Scarlet Letter

1018 Words | 3 Pages

The Scarlet Letter: The Cowardly and Weak Dimmesdale In the book The Scarlet Letter, the character Reverend Dimmesdale, a very religious man, committed adultery, which was a sin in the Puritan community. Of course, this sin could not be committed alone. His partner was Hester Prynne. Hester was caught with the sinning only because she had a child named Pearl. Dimmesdale was broken down by Roger Chillinsworth, Hester Prynne’s real husband, and by his own self-guilt. Dimmesdale would later confess

The Empiricist Journey of Young Goodman Brown

1607 Words | 4 Pages

innocence of his childhood does not last forever. Locke believed that people gain knowledge from their own personal experience. For Young Goodman Brown, this experience comes with his journey into the forest with the fellow traveler as chronicled in Nathaniel Hawthorne’s short story. Initially, Brown was, as his namesake foretells, a "young, good man" who believes in man’s basic goodness, yet within the inner desires of his heart wishes to see what all the world had to offer. Therefore, he set off on

Rev. Arthur Dimmesdale and Hester’s Quest for Identity in Hawthorne's Scarlet Letter

2491 Words | 5 Pages

is one of the same: that one needs both individual freedom and social belonging. Although it is impossible for them to have both, and complete themselves, at least they have come to the recognition of this truth. Works Cited Hawthorne, Nathaniel. The Scarlet Letter. Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, 1998. Girgus, Sam B. Desire and The Political Unconsciousness in American Literature. New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1990.

Unattainable Beauty in Nathaniel Hawthorne's The Birthmark

1040 Words | 3 Pages

right places, and the ultimate “gift”: plastic surgery. Women seem not to care what the consequences are, just as long as their goal of perfection is achieved. But can a person ever really be physically perfect? The great 19th century writer, Nathaniel Hawthorne, was writing about feminine beauty and the lengths man will go to in order to achieve that physical perfection long before the era of “America’s Next Top Model” and “Nip/Tuck”. Hawthorne’s classic tale “The Birth-mark” seems to caution