Ilona Biographical information Aliases

Princess Ilona

Gender

Female

Species

Human

Status

Deceased; reincarnated

Cause of Death

Burned alive

Killed By

Order of the Dragon

From

Romania

Occupation

Princess Consort of Wallachia

Relations Spouse

Vlad III

Friends

Vlad III

Enemies

Order of the Dragon

Appearance Based on

Ilona Szilágyi

Portrayed By

Jessica De Gouw

Source

Ilona was the wife of Vlad III and the princess consort of Wallachia.

400 years after Ilona's death; she was reincarnated as Mina Murray.

Biography[]

Ilona was Vlad III's wife during his human lifetime. Though very little is shown about their life, it is clear through flashbacks that their marriage was a remarkably happy one. In the animated web comanpion Dracula Rising, she is mentioned to have come from a peasant's background. When once asked if she was frightened by her husband's bloody tendencies, she replied that she knew he had it in him to be a good man and change the world for the better. A painter once complimented her as an "otherworldly beauty" with porcelain skin, blue eyes and raven hair.

The couple's happiness was cut short when Vlad gradually became disillusioned with the Order of the Dragon and turned against them. In retaliation for his defiance and treason, Ilona was abducted and Vlad was arrested and tortured before being turned into a vampire. Just mere moments before her death Ilona told him that they were bound body and soul and that they would meet again. Vlad desperately wanted to believe her but he did not share her faith and was forced to watch as his beloved princess was burned at the stake, while he was condemned to suffer as a vampire. While confined and starved in his coffin for almost four centuries, Vlad grieved Ilona’s death further fuelling his thirst for vengeance.

When Vlad introduces himself into Victorian London society as an American entrepreneur named Alexander Grayson, he meets Mina Murray; who is revealed to be the reincarnation of Ilona.

Throughout the series; Ilona appears in several flashbacks, hallucinations and dream sequences.

Trivia[]