The Norwegian Broadcasting Corporation ltd (NRK) pledges in its Objects Clause to offer public service broadcasting on radio, TV, Internet and miscellaneous new media platforms.

Furthermore the company’s main obligation is to broadcast a wide range of programs and services that will maintain and strengthen the Sámi language, culture and identity.

NRK’s Objects Clause is the basis of the company’s broadcasting activities nationwide and regionally, and defines the core of its mission as a motivator for and developer and transmitter of Norwegian and Sámi art and culture.

Purpose

Through its programme policy NRK Sápmi shall actively contribute towards enabling the Sami People to live and act as Sami. In addition, NRK Sápmi shall endeavour to generate greater knowledge within the population of Norway in

matters regarding Sápmi and the Sami People; their culture and society.

Organization

NRK Sápmi is, within the company organization, a division of the Norwegian Broadcasting Corporation (NRK). The Head of NRK Sápmi reports directly to the Director General of NRK, and is responsible for all content of broadcasting

produced by NRK Sápmi.

Collaborating partners

In addition to NRK Sápmi, radio and television stations broadcasting

in Sami are located in Finland and Sweden.

In Finland,YLE Sápmi (Enare) is a district office of Yleisradio, and in Sweden the SR Sámi Radio is established as an entity within Sveriges Radio. In addition, Sveriges Television has a Sami editorial office in Kiruna; SVT Sápmi. The Sami broadcasting services of Sweden, Finland and Norway offer shared transmissions with news and topical programmes on a daily basis. NRK Sápmi, SVT Sápmi and YLE Sápmi produce and transmit TV news services on a daily basis. The broadcasts are 19 minutes long.

Indigneous affairs and joint ventures

NRK Sápmi has been active in developing a cooperative partnership between a number of indigneous peoples’ broadcasting companies in order to increase the production of news spots and features on indigenous affairs, both for its own use and for NRK’s nationwide networks. NRK Sápmi has established a news network in association with several broadcasting stations of other indigenous

peoples around the world – this is now being developed further as an integrated part of the daily news service. In 2008, a worldwide network of indigenous television broadcasters was established, World Indigenous Television

Broadcasters Network (WITBN). The aim of the network is to develop cooperation in programme production, development and – exchange.

Broadcasting station

Since 1984, NRK Sápmi has had its own broadcasting station in Karasjok. The building is located near legendshrouded «Stálloláttu», and after three extensions now measures ca. 2500 m2, sporting offices, editorial and production facilities for radio, TV and Internet.

Language

NRK holds Norwegian and Sami as official languages.The majority of NRK Sápmi’s broadcasts for TV and radio are in the Northern Sami language, but there are also permanent broadcasts in the Lule Sámi and South Sami

languages. The continuous news coverage by NRK Sápmi on the Internet is done both in Norwegian and Sami. NRK Sápmi’s TV and Internet services are of vital importance, both when it comes to the information output for the Sami

people, as well as for the preservation and further development of the Sami language.

Programme content

The news

Ideally, Sami speaking people should be able to have all their news broadcasts presented in the Sami language. The news service should endeavour to present essential news stories that concern as many as possible, placing singular topics within a larger frame of relevance, and analyzing the consequences of various political decisions concerning everyday life.The news in Sami must be founded in Sámi reality and everyday life reflecting the Sámi people as an integrated part of a Nordic and gobal news agenda. In this context, NRK Sápmi places special emphasis on news from and about other indigenous peoples of the world.

NRK Sápmi presents news broadcasts on radio, TV, Internet and Teletext on a daily basis.

Miscellaneous Programmes

NRK Sápmi’s programme schedule on radio and TV is intended to inform, develop, challenge and entertain its’ targeted public. The proffered broadcasts should also aspire to reach the attention of a large part of the general public. The radio programme schedule should be varied, reflecting Sami society at large. It is important that the broadcasts reach both large and smaller target groups. Besides news and commentaries NRK Sápmi presents a wide range of programmes, eg: Cultural programmes, Service and entertainment programmes,

Documentaries and debate programmes, and programmes for children and youth.

NRK Sápmi offers children’s TV-programmes in the Sami language four times a week (Mánáid-TV), and 10-15 TV documentaries and cultural programmes per year. As in its news coverage, it is important that NRK Sápmi’s general programme schedule reflects and develops the Sami peoples’ affinity to and cohesion with other indigenous peoples around the world.

DAB Broadcasts

Since late 1999 NRK Sápmi has been broadcasting test transmissions on the digital net (DAB). These broadcasts may be heard in areas with DAB coverage. DAB radio may also be received by listeners with dish antennas. Furthermore, all digital programme signals from NRK Sápmi may be received on NRK Radio transmissions on Internet.

Internet News Site and Teletext

NRK Sápmi features news on specially designated Internet

pages, www.nrk.no/sapmi. Here, updated current news

is presented in Sami and Norwegian. NRK Sápmi also

publishes updated news on it’s own Teletext-pages: http://nrk.no/tekst-tv/480/

Local Offices

Useful Dates