NRK - Norwegian Broadcasting Corporation - is the public service broadcaster in Norway.

The objective of public service broadcasting is to provide the entire population with access to a broad range of content.

The Broadcasting Act authorises NRK to engage in broadcast activities. NRK is public financed (97 %) by a individual tax everybody in Norway have to pay.

The NRK’s public service remit is set out in the NRK placard, which is incorporated into NRK’s articles of association.

The Norwegian Broadcasting Corporation (NRK) offers the Norwegian public a wide range of content with three national TV-channels, 14 national radio-channels and the website nrk.no.

See:

NRK's Organization

Norwegian Broadcasting Cooperation - NRK - Organization Chart - main structure

NRK's Corporate Strategy

NRK should be a World-Class Publisher and Content Producer, its said in the Corporate Strategy toward 2024.

Read more: NRK - Corporate Strategy

Norway’s biggest mediahouse

NRK is Norway’s biggest mediahouse. The broadcaster is state-owned and the Parliament (Stortinget) has given the mandate and the owner-role to the Ministry of Culture.

NRK has been given a special mandate to be a non-commercial, politically independent public broadcaster.

Around 3 400 employees situated in around 50 departments throughout Norway work for NRK. The main office is located at Marienlyst, Oslo. In Tromsø, Trondheim and Bergen NRK have bigger regional centres.

Guided by its public service remit, NRK does not serve any commercial or political interests, and provides strictly non-commercial programming, with no advertising apart from the sponsorship of some cultural and sporting events.

Almost nine out of ten use NRK

On any average day in 2019 89 percent of the population in Norway used one or more of NRK's services on television, radio, text-TV, web or mobile.

NRK's challenge has been to connect with the 12 - 29 age groups, and to audiences of immigrant origin. By consciously working with a multi-platform content strategy, NRK has improved its penetration in these audience groups.

NRK1 is the biggest television channel in Norway.

The overall TV viewing is falling, the average Norwegian watched two hours of television every day in 2019 - ten years ago it was around tree.

NRK's radio channels have a combined market share of 66 percent in 2017. NRK P1 is the biggest radio channel in Norway.

Mobile platforms exploding

When traditional use of radio and television have stable support among the public, the use of content on mobile platforms are increasing very quick these days.

The website nrk.no is the second biggest website in Norway.

What NRK can offer

NRK deliver reliable and unbiased news, information and documentaries; NRK offer entertainment, sport and other mainstream content; a wide range of programs based on quality, relevance and credibility.

NRK has an important objective around analysing and decoding the news, not least through discussion and debate.

Decentralising the NRK is crucial in order to represent Norwegian society in content production. NRK has 10 regional offices across the country including three large production centres in Tromsø, Trondheim and Bergen, who hold responsibility for key genre areas such as science, belief and nature.

The regional offices deliver daily regional content on radio, television and online, ensuring a central core of NRK's network output is made in different parts of the country.

As well as news and coverage of current affairs, this crucially also applies to content for children, belief, entertainment and stories about everyday life. This gives a wider range of colour to programmes, strengthening the representation of children and adults throughout the country.

The NRK reflects the geographical diversity of Norway, provides a range of local programs and maintains a local presence.

Quality content

NRK takes upon itself the special responsibility of providing quality content for children, the young and for minorities. It helps to strengthen Norwegian and Sami language, identity and culture. A large proportion of this provision is rooted in Norway and reflects Norwegian realities.

NRK’s channels

Television channels

NRK’s television objectives form a three-channel strategy.

NRK1 is Norway’s biggest channel. It is varied and broad, and is intended to give Norwegian people shared understanding and great experiences across news, sport, drama, entertainment and documentaries.

NRK2 offers specialised knowledge, culture and current affairs. The channel offers a variety of thematic initiative, via theme nights or over longer seasons.

NRK3 focuses on innovative Norwegian content and developing new talent. NRK3 has worked hard to develop several Norwegian series, and in 2012 the channel had great success with Norwegian productions.

Along with NRK P3, mP3 and initiatives from nrk.no, NRK3 provides content that is relevant for the younger age groups. NRK3 shares a channel with NRK Super, NRK’s children’s channel with a vision to create a world where children grow up and are important.

Radio digitisation

As the first country in the world Norway became the first country in the World to end nationwide FM radio in 2017.

The switch off all nationwide FM-stations followed up the radio digitisation mandate issued by the Storting (The Norwegian Parliament).

Whereas the FM system only had space for five national channels, DAB offers around 25, and there is capacity for almost 20 more.

Read more: Radio digitisation in 2017

NRK has 14 radio channels.

NRK P1 is Norway’s largest radio station, both in audience figures and in broadcasting hours. Editorial centres in Trondheim, Oslo, Bergen and the district offices now reach a broad over-30s audience.

NRK P1 should unite people and give listeners shared experiences. The channel focuses on news, local journalism, music, current affairs, sport, traditions and entertainment.

NRK P2 is specialist channel for culture and society, offering, amongst others, news and debate with background and analysis throughout the day.

NRK P2 aims to develop a modern and inviting tone, to ensure both experienced and loyal P2 listeners plus the new and younger audiences find the channel attractive and relevant. The channel has adopted systematic promotion of its content both on its own channel and on NRK P1.

NRK P3 is the youth radio station, focusing on new music, humours and entertainment and the reality of being young.

The target audience is young people in Norway between the ages of 15 and 30. P3 has an important role as an ambassador for new Norwegian music.

Through live broadcasts of "P3sessions" and "Urørt" (unsigned), NRK P3 brings more Norwegian artists to the limelight each year. NRK P3 will also be where young people are, delivering content from the main Norwegian music festivals.

NRK Alltid Nyheter is offering news, from BBC late evenings and nights, NRK P1+ is for plus 55-audience, NRK Sport offers sport and music and NRK Super is the childrens radio channel.

Listen to all channels, listen to podcasts and find a lot of content on NRK Radio at radio.nrk.no.