Largest media organization in Norway to use WSC Sports platform to automate real-time highlights for Euro 2020

WSC Sports, the global leader in artificial intelligence (AI)-driven sports video technology, today announced it will be working with NRK Sport, the sports division of NRK, the Norwegian state-owned public broadcasting company and largest media organization in Norway, to bring automated real-time video highlights of the Euro 2020 action to fans across the region.

NRK will be using WSC Sports’ full suite of tools to deliver the most innovative Euro viewing experience for the Norwegian public, sharing highlights of key plays and players across NRK’s digital and social media assets. The partnership will also include one of WSC Sports latest offerings that automatically creates Stories for Google’s OneBox, the first search result in Google, that will help them drive traffic to NRK’s website and other digital products while making NRK content more accessible than ever before.

WSC Sports’ platform enables NRK to create and distribute customized video highlights that automatically create a personalized fan experience that delivers the most from live sport events, changing the way fans consume and engage with content during the Euros. NRK will be utilizing new WSC Sports’ features including Live Stories which allows NRK to publish content in stories format for better mobile experiences. In addition, NRK will be launching a live ticker on its website that will feature highlights of key play-by-plays throughout the games.

“We are excited to bring WSC Sports’ AI-powered technology to NRK to help them create the best fan-viewing experience for the Euros this year. We are particularly looking forward to helping NRK deliver its sports content for the first time ever in story format through Google OneBox with the rollout of WSC Sports Stories.” said Ido Ratzon, Business Development at WSC Sports

About WSC Sports

WSC Sports’ proprietary AI technology platform automates the creation and distribution of highlights for over 150 leagues and broadcast partners across the globe, including the NBA, NHL, ESPN, YouTubeTV, Bundesliga, FIBA and Bleacher Report.

Utilizing advanced AI and Machine Learning technologies the WSC Sports platform analyzes live sports broadcasts, identifies each and every event that occurs in a game, and in real-time creates and publishes customized short-form videos. This enables sports media rights owners to maximize the use of their content, creating new revenue streams and a personalized fan experience on every platform for every type of fan.