Princess Marie of Denmark (née Marie Agathe Odile Cavallier; born 6 February 1976) is the second wife of Prince Joachim of Denmark, with whom she has two children, Prince Henrik and Princess Athena.

Early Life[]

Marie was born on 6 February 1976 in Paris, France.

She has two older, maternal half-brothers, Benjamin and Gregory Grandet. She also has two younger, paternal half-brothers, Charles and Edouard Cavallier.

Education[]

Marie's parents divorced, and she was sent to the Collège Alpin International Beau Soleil boarding school in Switzerland. She attended Babson College in Wellesley, Massachusetts to study international business and economics, and then went on to study economics in Geneva. Marie earned a Bachelor of Arts at Marymount Manhattan College.

In addition to French, Marie speaks English, Spanish, Italian, and Danish.

Career[]

In 1994, while still in college, Marie worked for Estée Lauder as the assistant to the public relations manager. She also worked as an assistant to the managing director of ING Numismatic Group SA in Geneva.

After graduating, Marie started working as an international marketing coordinator for DoubleClick Inc, an international advertising agency in New York. Back in France, she worked for advertising agency Media Marketing. Marie then worked for Reuters' financial news agency Radianz in Switzerland, took a position with REInvest in Geneva, and worked as executive secretary in ING Numismatic Group SA until her engagement.

Personal Life[]

Marriage[]

Dating

In August 2005, Marie first came to public attention when she was photographed on a private holiday in Avignon, France, with Prince Joachim of Denmark.

She celebrated the 2006/2007 New Year with Joachim, his former wife Countess Alexandra, and their sons Prince Nikolai and Prince Felix, as well as close friends.

In January 2007, Marie accompanied Joachim and his children on a skiing holiday in Switzerland. Later that year, she joined the royal family for Easter at Marselisborg Palace, where she met Joachim's mother, Margrethe II, for the first time. Marie then started making weekend visits to Denmark from Geneva.

Engagement

Main article: Engagement of Prince Joachim of Denmark and Marie Cavallier

On 3 October 2007, the Danish Royal Court officially announced that Marie and Joachim were engaged.

Wedding

Main article: Wedding of Prince Joachim of Denmark and Marie Cavallier

On 24 May 2008, the couple were married at Møgeltønder Church in Møgeltønder.

In connection with the marriage, Marie became a Princess of Denmark and Countess of Monpezat. She also gave up her French citizenship and changed from Roman Catholic to Lutheran.

Children[]

Marie and Joachim have two children, Count Henrik, born 4 May 2009, and Countess Athena, born 24 January 2012.

Marie is also stepmother to Joachim's sons from his first marriage, Count Nikolai and Count Felix.

Godchildren[]

Marie has multiple godchildren.

Tanguy Peretti, born 2000. Son of Marie's cousin Sonia Dollfus Peretti and her husband Gabriel Peretti.

Sofie Agnete Davidsen Siesbye, born 2009. Daughter of Oscar and Britt Davidsen Siesbye.

Agathe Anna Steenstrup, born 2009. Daughter of Peter and Henriette Steenstrup.

Nicholas Christian Iuel Bendtner, born December 2010. Son of Caroline Fleming and Nicklas Bendtner.

Princess Josephine of Denmark, born 8 January 2011.

Interests[]

Marie is an avid sportswoman and has a passion for biking, skiing, and racing.

Public Life[]

Activities[]

Committees[]

Patronages[]

Tønder Festival, 2009

An international folk music festival near Marie and Joachim's official residence, Schackenborg Castle.

Annual Literature Prize, 2009

Awarded for French-language literature in Copenhagen. Marie took over this patronage from the then-Prince Consort.

Syddansk Universitet, September 2009

Danish National Commission for UNESCO, 17 November 2009

Danish Ski Federation, January 2010

The AIDS Foundation

Autism Denmark

Danish Epilepsy Association and Kattegatcentret

Titles, Styles, & Arms[]

6 February 1976 - 24 May 2008: Miss Marie Agathe Odile Cavallier

24 May 2008 - present: Her Royal Highness Princess Marie of Denmark, Countess of Monpezat

Honours[]

References[]

Template:Danish princesses by marriage