This Policy describes the types of Personal Information that Zimmer Biomet collects, how we may use and disclose that Personal Information, and how you may exercise your rights regarding our processing of your Personal Information. This Policy applies to the Personal Information that is collected or processed by us online and in other situations where you interact with us. Specifically, when you visit any online portal, website or mobile application where this Policy is posted (individually and collectively referred to in the Policy as the “Website” or “Websites”), this Policy applies. This Policy also applies to Personal Information that is collected or processed when you interact with us by means other than our Websites, including, Personal Information collected in-person, by telephone, or by mail and where you are not provided a more specific privacy notice at the beginning of our relationship or, in the case of a single interaction, at the time of our interaction. For example, you may engage Zimmer Biomet and provide your information to us in-person when you attend a conference, pursue employment with us, make a complaint to us by phone or mail, or interact with us in other ways.

Zimmer Biomet has other unique privacy policies that apply to certain specific situations, such as privacy notices directed to our hospital, medical scanning facilities, and other similar healthcare provider customers, our suppliers, and others for various specific circumstances. To the extent those policies or notices apply and conflict with this Policy, those policies govern our interactions with you.

If you are a healthcare provider, including hospital, medical treatment or scanning facility personnel or one of their representatives, that is a Zimmer Biomet customer or acting on behalf of a Zimmer Biomet customer and you provide patient information (for example, health or treatment information including x-rays or medical images that relate to an individual) to Zimmer Biomet in any manner, including over any Website that links to this Policy, please note that you are responsible for obtaining any consent required under applicable laws from the relevant individual before providing, uploading, or posting the information. In addition, you are responsible for complying with all applicable privacy laws.

Please carefully review this Policy. To the extent permitted by applicable law, by providing us your Personal Information or otherwise interacting with us, you are agreeing to this Policy.

The Zimmer Biomet subsidiary or affiliate with whom you are interacting or who owns and operates the Website or online service that you are visiting is, where applicable, the data controller responsible for the collection and use of your Personal Information. A list of the data controllers can be found in Appendix 1 to this Policy, which is available here and contact details can be found in the Contact Us section at the end of this Policy.

Personal Information

“Personal Information” (also referred to as “Personal Data” in some jurisdictions) is any information that can be used to identify an individual or that we can link directly to an individual, such as name, address, email address, telephone number or credit card number, as applicable. Personal Information, in some jurisdictions, can even include information that indirectly identifies a person – such as a unique number assigned to a patient by a medical facility or healthcare professional, even absent other identifying information. Health and treatment information pertaining to an identified or identifiable individual is a form of Personal Information that, in this Policy, we call Special Personal Information (“Special Personal Information”). We will process any Special Personal Information and Personal Information we collect in accordance with applicable law and as explained in this Policy (unless, as explained above, one of our other policies governs). If you do not want to provide us with this information, certain products, services, or features of the Websites may be unavailable to you.

Below is a summary of how we collect and use Personal Information:

We may disclose the above categories of information for business purposes described in the Using and Sharing the Information We Collect section of this Policy.

Examples of instances where we collect Personal Information, include if you:

register for an account for one of our services or events;

sign up for newsletters or other informational or marketing materials;

participate in our events, conferences, or trainings, including surgery trainings and product demonstrations;

ask us a question by contacting us at the information provided in the Contact Us section of the Website;

apply for employment with us;

interact with us as a customer, supplier, or business partner or an employee or representative of same, including if you provide information about your customers or patients;

respond to our surveys or questionnaires;

make a complaint to us or to our customers about us and we receive your information from them; or

purchase our products or services.

The information we collect is typically related to the product or service requested, such as name and contact details, the nature of the product or service requested, and related information so that we may fulfill requests and respond to them. For example, if you apply for a job with Zimmer Biomet, the information collected will include your qualifications for the position, your education, applicable licenses or certifications, prior job history, references, and any other information that you choose to include about yourself. Similarly, if you contact our customer service telephone number for assistance, the information collected may include your name, contact details, a description of your experience with a certain product or service, and any other information that you choose to disclose about yourself.

We may be required by law to collect certain Personal Information about you or as a consequence of any contractual relationship we have with you. Failure to provide this information may prevent or delay the fulfillment of these obligations.

Occasionally, Zimmer Biomet may invite you to participate in a survey or poll, for example, to provide feedback on our services or products.

Cookies and Similar Tools

Also when you visit the Websites, we, like many websites, may use “cookies,” web beacons and other technologies on our Websites to help us serve users better, and to help us evaluate and improve the content or functions of our site. A cookie is a unique numeric code that we transfer to your computer so that we can keep track of your interests and/or preferences and, among other things, recognize you as a return visitor to our Websites. Web beacons are small pieces of code placed on our Websites that allow us to obtain information about website usage.

Common uses for cookies include:

Identifying visitors who have signed into a protected website to avoid users having to submit a user name and password for every page;

Keeping track of visitors’ preferences regarding the content they would like to see and the format in which they would like to view it so they don’t need to resubmit the preferences every time they visit the site;

Keeping track of which pages visitors request to make improvements to site content and navigation;

Engaging in analytics about how the Websites are used; and

Collecting information about visitors’ online activities over time and across different websites when they use the Websites.

If you prefer not to receive cookies from this Website set your browser to refuse all cookies from this and other websites that you may visit. This will provide you with more control over the acceptance of cookies on your computer. However, it is possible that some portions of the Websites will not function properly or may perform more slowly if you choose to reject cookies. By using our Websites and not disabling cookies, you consent to their use. We may also provide additional options for your choices regarding cookies on the Websites.

For more information on our use of cookies, please see the Zimmer Biomet Websites Cookie Policy at www.zimmerbiomet.com/cookies-policy.html.

Your browser may offer you a “Do Not Track” option, which allows you to signal to operators of websites and web applications and services (including behavioral advertising services) that you do not wish such operators to track certain of your online activities over time and across different websites. While we might engage in such tracking, our Websites do not support Do Not Track requests at this time.

Zimmer Biomet uses the information we collect: to communicate with you, to provide our products and services to you; to customize or personalize content for you; to identify and authenticate you; to improve our products and services, including the content on our Websites; to market to you; and for administrative purposes, system security, product development, and research.

We may share the information that we collect, including your Personal Information, among our affiliates, subsidiaries, and related companies, as well as with certain third parties that assist us in providing the products or services that you request or improving our marketing or administration. These may include companies that provide analytics to us about use of our products and services, including your use of our Websites, so that we can evaluate those analytics and continue to improve our products and services. Because we operate as part of a global business, the recipients referred to above may be located outside the jurisdiction in which you are located (or in which we provide the services).

To the extent that Personal Information and Special Personal Information is transferred out of the country where you, or other individual whose information is provided to us, lives, such as to Zimmer Biomet companies in other countries, including in the United States, there may be different standards that apply to how your Personal Information may be used and protected. Zimmer Biomet has put in place appropriate safeguards, in accordance with applicable legal requirements, to ensure that Personal Information is adequately safeguarded and protected, irrespective of the standards in the country where your Personal Information may be transferred. This includes obtaining written assurances from any third parties, such as service providers, given access to your Personal Information, so as to require them to adopt standards that ensure an equivalent level of protection for data as that adopted by Zimmer Biomet. Should you wish to know more about how Personal Information and Special Personal Information are protected please contact privacy.emea@zimmerbiomet.com.

From time to time, we will provide aggregate statistics about our customers (including their customers), sales, online traffic patterns, and related information to reputable third parties, who help us improve our business and services. These aggregate statistics do not include any personally identifying information. Anonymized or de-identified and aggregated information may also be shared with third parties for other purposes, including the optimization of your web browsing experience and for reports on industry or company trends.

We also may use or disclose information to third parties, such as law enforcement agencies and government authorities, when we have a good faith belief that disclosure is necessary in order to protect the legal rights, safety, and security of Zimmer Biomet, our affiliates, or our business partners; to respond to and resolve claims or complaints; to prevent fraud; for risk management purposes; and to comply with or respond to law enforcement, a legal process, or a request for cooperation by a government or other regulatory entity.

In the event that we sell, assign, or transfer all or part of the Zimmer Biomet business or its assets, we may transfer your information, including Personal Information, to the buyer, assignee, or transferee that is a party to that transaction. However, the buyer, assignee, or transferee will be required to safeguard Personal Information in a manner that is consistent with the requirements in this Policy. In such situations, your continued use certain products or services may signify your agreement to be bound by the privacy policy and other applicable terms of the subsequent owner or operator.

Zimmer Biomet takes reasonable steps to ensure that Personal Information is accurate and up-to-date for the purposes for which it was collected. We encourage you to contact us to update or correct your information if it changes or if you believe any information that we have collected about you is inaccurate. You can also ask us to erase, restrict, or port your Personal Information and you may tell us if you object to our use of your Personal Information. Consistent with legal requirements and limitations, Zimmer Biomet will comply with reasonable requests to obtain a copy of Personal Information that we hold about you where applicable law requires we do so.

If you are a resident of California, you may have the following rights:

Right to access Personal Information;

Right to data portability;

Right to deletion;

Right to disclosure: Users exercising this right can receive additional information regarding the sources from which we collect Personal Information, the purposes for which we collect and share Personal Information, the Personal Information of theirs we hold, and the categories of parties with whom we share their Personal Information;

Right to be free from discrimination on account of exercise of these rights;

Please note that we do not “sell” Personal Information for monetary or other valuable consideration, including the personal information of minors under 16 years of age.

To exercise your rights, please write to us at privacy.emea@zimmerbiomet.com or Zimmer Biomet, Attn: Global Privacy Officer, P.O. Box 708, 1800 West Center Street, Warsaw, Indiana 46581-0708 USA. If you are a California resident, you may also submit your request here, via telephone at 844-922-2721, or via an authorized agent. If you use an authorized agent, we will require that the agent demonstrate that they are registered with the California secretary of state and have the authority to act on your behalf. Please note that we will require sufficient information for us to identify records responsive to your request. We may, after receiving your request, require additional information from you in order to honor the request.

If you are located in the Asia Pacific region, please contact the relevant data protection officer for your country listed at Appendix 2 to this Policy via the contact details set out therein.

If you are concerned about how your Personal Information is used, please email us or contact us at the address below. Alternatively you may have a right to complain to your local data protection authority (if one exists in your country).