This Notice describes the types of Personal Data that Zimmer Biomet may collect or process, how we may use and disclose that Personal Data, and how you may exercise any rights you may have regarding the processing of your Personal Data. This Notice applies to Personal Data collected or processed by us online (through websites, applications, and otherwise), when we provide products or services to you, your doctor, hospital, medical treatment or scanning facility, or other healthcare provider (collectively, “Healthcare Provider,” which refers both to the Healthcare Provider institution, organization, or company, and individuals employed by or working for or with such organization), or your patients, and in other situations where you interact with us, including anywhere this Notice is posted or referenced (products, services, websites, and other systems will be referred to in this Notice as “Products and Services”). This Notice also applies to Personal Data that is collected or processed when you interact with us in-person, by telephone, or by mail.

齐默Biomet可能有其他独特的隐私通知s that apply to certain specific situations, such as privacy notices for specific Products and Services in various specific circumstances. To the extent you were provided with a different privacy notice or policy and those policies or notices apply, those policies or notices will govern our interactions with you, not this one.

If you provide Personal Data of anyone other than yourself, please note that you are responsible for complying with all applicable privacy and data protection laws prior to providing that information to Zimmer Biomet (including obtaining consent, if necessary and required).

Please carefully review this Notice. To the extent permitted by applicable law, by providing us your Personal Data or otherwise interacting with us, you are agreeing to this Notice.

The Zimmer Biomet subsidiary or affiliate with whom you, your Healthcare Provider, or your patient is interacting or who owns and operates the Product or Service is, where applicable, the entity responsible for the collection and use of your Personal Data (known in some jurisdictions as the data controller). A list of the data controllers and contact details can be found in Appendix 1 to this Notice.

Personal Data

“个人资料”的任何信息,可以使用d to identify an individual or that we can link directly to an individual, such as name, address, email address, telephone number, credit card number, or health or treatment information, as applicable. Personal Data in some jurisdictions can include information that indirectly identifies a person – such as a unique number assigned to a patient by a Healthcare Provider, even absent other identifying information. Please note that, for patients, as described below, we often receive information about you from your Healthcare Provider.

Some examples of instances where we collect Personal Data include if you:

register for an account for one of our Products or Services;

sign up for newsletters or other informational or marketing materials;

participate in our events, conferences, or trainings, including surgery trainings and Product and Service demonstrations;

ask us a question by contacting us;

apply for employment with us;

interact with us as a customer, vendor, supplier, or business partner or an employee or representative of same, including if you provide information about your customers or patients;

respond to our surveys or questionnaires;

make a complaint to us or to our customers about us; or

purchase, use, or receive our Products or Services.

We will process any Personal Data we collect in accordance with applicable law and as explained in this Notice (unless, as explained above, one of our other policies or notices governs). In some circumstances, if you do not want to provide us with your information, certain Products and Services may be unavailable to you.

Below is a summary of how we may collect, process, and use Personal Data and the potential recipients of your Personal Data, now and over the past twelve months. Some jurisdictions require us to state the legal bases for processing your Personal Data, which is included below, but please note that not all jurisdictions may recognize all legal bases.

Cookies and Similar Tools

当你访问齐默Biomet网站或应用ons, we may use “cookies,” web beacons, and other technologies to help us serve users better and to help us evaluate and improve the content or functions of the Products or Services. A cookie is a small piece of data (a unique numeric code) sent from a website or application and stored on a user’s device while the user is browsing the website or using the application. Cookies do lots of different jobs, like identifying previous activity so that your use of the Product or Service is more efficient and enjoyable, remembering your preferences (like language choices), and authenticating you.

****Geolocation information may be either provided by you or collected automatically for the legitimate business interest of running and maintain the website. This information may include your IP address and/or geographic location (such as longitude, latitude, city, state, and/or zip code).

Common uses for cookies include:

identifying users who have signed into a Product or Service to avoid users having to submit a user name and password repeatedly;

keeping track of users' preferences regarding the content they would like to see and the format in which they would like to view it so they do not need to resubmit preferences;

keeping track of which pages users’ request to make improvements to site content and navigation;

engaging in analytics about how the Products or Services are used; and

collecting information about users’ activities over time and across different websites or applications while using the website or application.

Web beacons (also known as internet tags, pixel tags, and clear GIFs) are small pieces of code that may be placed on our websites or other Products and Services that allow us to obtain information about usage. Web beacons cannot identify you as an individual and are used to help display content to visitors and to generate statistics regarding web traffic and trends.

If you would like to opt-out or withdraw consent to use non-essential cookies and related technologies, you can set your web browser to prevent the use of cookies from Zimmer Biomet websites, as well as other websites that you may visit (seewww.aboutcookies.orgfor more information on how to do this). If you do so, you can still use Zimmer Biomet Products and Services, but it is possible that some portions of the Products and Services will not function properly or may perform more slowly. You may also be able to opt-out / withdraw consent to use non-essential cookies and related technologies by clicking the “Preferences” button at the bottom of this Product or Service. Except where prohibited by law, by using our Products and Services and not disabling cookies, you consent to their use.

For more information on our use of cookies, web beacons, and similar technologies, please see theZimmer Biomet Cookie Notice.

Under your jurisdiction’s data protection law, you may exercise the following rights with respect to some or all of your Personal Data:

to request access to your Personal Data (including under GDPR Article 15);

to request that we rectify or erase your Personal Data (including under GDPR Articles 16 and 17);

to request that we restrict or block the processing of your Personal Data (including under GDPR Articles 18, 21 and 22);

to provide your Personal Data directly to another, i.e., a right to data portability (including under GDPR Article 20); and

when we previously obtained your consent, to withdraw consent to processing (including under GDPR Article 21).

Zimmer Biomet will not discriminate against you for exercising your rights.

To exercise these rights, please submit a request using thePrivacy Request Form, write atprivacy.nam@zimmerbiomet.comor for the US only, call us at 1-844-922-2721. Alternatively, you can find the relevant contact details for your country of residence in Appendix 1 to this Notice.

Please note that we may require additional information from you or your authorized agent to honor your request and may deny your request if we cannot verify your identity or status.

If you are concerned about how your Personal Data is used, please email us or contact us. You may also have the right to lodge a complaint against us. To do so, contact your local data protection authority (if one exists in your country).

If you have an unresolved privacy or data use concern that we have not addressed satisfactorily, please contact our U.S.-based third party dispute resolution provider (free of charge) athttps://feedback-form.truste.com/watchdog/request.

Please be aware that Personal Data we collect and process may be transferred and maintained outside your state, province, country, or other jurisdiction, where the privacy laws may not be as protective as those in your location, including the United States. In particular, Zimmer Biomet may disclose Personal Data to the countries listed in Appendix 1, the list of data controllers. Zimmer Biomet has put in place safeguards, in accordance with applicable legal requirements, to protect your Personal Data irrespective of the standards in the country where your Personal Data may be transferred. This includes entering into agreements with third parties, such as service providers, to require them to adopt standards that ensure an equivalent level of protection for data as those we adopt.

Zimmer Biomet’s privacy practices, described in this Privacy Policy, comply with the APEC Cross Border Privacy Rules System. The APEC CBPR system provides a framework for organizations to ensure protection of personal information transferred among participating APEC economies. More information about the APEC framework can be found here:www.cbprs.org.

If you are located in Japan, the following sections also apply to you:

Joint Use of Personal Data

Zimmer Biomet may use your Personal Data jointly with any subsidiary or affiliate of Zimmer Biomet Holdings, Inc. as described here. Personal Data subject to joint use: The personal information indicated in “Information Collection.” Range of joint users: Zimmer Biomet Holdings, Inc., and its subsidiaries and affiliates (Please refer to Appendix 1 for the specific names of the subsidiaries and affiliates.) Joint users’ purposes of use: The purposes described in “Information Collection.” Party responsible for managing your Personal Data: Zimmer Biomet Holdings, Inc.

Acquisition of Personally Referable Information:

Zimmer Biomet may acquire personally referable information (for example, browsing history, purchase history, service usage history, OS and other device information, cookie IDs, advertising identifiers, IP addresses, and other online identifiers) obtained from other companies, such as advertising companies, affiliates, and companies that are related to advertising things such as DMP companies, as Personal Data by linking it to the Personal Data that Zimmer Biomet already possess and use such personally referable information in accordance with the purposes of use described in “Information Collection.”