Table of Contents

As filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on March 28, 2014

Registration No. 333-

UNITED STATES

SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION

Washington, D.C. 20549

FORM S-1

REGISTRATION STATEMENT

UNDER

THE SECURITIES ACT OF 1933

BIOMET, INC.

(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)

(see table of additional registrant guarantors below)

56 East Bell Drive

Warsaw, Indiana 46582

(574) 267-6639

(Address, including zip code, and telephone number, including area code, of registrant’s principal executive offices)

Bradley J. Tandy

Senior Vice President, General Counsel and Secretary

Biomet, Inc.

56 East Bell Drive

Warsaw, Indiana 46582

(574) 267-6639

(Name, address, including zip code, and telephone number, including area code, of agent for service)

Approximate date of commencement of proposed sale to the public:

As soon as practicable after this registration statement becomes effective.

If any of the securities being registered on this Form are to be offered on a delayed or continuous basis pursuant to Rule 415 under the Securities Act of 1933 check the following box: x

If this Form is filed to register additional securities for an offering pursuant to Rule 462(b) under the Securities Act, check the following box and list the Securities Act registration statement number of the earlier effective registration statement for the same offering. ¨

If this Form is a post-effective amendment filed pursuant to Rule 462(c) under the Securities Act, check the following box and list the Securities Act registration statement number of the earlier effective registration statement for the same offering. ¨

If this Form is a post-effective amendment filed pursuant to Rule 462(d) under the Securities Act, check the following box and list the Securities Act registration statement number of the earlier effective registration statement for the same offering. ¨

Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, or a smaller reporting company. See the definitions of “large accelerated filer,” “accelerated filer,” and “smaller reporting company” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act.

Large accelerated filer ¨ Accelerated filer ¨ Non-accelerated filer x (Do not check if a smaller reporting company) Smaller reporting company ¨

CALCULATION OF REGISTRATION FEE

Title of each class of

securities to be registered

Amount to be

registered

Proposed maximum

offering price

per unit

Proposed maximum

aggregate

offering price(1) Amount of

registration fee(2)

6.500% Senior Notes due 2020

(1) (1) (1) (1)

Guarantees of 6.500% Senior Notes due 2020(3)

(1)(3) (1)(3) (1)(3) (1)(3)

6.500% Senior Subordinated Notes due 2020

(1) (1) (1) (1)

Guarantees of 6.500% Senior Subordinated Notes due 2020(3)

(1)(3) (1)(3) (1)(3) (1)(3)

(1) An indeterminate amount of securities are being registered hereby to be offered solely for market-making purposes by specified affiliates of the registrants. Pursuant to Rule 457(q) under the Securities Act of 1933, no filing fee is required. This registration statement includes securities that had previously been registered under the registrant’s market-making shelf registration statement on Form S-1 (333-188262) initially filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on May 1, 2013 and amended from time to time thereafter (the “Previous Registration Statement”). In connection with the registration of such securities on the Previous Registration Statement, the registrant was not required to pay a filing fee pursuant to Rule 457(q). In accordance with Rule 429 of the Securities Act, the offering of any securities registered under the Previous Registration Statement will be deemed terminated as of the date of effectiveness of this registration statement.

(2) Each of Biomet, Inc.’s wholly-owned domestic subsidiaries jointly, severally and unconditionally guarantees the 6.500% Senior Notes due 2020 on a senior unsecured basis, and the 6.500% Senior Subordinated Notes due 2020 on a senior subordinated unsecured basis, in each case to the extent such subsidiaries guarantee our senior secured credit facilities. See inside facing page for table of additional registrant guarantors.

(3) Pursuant to Rule 457(n) under the Securities Act, no separate fee is payable for the registration of the Guarantees.

The registrant hereby amend this Registration Statement on such date or dates as may be necessary to delay its effective date until the registrant shall file a further amendment which specifically states that this Registration Statement shall thereafter become effective in accordance with Section 8(a) of the Securities Act of 1933 or until the Registration Statement shall become effective on such date as the SEC, acting pursuant to said Section 8(a), may determine.

Table of Contents

TABLE OF ADDITIONAL REGISTRANT GUARANTORS

Table of Contents

Table of Contents

EXPLANATORY NOTE

This Registration Statement relates to the previously filed a Registration Statement on Form S-1 (File No. 333-188262) (the “Previous Registration Statement”) of Biomet, Inc. (“Biomet”). Biomet filed the Previous Registration Statement to register the following securities issued by Biomet and guaranteed by the guarantors named in the Registration Statement: $1,825,000,000 6.500% Senior Notes due 2020 (the “Senior Notes”) and $800,000,000 6.500% Senior Subordinated Notes due 2020 (the “Senior Subordinated Notes”). There were no applicable registration fees required to be paid at the time of the original filing of the Previous Registration Statement.

This Registration Statement has two purposes:

• First, to register subsidiary guarantees of the Senior Notes and the Senior Subordinated Notes by certain additional subsidiaries (the “Additional Subsidiary Guarantors”) of Biomet, and to include the Additional Subsidiary Guarantors as registrants; and

• Second, to update the Previous Registration Statement pursuant to Section 10(a)(3) of the Securities Act to incorporate by reference the consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto included in Biomet Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2013 and to update certain other information in the Registration Statement.

Pursuant to Rule 429 under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, this Registration Statement, upon effectiveness, will serve as a post-effective amendment to the Previous Registration Statement.

Table of Contents

The information in this preliminary prospectus is not complete and may be changed. These securities may not be sold until the registration statement filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission is effective. This preliminary prospectus is not an offer to sell nor does it seek an offer to buy these securities in any jurisdiction where the offer or sale is not permitted.

SUBJECT TO COMPLETION, DATED MARCH 28, 2014

PRELIMINARY PROSPECTUS

$1,825,000,000 6.500% Senior Notes due 2020

$800,000,000 6.500% Senior Subordinated Notes due 2020

NOTES OFFERED

• $1,825.0 million of our 6.500% Senior Notes due 2020, which we refer to as the senior notes.

• $800.0 million of our 6.500% Senior Subordinated Notes due 2020, which we refer to as the senior subordinated notes. We refer to the senior notes and the senior subordinated notes collectively as the notes.

MATURITY

• The senior notes will mature on August 1, 2020.

• The senior subordinated notes will mature on October 1, 2020.

INTEREST

• Senior notes: Interest is payable in cash and accrues at the rate of 6.500% per annum.

• Senior subordinated notes: Interest is payable in cash and accrues at the rate of 6.500% per annum.

INTEREST PAYMENT DATES

• Senior notes: August 1 and February 1, commencing February 1, 2013.

• Senior subordinated notes: April 1 and October 1, commencing April 1, 2013.

REDEMPTION

• We may redeem some or all of the senior notes on or after August 1, 2015 at redemption prices described in this prospectus.

• We may redeem some or all of the notes on or after October 1, 2015 at redemption prices described in this prospectus.

CHANGE OF CONTROL

• Upon certain change of control events, each holder of notes may require us to purchase all or a portion of such holder’s notes as described in this prospectus.

GUARANTEES

• Each of our existing and future wholly-owned domestic restricted subsidiaries will jointly, severally and unconditionally guarantee the senior notes on a senior unsecured basis and the senior subordinated notes on a senior subordinated unsecured basis, in each case to the extent such subsidiaries guarantee our senior secured credit facilities.

RANKING

• The senior notes and the related guarantees will be our senior unsecured obligations and will rank pari passu in right of payment with all of our existing and future indebtedness that is not expressly subordinated in right of payment thereto; be senior in right of payment to any future indebtedness that is expressly subordinated in right of payment thereto (including our senior subordinated notes); and be effectively junior to our and our guarantors’ existing and future secured indebtedness (including the borrowings under our senior secured credit facilities), to the extent of the value of the collateral securing such indebtedness and to all existing and future liabilities of our non-guarantor subsidiaries.

• The senior subordinated notes will be our senior subordinated unsecured obligations and will rank junior in right of payment with all of our existing and future indebtedness that is not expressly subordinated in right of payment thereto (including the senior notes); rank pari passu in right of payment to any of our existing and future senior subordinated indebtedness and other obligations; and be senior in right of payment to any future subordinated indebtedness and effectively junior to our and our guarantors’ existing and future secured indebtedness (including the borrowings under our senior secured credit facilities), to the extent of the value of the collateral securing such indebtedness and to all existing and future liabilities of our non-guarantor subsidiaries.

See “Risk Factors” beginning on page 7 for a discussion of certain risks that you should consider before investing in the notes.

NEITHER THE SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION NOR ANY STATE SECURITIES COMMISSION HAS APPROVED OR DISAPPROVED OF THESE SECURITIES OR PASSED UPON THE ADEQUACY OR ACCURACY OF THIS PROSPECTUS. ANY REPRESENTATION TO THE CONTRARY IS A CRIMINAL OFFENSE.

This prospectus has been prepared for and may be used by Goldman, Sachs & Co. and any affiliates of Goldman, Sachs & Co. in connection with offers and sales of the notes related to market-making transactions in the notes effected from time to time. Goldman, Sachs & Co. or its affiliates may act as principal or agent in such transactions, including as agent for the counterparty when acting as principal or as agent for both counterparties, and may receive compensation in the form of discounts and commissions, including from both counterparties, when it acts as agents for both. Such sales will be made at prevailing market prices at the time of sale, at prices related thereto or at negotiated prices. We will not receive any proceeds from such sales.

The date of this prospectus is , 2014.

We are responsible for the information contained or incorporated by reference in this prospectus. We have not authorized anyone to provide you with additional information or information different from that contained in this prospectus and we take no responsibility for any other information that others may give you. This prospectus does not offer to sell nor ask for offers to buy any of the securities in any jurisdiction where it is unlawful, where the person making the offer is not qualified to do so, or to any person who cannot legally be offered the securities. You should not assume that the information contained in or incorporated by reference in this prospectus is accurate as of any date other than the date on the front cover of this prospectus or the date of any document incorporated by reference herein.

Table of Contents

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Page

WHERE YOU CAN FIND MORE INFORMATION

i

FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS

ii

MARKET AND INDUSTRY

iii

TERMS USED IN THIS PROSPECTUS

iii

SUMMARY

1

RISK FACTORS

7

USE OF PROCEEDS

17

DESCRIPTION OF SENIOR NOTES

18

DESCRIPTION OF SENIOR SUBORDINATED NOTES

67

FORM, BOOK-ENTRY PROCEDURES AND TRANSFER

121

CERTAIN UNITED STATES FEDERAL INCOME TAX CONSIDERATIONS

123

PLAN OF DISTRIBUTION

125

LEGAL MATTERS

126

EXPERTS

126

INCORPORATION ON CERTAIN DOCUMENTS BY REFERENCE

126

WHERE YOU CAN FIND MORE INFORMATION

We and the guarantors have filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”), a registration statement on Form S-1 under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”) with respect to the notes being offered hereby. This prospectus, which forms a part of the registration statement, does not contain all of the information set forth in the registration statement. For further information with respect to us, the guarantors or the notes, we refer you to the registration statement. We also file annual, quarterly, and current reports and other information with the SEC. The registration statement, such reports and other information can be inspected and copied at the Public Reference Room of the SEC located at Room 1580, 100 F Street, N.E., Washington D.C. 20549. Copies of such materials, including copies of all or any portion of the registration statement, can be obtained from the Public Reference Room of the SEC at prescribed rates. You can call the SEC at 1-800-SEC-0330 to obtain information on the operation of the Public Reference Room. Such materials may also be accessed electronically by means of the SEC’s home page on the Internet (http://www.sec.gov).

Our Internet address is www.biomet.com. There we make available free of charge, on or through the “Investors” section of our Web site, Annual Reports on Form 10-K, Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q, Current Reports on Form 8-K and amendments to those reports filed or furnished pursuant to Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities and Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”), as soon as reasonably practicable after we electronically file such material with, or furnish it to, the SEC. The information found on our Web site, other than as specifically incorporated by reference into this prospectus, does not form a part of this prospectus.

Under the terms of the indentures relating to the notes, we have agreed that, whether or not we are required to do so by the rules and regulations of the SEC, for so long as any of the notes remain outstanding, we will furnish to the trustee and holders of the notes the information specified in the indentures. See “Description of Senior Notes” and “Description of Senior Subordinated Notes.”

i

Table of Contents

FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS

Some of the statements made under the headings “Summary” and elsewhere in this prospectus contain forward-looking statements within the meaning of U.S. federal securities laws, including Section 27A of the Securities Act and Section 21E of the Exchange Act. Statements that are not historical facts, including statements about our beliefs and expectations, are forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements include statements generally preceded by, followed by or that include the words “believe,” “could,” “expect,” “forecast,” “intend,” “may,” “anticipate,” “plan,” “predict,” “possibly,” “project,” “potential,” “estimate,” “should,” “will,” or similar expressions. These statements include, but are not limited to, statements related to:

• the timing and number of planned new product introductions;

• the effect of anticipated changes in the size, health and activities of the population or on the demand for our products;

• assumptions and estimates regarding the size and growth of certain market categories;

• our ability and intent to expand in key international markets;

• the timing and anticipated outcome of clinical studies;

• assumptions concerning anticipated product developments and emerging technologies;

• the future availability of raw materials;

• the anticipated adequacy of our capital resources to meet the needs of our business;

• our continued investment in new products and technologies;

• the ultimate marketability of products currently being developed;

• our ability to successfully implement new technologies and transition certain manufacturing operations, including transitions to China;

• our ability to manage working capital and generate adequate cash flows to service outstanding debt;

• our ability to sustain sales and earnings growth;

• our success in achieving timely approval or clearance of our products with domestic and foreign regulatory entities;

• our success in implementing our operational improvement programs;

• the stability of certain foreign economic markets;

• the effect of foreign currency fluctuations on our results;

• the impact of anticipated changes in the musculoskeletal industry and our ability to react to and capitalize on those changes;

• our ability to successfully implement desired organizational changes;

• the impact of our managerial changes;

• our ability to take advantage of technological advancements;

• our reliance on our private equity stockholders;

• our $5,896.8 million of total indebtedness outstanding as of November 30, 2013, and our ability to incur additional indebtedness in the future; and

• our inability to generate sufficient cash in order to meet our debt service obligations.

Any forward-looking statements contained in this prospectus are based upon our historical performance and on our current plans, estimates and expectations in light of information currently available to us. The inclusion of this forward-looking information should not be regarded as a representation by us, our Principal Stockholders, the underwriters or any other person that the future plans, estimates or expectations contemplated by us will be achieved. Such forward-looking statements are subject to various risks and uncertainties and assumptions relating to our operations, financial results, financial condition, business, prospects, growth strategy and liquidity. Accordingly, there are or will be important factors that could cause our actual results to differ materially from those indicated in these statements. You should not place undue reliance on any forward-looking statement and should consider the following factors, as well as the factors discussed elsewhere in this prospectus, including under “Risk Factors”. We believe that these factors include:

• changes in general economic conditions and interest rates;

• changes in the availability of capital and financing sources;

• changes in competitive conditions and prices in our markets;

• changes to the regulatory environment for our products, including national health care reform;

• the effects of incurring or having incurred a substantial amount of indebtedness under our 6.500% senior notes, 6.500% senior subordinated notes and senior secured credit facilities;

• the effects upon us of complying with the covenants contained in our senior secured credit facilities and the indentures governing our 6.500% senior notes and 6.500% senior subordinated notes;

• restrictions that the terms and conditions of our 6.500% senior notes and 6.500% senior subordinated notes and our senior secured credit facilities may place on our ability to respond to changes in our business or take certain actions;

• changes in the relationship between supply of and demand for our products;

• fluctuations in costs of raw materials and labor;

ii

Table of Contents

• the effect of foreign currency fluctuations on our results;

• changes in other significant operating expenses;

• decreases in sales of our principal product lines;

• slowdowns or inefficiencies in our product research and development efforts;

• increases in expenditures related to increased government regulation of our business;

• developments adversely affecting our sales activities inside or outside the United States;

• decreases in reimbursement levels by our customers, including certain of our foreign government customers that are experiencing financial distress;

• difficulties in transitioning certain manufacturing operations to China and other locations;

• challenges in effectively implementing restructuring and cost saving initiatives;

• increases in cost-containment efforts from managed care organizations and other third-party payors;

• loss of our key management and other personnel or inability to attract such management and other personnel;

• increases in costs of retaining existing independent sales agents of our products;

• potential future goodwill and/or intangible impairment charges;

• inability to obtain, protect or enforce our intellectual property rights;

• unanticipated expenditures related to litigation; and

• failure to comply with the terms of the DPA (as defined elsewhere in this prospectus).

We caution you not to place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements, which speak only as of the date they were made. We do not undertake any obligation to publicly release any revisions to these forward-looking statements to reflect events or circumstances after the date of this prospectus or to reflect the occurrence of unanticipated events.

MARKET AND INDUSTRY DATA

This prospectus includes industry data and forecasts that we obtained from industry and government publications and surveys, studies conducted by third parties, public filings and internal company sources. Industry publications, surveys and forecasts generally state that the information contained therein has been obtained from sources believed to be reliable, but there can be no assurance as to the accuracy or completeness of the included information. Statements as to our ranking, market position and market estimates are based on independent industry publications, government publications, third party forecasts and management’s estimates and assumptions about our markets and our internal research. While we are not aware of any misstatements regarding our market, industry or similar data presented herein, such data involve risks and uncertainties and are subject to change based on various factors, including those discussed in “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and “Risk Factors” in this prospectus.

TERMS USED IN THIS PROSPECTUS

Unless otherwise noted or indicated by the context, in this prospectus:

The term “guarantors”, as of the date of this prospectus with respect to both the senior notes and the senior subordinated notes, means Biomet 3i, LLC, Biomet Biologics, LLC, Biomet Europe Ltd., Biomet Fair Lawn, LLC, Biomet Florida Services, LLC, Biomet International Ltd, Biomet Leasing, Inc., Biomet Manufacturing, LLC, Biomet Microfixation, LLC, Biomet Orthopedics, LLC, Biomet Spine, LLC, Biomet Sports Medicine, LLC, Biomet U.S. Reconstruction, LLC, Biomet Trauma, LLC, Cross Medical Products, LLC, EBI Holdings, LLC, EBI, LLC, EBI Medical Systems, LLC, Electro-Biology, LLC, Implant Innovations Holdings, LLC, Interpore Cross International, LLC, Interpore Spine Ltd., Kirschner Medical Corporation, Lanx, Inc. and Lanx Sales, LLC. However, since each of our current and future wholly owned domestic restricted subsidiaries that is a guarantor of our senior secured credit facilities will fully and unconditionally guarantee the senior notes on a senior unsecured basis and the senior subordinated notes on a senior subordinated unsecured basis, the identities of the guarantors may change from time to time without notice. See “Description of Senior Notes—Guarantees” and “Description of Senior Subordinated Notes—Guarantees.”

The term “senior notes indenture” refers to the Senior Notes Indenture dated as of August 8, 2012 among Biomet, Inc., the Guarantors listed therein and Wells Fargo Bank, National Association and the First Supplemental Indenture, dated as of October 2, 2012 among Biomet, Inc., the Guarantors listed therein and Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, collectively.

The term “senior subordinated notes indenture” refers to the Senior Subordinated Notes Indenture dated as of October 2, 2012 among Biomet, Inc., the Guarantors listed therein and Wells Fargo Bank, National Association.

The term “indentures” refers to the senior notes indenture and senior subordinated notes indenture, collectively.

iii

Table of Contents

The term “senior notes registration rights agreements” refers to each of the registration rights agreements we entered into with the initial purchasers of the original senior notes concurrently with the sales of the original senior notes on August 8, 2012 and October 2, 2012, respectively.

The term “senior subordinated notes registration rights agreement” refers to registration rights agreement we entered into with the initial purchasers of the original senior subordinated notes concurrently with the sale of the original senior subordinated notes on October 2, 2012.

The term “registration rights agreements” refers to the senior notes registration rights agreements and the senior subordinated notes registration rights agreement, collectively.

References to our fiscal years through and including fiscal 2012 are to the twelve months ended on May 31 of such year.

SUMMARY

This summary highlights aspects of our business and the notes. You should, however, carefully read the entire prospectus, including the information presented under the section entitled “Risk Factors” and our consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto incorporated by reference into this prospectus before making an investment decision. This summary contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ significantly from the results discussed in the forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors, including those set forth under “Risk Factors” and “Forward-Looking Statements.”

Unless the context otherwise requires or indicates, references to “Biomet,” “the Company,” “we,” “us” and “our” refer to Biomet, Inc. and its subsidiaries.

Our Company

General

Biomet, Inc., an Indiana corporation incorporated in 1977, is one of the largest orthopedic medical device companies in the United States and worldwide with operations in more than 50 locations throughout the world and distribution in approximately 90 countries. Our principal subsidiaries include Biomet U.S. Reconstruction, LLC; Biomet Orthopedics, LLC; Biomet Manufacturing, LLC; Biomet Europe BV; EBI, LLC; Biomet 3i, LLC; Biomet International Ltd.; Biomet Microfixation, LLC; Biomet Sports Medicine, LLC; Biomet Trauma, LLC; and Biomet Biologics, LLC. We design, manufacture and market surgical and non-surgical products used primarily by orthopedic surgeons and other musculoskeletal medical specialists. We operate in one reportable business segment, musculoskeletal products, which includes the design, manufacture and marketing of products in six major categories: Knees, Hips, Sports, Extremities, Trauma, or S.E.T., Spine, Bone Healing and Microfixation, Dental and Cement, Biologics and Other Products. We have three geographic markets: United States, Europe and International.

Our product categories were changed during fiscal year 2014, the update to the fiscal year 2013 and 2012 sales by product category are as follows:

(in millions) Year Ended

May 31, 2013 Year Ended

May 31, 2012

Net sales by product:

Knees

$ 940.0 $ 941.8

Hips

632.7 633.0

S.E.T.

600.1 361.6

Spine, Bone Healing & Microfixation

408.8 411.5

Dental

257.0 267.7

Cement, Biologics & Other

214.3 222.5

Total

$ 3,052.9 $ 2,838.1

Corporate Information

Biomet is incorporated in the State of Indiana. Our principal executive offices are located at 56 East Bell Drive, Warsaw, Indiana 46582. Our website address is www.biomet.com. The information contained on our website or that can be accessed through our website will not be deemed to be incorporated into this prospectus or the registration statement of which this

1

Table of Contents

prospectus forms a part, and investors should not rely on any such information in deciding whether to purchase the notes. We have included our website address in this prospectus only as an inactive textual reference and do not intend it to be an active link to our website. For additional information, contact our Corporate Communications department at (574) 372-1514.

Ownership and Corporate Structures

LVB Acquisition, Inc., or “Parent,” owns all of our issued and outstanding capital stock. LVB Acquisition Holding, LLC (“Holding”) owns 97.12% of the issued and outstanding capital stock of Parent. Substantially all the equity interests in Holding are owned, directly or indirectly, by a consortium of private equity funds affiliated with The Blackstone Group, Goldman, Sachs & Co., Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Co. and TPG Global, LLC (together with its affiliates, “TPG”), and their co-investors (jointly, the “Sponsors”).

Recent Developments

As of March 3, 2014, we are a defendant in 1,319 product liability lawsuits relating to metal-on-metal hip implants, most of which were filed in 2013. The majority of these cases involve the M2a-Magnum™ hip system, 284 cases involve the M2a-38™ hip system, 45 involve the M2a-Taper™ system, and six involve the M2a-Ringloc™ system. The cases are currently venued in various state and federal courts. The cases in federal court have been consolidated in one multi-district proceeding in the U.S. District Court for the Northern District of Indiana.

On February 3, 2014, we announced the settlement of the Multi-District Litigation entitled MDL 2,391– In Re: Biomet M2A Magnum Hip Implant Product Liability Litigation. As of March 3, 2014, there were 1,231 lawsuits pending in the MDL. Additional lawsuits filed in the MDL by April 15, 2014 may participate in the settlement. We continue to evaluate the inventory of lawsuits in the MDL pursuant to the categories and procedures set forth in the settlement agreement. The final amount of payments under the settlement is uncertain. However, we believe that the payments under the settlement will exhaust our self-insured retention under our insurance program, which is $50.0 million. If this should occur, we would submit an insurance claim for the amount by which ultimate losses under the settlement exceed the self-insured retention amount.

We maintain $100.0 million of third-party insurance coverage. Our insurance carriers have been placed on notice of the claims associated with metal-on-metal hip products that are subject to the settlement and have been placed on notice of the terms of the settlement. As is customary in these situations, certain of our insurance carriers have reserved all rights under their respective policies and could still ultimately deny coverage for some or all of our insurance claims. We continue to believe our contracts with the insurance carriers are enforceable for these claims and the settlement agreement. However, we would be responsible for any amounts that our insurance carriers do not cover or for the amount by which ultimate losses exceed the amount of our third-party insurance coverage. The settlement does not affect certain other claims relating to our metal-on-metal hip products that are pending in various state courts or other claims that may be filed in the future.

Our $50.0 million accrual for contingencies associated with metal-on-metal hip products is unchanged since November 30, 2013. We are currently assessing any necessary adjustments to the current accrual amount to cover the estimated full amount of the settlement, and assessing any potential receivables to be recorded for recoveries from the insurance carriers.

2

Table of Contents

Summary of the Terms of the Notes

The following summary contains basic information about the notes and is not intended to be complete. It does not contain all the information that is important to you. For a more complete understanding of the notes, you should read the section of the prospectus entitled “Description of Senior Notes” and “Description of Senior Subordinated Notes.” For purposes of this summary and the “Description of Senior Notes” and “Description of Senior Subordinated Notes,” references to “the Company,” “Biomet,” “the issuer,” “we,” “our” and “us” refer only to Biomet, Inc. and not to its subsidiaries.

Issuer

Biomet, Inc.

Notes Offered

Senior Notes

$1,825 million in aggregate principal amount of 6.500% Senior Notes due 2020.

Senior Subordinated Notes

$800 million in aggregate principal amount of 6.500% Senior Subordinated Notes due 2020.

Maturity Dates

The senior notes will mature on August 1, 2020. The senior subordinated notes will mature on October 1, 2020.

Interest Rates

Interest on the notes will be payable in cash and will accrue at a rate of 6.500% per annum.

Interest Payment Dates

Senior Notes

August 1 and February 1, commencing February 1, 2013.

Senior Subordinated Notes

April 1 and October 1, commencing April 1, 2013.

Guarantees

Each of our existing and future wholly-owned domestic restricted subsidiaries has jointly, severally and unconditionally guaranteed the senior notes on a senior unsecured basis and the senior subordinated notes on a senior subordinated unsecured basis, in each case to the extent such subsidiaries guarantee our senior secured credit facilities.

3

Table of Contents

4

Table of Contents

Optional Redemption

Senior Notes

At any time prior to August 1, 2015, we may redeem up to 35% of the aggregate principal amount of the senior notes with the net proceeds of certain equity offerings at the redemption price set forth in this prospectus, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to the redemption date.

At any time prior to August 1, 2015, we may redeem the senior notes, in whole or in part, at our option, at a redemption price equal to 100% of their principal amount plus a “make-whole premium” and accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to the date of redemption.

On and after August 1, 2015, we may redeem some or all of the senior notes at any time at the redemption prices set forth in this prospectus plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to the date of redemption.

See “Description of Senior Notes—Optional Redemption.”

Senior Subordinated Notes

At any time prior to October 1, 2015, we may redeem up to 40% of the aggregate principal amount of the senior subordinated notes with the net proceeds of certain equity offerings at the redemption price set forth in this prospectus, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to the redemption date.

At any time prior to October 1, 2015, we may redeem the senior subordinated notes, in whole or in part, at our option, at a redemption price equal to 100% of their principal amount plus a “make-whole premium” and accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to the date of redemption.

On and after October 1, 2015, we may redeem some or all of the senior subordinated notes at any time at the redemption prices set forth herein plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to the date of redemption.

See “Description of Senior Subordinated Notes—Optional Redemption.”

Change of Control

Upon certain change of control events, each holder of notes may require us to purchase all or a portion of such holder’s notes at a purchase price equal to 101% of the principal amount thereof, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to the purchase date. See “Description of Senior Notes—Repurchase at the Option of Holders—Change of Control” and the definition of “Change of Control” under “Description of Senior Notes—Certain Definitions,” and “Description of Senior Subordinated Notes—Repurchase at the Option of Holders—Change of Control” and the definition of “Change of Control” under “Description of Senior Subordinated Notes—Certain Definitions.”

5

Table of Contents

Certain Covenants

The indentures governing the notes contain covenants that, among other things, limit our ability and the ability of our restricted subsidiaries to:

• pay dividends on, redeem or repurchase capital stock or make other restricted payments;

• make investments;

• incur indebtedness or issue certain equity;

• create certain liens;

• incur obligations that restrict the ability of our subsidiaries to make dividend or other payments to us;

• enter into transactions with our affiliates;

• create or designate unrestricted subsidiaries; and

• consolidate, merge or transfer all or substantially all of our assets.

These covenants are subject to important exceptions and qualifications, which are described under the headings “Description of Senior Notes” and “Description of Senior Subordinated Notes” in this prospectus.

Certain of these covenants will be suspended if the notes are assigned an investment grade rating by Standard & Poor’s Rating Services (“Standard & Poor’s”) and Moody’s Investors Services, Inc. (“Moody’s”) and no default has occurred and is continuing. If either rating on the notes should subsequently decline to below investment grade or a default occurs and is continuing, the suspended covenants will be reinstated.

Listing

We do not intend to list the notes on any securities exchange.

Governing Law

The notes are governed by, and construed in accordance with, the laws of the State of New York.

Trustee

Wells Fargo Bank, National Association

Risk Factors

See “Risk Factors” and the other information in this prospectus for a discussion of some of the factors you should carefully consider before investing in the notes.

6

Table of Contents

RISK FACTORS

You should carefully consider the risks described below and the risk factors included in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2013 and our Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarters ended August 30, 2013 and November 30, 2013, which are incorporated by reference in this prospectus, as well as the other information contained in this prospectus and in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended May 31, 2013, and in our Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarters ended August 30, 2013 and November 30, 2013, before investing in the notes. We cannot assure you that any of the events discussed in or incorporated by reference into this prospectus will not occur. In such case, you may lose all or part of your original investment in the notes.

Risks related to Our Business

We, like other companies in the orthopedic industry, are involved in ongoing governmental investigations, the results of which may adversely impact our business and results of operations.

We are subject to various federal and state laws concerning healthcare fraud and abuse, including false claims laws and anti-kickback laws, such as the Federal Anti-Kickback Statute and similar state laws. In addition, we are subject to various federal and foreign laws concerning anti-corruption and anti-bribery matters, sales to countries or persons subject to economic sanctions and other matters affecting our international operations. Violations of these laws are punishable by criminal and/or civil sanctions, including, in some instances, fines, imprisonment and, within the United States, exclusion from participation in government healthcare programs, including Medicare, Medicaid and VA health programs. These laws are administered by, among others, the DOJ, the Office of the Inspector General of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, or OIG-HHS, the Securities and Exchange Commission, or SEC, the Office of Foreign Assets Control, the Bureau of Industry and Security of the U.S. Department of Commerce and state attorneys general. The interpretation and enforcement of these laws and regulations are uncertain and subject to change.

In June 2013, we received a subpoena from the U.S. Attorney’s Office for the District of New Jersey requesting various documents relating to the fitting of custom-fabricated or custom-fitted orthoses, or bracing, to patients in New Jersey, Texas and Washington. We have produced responsive documents and are fully cooperating with the request of the U.S. Attorney’s Office. We may need to devote significant time and resources to this inquiry and can give no assurances as to its final outcome.

In September 2010, we received a Civil Investigative Demand, or CID, issued by the U.S. Department of Justice Civil Division pursuant to the False Claims Act. The CID requests that we provide documents and testimony related to allegations that OtisMed Corp., Stryker Corp. and our company have violated the False Claims Act relating to the marketing of, and payment submissions for, OtisMed’s OtisKnee® (a registered trademark of Otis Med) knee replacement system. We have produced responsive documents and are fully cooperating in the investigation. We may need to devote significant time and resources to this inquiry and can give no assurances as to its final outcome.

In February 2010, we received a subpoena from the Office of the Inspector General of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services requesting various documents relating to agreements or arrangements between physicians and our Interpore Cross subsidiary for the period from 1999 through the present and the marketing and sales activities associated with Interpore Cross’s spinal products. We are cooperating with the request of the Office of the Inspector General. We may need to devote significant time and resources to this inquiry and can give no assurances as to its final outcome.

In April 2009, we received an administrative subpoena from the U.S. Attorney’s Office for the District of Massachusetts requesting various documents relating primarily to the Medicare reimbursement of and certain business practices related to our non-invasive bone growth stimulators. It is our understanding that competitors in the non-invasive bone growth stimulation market received similar subpoenas. We received subsequent subpoenas in connection with the investigation in September 2009, June 2010 and February 2011 along with several informal requests for information. We are producing responsive documents and are fully cooperating in the investigation. We may need to devote significant time and resources to this inquiry and can give no assurances as to its final outcome.

In April 2009, we became aware of a qui tam complaint alleging violations of the federal and various state False Claims Acts filed in the U.S. District Court for the District of Massachusetts, where it is currently pending. Biomet, LVB Acquisition, Inc. and several of our competitors in the non-invasive bone growth stimulation market were named as defendants in this action. The allegations in the complaint are similar in nature to certain categories of requested documents in the above-referenced administrative subpoenas. The U.S. government has not intervened in the action. We are vigorously defending this matter and intend to continue to do so. We may need to devote significant time and resources to this inquiry and can give no assurances as to its final outcome.

On September 25, 2007, we received a letter from the SEC informing us that it was conducting an informal investigation regarding possible violations of the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act, or FCPA, in the marketing and sale of medical devices in certain foreign countries by companies in the medical devices industry. The FCPA prohibits domestic concerns, including U.S. companies and their officers, directors, employees, shareholders acting on their behalf and agents, from offering, promising, authorizing or making payments to foreign officials for the purpose of obtaining or retaining business abroad or otherwise obtaining an improper advantage. This law also requires issuers of publicly registered securities to maintain records which fairly and accurately reflect transactions and to maintain an adequate system of internal controls. In many countries, hospitals and clinics are government-owned and, therefore, healthcare professionals employed by such hospitals and clinics, with whom we regularly interact, may meet the definition of a foreign official for purposes of the FCPA. On November 9, 2007, we received a letter from the DOJ requesting that any information provided to the SEC also be provided to the DOJ on a voluntary basis.

7

Table of Contents

On March 26, 2012, Biomet resolved the DOJ’s and SEC’s investigations by entering into a Deferred Prosecution Agreement, or DPA, with the DOJ and a Consent to Final Judgment, or Consent, with the SEC. Pursuant to the DPA, the DOJ has agreed to defer prosecution of Biomet in connection with this matter, provided that Biomet satisfies its obligations under the agreement over the three-year term of the DPA. The DOJ has further agreed to not continue its prosecution and seek to dismiss its indictment should Biomet satisfy its obligations under the agreement over the three-year term of the DPA.

In addition, pursuant to the terms of the DPA, an independent external compliance monitor has been appointed to review Biomet’s compliance with the DPA, particularly in relation to Biomet’s international sales practices, for at least the first 18 months of the three-year term of the DPA. The monitor has divided his review into two phases. The first phase consisted of the monitor familiarizing himself with our global compliance program, assessing the effectiveness of the program and making recommendations for enhancement of our compliance program based on that review. The second phase commenced in June 2013 and consists of the monitor testing implementation of his recommended enhancements to our compliance program. The monitor recently identified that certain of our compliance enhancements have been implemented too recently to be satisfactorily tested, and we continue to work with the monitor to allow for such transactional testing. The Consent Biomet entered into with the SEC mirrors the DPA’s provisions with respect to the compliance monitor. Compliance with the DPA requires substantial cooperation of our employees, distributors and sales agents and the healthcare professionals with whom they interact. These efforts not only involve expense, but also require management and other key employees to focus extensively on these matters.

Biomet agreed to pay a monetary penalty of $17.3 million to resolve the charges brought by the DOJ. The terms of the DPA and the associated monetary penalty reflect Biomet’s full cooperation throughout the investigation. Biomet further agreed in its Consent to disgorge profits and pay prejudgment interest in the aggregate amount of $5.6 million.

From time to time, we are, and may continue to be, the subject of additional investigations. If, as a result of these investigations described above or any additional investigations, we are found to have violated one or more applicable laws, our business, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows could be materially adversely affected. If some of our existing business practices are challenged as unlawful, we may have to modify those practices, which could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows.

Our business may be harmed as a result of product liability litigation.

Our involvement in the design, manufacture and sale of medical devices creates exposure to risks of product liability claims alleging that component failures, manufacturing flaws, design defects or inadequate disclosure of product-related risks or product-related information resulted in an unsafe condition or injury to patients, particularly in the United States. In the past, we have received product liability claims relating to our products and anticipate that we will continue to receive claims in the future, some of which could have a material adverse impact on our business. These claims are subject to many uncertainties and outcomes are not predictable. We may incur significant legal expenses regardless of whether we are found to be liable. In

8

Table of Contents

addition, we could experience a material design or manufacturing failure in our products, a quality system failure, other safety issues or heightened regulatory scrutiny that would warrant a recall of some of our products. Our existing product liability insurance coverage may be inadequate to satisfy liabilities we might incur. Moreover, even if any product liability loss is covered by an insurance policy, these policies have substantial self-insured retentions or deductibles that we remain responsible for. Any product liability claim brought against us, with or without merit, can be costly to defend and may negatively impact our ability to obtain third-party insurance coverage in future periods on a cost effective basis or at all.

As of March 3, 2014, we are a defendant in 1,319 product liability lawsuits relating to metal-on-metal hip implants, most of which were filed in 2013. The majority of these cases involve the M2a-Magnum™ hip system, 284 cases involve the M2a-38™ hip system, 45 involve the M2a-Taper™ system, and six involve the M2a-Ringloc™ system. The cases are currently venued in various state and federal courts. The cases in federal court have been consolidated in one multi-district proceeding in the U.S. District Court for the Northern District of Indiana.

On February 3, 2014, we announced the settlement of the Multi-District Litigation entitled MDL 2,391– In Re: Biomet M2A Magnum Hip Implant Product Liability Litigation. As of March 3, 2014, there were 1,231 lawsuits pending in the MDL. Additional lawsuits filed in the MDL by April 15, 2014 may participate in the settlement. We continue to evaluate the inventory of lawsuits in the MDL pursuant to the categories and procedures set forth in the settlement agreement. The final amount of payments under the settlement is uncertain. However, we believe that the payments under the settlement will exhaust our self-insured retention under our insurance program, which is $50.0 million. If this should occur, we would submit an insurance claim for the amount by which ultimate losses under the settlement exceed the self-insured retention amount.

We maintain $100.0 million of third-party insurance coverage. Our insurance carriers have been placed on notice of the claims associated with metal-on-metal hip products that are subject to the settlement and have been placed on notice of the terms of the settlement. As is customary in these situations, certain of our insurance carriers have reserved all rights under their respective policies and could still ultimately deny coverage for some or all of our insurance claims. We continue to believe our contracts with the insurance carriers are enforceable for these claims and the settlement agreement. However, we would be responsible for any amounts that our insurance carriers do not cover or for the amount by which ultimate losses exceed the amount of our third-party insurance coverage. The settlement does not affect certain other claims relating to our metal-on-metal hip products that are pending in various state courts or other claims that may be filed in the future.

Our $50.0 million accrual for contingencies associated with metal-on-metal hip products is unchanged since November 30, 2013. We are currently assessing any necessary adjustments to the current accrual amount to cover the estimated full amount of the settlement, and assessing any potential receivables to be recorded for recoveries from the insurance carriers.

On August 27, 2013, we initiated a voluntary recall of 87,601 units of OSSEOTITE®, NanoTite™ and T3® dental implants, of which 34,744 units have been distributed. We have notified regulatory bodies of this recall, which was taken due to discoloration of some implants that did not meet our internal standard for visual inspection. The discoloration was caused by the affected implants coming into contact with residual machining fluid that may have been left on the metal packaging insert for the products. We have determined that there are no known health effects of the residue. The ultimate financial impact with respect to this matter will depend on many factors that are difficult to predict with the limited information received to date and may vary materially based on the number of and actual costs of patients seeking testing and treatment services and the number of and actual costs to settle any lawsuits filed against us.

Product liability lawsuits and claims, safety alerts or product recalls, regardless of their ultimate outcome, could have a material adverse effect on our business and reputation and on our ability to attract and retain customers. If a product liability claim or series of claims is brought against us for uninsured liabilities or is in excess of our insurance coverage limits, our business could suffer and our financial condition, results of operations and cash flow could be materially adversely impacted. Further, such product liability matters may negatively impact our ability to obtain insurance coverage or cost-effective insurance coverage in future periods.

We may be subject to intellectual property litigation and infringement claims, which could cause us to incur significant expenses or prevent us from selling our products.

The musculoskeletal products industry is highly litigious with respect to the enforcement of patents and other intellectual property rights. In some cases, intellectual property litigation may be used to gain a competitive advantage. We have in the past and may in the future become a party to lawsuits involving patents or other intellectual property. A successful claim of patent or other intellectual property infringement against us could adversely affect our growth and results of operations, in some cases materially. A legal proceeding, regardless of the outcome, could put pressure on our financial resources and divert the time, energy and efforts of our management.

From time to time, we receive notices from third parties of potential intellectual property infringement and receive claims alleging intellectual property infringement. We may be unaware of intellectual property rights of others that may cover some of our technology. If someone claims that our products infringed their intellectual property rights, any resulting litigation could be costly and time consuming and would divert the attention of management and key personnel from other business issues.

The complexity of the technology involved and the uncertainty of intellectual property litigation increase these risks. Claims of intellectual property infringement also might require us to enter into costly royalty or license agreements. However, we may be unable to obtain royalty or license agreements on terms acceptable to us or at all. We also may be subject to significant damages or an injunction preventing us from manufacturing, selling or using some of our products in the event of a successful claim of patent or other intellectual property infringement. Any of these adverse consequences could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows.

9

Table of Contents

In January 2009, Heraeus Kulzer GmbH, or Heraeus, initiated legal proceedings in Germany against Biomet, Biomet Europe BV and certain other subsidiaries, alleging that we and Biomet Europe BV misappropriated Heraeus Kulzer trade secrets when developing our new lines of European bone cements. The lawsuit seeks injunctive relief to preclude us from producing and marketing our current line of European bone cements and a judgment requiring that we compensate Heraeus for any damages incurred (which they allege to be in excess of €30.0 million). On December 20, 2012, the trial court ruled that Biomet did not misappropriate trade secrets and consequently dismissed Biomet, Inc., Biomet Europe BV, Biomet Deutschland GmbH and other defendants from the lawsuit. Biomet Orthopaedics Switzerland GmbH or Biomet Switzerland, remains as the only defendant in the lawsuit and as to it the trial court has ruled that Heraeus Kulzer will not be permitted to review certification materials of Biomet Switzerland for purposes of determining whether there is any evidence that would support a claim of trade secret misappropriation by that entity. The trial court’s decision remains subject to appeal by Heraeus Kulzer and we are continuing to vigorously defend this matter. We can make no assurance as to the final outcome of this matter.

On May 3, 2013, Bonutti Skeletal Innovations LLC, a company formed to hold certain patents acquired from Dr. Peter M. Bonutti and an affiliate of patent licensing firm Acacia Research Group LLC, filed suit against us in the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Texas, alleging a failure to pay royalties due under a license agreement with Dr. Bonutti, misuse of confidential information and infringement of U.S. Patent Nos. 5,921,986; 6,099,531; 6,423,063; 6,638,279; 6,702,821; 7,070,557; 7,087,073; 7,104,996; 7,708,740; 7,806,896; 7,806,897; 7,828,852; 7,931,690; 8,133,229; and 8,147,514. The lawsuit seeks damages in an amount yet to be determined and injunctive relief. Prior to the filing of this lawsuit, on March 8, 2013 we had filed a complaint for declaratory judgment with the U.S. District Court for the Northern District of Indiana seeking a judgment of noninfringement and invalidity of the patents at issue. We are vigorously defending this matter and believe that our defenses against infringement and patent validity are valid and meritorious. We can make no assurances as to the time or resources that will be needed to devote to this litigation or its final outcome.

We are involved in legal proceedings that may result in adverse outcomes.

In addition to intellectual property and product liability claims and lawsuits, we are involved in various commercial litigation and claims and other legal proceedings that arise from time to time in the ordinary course of our business. Although we believe we have substantial defenses in these matters, litigation and other claims are subject to inherent uncertainties and management’s view of these matters may change in the future. Given the uncertain nature of legal proceedings generally, we are not able in all cases to estimate the amount or range of loss that could result from an unfavorable outcome. We could in the future incur judgments or enter into settlements of claims that could have a material adverse effect on our results of operations in any particular period.

Risks Related to Our Indebtedness and the Notes

Our substantial level of indebtedness could materially adversely affect our ability to generate sufficient cash to fulfill our obligations under the notes and any other outstanding indebtedness, our ability to react to changes in our business and our ability to incur additional indebtedness to fund future needs.

We are highly leveraged. As of November 30, 2013, we had total indebtedness of $5,896.8 million (compared to total indebtedness of $5,966.4 million as of May 31, 2013). The following chart shows our level of indebtedness as of November 30, 2013 and May 31, 2013:

(in millions) November 30,

2013 May 31,

2013

Debt Instruments

European facility

$ — $ 2.3

China facility

3.3 6.0

Term loan facilities

3,078.3 3,295.4

Cash flow revolving credit facility

— —

Asset-based revolving credit facility

155.0 —

6.500% Senior Notes due 2020

1,825.0 1,825.0

6.500% Senior Subordinated Notes due 2020

800.0 800.0

Premium on notes

35.2 37.7

Total debt

$ 5,896.8 $ 5,966.4

As of November 30, 2013, we had outstanding approximately $3,078.3 million in aggregate principal amount of indebtedness under our senior secured credit facilities that bears interest at a floating rate and we had a $155.0 million outstanding principal balance under our asset-based revolving credit facility. We have also entered into a series of interest rate swap agreements to fix the interest rates on approximately 46% of the borrowings under our senior secured credit facilities as of November 30, 2013.

10

Table of Contents

Our substantial level of indebtedness increases the possibility that we may be unable to generate cash sufficient to pay, when due, the principal of, interest on or other amounts due in respect of our indebtedness. Our substantial indebtedness, combined with our other financial obligations and contractual commitments, could have important consequences. For example, it could:

• make it more difficult for us to satisfy our obligations with respect to our indebtedness, including the notes, and any failure to comply with the obligations under any of our debt instruments, including restrictive covenants, could result in an event of default under such instruments, including the indentures;

• require us to dedicate a substantial portion of our cash flow from operations to payments on our indebtedness, thereby reducing funds available for working capital, capital expenditures, acquisitions, research and development and other purposes;

• increase our vulnerability to adverse economic and industry conditions, which could place us at a competitive disadvantage compared to our competitors that have relatively less indebtedness;

• increase the risk we assess with our counterparties which could affect the fair value of our derivative instruments related to our debt facilities noted above;

• place us at a competitive disadvantage compared to our competitors that are less highly leveraged and therefore able to take advantage of opportunities that our indebtedness prevents us from exploiting;

• limit our flexibility in planning for, or reacting to, changes in our business and the industries in which we operate;

• limit our noteholders’ rights to receive payments under the notes and any other outstanding notes if secured creditors have not been paid;

• limit our ability to borrow additional funds, or to dispose of assets to raise funds, if needed, for working capital, capital expenditures, acquisitions, research and development, debt service requirements, execution of our business strategy and other corporate purposes; and

• prevent us from raising the funds necessary to repurchase all notes tendered to us upon the occurrence of certain changes of control, which would constitute a default under the indentures.

Restrictions imposed by our indentures, our senior secured credit facilities and our other outstanding indebtedness may limit our ability to operate our business and to finance our future operations or capital needs or to engage in other business activities.

The agreements governing our indebtedness, including the indentures, contain various covenants that limit our discretion in the operation of our business and also require us to meet financial maintenance tests and other covenants. The failure to comply with such tests and covenants could have a material adverse effect on us. The agreements governing our indebtedness, including the indentures, restrict our and our restricted subsidiaries’ ability, among other things, to:

• incur additional indebtedness;

• pay dividends on our capital stock or redeem, repurchase or retire our capital stock or indebtedness;

• make investments, loans, advances and acquisitions;

• create restrictions on the payment of dividends or other amounts to us from our restricted subsidiaries;

• engage in transactions with our affiliates;

• sell assets, including capital stock of our subsidiaries;

• consolidate or merge;

• create liens; and

• enter into sale and lease-back transactions.

11

Table of Contents

The terms of our senior secured credit facilities also restrict Parent from conducting any business or operations other than, among others, (i) owning Biomet, (ii) maintaining its legal existence, (iii) performing its obligations with respect to the senior secured credit facilities and the indentures governing the notes, (iv) publicly offering its common stock, (v) financing activities, including the issuance of securities, incurrence of debt, payment of dividends, making contributions to the capital of its subsidiaries and guaranteeing the obligations of its subsidiaries, or (vi) providing indemnification to our officers and directors.

In addition, if borrowing availability under our senior secured revolving credit facilities is less than 10% of the sum of aggregate commitments under our asset-based revolving credit facility and the revolving credit commitments under our cash flow credit facilities at any time, we are required to maintain a fixed charge coverage ratio as of the end of the most recently ended fiscal quarter that must be greater than or equal to 1.00 to 1.00. In the event of a default under any of our senior secured credit facilities, the lenders could elect to declare all amounts outstanding under the agreements governing our senior secured credit facilities to be immediately due and payable. If the indebtedness under our senior secured credit facilities, or the notes were to be accelerated, our assets may not be sufficient to repay such indebtedness in full. In particular, noteholders will be paid only if we have assets remaining after we pay amounts due on our secured indebtedness, including our senior secured credit facilities.

We, including our subsidiaries, have the ability to incur substantially more indebtedness, including senior secured indebtedness, and our noteholders’ right to receive payments on each series of notes is effectively junior to the right of lenders who have a security interest in our assets to the extent of the value of those assets.

Our obligations under the notes and our guarantors’ obligations under their guarantees of the notes are unsecured, but our obligations under our senior secured credit facilities and each guarantor’s obligations under its guarantee of our senior secured credit facilities are secured by a security interest in substantially all of our domestic tangible and intangible assets, including the stock of substantially all of our wholly-owned U.S. subsidiaries and a portion of the stock of certain of our non-U.S. subsidiaries. If we are declared bankrupt or insolvent, or if we default under our senior secured credit facilities, the lenders could declare all of the funds borrowed thereunder, together with accrued interest, immediately due and payable. If we were unable to repay such indebtedness, the lenders could foreclose on the pledged assets to the exclusion of holders of the notes, even if an event of default exists at such time under the indentures. Furthermore, if the lenders foreclose and sell the pledged equity interests in any guarantor under the notes, then that guarantor will be released from its guarantee of the notes automatically and immediately upon such sale. In any such event, because the notes are not secured by any of our assets or the equity interests in the guarantors, it is possible that there would be no assets remaining from which noteholders’ claims could be satisfied or, if any assets remained, they might be insufficient to satisfy noteholders’ claims in full.

Subject to the restrictions in our senior secured credit facilities and the indentures, we, including our subsidiaries, may incur significant additional indebtedness. As of November 30, 2013:

• we and the guarantors had approximately $330.0 million available for borrowing under our cash flow revolving credit facilities, which, if borrowed, would be senior secured indebtedness;

• we and the guarantors had $286.6 million available for borrowing under our asset-based revolving credit facility, subject to borrowing base limitations, which, if borrowed, would be senior secured indebtedness;

• we and the guarantors have the option to incur additional incremental term loans or increase the cash flow revolving credit facilities commitments under our senior secured credit facilities up to an amount that would cause our Senior Secured Leverage Ratio (as defined in our senior secured credit facilities) to be equal to or less than 4.50 to 1.00, which, if borrowed, would be senior secured indebtedness; and

• we and the guarantors have the option to increase the asset-based revolving credit facility commitments under our asset-based revolving credit facility by up to $100.0 million, which, if borrowed, would be senior secured indebtedness.

Although the terms of our senior secured credit facilities and the indentures contain restrictions on the incurrence of additional indebtedness, these restrictions are subject to a number of important exceptions, and indebtedness incurred in compliance with these restrictions could be substantial. If we and our restricted subsidiaries incur significant additional indebtedness, the related risks that we face could intensify.

As of November 30, 2013, we also had $16.7 million available for borrowing under our China Facility which is net of $3.3 million of outstanding borrowings.

12

Table of Contents

We may not be able to generate sufficient cash to service all of our indebtedness, including the notes, and may be forced to take other actions to satisfy our obligations under our indebtedness, which may not be successful.

Our ability to make scheduled payments on or to refinance our debt obligations depends on our financial condition and operating performance, which is subject to prevailing economic and competitive conditions and to certain financial, business and other factors beyond our control. We may not be able to maintain a level of cash flows from operating activities sufficient to permit us to pay the principal, premium, if any, and interest on our indebtedness, including the notes.

If our cash flows and capital resources are insufficient to fund our debt service obligations, we may be forced to reduce or delay investments and capital expenditures or to sell assets, seek additional capital or restructure or refinance our indebtedness, including the notes. Our ability to restructure or refinance our debt will depend on the condition of the capital markets and our financial condition at such time. Any refinancing of our debt could be at higher interest rates and may require us to comply with more onerous covenants, which could further restrict our business operations. The terms of existing or future debt instruments, including the indentures, may restrict us from adopting some of these alternatives. In addition, any failure to make payments of interest and principal on our outstanding indebtedness on a timely basis would likely result in a reduction of our credit rating, which could limit our ability to incur additional indebtedness. In the absence of such operating results and resources, we could face substantial liquidity problems and might be required to dispose of material assets or operations to meet our debt service and other obligations. Our senior secured credit facilities and indentures restrict our ability to dispose of assets and use the proceeds from the disposition. We may not be able to consummate those dispositions or to obtain the proceeds that we could realize from them and these proceeds may not be adequate to meet any debt service obligations then due. These alternative measures may not be successful and may not permit us to meet our scheduled debt service obligations.

Repayment of our debt, including the notes, is dependent on cash flow generated by our subsidiaries.

Our subsidiaries own a significant portion of our assets and conduct a significant portion of our operations. Accordingly, repayment of our indebtedness, including the notes, is dependent, to a significant extent, on the generation of cash flow by our subsidiaries and their ability to make such cash available to us, by dividend, debt repayment or otherwise. Unless they are guarantors of the notes, our subsidiaries do not have any obligation to pay amounts due on the notes or to make funds available for that purpose. Our subsidiaries may not be able to, or may not be permitted to, make distributions to enable us to make payments in respect of our indebtedness, including the notes. Each subsidiary is a distinct legal entity and, under certain circumstances, legal and contractual restrictions may limit our ability to obtain cash from our subsidiaries. While the indentures limit the ability of our subsidiaries to incur consensual restrictions on their ability to pay dividends or make other intercompany payments to us, these limitations are subject to certain qualifications and exceptions. In the event that we do not receive distributions from our subsidiaries, we may be unable to make required principal and interest payments on our indebtedness, including the notes.

Claims of noteholders will be structurally subordinated to claims of creditors of all our non-U.S. subsidiaries and some of our U.S. subsidiaries because they will not guarantee the notes.

The notes are not guaranteed by any of our non-U.S. subsidiaries or any of our less than wholly owned U.S. subsidiaries. Accordingly, claims of holders of the notes will be structurally subordinated to the claims of creditors of these non-guarantor subsidiaries, including trade creditors. Therefore, all obligations of our non-guarantor subsidiaries will have to be satisfied before any of the assets of such subsidiaries would be available for distribution, upon a liquidation or otherwise, to us or a guarantor of the notes.

For the six months ended November 30, 2013 and the fiscal years ended May 31, 2013 and 2012, our non-guarantor subsidiaries accounted for $564.4 million, or 36% of our consolidated net sales, $1,130.6 million, or 37% of our consolidated net sales and $1,068.3 million or 38% of our consolidated net sales, respectively. As of November 30, 2013 and May 31, 2013 and 2012, our non-guarantor subsidiaries accounted for approximately $2,350.5 million, or 24%, $2,622.1 million, or 27%, and $2,7343 million, or 26% of our consolidated assets, respectively, and approximately $424.9 million, or 5.5%, $439.4 million, or 5.6%, and $413.1 million, or 5.3% of our consolidated liabilities, respectively. All amounts are presented after giving effect to intercompany eliminations.

The lenders under our senior secured credit facilities will have the discretion to release any guarantors under these facilities in a variety of circumstances, which will cause those guarantors to be released from their guarantees of the notes.

While any obligations under our senior secured credit facilities remain outstanding, any guarantee of the notes may be released without action by, or consent of, any holder of the notes or the trustee under the indentures, at the discretion of lenders under our senior secured credit facilities, if the related guarantor is no longer a guarantor of obligations under our senior secured credit facilities or any other indebtedness. The lenders under our senior secured credit facilities will have the discretion to release the guarantees under our senior secured credit facilities in a variety of circumstances. Noteholders will not have a claim as a creditor against any subsidiary that is no longer a guarantor of the notes, and the indebtedness and other liabilities, including trade payables, whether secured or unsecured, of those subsidiaries will effectively be senior to claims of noteholders.

13

Table of Contents

If we default on our obligations to pay our other indebtedness, we may not be able to make payments on the notes.

Any default under the agreements governing our indebtedness, including a default under our senior secured credit facilities that is not waived by the required lenders, and the remedies sought by the holders of such indebtedness, could prevent us from paying principal, premium, if any, and interest on the notes and substantially decrease the market value of the notes. If we are unable to generate sufficient cash flow and are otherwise unable to obtain funds necessary to meet required payments of principal, premium, if any, and interest on our indebtedness, or if we otherwise fail to comply with the various covenants, including financial and operating covenants in the instruments governing our indebtedness (including covenants in our senior secured credit facilities and the indentures), we could be in default under the terms of the agreements governing such indebtedness, including our senior secured credit facilities and the indentures.

In the event of such default:

• the holders of such indebtedness may be able to cause all of our available cash flow to be used to pay such indebtedness and, in any event, could elect to declare all the funds borrowed thereunder to be due and payable, together with accrued and unpaid interest;

• the lenders under our senior secured credit facilities could elect to terminate their commitments thereunder, cease making further loans and institute foreclosure proceedings against our assets;

• we could be forced into bankruptcy or liquidation; and

• the subordination provisions in senior subordinated notes may prevent us from paying any obligation with respect to such notes.

If our operating performance declines, we may in the future need to obtain waivers from the required lenders under our senior secured credit facilities to avoid being in default. If we breach our covenants under our senior secured credit facilities and seek a waiver, we may not be able to obtain a waiver from the required lenders. If this occurs, we would be in default under our senior secured credit facilities, the lenders could exercise their rights, as described above, and we could be forced into bankruptcy or liquidation.

Your right to receive payments on the senior subordinated notes will be junior to the rights of the lenders under our senior secured credit facilities and all of our other senior debt (including the senior notes) and any of our future senior indebtedness.

The senior subordinated notes will be general unsecured senior subordinated obligations that will rank junior in right or payment to all of our existing and future senior indebtedness. We may not pay principal, premium, if any, interest or other amounts on account of the notes in the event of a payment default or certain other defaults in respect of certain of our senior indebtedness, including the senior notes and borrowings under our senior secured credit facilities, unless the senior indebtedness has been paid in full or the default has been cured or waived. In addition, in the event of certain other defaults with respect to certain of our senior indebtedness, we may not be permitted to pay any amount on account of the notes for a designated period of time.

Because of the subordination provisions in the indenture governing the senior subordinated notes, in the event of our bankruptcy, liquidation or dissolution, our assets will not be available to pay obligations under the senior subordinated notes until we have made all payments in cash on our senior indebtedness, see “Description of Senior Subordinated Notes.” Sufficient assets may not remain after all these payments have been made to make any payments on the senior subordinated notes, including payments of principal or interest when due. See “Description of Other Indebtedness” for a description of the outstanding indebtedness that will rank senior to the senior subordinated notes.

We may not be able to repurchase the notes upon a change of control.

Upon the occurrence of specific kinds of change of control events, we will be required to offer to repurchase all outstanding notes at 101% of their principal amount plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any. The source of funds for any such purchase of the notes will be our available cash or cash generated from our subsidiaries’ operations or other sources, including borrowings, sales of assets or sales of equity. We may not be able to repurchase the notes upon a change of control because we may not have sufficient financial resources to purchase all of the notes that are tendered upon a change of control. Further, we

14

Table of Contents

will be contractually restricted under the terms of our senior secured credit facilities from repurchasing all of the notes tendered by holders upon a change of control. Accordingly, we may not be able to satisfy our obligations to purchase the notes unless we are able to refinance or obtain waivers under our senior secured credit facilities. Our failure to repurchase the notes upon a change of control would cause a default under the indentures and a cross default under our senior secured credit facilities. Our senior secured credit facilities also provide that a change of control will be a default that permits lenders to accelerate the maturity of borrowings thereunder. Any of our future debt agreements may contain similar provisions.

The trading prices for the notes will be directly affected by many factors, including our credit rating.

Credit rating agencies continually revise their ratings for companies they follow. The condition of the financial and credit markets and prevailing interest rates have fluctuated in the past and are likely to fluctuate in the future. Any such fluctuation may impact the trading price of the notes. In addition, developments in our business and operations could lead to a ratings downgrade which could adversely affect the trading price of the notes, or the trading market for the notes.

An adverse rating of the notes may cause their trading price to fall.

If a rating agency rates the notes, it may assign a rating that is lower than the rating expected by the noteholders. Ratings agencies also may lower ratings on the notes or any of our other debt in the future, or may choose to cease providing ratings on the notes or such other debt. If rating agencies assign a lower than expected rating or reduce, or indicate that they may reduce, their ratings of our debt in the future, the trading price of the notes could significantly decline.

Certain covenants under the indentures will be suspended if and for so long as the notes are rated “investment grade” by both Standard & Poor’s and Moody’s and no default has occurred and is continuing. These covenants restrict, among other things, our and our restricted subsidiaries’ ability to incur or guarantee debt or issue certain stock, pay dividends, make distributions on, or redeem or repurchase, capital stock and enter into transactions with affiliates. Because these restrictions would not apply if the notes are rated investment grade, we would be able to incur additional debt and consummate transactions that may impair our ability to satisfy our obligations with respect to the notes. In addition, we would not have to make certain offers to repurchase the notes. These covenants would be reinstated if the credit ratings assigned to the notes later declined below investment grade or a default occurs and is continuing.

Federal and state fraudulent transfer laws may permit a court to void the notes and the guarantees, subordinate claims in respect of the notes and the guarantees, and require noteholders to return payments received. If this occurs, noteholders may not receive any payments on the notes.

Federal and state fraudulent transfer and conveyance statutes may apply to the issuance of the notes and the incurrence of any guarantees. Under federal bankruptcy law and comparable provisions of state fraudulent transfer or conveyance laws, which may vary from state to state, the notes or guarantees could be voided as a fraudulent transfer or conveyance if (1) we or any of the guarantors, as applicable, issued the notes or incurred the guarantees with the intent of hindering, delaying or defrauding creditors or (2) we or any of the guarantors, as applicable, received less than reasonably equivalent value or fair consideration in return for either issuing the notes or incurring the guarantees and, in the case of (2) only, one of the following is also true at the time thereof:

• we or any of the guarantors, as applicable, were insolvent or rendered insolvent by reason of the issuance of the notes or the incurrence of the guarantees;

• the issuance of the notes or the incurrence of the guarantees left us or any of the guarantors, as applicable, with an unreasonably small amount of capital to carry on the business;

• we or any of the guarantors intended to, or believed that we or such guarantor would, incur debts beyond our or such guarantor’s ability to pay such debts as they mature; or

• we or any of the guarantors was a defendant in an action for money damages, or had a judgment for money damages docketed against us or such guarantor if, in either case, after final judgment, the judgment is unsatisfied.

15

Table of Contents

A court would likely find that we or a guarantor did not receive reasonably equivalent value or fair consideration for the notes or such guarantee if we or such guarantor did not substantially benefit directly or indirectly from the issuance of the notes or the applicable guarantee. As a general matter, value is given for a transfer or an obligation if, in exchange for the transfer or obligation, property is transferred or an antecedent debt is secured or satisfied.

We cannot be certain as to the standards a court would use to determine whether or not we or the guarantors were solvent at the relevant time or, regardless of the standard that a court uses, that the issuance of the guarantees would not be further subordinated to our or any of our guarantors’ other debt. Generally, however, an entity would be considered insolvent if, at the time it incurred indebtedness:

• the sum of its debts, including contingent liabilities, was greater than the fair value of all its assets;

• the present fair saleable value of its assets was less than the amount that would be required to pay its probable liability on its existing debts, including contingent liabilities, as they become absolute and mature; or

• it could not pay its debts as they become due.

If a court were to find that the issuance of the notes or the incurrence of the guarantee was a fraudulent transfer or conveyance, the court could void the payment obligations under the notes or such guarantee or further subordinate the notes or such guarantee to presently existing and future indebtedness of ours or of the related guarantor, or require the holders of the notes to repay any amounts received with respect to such guarantee. In the event of a finding that a fraudulent transfer or conveyance occurred, noteholders may not receive any repayment on the notes. Further, the voidance of the notes could result in an event of default with respect to our and our subsidiaries’ other debt that could result in acceleration of such debt.

Although each guarantee entered into by a guarantor will contain a provision intended to limit that guarantor’s liability to the maximum amount that it could incur without causing the incurrence of obligations under its guarantee to be a fraudulent transfer, this provision may not be effective to protect those guarantees from being voided under fraudulent transfer law, or may reduce that guarantor’s obligation to an amount that effectively makes its guarantee worthless.

We are indirectly owned and controlled by the Sponsors, and the Sponsors’ interests as equity holders may conflict with the interests of noteholders as creditors.

Biomet is a subsidiary of Parent, which is controlled by the Sponsors, and, accordingly, the Sponsors have the ability to control our policies and operations. The interests of the Sponsors may not in all cases be aligned with our noteholders’ interests. For example, if we encounter financial difficulties or are unable to pay our debts as they mature, the interests of our equity holders might conflict with our noteholders’ interests. In addition, our equity holders may have an interest in pursuing acquisitions, divestitures, financings or other transactions that, in their judgment, could enhance their equity investments, even though such transactions might involve risks to holders of the notes. Furthermore, the Sponsors may in the future own businesses that directly or indirectly compete with us. The Sponsors also may pursue acquisition opportunities that may be complementary to our business, and as a result, those acquisition opportunities may not be available to us.

16

Table of Contents

USE OF PROCEEDS

This prospectus is delivered in connection with the sale of notes by Goldman, Sachs & Co. and its affiliates in market-making transactions. We will not receive any of the proceeds from such transactions.

17

Table of Contents

DESCRIPTION OF SENIOR NOTES

General

Certain terms used in this description are defined under the subheading “—Certain Definitions.” In this description, (1) the term “Issuer” refers only to Biomet, Inc. and not to any of its subsidiaries and (2) the terms “we,” “our” and “us” each refer to the Issuer and its consolidated Subsidiaries. Defined terms in this “Description of Senior Notes” may have different meanings than similar or identical terms used in the “Description of Senior Subordinated Notes” below. For example, references to “Guarantees” or “Guarantors” in this “Description of Senior Notes” means guarantees or guarantors of the senior notes, and not guarantees or guarantors of the senior subordinated notes.

The Issuer issued $1,000.0 million aggregate principal amount of senior notes under an indenture dated as of August 8, 2012 and $825.0 million of senior notes under a supplemental indenture dated as of October 2, 2012 (collectively, the “senior notes indenture”) among the Issuer, the Guarantors and Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as trustee (the “Trustee”).

The senior notes indenture has been qualified under and is subject to and governed by the Trust Indenture Act of 1939. Except as set forth herein, the terms of the senior notes will be substantially identical in all material respects and include those stated in the senior notes indenture and those made part of the senior notes indenture by reference to the Trust Indenture Act.

The following description is only a summary of the material provisions of the senior notes indenture, does not purport to be complete and is qualified in its entirety by reference to the provisions of the senior notes indenture, including the definitions therein of certain terms used below. We urge you to read the senior notes indenture because it, and not this description, defines your rights as Holders of the senior notes. You may request copies of the senior notes indenture at our address set forth under “Where You Can Find Additional Information.”

Brief Description of the Senior Notes

The senior notes:

• are general, unsecured, senior obligations of the Issuer;

• rank equally in right of payment with all existing and future Senior Indebtedness (including the Senior Credit Facilities) of the Issuer;

• are effectively subordinated to all Secured Indebtedness of the Issuer (including the Senior Credit Facilities), to the extent of the value of the collateral securing such Secured Indebtedness;

• are structurally subordinated to all existing and future Indebtedness, claims of holders of Preferred Stock and other liabilities of Subsidiaries of the Issuer that do not guarantee the senior notes;

• are senior in right of payment to all existing and future Subordinated Indebtedness of the Issuer; and

• are initially guaranteed on a senior unsecured basis by the Guarantors and will also be guaranteed in the future by each Subsidiary, if any, that guarantees Indebtedness under the CF Credit Facilities.

Guarantees

The Guarantors, as primary obligors and not merely as sureties, initially jointly and severally, irrevocably and unconditionally, guarantee, on an unsecured senior basis, the full and punctual payment when due, whether at maturity, by acceleration or otherwise, of all obligations of the Issuer under the senior notes indenture and the senior notes, whether for payment of principal of, premium, if any, or interest in respect of the senior notes, expenses, indemnification or otherwise, on the terms set forth in the senior notes indenture by executing the senior notes indenture.

The Guarantors guarantee the senior notes and, in the future, each direct and indirect Subsidiary of the Issuer that guarantees Indebtedness under the CF Credit Facilities will guarantee the senior notes. Each of the Guarantees of the senior notes is a general, unsecured, senior obligation of each Guarantor, ranks equally in right of payment with all existing and future Senior Indebtedness of such Guarantor (including such Guarantor’s guarantee of the CF Credit Facilities), is effectively subordinated to all Secured Indebtedness of such Guarantor (including such Guarantor’s guarantee of the CF Credit Facilities), to the extent of the value of the collateral securing such Secured Indebtedness, and ranks senior in right of payment to all existing and future Subordinated Indebtedness of such Guarantor (including such Guarantor’s guarantee of the senior subordinated notes). Each of the Guarantees of the senior notes is structurally subordinated to all existing and future Indebtedness, claims of holders of Preferred Stock and other liabilities of Subsidiaries of each Guarantor that do not guarantee the senior notes.

Not all of the Issuer’s Subsidiaries guarantee the senior notes. In the event of a bankruptcy, liquidation, reorganization or similar proceeding of any of these non-guarantor Subsidiaries, the non-guarantor Subsidiaries will pay the holders of their debt and their trade creditors before they will be able to distribute any of their assets to the Issuer. As a result, all of the existing and

18

Table of Contents

future liabilities of our non-guarantor Subsidiaries, including any claims of trade creditors, are effectively senior to the senior notes. For the six months ended November 30, 2013, the non-guarantor Subsidiaries of the Issuer accounted for approximately $564.4 million, or 36% of the Issuer’s consolidated net sales. As of November 30, 2013, the non-guarantor Subsidiaries of the Issuer accounted for approximately $2,350.5 million, or 24% of the Issuer’s consolidated total assets and approximately $439.4 million, or 5.6% of the Issuer’s consolidated liabilities.

The obligations of each Guarantor under its Guarantee are limited as necessary to prevent the Guarantee from constituting a fraudulent conveyance under applicable law. This provision may not, however, be effective to protect a Guarantee from being voided under fraudulent transfer law, or may reduce the applicable Guarantor’s obligation to an amount that effectively makes its Guarantee worthless. If a Guarantee was rendered voidable, it could be subordinated by a court to all other indebtedness (including guarantees and other contingent liabilities) of the Guarantor, and, depending on the amount of such indebtedness, a Guarantor’s liability on its Guarantee could be reduced to zero. See “Risk Factors—Risks Related to Our Indebtedness and the Notes—Federal and state fraudulent transfer laws may permit a court to void the notes and the guarantees, subordinate claims in respect of the notes and the guarantees, and require noteholders to return payments received. If this occurs, noteholders may not receive any payments on the notes.”

Any Guarantor that makes a payment under its Guarantee will be entitled upon payment in full of all guaranteed obligations under the senior notes indenture to a contribution from each other Guarantor in an amount equal to such other Guarantor’s pro rata portion of such payment based on the respective net assets of all the Guarantors at the time of such payment determined in accordance with GAAP.

Each Guarantor may consolidate with or merge into or sell all or substantially all of its assets to the Issuer or another Guarantor without limitation or any other Person upon the terms and conditions set forth in the senior notes indenture. See “—Certain Covenants—Merger, Consolidation or Sale of All or Substantially All Assets.”

Each Guarantee by a Guarantor provides by its terms that it will be automatically and unconditionally released and discharged upon:

(1) any sale, exchange or transfer (by merger or otherwise) of (i) the Capital Stock of such Guarantor, after which the applicable Guarantor is no longer a Restricted Subsidiary or (ii) all or substantially all the assets of such Guarantor, in each case if such sale, exchange or transfer is made in compliance with the applicable provisions of the senior notes indenture;

(2) the release or discharge of the guarantee by such Guarantor of Indebtedness under the CF Credit Facilities, or the release or discharge of such other guarantee that resulted in the creation of such Guarantee, except a discharge or release by or as a result of payment under such guarantee;

(3) upon the dissolution of such Guarantor; provided that no Default or Event of Default has occurred and is continuing;

(4) the designation of any Restricted Subsidiary that is a Guarantor as an Unrestricted Subsidiary in compliance with the applicable provisions of the senior notes indenture; or

(5) the exercise by the Issuer of its legal defeasance option or covenant defeasance option as described under “Legal Defeasance and Covenant Defeasance” or the discharge of the Issuer’s obligations under the senior notes indenture in accordance with the terms of the senior notes indenture; and

(2) such Guarantor delivering to the Trustee an Officer’s Certificate and an Opinion of Counsel, each stating that all conditions precedent provided for in the senior notes indenture relating to such transaction have been complied with.

Ranking

The payment of the principal of, premium, if any, and interest on the senior notes and the payment of any Guarantee ranks equally in right of payment to all existing and future Senior Indebtedness of the Issuer or the relevant Guarantor, as the case may be, including the obligations of the Issuer and such Guarantor under the Senior Credit Facilities.

The senior notes and the Guarantees are effectively subordinated in right of payment to all of the Issuer’s and the Guarantors’ existing and future Secured Indebtedness to the extent of the value of the collateral securing such Secured Indebtedness. As of November 30, 2013, the Issuer and the Guarantors had $3,233.3 million of Secured Indebtedness outstanding, consisting of borrowings and the related guarantees under the Senior Credit Facilities and the asset-based revolving credit facility. As of November 30, 2013, the Issuer had (1) the option to raise additional incremental term loans or incremental cash flow revolving facility commitments under the CF Credit Facilities of up to an amount that would cause our Senior Secured Leverage Ratio (as defined in the CF Credit Facilities) to be equal to or less than 4.50 to 1.00, which, if borrowed, would be Secured Indebtedness and (2) the option to raise additional incremental asset-based revolving credit facility commitments under the ABL Facilities by up to $100.0 million, which, if borrowed, would be Secured Indebtedness.

19

Table of Contents

Although the senior notes indenture contains limitations on the amount of additional Indebtedness that the Issuer and the Issuer’s Restricted Subsidiaries (including the Guarantors) may incur, un