SEATTLE -- Hal Keller was just handed one of baseball's 26 major league organizations to run, but he wasn't altogether happy about the turn of events.

The hapless Seattle Mariners proceeded with their organizational shakeup Friday by firing president and general manager Dan O'Brien and promoting Keller, the club's director of player development.

But Keller said he felt 'ambivalent' about replacing his longtime boss, who brought Keller to Seattle in the first place. Keller had worked for O'Brien for five years in Texas when they joined the Mariners organization in January 1979.

'It's a big challenge and if I didn't think that I could accept that challenge and make a dent at it I wouldn't have taken it,' said Keller. 'But at the same time Dan and I were very, very good friends. I worked for him for 10 years and he was a very good man to work for.'

Keller, 56, has been a relatively low-profile front-office man for most of his career in baseball. He has spent the past 28 years developing talent for the WasOington Senators, Minnesota Twins, Texas Rangers and Seattle. With his promotion, he was given the title of general manager and vice president, baseball operations.

The Mariners surprised many baseball experts a year ago by finishing fourth in the American League's Western Division but slumped badly in 1983, finishing with the worst record in in the majors, 60-102.

'I think there is talent on this club, bettern than 60 wins,' said Keller. 'I think we're going to have to find the mix that's going to improve on it.'

O'Brien's firing was the second major dismissal by the Mariners this season. Rene Lachemann was fired as manager in June and replaced by Del Crandall, who had no better luck the rest of the season than his predecessor.

George Argyros, the owner of the club, disputed suggestions O'Brien was being made a scapegoat for the club's dismal performance in 1983.

'No, he's not a scapegoat,' said Argyros. 'Pure and simple, it was time that we put our own management team into the baseball side of the organization. We had not done that. I think it will be better for the franchise and for the club.'

Argyros, who was meeting with other Mariner team officials in Tempe, Ariz., Friday, also denied he ever had plans to hire former Cincinnati Reds President Dick Wagner as rumored. There are no plans to hire a new club president, he added.

Argyros purchased the club in January 1981 and since then has lost a number of veteran players who were either free agents or approaching free agency.

Three former members of the club -- Tom Paciorek, Julio Cruz and Floyd Bannister -- played prominent roles with the Chicago White Sox in their drive to the American League Western Division crown this season, for example.

That has given Argryos a reputation as a fiscally tight-fisted owner, but he insisted Keller will be given the money to acquire the veteran players he thinks the club needs.

'The emphasis is to produce a winner as soon as possible,' said Argyros.