Last week, in my review of the Kurdish film My Sweet Pepper Land, I said that the Western had faded from the popular imagination. But here again the genre resurfaces, this time as an out and out comedy, made by Americans and set somewhere on the Western frontier, late in the 19th century. In a way, though, it’s less of a Western than Pepper Land, because it’s not really interested in ideas of heroism or murky zones of frontier morality that usually define the genre. It plays much more like a comedy rooted in the neurosis and crises of contemporary white masculinity – ploughing the same furrow as those gross out comedies from the Judd Apatow stable.

It’s made by Seth MacFarlane, a comic, writer and director known for his middle American vulgar obsessions who first reached a wide audience as creator of the adult TV animation The Family Guy. As a filmmaker he has one feature under his belt, the blokey rom com Ted, where he also voiced a foul mouthed CGI teddy bear and starred opposite Mark Wahlberg. Here, he takes centre stage playing a meek sheep farmer called Albert who lives with his parents in a dustbowl town. Really he’s a stand in for the suburban American everyman, frightened and depressed by the world around him, which is full of nasty villains, incurable diseases and lethal critters promising death in a million different guises (hence the title of the film).

It’s also a world that guarantees humiliation for average guys like Albert, and you see him get dumped by his girlfriend (Amanda Seyfried) at the beginning of the film for a smug businessman who owns the town’s local moustachery (Neil Patrick Harris). When Albert commits to a duel, he takes shooting lessons from a mysterious woman gunslinger (Charlize Theron) but doesn’t realise she’s married to a jealous outlaw (Liam Neeson). Wherever there’s a woman, a dangerous, obnoxious man is not far behind in this movie, a theme echoed in a subplot about Albert’s friend, a serial cuckhold and virgin (Giovanni Ribisi) who’s girlfriend (Sarah Silverman) is the town’s high-in-demand whore.

With this set up, a few moderately successful gags involving bodily fluids are soon coming down the pipe, and MacFarlane’s character – who talks like a guy you’ve met in the checkout line at Costco – whines and opines about this crazy wild west world like you’d expect a 21st century comic to do. As it unfolds, Albert’s story starts to look a bit like an exercise in self pity, which is true of a lot of the current crop of comedies about hapless suburban man-children who find out the universe can be a pretty messed up place. The poor little white guy is not in Kansas anymore. I specify “white” because this film puts race front and centre, poking a lot of fun at the blind spots of the late 19th century. Albert’s a heroic guy partly because he shows a very contemporary ability to empathise with the ethnic minorities in the film, expressing bafflement over the racist figurines in a fair ground shooting gallery, or bonding over peyote with a tribe of local Indians.