1.

Sexual objectification

disregarding personality or dignity; reducing a person to a commodity or sex object

Overview: Sexual objectification is the act of treating a person solely as an object of sexual desire. Objectification more broadly means treating a person as a commodity or an object without regard to their pe ...

0 0

2.

Body image

A person's perception of the aesthetics or sexual attractiveness of his or her own body

Overview: Body image is a person's perception of the aesthetics or sexual attractiveness of their own body. It involves how a person sees themself, compared to the standards that have been set by society. The concept ...

0 0

3.

Bikini barista

Person who serves coffee while dressed in two-piece swimwear

Overview: A bikini barista is a woman who works as a barista, preparing and serving coffee beverages, while dressed in scanty attire such as a bikini, lingerie or a crop top combined with bikini bottoms or hotpants ...

0 0

4.

Pornified

2005 book by Pamela Paul

Overview: Pornified: How Pornography Is Transforming Our Lives, Our Relationships, and Our Families (alternately titled Pornified: How Pornography Is Damaging Our Lives, Our Relationships, and Our Families) is a ...

0 0

5.

Overview: SexyMandarin is a company that sells Mandarin Chinese language learning videos featuring female models. It was founded by Kaoru Kikuchi and Michael Gleissner in December 2011.

0 0

6.

Female Chauvinist Pigs

Book by Ariel Levy

Overview: Female Chauvinist Pigs: Women and the Rise of Raunch Culture (2005) is a book by Ariel Levy which critiques the highly sexualized American culture in which women are objectified, objectify one another ...

0 0

7.

Overview: The Expert Group Meeting (EGM): prevention of violence against women and girls was convened as part of the United Nations Commission on the Status of Women's multi-year programme of work for 2010-2014 ...

0 0

8.

International Women's Year

Name given to 1975 by the United Nations

Overview: International Women's Year (IWY) was the name given to 1975 by the United Nations. Since that year March 8 has been celebrated as International Women's Day, and the United Nations Decade for Women, from ...

0 0