Location Profile

With a student enrolment in excess of 1450, and located on 5.4 hectares in the City of Banyule, Viewbank College provides outstanding educational opportunities to families in Rosanna, Heidelberg, Viewbank and surrounding suburbs. The College is academically focused, and has a high level of participation in other curriculum areas such as Music and the Visual & Performing Arts.

The College has developed a strong and tangible ethos based around hard work, respect for learning, the rights of others and the pursuit of success. Through the very successful student leadership program, the house program and a series of large general assemblies, the College promotes involvement, student participation and service to others. The College's sporting teams are regularly successful right through to the state level. The College production, the debating program, public speaking and the previously mentioned Music Program and the Social Action group are ways students can become involved and inspired.

The College Curriculum is a standard academic curriculum with VET subjects offered off campus. The College offers German and Japanese through to Year 12 and Music Performance is a strong VCE subject. The Instrumental Music program has 300 active participants and the College employs 20 instrumental music teachers. The College has a much sought after Acceleration and Enhancement Program and a stratified Maths program at Year 10. The College is starting to pilot a modified VCAL program.

The College maintains buildings and facilities to a high standard with well - equipped classrooms and staff rooms, complete with data projector facilities. A 1:1 laptop program was introduced in 2015 and has been expanded to include all year levels. Other valuable facilities include a well-resourced library and our new 420 seat Performing Arts Centre and STEAM Complex which opened in July 2018.

Program Benefits

This position attracts an incentive payment of $5,650 (pre-tax) for the successful candidate who meets the eligibility criteria set out under conditions of employment.

Conditions of Employment

All staff employed by the Department and schools have access to a broad range of employment conditions and working arrangements.

The appointment of successful applicants will be made subject to a satisfactory pre-employment conditions check.

A probationary period may apply during the first year of employment and induction and support programs provided.

Eligibility for incentive payments:

The successful candidate is committing to a minimum of 1 year employment at this school

The successful candidate will not be a Graduate Teacher Incentive recipient from a previous vacancy

The successful candidate must not be employed as a teacher by the Department at the time the advertised position is to commence

EEO AND OHS Commitment

The Department of Education is committed to the principles of equal opportunity, and diversity and inclusion for all. We value diversity and inclusion in all forms – gender, religion, ethnicity, LGBTIQ+, disability and neurodiversity. Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander candidates are strongly encouraged to apply for roles within the Department. The Department recognises that the provision of family friendly, supportive, safe and harassment free workplaces is essential to high performance and promotes flexible work, diversity and safety across all schools and Department workplaces. It is our policy to provide reasonable adjustments for persons with a disability (see Workplace adjustment guidelines).