Viewbank College takes pride in their strong academic standing, reflected in their commitment to providing a high quality education that fully develops the potential of each student. Through a variety of co-curricular and extra-curricular activities, students are afforded the opportunity to explore their passions and find their vocation in life. Viewbank College strives to foster an encouraging, caring environment where highly motivated and committed staff support students throughout their academic journey, shaping students into active, effective global citizens who are ready to participate within the community.

DIB worked with Viewbank College in installing a new projector system for one of their classrooms, with the hopes of improving the learning experience within the room.

Installation process

The classroom saw the installation of an EPSON EB-685W Projector. Notable for its 3,500 ANSI lumens of brightness output, this projector can generate ultra bright images, making it much easier for students to read the content displayed by the projector. Due to the projector being an ultra short throw, any shadows or glare that may obscure the images are reduced.

While the projector features in-built 16W speakers, an additional EPSON 30 watt speaker system was installed. Comprising of two 15W speakers, the speaker system is designed to provide audio support for the projector. Further, a 3.5mm audio input plate was fitted so that users can connect their iPod/MP3 device and play audio directly to the speakers, even when the projector system is off.

To make the new system easier to use, DIB installed a Joey Micro 6 wall control panel. These panels focus on simplifying how users work their system, taking all of the most important, most commonly used features and places them in one place. They are usually set up to include buttons that turn the system on and off, control the volume, and change the source to be displayed.

This projector system features a multitude of ways for users to connect their devices to the projector, whether through wireless connection (thanks to the projector’s advanced networking capabilities) or locally, through the projector’s HDMI and USB inputs, or through the HDMI input plate that was installed by DIB.