Viewbank College is an outstanding learning environment and its strength as a community lies in its people. Our students are at the centre of everything that we do.

We are proud of our strong academic standing in the community. The College is committed to providing quality teaching and learning and to challenge students to grow as learners and as individuals. We have high expectations of all our students and they thrive in an academically challenging environment, but one that is safe and well supported. We are able to achieve strong academic results due to the positive attitudes of our students and the support of passionate and dedicated teachers.

The future is full of possibilities and uncertainty. As a community we are committed to developing students who are globally aware learners. Those who can think critically, learn collaboratively and have a growing awareness of the political, social, economic and environmental challenges the world is facing.

We are equally committed, through our focus on Respectful Relationships, to build empathy in our students. Our College Pledge promotes inclusivity, diversity and respect. We aim to empower all students with a strong sense of self-worth and the confidence to take their place as global citizens who can help shape a positive future.

The College has breadth in our curriculum program and innovative extracurricular choices. Students can explore and develop interests and passions through our Accelerated program; Languages program; STEAM initiatives; Music and Performing and Visual Arts; debating and public speaking; Sports and Student Leadership. Please browse through our website to gain a better understanding of the opportunities for students to participate in a vibrant community and build connections with other students and staff throughout the College.

Viewbank College actively encourages parent participation through the College Council or a variety of parent support groups: Friends of Viewbank, Friends of Music, Friends of STEAM, Friends of Health and Wellbeing and Friends of the Visual and Performing Arts. We believe that educating young people is a shared commitment and we value the voice of our parents in doing so.