UPC 5996255708356

MADE IN HUNGARY

REGION 2 PAL DVD

Audio: English 5.1, Hungarian 2.1

Subtitles: Hungarian, Croatian, Slovenian

Total runtime: 108 minutes

English Summary:

The Contender is a 2000 American political drama film written and directed by Rod Lurie. It stars Gary Oldman, Joan Allen, Jeff Bridges and Christian Slater. The film focuses on a fictional United States President (played by Bridges) and the events surrounding his appointment of a new Vice President (Allen).

Second-term Democratic U.S. President Jackson Evans must select a new Vice President following the sudden death of his Vice President, Troy Ellard. The obvious choice seems to be Virginia Governor Jack Hathaway, who is hailed as a hero after he recently dove into a lake in a failed attempt to save a drowning girl. The President instead decides that his "swan song" will be helping to break the glass ceiling by nominating Ohio Senator Laine Hanson. In accordance with the 25th Amendment to the Constitution, approval from both houses of Congress is required. Standing in her way is Republican Congressman Sheldon Runyon of Illinois, who believes she is unqualified for the position, and backs Hathaway for the nod. His investigation into her background turns up an incident where she was apparently photographed participating in a drunken orgy as part of a sorority initiation. He is joined in his opposition by Democratic Representative Reginald Webster.

The confirmation hearings begin in Washington, D.C., and Runyon, who chairs the committee, quickly addresses Hanson's alleged sexual imbroglio. Hanson refuses to address the incident, neither confirming nor denying anything, and tries to turn the discussion towards political issues. Anticipating that Hanson would deem her personal past "none of anyone's business", Runyon starts rumors in the media saying that the sexual escapade in college was done in exchange for money and favors, making it prostitution.

Hungarian Summary:

Laine Hanson szenátor asszony karrierje hirtelen fordulatot vesz, amikor Evans elnök őt jelöli a hirtelen elhunyt alelnök helyére. A politikusnő nem sokkal korábban váltott pártot. Régi és új ellenségei lejárató kampányt kezdenek ellene. A legelszántabb köztük Runyon, a jelölőbizottság elnöke. Kiszivárogtat a sajtónak egy pikáns fejezetet Laine egyetemi múltjáról. Laine tanácstalan, a közvélemény megosztott és válaszokat vár. Runyon favoritja Jack Hathaway kormányzó, akit életmentő hősként tisztelnek, amióta egy lányt kimentett a folyóból. Hírek és híresztelések: a háttérben álló manipulátornak minden eszköz helyes, hogy céljait elérje...

Cast / Szereplők:

ActorCharacterRole Gary Oldman Sheldon Runyon (R-IL) Representative, chairman of the House Judiciary Committee Joan Allen Laine Billings Hanson (D-OH) Senator, vice presidential nominee Jeff Bridges Jackson Evans (D) President of the United States Christian Slater Reginald Webster (D-DE) Representative, House Judiciary Committee member Sam Elliott Kermit Newman White House Chief of Staff William Petersen Jack Hathaway (D-VA) Governor of Virginia Saul Rubinek Jerry Toliver White House Press Secretary Philip Baker Hall Oscar Billings (R-OH) former Governor of Ohio, Laine Hanson's father Mike Binder Lewis Hollis Laine Hanson's legal counsel Robin Thomas William Hanson Campaign manager, Laine Hanson's husband Kathryn Morris Paige Willomina FBI Special Agent