Rod Lurie is the director of the "The Outpost," released July 2020, starring Scott Eastwood, Caleb Landry Jones, and Orlando Bloom. The film, based on CNN chief correspondent Jake Tapper's bestselling book of the same name, tells the true story of the events leading up to and including the Battle of Kamdesh in Afghanistan, where a small unit of U.S. soldiers defended against an overwhelming force of Taliban fighters in what was one of the bloodiest American engagements of the Afghan War. The battle resulted in two living service members, Ty Carter and Clint Romesha, being awarded the Medal of Honor - the first time that had happened in fifty years.

Previously Lurie wrote and directed the widely-praised Academy Award and Golden Globe Award nominated political thriller "The Contender," starring Joan Allen, Jeff Bridges, Gary Oldman and Christian Slater. The film was also honored by the Broadcast Film Critics with the first-ever Alan J. Pakula Award. He also wrote and directed the films "Straw Dogs," a remake of the 1971 classic starring James Marsden, Kate Bosworth, and Alexander Skarsgard, "Nothing But the Truth," starring Kate Beckinsale, Alan Alda, and Matt Dillon, "Resurrecting the Champ," starring Samuel L. Jackson and Josh Hartnett. Additionally, he created and executive-produced "Line of Fire," a one-hour FBI drama for ABC, and directed the feature film "The Last Castle," which starred Robert Redford, James Gandolfini, and Mark Ruffalo.

In television, Lurie created the series "Commander In Chief," which was nominated for the Best Drama Series Golden Globe, and for which Geena Davis won the Best Actress Golden Globe for her depiction of the first female President of the United States.

Lurie made his film writing and directing debut in 1998 with the dramatic short "Four Second Delay," which won the Best Short Film award at the Atlanta Film Festival and the Crested Butte Reel Fest. The film also won the Prix du Jury at the Festival of American Cinema in Deauville, France. Lurie followed in 2000 with his first feature film, "Deterrence," a drama about America coming to the brink of nuclear war, starring Kevin Pollak and Timothy Hutton.

Before he segued to filmmaking, Lurie graduated from the United States Military Academy at West Point in 1984 and went on to serve for four years as a Combat Arms officer in the U.S. Army. After the military, Lurie first enjoyed success as a film critic and entertainment reporter, breaking into journalism as a reporter for the New York Daily News, and was also a film critic and interviewer for Channel 12 in Fairfield, Connecticut. In addition, he was a frequent contributor to such magazines as Premiere, Movieline and Entertainment Weekly.

After moving to Los Angeles, Lurie worked as a film critic, investigative reporter and contributing editor to Los Angeles Magazine from 1990-1995.

As an investigative reporter in the entertainment industry, Lurie's discovery of unethical and illegal practices of tabloid newspapers gained him national exposure on programs such as "60 Minutes" and "Nightline."

He spent the next four years as the film critic for KABC 790 Radio in Los Angeles, where his top-rated movie review show entertained Southern California moviegoers every Saturday from 1995 to 1999. His on-air guests included: Tom Hanks, James Woods, Billy Bob Thornton, Dustin Hoffman, John Travolta, Francis Ford Coppola, Martin Landau, James Cameron and Mel Gibson. In addition, Lurie authored the book Once Upon A Time in Hollywood in 1995.

He lives in Los Angeles with his wife, the bestselling novelist Kyra Davis.