Another year, another coach.

Jason Richardson can't wait.

The former Arthur Hill High School and Michigan State University basketball standout helped raise more than $24,000 Wednesday in the fifth annual Jason Richardson Golf Classic benefiting the United Way at The Fortress in Frankenmuth.

And, he didn't finish near the bottom. Last year, Richardson's foursome finished second-to-last. This year, his foursome shot a 72, ahead of 10 other teams in the 38-team field.

"I golfed here Tuesday to practice," Richardson said. "This is for fun, but I still don't like losing. Last year bothered me. I'm competitive. I shot a 43 yesterday over nine holes and only lost one ball. That's good for me.

"I've actually golfed more than usual this year, probably four or five times. I must be getting older because I get that itch to play golf once in a while."Richardson, 27, returns for his second season with the Charlotte Bobcats. Last season, Richardson led the Bobcats in scoring with 21.8 points per game. He also set personal highs in minutes played, 3-pointers, 3-point percentage and steals.

"We didn't make the playoffs, but at the end of the season I was excited," Richardson said. "I played all 82 games. I was healthy all season and I felt good. I was able to show what I can do."

• Saginaw's Jason Richardson keeps giving back

He has to impress another new head coach this season, former Detroit Pistons coach Larry Brown.

"This is my eighth year, and I've played for seven different head coaches," Richardson said. "I can't wait to play for Larry Brown. The first time I talked to him, he told me not to worry. He said anybody that can play for Tom Izzo can play for Larry Brown ... and I loved playing for Coach Izzo."

Richardson feels confident that Brown could stay in Charlotte for a long time, despite his reputation as a vagabond coach.

"He wants to prove himself after what happened in New York," Richardson said. "He's going back to North Carolina where he coached and played. He's a veteran coach, a great coach. I can't wait."

Richardson, a 6-foot-6 guard, hopes to stay in Charlotte, but after getting traded to the Bobcats from Golden State a year ago, he's prepared for anything.

"Nobody's safe, but that's life in the NBA," Richardson said. "When I was traded, I took it personally. But it's not personal. It's business. A lot of the moves in the NBA are business. People with big contracts or expiring contracts. You have to learn it's not personal. When I was traded, it hurt.

"But I love Charlotte. I'm getting married in a year. I have my kids there. It's a family-oriented city. It's good for me."

Wednesday's proceeds of $24,000 matched the 2007 total, bringing the five-year total to $73,000.

In the first two years, the outing raised $5,000 each year. The move to The Fortress upped the proceeds to $15,000 in 2006.

But in the past two years, Richardson has underwritten the outing, covering the expenses. All the money goes directly to the United Way.

"After the first two years, we were a little frustrated because we wanted to make this big event," United Way of Saginaw President Cherrie Benchley said. "We moved it to The Fortress and made it a first-class outing.

"The last two years, though, all the credit has to go to Jason for taking care of all the expenses, in addition to being here and doing everything to bring people in.

"He has such a big heart."

The winning foursome of Ed Bruff, Gene Pickleman, Jim Foresman and Al Pumford shot a 56 and received $600 to donate to a specific United Way charity. They chose the CAN Council.

The team of Wayne Sieggreen, Tom Sieggreen, Adam Haswell and Adam Hanson also shot a 56, losing out on the tie-breaker. The foursome donated the $500 prize to Hidden Harvest.

Hugh Bernreuter is the assistant sports editor of The Saginaw News. You can reach him at 776-9771.