WILMINGTON, N.C. – Jason Richardson looks around his new team and sees a lot in common with his old club that stunned the NBA last season: Similar point guards, similar athleticism, and a similar will to break through and reach the playoffs.

Three months after he was shocked to learn he’d been traded by Golden State to Charlotte, the familiar traits in his new teammates are making his transition to the young Bobcats easier.

“Actually, we’re very similar to Golden State,” Richardson said Tuesday after the Bobcats’ opening practice of training camp. “Very athletic, very young, got a lot of guys who can do a lot of different things. It’s pretty much the same situation on the East Coast.

“We can be a playoff team.”

And while that might bring a chuckle knowing the Bobcats haven’t won more than 33 games in any of their first three seasons, calling the Warriors a playoff team a year ago at this time may have seemed far-fetched, too.

But with Baron Davis at point guard and Richardson recovering from knee injuries to lead a late-season push, Golden State ended a streak of 12 straight losing seasons – then knocked off top-seeded Dallas in the first round of the playoffs.

“The playoffs is where basketball really counts. That’s where you make your name as an individual and as a team,” Richardson said. “Going through that whole process for the first time in my career was a great experience. Once you taste that, you always want that.”

The Bobcats have been talking playoffs since first-year coach Sam Vincent declared the day he was hired that he’d be “incredibly discouraged and disappointed” if they didn’t reach the postseason this season.

With Richardson giving Charlotte the go-to scorer it’s never had, the Bobcats plan on emulating Golden State’s fast-paced style with speedy point guard Raymond Felton feeding athletic wings Richardson and Gerald Wallace.

“Raymond, he reminds me of a young Baron Davis,” Richardson said. “Very strong point guard. He can do a lot of things. He can score, play defense. He’s got the body to post up. I’m going to show him some post moves down there. He’s a strong guy. He reminds me of a young Baron.”

Felton is Charlotte’s clear No. 1 point guard after Brevin Knight was released in the offseason. Felton struggled at times last season, shooting just 38 percent from the field.

He’ll be counted on to shoot less with Richardson’s presence.

“He’s a guy who’s a superstar, but he’s still a guy who’s hungry,” Felton said of Richardson, who has averaged 18.3 points in his six-year career, but is just a 69 percent free throw shooter. “He wants to get to the playoffs. He wants to get to that point. He wants to be on a winning team, a contending team.”

Richardson, despite having his name brought up in trade rumors, said he was “shocked” to learn on draft night he had been dealt. He was so angered he initially refused to take Bobcats part-owner Michael Jordan’s call.

But Richardson seemed relaxed Tuesday. He’s finished his move to Charlotte and wants to duplicate last season’s surprise playoff run – in a different uniform.

“They definitely knocked on the door last year, only four or five games out of the playoffs, especially with all the injuries they had,” Richardson said. “Just imagine a healthy team, adding me to the mix, and guys really wanting to make an attempt to get to the next level.

“We have an opportunity to do something good this season.”