CHARLOTTE, N.C. – When Jason Richardson’s feeling it, everything seems right with the 76ers. It didn’t hurt that Evan Turner had it going, too.

Richardson made four 3-pointers, all of them falling in the fourth quarter, and Turner couldn’t seem to pick a bad spot on the floor as the Sixers took down the Charlotte Bobcats, 104-98, Friday night at Time Warner Cable Arena.

Turner’s up-and-under move at the four-minute mark capped a game-saving run for the Sixers, who staved off two instances in which the Bobcats had drawn even in the fourth quarter in a game in which the Sixers owned a 10-point lead in the third. Richardson knocked down a quartet of treys, including one with 70 seconds to go, to keep Charlotte at arm’s length.

The last one was just like the one before it, with Richardson all alone in the left corner.

‘I was very surprised. There were a couple times I could’ve shot it, but looking at the clock, and knowing we had to waste some time, (I didn’t),’ said Richardson, who finished with 22 points, 14 of which came in the fourth. ‘But, yeah, I was shocked they left me open so many times.’

Everybody was open, as the Sixers shot 51.2 percent collectively.

Turner had 25 points on 10-for-15 shooting, and 10 rebounds, including a pair of big defensive boards in the final two minutes. Jrue Holiday paired 13 points with 15 assists and Lavoy Allen posted the first double-double of his career, logging 10 points and 10 boards.

Friday’s game represented the eighth consecutive game in which Turner has logged a double-digit scoring tally, the longest such streak in his three-year career.

‘When shots are going in, that’s how it’s supposed to go the whole year,’ Turner said. ‘That’s why I shot something like 50,000 shots this summer, so I can shoot like that. Once again, I’ve been saying to calm myself down. I was so anxious. Now I’m following through. When you’re making shots, the rim seems bigger.’

The Sixers (10-6), who have won four of five road games this season, won their second straight heading to Turner’s hometown, Chicago, for a tilt with the Bulls tonight.

The Sixers shot 58.5 percent in the opening half. But against Charlotte, which has one of the NBA’s more-porous scoring defenses, giving up an average of 100 points per contest, the Sixers didn’t seem to have any interest in putting away the Bobcats.

The Sixers assembled a 14-6 run midway through the third quarter for their largest lead, at 72-62. The Bobcats reeled off seven straight thereafter, setting the tone for a tight game the rest of the way.

Charlotte closed to within one, at 76-75, at the turn of the quarter, with a Bismack Biyombo bucket in transition. Once more, Turner was there to give the Sixers a cushion. His pull-up jumper in the lane led to a traditional 3-point play, and a 79-75 advantage.

‘He’s playing at a great rhythm and he knows where his sugar is,’ Collins said of Turner. ‘He’s getting to his spots and he’s not forcing anything. … Evan is playing great. I love what he’s doing.’

Not to be outdone, the Bobcats’ Ramon Sessions’ fastbreak flip with 9:28 to go brought the game even, at 81-all, for the first time since the first half. And that’s where it stayed for the next two minutes, as both teams traded a series of misses.

Then Richardson got it going from long range.

‘In the first half, they shaded me a little bit. In the second half, it kind of opened a little bit,’ he said.

Richardson made a 3-pointer, his first successful try from there in the game, to break the deadlock. His next 3, off a scrum and kept alive with fancy footwork from Holiday, made it an 89-85 Sixers lead with 5:34 remaining.

Left alone in the left corner, on a head-shaking performance defensively by the Bobcats, Richardson hit another trey and Turner – on the Sixers’ next possession – had a nifty up-and-under move to bring the Sixers’ lead back to three possessions, at 95-87. Richardson was on the left wing again, with 1:10 to go, and buried another 3-pointer to stall out the Bobcats’ rally.

Richardson logged 30 minutes, not a season-high but certainly up there for the 31-year-old. But he saved his best for late.

‘The competitor in me (wants) to play. I want to be on the floor,’ Richardson said. ‘That’s one of the parts of getting older. You don’t want to admit it that you get tired being out there that long. I’m just doing whatever it takes to help this team win. I’ve been in there before, when I was younger in my career. It’s all about winning games and getting toward a championship.’