The Charlotte Bobcats hope they found their go-to scorer, a seasoned guard who can still taste the postseason.

They plan to hand Jason Richardson the ball this season and watch the rainbow 3-pointers, acrobatic dunks and the franchise's first playoff appearance follow.

"The expectation is just to see him do what he does," first-year Bobcats coach Sam Vincent said. "He's going to be exciting because he's got an electrifying game. I don't see us putting additional pressure on him and I don't think the people will. I think the people just want him to come in and be the Jason Richardson that he's been, and I think that will be pretty good for us."

Richardson bounced back from a fractured hand early last season and guided Golden State to its first postseason appearance in 12 years. Once the Warriors reached the playoffs, they quickly shattered the bracket, defeating the Dallas Mavericks to become the first No. 8 seed to win a first-round best-of-7 series. It was the franchise's first playoff series victory in 16 years, and Bay Area fans were excited about their high-scoring team with its young, talented nucleus.

So Richardson, the fifth overall pick in the 2001 NBA Draft, was stunned when the phone rang on draft day in June and he heard the Warriors had dealt him and Jermareo Davidson to Charlotte for former North Carolina star Brandan Wright.

"At first, I had no idea I was going to be traded," Richardson said. "After things settled down I just looked at the team, looked at the situation, came out here and visited Charlotte. People from the airport as soon as I landed was excited about me being here. I realized it was a good situation for me."

The Bobcats think Richardson, at 6-foot-6 and 225 pounds, gives them exactly what they need: a dynamic scorer and shooter who relishes the challenge of taking shots and making plays in the final minutes. In six seasons with Golden State, Richardson averaged 18.3 points per game and hit 35 percent of his 3-point field goals. He won two dunk contests, made the All-Rookie team and ranked in the NBA's top 20 in scoring three different seasons.

The addition of Richardson, and the re-signing of Gerald Wallace, give the Bobcats one of the league's most dynamic wing tandems. Wallace, a 6-7 forward, led the Bobcats with 18.1 points per game last season.

Point guard Raymond Felton is happy, of course, to have another scorer to feed. He also expects Richardson to help fill a leadership void created when veteran guard Brevin Knight departed.

"He's a guy that's been through a lot, been on a team that wasn't winning as much," Felton said. "He's a guy who is looking to make it to the playoffs. He's a guy that's a superstar; that's hungry."

Charlotte forward Adam Morrison said Richardson already has made his presence felt by showing up on time and giving maximum effort in preseason workouts. And the Bobcats, who finished seven games out of the Eastern Conference playoffs a year ago, hope to be in that mix when April arrives.

"The playoffs is where basketball really counts," said Richardson, who helped Michigan State win the 2000 NCAA championship. "That's where you make a name for yourself as an individual, as a team and going through that whole process for the first time in my career was a great experience. I'm going to work hard and the other guys want to feel that for the first time. We're going to achieve it."

Brian Mull: 343-2034

brian.mull@starnewsonline.com