Beginning in 1981, Hosni Mubarak ruled Egypt for over twenty-nine years. Though he ran for

presidential reelection several times, elections were marked by widespread

fraud, and opposing politicians were legally prohibited from running against

Mubarak until 2005. Virtually all key officials in government were from

Mubarak's National Democratic Party (NDP). Mubarak constructed a vast security

apparatus to control public dissent; in the 1990s, citizens would only whisper

his name for fear of reprisal. For his entire tenure as president, Egypt was in

a legalized "state of emergency," which legalized censorship, expanded police

powers, and curtailed constitutional rights. The regime severely limited

freedom of the press, and the state-run media were no more than a propaganda

machine. Rumors abounded that Mubarak would eventually be replaced by his son

Gamal, transforming Egypt's supposedly electoral government into a de facto

monarchy.

Egyptian activists began to push the boundaries of the state's tolerance for dissent in the 2000s.

In 2004, a group of activists opposed to the Israeli occupation of Palestine

and the United States war in Iraq formed a new campaign called the Kefaya

(Enough) Movement, which targeted Mubarak and his family, and sought to prevent

succession of the presidency to Gamal. Then, textile workers frustrated by

Mubarak's neoliberal policies launched a wave of strikes in 2006 and 2007,

beginning in Mahalla and spreading across the country. From this point forward,

public displays of dissent were not unusual, as they once were. Though there

were often ten times as many police as protesters, workers and activists felt

more confident taking to the streets to voice their concerns. The majority of

the population, however, remained fearful of the regime.

A group of activist

youth formed the April 6 Movement in spring 2008, to support an industrial

protest in Mahalla. After the Mahalla protest ended, April 6 continued to

organize, using new tools such as Facebook and Twitter to connect with

potential allies and members. The group received training from members of the

Serbian group Otpor!, which organized the nonviolent resistance to and eventual

removal of Slobodan Milosevic. Despite arrests and harassment of April 6

leaders, the group remained active in its efforts to encourage resistance to

the regime.

Under Mubarak,

January 25 was Egypt's "National Police Day," a celebration of the country's

police. As January 25, 2011, approached, April 6 decided to use this day to

their advantage and hold a march in which they would chant creative,

anti-police, anti-Mubarak messages. In advance of the date, the group

distributed thousands of flyers advertising their rally, and also promoted the

event on Facebook. On January 18, April 6 member Asmaa Mahfouz posted a video

on YouTube in which she urged people to protest on the 25th, and not to be

afraid. The video went viral, gaining over 80,000 hits in less than a week.

January 25 protests were also organized and supported by Google executive Wael

Ghonim, who used his Facebook group, We Are All Khaled Said, to reach tens of

thousands more Egyptians. Many other groups, including the National Association

for Change, Kefaya, and opposition political parties, also endorsed the

rallies.

Recruitment efforts

for the day of protest were aided by the recent revolution in Tunisia, where

popular nonviolent protests forced long-time President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali

to step down on January 14. This stunning victory by Tunisians gave Egyptians

the feeling that change might also be possible in their country. By January 25,

close to 100,000 people indicated on Facebook that they would attend the day of

protest. Mubarak's government promised to strictly suppress any demonstrations,

on the grounds that activists had not obtained the required permits.

On Tuesday, January

25, tens of thousands of protesters filled the streets of Cairo, eventually

congregating in Tahrir ("Liberation") Square, where they chanted and waved

flags. Some protesters burned portraits of Mubarak. Police attempted to disperse

protesters with tear gas and water cannons. When this failed, police decided to

simply contain the masses, rather than attempt to disperse it. Clashes between

protesters and police took place on a number of side streets. Though some

protesters threw rocks, the majority of the participants were nonviolent.

Police actions were more aggressive, though they limited themselves to

non-lethal means such as batons, gas, water cannons, and rubber bullets. In

addition to the protests in Cairo, demonstrations occurred in Alexandria, Suez,

and other Egyptian cities.

Before Tuesday's

large rallies, the April 6, Ghonim, and other organizers framed the protests as

an outcry against torture, unemployment, and corruption, and not as a demand

for Mubarak to leave. Many participants in the protests wanted Mubarak to go,

however, and the official messaging from organizers quickly changed to reflect

that. By the end of Tuesday, organizers were calling for Mubarak to step down,

and vowing not to stop agitating until he did.

The next day,

citizens held smaller marches and rallies in Cairo and elsewhere. Police again

responded with organized efforts, leading to more clashes. Every time police

forced a group of protesters to disperse, protesters regrouped shortly and

resumed their chants for Mubarak to step down.

In official

statements, Mubarak's regime claimed that the protests were organized by the

Muslim Brotherhood, which in fact was not involved at all. Police violence

against mostly peaceful demonstrators attracted the attention of the

international community, including United States Secretary of State Hillary

Clinton, who encouraged Mubarak to allow peaceful protest.

On Thursday, January

27, small demonstrations continued, but most citizens stayed home. The youth

organizers of the campaign announced that Friday would be an escalation, a "Day

of Rage" against the regime. Both the government and the resistance used

Thursday to prepare. Spurred by the unexpected size and resilience of the

demonstration, the Muslim Brotherhood announced it would be joining the

coalition of organizers. In addition, Dr. Mohammed El-Baradei, former head of

the International Atomic Energy Agency and a critic of Mubarak, returned to the

country to provide a face to the protests. This was a strategic maneuver by the

youth leadership coalition, which believed that El-Baradei would help combat

the international perception of the protests as somewhat disorganized and

spontaneous. For his part, El-Baradei emphasized that the youth were the

leaders of the revolution.

The night before the

"Day of Rage," the Egyptian government ordered all Internet Service Providers

in the country to cut off Internet service. The ISPs complied, and Internet

traffic in Egypt immediately dropped to close to nothing. This was the first

time in history that a government had cut off all Internet access to its

people. In doing so, Mubarak's regime believed it would hinder the organization

of the protesters. The regime also hindered cell phone access, although it

could not cut it off entirely.

The following day,

after midday prayer services, hundreds of thousands of Egyptians streamed into

the streets across Egypt. In Cairo, people followed directions printed and

distributed by youth organizers, which instructed individuals to gather their

neighbors and start marching toward the center city and Tahrir Squre. Materials

distributed by April 6 and other organizers also stressed the importance of

remaining nonviolent and maintaining a positive attitude. Police attempted to

obstruct demonstrators in all parts of the city, using live ammunition in some

cases. One major confrontation occurred at the Kasr al-Nil Bridge, where police

armed with gas, water cannons and truncheons sought to beat back a swelling

crowd of demonstrators. For the most part, demonstrators did not engage in

hand-to-hand combat with the police, choosing instead to surpass them

nonviolently by the strength of their numbers.

The government

announced a 6 pm curfew, but almost nobody paid attention to it. When it became

clear that protesters were not intimidated into leaving the streets, the regime

withdrew the police forces from Cairo. Demonstrators burned abandoned police

vans, and also lit fire to the National Democratic Party headquarters. Many

Egyptians spoke of a "fear barrier" that had been broken by the day of conflict

with the police, in which the numbers and bravery of the protesters prevailed.

After police

vanished from Cairo, the national army entered the city. Aware that the army

would be an important arbiter of power, demonstrators cheered to welcome the

soldiers, gave them hugs, and chanted slogans like "The People and the Army are

One Fist." The army announced its intention to protect the people of Egypt, and

emphasized that it would not fire on civilians.

Later that night,

Mubarak appeared on state-run television and announced that he would dismiss

his cabinet. This statement did not appease the demonstrators. Several hundred

remained in Tahrir Square overnight, and vowed to stay until Mubarak stepped

down.

On January 29,

police did not return to the capital. Approximately 50,000 people gathered in

Tahrir Square again to demand that Mubarak resign. Organizers of the protests

encouraged people not to chant slogans supporting any particular party, but to

project a message of unity and courage. Official statements by organizers

emphasized the diverse nature of the demonstrators, who crossed lines of class,

gender, and religion. In Tahrir Square, people took turns sweeping and cleaning

up garbage, to prove that the Egyptian people could take care of themselves

without the iron hand of the police. People quickly convened "citizens'

patrols" in Cairo's neighborhoods to prevent looting or violence.

Meanwhile, the

regime amplified any slight incident involving violence or disorder in order to

portray the crowds as dangerous and chaotic. On Saturday evening, Mubarak swore

in the Head of Intelligence, Omar Suleiman, as his new vice president. Suleiman

made gestures toward the organizers of the resistance, but the organizers said

that they would not negotiate with the government until Mubarak was no longer

in power.

By this point, the

events in Egypt had captured the attention of people across the world. The Al

Jazeera news network provided 24-hour coverage of the protests in Arabic and

English, despite intimidation of its reporters by the regime. International

allies organized solidarity rallies in many countries, including the United

States. American activists called on President Barack Obama to cut off its

financial assistance to Egypt. Further aid came from the American company

Google, which developed "speak2tweet" technology that allowed activists to post

to Twitter over their phones, without Internet access.

On January 31 and

February 1, activists further developed the encampment in Tahrir Square,

building a tent city in the center, and barricades around the perimeter of the

square. Over two million people filled the square on February 1 to continue to

pressure the regime. The square acquired a potent symbolic value—people had the

feeling that, as long as there were demonstrators in the square, the revolution

was alive.

Egyptian state

television attempted to convince people to return to their "safe, stable

lives," and emphasized the stories of people who were inconvenienced or losing

business due to the protests. In addition, Mubarak gave another defiant speech

on February 1 in which he refused to step down, but promised not to run for

re-election and vowed to enact constitutional reforms. Most of the protesters

were not convinced by his promises.

The next morning,

February 2, pro-Mubarak groups streamed into the city, pledging allegiance to

their president and condemning the anti-Mubarak protesters. There is some

evidence that many of these counter-protesters were in fact the police forces

in plainclothes--pro-democracy demonstrators claimed to find police ID cards on

the "pro-Mubarak civilians." What started as a ‘war of voices'

escalated throughout the day into violent skirmishes. Street battles between

uncoordinated vigilante groups were fought with stones, sticks, and gasoline

bombs. Pro-Mubarak forces dropped bricks, furniture, and other items from

buildings onto opponent protesters below. They also targeted foreign

journalists, and beat many with fists and sticks. In the afternoon, pro-Mubarak

supporters armed with whips attempted to charge into Tahrir Square on camels

and horses, but were largely pushed back by opposition forces

Meanwhile, the

military largely stood by without intervening in the skirmishes. Army officials

did confront the Tahrir protesters, asking the demonstrators to return home.

Protesters wouldn't move an inch. In the meantime, Internet service was

returning to the country. Also, the nationwide curfew, which the public had

been defying and the military not enforcing, was reportedly reduced.

The next day,

February 3, as thousands maintained the occupation of Tahrir Square, street

battles continued. Pro-democracy protesters stood their ground. A nearby metro

station was turned into a makeshift holding cell; it was proved that some of

the pro-government supporters were in fact state police in plain clothes. After

standing by for so long, the army finally began situating themselves between

opposition groups throughout the city, preventing some clashes.

Additional

anti-Mubarak protesters entered Tahrir Square, protecting it from pro-Mubarak

agitators. In the afternoon the Square was shook with heavy gunfire. Several

people were killed and more injured; many were treated by volunteer doctors in

Tahrir Square's makeshift hospital.

On Friday, February

4, hundreds of thousands of anti-Mubarak protesters convened in Tahrir Square

for what was called the ‘Day of Departure,' renewing the call for the immediate

resignation of President Mubarak. Protesters waved flags, sang the national

anthem, cheered, prayers, and displayed banners and signs. With the curfew

lifted, more were expected to gather at the Square for prayer. Solidarity ‘Day

of Departure' demonstrations were held in New York and Damascus.

The military was by

now actively mediating between pro and anti-Mubarak protesters. The pro-Mubarak

protesters themselves set up and managed security checkpoints and set up

several layers of barricades to protect the Square, using secret codes to

communicate and form additional human barricades if necessary. Christians and

others not participating in Friday prayer also formed human barricades around

those praying to protect them.

On Saturday,

February 5, key leadership of the ruling National Democratic Party resigned

including President Mubarak's son Gamal Mubarak and the party secretary-general

Safwat el-Sharif. Banks opened for the first time since protest began. Again

the army pleaded with protesters to go home, only to be met with the chant,

‘we're not leaving, he is!'

The next day,

Egypt's vice president met with a group of leading opposition groups for the

first time, offering new concessions regarding freedom of press, the release of

detained protesters, and the possible lifting of the Emergency Laws. Opposition

groups saw the meeting as a premature step since their central demand had yet

to be met: the resignation of Hosni Mubarak.

On Monday, February

7, a symbolic funeral procession was held in Tahrir Square for Ahmed Mahmoud,

the first reported journalist casualty of the protests. Later, Wael Ghonim, a

Google executive and activist arrested by state authorities was released. His

moving appearance on TV after his release revived protesters spirits and

reenergized the campaign for thousands; Ghonim would soon play a leading role

in Tahrir Square.

By Tuesday, February

8, Tahrir Square was swelling with protesters, which now resembled a tent camp.

The largest march of the protest shook Cairo, with parallel demonstrations in

Ismaïlia, Asyut, El-Mahalla El-Kubra, and Alexandria. Flags were displayed as a

sign of unity. A Cairo bakery near Tahrir displayed cupcakes with the Egyptian

flag. The demonstrators grew in numbers. In addition to the civilian blockades

and checkpoints, ‘celebratory greeting crews' organized to welcome newcomers to

the Square. That night, as with the several before, protesters made music and

sang anti-Mubarak songs.

The next day workers

went on strike to join the protests. Private labor unions as well as workers of

state-owned companies called for better wages and benefits, for them,

longstanding demands that were now put forward. Some also called for the end of

Mubarak. Massive strikes spread throughout the country, halting economic life.

Other forms of resistance were allowed to come forth. Thousands of farmers from

the southern province Assiut blocked highways with flaming palm trees to

protest bread shortages. Hundreds of homeless Egyptians set fire to a

government office in Port Said in anger over lack of housing.

That night in the

Tahrir Square, a vigil was held to honor the up to 302 people killed in the

couple weeks of protest.

The next day,

February 10, the Egyptian government showed signs of change. The Prime Minister

formed a committee to inspect the ‘illegitimate practices' resulting from the

recent events. The criminal court endorsed the decision to ban three former

ministers from leaving the country. The security chief of Wadi al-Jadid was

fired and the police captain who ordered the shooting of protesters was

arrested.

Rumors circulated that

Mubarak would make an announcement to the public. The streets were flooded with

protesters. In the afternoon, 1,000 doctors in white coats entered the Square

to huge applause; about 3,000 lawyers joined soon after. The city was buzzing

with preliminary excitement. Protesters were sure the time had come. Mubarak

appeared on TV to deliver his speech. He reiterated his promise not run in the

next election, indicating he planned to remain in power until that time.

Protesters were enraged. They took the shoes off their feet and waved them at

Mubarak's image. That night, about 1,000 marched onto the state television

headquarters, which was guarded by the military. The crowd pleaded with the

military to ‘save Egypt' claiming, ‘we won't leave, they will leave.'

Egypt awoke the next

morning to massive demonstrations. It was Friday, February 11. Masses of

protesters rallied in front of the state television building in Cairo, the

presidential palace in Heliopolis, and of course, Liberation Square. Early in

the evening, after a day of intense protest, the vice-president got on air and

announced that Hosni Mubarak had resigned as president and handed over

political power to the army. Tahrir exploded with joy; Egyptians waved flags,

sang, chanted, and honked car horns.