Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak has resigned his post and handed the authority for running the country's affairs to the military, bowing to 18 days of pressure by pro-democracy demonstrators who refused to accept anything less than an end to his three decades of authoritarian rule.

Jubilation erupted across the country at the news that Mubarak had left office, with thousands of Egyptians in Cairo, Alexandria, and other cities pouring into the streets to celebrate, dance, chant "Goodbye! Goodbye!" and wave Egyptian flags.

Fireworks were shot into the sky and car horns were sounded as people celebrated the fall of the regime they say has kept the country poor and oppressed for 30 years.

Radio Free Afghanistan's Abdul Raouf Harawi described the scene in Cairo: "Everybody went out to the streets in happiness to welcome this historic moment. People came out in their cars onto the street making lots of noise. They congratulated each other and distributed different kinds of sweets to each other. At the same time, political figures and teachers and intellectuals and people from all backgrounds were all welcoming this moment."

In the capital, where huge crowds marched on parliament and the presidential palace -- the site of Mubarak's final, unsuccessful attempt to regain control of the country on February 10 -- the biggest celebration was in Tahrir Square, which has been epicenter of nearly three weeks of antigovernment protests.

At a Cairo metro station, someone used spray paint to cross out the “Mubarak” stop on the map and change it to “The Martyrs.” The graffiti artist then posted the picture on Twitter.

Military Assumes Power

The announcement that the 82-year-old president was stepping down and handing control to the army came in a brief statement by Vice President Omar Suleiman on state TV at 6 p.m. local time.

Vice President Omar Suleiman made the announcement that Mubarak was stepping down.

"My fellow citizens. In this difficult time that the country is going through, President Hosni Mubarak has decided to relieve himself of his position as president. He has tasked the Supreme Council of the Armed Forces to take control of the state's affairs. May God protect us," Suleiman said.

Almost instantly, tens of thousands of pro-democracy demonstrators in Cairo erupted in a frenzy of celebration, dancing, and waving Egyptian flags and chanting, "The people have brought down the regime!" People hugged and cried, and shouted, "Egypt is free!"

Hours earlier, Mubarak and his family left Cairo, arriving just before sundown in the Egyptian resort town of Sharm el-Sheikh, where he has a resort home.

The country is now ruled by the Armed Forces Supreme Council, which is the military's top body consisting of top generals and headed by Defense Minister Muhammad Hossein Tantawi.

An unidentified military spokesman appeared on state TV and promised that the army would not act as a substitute for a government based on the "legitimacy of the people." He said the military was preparing the next steps needed "to achieve the ambitions of our great nation" and would announce them soon.

Ibrahim Karawan, the former director of the Middle East Program at London’s International Institute for Strategic Studies, told RFE/RL he doesn’t think Mubarak will remain in Egypt.

"Mubarak himself doesn't pose a danger to the [new government], but I believe that he and his family will go abroad because he cannot stay in Sharm el-Sheikh,” Karawan said. “Sharm el-Sheikh itself is not immune to the rebellion and upheaval."

Leaderless Revolution

In the end, it took just 18 days to bring down a 30-year-old regime, but the anger that drove Egyptians into the street had been building for years.

What began as a youth movement on January 25 quickly grew into a popular, leaderless uprising that expanded as the days went by to include Egyptians of all ages, social classes, and religious persuasions -- Muslims and Christian, old and young, professionals and laborers stood shoulder to shoulder.

Some 300 people were killed in the antigovernment protests, while others were detained or beaten by security services. Many journalists were also abused or injured in the chaos, including AP photographer Khalil Hanna (above), wounded during clashes on February 3.

The demonstrators remained defiant despite orchestrated attacks from pro-regime thugs that led to an estimated 300 deaths and detentions and beatings by the security services. Throughout, they never dropped their demand that Mubarak step down and a new democratically elected government take his place.

Just as Egyptian youth took their inspiration from Tunisia, where citizens brought down the regime of President Zine el-Abidine ben Ali last month, the Egyptian revolution has rocked the Arab world and triggered similar uprisings in Jordan and Yemen, and inspired calls for protests in Syria, Algeria, and Morocco.

In a reflection of the type of nervousness some Arab leaders are feeling, Bahrain's king announced that he will give 1,000 dinars ($2,650) to each Bahraini family. King Hamad bin Isa al-Khalifa, a Sunni, is reportedly the target of protests planned next week by the majority Shi’ite population. Activists have called for protests on February 14, the 10th anniversary of Bahrain's Constitution.

The man who set up the Facebook page that first called Egypt’s youth to action, and who then was detained by security police for most of the uprising, said today he was proud to be an Egyptian.

Democracy activist Wael Ghonim, who is Google’s marketing manager for the Middle East and North Africa, told CNN by phone, “"I am proud to be Egyptian. I just want to say from the bottom of my heart: 'Congratulations to all Egyptians!' And I want to say 'Welcome, Egypt!'"

Obama: 'History Taking Place'

Throughout the upheaval, Mubarak seemed not to understand that he had become the symbol of the protests -- saying on February 10 "this isn't about me." In his last appearance as president, he defied all expectations that he would resign and instead offered more incremental reforms and reaffirmed his pledge not to seek reelection.

Mubarak, a former air force commander, came to power after the 1981 assassination of his predecessor, Anwar Sadat, by Islamic radicals. Throughout his rule, he showed a near obsession with stability, using rigged elections and a hated police force accused of widespread torture to ensure his control.

Opposition protesters celebrate Mubarak's resignation in Cairo's Tahrir Square.

In Washington, President Barack Obama made a statement to reporters after meeting with his national security advisers to discuss the latest developments.

“There are very few moments in our lives when we have the privilege of witnessing history taking place. This is one of those moments, this is one of those times. The people of Egypt have spoken, their voices have been heard, and Egypt will never be the same,” Obama said.

He said that by stepping down, Mubarak had responded to his people’s "hunger for change" and vowed that the United States would “continue to be a friend and partner to Egypt.” He said, “We stand ready to provide whatever assistance is necessary, and asked for, to pursue a credible transition to a democracy.”

Obama praised the Egyptian military for “acting responsibly as a caretaker to the state” and called on it to ensure that people’s rights are protected, the emergency law is lifted, and a clear path to free and fair elections is laid out.

“I’m sure there will be difficult days ahead and many questions remain unanswered. But I am confident that the people of Egypt can find the answers and do so peacefully and constructively, and in the spirit of unity that has defined these last few weeks,” he said.

'Finally Free'

Reaction from other world leaders has poured in. India said it welcomed Mubarak's resignation "in deference to the wishes of the people of Egypt" and "the commitment by military leaders to establish an open and democratic framework of governance."

German Chancellor Angela Merkel also welcomed Mubarak's decision to resign and said his decision to hand power to senior military commanders was a "historic change."

British Prime Minister David Cameron praised Egyptians and citizens of other Arab nations for speaking "so bravely and so peacefully for change in their country."

UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon offered Egypt the world body’s assistance, saying, “I commend the people of Egypt for the peaceful and courageous and orderly manner in which they have exercised their legitimate rights. I call on all parties to continue in the same spirit. The United Nations stands ready to assist in the process."

Ahmet Davotoglu, Turkish minister of foreign affairs, tweeted: “Congratulations to the Egyptian people. And we hope that a system meeting the expectations of the Egyptian people will emerge.”

Iran, which is celebrating the 32nd anniversary of the Islamic Revolution, said Egyptians have achieved a "great victory." Foreign Ministry spokesman Ramin Mehmanparast told Iran's Arabic-language Al-Alam television, "The conquest by the will of the great Egyptian nation over the resistance and persistence of officials who were dependent on the world powers is a great victory,"

Palestinians in Gaza shot off fireworks. Hamas spokesman Sami Abu Zuhri said, "The resignation of Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak is the beginning of the victory of the Egyptian revolution."

Israel, which considered Mubarak a strong security ally, said it hoped his resignation won't change its peaceful relations with Cairo. A senior Israeli official told Reuters, "We hope that the change to democracy in Egypt will happen without violence and that the peace accord will remain."

The day’s dramatic events were cause for celebration among demonstrators but for some, not reason enough to go home. Many said they planned to remain in Cairo’s Tahrir Square until the military’s next steps become clear.

Abdel-Rahman Samir, one of the Cairo organizers, said the movement would now open negotiations with the military over democratic reforms but vowed protests would continue to ensure change is carried out.

"We still don't have any guarantees yet,” he said. “If we end the whole situation now it's like we haven't done anything. So we need to keep sitting in Tahrir until we get all our demands."

Abdul-Rahman Ayyash, who described himself as an online activist and was born eight years after Mubarak came to office, said he would be celebrating all night, and then remain in the square to ensure the military "won't steal the revolution."

"I'm 21 years old," he said. "This is the first time in my life I feel free."

written by Heather Maher, with contributions from Richard Solash and agency reports

Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskiy said on July 25 that a suspect in the shooting death of former lawmaker Iryna Farion, who was known for campaigns promoting the Ukrainian language, was detained in the eastern city of Dnipro.

Zelenskiy wrote on Telegram that Interior Minister Ihor Klymenko had informed him of the detention of an 18-year-old man suspected in the July 19 shooting.

"The operation to detain the suspect was very complicated. Hundreds of specialists from the National Police of Ukraine, the SBU, and other services worked on solving the murder, all these days," Zelenskiy wrote, adding that he asked Klymenko to provide the public with all of the details of the investigation in the high-profile case.

Klymenko said shortly afterward in a statement that the suspect rented at least three apartments in Lviv while preparing the attack on Farion.

"Now the suspect is in custody. It is important to obtain all the details. At this point, investigators are inclined to think that the shooter is just the one who carried out the attack," Klymenko said, adding that any follow-up information will be made public later.

The Schemes (Skhemy) investigative unit of RFE/RL's Ukrainian Service was able to identify the suspect but decided not to disclose the information.

The suspect's father told RFE/RL that his son could not have had any motive to kill Farion.

"I am currently on the battlefield and have not seen my son for some time. I talked to him on the phone on a regular basis," the man said, adding that his son is a graduate of a high school in Dnipro.

"He passed courses on using drones so that he could join Ukrainian troops. He played soccer," said the suspect’s father, whose identity Schemes also decided not to reveal.

RFE/RL also interviewed residents in Dnipro, including one woman who described the suspect as a “very good boy.” The woman, who spoke anonymously, said she had difficulty believing the teenager could have been the killer.

The young man had a "healthy lifestyle," reads a lot, and was studying to be a journalist, she told RFE/RL.

Schemes confirmed through other sources that the suspect is a graduate of a high school in Dnipro. As a soccer player with the city's youth soccer club, he participated in a soccer tournament in autumn 2022 to support Ukraine's armed forces.

The 60-year-old Farion was shot in the head on a street in Ukraine's western city of Lviv and died in a hospital hours later.

Farion, a linguist, became a member of the nationalist Svoboda party in 2005 and was elected to parliament in 2012 but failed in subsequent attempts to win reelection.

She gained notoriety for frequent campaigns to promote the Ukrainian language and discredit public officials who spoke Russian.

Farion’s views were seen as radical by some critics, and some of her statements sparked controversy.

In 2018, when Ukraine was fighting Russia-backed separatists who had seized territory in the east, she called for a drive to "punch every Russian-speaking person in the jaw."

In 2023, she was dismissed as a professor at the Department of Ukrainian Language at the Institute of Humanities and Social Sciences at Lviv Polytechnic University due to her controversial statements.

At the end of May, the Lviv Court of Appeal issued a ruling reinstating her to the position.

Chinese engineers and the Taliban government officially started work on a massive project in Afghanistan to mine the world's second-largest deposit of copper.

At the July 24 event at Mes Aynak, some 40 kilometers southeast of the capital, Kabul, Taliban officials along with Chinese businessmen and diplomats carried out a ribbon-cutting ceremony as work began on the construction of a road to the mining site.

A $3 billion deal signed in 2008 gave the Chinese state-owned China Metallurgical Group Corporation (MCC) a 30-year mining concession, but combat between NATO-led troops and Taliban insurgents at the time delayed the project from moving forward for 16 years.

With violence waning since the Taliban's 2021 takeover of power amid the withdrawal of foreign troops, the cash-strapped Taliban-installed government is eager to exploit the country's vast and lucrative mineral deposits.

"The time wasted in the implementation of the project should be recuperated with speedy work," Deputy Prime Minister for Economic Affairs Abdul Ghani Baradar said at the ribbon-cutting event.

Embed share

The code has been copied to your clipboard.

The URL has been copied to your clipboard

No media source currently available

0:00 0:33:49 0:00

Taliban officials said it would likely be at least two years before the first copper was extracted by MCC while Chinese diplomats praised the progress as a sign of warming ties between Beijing and Kabul.

"The economic and trade relations between the two countries are becoming increasingly close," said China's ambassador to Afghanistan, Zhao Xing.

Since it seized power, the Taliban has faced the task of undertaking the reconstruction and development of a country devastated by decades of war.

But officials have also found their economy suffocated by Western sanctions and dealing with international isolation that has cut them off from receiving financial support.

China has been an exception for the Taliban government, with Beijing vowing to pursue deeper cooperation shortly after the group took control of Kabul.

Beijing has been particularly focused on exploiting Afghanistan's extensive resource wealth, from oil and gas to rare-earth metals.

Mes Aynak remains one of the most attractive offerings for Chinese firms. The deposit is estimated to contain 11.5 million tons of copper ore, which is vital for electronics components and is surging in value due to its use in growing markets related to electric vehicles, renewable energy, and data centers.

According to a Brookings Institute report, Afghanistan sits on some 2.3 billion metric tons of iron ore and 1.4 million metric tons of rare-earth minerals, and the U.S. Geological Survey has calculated that the country is sitting on $1 trillion in untapped minerals, such as iron, gold, and lithium -- an essential but scarce component in rechargeable batteries and other technologies.

Amir Mohammad Musazai, a retired professor from the Department of Geology and Mines at Kabul Polytechnic University, told RFE/RL's Radio Azadi that mining Mes Aynak is likely to yield amounts of copper ore worth more than the $3 billion that was signed for the mining rights, given that nearby areas also hold large copper reserves that weren’t factored into the original plans.

While the groundbreaking event at Mes Aynak is a sign that Chinese resource ventures are moving forward in the country after decades of delays due to war, security concerns are still a major hurdle holding back more expansive projects, which often rely on Chinese engineers and other staff.

The July 24 ceremony was closely guarded by dozens of armed men and Taliban officials made assurances that they would protect staff at the mining project.

Chinese workers have increasingly become a target of attacks in the region, including a suicide attack that killed five Chinese enginners in Pakistan in March and a 2021 bombing that killed 13 people, including nine Chinese workers, at a dam project in the South Asian country.

In Afghanistan, at least five Chinese nationals were wounded when gunmen stormed a Kabul hotel popular with Beijing businessmen in 2022.

U.S. President Joe Biden, speaking publicly for the first time about his decision to drop his bid for reelection, vowed to defend democracy at home and in allies such as Ukraine in the final months of his presidency.

In an address to the nation on July 24, Biden explained his decision to drop out of the November 5 presidential election, saying it was time to put personal ambition to the side and allow a new generation to take over.

Instead of running against Republican rival Donald Trump -- Biden has endorsed Vice President Kamala Harris as the Democratic Party's candidate -- the 81-year-old president said he would "keep working to ensure America remains strong and secure and the leader of the free world."

"We’ll keep rallying a coalition of proud nations to stop [Russian President Vladimir] Putin from taking over Ukraine and doing more damage. We’ll keep NATO stronger, and I’ll make it more powerful and more united than at any time in all of our history," he said in the 10-minute address broadcast live to the nation.

Throughout his nearly decade-long political career, Trump has praised authoritarian leaders like Putin, Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan, and Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orban.

At times Trump has publicly criticized U.S. aid to Ukraine's defenses as it tries to repel invading Russian troops, while his candidate for vice president, Senator J.D. Vance, helped lead Republican efforts to try and block billions in U.S. military and financial assistance to Kyiv.

During his term in office from 2017 to 2021, Trump tilted the Supreme Court to the right of the political spectrum, sought to overturn the 2020 election results, and -- his critics say -- undermined NATO unity.

Biden and Harris, who attended an international Ukraine peace summit in Switzerland last month, have been staunch supporters of Ukraine and of NATO's role in helping the country.

Biden, whose term officially ends on January 20, 2025, said that with the United States at an inflection point, Harris, 59, is best-placed to run in an election where "the soul of America was at stake."

Biden had sewn up the Democratic Party's nomination for the election, but dropped out of the race and endorsed Harris amid an erosion of support over concerns about his fitness to run because of his age.

He had been under pressure for weeks since a horrendous performance at a debate with Trump, where the president appeared frail and confused at times, raising questions about his physical and mental state.

Biden said he became the first incumbent U.S. president to give up his party's nomination in more than five decades because he needed to unite Democrats, even though he believed his record in the Oval Office merited a second four-year term.

"So I've decided the best way forward is to pass the torch to a new generation. That's the best way to unite our nation," he said.

"I know there is a time and a place for long years of experience in public life, but there’s also a time and a place for new voices, fresh voices, yes, younger voices, and that time and place is now."

Trump, who now becomes the oldest presidential nominee in U.S. history, immediately slammed Biden, saying in a post on his Truth Social network the address was "barely understandable and so bad."

Harris, a former prosecutor and California senator, would become the first black woman to run at the top of the election ticket for a major party in the country's history if she is confirmed as the Democratic nominee at the party's convention in Chicago that begins on August 19.

"The great thing about America is here kings and dictators do not rule, the people do. History is in your hands. The power is in your hands. The idea of America lies in your hands," Biden said at the end of his address.

With reporting by AP