A Clinically Integrated Network (CIN) is a collection of healthcare providers, such as doctors and hospitals, who commit to work together on the quality and cost effectiveness of care for a specific patient population. A CIN’s goal is to ensure that patients receive the highest quality care while providers minimize duplication of services and prevent medical errors.

CINs are also a vehicle for negotiating direct contracts with commercial and government payers. Typically these contracts tie reimbursement to quality benchmarks and lower the total costs for patients over time.

Roper St. Francis Health Alliance is a CIN, created to deliver a better coordinated, safer and overall better quality patient experience.

Administrative Team

Name

Position

Bob Oliverio, MD

VP & Chief Medical Officer- Ambulatory Care & Population Health, RSFHA ACO Medical Director

Ed McNellis, MD

Charleston ENT, RSFHA CIN Medical Director

Doug Bryan

Director of Operations Roper St. Francis Health Alliance

Kristy Hopkins

CIN Operations Coordinator

Nicholas Gedeon

CIN Clinical Operations Coordinator

Board of Directors

The Roper St. Francis Health Alliance (RSFHA) is a subsidiary of Roper St. Francis Healthcare, and its board of directors was formed to represent both the independent and employed physician communities. Active physician leadership is critical to the success of the network, which was a key component when creating the board. The board of directors is charged with developing and implementing the strategy for the RSFHA.

Name

Specialty

Brett Young, MD

Orthopaedics

Edward McNellis, MD

Otolaryngology

Joseph Ritchie MD

Palliative Care

Hugh Thompson, MD

Internal Medicine

Scott Burns MD

Emergency Medicine

Muhammad Rashad, MD

Pulmonary Disease

Chris McLain, MD

Chief Physician Officer, RSFH

Michael Sagatelian MD

Gastroenterology

Charlie Black

Medicare Beneficiary Representative

Bob Oliverio, MD

Internal Medicine

Chrysoula Pappa, MD

Rheumatology

TJ Tipton

Urology

Hugh Durrence, MD

Family Medicine

Kenosha Gleaton MD

Obstetrics & Gynecology

Aaron Hyson, MD

Family Medicine

Committees

Four board sub-committees have been developed to ensure accountability. These committees report directly to the RSFHA board and are critical to the success and growth of the RSFHA.

Quality and Performance Improvement

Payer Strategy and Contracting

Credentialing and Professional Standards

Primary Care Collaborative

If a member of the Roper St. Francis Health Alliance is interested in joining a committee or would like to request more information, please email rsfhealthalliance@rsfh.com.