Backstage at the auditorium in Lisbon, I'm having a moment straight out of the heavy metal spoof documentary This is Spinal Tap. I'm with Emir Kusturica, the revered independent filmmaker, who is the only director apart from Francis Ford Coppola to win the Palme d'Or in Cannes twice. When not being a controversial director of modern classics such as Underground (1995), The Time of the Gipsies (1998) and a new documentary about Diego Maradona, who he calls "the Elvis of football", Kusturica tours round the world with his band, the No Smoking Orchestra.

I've been invited to join a pre-gig ritual, in which we put our hands together in a circle and raise and lower them. "Rock and roll!" shouts the guitarist, who is dressed in a Dracula cape and top hat. The singer, Nellie Karajlic – Serbia's answer to Iggy Pop – has gone for a cut-price super-hero look in a cheap turquoise bodysuit, while Kusturica is wearing a Pancho Villa

T-shirt and cowboy hat. We're rushing round the warren beneath the auditorium when we take a wrong turn and get momentarily lost. "A catastrophe," says Kusturica.

Actually, the show is a minor triumph; the 10-piece band, including an accordionist, a superb fiddle player, and sax and tuba players, have sold out a 4,000-seater hall, and the audience raises the roof. By the third number, there are at least 10 female audience members also dancing on stage. During the course of the concert there are snatches of gipsy music, Serbian rock, an old Latin tune, a minute or two of Deep Purple's Smoke on the Water. There are anarchic political songs such as The Devil in Business Class and their European hit, Unza Unza Time, which complains about how "music has become a fashion show".

Backstage, the bear-like Kusturica asks me what I think. I tell him it's a mess, bad taste – and enormous fun. "We take garbage and we turn it into something beautiful. It is something Antic, like the pagan rituals of Ancient Greece."

At times, though, it's more Benny Hill than Dionysus. More serious-minded world music critics cordially loathe his band, who are making their UK debut this week at the Barbican in London. Joe Strummer of the Clash who was a friend of Kusturica and played with the band called it "crazy Greek-Jewish wedding music of the paste_SLps and the future".

The band were formed in Sarajevo in the early Eighties. Kusturica, previously only an occasional member, became fully involved in 1997.

The the exuberant vulgarity of the band should not have been surprising. Kusturica's films are full of high-energy slapstick: as The New York Times put it, "no matter how brutal the subject, they are stuffed with joy, animated by screwball antics".

The films are a riot of music, with brass bands to the fore, wild weddings and funerals and animals everywhere, often set in the chaos of war.

One of most extraordinary scenes in modern films is the bombing of the zoo in Underground, an allegory about Serbia: the film had critics accusing him of being pro-Milos?evic´ and a Serbian nationalist. "Just because I believe in the identity and integrity of my country doesn't make a xenophobe or a nationalist," says Kusturica. He aligned himself with the Yugoslav experiment, a complex mix of ethnicities, which was seen as betrayal by the Bosnians in Sarajevo, where he is still persona non grata.

In fact, he's claimed that Underground was "the strongest attack ever made on Milos?evic´". He's famously combative and once challenged ultra-nationalist Serbian politician Vojislav S?es?elj to a duel; S?es?elj refused, saying he wouldn't be responsible for the death of a naïve artist.

His answer is that to portray gipsies in a wholly positive light would be a form of "reverse racism" because nearly everyone else in his films is a thief, adulterer or borderline insane. It would be unfair not to include the gipsies.

Kusturica's documentary on Maradona features the football star hanging out with Fidel Castro and wearing anti-Bush T-shirts. Kusturica makes the infamous 1986 "Hand of God" World Cup game against England into a symbolic blow against the forces of imperialism, a revenge against the Falklands War.

For Kusturica, Maradona was the best footballer in history – "the last real god of the game". "I've been around some very famous people, but no one has the effect Maradona has; people tremble in his presence."

While acknowledging that, at 54, he is "a punk grandfather, a man of the last century" Kusturica says that, while anyone can make a film and post it on the web, he doubts whether it would be possible now for a truly great filmmaker like Bergman or Tarkovsky to come along.

Part of his response to the modern world is a slightly megalomaniac idea of building his own utopian corporate-free wooden town in Kustendorf in Serbia, where he runs an annual film festival. Already there are scores of houses, and an arts complex. Seeing him after the concert with a brick of currency from ticket sales, he says that the money will go to building another house in his model town.

At least, he says, "I put my ideas into practice. That may be the reason people hate me." Judging from the awe-struck fans backstage after the No Smoking Orchestra concert, plenty also adore him.