Romanov Birthdays→ Prince Michael Feodorovich of Russia, May 4

A grand-nephew of the last Emperor Nicholas II (through his sister Xenia), Prince Michael Feodorovich was born in Paris on 4 May 1924. He was the only son of Prince Feodor Alexandrovich of Russia and his wife Princess Irina Pavlovna Paley. He descended from the Romanovs through both his father and his mother.

Prince Michael Feodorovich was called in France Michel Romanoff (his civil name in his French identity papers). He was brought up in Paris and Biarritz. As a child, he learned to speak French, English and Russian. In his later years, he learned Spanish and Catalan.

After the separation of his parents in 1932, Prince Michael Feodorovich went to live with his mother in Neuilly where he attended the École du Montcel school. Following the outbreak of World War II, his family moved back to Biarritz. He served in the French infantry between 1945 and 1946 and accompanied the army of General Leclerc into Germany.

In 1949, Prince Michael Feodorovich moved into the film industry working as an assistant director, later becoming a director of production. He worked, among others, with René Clair, Julien Duvivier and Henri-Georges Clouzot. Burt Lancaster, Tony Curtis, Gina Lollobrigida and Marlon Brando were some of the well-known actors who appeared in his films.

In the 1950s, the prince had an affair with actress Annabella (1907–1996), after the latter had divorced the American actor Tyrone Power. Their love affair lasted ten years, and despite their age difference, the French actress would have liked to marry the prince. They later split, but Michael Feodorovich remained very attached to Annabella until her death.

After retiring from the industry in 1985, he spent his retirement living between Biarritz and Neuilly. Prince Michael Feodorovich first visited Russia in 1990. He made another visit to Russia in 1997 to attend the opening of his Romanov photographic exhibition, which was also attended by a number of his cousins. Prince Michael Feodorovich and other members of the Imperial family refused to attend the burial of his great uncle Nicholas II and his family, because he doubted the bones were genuine.

He later tried unsuccessfully to prevent the reburial of the remains in Saint Petersburg of his great grandmother, the Dowager Empress Maria Feodorovna, as he felt that "members of the Imperial family who died in exile should stay where they passed away". In 2008, Prince Michael Feodorovich died in Paris at the age of 84. His cousin Prince Michael Andreevich of Russia died in Sydney on the same day.