Hey there, time traveller!

This article was published 24/08/2021 (1086 days ago), so information in it may no longer be current.

Here’s a music-industry tip: when Atlantic Records is calling, pick up the phone.

That’s the big lesson Tim Jones, who set up the Winnipeg-based record label Pipe & Hat in 2006, provides to anyone in the music business.

Another label he helped found, vnclm_, announced in July it has formed a joint venture with Atlantic, an industry giant that launched the careers of Ray Charles, Aretha Franklin, Led Zeppelin and represents 21st-century superstars such as Cardi B, Lizzo and Ed Sheeran as well as Manitoba up-and-coming pop singer Faouzia.

Like many startup companies, vnclm_ (pronounced VINK-you-lum) had the ideas and the know-how when it began in March 2020, but it wasn’t long before the label needed an investment to make it grow the way the trio wanted.

“Near the end of 2020, we realized we needed a little more heft behind our name and we also ultimately needed more funding because we had been spending everything out of our own pockets,” Jones says. “There was going to come a point where that wasn’t feasible anymore.”

The vnclm_ trio — Jorge Hernandez, Mike Kosak and Jones — made their presentations to several record labels and distribution companies, but previous dealings with Atlantic gave them a foot in the door.

Jones signed Faouzia to Pipe & Hat and remains one of her managers after she went to Atlantic last November and Kosak manages New Jersey singer-songwriter Royal and the Serpent, another new Atlantic artist.

“With some of the other companies we were talking to, we felt like we were having to pitch them, to convince them. We were going off the merit of our own abilities,” Jones says.

When vnclm_ approached Atlantic, it wasn’t long before Jones heard from Julie Greenwald, Atlantic’s chief operating officer, he says.

“She called me back later that night. It was 1 a.m., and she’s in New Jersey so it would have been 2 a.m. when she called me,” Jones says, adding they decided to set up a conference call the next Monday morning. “When we got on the (conference) call, she said, ‘This will be the easiest episode of Shark Tank ever. Just tell us what you need and we’re in.’ It was kind of shocking.

“She’s a pretty storied person in the music industry,” Jones adds. “One of the founders of Def Jam. She’s somebody who’s been around a long time and known for being hard-nosed and whipping people into shape and getting them going.”

The agreement caught the attention of prominent entertainment magazines such as the Hollywood Reporter, Variety and Billboard, which in its report says Atlantic was drawn to vnclm_ and its ability to find and develop new musical voices.

“We’ve taken artists who are really, really green, no following, nothing on social media… to having millions of streams on Spotify or millions of views on YouTube,” Jones says.

The old perception of the music business, if it ever was true, had record executives going to small clubs or band rehearsals, and if they heard something they really liked, a deal would eventually be struck and songs were recorded. The rest was up to the magic of showbusiness.

Well, things have changed.

“The way the music industry works now, especially for the major labels, they rarely sign anything that doesn’t already have traction,” Jones says. “It’s all very data-driven. Maybe this artist hasn’t put out much music but they have 2 million followers on TikTok or maybe they don’t have a big following but they put out one song that went viral. Whatever the case is, that’s usually what’s getting artists signed these days.

“Whereas we’re taking artists that we believe in and love what their music is sounding like, and signing (them). On much smaller budgets, we’re getting some traction.”

While bigger labels such as Atlantic — itself a subsidiary of Warner Music Group — will have some input on records and how their artists are promoted, managers such as Jones are a vital link between the record company and the artist. That means co-ordinating countless details for streaming services, videos, livestreams, and eventually when the COVID-19 pandemic allows it, concerts.

It’s a daunting list of tasks to co-ordinate.

“Depending where they’re at in their career, they might have a stylist, and a hair person and a makeup person and a choreographer and a music director for live performance. A lot of times these pieces aren’t talking to each other,” Jones says. “If they have a thousand things going on at once, as the manager, my job is to somehow know all of the things and communicate with all the parties involved and make sure everything runs smoothly. The idea being is the only person the artist has to check with is me.

“Every form of communication, I have to use it everyday.”

It’s not uncommon for bigger record companies to team up with smaller ones. Perhaps the most notable recent example is how Interscope Records — which formed a joint venture with Atlantic back in 1990 before becoming part of the Universal Music Group — partnered with Darkroom, the label that had signed teenage superstar Billie Eilish.

While vnclm_ had no artist signed prior to its deal with Atlantic, its founders had built track records in finding talented performers and building their profiles. Jones believes the label will show far more value than the sum of the talent of its three founders.

He began managing artists in 2008 and has seen first-hand how artists have used social media to bolster careers already underway or creating a profile almost from scratch. He says it has improved the relationship between artists and their fans.

“It used to be there that there was the allure of a musician or artist, there was something unattainable about that if you’re a fan,” he says. “You’d wait outside after the concert at their merch table or by their bus for a second to meet them and experience some part of their lives.

“Now it’s the opposite. Artists have to put their entire lives on display on social media to interact and engage with their fans.”

The Atlantic deal has changed Jones’s life as well as his career. He had been travelling back and forth between Winnipeg and Los Angeles for the past four years but the deal with Atlantic and the fact that vnclm_ is an American company meant he needed a work permit and in June it was time to pack up his stuff and make the move to L.A. permanent.

“It’s a lot more complicated to get all of your possessions across the border than I ever would have imagined,” Jones says. “Even the night when the semi-trailer crossed the border, I was still kind of paranoid that it would get stopped and something would go wrong.”

The Atlantic deal has given Jones the inspiration to keep searching for the next new music star and help bring that person’s talent to the world.

He also admits it has provided some validation as well.

“Sometimes you can be confident and sometimes you can feel like you have imposter syndrome and I think I was leaning towards the latter at the time (of the deal),” he says. “I was hoping they’d be interested but sort of felt like, ‘Who am I to even ask for this? I’m just a random guy who grew up in Winnipeg.’ “

alan.small@freepress.mb.ca

Twitter:@AlanDSmall