• Julie Greenwald has been elevated to Chairman & CEO of the newly created Atlantic Music Group. In her new post, Greenwald oversees Atlantic Records — including the Atlantic, ATCO, Big Beat, and Canvasback labels — as well as 300 Elektra Entertainment, which encompasses 300, Elektra, Fueled By Ramen, Roadrunner, Low Country Sound, DTA, and Public Consumption.

Greenwald and Craig Kallman will continue to jointly lead Atlantic Records, with Kallman as Chairman & CEO. This June saw the creation of 300 Elektra Entertainment, led by Chairman & CEO Kevin Liles. Today, Atlantic Music Group ranks as the No. 1 streaming label group in the U.S. year-to-date for 2022.

Max Lousada, CEO of Recorded Music for Warner Music Group said, “Julie’s a force of nature — a fearless champion of original talent, a mentor to countless artists and executives, and the visionary behind game-changing moves, such as Atlantic’s early embrace of streaming and the spin-off of the Elektra Music Group. She’s made artist development an artform in its own right, by combining passion and intelligence, gut sense and strategic thinking, the big picture and the smallest detail. This new role only hints at the full scope of her influence and impact across our industry, but it’s still much deserved recognition of her dynamic leadership at our company.” Lousada added, “Julie’s strengths, combined with Craig’s extraordinary creative talents, make them one of the outstanding partnerships in the history of music. We’re all extremely fortunate to be working with them as they write the next great chapter in the Atlantic story.”

“I love nurturing the next generation, contributing to culture, and building vibrant communities for our artists,” said Greenwald. “We have the most fantastic talent at Atlantic, 300, and Elektra, from superstars to baby bands, from expert execs to young people just starting out in the business. I want them all to feel that this is the best place to do bold, brave, creative work, and build real careers. I’m so proud to be in it with them, shoulder to shoulder, every day. I’d like to thank Craig and Kevin for being my partners, Max and Steve for their leadership, and our allies across the industry who help us bring great music to the world.”