Contrary to what appears to be the case in the new “Remember Me” video, T.I. is not spending his days behind bars at Arkansas’ Forrest City Federal Correctional Facility shooting music videos, nor is Mary J. Blige filming her guest spot during visitation hours. “Remember Me” was filmed in the weeks before Tip’s official lockup on May 26th, but the video gives fans a taste of some of the trials and tribulations facing T.I. — and prisoners in general — as he’s pulled out of the real world and moved into a society separated by jail cells, iron bars and heavily armed guards. Loved ones move on and family members stop writing when one is locked up, fueling Mary J. Blige to sing on behalf of T.I., “Remember me.”

“Remember Me,” originally dubbed “Don’t Forget” when it leaked out back in May 2009, was supposed to be the first official track released off the planned Paper Trail: Case Closed reissue, however MTV is now reporting that plans to release Case Closed have been nixed. “The re-release is definitely not happening,” a rep for Atlantic Records told MTV, adding “We plan on releasing the additional songs digitally.”

“Remember Me” is already available for download on Atlantic’s Website. “Remember Me” won’t be the only time fans will get to see Tip while the rapper is sporting the orange jumpsuit in an Arkansas penitentiary. Fansite Trap Musik reports that a video for “Hell of a Life,” another track off of the now-canceled Paper Trail reissue, was also filmed prior to T.I.’s lockdown. Unlike “Remember Me,” “Hell of a Life” features much more uplifting subject matter like video vixens, nice rides and people smiling.

Trending

“A year and a day and counting, you understand that. About the time you hear this, I’ll probably be halfway home. Now remember that, suckas,” T.I. says during the video’s closing notes. While he isn’t exactly at the halfway point yet, as Rock Daily previously reported, T.I.’s 366-day sentence will likely only result in 298 days behind bars when factoring in the possibility of reducing the sentence by 15 percent due to good behavior. Plus, the two weeks T.I. spent in prison prior to being sentenced will likely be added to the final tally, reducing the sentence even more.