Emma Heming Willis is celebrating a very special milestone in her marriage to Bruce Willis.

The couple marked their 15th wedding anniversary on Thursday, with Emma, 45, posting a sweet photo of her husband planting a smooch on her.

In the touching accompanying caption, the mother of two wrote, "Today marks our 15th wedding anniversary! And today, I can make a choice. I can wallow in sorrow or I can celebrate it."

Emma went on to say, "I call this the 'remarkable reframe,' " explaining of the phrase, "What I know is there is so much to celebrate. Our union and connection is probably stronger than ever. We have two bright, fun and healthy daughters. We have a family unit that is built on mutual respect and admiration. And simply, I just love and adore the man I married."

"I’m so proud of what we have and continue to create. So, happy crystal anniversary to us! 💞," she concluded the post.

Never miss a story — sign up for PEOPLE's free daily newsletter to stay up-to-date on the best of what PEOPLE has to offer, from juicy celebrity news to compelling human-interest stories.

March is a celebratory month for the couple, as they also celebrated Bruce's 69th birthday on Tuesday. For the occasion, Emma shared a photo of the Die Hard actor holding a baby as she honored her husband.

"Just like you, we simply adore him. What you might not know, but maybe you could imagine, that being wrapped in his arms is the safest place in this whole wide world," Emma wrote in the caption to her snap. "He’s a true gentle-man. With so much love to give and share. That’s what I get to see, his true core. I can tell you, it’s so pure and ever so good."

"Happy Birthday my love. You are the gift that keeps giving 💞," she added.

Emma and Bruce, who met in 2007 and married in Turks in Caicos on March 21, 2009, share two daughters: Evelyn, 9, and Mabel, 11. He also shares three adult daughters with ex-wife Demi Moore: Rumer Willis, 35, Scout Willis, 32, and Tallulah Willis, 30.

Emma regularly shares photos with her Pulp Fiction star husband, and memories from throughout their relationship, to social media.

In February, she looked back at Bruce's 60th birthday with sweet photos showing the couple posing together in a photo booth.

Emma also shared a photo of the couple on Valentine's Day, posting a throwback to Instagram of herself and the actor at Niagara Falls in Ontario, Canada.

In a comment on her post, Emma wrote that the snapshot was taken in March 2010, one year after the couple's wedding.

"Love is a beautiful thing ❤️ Wishing you all a Happy Valentine’s Day 🫶🏽," she wrote at the time.

Last month, Emma announced that she will be publishing a “book for caregivers” in 2025 through The Open Field, the book imprint helmed by Maria Shriver, per a statement obtained by PEOPLE.

The book, which is untitled as of now, is inspired by her “newfound role as a care partner” to her husband after his diagnosis with frontotemporal dementia in February 2023.

Bruce was first diagnosed with aphasia, a language disorder, which led to him “stepping away” from acting in March 2022. His family confirmed that the disease had progressed to frontotemporal dementia, also known as FTD.

With her new book, Emma hopes to share information she has learned through her caregiving journey, as well as resources to help others in similar situations.

“For me knowledge is power, and building a supportive community around me has been vital," the author said in a statement at the time. "It has brought stability and a certain amount of control back, control that was completely shattered when the diagnosis of frontotemporal dementia first came into our family’s world.”