MULTI-TALENTED RONNIE MCDOWELL

THE SINGER

NASHVILLE, Tenn. – Ronnie McDowell is highly respected by his peers and loved by his fans. Radio favorites and chart topper’s such as “Older Women” and “You’re Gonna Ruin My Bad Reputation,” along with “Watchin’ Girls Go By,” “All Tied Up” and “In A New York Minute” laid the foundation to an impressive career spanning more than forty years.

It wasn't that long ago that Ronnie was presented with the opportunity to sing a duet with the legendary Dolly Parton called “Last Night I Dreamed About Elvis.” It seemed like the obvious choice because she knew he had the same love for Elvis as she did. Dolly shared with Ronnie her story about the time Elvis wanted to record “I Will Always Love You,” she was so excited about it and had told everyone. Due to disagreements over publishing with Colonel Tom Parker, Elvis’ manager, Dolly never got her Elvis moment.

Touched by the story, Ronnie put one of his lesser known talents to work and not only created an Elvis moment for Dolly, but one designed to stand the test of time. Ronnie shares, “When the time came to reveal the big surprise, I took the cover off and Dolly’s expression was priceless and was followed by screams and more screams. I filmed it and I’m so glad I did because it was magic.”

Painting description: Elvis and Dolly are on a picnic in her hometown of Sevierville, Tennessee, with the Great Smoky Mountains in the background. The lyric sheet to “I Will Always Love You,” which is also the name of the painting, is laying on the blanket with Dolly holding her guitar with a butterfly resting gently on it.

When Dolly had a moment to compose herself, she exclaimed “Damn! I WISH I looked that good!”

- Courtesy Webster Public Relations

Ronnie McDowell Tour Dates:

Jan. 24 - Portland, TN / Portland High School

Feb. 14 Blue Summit, PA / The Lodge

Feb. 15 - Baltimore, MD / Rosedale American Legion

Feb. 21 - Liberty, NC / The Liberty Showcase

March 6 - Fulton, MS / Itawamba Agricultural High School, Elvis Presley Charity Event

March 14 - Clarksville, TN / Austin Peay University Mabry Hall

March 20 - Pace, FL / Emmanuel Baptist Church

March 21 - Russellville, AL / The Roxy Theater

March 27- Liberty, KY / Central KY Agriculture Expo Center

Apil 19 - Ronnie McDowell’s “Dream Cruise”

April 26 - Sailing from New Orleans

Be the first to know

Get local news delivered to your inbox!

* I understand and agree that registration on or use of this site constitutes agreement to its user agreement and privacy policy.