Just after country musician Ronnie McDowell released his smash hit "The King is Gone," his father built him a grand house to use as rehearsal and office space.

It was called Strawberry Manor, an homage to McDowell's hometown, Portland, known for all things strawberry.

The Victorian-style home changed ownership in the 1980s, but owner Helen Porter and McDowell remained in touch.

This year, the 40th anniversary of the song and the manor, McDowell is restoring the building to become the Ronnie McDowell Arts and Events Center.

"What better place to have than my place?" he said.

The end goal is for fans and music lovers to watch concerts at the manor, view McDowell's original paintings of legendary musicians like Dolly Parton and Elvis Presley, see memorabilia from his lifelong career and purchase merchandise.

But first, the home needs some touch-ups.

Family members and friends are helping McDowell paint the outside of the manor, originally a pinkish-tan brick, white with touches of gray on the front porch pillars.

Columns at the property's entrance have also been painted white and gray, and brick enclosing a massive, circular flower bed in the driveway will be painted white.

"I just love white and gray," McDowell said. "It looks like the White House — very clean and pristine."

A red carpet will cover the porch, in line with the strawberry theme.

Inside, the singer's paintings will hang in the lobby, with notable features like mirrors on the ceiling and an intricate white and gold border.

To the right, a small room will become to a mini museum and gift shop displaying his 42 albums.

To the left of the lobby is a staircase leading to an upstairs apartment, for McDowell's personal use when he chooses.

A large mural of strawberries, painted by McDowell and his late brother, Ricky, in the 70s is another of the manor's highlights on the wall by the staircase.

To McDowell's amazement, the bathrooms' original light fixtures are still in working condition. He's leaving them untouched.

A large room in the back of the manor, with a red stage in the corner, will be the showstopper.

"This is the stage that we'd all rehearse on, get on the bus and go to the gigs," McDowell said.

The room has been used for storage for decades, but after clearing it out, McDowell plans to install theater seating for guests to enjoy live concerts from McDowell and his friends.

"This is such a labor of love for me," he said.

Owner Porter also installed a new roof for her friend and tenant.

"He's the kid and I'm the grandma," she said of their 40-year relationship.

Despite his busy tour schedule, McDowell hopes to open the events center this spring.

"I'm hoping by April we can have a grand reopening and a homecoming," the singer said.

Strawberry Manor is located at 603 N. Broadway in Portland.

Reach reporter Jen Todd at 615-806-2124 or on Twitter @jentoddwrites.