The movie Frances Ha, shot in black and white and on a smaller budget than most film-school productions, is directed by Noah Baumbach and stars Greta Gerwig, his girlfriend and the cause of this season's mass hipster swooning. She is, at 29, more whimsical than her friend Lena Dunham, less self-consciously edgy than her progenitor Chloë Sevigny, and aware of the invidiousness of these kinds of comparisons. The film, meanwhile, is thoroughly excellent.

"I've been having terrible anxiety dreams about it," Gerwig says over pasta on a hot day in Manhattan's West Village. "This must be what it's like to have children." Except no one is going to criticise your children in the newspaper. "Right. Or compare your children to other children, publicly." Gerwig makes a fanciful face. "'He's sort of like this other child, but more hopeless.'"

There are lines from Frances Ha you will want to repeat, their archness just the right side of too cute. "This apartment is very… aware of itself," Mickey Sumner's character Sophie says to Gerwig's Frances, criticising her best friend's new living arrangements, but also the unravelling of their friendship as their 20s draw to a close. The dialogue nails certain states of being: the exact gestation of a private joke; the casual intimacy of friendship at that age ("Stop picking at your face," Sophie says to Frances). There is the sense of bereavement when that friendship wanes, or at the very least changes. As Frances says after Sophie takes up with Patch, a guy in – ugh! – finance, "It's just that if something funny happens on the way to the deli, you'll only tell one person about it and that'll be Patch and I'll never hear about it."

If you are only dimly aware of Gerwig, who co-wrote Frances Ha with Baumbach, it's probably from her role in Greenberg, the Ben Stiller movie, also directed by Baumbach, that everyone, including him, imagined would do better. It is thought to have underperformed for being too gloomy, and Frances Ha is intentionally lighter. It also has a much bigger role for Gerwig, as a dancer failing to make a living and struggling through the last phase of post-post-adolescence that now extends into a young adult's late 20s. "I'm so embarrassed," she says after doing something particularly gauche. "I'm not a real person, yet."

In different hands, this might have been unbearable, but Gerwig injects Frances with just the right amount of wry detachment, her performance perfectly pitched between shtick and an urgent sincerity. Initially, she hesitated about being in the film, citing reasons of ego. "Noah said, 'That's ridiculous – you're playing Frances.' But it feels kind of disgusting, like baking a cake and eating it yourself. Like, I wrote it, and now I'm doing it! It felt very Orson Welles."

Gerwig speaks in great bursts of articulacy, a sort of verbal slapstick that gives her voice a tremulous edge, quivering with enthusiasm and the traffic of ideas. She has, she says, always been subject to fierce passions and obsessions. She wanted to be a ballet dancer, until her mother intervened.

"I was an intense child. When I loved an activity, I had trouble doing it halfway. It was scary with ballet – I would have gone to class for four hours a day, seven days a week, if I could have. And it's kind of a cultish world. Relationships between ballet teachers and students aren't always totally normal, and my teacher – she was British and had been to the Royal Ballet School – gave everybody 'ballet names', which put my mum over the edge: 'She gave you another name?!'"

What was it? "My ballet name was supposed to be Scarlett, and my mum was like, 'No, she can call you by your given name, this is a cult.' She freaked out. But when you're 12 or 13, you don't know what's unhealthy."

Gerwig's mother is a nurse; her father was a computer programmer and now works for a credit union. She grew up in Sacramento, California (her old neighbourhood, and her parents, have cameos in Frances Ha). As an alternative to ballet, her mother enrolled her in a hip-hop class that had none of the fanaticism. Gerwig giggles at her own ridiculousness. "My mum knew me well enough to know that you can't stop me from being obsessed with something, but you can shift my focus."

The niceness of the parents in her film is a tribute to Gerwig's own family. For once, she says, she and Baumbach wanted to see an ordinary family depicted with no satire, no drama. It's touching when Frances returns home to Sacramento in a funk that her parents are helpless to solve. In a lesser movie, they'd have been absurd or inadequate, but the script doesn't lay this one on the parents. It's a restraint that runs through the film. It's also an expression of nostalgia: unlike the rawness of Dunham's Girls, Frances Ha looks back with indulgence on youth, already fading to the fixed quality of photos.

At the end of her schooling, Gerwig wanted to go to New York University to do a degree in musical theatre. "This was another of my mum's great moments, where she said, 'I'm not spending $40,000 a year for you to learn how to tap dance.'"

Instead, she went to Barnard, also in New York, joined the debating team and thought for a while that she might be a lawyer. Theatre was still an attraction, although not by her standards an obsession. This worries Gerwig sometimes, as things tend to. When she looks at Baumbach, who knew he wanted to be a director from the earliest age, she worries she doesn't have the same singularity of purpose. In these moments, she returns to various touchstones of reassurance. "I read an interview with Lorrie Moore in the Paris Review, and she said she didn't feel 'called' to write. She said you really have to give yourself permission to do it. I was like, 'Oh my God.' I printed it out."

'My mum knew me well enough to know that you can't stop me from being obsessed with something, but you can shift my focus'

These are the kinds of anxieties that she and Baumbach put into Frances, as she tries to figure out who and what she is supposed to be. Filled with notions of being an artist but failing, well‑educated and broke, she is instinctively hostile to old friends making money – all of which characterised phases of Gerwig's own 20s.

"There's a moment when you realise some of your friends don't have loans," Gerwig says. "Which is really odd, because you thought everybody did. Or, Sophie's character, who works for a corporate entity and gets health insurance: she knows how much money she's going to get every week, versus the person who's being an artist. There's nothing wrong with that, it's just… it's not nonexistent in a friendship."

Gerwig had no particular expectations when she started out; her only desire was to make a living doing something she liked. "I worked as a stage manager and did technical theatre. I thought, 'If I can be good at lots of things, there'll be a place for me.'"

There were small victories that kept her going. When she got her Screen Actors Guild card; when, by keeping her overheads low, she managed to live purely on her earnings from acting and writing. Then she made Greenberg and expected her life to change. It didn't. The phone didn't ring. She had been in what felt like a game-changing film, but it didn't do well and nobody appeared to have noticed her in it. She didn't work for almost a year afterwards.

"I was really depressed. I cried a lot. It was a hard year. I was 25 and thinking, 'This is supposed to be the best time and I'm miserable.' Looking back, I wish I had taken that time and written more, but it felt like acting was happening for me, and I went back to acting classes. The blessing and curse of my life is that I think I thrive when I have a singular purpose and a calling. But actually I'm happiest when I'm doing lots of things. And I have to reconcile that."

Baumbach was married to Jennifer Jason Leigh when he and Gerwig met on the set of Greenberg; the marriage ended soon after. They got together briefly while writing Frances Ha, then split, then got back together a month into filming.

"There was a time when it was too much," Gerwig says. "And then, I don't know. We were in love, so… But now it's been a year and a half. Working together isn't hard. It's very easy."

They're working on separate projects right now, and are also still writing together. "You find people you collaborate well with, but you don't want to be too precious about it. It's like a band. Except, with bands, everyone ends up hating each other. I think we trust that it'll ebb and flow."

Gerwig has her own apartment, but she and Baumbach are basically living together. A historical worry: before Frances Ha was released in the US last year, given his more established reputation, Gerwig fretted that if it failed she, as the junior partner, would be blamed. "Like: 'He had it right until this person came along.' You don't want to be the element that is bad."

'The blessing and curse of my life is that I think I thrive when I have a singular purpose and a calling. But actually I'm happiest when I'm doing lots of things'

So it was a great relief when the film was rapturously received. Gerwig's main concern – that it would be dismissed as frivolous, that "people would think it didn't matter" – didn't come to pass. After the first screening, with great reviews already on Twitter, Baumbach turned to Gerwig and said, "Thanks for giving me a hit."

Not, of course, that it will necessarily make money. The indie film business is too precarious for that. Frances Ha was funded by, as Gerwig puts it, some "lovely Brazilian guys" who wanted minimal interference, even to the extent of forfeiting the indie film's most assured method of recouping investment – selling it to show on TV after the cinema release. (A black-and-white film won't sell in this manner.) But, she says, they understood Baumbach's intention: "Making something as small as he could without sacrificing anything that actually makes a movie worth watching."

Producer Scott Rudin, who works with Baumbach on all his films, was hovering in the background, but "from a distance", Gerwig says. "He looked at casting tapes and read drafts of the script, but it wasn't one of his projects where he was like, 'I'm getting Warner Bros and Sam Mendes and Kate Winslet' or whoever. Then there would be pressure because he's on set every day. But this was much more – he was 'helping'. He showed up once at 3am, on the Lower East Side. Noah looked up and was like, 'Is that Scott Rudin?!' He was on the street corner, opposite us. And we were like, 'How did he even know where we were?'"

Given the modesty of its origins, there are no particular expectations for Frances Ha. In 2011, Baumbach worked on something that looked like such a surefire hit, it was bound to fail: an adaptation of Jonathan Franzen's The Corrections for HBO, in which Gerwig was slated to star, along with Ewan McGregor and Chris Cooper. But after a pilot was shot in 2012, HBO failed to commission it and the project was abandoned. "Sometimes," Gerwig says, "the thing that's anticipated more often than not is the thing [that doesn't work]. Things that have been stamped with approval prior to existing have no life. It's so hard to determine what's going to work. You just don't know. David O Russell's last movie before Silver Linings Playbook lost its insurance and was never finished."

Frances Ha has the integrity of a film made precisely the way the film-makers wrote it. The cast were permitted no ad-libbing on set, right down to any extra "like"s and "you know"s. (Gerwig says Sumner, the daughter of Sting and Trudie Styler, had an easier time sticking to the script because she is English and felt less of a gravitational pull towards these idiomatic tics.)

It's the small, quiet moments that make the film: when Frances runs to an ATM and has a moment of hesitation before accepting the $2.50 surcharge; when, while taking a walk in a wood, she remarks with hopeless optimism, "At least you can't spend money in nature." When she says, "I love you, Sophie, even if you do love your phone that has email more than me." At one point, Frances spends money she doesn't have and goes to Paris on a whim. In another film, she would be rewarded for her risky and whimsical flight. Here, she has a rubbish time, wandering around in a state of lonely anticlimax that is both hilarious and true. In desperation, she tries to go to the cinema. "Noah and I always say that the saddest line in the movie is when she's in Paris and she asks the woman in the movie theatre, 'When did Puss In Boots start?' She's not even going to see it from the beginning."

Frances does, ultimately, triumph, and it's a literary script, so the symbolic underpinnings are good. "So much of modern dance is about learning how to fall, and I thought that was kind of a good metaphor for Frances." For Gerwig, too, perhaps; although, in her case, it is less a case of learning to fall than to stop feverishly anticipating all the ways it might happen.