Millions of Americans loved Ulysses S. Grant, but, as so often with love, the relationship can be hard to understand from the outside. Grant did not woo the public. A rumpled man, he seemed shorter than he was. When he opened his mouth, cigars and whiskey went in, but few words came out. His critics, then and now, have disagreed over whether he should be condemned primarily as a brute of a general or a dupe of a president.

To those who adored him, he looked rather different. He and Lincoln saved the Union in the Civil War, but only Grant lived to receive the nation’s thanks. And he won without ego. “There was no nonsense, no sentiment,” wrote one private, “only a plain businessman of the Republic.” The newspaperman Charles A. Dana called Grant “the most honest man I ever knew, with a temper that nothing could disturb.”

One man did disturb that temper. Grant would dig his fingernails into the armrests of his chair at the thought of him, and told a friend he wanted to kill him, “as I would a snake. I believe I should do it, too, but I do not wish to be hanged for the killing of such a wretch.” When Grant died a year later, on July 23, 1885, the public blamed that “wretch,” who pitied himself as “the best-hated man in the United States.”

His name was Ferdinand Ward. In 1880, when just 28, he had persuaded the former president to become a partner in Grant & Ward, a Wall Street brokerage house. Ward reported astonishing profits, occasionally doling out cash to his partners. Grant believed he was rich. In reality, Ward was running a Ponzi scheme. In 1884, it blew up, bankrupting Grant and his family.

The author of this elegant new biography of Ward, “A Disposition to Be Rich,” is his great-grandson. For decades, Geoffrey C. Ward has told Americans stories of their ancestors. He has edited American Heritage, collaborated with the filmmaker Ken Burns and written esteemed books like “A First-Class Temperament: The Emergence of Franklin Roosevelt” and “Unforgivable Blackness: The Rise and Fall of Jack Johnson.” All this time, he has freighted about a box of letters, preserved by his grandfather, documenting the fall of his earnest family because of one remorseless son.

In telling this personal tale, Ward applies his characteristic scrupulousness and narrative skill. Vivid, living people swarm the pages. Ferdinand Ward’s quarrelsome father, the Rev. Ferdinand Ward, went to evangelize India as a young man. Told that missionaries should die on the spiritual battlefield, he concluded that it might be an excellent policy for his detested colleagues though not for himself, and returned to wage doctrinal battles in a small church in Geneseo, N.Y.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.