alignjustifyWally Stanford Harris was born August 10, 1947, in Georgetown, Texas, moving shortly thereafter to Baird, Texas. He departed this life April 22, 2009, at his home in Midland, Texas.

alignjustifyWhile growing up, Wally was very involved in baseball, football, basketball and track. After graduating from Baird High School in 1965 Wally attended Southwestern Oklahoma State University in Weatherford, Oklahoma. While there he met and married his wife, Sue.

alignjustifyHe graduated from the School of Pharmacy there in 1970 and moved to Big Spring, Texas, and worked there two years. In 1972, they moved to Clovis where they lived until November, 1973. In 1973, they moved to Hobbs, New Mexico, where he purchased Hobbs Drug the following summer. He remained there until January, 2007, when they moved to Midland, Texas.

alignjustifyWally accepted Christ as his savior many years ago and was a member of Taylor Memorial Baptist Church. Wally's favorite pastimes were traveling with Sue to many places, especially the Riverwalk in San Antonio, seeing and playing with his children and grandchildren and certainly, playing golf with his many friends. Many stories can be told about these games.

alignjustifyWally leaves to mourn his passing his loving wife, Sue of 41 years; a son and daughter-in-law, Jason and Brenda Harris of The Woodlands, Texas; a daughter and son-in-law, Gina and Steve Johnson of Frisco, Texas; a daughter, Traci Harris of Odessa, Texas; his grandchildren, Corey Harris, Kristen and Tyler Johnson, Justin and Erica Harris; and his wonderful mother, Cubelle Harris of Baird, Texas; numerous aunts, uncles and cousins and two sisters-in-law.

alignjustifyPreceding him in death was his father, Joe Harris; his grandparents, J.T. and Florence Loper; Uncle Jerry Loper; Aunt Nell Freeman; and his father-in-law and mother-in-law, Kenneth and Gerry Robertson.

alignjustifyServices will be held on Monday, April 27, at 10 a.m. at Taylor Memorial Baptist Church in Hobbs, with Dr. Dean Mathis officiating. Services will be under the direction of Chapel of Hope Funeral Home.

alignjustifyGraveside services will follow later at Ross Cemetery in Baird, Texas. Sandra Keith will officiate and will be under the direction of Parker Funeral Home.

alignjustifyThe family will greet visitors at Chapel of Hope 2 - 4 p.m., Sunday.

Visitation

Chapel of Hope

3321 N. Dal Paso

Hobbs, NM 88240

Sunday, April 26, 2009

2 4 p.m., Sunday

Service

Church Service

Taylor Memorial Baptist Church

1700 E. Yeso

Hobbs, NM 88240

Monday, April 27, 2009

10:00 a.m., Monday

Cemetery

Ross Cemetery

Baird, TX 79504