rip -- poet Derek Walcott Pulitzer Prize Winner

Walcott is often considered a “political” poet, and in certain respects he was. But he was more than that. He was, finally, writing about love — for place and people and the sacred. “The fate of poetry,” he wrote, “is to fall in love with the world.”

https://www.nationalreview.com/corner/derek-walcott-poet-rip/

Derek Walcott, Poet and Nobel Laureate of the Caribbean, Dies at 87

https://www.nytimes.com/2017/03/17/books/derek-walcott-dead-nobel-prize-literature.html

Derek Walcott, whose intricately metaphorical poetry captured the physical beauty of the Caribbean, the harsh legacy of colonialism and the complexities of living and writing in two cultural worlds, bringing him a Nobel Prize in Literature, died early Friday morning at his home near Gros Islet in St. Lucia. He was 87. His death was confirmed by his publisher, Farrar, Straus and Giroux. No cause was given, but he had been in poor health for some time, the publisher said. Mr. Walcott's expansive universe revolved around a tiny sun, the island of St. Lucia.

Derek Walcott Boston University

Creative Writing Department

Derek Walcott was born in 1930 in Saint Lucia, Windward Islands, West Indies. He graduated from the University College of the West Indies and was awarded a Rockefeller Foundation Fellowship to study American drama in 1957. Presently, he divides his time between Trinidad and Boston and teaches Drama and Poetry in the English Department at Boston University.

Derek Alton Wolcott

West Indian poet and playwright is the first black to receive the $1.2 million Nobel Prize for Literature 1992.

He won for poetic oeuvre of great luminosity, sustained by a historical vision, the outcome of a multicultural commitment. Born Jan. 23, 1930, Castries, Saint Lucia , one of the Windward Islands in the Lesser Antilles. Walcott is of mixed black, Dutch, and English descent. He currently is a professor in Boston University's English Department.

Residence: Trinidad and Boston

Resources

Nobel Lecture

Curriculum Vitae

Biography

Poems

Hear him Speak

Creolizing Homer for the Stage: Walcott's "The Odyssey"

Robert D. Hamner

Twentieth Century Literature, Vol. 47, No. 3 (Autumn, 2001), pp. 374-390

doi:10.2307/3176023

BPJ Author Index "W" -- 1950-2005

... Walcott, Derek Rivers, 13 (Summer 1963), 1. Selected Poems, rev. Robert H. Glauber, 16 (Spring 1966), 51. The Arkansas Testament, rev. Marion K. Stocking, 40 (Spring 1990), 39. Omeros, rev. Marion K ...

Las Vegas Mercury: Books: The Prodigal by Derek Walcott

Sunday, Jan 16, 2005, 08:33:42 AM Home 2AM Club Guide Archive Contact Personals Wildside Personals Advertisements

The Prodigal By Derek Walcott 105 pages Farrar, Strauss and Giroux Grade: A Thursday ...

The Richmond Review, Book Review, Tiepolo's Hound by Derek Walcott reviewed ...

book review | WHAT'S NEW | LIBRARY | FEATURES | REVIEWS | WHO WE ARE | LINKS | home : book reviews :

Tiepolo's Hound by Derek Walcott Tiepolo's Hound Derek Walcott Tiepolo's Hound Derek Walcott Faber ...

Derek Walcott - The Academy of American Poets

Derek Walcott

Derek (Alton) Walcott (1930-) The major West Indian poet and dramatist writing ...

... Derek Walcott has lived most of his life in Trinidad. He was awarded the Nobel Prize for literature ...

Derek Walcott Pulitzer Prize Winner

... Linguistics Area Language Home AAVE Websites African Languages Army Navy Ask the Experts Definitions

Dialect Resources Derek Walcott Ebonics Ebonics Resolution Gullah Culture Gullah/Geechee Issues & ...

Derek Walcott

Derek Walcott Blues Midsummer, Tobago Codicil A City's Death by Fire Derek Walcott speaks biography/bibliography

back to Snally Gaster's African American Phat Library Experience Not enough poems here ...

Lannan Foundation - Derek Walcott with Glyn Maxwell, November 20, 2002

... org/lf/rc/event/derek-walcott/) Home Contact Share Help A A A Home: Readings & Conversations: Derek

Walcott Lannan Readings & Conversations Derek Walcott with Glyn Maxwell Wednesday November 20 2002 ...

Derek Walcott - Biography

HOMESITE HELPABOUT SEARCH NOBELPHYSICSCHEMISTRYMEDICINE LITERATURE PEACEECONOMICS LAUREATES ARTICLESEDUCATIONAL

Derek Walcott Biography Derek Walcott was born in 1930 in the town of Castries in ...

New York State Writers Institute - Derek Walcott

Derek Walcott Channel 17 Sunday at 2:00 p.m. September 17, 2000 Photo Credit: Nancy Crampton Derek Walcott,

poet and playwright, was the winner of the 1992 Nobel Prize for Literature. He was born in ...