Ninety years ago today, on 18 November 1932, the much loved, legendary Laurel and Hardy picture The Music Box was awarded a well-deserved Academy Award for the best short subject of 1932

This was the only such award Laurel and Hardy ever won. Technically though, the award went to film’s producer, Hal Roach. It was still a wonderful achievement of course, and Mr Roach was gracious enough to let Stan and Babe be presented with the award.

1932 was the first year in which ‘short subjects’ could be nominated but “The award was not an ‘Oscar” said Stan, “but a parchment scroll affair that was awarded to the studio though our names were on it and Babe and I accepted it on behalf of the Studio”

From Randy Skretvedt’s marvellous ‘Laurel and Hardy, The Magic Behind the Movies‘: The Music Box competed against ‘The Loud Mouth’, a Mack Sennett short starring Matt McHugh, Marjorie “Babe” Kane, and Fred Kelsey, directed by Del Lord. (Charley Chase remade this in 1940 at Columbia as ‘The Heckler’, and Shemp Howard further remade it as Mr. Noisy.) More competition was provided by Clark and McCullough’s ‘Scratch-As-Catch-Can’, directed for RKO by Mark Sandrich and featuring Jimmy Finlayson and Charlie Hall in support. Charlie thus had the distinction of appearing in two-thirds of the films in this category.

Also from Randy: Disliked Studio Manager, Henry Ginsberg was, ironically, partially responsible for L&H winning their Academy Award certificate for “Best Short Subject (Comedy)” for The Music Box, because he had written to the Academy and suggested that they create an award, or several, for short subjects. This was just a few months before the ceremony at which L&H won. So, anyone since the spring of 1932 who has won an Academy Award for a short film has Ginsberg to thank.

Laurel and Hardy would be nominated again in the Best Short Subject category in 1935. This time the nomination would be for the ‘sequel’ to Them Thar Hills, which was of course, Tit For Tat. However, it lost out to short comedy How to Sleep which was both written by and starred humourist Robert Benchley

Stan was awarded an honorary Oscar in 1961 for “his creative pioneering in the field of cinema comedy,” though the award had to be accepted by Danny Kaye as Stan was ill and unable to attend the event. Here’s a short clip of Kaye’s acceptance speech.

At the time, Stan said “Naturally, I’m thrilled and happy to receive such a wonderful tribute – I only wish my dear late partner had been here to share this great honour which he helped make possible”.

In 1997, the Library of Congress selected The Music Box for preservation in the National Film Registry.

Stan was earlier quoted as saying “Personally, I think the silent films were more effective for L&H, but the sound was of great value in enhancing the effects – dialog eliminated a lot of action & sight gags – I always feel that ‘action’ speaks louder than words”.