The Why Store was formed in the late 1980s in Muncie, Indiana. Lead Singer Chris Shaffer, also a Ball State student, joined the band after a few months and they played a few gigs as Emerald City. That same year, the band switched to its present name, The Why Store, the name of a former Muncie haberdashery.In 1993, the band independently recorded Welcome to the Why Store. One year later the band recorded Inside the Why Store. Both albums were locally successful, and The Why Store began getting attention from record labels. In 1995, The Why Store signed to MCA’s subsidiary Way Cool Music for their first major-label effort, a self-titled LP, which was released in 1996.Their major label debut on MCA Records spawned several hits. The first single, "Lack Of Water", was a #1 hit on Triple-A Radio; the band performed "Surround Me" on Late Night with Conan O’ Brien and saw their video for "Father" receive rotation on MTV2 and VH1. The Why Store was a Top 20 album for 1996 and went on to sell 200,000 copies.The Why Store split up in 2000 citing creative differences, though each member has continued onto different projects, most notably Shaffer who has recorded several solo disks as well as recording with his first post-Why Store band, Shaffer Street.Some of the artists they shared the stage with include John Mellencamp, The Clarks, Sonia Dada, The Tragically Hip, Widespread Panic, Eddie Money, Foreigner, Kansas, Train, Cowboy Mouth, Ziggy Marley & The Melody Makers, Violent Femmes, Vertical Horizon, Pat Travers, George Clinton, Cracker, Incubus, Hoobastank, Mickey Hart Band, Robert Bradley’s Blackwater Surprise, The Bodeans, Big Head Todd & The Monsters, Ben Harper, The Samples and Collective Soul.In 2007, Shaffer has reincarnated The Why Store and is poised to break back into the scene with an exiting new album called VIM. Produced by Rusty Anderson, Paul McCartney’s long time guitarist, VIM showcases Chris’s passionate songwriting and refreshingly edgy vocal ability. “It was a magical experience, definitely the best thing I’ve ever done,” says Shaffer. The Why Store is open for business…