Remembered with love, Lucy Michelle Plasencio Farley, 68, took her last breath on June 23, 2024, at home with her family by her side after a long battle with Vascular Dementia. Lucy—aka Mik, Denny or Moms, was born in Safford, Arizona, to Mike and Nellie (Escobedo) Plasencio. She was the second born of four children. Shortly after the birth of her first child, her and her new family took the big leap and moved to the big city of Phoenix, Arizona.

Lucy was an Earth mother. Spending her time mostly as a homemaker, always eager to nanny for family and friends, and along with her siblings spent the last four years of her mother’s life as her caretaker. Thereafter, even joining an “Angel Agency" as a caretaker for her community elders through a local in-home care company. Similar to her father, Lucy enjoyed rummaging and finding treasures. Her prized treasures were Coca-Cola memorabilia, pottery, miniatures or anything unique and old. Aside from thrifting, Lucy also had a love of nature with all of God’s creatures. She will be remembered by her smile, her generous personality, and unbiased supportiveness.

She is survived by her former spouse and their two daughters, Jennifer Alben and Christy Farley; two grand-children, Anthony and Tyler (Ashley); and one great-grand-child, Lily. Lucy left behind one older brother, Joe, and two younger siblings, Lisa (Jeff) and Jim. As well as five nieces and nephews, Mikel, Joie (Shawn), Mannie (Matt), Harley (Robert), Michael (Aubrey) She is preceded in death by her parents, Mike and Nellie Plasencio.

The family is forever grateful for the support of our “Team” including, the four core caretakers, the compassionate hospice nurses/Drs. and case worker, and all family and friends involved.

Services will be held at the Safford Cemetery beginning with a private family ceremony followed by the public Internment at 11:30am. A Memorial Reception will take place at 6:00 pm – 10:00 pm at The Manor.

In lieu of flowers, you may contribute to your local shelter for women of domestic violence.