Lucy, the Guardian Angel is a custom champion in League of Legends.

Abilities[]

Theoretical Item Build[]

Lore[]

Lucy born in Demacia, she spent her childhood in the care of the Holy Order. Religious organization sharing wisdom of Angels, sometimes called as "Guardians". Holy Order belives that every man has an accompanying Angel, that helps to go through life with hope for a better tomorrow, even in the worst situation. Lucy were inspired by all the tales and lessons about the mighty Angels. When Lucy became teenager there was war of Ionia and Noxus, Lucy wanted to depart in order to support Ionian Warriors fighting Noxians. When Lucy came she tried to help Ionia help war at all the cost, suddenly, Sky gone dark, Crows started to fly around the battlefield group of them, led by biggest of them, attacked Lucy. Covered in scars and blood, Lucy fell down... dead. Suddenly, she woke up, in a world, whole covered in white and blue, fullfiled with Angels, patroling what's down, Lucy checked what's going on, apparently, this place is bestead in the Sky and Angels observes what's going on in Valoran. Someone touched her back and said, "If you want, you can go back, just jump". As he said, she did. All people nearby were shocked, a real Angel came to support their fight. When it was over, Lucy decided to join League of Legends, to stop Noxus's cruelty, in somewhere, where she can make a change.

“ "Her Bravery is impressive, Her Will is strong, truly an opponent who you want to kill again" — Swain, the Master Tactician

Quotes[]

Upon Selecting

"Let's show them the wisdom of the Angels"

Attacking

"I'm sorry for that..."

"You're not worth it..."

"I belive in other way"

"I wasn't mean to..."

"Sorry..."

"It's not my fault..."

"If it has to be done..."

"If that's the cost..."

"We all have to sacrifice something..."

Movement

"As you wish"

"Going"

"Let's go Summoner"

"I will be their Guardian"

"They cannot stop Angel's will"

"If you want..."

"Sure"

"Seems fine for me"

"If i must"

Joke

"I've died once, now i fear nothi... whoAOAOAOOA!.. I saw a Spider..."

"Surredner, we don't need to waste each others tim.. AAAAAAAAAH!!!... ugh... i hate Spiders..."

Taunt

"Everyone has a Guardian Angel... yours is just not around..."

"You want a Guardian Angel? I'm on their side, sorry..."

When Casting

Angel's Insight

"Piercing Light!"

"Holy light!"

Sacrifice

"WHAT... must... be done..."

"EVERYONE... has to make... sacrifice..."

When taunting anyone related to Noxus

"Remember me? I wouldn't forget likes of you"

"We could end it then... but war for you is eternal"

[]

"What champion rework?! Where?!"

http://leagueoflegends.wikia.com/wiki/User_blog:ErdamonPL/Lucy_-_The_Guardian_Angel

There it is