Next Article

Lucy Angel

Born and raised in Wollongong, NSW, Lucy began her training at Joanne Grace School of Dance at age eight before completing her Certificate IV in dance at the Royal Academy of Dance at age 15. Lucy joined The Sarasota Ballet in Florida, USA as a trainee for their 2018-2019 season. At the end of 2019, she performed in The International Divertissement Ballet Gala with Projection Dance, as well as being a finalist in The Brisbane International Contemporary Dance Prix. Lucy joined Sydney Dance Company’s Pre-Professional Year in 2021 where she performed works by James Bachelor, Cloe Fournier, Stephanie Lake and Rafael Bonachela. Lucy commenced her traineeship with Sydney Dance Company at the end of 2022, premiering with the Company in Rafael Bonachela’s ab [intra] at DanceX

Naiara de Matos

Naiara de Matos was born in Salvador, Brazil. In 2007, she began fulltime training with the Bolshoi Ballet School in Joinville (Brazil). Following her graduation in 2011, Naiara began working in the Young Company of Bolshoi Ballet Brazil until she was offered a position with the Salzburg Landestheater in 2013. Throughout her career, Naiara has joined companies such as Leipzig Ballet (as a soloist), Konzert Theater Bern, Augsburg Ballet and Dance Company St Gallen. She has performed a variety of classical and modern repertoire including a number of soloist and principal roles, both in Europe and further abroad. Naiara has worked with internationally renowned choreographers such as Ohad Naharin, Johan Inger, Uwe Scholz, Nadav Zelner, Martin Zimmermann, Dimo Milev, Alba Castillo, Giovanni Insaudo, Mauro Astolfi, Francesca Frassinelli and more. Naiara joined Sydney Dance Company in 2023.

Dean Elliott

Dean began his dance training in Auckland, New Zealand at age 17. In 2018, he graduated from Ev and Bow Full-time Dance Training Centre in Sydney. During his time there, he worked with many Australian dance professionals and performed in works by choreographers Larissa McGowan, Anton, Robbie Curtis and Adam Blanch. In 2018, Dean appeared as a special guest artist in the Sydney City Youth Ballet’s Australian Tour of Together Live, performing in Lucas Jervies’ PowerHouse. Dean played the role of Young Brett Whitely in Theatre of Image’s Brett and Wendy… A Love Story Bound by Art directed by Kim Carpenter and choreographed by Lucas Jervies. Dean joined Sydney Dance Company in 2019.