Lucy Ann Perillo of Williston Park NY, ascended to Heaven Friday, May 19th at the age of 72.

She was born in Brooklyn on November 17th, 1950 to Carmela (Ines) and Teresio Cavallo. Her parents were immigrants from Italy – Teresio from Piedmont and Carmela from Napoli. Lucy grew up with her older brother John in Williamsburg, Brooklyn. Together, they navigated through a strict childhood. With family at the core, cousins were just a block away. When she was 22 she met a handsome firecracker, Frank Paul Perillo from Queens. Their courtship was adventurous as Teresio put Frank to the test to prove his love and dedication to Lucy. The young couple spent many memorable moments, fingers laced, watching the water along the Cross Island Parkway, and speeding around to meet her curfew in his car (a secret from Teresio). After their marriage in the Spring of 1973, the young couple quickly started a new family and planted roots in Williston Park, NY.

Lucy was an angel amongst us. She truly was a mother and mentor to us all. Her positivity and care for others radiated infectiously to anyone she met. From her early years working in the NYC law offices, to her recent years helping others find a home to build a family, Lucy always found a way to fill other’s hearts with love. Mixed along with her infamous cooking, and massages, this mother of 4 and grandma of 8 built a foundation of values and dedication. Her empathy was her superpower, her selflessness was her shield, and her perseverance paved the way for all of us.

Carrying her love and adoration forward are her loving husband, Frank P. Perillo; her 4 children, Andrea Golub and her husband Arthur, Felicia Brennan and her husband Shaun, Michelle Wolynski and her husband Todd and Frank N. Perillo and his fiancé Vilyana; her 8 grandchildren: Andrew, Alex, Tyler, Leah, Shaun, Jacob, Moriah, and Benjamin; and her brother John Cavallo and his wife Mary. Each of them take comfort in knowing that their angel on earth is now their angel in heaven.