Sharon Brown was a strong-minded woman who moved through the hardships of life with courage and spirit. She was loving and supportive as well as creative and spontaneous. Attentive to her children and husband, Sharon showed how important family was to her.

Sharon was the fourth of seven children born to Eugene and Sophie Sieracki in Grand Rapids, Michigan on July 25, 1948. It was a time of optimism in American history, when much of the world was recovering from WWII. Growth in U.S. industry and jobs gave workers the opportunity to build homes and start families that launched the baby boom era. Sharon’s parents supported the family with her mother’s job at Kendall Furniture and her father’s work in a jewelry store and Ball Park Hardware. They ran a strict household and family life could be difficult but, as a result, the children grew up quickly, and Sharon formed a close bond with her siblings, especially Dianne, Pam, Gene and Tim.

The Sierackis made their home on Hovey Street SW in Grand Rapids, and Sharon attended Sacred Heart Elementary and Union High Schools. However, she left high school after the 10th grade because of unrest during the riots of the 1960s. She married at age 18, and her daughter Cherie was born from that union, but it did not last. Sharon’s exposure to life’s challenges at an early age made her the resilient person she was.

When Sharon remarried, she was blessed with two more children: Greg and Andrew. She was very invested in all her children’s lives, introducing them to the arts that she enjoyed so much. She had always been very artistic and liked making ceramics and other crafts. It gave her pleasure to share her interests with her children, all the while taking an interest in their activities. Living on a farm in the Hudsonville-Zeeland area, Sharon took the kids to many 4-H events, and she herself enjoyed gardening. Country life was also the perfect place to have pets, and Sharon was real dog lover, Molly being her most recent “love.”

Still, Sharon’s deepest love was reserved for her children, to whom she was absolutely committed. The strength she drew from her faith community, Deeper Life Church in Allendale, was extended to her kids. They testify that “she is the reason Andrew is a Christian today.”

The kind of impact Sharon had on her children was not surprising, since she was someone who let others know what was important to her. She was very direct and always spoke her mind. At the same time, she was caring of the needs of others in practical ways. Meals like BBQ spare ribs and desserts like cheesecake and “hip huggers” were crowd pleasers. Her habit of reading magazines and the newspaper made her a Sunday coupon-clipper, which also helped the household budget. Is it any wonder that the sentiments of country music, like the tunes of LeAnn Rimes, struck a chord with Sharon? Life might be tough, but Sharon was tougher still.

In time, Sharon was once again on her own, but then she met Richard “Ponch” Brown, who “changed her world.” As it had been set up, Sharon was to meet Richard at a 50th anniversary party for his parents. When he came in late from trucking long haul, Sharon saw him and was “swept her off her feet.” He, too, thought she was very attractive, and from that time on, their relationship grew. Richard showed Sharon great respect, and he felt very safe to her. On his birthday in 1985, Ponch and Sharon were married on the 19th of March at Circus Circus in Las Vegas. They had made a trucking run to California and met up with a brother and sister-in-law, who witnessed the beginning of Sharon and Richard’s life together.

Sharon and Ponch shared their adventure with fun and spontaneity, spending several winters at a time-share in Florida or taking life wherever it led. For example, on a trip to Arizona to see her son, Andrew, Sharon wanted to know where a certain road ended up. So they took it and ended up in Mexico.

Over the years, Sharon had her share of health problems, with several back operations and, more recently, respiratory issues. In 2007, she suffered from COPD and had difficulty breathing. Sadly, Sharon passed away at the age of 60 on Wednesday, December 24, 2008, the eve of her favorite holiday. Her family will long remember how happily she labored to make Christmas special. She loved to decorate the house and landscape, taking a whole day to decorate her trees.

These and many more acts of love and joy will be treasured by her beloved family. They include her husband, Richard “Ponch”; children, Cherie Beardsley, Greg Morren, and Andrew (Holly) Morren; grandchildren, Eric, Allyssa, Alley, Brandon, Jordan, Nicole, and Sophie; her mother, Sophie Sieracki; and 6 siblings. The service to celebrate her life will be held at 1 PM on Monday at Heritage Life Story Funeral Homes, 2120 Lake Michigan Drive NW. Friends may meet her family from 11 AM until the time of the service. In lieu of flowers, contributions to St. Jude’s or Disabled American Veterans would be appreciated. Please visit Sharon’s web page at www.lifestorynet.com to archive a memory or photo, or to sign the guestbook if you are unable to attend.