If you're thinking about George Harrison lately, there's a good chance it's because of Get Back, Peter Jackson's epic Disney+ documentary looking into the making of The Beatles' Let It Be album, which features some particularly interesting moments for the Fab Four's lead guitarist. But that's not the only reason to celebrate the legendary Harrison this year. Last year marked the 50th anniversary of All Things Must Pass, Harrison's extraordinary solo debut, and this year marks the 50th anniversary of the single release of "My Sweet Lord," arguably his most popular and most enduring solo song. To pay tribute, a truly all-star lineup of comedy stars, actors, musicians, and fans got together to make something special.

On Wednesday, Harrison's official YouTube page released a new official music video for "My Sweet Lord" to promote a remaster of the song overseen by Harrison's son, Dhani. Directed by Lance Bangs (Portlandia, The Meltdown with Jonah and Kumail), the video begins with none other than Star Wars legend Mark Hamill acting as a kind of supervisor to Fred Armisen (Portlandia, Saturday Night Live), who's an unnamed "agent" being sent back in the field to investigate...well, something. What follows is a search that takes him through various Los Angeles landmarks, including the legendary Last Bookstore, with a flashlight and what looks like a UV scanner, in search of something mysterious while the song plays.

The real hook of the video, apart from its beautiful camerawork and simply enjoying the new mix of "My Sweet Lord," though, is the sheer number of stars who've found their way into the short. As Armisen goes on his search, he links up with everyone from fellow SNL alum Vanessa Bayer to Mad Men star Jon Hamm to comedian Patton Oswalt and comedy music icon Weird Al Yankovic. Plus, if you keep watching, you'll spot everyone from Eagles guitarist Joe Walsh to actress Rosanna Arquette to one of the two surviving fellow Beatles...but we won't spoil which. It all adds up to a very fitting tribute for Harrison, who loved comedy and filmmaking almost as much as he loved music.

Check it out:

Though he released a pair of experimental albums prior to this release, All Things Must Pass marked the first major solo output from Harrison following the breakup of The Beatles, and came amid a year in which each of his bandmates also released solo records to mark their own paths forward in the aftermath of the group's dissolution. It has gone on to be one of the most enduring works by a former Beatle, particularly thanks to the title track and "My Sweet Lord," which remains a beloved Harrison solo track. Now we just have to wait for the 50th anniversary of the Cloud Nine album so this same group of celebrities can get together and make a tribute to "Got My Mind Set On You."