It's Tax-Free Weekend

The 2019 Massachusetts Sales Tax Holiday applies to most single items priced $2,500 or less. Meals are included and tax-free for the weekend, but alcohol purchased as part of a meal remains ineligible and still subject to tax.

The regulation in its entirety and a list of frequently asked questions are published at www.mass.gov/info-details/sales-tax-holiday-frequently-asked-questions.

West Barnstable Village Fest

The 29th annual West Barnstable Village Festival is tomorrow (Aug. 17), from 10 a.m. to 3 p.m. along Route 149/Meetinghouse Way. Rain date is Sunday, Aug. 18.

A free shuttle will run between all festival sites, including the train station, West Barnstable Community Building and Whelden Memorial Library, Meetinghouse Farm, the 1717 Meetinghouse and West Parish Church.

The event offers great fun for kids, with games, races, face painting, a K-9 demonstration, foam frolic, magic show and dunk tank. Adults are invited to enjoy crafters and artisans; bake, produce and book sales; a classic car show; and a flower show.

Discount prices will be available on train rides, plus there's live music, 50/50 raffles and plenty of food. Visit www.westbarnstable.org for more info.

CraftFest in Cotuit

If you've not been to Cotuit lately, this is the weekend to do it. The village's 49th CraftFest runs 10 a.m. to 4 p.m. tomorrow and Sunday, rain or shine, at 40 School St.

The event features more than 130 artisans and crafters, live music, children's activities, and lobster rolls. Admission is free, as is parking and shuttle service.

Stop by Lowell Field, where championship gear is on sale at the Kettleers Store this weekend and next, Saturday from 10 a.m. to 4 p.m., and Sunday from noon to 4 p.m.

Art at the Farm

Meetinghouse Farm and the West Barnstable Village Association are celebrating nature and creativity tomorrow (Aug. 17) from 10 a.m. to 4 p.m. during Art at the Farm, 2135 Meetinghouse Way.

Highlights include a litter sculpture contest, music by Graham Hempstead, children's crafts, and a fun foam frolic. For a complete list of participating artists and crafters, visit www.meetinghousefarm.org. Rain date: Sunday, Aug. 18.

Mindful wellness from HOW

Does a healthy lifestyle and choices make a difference? According to research from Harvard Medical School, they make a big difference. The healthier choices people make, the longer their lifespan.

On Tuesday, Aug. 20, from 7 to 8:30 p.m., HOW will present “How Mindful Wellness Can Impact Your Health,” an informational and inspirational program at the YMCA of Cape Cod, 2245 Iyannough Rd., West Barnstable.

Speaking on healthy choices will be YMCA Instructors Tammy Smith and Steve Crossen, along with David Sauro of HOW. YMCA members and non-members are welcome to attend.

Then on Wednesday, Aug. 21, a similar program will be presented at the Centerville Library, 585 Main St., Centerville, from 7 to 8:30 p.m.

Social time with refreshments will start at 6:30 p.m. at both programs. There's no charge and no attempt to sell products or services. HOW is a nonprofit dedicated to sharing the importance of heart wellness, and these programs will benefit everyone from young adults to seniors.

For additional information, visit www.heartofwellness.us and read HOW's wellness column on Pg. A5 of the Patriot's Aug. 16 print edition.

Greater Hyannis Chamber

The Hyannis Chamber's August Business After Hours on Wednesday, Aug., 21, 5:30 to 7 p.m., is race car-themed to celebrate the 55th anniversary of its host, Cape Tire.

Jon McKennedy, one of the most talented NASCAR racers in New England, is scheduled as the evening's special guest. Plus, there will be live music by Club 9 Ball, an East Coast-based rock band; exclusive access to and photo opps with a Cape Tire racing car; and sweepstakes and VIP gifts. Enjoy catering by The Original Gourmet Brunch, and beer and wine by Luke's Cape Cod.

To register, visit www.hyannis.com, and B.Y.O. great attitude. Cape Tire is located at 45 Falmouth Road, Hyannis.

HyFD open house Aug. 22

Hyannis Fire's very own Debe Schiavi, executive assistant to Chief Peter Burke, is retiring. If you have ever met or worked with Debe over the years, you know how sorely she'll be missed!

Come by Hyannis Fire Headquarters between 9 a.m. and noon on Thursday, Aug. 22 to wish our "Debuty" well.

Dispose of properly

The next Household Hazardous Waste collection for Town of Barnstable residents is scheduled for Saturday, Aug. 24 from 9 a.m. to noon at the Barnstable Transfer Station, 45 Flint Street in Marstons Mills. A Town of Barnstable recycling sticker needed to participate.

Don’t know what’s acceptable? Visit www.loveyourlocalwater.org. Please note: Latex paint is not hazardous; just dry out and throw out.

Business owners may also take advantage of the opportunity to dispose of hazardous and toxic materials that pose harm by contaminating groundwater, lakes, ponds and soil in the event of a hurricane or other emergency or inappropriate disposal. For more info, call 508-375-6699.

Summer Splash Aug. 25

The Barnstable Historical Society's annual Summer Splash is set for Sunday, Aug. 25 on the patio of Barnstable Tuscan Cuisine Terrace, beginning at 4 p.m.

Enjoy live music by the Alan Clinger Jazz Trio, a complimentary drink ticket, passed hors d'oeuvres, and a silent auction and wine pull.

Tickets are $50 per person and available at BHS or online at www.barnstablehistoricalsociety.org.

Cape Wildlife Festival

The Long Pasture Wildlife Sanctuary will host the 10th annual Cape Wildlife Festival on Saturday, Sept. 7, from 10 a.m. to 3 p.m.

The event is free, but donations are welcome. The wildlife sanctuary is located at 345 Bone Hill Rd. in Cummaquid.

Fundraiser for family

of Sgt. Jason Sturgis

The Barnstable Police Department has been humbled by the outpouring of support for Sergeant Jason Sturgis and his family. Sgt. Sturgis was married with three young children at the time of his sudden and unexpected passing.

A fund has been set up through the Barnstable Police Association to assist the Sturgis Family, and 100 percent of the proceeds of a Saturday, Sept. 7 Cornhole Tournament at Cape Cod Beer, 5 to 9 p.m., will go directly to the Sturgis Family Fund.

Tickets are as follows: $30 entry into blind draw cornhole tournament, and the Top 2 teams win Cape Cod Beer/Sturgis Sweatshirts. It's $25 to attend the event, and the first 140 attendees receive Cape Cod Beer/Sturgis Pint glass.

The Cornhole Tournament will be run by Cape Cod Cornhole https://www.capecodcornholes.com. There will be live music, BBQ for sale, and a cash bar.

Sunset Cruise Sept. 7

The Birdsey Cape Wildlife Center is chartering a sunset Whale Watcher cruise out of Barnstable Harbor on Saturday, Sept. 7 to help provide veterinary care to wildlife in need.

"This season has been the busiest on record, especially with the recent storms, and we are selling tickets to help us raise enough money to care for all of the patients that need help this year," said Zak Mertz, the center's executive director.

Tickets are $118 per person, and all proceeds will go directly to supporting emergency care for sick, injured or orphaned wildlife on the Cape. Call 508-362-0111 or visit www.capewildlifecenter.com to buy tickets.

Marstons Mills Village Day

Coming up Sunday, Sept. 8, it's Village Day in Marstons Mills. Main Street/Route 149 will closed down for foot traffic only from noon to 4 p.m., and attendees are encouraged to park behind the elementary school on the Route 28 side.

A flag-raising ceremony begins at 12:15 p.m. All are invited to a burger-n-dawg lunch from noon to 2 p.m., with live music by Mike Dumas and the Satellite Band – back by popular demand.

Activities along Marstons Mills Main Street from noon to 3 p.m. include pony rides, face painting, bounce house, balloon art, Community Church activities, and vendor tables by local merchants, BARS, COMM, and village association volunteers.

Proceeds of a 50/50 raffle drawing benefit the village scholarship fund. You need not be present to win but are invited to stick around for the Liberty Hall Club's annual chicken BBQ at 4 pm. Early bird tickets are $12 at the Marstons Mills Library.