Join us this Sunday for our premiere village event, the Marstons Mills Village Association’s Village Day.

This year in addition to the classic favorites such as face painting, the foam fire truck and local vendor tables, new events such as a children’s pie eating contest, a strolling magician, and the Cape Cod Wood Turners will add to the festivities! This fun-filled family event is open to everyone and ends with the ever-popular chicken barbecue dinner sponsored by the Liberty Hall Club.

Thanks to Village Day organizers Donna Lawson and Debbie Lavoie, and to all the volunteers and donors who make this event possible. The day’s proceeds go to the MMVA’s scholarship fund.

The village association is still working with town planners to further improve our village center, making it safer and more user friendly. A group of town officials including Town Manager Tom Lynch and Assistant Town Manager Mark Ells met last month with members of the MMVA and the Cape Cod Disc Golf Club to review possible upgrades in areas of Burgess Park. This park is used more often than people realize by folks of all ages, and we hope to see it grow more for increased use by villagers in the future. A brief tour of the Burgess House and barn was included. It was an educational visit for all.

A public hearing before the planning board for a second wind turbine at Peck’s Boatyard is presently scheduled for next Monday, Sept. 10 at 7 p.m. I have heard from many Millagers regarding safety and other concerns about the proposed project, and as always, urge folks to become informed and participate in their democracy. Check the town website (town.barnstable.ma.us) for more information on the planning board’s agenda for that evening.

While I am on my civic-duty soapbox, the 2012 primary is now in the history books, and we look forward to an important Election Day in November. Again, be informed and VOTE! Residents of my Precinct 10 in Marstons Mills need to know that they are voting in a different district for state Senator (Cape & Islands) and state Representative (Barnstable 2nd District) this election. We are now included with most of the Town of Barnstable in our representation and I think that makes more sense. We still vote at the former Horace Mann Charter School, which is now the Grade 4-5 School, on Osterville-West Barnstable Road.

I would like to thank Rep. Randy Hunt (Precinct 10’s soon-to-be former State Rep.) for his diligence and persistence in supporting and advocating for two bills to battle substance abuse that were passed in our last legislative session. In this very important instance our elected officials heard very clearly from their constituents and responded appropriately.

While not an attractive subject to bring up, substance abuse, its contributing factors and negative impact on our families, neighborhoods and town cannot be ignored. I truly appreciate our new Hyannis Councilors Jen Cullum and Mike Hersey for having the courage not only to acknowledge the “elephant in the living room,” but to vocally and positively express an interest in finding solutions. I look forward to working with them and other councilors who support prevention initiatives in the Town of Barnstable.

Barnstable has always been strong and courageous enough to face its problems, find solutions and make our community stronger and I emphatically believe that with a unified commitment from our town leadership we can achieve this goal. As part of that continuing commitment, the Barnstable Youth Services Division is sponsoring a Cape & Islands Family Festival at the Cape Cod Mall Saturday, Sept. 15, noon - 4 p.m. Featuring family-oriented entertainment and informative displays by area human service agencies, this is another must-attend event for your family!

While we’ve been through a challenging year, we are definitely moving forward in a positive direction. Onward and upward!