Get details on this and other incidents in Wednesday's police log.

The Barnstable Police Department provided the following. It does not indicate a conviction.

Notable incidents from Wednesday February 6, 2013

Police arrested Lawrence D. Hollinger during a motor vehicle stop on Winter St. and Stevens St. at 12:59 a.m. Hollinger was charged with operating a motor vehicle with an open container, operating a motor vehicle after suspension of license, and stop sign violation.

Police arrested Shuan P. Mcallister during a motor vehicle stop on Skunknet Rd. and Dolar Davis Rd. at 1:32 a.m. Mcallister was arrested on an outstanding warrant.

Police responded to a report of domestic assault and battery on Blueberry Hill Rd. at 10:26 a.m.

Police responded to a report of shoplifting in the Cape Cod Mall parking lot at 12:05 p.m.

Police responded to a report of harassment on Haven Ln. at 1:17 p.m.

Police responded to a report of larceny at the International Inn on Main St. at 3:55 p.m.

Police arrested Michael Terrance Cardoza, 38 of Bourne, during a motor vehicle stop at Cape Crossroads Condominiums at 3:57 p.m. Cardoza was arrested on an outstanding warrant.

Police arrested Debra Santos, 43 of West Yamouth, and Charles Kenneth Sanford, 47 of West Yarmouth, during a motor vehicle stop at Pufferbellies at 6:00 p.m. Santos was charged with operating a motor vehicle with an open container, operating a motor vehicle uninsured and attaching plates. Sanford was charged with disorderly person and having open alcoholic container.

Police responded to a report of shoplifting at Kmart on Iyannough Rd. at 6:29 p.m.

Police arrested Juan L. Rodriguez, 24 of New Bedford, during a motor vehicle stop n Charles St. at 6:30 p.m. Rodriquez was charged with unauthorized use of motor vehicle, operating with a revoked license, and a red light violation.

Police responded to a report of assault on West Main St. at 7:01 p.m.

Police responded to a report at Liberty Hall on Main St. at 8:54 p.m.