Growing up in the 1950s, I listened every Saturday afternoon to the “National Farm and Home Hour” on radio. It always began with Everett Mitchell, the host, saying, “It is a beautiful day here in Chicago,” regardless of whether it was stormy, rainy, or bright.

The show was broadcast in various formats from 1928 to 1958 and was produced by the United States Department of Agriculture. Sponsored by Allis Chalmers, it served as a bulletin board of agricultural news, adding university research and updates from related groups to information provided by the Department of Agriculture. It kept farmers current on the latest markets, livestock, and crop research.

During this time and into the 1960s, radio stations invested heavily in agricultural programs. WLW in Cincinnati had a full-time agriculture director whose weekday morning programs featured taped interviews with agriculture specialists from Ohio State, Purdue, Illinois, Kentucky, and other agricultural colleges in the midwest.

In addition to this, WLW purchased a farm near Mason just outside Cincinnati and broadcast live from that location each weekday. The farm manager discussed what was taking place at the farm and told about any new things they were trying. In keeping with its title, “Everybody’s Farm,” the program gave anyone who tuned in an education about everyday activities on a typical Ohio farm.

Other media sources providing information to farmers were specialized magazines, cooperative extension services and newspapers. During the 1950s and 1960s, an estimated 12 percent of the population still farmed, so it continued to be lucrative for the media to court the agriculture sector for its business.

Today, less than 2 percent of the population is engaged in farming. With the advent of technology, these farmers can get instant feedback to their questions on markets, livestock and crop research. They can buy and sell over the internet without ever leaving home. They can turn the work over to machinery with computer controls and sit back and oversee production.

The days of radio programs and magazine articles as major sources of information to the farmer are practically over, and the televised agriculture program most recommended to me by friends airs at five and six in the morning. Sadly, this lack of information and inconvenience in finding it is another deterrent to helping the non-farming population understand the farmer.

While one might find a program on agriculture scrolling through the channels or flipping through the pages and pause a moment to investigate, he/she is not apt to Google a farm topic on purpose. We commend our own local paper for providing the Farm Bureau and its affiliated writers an opportunity to share.

President Eisenhower once stated, “farming looks mighty easy when your plow is a pencil and you’re a thousand miles from a cornfield.” We hope to use our pencils to help others get a better look at “cornfields” and other ag topics.

Chuck Bell is a Farm Bureau member and former Muskingum County 4-H Educator.