SAN FRANCISCO, CA - Salesforce.com, the technology and market leader in on-demand customer relationship management (CRM), announced that President George W. Bush will recognize salesforce.com Vice President of Finance Steve Houck when the President arrives in Santa Clara, Calif., today. Supported by salesforce.com's donation of 1% of employee work time -- six days a year -- to volunteer activity, Houck has completed over 125 hours of community service since joining the company in August 2002. Under Houck's leadership and stellar example, his department's participation in volunteer programs has increased by 200% during this same period. Overall, salesforce.com employees have donated over 3,000 community service hours in the past year to a variety of Bay Area organizations.

Earlier this year, President Bush celebrated the first anniversary of the USA Freedom Corps -- his initiative to engage all Americans in service to their neighbors and their nation. President Bush is recognizing individuals around the country like Houck who are answering the call to volunteer service. Salesforce.com has a history of involvement with the USA Freedom Corps through its participation in the Business Strengthening America (BSA) campaign, a peer-to-peer campaign to mobilize the business community to support effective service and civic engagement by every American.

"Salesforce.com's integrated business model, especially our active support of the salesforce.com/foundation, is a fundamental part of building a culture of service," said Marc Benioff, chairman and CEO of salesforce.com and founder of the salesforce.com/foundation. "I am extremely proud of our tireless and dedicated employees, like Steve Houck, who are pioneering a new interdependence of community and corporate success."

In addition to lending finance expertise to a variety of capital and fund-raising programs at St. Leo the Great in San Jose, Calif., Houck has served as a director on the board for the Multiple Sclerosis Society of Northern California. He has also served on the Board for the Shasta/Hanchett Park Neighborhood Association, focusing on landmark preservation in San Jose. Houck is an active and integral member of the salesforce.com/foundation steering committee, evaluating grant applications and serving as direct liaison between the company and the foundation. Houck frequently shares his life and professional experience, as well as passion for community service, with local youth during salesforce.com career exploration days.

Salesforce.com has relentlessly focused on integrating business with the community since the company's 1999 inception. Through its model of donating 1% of profits to the community annually, 1% of salesforce.com equity to its programs and 1% of employee working hours to community service, salesforce.com ensures that as the business grows so does its contribution to the community. The salesforce.com/foundation was established as the vehicle to harness the energy of the salesforce.com community and drive this 1% model. The foundation initiates and manages a variety of volunteer programs designed to benefit the community and offers funding for diverse projects through its grant program. As salesforce.com continues its rapid growth and profitable operations with over 6,200 customers worldwide, its integrated business model, especially the volunteer program, is fundamental part of building a culture of dedication and service.

President Bush created the USA Freedom Corps office at the White House to foster a culture of service, citizenship and responsibility. Through the USA Freedom Corps, President Bush wants to help every American answer the call to volunteer service by strengthening and expanding service opportunities to protect our homeland, support our communities, and extend American compassion around the world. Interested volunteers can find opportunities in their own neighborhoods through the USA Freedom Corps web site at www.usafreedomcorps.gov or by calling 1-877-USA-CORPS.

About salesforce.com

Salesforce.com builds and delivers customer relationship management (CRM) applications on demand via its web services platform. The salesforce.com product suite -- Team Edition, Professional Edition, Enterprise Edition, Wireless Edition and Offline Edition -- gives companies of all sizes a complete 360-degree view of the customer. The company's award-winning CRM solutions provide integrated online sales force automation, customer service and support management, and marketing automation applications to help companies meet the complex challenges of global customer communication.

Salesforce.com has received considerable recognition in the industry, including Editors' Choice and two Five-Star ratings from PC Magazine, two Deploy Awards from InfoWorld, Red Herring 100, Upside Hot 100, Investor's Choice Award from Enterprise Outlook, Editors' Choice from TMCLabs, Top 10 CRM Implementation from Aberdeen Group and InfoWorld's 2001 CRM Technology of the Year. Founded in 1999, salesforce.com is headquartered in San Francisco, with offices in Europe and Asia. Salesforce.com can be found at http://www.salesforce.com/.

About salesforce.com/foundation

Salesforce.com/foundation is the leader in integrating philanthropy and business. Through its model of donating 1% of profits to the community annually, 1% of salesforce.com equity to its programs and 1% of employee working hours to community service, the Foundation is building a new model for corporations to better serve the communities in which they operate. The Foundation also strives to better the lives of youth by providing relevant access to technology in underserved communities both domestically and abroad. The Foundation works with other corporations, youth development agencies, and NGOs to create a society in which children, regardless of socio-economic background, ethnicity or learning level, have access to technology and understand how to use it to enhance their lives. Since launched in July 2000 with Colin Powell in attendance, the Foundation has opened 41 Community Technology Centers serving over 30,000 youth and other community members around the world; has provided nearly 4,000 hours of service to the community through salesforce.com's 300 employee volunteers; and offers the salesforce.com award winning online customer relationship management application for free to more than 100 qualified nonprofits globally saving them hundreds of thousands of dollars every year. More information is available at http://www.salesforcefoundation.org/ or see youth work at http://www.youthspace.net/.

Salesforce.com is a registered trademark of Salesforce.com, Inc., San Francisco, Calif. Other names used may be trademarks of their respective owners.