SAN FRANCISCO, CA - Salesforce.com(R), the market leader in online customer relationship management (CRM), today announced that it has received the Award for Excellence in Corporate Community Service by the Points of Light Foundation and Volunteer Center National Network. Salesforce.com, which has been focused on integrating business with the community since it's 1999 inception, was honored for creating a socially responsible corporate culture and making a significant impact on the communities where its employees work in its early stages and in innovative ways. The other honorees include: John Hancock Financial Services (NYSE:JHF), Oracle (Nasdaq:ORCL), SAFECO (Nasdaq:SAFC), IBM Corporation (NYSE:IBM) and Universal Parks & Resorts. Hamilton Jordan, former chief of staff, Carter Administration, will be the keynote speaker at the luncheon.

Salesforce.com's 1% model, in addition to offering 1% of the company's equity and 1% of the company's profits, grants 1% of employee work time -- six paid days every year -- to ensure that as the business grows so does its contribution to the community. The salesforce.com/foundation, established as the vehicle that drives this 1% model, initiates and manages a variety of volunteer programs designed to not only have impact on the community, but also inspire a variety of volunteer activities and commitments.

"Salesforce.com's integrated business model, especially the volunteer program, is a fundamental part of building a culture of service and acknowledges the interdependence of community and corporate success," said Marc Benioff, chairman and CEO of salesforce.com and the salesforce.com/foundation. "The end of corporate philanthropy as we know it is just as important as the end of software, and I am extremely proud of our tireless and dedicated employees and partners, who enable us to push these limits."

"These winning companies are engaging thousands of men and women in volunteer service across America and the world," said Robert K. Goodwin, president and CEO of the Points of Light Foundation. "The estimated value of their combined effort is priceless to those in need."

The Points of Light Foundation, established under former President George Bush, promotes volunteerism and advocates community service through its partnership with the Volunteer Center National Network and annually selects only a handful of companies that exemplify corporate community service through their company sponsored volunteer programs, which meet strategic business goals and target serious social problems. The 10th Annual Awards for Excellence in Corporate Community Service, the nation's premier annual gathering of business leaders supporting workplace-based volunteerism, provides honorees with the opportunity to highlight their volunteer programs. Benioff and other executives will address thought-provoking questions around the trends of business engagement in community service and workplace volunteering. The free event begins at 8:00 a.m. PST, and is open to the public during the Business Leadership Forum from 10:30-12:30 PST. For more details please visit www.pointsoflight.org .

About salesforce.com

Salesforce.com builds and delivers customer relationship management (CRM) applications as scalable online services. The salesforce.com product suite -- Team Edition, Professional Edition, Enterprise Edition, Wireless Edition and Offline Edition -- gives companies of all sizes a complete 360-degree view of the customer. The company's award-winning CRM solutions provide integrated online sales force automation, customer service and support management, and marketing automation applications to help companies meet the complex challenges of global customer communication. Salesforce.com has received considerable recognition in the industry, including Editors' Choice and two Five-Star ratings from PC Magazine, two Deploy Awards from InfoWorld, Red Herring 100, Upside Hot 100, Investor's Choice Award from Enterprise Outlook, Editors' Choice from TMCLabs, Top 10 CRM Implementation from Aberdeen Group and InfoWorld's 2001 CRM Technology of the Year. Founded in 1999, salesforce.com is headquartered in San Francisco, with offices in Europe and Asia. Salesforce.com can be found at .

About salesforce.com/foundation

Salesforce.com/foundation is the leader in integrating philanthropy and business. Through its model of donating 1% of profits to the community annually, 1% of salesforce.com equity to its programs and 1% of employee working hours to community service, the Foundation is building a new model for corporations to better serve the communities in which they operate. The Foundation also strives to better the lives of youth by providing relevant access to technology for youth in underserved communities both domestically and abroad. The Foundation works with other corporations, youth development agencies, and NGOs to create a society in which children, regardless of socio-economic background, ethnicity or learning level, have access to technology and understand how to use it to enhance their lives. Since July 2000, the Foundation has opened 40 Community Technology Centers serving over 25,000 youth and other community members around the world; has provided nearly 4000 hours of service to the community through salesforce.com's 200 employee volunteers; and offers the salesforce.com award winning online customer relationship management application to more than 100 qualified nonprofits globally saving them hundreds of thousands of dollars every year. More information is available at or see youth work at .

Salesforce.com is a registered trademark of Salesforce.com, Inc., San Francisco, California. Other names used may be trademarks of their respective owners.