Dialogic Corp. completed its previously announced acquisition of Veraz Networks.

The merged company, headquartered in San Jose, CA, is now named Dialogic and is publicly traded on the NASDAQ under the ticker symbol (NASDAQ: DLGC).

Nick Jensen leads the company as Chairman of the Board and Chief Executive Officer (formerly Chairman of the Board and Chief Executive Officer of Dialogic), and Doug Sabella is the President and Chief Operating Officer (formerly Veraz President and Chief Executive Officer).

Veraz Networks supplies application, control, and bandwidth optimization products for service providers. The Veraz MGN separates the control, media, and application layers while unifying management of the network, thereby increasing service provider operating efficiency. The portfolio also includes its ControlSwitch, Network-adaptive Border Controller, I-Gate 4000 Media Gateways, the VerazView Management System, and a set of prepackaged applications.

Dialogic, which traces its origins back to 1984 and the beginning of computer telephony integration (CTI), currently supplies a range of media and signaling products for network equipment manufacturers providing video, voice, conferencing, and fax, along with network-edge infrastructure products. These products include TDM-IP voice and video gateways; SS7 and SIGTRAN signaling; and IP-to-IP border elements with security services, such as SIP mediation.

The merged company will offer communication solutions both to service providers and to other network equipment suppliers. Its technology expertise encompasses stand-alone media, including video, signaling and security solutions, as well as integrated media, signaling and security.

“While the capability of mobile networks around the world has been steadily expanding, the future will bring even greater demands on these networks due to the unprecedented growth in global mobile data and video traffic,” said Jensen. “By combining Dialogic’s proven expertise in enabling applications for voice and video with Veraz’s leadership in voice and data session control, security and transport, we’ve created a company that gives our customers the technologies to maximize the multimedia capabilities of 3G/4G networks. In fact, over 2 billion mobile subscribers today communicate on the networks of service providers who have built their solutions on Dialogic products.”http://www.dialogic.com