Dialogic, an Enghouse Company, is a leading cloud-optimized solutions provider for real-time communications media, applications, and infrastructure to service providers, enterprises, and developers around the globe. With offices worldwide, Dialogic works with 48 of the world’s top 50 mobile operators, and nearly 1,000 application developers build and deploy on agile networks. Their global team of professional services experts is ready to help you with unparalleled support and consulting so you can get the most out of your network investment.

Brooktrout Fax

Dialogic offers the Brooktrout intelligent fax technology that supports corporate networks in various stages of transition, ranging from purely TDM, to hybrid, to pure VoIP/SIP networks. Dialogic is one of the market leaders in fax platforms, offering a robust feature set and a broad range of fax and FoIP (Fax over IP) platforms in both hardware and software configurations. Dialogic delivers time-tested industry-leading fax technology, offering a broad range of fax and fax over IP products, which are supported by software partners around the world. The Dialogic® Brooktrout® T.30 Stack has been deployed for more than 20 years.

Dialogic® Brooktrout® SR140 Fax Software can provide exceptional options for application developers because Brooktrout SR140 supports the Dialogic® Brooktrout® Bfv API, the same API used throughout Dialogic's line of fax products. Developers can choose to write one application to the Bfv API and deploy it on both TDM and IP equipment. This dual-network support also allows developers who wish to sell into both TDM and IP accounts to use either Dialogic® Brooktrout® TR1034 Fax Boards or the Brooktrout SR140.

PowerMedia Host Media Processing (HMP)

PowerMedia® HMP software provides media services and functionality for building flexible, scalable, and cost-effective next-generation media servers and converged telephony applications. PowerMedia® HMP performs media processing tasks on general-purpose servers, eliminating the need for specialized hardware. This results in a flexible, scalable, and cost-effective solution that supports Dialogic® R4 and GlobalCall interfaces, facilitating easy migration for existing Dialogic® DM3 based applications.

PowerMedia Extended Media Server Software (XMS)

Build media-rich applications with minimal effort. The highly scalable, standards-based specialist in real-time multimedia processing, PowerMedia XMS is your time-saving building block for new and innovative applications for every industry.

BorderNet Session Border Controllers (SBC)