NEW DELHI, Jan. 27 /PRNewswire-Asia/ -- Dialogic Corporation ( http://www.dialogic.com/ ) ("Dialogic"), a global provider of world-class products and technologies for multimedia and signal processing, today announced that Mahanagar Telephone Nigam Ltd. (MTNL), one of India's largest mobile telecommunications operators, has selected Spice Digital and Bay Talkitec's 3G mobile video VAS (Value Added Services) solutions to provide enhanced video services to their 3G subscribers. These VAS solutions are built on the Dialogic(R) Vision(TM) CX Video Gateway and Dialogic(R) Host Media Processing (HMP) Software Release 4.1LIN.

"With Dialogic video technology being incorporated in innovative video solutions around the world, it was natural for our development partners in India who supply to MTNL to move forward with their own innovative video VAS solutions," said Jyoti Handa, Regional Sales Director for Dialogic, South Asia. "Two of our partners in India, Spice Digital and Bay Talkitec, created innovative 3G video solutions including Live Aarti (Spice Digital), which streams live video to cell phones from religious places of worship, as well as Video Conferencing and Video Portals (Bay Talkitec)."

Handa continues, "Dialogic's Vision CX Video Gateway and Host Media Processing Software allow for fast and simple interoperability with the 3G network, which enabled these new video services to go live quickly. In the coming months, Spice Digital and Bay Talkitec will deploy a diverse offering of enhanced mobile video services that will run on Dialogic platforms."

"We decided to use Dialogic platforms since they provide a great framework for creating and rapidly deploying 3G video applications. The rich APIs provided in the Dialogic platforms make it possible to write end-to-end applications such as Video Ring Back Tones, Mobile TV applications and Video SMS," said D. Arunan, Founder & Managing Director at Bay Talkitec. "Thanks to Dialogic, Bay Talkitec is one of the first leading providers of 3G Value Added Services to operators in India."

"At Spice Digital, our goal is to create video products that represent the true essence of our innovative approach to ensuring our customers' success. Dialogic has been instrumental at each and every step in helping us achieving our goal," said Dr. Abhinav Mathur, Chief Strategy & Technology Officer at Spice Digital. "We use Dialogic's HMP Software and video gateways to develop cost effective, scalable, innovative and robust video applications for 3G networks. We look forward to deploying an exhaustive range of VAS solutions targeted at different sections of the MTNL network."

About Dialogic Corporation

Dialogic Corporation is a leading provider of world-class, innovative technologies based on open standards that enable innovative mobile, video, IP, and TDM solutions for Network Service Providers and Enterprise Communication Networks. Dialogic's customers and partners rely on its leading-edge, flexible components to rapidly deploy value-added solutions around the world.

Headquartered in Montreal, Canada, Dialogic and its subsidiaries have over twenty offices worldwide, providing local presence, knowledge and support to serve its customers around the globe. Dialogic's research and development centers are located in Parsippany, New Jersey; Getzville, New York; Needham, Massachusetts; Hyannis, Massachusetts; Salem, New Hampshire; Chicago, Illinois; Fordingbridge, England; and Renningen, Germany as well as Montreal.

Information about Dialogic is available at http://www.dialogic.com/ . Also, join our social networking community, the Dialogic Exchange Network (DEN), at http://www.dialogic.com/den or visit our Facebook, Twitter and YouTube pages for additional Dialogic news, updates and partner application demos.

Dialogic is a registered trademark and Vision is a trademark of Dialogic Corporation. Other trademarks mentioned and/or marked herein belong to their respective owners. Dialogic and its subsidiaries encourage all users of their products to procure all necessary intellectual property licenses required to implement their concepts or applications, which licenses may vary from country to country.