PARSIPPANY, N.J., March 16, 2016 /PRNewswire/ -- Dialogic, a cloud-optimized applications and infrastructure solutions provider for service providers, enterprises, and developers, announced today that Penta Corporation, a leading provider of voice and data control solutions for the transportation industry, chose a PowerMedia™ software based media server solution from Dialogic as part of its latest dispatch and communications systems for the transit and light and heavy rail industry. The Penta Media Exchange (PMx) leverages Dialogic's PowerMedia technology to provide a flexible and highly scalable dispatching solution.

Penta selected Dialogic's solution to handle the complex any-to-any connectivity demands of a major northeast commuter railroad. As communications have evolved, connectivity between myriad devices must take place. Penta products provide two-way communications, conferencing, data transmission, remote equipment management, public address and synchronous distribution of digitized voice and visual announcements. They simultaneously handle any form or combination of electronic communication from complex radio networks, PBX/PSTN extensions, intercoms, and legacy circuits to fiber optic circuits, carrier systems, and cellular networks.

"Dialogic is a trusted partner of ours, and we've built our communications control systems on Dialogic solutions for over fifteen years," reports Herb Forster, General Manager of Penta Communications. "Dialogic's PowerMedia technology provides us the rock-solid platform for building our high-reliability dispatch system that transit systems demand, including a recent installation at a major commuter rail line in the Northeast. Our solutions allow rail systems to effectively manage dispatcher to radio, telephone, emergency lines, passenger communications, and today's cellular technologies with leading edge IP and server based technology. With this solution from Dialogic, we have a platform that will take us into the future."

The PowerMedia solution used by Penta is a highly scalable, software-only multi-media processing platform that enables standards-based, real-time multimedia communications solutions for enterprise, IMS, and WebRTC applications on premise or in the cloud. Built on 15+ years of software media processing experience, this PowerMedia technology is trusted by world class service-providers and large enterprises to power millions of rich media sessions.

"Application developers continue to develop and migrate their communications solutions to software-based solutions, and PowerMedia technology is an award-winning software media processing platform at the forefront of the market," said Jim Machi, Senior VP of Product Management and Marketing at Dialogic. "Penta Corporation is an excellent example of the many application developers that have successfully grown their business using Dialogic solutions and continue to offer 'mission-critical' communications solutions to a broad range of industries."

About Penta Corporation

Penta Corporation is an ISO 9001:2012 certified manufacturer of technology solutions for the Transportation, Utility, and Public Safety industries for over 35 years. Based in New Orleans, LA, Penta's products include the highly scalable server based, Penta Media Exchange (PMx) and cPCx VOIP integrated radio/telephone voice dispatching systems and consoles, WavWriter ADA compliant VOIP voice/visual announcement, Digital Signage systems and software, radio voice interconnects, interoperability controllers, and communications solutions. Visit www.penta-corp.com for more information.

About Dialogic

Dialogic is a leading cloud-optimized solutions provider for real-time communications media, applications, and infrastructure to service providers, enterprises, and developers around the globe. Based in Parsippany, NJ with offices worldwide, Dialogic helps 48 of the world's top 50 mobile operators, and nearly 3,000 application developers build and deploy on agile networks. Learn more about how Dialogic is enabling agility by following us on Twitter @Dialogic, and visiting www.dialogic.com and the Dialogic Blog for the latest industry news, trends and advice.

Dialogic and PowerMedia are either registered trademarks or trademarks of Dialogic Corporation or a subsidiary thereof ("Dialogic"). Other trademarks mentioned and/or marked herein belong to their respective owners.

Logo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20160108/320392LOGO

SOURCE Dialogic

Related Links