How Newfoundland lost its money by joining Confederation

The last vestiges of Newfoundland’s currency disappeared with the signing of the Terms of Union. Newfoundland’s entry into Confederation marked the end of an era when colonies issued their own coins and paper money.

Newfoundland: island of cod

When John Cabot landed at Bonavista in 1497, he claimed the island for King Henry VII of England, who called it the “New Found Launde.” It is ironic that for centuries Newfoundland (and today, Labrador) was remembered less for the "land” than for the seas and their abundance of cod fish beyond her shores. In fact, some early 16th century Portuguese maps called it terra do Bacalhau or ilha do Bacalhau, “land” or “island of cod.” Given that cod would drive the colony’s economy for the next four hundred years, maybe the Portuguese name would have been more suitable.

Several Indigenous Peoples in North America—including Inuit, Innu, Wolastoqiyik, Mi'kmaq and Beothuk—have fished the Atlantic cod for thousands of years. What we call Newfoundland today was known as Ktaqmkuk when Europeans first landed on the island. It was inhabited by the Beothuk and Mi’kmaq at that time.

Newfoundland became the site of an international fishery. Portuguese, Spanish, Basque, French, English and Dutch fishermen were active on the Grand Banks. Boats from ports all over Europe would cross the Atlantic Ocean in the spring, crowd the waters off the coast to cast their nets, and set up temporary camps on the shores to dry their catch. They had little interest in the island or the people that called it their home. For them, it was all about the fish!

Permanent settlement, fish currency and coinage

For nearly 200 years after Cabot’s landing, Newfoundland remained largely uninhabited by Europeans. In 1610, a few English fishers wintered at Cupids, located in the Avalon peninsula. After a couple of years, the population at the site was 62 people, including a few families. A decade later, in 1623, England chartered the colony of Avalon, with Ferryland as its main settlement. It was founded mainly to support the fishery. The French gained residence in Placentia (a variation of Plaisance), located on the other side of the peninsula, in 1655. The coexistence between English and French settlers during those years was tense and even violent. One campaign, launched by French forces, began in 1696 with the raiding of the Ferryland settlement. The campaign destroyed 23 English settlements along the coast of the Avalon Peninsula in the span of three months.

Following this destruction, England passed new legislation in 1699 allowing permanent English settlement in Newfoundland to protect its fishing interests against any French aggression. The Treaty of Utrecht in 1713 permanently ceded Newfoundland to Great Britain, although the French maintained special fishing privileges with a base on the islands of St. Pierre and Miquelon. Despite the British government effectively discouraging settlement, Newfoundland had a population of about 2,000 settlers by 1700. The arrival of European settlers introduced diseases such as tuberculosis, which took an enormous toll on the Beothuk. A lack of both resources and outside help to confront the disease led to a decline in their numbers throughout the 18th and 19th centuries, until the Beothuk eventually disappeared.

Coinage was scarce in Newfoundland, a phenomenon not uncommon in many English colonies around the world. For decades, commerce on the island operated on a credit system, with dried cod as the local trade commodity. In the spring, merchants on the island would outfit the fishermen with equipment, and the fishermen would settle their account in the fall with their seasonal catch. Merchants exported the salted and dried cod to Europe, South America and the Caribbean. Reliance on a credit system and the extensive use of bills of exchange to settle transactions between the island merchants and their suppliers in Europe further prove the lack of coinage. Coins were not available in any reliable quantity for commerce, let alone for capital to help grow the economy.

Financial panic and the fall of the Newfoundland banks

Newfoundland’s two banks, the Commercial and the Union, were the main providers of capital and currency for the colony. Yet by 1894, with a drying up of the cod fishery, difficulty in increasing mining output and rising costs to build the railway, the banks’ finances were stretched thin. They were overdrawn on their loans and riding the edge of insolvency. Acting on these rumours, people quickly sought to withdraw their money from the banks, only to learn that there were no funds to do so. Unable to meet their financial obligations, both banks permanently closed on December 10, 1894. The effects were immediate with businesses failing, workers losing their jobs and the price of food and other essentials rising. The entire colony was on the verge of bankruptcy. Payment of specie was suspended until Newfoundland passed legislation to wind up the affairs of the failed banks and for others, namely, the Bank of Montreal, the Bank of Nova Scotia and the Merchant’s Bank of Halifax (later, the Royal Bank of Canada), to come to the rescue. Notes of the Commercial and Union were redeemed at huge discounts. The inhabitants of Newfoundland who had faith in the banks to protect their savings lost almost everything.

The 20th century and a new attitude toward Confederation

Newfoundland never fully recovered from the 1894 financial crisis. And over the decades that followed, the option of joining Confederation seemed more and more attractive. The problem was that the rest of the Dominion of Canada was less enthusiastic about accepting it and its economic troubles. Throughout the First World War and the Great Depression, Newfoundland’s financial situation was desperate—so much so that, in 1934, the British parliament suspended the Newfoundland government and appointed a commission of government in hopes of steering the colony toward recovery. The Second World War turned around the colony’s fortunes, with increased immigration and influxes of money for the war effort. Newfoundland was again on the road to economic and financial stability, right in time for talks on joining Confederation to resurface.

1949: Newfoundland finally joins Canada

In December 1945, the British parliament announced that Newfoundland would hold a National Convention to choose the colony’s political destiny: self-government or union with Canada. The factions were equally split, but the pro-Confederation delegates led by Joey Smallwood won the motion to go to Ottawa to discuss terms for joining with Canada. While several delegates of the National Convention rejected the draft terms, disagreeing over the style of government, active campaigning in favour of Confederation allowed for the option to remain on the referendum ballot. On June 3, 1948, Newfoundlanders went to the polls. In a low turnout, the votes were split, with no clear winner. The results of a second referendum held the following month gave Confederation the nod. The final Terms of Union were signed on December 11, 1948, and in February 1949, the Canadian Parliament ratified them. Newfoundland was in. Labrador was physically separated, but had always been a part of Newfoundland. To reflect this, the province changed its official name in 2001 to Newfoundland and Labrador, recognizing it as a single entity.