An independent dominion, Newfoundland made a tremendous contribution to the Allied war effort: from a population of 242,000, roughly 12,000 Newfoundlanders enrolled for service during the First World War. Theyfought on land, in the air and at sea; they fought in the trenches of Gallipoli, and those of the Western Front. In victory and in hardship, the Royal Newfoundland Regiment pressed on with uncommon valour, courageously going over the top once more at the Ypres front in September 1918 and pushing into enemy territory, before joining the occupation force in Germany.

From Grand Falls to Gallipoli, and into Germany. Order your commemorative coin today.

SECOND IN FIRST WORLD WAR ALLIES 4-COIN SERIES: On the 100th anniversaryof the Armistice of 11 November 1918, this four-coin series reflects on the wartime contributions of select Allied forces who were united in a common causeand bound by heroism and duty.

FOUR ALLIES, ONE LAST PUSH: Like Canada, Newfoundland was an independentdominion during the First World War; the second coin in our First World War Allies series highlights the tremendous wartime contributions and sacrifices of Newfoundlanders.

THE IMAGE OF HEROISM: The scene on the reverse features an outstanding amount of engraved details! Multiple finishes add a sense of depth to a poignant design, which showcases the courageous spirit of the Royal Newfoundland Regiment in the trenches that were a defining experience of the Great War.

SELECTIVE GOLD PLATING: Like all coins in this limited series, selective gold plating on your coin adds a fitting gleam to the regimental insignia of the Royal Newfoundland Regiment.

FOR KING AND COUNTRY: Selective gold plating also highlights the effigy of KingGeorge V on the obverse, which largely resembles that of all Canadian coins issued during the First World War.

COLLECT ALL 4 COINS FOR THE COMPLETE STORY: It’s a touching memorial to all the combatants—one that goes beyond borders to put a face on the Great War.

INCLUDES SERIALIZED CERTIFICATE! The Royal Canadian Mint certifies all of its collector coins. Most of these are serialized certifications, meaning that each certificate is given a unique number, starting at 1.

LIMITED MINTAGE! Your coin has a limited worldwide mintage.

1 OZ. PURE SILVER! Your coin is crafted from one ounce 99.99% pure silver.

NO GST/HST!

Designed by Canadian artist Pandora Young, your coin places the viewer at the heart of the action during the First World War, in the muddy trenches that defined thewar on the Western Front. Multiple finishes give the engraved design a sense of depth as a crowd of soldiers of the Royal Newfoundland Regiment rush to theladders and go over the top. Not one soldier looks back—all eyes are focused on the climb and what laysahead; it is a testament to the heroic fighting spirit of Newfoundlanders who, time after time, mustered their courage and placed themselves in harm’s way in the name of the Allied cause. Selectivegold plating highlights the regimental insignia of the Royal Newfoundland Regiment, which features a woodland caribou defiantly facing the enemy. The selectively gold-plated obverse features the effigy of King George V by Sir E. B. MacKennal.

In 1914, Newfoundland’s government moved swiftly to raise and equip its own regiment of 500 volunteers, known as the First Five Hundred. Due to a shortage of khaki material, the first wave of soldiers wore blue woollen puttees when they arrived in England—hence the Newfoundland regiment’s nickname, “The Blue Puttees.”

Newfoundland’s regiment was the only North American unit to serve in the Gallipoli Campaign in 1915.

The following spring, the regiment was ordered to northern France in preparation for the start of the Battleof the Somme on July 1, 1916. But the devastating losses at Beaumont-Hamel plunged Newfoundland into a period of mourning: from a regiment of 780 officers and soldiers, only 110 survived.

In recognition of its contributions at Ypres and Cambrai in 1917, the Newfoundland Regiment became the Royal Newfoundland Regiment—the only unit to be awarded the “Royal” prefix during the war.

Almost 10% of Newfoundland’s male population enrolled during the war: 8,707 men enrolled in the Royal Newfoundland Regiment, the NewfoundlandRoyal Naval Reserve and the Newfoundland Forestry Corps, while another 3,296 joined the Canadian Expeditionary Force (CEF). Others joined the Royal Flying Corps and the Royal Air Force, while more than 500 sailors served in the Merchant Marine.

In April 1918, compulsory service became lawin Newfoundland, but its regiment remained a volunteer formation until the end.

A life-sized, bronze statue of the Royal Newfoundland Regiment’s caribou mascot honours the regiment’s sacrifices, and those of all Newfoundlanders who perished in the war, at five different battlefield memorials: Beaumont-Hamel, Masnières,Monchy-le-Preux, Gueudecourt and Courtrai. A replica can also be seen at Bowring Park in St. John’s.

Your coin is encapsulated and presented ina Royal Canadian Mint-branded maroon clamshell witha black beauty box.

Order today!