LOS ANGELES — Adam Green has no intention of letting anyone bury this "Hatchet."

Still, said the 35 -year-old writer/director, the controversy that has arisen over his sequel, "Hatchet II," has made for a frustrating experience.

A horror comedy that picks up where Green’s 2006 slasher film “Hatchet” left off, “Hatchet II” was given a NC-17 rating by the Motion Picture Association of America (MPAA).

The rating means no one younger than 17 years old may be admitted to see the film. That severely limits its potential audience, and hence performance at the box office.

“You can’t play in mainstream theaters with that rating,” Green said Tuesday by phone from Los Angeles, “which has been a trend with a lot of independent movies. ... They don’t seem to be held to the same standard as studio movies.”

Instead of accepting the NC-17, Green chose to release “Hatchet II,” which opens in Muskegon Friday at the Harbor Theater, without a rating.

That did not settle things: “Hatchet II” arrives here amid controversy. Earlier this week, the American Multi-Cinema (AMC) chain pulled the film from its theaters nationwide.

Green said he does not want, for legal reasons, to publicly discuss the removal. He said, however, that “Hatchet II” is a satiric spoof on so-called torture porn films — such as the “Saw” and “Hostel” franchises — that graphically depict sadistic brutality.

“Hatchet II,” Green said, did not deserve NC-17.

“Yeah, the movie is very violent,” he said, “but there’s not a single act of violence in this that could actually happen.”

Moreover, “... I’ve seen the movie now in the U.K., I’ve seen it in Germany. I saw it when it was briefly shown in theaters here. People were just cheering, laughing, clapping, walking out so happy. The fans are loving it. I’m very happy with it. It’s just unfortunate that it’s got this controversy around it now.”

“Hatchet II” is not the first time Green has taken issue with the MPAA’s treatment of one

of his movies. The original “Hatchet” also received an NC-17 rating, he said, and his subsequent cutting of the film, which resulted in an R rating, changed its nature.

“When the movie opened in theaters, on one hand I was very excited that my first real movie was playing in theaters and I could go to the theater and buy a ticket and see it with people,” Green said. “But that wasn’t the movie I made. Unfortunately, the cuts we had to make were so tremendous that it changed the tone of the film.”

Although he concedes that “Hatchet II” is a splatter fest, Green said it’s no more so than some movies of more established filmmakers, such as Robert Rodriguez and Quentin Tarantino. Blood and gore in these movies spews like geysers, in the unrealistic fashion of, say, Monty Python’s “The Meaning of Life.” When violence is so over-the-top and played for laughs, Green said, it can’t be taken seriously.

In “Hatchet II,” a heroine (played by Danielle Harris) is pursued through a Louisiana bayou by a deformed killer (Kane Hodder). She returns to the scene of his crimes to exact revenge. Also in the film, as a character named the Rev. Zombie, is Tony Todd, an actor best known for playing the title role in the “Candyman” horror films.

Some early, postive reviews of “Hatchet II” have come from surprising sources. While the film received only a 36-percent critics’ rating on the Rotten Tomatoes movie-review website, praise came from such newspapers as the Hollywood Reporter, The New York Times and the Los Angeles Times.

“The reviews have been insane, for a movie like that,” Green said. “Typically when you have a low-budget slasher movie, the mainstream press just tears it apart.”

That said, Green’s frustrations with the MPAA remain. He sees a playing field that is uneven.

“There’ll never be a way to prove it,” he said, “but if (‘Hatchet II’) was a big, studio movie, then I don’t think there would be a problem.”

"Hatchet II" will be shown 9:30 p.m. Friday and Saturday at the Harbor, 1937 Lakeshore, Muskegon.