MIAMI, March 22 - Dell, the world's largest computer maker, said on Wednesday that it would buy the Alienware Corporation, whose high-end PC's are widely acclaimed by video gamers for their fast performance and sleek, U.F.O.-themed looks.

Dell, based in Round Rock, Tex., did not announce terms of the deal, which will help expand its offerings for the lucrative gaming and multimedia market. Dell said Alienware would operate as a wholly owned subsidiary and would keep its brand name and its own product development, marketing, sales, technical support and other operations.

Alienware, based in Miami, was founded in 1996 by Nelson Gonzalez and Alex Aguila, two childhood friends who have built a cultlike following for their PC's, which cost an average of $3,000 to $4,000. They will continue to run the company as a stand-alone unit of Dell, Dell said.

"This acquisition makes sense because the space that Alienware plays in is a high-growth segment of the PC business. It's also a high-margin segment," an analyst at IDC, Richard Shim, said.

Alienware is on track to reach $225 million in sales this year, up from $172 million in 2005, according to recent projections by Mr. Gonzalez, the company's chief executive. Mr. Aguila is president.

Dell revamped its XPS line in 2001 to feature high-powered, high-priced computers to better compete with companies like Alienware and Voodoo PC, another niche player. Earlier Wednesday, Dell started its XPS 600 Renegade system for gamers, starting at $9,930 with a flat-panel monitor.

Alienware's least expensive laptops and desktops start at about $700, but the top-of-the-line, liquid-cooled ALX models can approach $10,000 when fully equipped with dual-core processors, hard drives that can store up to a terabyte of data, and state-of-the-art graphics cards.

Alienware has branched out by offering some cheaper computers. It also has growing sales of workstations and servers to corporate and government clients, like Lockheed Martin and the Army. Gaming PC's, however, still make up 80 percent of sales.