Alienware, the subsidiary of Dell that makes high-end gaming PCs, is in the midst of a string of announcements aimed at keeping the company on the leading edge. People wondered when Dell bought Alienware in 2006 whether the rebellious upstart would become just another buttoned-down version of its corporate parent, but that clearly hasn't been the case (or chassis, as the case may be).

Last week, the company dropped its potent Alienware 13 notebook on the market, a feat all-the-more impressive for the fact that it doesn't look muscle bound. With updated components, it has all the power the previous-generation Alienware 14, but is almost half as thick (1” vs. 1.7”) and two pounds lighter (4.5lb vs. 6.1 lb).

This week, the company is announcing its answer to the consoles ( Microsoft , Sony , and Nintendo ), the Alienware Alpha, a living-room style PC skinned to look and act like a console. Although the system runs on Microsoft’s Windows 8.1, the user never sees a Microsoft screen. The entire experience is handled by the Alpha User Interface (UI).

Later in the season, the desktop is due for a major tune-up. More about that closer to PAX Prime, the gaming show in Seattle that opens Aug. 29.

Last week, Alienware executives were in New York, giving journalists and analysts and advanced peek at the lineup. On hand to lead the festivities was Frank Azor, the Alienware general manager who now also runs Dell’s XPS division, which makes the highest-end Dell branded systems.

When I asked Azor about how Alienware was doing, whether it had lost some of its most rabid fans when it “went corporate,” he said de lo contrario (Alienware’s roots are in Florida’s Cuban community), it is doing better than ever. He said Alienware still possesses all the talent and inventiveness of the independent company, but benefits from the finances, back office, and distribution of Dell. Although Alienware doesn’t break out its results separately from Dell, Azor gave a number of indicators of success. The company remains headquartered at its original location near Miami. It is one of Dell’s higher margin businesses, contributing more than its fair share to Dell’s corporate selling, general, and administrative expenses. And Azor’s addition of the XPS division to his portfolio says something about Alienware’s overall momentum.

When Alienware was bought, there was some grumbling in the community (even if timeless in their content, the timing of these complaints raises an eyebrow). The image of Alienware as a rebel, outside the accepted structure, was stretched when it became part of Dell, an established supplier of commodity PCs, and the during the integration period, not all procedures and policies made the transition entirely smoothly.

But a few months after the Alienware acquisition, Hewlett-Packard bought the other important independent, Voodoo, based in Calgary. In contrast to Alienware’s increasing role, Voodoo has since been absorbed entirely by the mother ship.

Velocity Micro is still out there making gaming PCs, as recently as July launching an affordable gaming machine.

But very few reputable independents remain. And even as the influence and culture of Alienware is expanding, rather than being diluted by its corporate parent, the subsidiary continues to update and improve its product line, paying attention to user experience, high performance, and quality of manufacture.

Meanwhile, the long-term rise of PC games over consoles is working in Alienware’s favor. Although consoles are enjoying a few moments in the sun now — with Sony PS4 and Microsoft Xbox One selling in the millions of units, even as Nintendo is struggling — PC gaming is making steady gains. Ultimately, a PC can contain much more computing power than a stock console, which is necessarily limited in some of its characteristics because it is optimized for the living room. A real gaming PC can deliver top performance, detail, and buttery playability with 3D spatial effects and high frame rates with no compromise.

And with the standardized platform providing a large target for developers, the pool of software for PC games just keeps increasing. As for the cost, the PC platform gives the greatest bang for the buck.

At the other end of the spectrum, high mobility platforms, like Apple’s iOS and Google ’s Android, are taking share from consoles in casual games.

And now, with the Force aligned to its polarity, Alienware is set to increase pressure on the console makers with a more direct competitor in the form of the Alpha gaming box and Alpha UI. The Alpha UI offers simple choices, big buttons, and intuitive sequences. Alerts from the system are fielded and ganged to reduce their impact on user experience.

The player is never interrupted, has first priority, is never made a slave to the system, which is good because for competitive gamers milliseconds matter, and all interruptions are anathema.

With Alpha, the system exists to serve the owner, rather than the usual arrangement.

Disclosure: Endpoint has a consulting relationship with Dell.