Golden State Warriors Acquire Steve Blake In Three-Player Deal

On February 19th, 2014, the Golden State Warriors traded guard MarShon Brooks and guard-forward Kent Bazemore to the Los Angeles Lakers for guard Steve Blake.

The Los Angeles Lakers signed Steve Blake as a free agent to a four-year, $16 million contract after repeating as NBA Champions during the 2009-10 season. Blake was coming off of a season that he split with the Portland Trail Blazers and Los Angeles Clippers. He assumed Jordan Farmar’s role of backup point guard to Derek Fisher. In 79 games, Blake produced 4.0 PPG on 35.9% from the field, 2.0 RPG and 2.2 APG in 20.0 MPG. The Lakers continued to stay in the contender’s circle of the Western Conference with a 57-25 record during the 2010-11 season. That record put the Lakers in the position of second seed in the West.

In the first round of the 2011 postseason, the Lakers faced the Hornets and their superstar Chris Paul. Blake missed Game One after having missed the last two regular season games due to contracting adult chicken pox. Paul torched the Lakers with a triple-double leading to an upset victory in Game One. Los Angeles won the next two games before Paul recorded another triple double in a New Orleans Game Four victory. The Lakers won the next two games by a combined 34 points to win the series 4-2.

The second round would not be fun for the Lakers. They were swept by the Mavericks in shocking fashion. After losing Game One at home by just two points, the Lakers lost by a combined 54 points in the next three games. They were eliminated in a 36-point loss to the Mavericks in Game Four. Blake struggled mightily throughout the postseason. In nine games, he shot just 30.4% from the field and averaged 2.2 PPG in 16.2 MPG.

After the 2010-11 season, Lakers head coach Phil Jackson announced his retirement after hinting throughout the ‘10-’11 season that he would step back. The Lakers hired coach Mike Brown to run the ship on a four-year, $18.25 million deal. Before the lockout-shortened 2011-12 season would get underway, the Lakers made a shocking move when they dealt sixth man Lamar Odom to the Dallas Mavericks with a future second round pick for Dallas’ first round choice in 2012.

The lockout-shortened season was a slight step back for the Lakers who were in transition. The team was still the third seed in the West and tied for the third best record in the NBA with a 41-25 record. They continued to make some alterations to their roster. At the trade deadline, they dealt Fisher to the Rockets for forward-center Jordan Hill and they also acquired point guard Ramon Sessions from the Cleveland Cavaliers. Blake played in 53 games (5 starts) and managed 5.2 PPG, 1.6 RPG, 3.3 APG and 0.7 SPG in 23.3 MPG.

In the 2012 postseason, Blake would play a pivotal role with some very clutch shots. The Lakers played the sixth-seeded Denver Nuggets in the first round. Los Angeles won two of the first three games and Game Four would prove to be an important moment in the series. The game was tied at 86 with less than a minute left. Kobe Bryant found Sessions open in the corner for three with 48.1 seconds left to give the Lakers a three-point lead. After another stop, Bryant found Blake in the opposite corner to give the Lakers a 92-86 lead with just 18.9 seconds left in the game. The win in Game Four gave the Lakers a 3-1 advantage. Denver stormed back to win Games Five and Six to force a final seventh game. In Game Seven, Blake had a big role as he knocked down five triples and scored 19 points in a nine-point victory.

The second round would feature a matchup between the Lakers and Oklahoma City Thunder. The Thunder won Game One by 29 points in a rout. In Game Two of the Semifinals, Blake missed a potential game-winning three in the corner. After the loss, fans attacked him and his family on Twitter with reported death threats for his miss. The Lakers won Game Three at home with Blake contributing 12 points and 8 rebounds. Los Angeles would lose the series after failing to hang with the Thunder. Games Four was won on a late Kevin Durant three-pointer and Game Five featured OKC pulling away late.

The Summer of 2012 featured the Lakers making big transactions that made them an early favorite as a contender. They acquired All-Star Steve Nash in a sign-and-trade with the Phoenix Suns and also traded for star center Dwight Howard in a big four-team deal. The Lakers struggled immediately upon the start of the season. They lost four of their first five games when the team decided to fire Mike Brown. After assistant Bernie Bickerstaff coached for five games on an interim basis, the Lakers signed coach Mike D’Antoni to a three-year deal.

The addition of D’Antoni still couldn’t solve some of the issues the Lakers had. Forward Pau Gasol dealt with plantar fasciitis on and off throughout the season, Steve Nash missed multiple games due to a small fracture in his left leg, and Dwight Howard was still recovering from the back surgery he had during the tail end of the previous season. Blake had laparoscopic surgery to repair a torn abdominal muscle which caused him to miss two and a half months of action. The Lakers floundered and were even 17-25 at one point. They rallied and reached 42-37 when Kobe Bryant tore his achilles tendon on a drive to the rim against the Golden State Warriors. Bryant’s injury deflated Los Angeles’ hopes of making any semblance of noise in the postseason. The Lakers finished with a 45-37 record. Blake played in 45 games (13 starts) and managed 7.3 PPG, 2.9 RPG, 3.8 APG and 0.8 SPG in 26.1 MPG.

In the postseason, the Lakers didn’t stand a chance against the San Antonio Spurs who swept them easily in a 4-0 sweep. The Lakers were already missing Bryant in the series when Nash, Blake and backup Jodie Meeks all went down with injuries during the series. This forced the Lakers to start end of the bench players Darius Morris and Andrew Goudelock in the final two games of the series.

After the tough series loss, the Lakers suffered a devastating departure, when they lost Howard to the Houston Rockets in free agency. The Lakers made some relatively small additions in free agency. They signed center Chris Kaman and also added guard Nick Young from the Philadelphia 76ers. The loss of Howard and the pending recovery of Kobe Bryant from his torn achilles lowered any serious expectations for the Lakers. Despite all of this, the Lakers started off the season a respectable 10-9. Nash went down with nerve root irritation in his back. Blake would miss 26 games with a torn ulnar collateral ligament in his right elbow.

Upon his return, Blake had some positive moments including a triple double in a win against the Cleveland Cavaliers. After returning for six games, Blake was traded to the Warriors to open up playing time for younger point guards including Kendall Marshall and Jordan Farmar. The Lakers were 18-35 at the time of the trade. Blake departed Los Angeles with averages of 5.8 PPG, 2.3 RPG, 3.5 APG and 0.7 SPG in 204 games. He shot 38% on FGs, 38% on three-pointers, and 80% on FTs in that three and a half year span.

The Golden State Warriors signed Kent Bazemore as an undrafted free agent after he performed well on Golden State’s undefeated 2012 Summer League team. The “Bazed God” was known for his defensive ability and athleticism that could help the Warriors down the road after some development. In his rookie season, he received spot duty for the Warriors off the bench. He played in 61 games and managed 2.0 PPG in 4.4 MPG. He gained more acclaim for his bench celebrations and support of teammates. The Warriors finished with a 47-35 record and earned a postseason berth for the first time since the 2006-07 season. In the postseason, the Warriors upset the Denver Nuggets in the first round with a 4-2 series victory. The Warriors lost in the Semifinals to the San Antonio Spurs in six games.

The Warriors acquired Andre Iguodala in a sign-and-trade with the Denver Nuggets during the Summer of 2013. The Warriors had a solid start with a 24-13 record. They made a mid-season trade to acquire Jordan Crawford and MarShon Brooks from the Boston Celtics in a three-team trade. Bazemore maintained a similar role in his second season. He played in 44 games and averaged 2.3 PPG and 0.9 RPG in 6.1 MPG. Brooks played a total of 15 minutes with the Warriors after being traded. Bazemore departed the Warriors with averages of 2.1 PPG and 0.6 RPG in 105 games. He shot 37% on FGs and 57% on FTs in that time.

The Warriors used a $4 million trade exception they acquired in a deal with the Utah Jazz. The Blake acquisition put them about $400,000 under the luxury tax. The Lakers received a $2.8 million trade exception in the trade as well.

After the trade, Blake was Stephen Curry’s backup point guard after arriving in Golden State. He played in 28 games (1 start) and averaged 4.4 PPG, 2.0 RPG, 3.6 APG and 0.7 APG in 21.7 MPG. The Warriors finished the 2013-14 season with a 51-31 record. A rib injury to starting center Andrew Bogut hurt Golden State’s chances of advancing far in the postseason.

The Warriors faced the Los Angeles Clippers in the first round and managed to steal Game One of the series in Los Angeles. The Clippers won Games Two and Three before the Warriors evened the series 2-2 in Game Four. The Warriors and Clippers split Games Five and Six before the Clippers held on for a victory in Game Seven to win the series. Blake had a limited impact in the series and struggled by shooting just 33.3% from the field in 45 combined minutes. The Warriors chose to go with Jordan Crawford in the final two games as Blake played just 11 seconds. After the end of the season, Blake signed a two-year deal worth $4.2 million with the Portland Trail Blazers. The contract included a player option after the first season.

Bazemore and Brooks received ample opportunity to display their skills with numerous Lakers on the injured list. Bazemore made a strong impression with his defensive ability and a better than expected ability to score. He played in 23 games (15 starts) and produced 13.1 PPG, 3.3 RPG, 3.1 APG and 1.3 SPG in 28.0 MPG. Bazemore connected on 33 of 89 three point attempts (37.1%).

Before the end of the season, Bazemore tore a tendon in his right foot causing him to miss the last stretch of games. Brooks saw more action with the Lakers, but still couldn’t find a consistent role. He played in 18 games with the Lakers and averaged 6.4 PPG, 1.7 RPG, 1.2 APG and 0.7 SPG in 12.7 MPG. The Lakers finished the 2013-14 season with a 27-55 record. After the season, Bazemore agreed to a two-year, $4 million contract with the Atlanta Hawks. Brooks agreed to a contract overseas with Olimpia Milano in Italy.

Steve Blake on the trade (via LA Times):

“Real mixed emotions. The hardest thing is for my family, really. I’ve got a wife and three little kids and now I’m going to have to spend four months probably away from them.”

On his time with the Lakers:

“I’ve loved my time here. When you spend some place this long, you start to get comfortable and we loved where we lived and loved the schools my kids were in, always loved the support of the fans and ownership. “This is one of the best places I’ve ever played at and in the future if they wanted me back, I absolutely, definitely would consider it.”

On playing for Golden State:

“I’m going to obviously a really, really good team. How I fit in, I don’t know. But we’ll figure it out. I’ve got a lot of respect for them there and I look forward to getting to know them.”

On playing for coach Mike D’Antoni:

"I loved playing for Coach D'Antoni, the freedom he gave me as a player to go out there and be successful. I’m totally grateful for that.”

On when he found about the trade (via ESPN):

“I was in my warm-ups, my uniform. I was ready to go. It’s a tough situation but it is what it is and I’m ready to start something new.”

On hearing about Kobe Bryant’s disappointment with him being traded (via LA Times):

“Whenever you have support like that from a teammate, it feels great, especially from one of the greatest. I’ve developed a great relationship with him and we both love competing. It was a sad day to leave good friends like that in a place where you’ve had a lot of battles.”

On the difference between playing with the lakers and Warriors:

“It’s very different. I was playing a lot of minutes with the Lakers and now it’s probably around 15 or 20, maybe more depending on the game. But as long as I’m doing something productive to help the team, stats don’t really matter.”

Kent Bazemore on finding out about the trade (via ESPN):

“At first I was in shock. Then (Myers) said, ‘Los Angeles, like, the Lakers,’ and I was like, 'Oh my god! That’s a dream come true.’ Growing up, idolizing Kobe Bryant. He’s probably, hands down, one of the greatest players to ever touch the basketball.”

On MarShon Brooks:

“MarShon is reminiscent of, he used to get it in college, of the young Kobe Bryant with the fro and how he moves. Brooks is one of the smoothest players around.”

On Kobe Bryant:

“Kobe Bryant arguably has the greatest ticker in sports history as far as a guy that wants to get the job done and it’s kind of contagious. I watched him growing up and you could see the fire in his eyes. When I put on the Lakers jersey tonight, hopefully I get some of those same powers going.”

Describing his game:

“Energy. Just bringing energy, whether it be on offense or defense.”

On Mike D’Antoni and the offense:

“It’s good for guards like myself that like to get up and down and use my length and athleticism to run the wing, get in the pick-and-roll, get in the lane and finish. He’s a very player-coach type of guy that likes to joke around with you, but all he asks for is just to play hard and give it your all.”

MarShon Brooks on the Lakers (via ESPN):

“I grew up a Lakers fan, a big Kobe Bryant fan, so I’m just excited to get to work.”

On his situation so far during the 2013-14 season:

“This year I haven’t really had the opportunity to play at all. I haven’t really played meaningful minutes at all.”

On the Lakers’ style:

“I’ve proven I could score in this league. Just so much space on the court – they like to play with four shooters around one big – that’s just a lot of spacing and I’m excited.”

On his skills:

“I can score the ball, pretty much. Play make. Just make things happen, create my own shot.”

Golden State Warriors general manager Bob Myers on the trade (via San Jose Mercury News):

“We think this just bolsters the bench and gives us some more options, some more weapons and a player when you give him the ball you know you can trust him. We just think it was a chance to improve our roster and that was our justification.”

On keeping the Warriors’ core intact:

“We like our core, and I think our core likes each other. I think it’s a core that can win, and our bench, for whatever reason, struggled early on. Anything we could do to fortify it, we tried to do without removing what we consider our core.”

On Blake (via ESPN):

“The acquisition of Steve Blake will provide us with additional veteran depth at point guard as we enter the stretch run of the season. He’s had a productive career and is a player who can both run an offense and has the ability to shoot the basketball. On the other hand, we thank Kent and MarShon for their contributions to our team both on and off the court and wish them success as they enter the next stage of their careers.”

Los Angeles Lakers general manager Mitch Kupchak on the trade (via Lakers.com):

“Steve Blake has been here almost four years and as a person and player, we loved him, but our shortage of point guards about a month ago led us to Kendall Marshall. With Kendall and Jordan (Farmar), and of course Steve Nash is back there and Steve Blake, it really got to the point where we needed to free up some time in the backcourt to look at Jordan and give Kendall the time that he’s earned, and let’s review and evaluate where we are with those two players. The other part of it is we got back two young players that are developing – one that’s been in the league for three years, the other for two years and (with) varying levels of ability and skill. So really, when you look at the deal – at least how we looked at the deal – those two components.”

On whether there was any financial motivation behind the deal:

“With this organization, that kind of relief is not really a big number. But as I’ve said many times before, the financial aspect of what we do is not something that is not taken into consideration because it is.”

Lakers head coach Mike D’Antoni on Steve Blake (via ESPN):

“He was a joy to coach. I think every coach should have an opportunity to coach somebody like that. He was one of the toughest guys that I’ve ever coached, and he’s good. Any team that wants to win, he’ll be a nice piece. Steve’s a good player. He’s going to a team where he’ll play a lot and they’ll love him. It’s disappointing to everybody [in L.A.], but that’s the business of the game.”

On Bazemore and Brooks (via ESPN):

“Obviously they’re in the pros, so they got talent and we’ll try to fit them in. Each one is a little bit different. Bazemore is long and rangy and a defender and Brooks is a good offensive player. More than that, I don’t know. We’ll (get to) know their personalities and we’ll see what they can do.”

On trying to make things simple for the new players:

“Hopefully we don’t put too much in their mind to bog them down and let them just flow and play and try to make it simple for them as much as we can.”

Warriors head coach Mark Jackson on acquiring Blake (via San Jose Mercury News):

“I know both guys (Jordan Crawford as well), and with Steve, I’ve watched him throughout the course of his career, and he’s a guy that’s not afraid of the moment. It gives us great depth and it gives us experience.”

Warriors guard Stephen Curry on the emotional game after the loss of Bazemore in the trade (via SF Gate):

“It was an emotional start to the game. Nobody had any idea that it was going to happen. With a guy like Kent, who has poured so much of his passion, soul and energy into our team for two years, it’s tough to see the business take over. We’re going to miss him a lot. For us to win this game, it was a good bounce back from that.”