Pakistani physicist may have discovered &#8220;new form of matter​

ISLAMABAD: Research work carried out by a young Pakistani particle physicist Jamil Aslam and two of his team members may lead to the discovery of a &#8220;new form of matter&#8221;.

Jamil Aslam is a faculty member of the Physics Department at Quaid-i-Azam University (QAU), while the other two physicists are working in Deutsches Elektronen Synchrotron (DESY), the biggest German research center for particle physics.

Jamil Aslam and his team members &#8212; Ahmed Ali and Christian Hambrock &#8212; analyzed the data collected by the KEK particle collider in Japan during an experiment known as Belle and claimed the discovery of tetraquark particles that consist of four quarks instead of the usual two (quark-antiquark) and three quark ones.

A quark is an elementary particle and a fundamental constituent of matter. &#8220;Though it is not conclusive, however, the analysis made in paper supports the evidence of tetraquarks and if it is proved in Belle experiments, scheduled for later this year, it will introduce a new form of matter,&#8221; said a member of the team.

Both Dr. Jamil Aslam and Dr. Ahmed Ali are PhDs from the Physics Department of QAU, and are students of prominent Pakistani theoretical physicist and eminent scientist Professor Dr. Riazuddin.

Commenting on the work of his ex-students, Riazuddin remarked that the work is highly significant in its ability to explain certain anomalies in the experiments that could not be explained within the framework of the standard quark theories.

&#8220;The tetraquark model if confirmed would imply the existence of exotic states of fundamental particles,&#8221; he said.

The research work done by the group was published in Physical Review Letters, a well reputed physics journal, and has been selected for special mention in notable journals of science including Institute of Physics (IoP), Physics Today and New Scientist.

Pakistani physicist may have discovered &#8220;new form of matter&#8221; &#8211; The Express Tribune

Dr Riazuddin is one of Dr Abdus Salam students, you can expect these people to continue producing great scientific minds for years to come. I dearly hope that the Educational Institute Dr Salam wanted to establish in Pakistan is made one day for the benefit of the youth of our nation.

You can call it a new form of matter, as of now it's a meson. If conclusively proven it will be a standard subatomic particle, not a form of matter.

Best of luck to the chaps. The QAU Dept of Physics and the NCP have pursued some of the best scientific work in Pakistan and continue to maintain a very high standard of research unlike other institutes.

Actually the report is a bit old. The results were reported back in late April and the earliest paper by the group on this model dates back to December 2009 but the model was proposed in April. I guess I forgot to post about it earlier. The papers have posted about it now. Better late than never.

Dr Riazuddin is the greatest living Pakistani physicist. The National Centre for Physics has been renamed as the Riazuddin National Center for Physics in his honour as well.

Here's the Facebook page for the Dept. Go and congratulate them :- http://www.facebook.com/pages/Islamabad-Pakistan/Physicists-of-QAU/220400056889?ref=ts

And these are the two Pakistanis (I guess you can tell that the centre one is the German):-

Pakistan has produced some really exceptional physicists especially theoretical physicists (applied physics costs a lot). Abdus Salam, Riazuddin, Zia Mian, Salim Mahsud, Suhail Zubairy, Hoorani, R M Chaudhary, Fiazuddin, Masud Ahmed, Hoodbhoy, Abdullah Sadiq, Munir Ahmad Khan, Aslam Khalil, N. M. Butt, A H Nayyar and many more. (Yeah I can remember names)