Our Daily Bread (1934) is a drama movie that centers around a couple. Furthermore, they move into the village and start their crop business. However, an incoming drought threatens to spoil their crops, eventually making their lives hard. King Vidor wrote and helmed the movie.

Here’s how you can watch and stream Our Daily Bread (1934) via streaming services such as Amazon Prime Video.

Is Our Daily Bread (1934) available to watch via streaming?

Yes, Our Daily Bread (1934) is available to watch via streaming on Amazon Prime Video.

The movie is set during the Great Depression, wherein a couple is forced to move to a village to earn a living. At first, they are clueless about how to get started, but as they proceed they receive help from people around them. Soon, they learn about an incoming drought, and everyone collectively uses their hands to dig a ditch, leveraging the creek water to irrigate the crops.

The cast members are Karen Morley as Mary, Tom Keene as John Sims, Barbara Pepper as Sally, Addison Richards as Louie Fuente, and others.

Watch Our Daily Bread (1934) streaming via Amazon Prime Video

Our Daily Bread (1934) is available to watch on Amazon Prime Video.

Amazon Prime Video is a renowned streaming service that presents you with an international entertainment library, available to access on a flexible plan.

You can watch via Amazon Prime Video by following these steps:

Go to Amazon Prime Video

Select ‘Sign in’ and ‘Create your Amazon account’

Sign up for a Prime Video membership:

$14.99 per month or $139 per year with an Amazon Prime membership

$8.99 per month for a standalone Prime Video membership

Amazon Prime is the online retailer’s paid service that provides fast shipping and exclusive sales on products, so the membership that includes both this service and Prime Video is the company’s most popular offering. However, you can also opt to subscribe to Prime Video separately.

Our Daily Bread (1934) synopsis is as follows:

“John and Mary Sims are city-dwellers hit hard by the financial fist of The Depression. Driven by bravery (and sheer desperation) they flee to the country and, with the help of other workers, set up a farming community – a socialist mini-society based upon the teachings of Edward Gallafent. The newborn community suffers many hardships – drought, vicious raccoons, and the long arm of the law – but ultimately pulls together to reach a bread-based Utopia.”

NOTE: The streaming services listed above are subject to change. The information provided was correct at the time of writing.