Texting and driving is one of the riskiest behaviors drivers can engage in behind the wheel. When you send or read a text, you may only take your eyes off of the road for a few seconds. But according to the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA), driving at 55 mph while sending or reading a text message for five seconds is the same as driving an entire length of a football field with your eyes shut.

When you’re texting and driving, you’re distracted in three ways: visually, manually and cognitively.

That’s because you’re taking your eyes off of the road to look at your phone screen, you’re taking at least one hand off of the wheel to type and you’re also taking your mind off of driving, which can have disastrous results.

Here’s what you should know about how this dangerous behavior can affect you and others on the road, or how it can impact the cost of your car insurance.

Key Texting and Driving Statistics

What are the dangers of texting and driving?

According to information provided by the NHTSA, distracted driving has become a leading cause of vehicle crashes in the U.S. Much of the distraction on the roads is attributed to texting while driving.

Nearly all of the drivers (93%) surveyed by AAA in 2022 believe texting or emailing while driving is very or extremely dangerous. But 37% of drivers admitted that in the month prior they had read a text or email while driving—and another 27% admitted to typing one while driving.

Studies also show that using your phone to send a text while driving can have the same effect on your reaction time as drinking four beers before getting behind the wheel.

Your recovery time on the road can also be affected by texting while driving. When you take your eyes off the road to use your phone, it can take up to 27 seconds for your eyes to recover and reorient to the road and for the mental distraction to end, according to AAA. The phenomenon, called the hangover effect, can occur any time you text and drive—even if you do it while stopped at a traffic light or stop sign.

How many accidents are caused by texting and driving?

Statistics show that a significant percentage of accidents occur when a driver is distracted, which includes texting and driving. According to 2021 NHTSA data, cell phone use or texting while driving was a factor in:

12% of the distracted driving accidents that resulted in deaths

8% of distracted driving injury crashes, or 20,015 accidents in total

8% of non-fatal crashes involving a distracted driver, or 44,518 accidents in total

How many people die from texting and driving?

Hundreds of Americans are killed annually in accidents involving texting and driving:

In 2021, 410 people in total were killed as a direct result of accidents caused by texting and driving. That amounts to more than one death per day.

In 2020, 397 people were killed in fatal crashes caused by texting and driving.

In 2021, there were 644 nonoccupants (pedestrians, bicyclists and others) killed in crashes involving a distracted driver, including those who were texting.

Texting and Driving Deaths Over Time

Source: National Highway Traffic Safety Administration

Texting and Driving Laws By State

Source: Governors Highway Safety Association

Consequences of Texting and Driving

Aside from the risk to themselves and others on the road, there can be numerous repercussions that drivers face for texting while driving. Most states have outlawed the practice for drivers and the penalties for breaking these laws typically start with fines to deter the practice.

While the specific fines for texting and driving vary by state, in general, you can expect to pay anywhere from $20 to $500 or more if you’re caught texting and driving in a state that has outlawed it. In some states, the penalties are even higher:

In Alaska, texting and driving is a misdemeanor criminal offense that could come with a year of jail time and a $10,000 fine for the first offense.

Oregon has instituted a fine that starts at $1,000 for drivers who are caught texting while driving—with a maximum penalty of up to $2,500 and six months in jail for a third texting and driving offense.

If you cause an accident while texting and driving—especially one that results in bodily injury or death—the penalties can be stiffer. In these cases, you may face loss of your license and even criminal charges and jail time.

“When texting, you easily lose track of speed and your surroundings, so aside from potentially getting a ticket, you are endangering pedestrians and/or road workers, which could lead to them being injured or killed by distracted driving,” says P.J. Miller, partner and independent insurance agent with Wallace & Turner Insurance. “This can result in criminal charges, not just increased rates. Additionally, you could lose your license or even your job.”

Commercial drivers may also face heftier penalties for texting while driving. In addition to state laws prohibiting texting and driving that apply to all drivers, the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration (FMCSA) prohibits texting while driving by commercial motor vehicle drivers and imposes sanctions, such as driver disqualification, for those who do not comply.

How Texting and Driving Affects Car Insurance Rates

Car insurance rates are calculated for each driver based on a number of risk factors, including ZIP code, the make and model of your vehicle, driving history and your claims history. Drivers with traffic ticket convictions—such as for texting and driving, reckless driving or speeding—will likely pay more than drivers with clean records.

If you’re caught texting and driving, that ticket or fine on your record can result in higher car insurance rates. And, depending on the circumstances in which you were caught, the rate increase could be substantial.

But it’s not just texting and driving offenders who face higher rates for their car insurance. Drivers across the board pay higher premiums because of widespread texting and driving, even if they aren’t the ones taking risks behind the wheel. This is because insurers can decide to raise rates for everyone if they’re paying out more for claims.

“Distracted driving is likely the largest area of insurance losses over the past five years, and many companies have begun to react to this,” says Ezra Peterson, senior director of sales at Way.com, a car-focused software platform. “Some estimates place the premium surcharge range around 6% to 8% for the total market, meaning every single insured person is paying that much more just due to this behavior.”

Getting Drivers to Stop Texting

A number of insurance companies offer apps to monitor distracted driving and reward good driving with discounts, which can incentivize drivers to put their phones down and pay attention to the road.

One such example is the KnowYourDrive App from American Family. This app encourages drivers to become safer behind the wheel by offering up to a 20% discount on car insurance based on how safe they drive.

Other insurers, including Nationwide, Progressive, State Farm and Safeco, offer similar apps and usage-based car insurance discounts. Taking advantage of these opportunities can organically lead to safer habits behind the wheel—and help curb texting and driving.

Texting and Driving FAQ