Last week Samsung announced that it was acquiring Joyent, a San Francisco-based cloud provider.

Even though the analysts declared that the public cloud market consolidation is over, this deal proves that there is still scope for M&A in the infrastructure segment. Interestingly, Joyent is not bought by a competitor or an enterprise infrastructure player looking at strengthening its position. Instead, the acquisition offer came from an unusual entity, which is the leader in the consumer electronics market.

Joyent was originally started in 2005 as TextDrive, a web hosting company that provided lifetime hosting for an upfront fee of $199. Though the original web hosting service was shut down in 2014, Joyent successfully transitioned into a public cloud competing with Rackspace, Amazon, and Microsoft. The core platform eventually transformed into a Container as a Service (CaaS), focused on delivering container management services through Triton. Joyent also offers Manta, an open source object storage service, and a hosted Node.js platform.

With just over 100 employees and a presence that’s restricted only to the US, Joyent is not the public cloud with a massive footprint. Like most of its competitors, Joyent is also struggling to compete in a market that’s dominated by deep-pocketed cloud companies. Why did Samsung invest in this deal?

Xiaomi and other Asian brands have started to offer Android-based phones that are much cheaper than the company’s flagship products. Samsung is facing increased competition in the hardware business. The hardware market is extremely fragmented resulting in shrinking margins for vendors. Samsung knows that it needs to strengthen its software investments to stay in the game for the long term. Joyent would instantly bring the expertise of Node.js, which will play a key role in embedded platforms. It would also benefit from the core capabilities of Joyent including object storage and container management.

Though it’s not officially confirmed, Samsung’s backend infrastructure for phones, TVs, and IoT is powered by Amazon Web Services. By acquiring Joyent, Samsung can gradually migrate the infrastructure and data to its own cloud platform which may offer better control and economies of scale.

Internet of Things is high on the agenda of Samsung. In 2014, It acquired SmartThings, a consumer IoT platform company. Branded as Artik, the company has also built System on Chip (SoC) boards along with a cloud-based IoT platform called Artik Cloud, which currently runs on AWS. With this acquisition, Joyent can become the preferred destination for apps that developers build on Artik platform.

Machine learning and artificial intelligence demand high-end, scalable infrastructure, which Samsung can gain through Joyent’s acquisition. With the battleground shifting to artificial intelligence, Samsung will have to build its own AI engine that can effectively compete with Apple, Google, Amazon, and Microsoft. Eventually, it can leverage Joyent to augment S-Voice with AI capabilities to compete with Siri, Alexa, and Cortana services.

This acquisition will help Samsung to transition into a software and cloud platform company. It can port SmartOS, Joyent’s lean and mean hypervisor to ARM platform which will open up new avenues. Node.js will get first class support on Samsung’s Artik IoT developer platform. To compete with the local players, Samsung may expand Joyent’s cloud infrastructure to Asian and European markets. Samsung’s sales and marketing engines will help Joyent to take its private cloud and Triton platforms to enterprises.

The success of this acquisition highly depends on the way Samsung handles the transition of Joyent’s employees and customers.