At the Kevin P Landry Law Offices we see on a daily basis the catastrophic injuries that result from texting and driving. We dedicated not only to obtaining the best results for our injured clients but also dedicated to keeping our clients as well as all drivers safe on the American roadways.

The advent of the information age has brought many advances and conveniences to the American lifestyle. It unfortunately has also resulted in many negative and unintended consequences. Currently, according to the Institute for Highway Safety, texting while driving causes nearly 25% of all accidents and 11 teen deaths daily.

If you text and drive you are 23 times more likely to get in an accident. So, how can we address this issue that is so vital to the safety of our youth and those drivers around them. Here is your opportunity to tell us what you can do.

Qualified Applicants

This scholarship is available to all students seeking a post-secondary education in the United States.

You must be enrolled in a University, College or other post-secondary institution or plan to enroll in the Fall of 2016.

You may apply or re-apply for the scholarship in any one or all of the four (4) post-secondary.

Application Process

The application process is simple, please include all information that is listed below or your application will be disqualified. Please follow the instructions carefully.

Prepare an essay, limited to no more than five hundred (500) words on the following topic: What can you do to “Help Save Lives” by prevent texting and driving.

Include your name, email address, home address, contact phone number, college name and address that you are presently attending or planning to attend in the Fall of 2016.

Within the body of the essay each applicant must pledge not to text and drive.

Email completed application to:

Submission deadline is April 1, 2016. The scholarship will be awarded, made payable to the individual student, on June 1, 2016.

Awarding of Scholarship

The scholarship winner will be notified of the award via email on June 1, 2016.

If awarded the scholarship, the applicant must provide proof of enrollment at the particular University, College or other post-secondary institution.

Payment will be made to the Student in the Student’s name.

NOTE: If any of the information requested is not included or the essay is over the five (500) word limit the applicant will be disqualified. The identifying information required is not considered in the word count for the essay.

Please No phone calls.

[si-contact-form form=’1′]