Veteran broadcaster and outstanding media entrepreneur, Mr. John Momoh has been nominated as the Outstanding Media Entrepreneur of the Decade in the forthcoming Marketing Edge Award for Excellence.

Mr. John Momoh who is the Chairman of Nigeria’s multiple award winning television station, Channels TV was nominated in the exclusive category of the annual awards following his many years of remarkably, admirably and salutary contributions to the media industry in Nigeria and the socio-economic development of the country.

Momoh has vast experience spanning over three and half decades in the field of bro adcast journalism in Nigeria. Before establishing Channels TV, Momoh worked in various capacities as News Anchor, Senior Reporter and Senior Producer for both Radio Nigeria and later Nigeria Television Authority (NTA).

The ace broadcaster is a Mass Communication graduate of the University of Lagos. He also has a Masters’ Degree in International Law and Diplomacy from the same University. His résumé also includes Diplomas from the Thomas Foundation, Cardiff and the University of Manchester UK. He is also an alumnus of the prestigious Harvard Business School (OPM-40) and the Lagos Business School (CEP7).

Married to Sola Momoh an equally intelligent and outstanding broadcaster, Mr Momoh established Channels TV in 1995, as a private television station with only 15 employees. Its primary focus is producing news and current affairs programs on Nigerian domestic issues.

Channels Television is the first and only thriving national TV brand, dedicated solely to the dissemination of news. It is the first Nigerian broadcaster to stream its television programming live for 24 hours.

According to the news channel’s website, the Channel’s mission is to act as a watchdog on governmental policies and activities. And over the years, it has dispatched this responsibility with high sense of patriotism and professionalism. And from Lagos, where it began broadcasting, Channels TV has grown to include three other stations in Abuja, Edo and Kano states.

During its 20-year existence, the broadcaster has been named “Best Station of the Year” Ten times by The Federal Republic of Nigeria’s Media Merit Award Trust. In 2013, the channel won multiple awards, such as “Best TV Station in Africa” awarded by African Achievers Awards,[11] “Most Compliant Television Station In Media Category” by Advertising Practitioners Council of Nigeria, Lagos State Ministry Of Education’s “Jam Feast” award for its contribution towards youth invention and educational development, “Best Report On Maternal Health” by the Society of Gynaecology And Obstetrics Of Nigeria (Sogon), and Customer Service Excellence Award in Media.

Now, Momoh is set to add another glorious feather to his already beaded cap of honour with his nomination as Outstanding Media Entrepreneur of the Decade in the Marketing Edge awards.