Alva Sylvester Gilbert was the only son of Charles Bluford and Amanda Wells Gilbert, one of the early families of Jefferson county.

He was born September 17th, 1886, in Blissville Township, Jefferson county, Illinois, and passed peacefully into the "Great Beyond" at 11:50 a.m., September 11th. 1957, at Jefferson Memorial Hospital, Mount Vernon, Illinois, after an extended illness. He was 70 years, 11 months, and 25 days old.

On October 9th, 1904, he was united in marriage with Inez Fairchild, Daughter of Eli and Jeannette Dixon Fairchild.

To this union was born three daughters, Mildred, deceased, Neva, the wife of Lt. Colonel Julius Baker, Mount Holly, New Jersey, and Anita, the wife of Mr. MaxeyHolloway, Waltonville, Illinois. Besides his wife and two daughters, Mr. Gilbert is survived by a nephew, Gilbert Stoddard, Decatur, Illinois, and a niece, Mrs. Sema McKittrick, Waltonville, Illinois.

His parents, an only sister, Mrs. Opal Stoddard, and infant daughter Mildred preceded him in death.

Mr. Gilbert was a highly respected and successful farmer having lived his entire life on the farm near Waltonville. He was a member of the Jefferson county Farm Bureau, had formerly served as a director of Knob Prairie Cemetery Association, and was for many years director and treasurer of the Tri County Telephone Company. In addition to farming and many other activities Alva always had time to devote to the well being and comfort of friends and neighbors in time of stress and need. An active participant in community affairs, he was a member of the Waltonville Methodist church and was always interested in its progress. He gave unstintingly of his time and wordly goods to projects designed to improve the standing of the church in the community, including the building of the Methodist Church parsonage.

After his family, to which he was intensely devoted, his great interest centered in his membership and activities in the Independent Order of Odd Fellows and the Rebekah lodges. He was a member of Waltonville Lodge No. 945, I. O. O. F., for 36 years, and also held membership in Rebekah Lodge No. 173. Waltonville, Encampment No. 14 at Benton, and Canton Illini No. 5, at Herrin.

He had been honored with many offices in the lodges, the most recent being past grand chaplain of the Grand Lodge of Illinois I. O. O. F. He was widely known and loved by members throughout the state. The acquaintances and friendships made through these associations over the years were of great comfort to him during his illness as were those of his host of other friends and neighbors. Alva will be greatly missed by them and his family.