22 Days

Trip Introduction:-

The best option to escape from terribly crowded trekking trail to Everest Base Camp at least for few days and also from the disturbed Lukla flight, Aiselu Kharka to Everest Base Camp Trek will be the most reliable Trekkking trip. Letting you experience unspoiled nature and culture of the lower Everest region, the trail takes us to Everest Base Camp and Kalapatthar and provides an opportunity to witness the most stupendous Mt. Everest and mighty glaciers around. Acknowledging endangered species of alpine flora and fauna and distinctive Sherpa culture and civilization will be a spectacular experience during the trek. In the same way, walking into the wild nature, passing through beautiful towns including Namche, Dingboche, Tengboche and Lukla will be an awesome experience during Aiselu Kharka to Everest Base Camp Trek.

Begin you Aiselu Kharka to Everest Base Camp Trek from a small town Aiselu Kharka. Before that, we undertake a long drive from Kathmandu to get Aiselukharka. Celebrating magnificent walk into unharmed natural astonishments and picturesque traditional settlements, we enter into Sagaramtha National Park from Monjo. We, further, trek up to Namche Bazar, hike up to Hotel Everest view for stunning sunrise and astounding Mt. Everest and explore the incredible Namche town. Visit holy Tengboche Monastery and enjoy the most delightful walk in Sagarmatha National Park. Passing Dingbcohe and Lobuche , you will arrive at Gorekh Shepa. Climb Kalapatthar and walk to Everest Base Camp and capture the most stupendous Mt. Everest, Pumori, Loa Tse, Nupse, Makalu and other mesmerizing snow-fed mountain summits of Khumbu region. After capturing the most blissful moments, we trek back to Lukla via Tengboche, Namche and Phakding and take a short flight to Kathmandu to conclude Aiselu Kharka to Everest Base Camp Trek.

Difficulty Level:-

Aiselukharka to Everest Base Camp Trek is graded as a moderate trekking in Nepal. But, sometimes, it turns to be challenging to some trekkers too. So, it requires good level of stamina and confidence. In fact, it doesn’t really demand prior trekking/hiking experience; however, these skills will certainly be helpful during this trek. Those who are ready to walk 5-6 hours in average in higher elevation above 4000 m. can do this trek.

Best Weather of the Year:-

There are two best weathers: Autumn ( Sep-Nov) and Spring ( May-Mar) of the year for Aiselukharka to Everest Base Camp Trek. These two weathers will not receive snowfall in the mountain. But you may get some rain on the trail for few days during Spring but it is rare. You will have magnificent time during these two weathers. Mountain views and the landscapes are crystal-clear.

Trek Preparations:-

Prepare to take long drive from 8-9 hours to Aiselukharka from Kathmandu to begin this trek. And while returning, prepare to take a short and scenic flight to Kathmandu from Lukla. Also, do regular exercises like jogging, aerobics and short trekking or hiking if possible to enhance your stamina. In addition to, pack up right and reliable trekking gear and go with professional and experienced trekking crew.

Trip Fact

Group Size

1-12 people.

Max. Altitude

5545m/18,192ft

Destination

Nepal.

Difficulty

Moderate.

Arrival on

Kathmandu nepal

Departure from

Kathmandu, Nepal.

Meals

Breakfast in Kathmandu and all meals during the trek.

Accommodation

Hotel accomodation in Kathmandu and teahouses during the trek.

Overview

Outline itinerary:-

Day 01: Arrive in Kathmandu

Day 02: Trek preparation and free information of Kathmandu valley.

Day 03: Drive from Kathmandu to Ainselu Kharka by sharing jeep (9/10 hours)

Day 04: Trek from Ainselu Kharka to lokhim.

Day 05: Rest and excursion day in lokhim

Day 06: Trek from Lokhim to Wakku.

Day 07: Trek from Waku to Bupsa.

Day 08: Trek from Bupsa to Surkhe.

Day 09: Trek from Surkhe to Monjo.

Day 10: Trek from Monjo to Namche bazaar.

Day 11: A rest day in Namche Bazaar.

Day 12: Trek from Namche Bazzar to Tengboche (3,870m/12,694ft): (5 – 6 hrs)

Day 13: Trek from Tengboche to Dingboche (4,360 m/14,300ft): (5 – 6 hrs)

Day 14: A rest day at Dingboche (4,360 m/14,300ft).

Day 15: Trek from Dingboche to Duglha (4,600 m/15,090 ft): (3 – 4 hrs)

Day 16: Trek from Duglha to Lobuche (4940 m/16,207 ft): (2 – 4 hrs)

Day 17: Trek from Lobuche to Gorak Shep (5,170 m/16,961ft) – Everest Base Camp (5,364m/17,594ft) – Gorak Shep: (8 – 9 hrs Gorak Shep)

Day 18: Trek from Gorak Shep to Kala Patthar (5545m/18,192ft) – Pheriche (4280 m/14,070 ft): (8 – 9 hrs)

Day 19: Trek from Pheriche to Namce Bazaar (3,440m/11,280 ft): (6 – 7 hrs)

Day 20: trek from Namche Bazaar to Lukla: (4 – 5 hrs)

Day 21: Fly from Lukla to Kathmandu and shop Farewell (Dinner)

Day 22: Final Departure

Trip Highlights:-

Experience unspoiled nature and culture of the lower Everest region.

Trek to Everest Base Camp and Kalapatthar and witness the most stupendous Mt. Everest, , Pumori, Loa Tse, Nupse, Makalu and mighty glaciers around.

Acknowledge endangered species of alpine flora and fauna and distinctive Sherpa culture and civilization.

Enjoy spectacular flight and also via magnificent landscapes.

Itinerary

Day 1:

Arrive in Kathmandu

Our airport representative will transfer you upon your arrival at the Kathmandu airport. Next, we will talk briefly about the trip you have chosen. You can make any query about the trip if you still have confusion at this meet today.

Day 2:

Trek preparation – Free Day

You can use your time today for the preparation of the trek. For this, you can buy or hire the equipment you require during the trek. Walk around the place you stay and explore the area. Optionally, you can do half-day city sightseeing to World Heritage Sites. We are ready to arrange it if you really want which will be an extra activity.

Day 3:

Drive from Kathmandu to Aiselu Kharka by sharing jeep (9/10 hours)

We get in the sharing jeep for Aiselu Kharka after we have breakfast in Kathmandu. We drive along the B.P. Highway passing through various traditional villages. You will experience big rivers and incredible landscapes on this drive today.

Day 4:

Trek from Aiselu Kharka to Lokhim.

You will enjoy today’s walk fully hitting the less crowded trekking trail to Lokhim. Encounter with several picturesque traditional settlements, lush forest and hospitable Sherpa people at lower Everest region today. Arrive at Lokhim and explore the local settlements and their way of life.

Day 5:

Rest and excursion day in lokhim

You can enjoy this rest day taking short hike around the village and up to the hills. The hills around offers you magnificent landscapes and the village inhabited by Sherpa and Gurung people provides an authentic rural lifestyle. Relax at this less populated village.

Day 6:

Trek from Lokhim to Wakku

Again, the trail today continues passing via beautiful settlements, green hills with lush rhododendron and the landscapes. Actually, you are following the very classical trail to Everest Base Camp. Wakku is another beautiful village with a few local lodges.

Day 7:

Trek from Waku to Bupsa.

Enjoy today’s walk passing though core wilderness into lush forest. You will also have the experience of crossing suspension bridge today. The beautiful village Bupsa located on the classical trail to Everest Base Camp, has a monastery to visit. We arrive in Bupsa and go to visit Monastery.

Day 8:

Trek from Bupsa to Surkhe

Today, we are getting very closer to Lukla. Passing ups and downs via traditional villages, we arrive at Surke. Surke is a village located just below Lukla. This village is considered to be the last settlement before we get into the main trail to Everest Base Camp.

Day 9:

Trek from Surkhe to Monjo

We are getting the main trail to Everest Base Camp Today at Monjo. We enjoy crossing various suspension and wood bridges across the creek. This walk passing through juniper, pine and rhododendron will be beautiful today. We get to Monjo which is the beginning point of Sagarmatha Naional Park.

Day 10:

Trek from Monjo to Namche bazaar

You begin your walk in Sagarmatha National Park Today. Walk though cool pine, oak, juniper and rhododendron. You will get to see Dudhkoshi River originated from Gokyo Lake today before you hike up to Namche. Cross the suspension bridge and walk up to Namche Bazaar.

Day 11:

A rest day in Namche Bazaar

First, hike up to Hotel Everest View, capture mesmerizing Mt. Everest, Amadablam, Khumjung Village and other alluring snow-covered summits. Walk down to Namche Bazar, walk around to observe the town. Go to visit Sherpa Cultural Museum and observe Traditional Tibetan Market. Do not surprise to see modern hotels, cafes, restaurants, banks and ATMS at Namche.

Day 12:

Trek from Namche Bazaar to Tengboche (3,870m/12,694ft): (5 – 6 hrs)

Take a small ascent till you get the main trail to Tengboche. Follow the flat trail for about an hour. Now, you will get the trails: one going to Gokyo and the other to Tengboche. Catch the trail leading to Tengboche. Walk down to the river, cross it and walk up to Tengboche though pine woods. Explore holy Tengboche monastery in the evening.

Day 13:

Trek from Tengboche to Dingboche (4,360 m/14,300ft): (5 – 6 hrs)

The walk, today, is, relatively, easier because you are walking along the flat trail. The trail though deep woods celebrating complete freedom will be exhilarating today. Arrive at Dingboche, a large town with numerous lodges.

Day 14:

A rest day at Dingboche (4,360 m/14,300ft)

Dingboche is a perfect place to halt for rest in Khumbu region before climbing Everest, Amadablam and Island Peak. Walk to Chukkung Valley if you want. Otherwise, take a short walk around the town and up to the hills nearby and relax at the lodge.

Day 15:

Trek from Dingboche to Duglha (4,600 m/15,090 ft): (3 – 4 hrs)

We begin to get alpine vegetations today. Trek via beautiful pastures, encounter with yaks carrying loads on their back. Enjoying the walk among snow-fed mountain peaks, we arrive at Duglha and stay overnight at local lodge.

Day 16:

Trek from Duglha to Lobuche (4940 m/16,207 ft): (2 – 4 hrs)

Today, you will walk along the dry trail viewing breathtaking mountain range. Mt. Pumori and Nupse are visible today. We stare at colorful prayer flags and pass through Sherpa Graveyard before we get to Lobuche. Lobuche town is the base camp of Lobuche East and West Peak.

Day 17:

Trek from Lobuche to Gorak Shep (5,170 m/16,961ft) – Everest Base Camp (5,364m/17,594ft) – Gorak Shep: (8 – 9 hrs Gorak Shep)

The more we ascend, the more Pumori, Nupse and other magnificent mountain peaks are visible today. Passing through various arid ridges, we arrive at Gorekh Shep, the last settlement on the trail to Everest Base Camp. First, we put our luggage at the lodge where we are staying overnight at Gorekh Shep and continue our trek to Everest Base Camp. We put our footsteps at the highest mountain base camp of the world and trek back to Gorekh Shep.

Day 18:

Trek from Gorak Shep to Kala Patthar (5545m/18,192ft) - Pheriche (4280 m/14,070 ft): (8 – 9 hrs)

We begin this climb before sunrise. We climb up to the top of the Kalapatthar and wait for the sunrise. Slowly the stunning sunrise and the mountain panorama dazzle our eyes. We capture the most stupendous Everest, Pumori, Nupse, Loa Tse and many other majestic peaks from Kalapatthar. Walk down to Gorekh Shep and trek down to Periche after breakfast. We follow the same trail passing through Lobuche for Periche except the last portion of the walk when we are arriving at Periche.

Day 19:

Trek from Pheriche to Namche Bazaar (3,440m/11,280 ft): (6 – 7 hrs)

We know we are going back but it doenst mean that the walk is boring. The walk in Sagarmatha National Park among Khumbu Himalayan range will never be so. You will excitedly enjoy today’s walk to Namche passing through Tengboche.

Day 20:

Trek from Namche Bazaar to Lukla: (4 – 5 hrs)

Walk down to Dudhkoshi River, pass Monjo and Phakding and finally arrive at Lukla town. You will wait for the next day’s flight to Kathmandu here.

Day 21:

Fly from Lukla to Kathmandu and shop Farewell (Dinner)

Fly to Kathmandu and check in Hotel. Spend whole afternoon for strolling around and shopping. Attend farewell dinner with cultural show in the evening.

Day 22:

Final Departure

In order to end this trip formally, we drop you to the international airport so that you can catch your flight homewards.

The Trip Cost Includes

All airport and hotel transfers.

Three nights in a standard hotel in Kathmandu with breakfast.

Welcome and farewell dinners.

Teahouse/Lodge accommodation during trek.

Lukla-Kathmandu flight and airport departure taxes.

An experienced English-speaking trek leader (trekking guide), assistant trek leader (4 trekkers: 1 assistant guide) and Sherpa porters to carry luggage (2 trekkers:1 porter) including their salary, insurance, equipment, flight, food and lodging.

Down jacket, four seasonal sleeping bag, duffel bag, t-shirt, and trekking map (down jacket and sleeping bag are to be returned after trip completion).

All necessary paper work and permits (National park permit, TIMS ).

A comprehensive medical kit.

All government and local taxes.

The Trip Cost Excludes

Nepal Visa fee (bring accurate USD cash and two passport photographs).

International airfare to and from Kathmandu.

Excess baggage charges.

Lunch and evening meals in Kathmandu(and also in the case of early return from the mountain than the scheduled itinerary).

Extra night accommodation in Kathmandu because of early arrival, late departure, and early return from the mountain(due to any reason) than the scheduled itinerary.

Travel and rescue insurance.

Personal expenses (phone calls, laundry, bar bills, battery recharge, extra porters, bottle or boiled water, shower etc).

Tips for guides and porters.

27% Off

From $1,800 $1,320

/ Adult

Trip Fact

Group Size

1-12 people.

Max. Altitude

5545m/18,192ft

Destination

Nepal.

Difficulty

Moderate.

Arrival on

Kathmandu nepal

Departure from

Kathmandu, Nepal.

Meals

Breakfast in Kathmandu and all meals during the trek.

Accommodation

Hotel accomodation in Kathmandu and teahouses during the trek.