Situated along the sandy Madirokely Beach, Résidence Au Sable Blanc features panoramic views of the Indian Ocean. It also offers a tour desk, library and free Wi-Fi in all areas. The self-catering studios and apartments come with a well-equipped kitchen or kitchenette, and a bathroom with shower. The apartments also include a dining and lounge area, and a terrace. Guests can relax by the beach or swim in the ocean. Résidence Au Sable Blanc offers a 24-hour front desk and car rental services. Free private parking is available on site. Guests can rent cars or requests taxis from the property and they will also help with organising sea and land activities. Madirokely Beach is very lively over the weekend, guests can enjoy the festivities with the locals, especially on a Sunday. Entertainment is provided in the hotel's bar every Sunday from midday through to the evening. A variety of restaurants and bars can be found a 15-minute walk away in Ambatoloaka village. Hellville is 15 minutes’ drive away and Fascene Airport is 40 minutes’ drive from the apartments.

Couples particularly like the location — they rated it 8.3 for a two-person trip.

Distance in property description is calculated using © OpenStreetMap

Guests are required to show a photo identification and credit card upon check-in. Please note that all Special Requests are subject to availability and additional charges may apply.

Please inform Hotel-Residence Au Sable Blanc in advance of your expected arrival time. You can use the Special Requests box when booking, or contact the property directly with the contact details provided in your confirmation.

This property will not accommodate hen, stag or similar parties.

Quiet hours are between 14:00:00 and 08:00:00.

In response to Coronavirus (COVID-19), additional safety and sanitation measures are in effect at this property.

Food & beverage services at this property may be limited or unavailable due to Coronavirus (COVID-19).

Due to Coronavirus (COVID-19), this property has reduced reception and service operating hours.