Rolandas Paksas EN

EU Commissioner Andriukaitis: Paksas should not be held hostage to the situation

Lithuania should adopt constitutional amendments to allow Rolandas Paksas, the impeached former president, to run for elected office, says Vytenis Andriukaitis, European commissioner for health and food safety and member of the Social Democratic Party of Lithuania. However, he is critical of a recent resolution passed by the Lithuanian parliament, advocating Paksas’ rehabilitation. […]

Parliament endorses resolution blaming Constitutional Court for violating rights of impeached president Paksas

The Seimas, the Lithuanian Parliament, has approved the findings of the ad hoc commission tasked with probing the implementation of the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) decision in the case of impeached former president Rolandas Paksas. […]

Lithuania may face fines after blocking Paksas from running for office, says PM

Lithuania may face fines following the decision by parliamentarians not to allow former Lithuanian president Rolandas Paksas to run again for elected office, according to Prime Minister Algirdas Butkevičius. […]

Failed Paksas vote was calculated move by Labour Party, observer says

A failed vote in the Lithuanian Seimas on Tuesday will prevent the leader of the ruling Order and Justice party, Rolandas Paksas, to run for parliament in next year’s elections. Observers say the situation has been engineered by the Labour Party which wants to steal Paksas’ voters. […]

Current leaders among most trustes public figures in Lithuania

For several months in a row, Lithuanians trust most the current leaders of the country, the latest poll shows. Political experts link this to a stable political and economic situation in the country and the leaders’ authority. […]

Lithuanian MEPs have split opinion over EU refugee plan

At the European Parliament (EP) vote in Brussels on Thursday on distribution of 120,000 refugees among European Union (EU) member-states, the opinions of Lithuanian MEPs split. […]

Lithuanian parliament backs ‘Paksas amendment’

The Seimas of Lithuania on Thursday gave its initial backing to a constitutional amendment that will allow Rolandas Paksas, leader of the Order and Justice party, to run for parliament and president. […]

Lithuania’s incumbent MP most popular candidate to continue in the post

With a full year still remaining until the next Lithuanian parliamentary elections, incumbent Prime Minister Algirdas Butkevičius retains high approving rates. The majority of surveyed voters, 20.9 percent, believe he would be the best candidate for prime minister, a recent survey showed. […]

Lithuanian opposition parties to snub national agreement on emigration

A national agreement on emigration, initiated by Lithuania’s ruling Order and Justice party, has failed to secure the support of the country’s key political parties. Major opposition parties have no plans of signing it, the Lietuvos Žinios daily reports. […]

Two bills regarding impeached president fail to reach Lithuanian parliament’s agenda

Two bills opening the way for impeached and removed Lithuanian president Rolandas Paksas to run for parliament were to be presented for parliamentary deliberation on Thursday, but were removed from the agenda at the last minute. […]

Good news for Paksas from the Seimas

Lithuania’s Seimas on Thursday gave its initial backing to a constitutional amendment that would allow leader of the Order and Justice party Rolandas Paksas who was impeached and removed as president to run for parliament and president. […]

Ruling bloc to submit amendment to pave way for Paksas to elections

Lithuania‘s ruling parties intend to shortly again submit a Constitutional amendment to the parliament to pave way for removed president Rolandas Paksas to run for parliament and president. […]

Lithuanian parliament moves to amend Constitution to allow Paksas to run for office

A hundred Lithuanian MPs have drafted Constitutional amendments that should pave the way for Rolandas Paksas, a member of the ruling Order and Justice party who has been impeached as president in 2004 and banned from running for public office since then, to run for parliament and president again. […]

Lithuania urged to implement ECHR rulings on sex change and ousted president

Lithuania’s representative at the European Court of Human Rights (ECHR) Karolina Bubnytė has urged state institutions to focus its efforts on the implementation of the court’s rulings on sex change surgeries and the right for ousted president Rolandas Paksas to run for elections. […]

Lithuanian MEP Valentinas Mazuronis leaves his party

Lithuanian MEP Valentinas Mazuronis said on Tuesday that he was no longer a member of the Order and Justice party, part of the ruling coalition in Lithuania. […]

Blinkevičiūtė most popular MEP with Lithuanian voters

Lithuanian Social Democrat MEP Vilija Blinkevičiūtė has been named the politician who best represents voters’ interests in the European Parliament, according to a recent survey. […]

Order and Justice founder’s son quits party due to “principle” disagreements

MP Andrius Mazuronis, son of MEP Valentinas Mazuronis, has announced about his decision to leave the parliamentary group of the party Order and Justice. […]

EFDD itself will decide how to discipline its staff member behind Red Dalia, EP says

European Parliament President Martin Schulz will wait for the eurosceptic Europe of Freedom and Direct Democracy (EFDD) group to make its own decision on disciplinary measures against a member of its secretariat who is believed to have distributed books smearing Lithuania’s President Dalia Grybauskaitė. […]

Opinion: Nigel Farage, one of Putin’s pawns

It is often said that politicians make for strange bedfellows. Moreover, people are judged by the friends or partners they have in life. In that light, one really should question Rolandas Paksas’ judgement when he invited UKIP’s Nigel Farage to his Order and Justice party congress in Vilnius. […]