Aoyama Gakuin University is a private Christian educational and research institution located in Shibuya, Tokyo. Founded in 1874 by Methodist missionaries, the university has a long history of serving the local community and providing top-notch education integrated with Christian values. The university believes in every individual’s potential to influence positive change to society and address its issues with creativity, intellect, and humility.

Aoyama Gakuin University Overview

Aoyama Gakuin University Rankings

SAA Best University Rankings 2024

Category Rankings Percentage Rankings World # 1612 21 % Continent: Asia Rankings # 496 15 % Country: Japan Rankings # 83 —

SAA Best Value University Rankings 2024

Category Rankings Percentage Rankings World # 1719 22 % Continent: Asia Rankings # 530 16 % Country: Japan Rankings # 84 —

Tuition Fees at Aoyama Gakuin University

Aoyama Gakuin University tuition fees for both bachelor's and master's students are discussed in this section.

Bachelor's Tuition Fees

Student Type Annual Tuition Fees in Yen Domestic Students 833,000 Yen - 1,181,000 Yen International Students 833,000 Yen - 1,181,000 Yen

Master's Tuition Fees

Student Type Annual Tuition Fees in Yen Domestic Students 666,000 Yen - 813,000 Yen International Students 666,000 Yen - 813,000 Yen

Although this range provide a good estimate of tuition costs at Aoyama Gakuin University, the actual fees depend on your chosen program. Thus, for more exact figures, you may refer to Aoyama Gakuin University tuition fee pages.

Ready to save in tuition and study in Japan? Click here to read our guides to tuition fees and cheapest universities in Japan and start planning your dream education today.

Admissions At Aoyama Gakuin University

If you wish to study at Aoyama Gakuin University, you’ll need to know the admission process, requirements, and other relevant information. Those may vary based on the program you’re applying to Aoyama Gakuin University.

Moreover, the process and requirements for Aoyama Gakuin University international admission may differ from domestic admission. Thus, if you’re an international student, check what additional requirements you need to submit and how you can validate your academic credentials.

To help you find all the admission-related information, we’ve compiled the bachelor's and master's admission pages of Aoyama Gakuin University. Select which one applies to you and take note of the process and requirements.

Degree Admission Pages Bachelor's Domestic Admissions Page International Admissions Page Master's Domestic Admissions Page International Admissions Page

Planning to study in Japan?

From choosing your university to applying for your student visa, we know that studying abroad is not easy. However, we are here to support you every step of the way! Don't forget to explore our comprehensive guide as you prepare for your educational journey in Japan.

Degree Programs offered at Aoyama Gakuin University

There are several Aoyama Gakuin University majors or degree programs for bachelor’s and master’s level that you can pursue. Here are some of them: