Rio de Janeiro is located in the Brazilian geopolitical region of the Southeast and its boundaries, all of them with other Brazilian states in the Southeast region, Rio de Janeiro has an area of 43,653km² and its capital is the city of Rio de Janeiro, which was the capital of the Portuguese colony as of 1763.

It is the only state in the Southeast to share borders exclusively with other states in the same macro Region, are with Minas Gerais, Espírito Santo and Sao Paulo and with the Atlantic Ocean. Rio de Janeiro is divided by a mountain range into two areas: the North Zone and the South Zone. The south zone holds most of the city’s sights, including the Sugar Loaf and the famous beaches.

Rio de Janeiro City

It is one of the most spectacular cities on the planet also it is large city in Brazil, on the South Atlantic coast. Rio Janeiro is famous for its breathtaking landscape, its laidback beach culture, enormous and impressive skyscrapers that compete with colonial buildings and its annual carnival. The Christ the Redeemer on the Mountain Corvado gives a better perspective of the limits of known Rio. One of the best ways to appreciate the setting is by going up Sugar Loaf Mountain, where you'll get a fantastic view of Rio and Guanabara Bay. Across the Bay, you will see the Rio Niteroi Bridge.

Rio de Janeiro has more than 6 million inhabitants and one of Rio's most precious resources is its people. Brazil is a melting pot of races, colours and creeds. No one race, colour or religion dominates in Brazil. Many visitors who come to Brazil each year from every corner of the planet say that the Cariocas (Rio natives) are particularly warm and fun loving.

For any fan, a visit to the Maracana Stadium is a required pilgrimage, where you can lay your feet in the imprints of those belonging to the great Pele and many other legends. In Rio's summer (December - February), temperatures regularly reach 40ºC or more. These months are also peak season not only are international flights more expensive, but domestic travel and hotels are charged at a premium and get booked up quickly especially after the Christ the Redeemer was elected one of the "New Seven Wonders of the World".