'Bull' is back with an engaging episode and this time, Marissa (Geneva Carr) is at the center of all the trouble. It's a rather unpleasant Christmas for TAC, as Bull (Michael Weatherly) and Benny (Freddy Rodriguez) represent Marissa (and her estranged husband Greg (David Furr) in federal court after they're charged with money laundering and fraud connected to Greg's restaurant.

Bull and Benny struggle to defend the divorcing couple together so that the prosecution can't use them against each other. The hunt for jurors isn't going well, as there are not many who believe that Marissa was not aware of Greg's business dealings. Moreover, Bull and Izzy (Yara Martinez) prepare to baptize Astrid before Christmas and they reach a stalemate as they can't seem to decide what they want from their renewed relationship.

Marissa has been sucked into a vortex of trouble, even though she had no part in it. She asks Greg how he did not check the dealings and says that she had trusted him. Fans feel sorry for Marissa and say that she doesn't deserve to go through this. "Marissa is innocent, Greg is guilty. Marissa doesn’t deserve to go through this #Bull," a fan wrote. "Don't worry Marissa Morgan @Go_Carr_Gowe know your innocent and Dr. Jason Bull @M_Weatherlyand Benny Colon @FreddyRdriguez

will bail you out hang on girl #Bull@BullCBS," another fan sympathized.

However, others are annoyed with her and say that she is just plain naive. "Marissa is really getting on my nerves. To be so smart she can be so dumb and Naïve #bull," one tweeted. Fans hoped they divorce soon. "Poor Marissa! That 'husband' of hers has been nothing but trouble! And whatever happened to those divorce papers?!! #Bull," one fan wrote. "Uh oh, Marissa is really in trouble with the FBI. Rather unfeeling Agents if they really wanted her cooperation. #Bull," a fan tweeted.

Meanwhile, Bull and Izzy face an impasse in their relationship due to Astrid's baptism. Bull wants to propose to Izzy, but he is not sure whether he should go ahead with it or not, given their history.

'Bull' airs on CBS, Tuesdays at 10 pm.