Morgan Ortagus, the American television commentator and political advisor, grew up with three siblings, among whom one is her twin.

Key Takeaways

Morgan Ortagus shares a close bond with her twin sister, Megan, and another sibling, Marissa.

Megan is a co-founder of an NGO that empowers Afghan girls.

Before that, she was a senior intelligence officer for the American government.

Megan Ortagus Ahmed is a veteran senior intelligence officer and former briefer to U.S. President cabinet officials.

She is a married woman who now resides in New York City and is a proud host mother to an Afghan teenager.

Megan has created secrecy regarding her husband, Mr. Ahmed, who has yet to be revealed.

The twins have a little sister, Marissa, who is 34 years old and a licensed social worker at a major hospital.

She is married to her husband, Jamie, and they had their wedding in September 2022.

Empowering Afghan Futures While Navigating Global Challenges

The twin sister, Megan, is the co-founder and president of Uplifting Afghan Girls (UAG), an NGO that was started in May 2023.

The non-profit organization partners with a charity in Afghanistan to find exceptional young women and give them a fantastic opportunity to study in the United States.

Not only that, she has a wealth of experience as a senior intelligence officer, dealing with significant global issues in regions like South Asia, the Middle East, and Africa.

Likewise, she served in the United States Federal Government from January 2011 to December 2022.

Before her government work, Megan spent two years as a communications director at the Institute for the Study of War.

Talking about her education, she graduated with top honors from Johns Hopkins University in May 2014, earning a Master of Arts in Global Security Studies.

A Brief Stint In Entertainment Field

Megan Ortagus was part of the Script and Continuity Department for the short movie “Don’t Go There” (2007), where her role was script supervisor.

The 6-minute movie was released in 2007 and details the story of a teenager who is faced with the harsh reality of his mistake of driving under the influence of alcohol.

It was directed by Hugo Reiner and stars Glenn Shelhamer, Nicole Suess, and Lauren Possenti.

FAQs

Who Is Morgan Ortagus’ Husband?

In 2013, Ortagus married Jonathan Weinberger, who works as a lawyer. They have a daughter named Adina, born in 2020. Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg, who was Ortagus’ neighbor, conducted their wedding ceremony. This marriage is her second, as she was previously divorced.

Where Is Morgan Ortagus From?

Morga hails from Auburndale, Florida, where she was born to Ronald E. and Denise C. Ortagus. Her father ran a cleanup and restoration business, while her mother worked as an office manager. Raised in Florida, she achieved the title of Miss Florida Citrus in 2003.

What Is Morgan Ortagus’ Education Qualification?

In 2013, Ortagus finished her education at Johns Hopkins University, obtaining a Master of Arts degree and a Master of Business Administration from the Carey Business School. Her studies at JHU involved research on counterinsurgency.