Morgan Radford had been waiting almost two years to say 'I do' to her partner David Williams, having had to postpone their wedding on several occasions due to the pandemic.

MORE: Fairytale wedding gowns inspired by celebrities

But on January 8, the couple finally got to have their dream day in Cartagena, Colombia, and it sounded like something from a fairy tale.

Talking to HELLO! after tying the knot, Morgan opened up about her special day, and her and David's hopes for the future.

The TV star said: "We had an intimate gathering with just our closest friends and family. Every single element of the wedding was conducted by a family member or friend – from our officiant, to our emcees, to my hair stylist; they were all friends and family who had poured into our union and partnership long before this day.

Morgan Radford and her partner David Williams had a magical wedding day Marissa Joy Daly / Marissa Joy Photography

"The wedding was honestly more than we could have ever dreamed of – or hoped for. To see our family and friends connecting – Cuba and Lagos, Davenport and Greensboro – all in one place, was truly magical."

MORE: 12 chic-yet-casual wedding dresses for a low-key ceremony

It's safe to say that Morgan and David's loved ones found their wedding day incredibly emotional, knowing just how long the couple had waited to say 'I do'.

"The tears in our family and friends' eyes said it all. David and I had waited so long for this moment – not only through pandemic delays, but also after reconnecting and finding each other again 11 years after we first met in college! It felt like a full-circle moment – that happened at exactly the right time."

It was an incredibly emotional day for the couple Marissa Joy Daly / Marissa Joy Photography

All guests were vaccinated and tested ahead of the wedding and all events were outdoors, with dinner served under a sun/ rain cover, to ensure that all Covid precautions were in place. The hotel was also only open for the wedding guests.

Morgan looked every inch the blushing bride on her special day too, wearing a gorgeous wedding dress from Australian designer Leah Da Gloria, which was beaded from head to toe. "It was magical," the TV star said.

"Even more special, was the time and attention the ladies at Bridal Reflections – from where I purchased the dress in New York City - spent customizing the gown to fit perfectly."

MORE: 11 celebrity brides who wore beautiful bright colored wedding dresses

"For the afterparty, I changed into a party dress (also with beading!) so that I could salsa the night away and break it down on the dancefloor to Frankie Beverly & Maze for a surprise father-daughter dance with my Dad!"

With too many special moments to pick a favorite, Morgan's day had plenty of special touches.

The intimate wedding was attended by close family and friends Marissa Joy Daly / Marissa Joy Photography

"The night before the wedding, we did a traditional Nigerian ceremony to honor my husband’s heritage – where David put together a dance routine to formally ask for my hand in marriage," the TV star said.

DISCOVER: The celebrity brides who wore Alexander McQueen like Kate Middleton

"In tailored outfits delivered from Nigeria, he and his closest friends danced their way to my family, laid at their feet, and asked for my family’s permission to marry me. It was so fun, vibrant, musical and colorful – the guests really got an intimate glimpse into the richness of Yoruba culture.

"The following day during the wedding ceremony, my entire family escorted me into the ceremony as a symbol of unity before my father walked me down the aisle. It was a moment I will never forget.

Morgan's beautiful wedding dress was by Leah Da Gloria Marissa Joy Daly / Marissa Joy Photography

"At dinner, we gave speeches in English and Spanish – to honor my own Cuban roots and the hospitality of the Colombian people who helped make this day possible – before dancing the night away to salsa, Motown, and everything in between.

"My new husband even surprised me with a choreographed dance to “Reach Out (I’ll Be There”) with all of the men in my life. To say this was the best weekend of my life is an understatement!"

Now that they are officially husband and wife, Morgan and David have their future to look forward to. The star has been incredibly open about freezing her eggs, and is keen to start a family one day.

"We are looking forward to having kids one day and sharing with them the lessons of community and inclusion that our families taught us," she said.

"Ultimately, we hope that the love we have and express for each other will include new, littler members of our Village!"

Read more HELLO! US stories here