Well, we can’t blame this one on the pressure of reality TV. Former Ladies of London star Marissa Hermer has officially called it quits with her husband, Matt Hermer after 14 years of marriage. They share three kids and own multiple businesses together, but now, they’re headed for divorce. Here’s everything you need to know about their sudden breakup.

Marissa pulled the plug

On Ladies of London, Marissa appeared as a full-time cast member for all three seasons. Once the show ended in 2017, she and Matt left the UK and moved to Los Angeles. Together, they opened a few restaurants and were seemingly living a happy little life outside of the reality TV bubble. That all started to fall apart over the last year.

A source close to the couple spoke to Us Weekly and said that the two started drifting apart over the last year. For example, Matt has been absent from Marissa’s Instagram since 2023. That’s not a coincidence.

“They have been having issues for the last year but separated early this year. It was a long time coming,” the insider claimed. “They grew apart in their marriage but are still best friends and are amazing at co-parenting together.”

Alas, Marissa confirmed their breakup on Instagram, saying that it took a lot of “soul searching” to conclude that their marriage was no longer working.

Marissa wrote, “Together, through tremendous soul searching, we have evolved our relationship to a place that gives us space to raise our family, support each other, and grow our businesses.”

She continued, “While our marriage was a success, it is now complete, and we’ve made the decision to separate. The love we share for our family and mutual respect for each other will continue to grow into our next chapter as we are committed to being parents, best friends, and business partners.”

Apparently, they’re very serious about maintaining that business relationship. The exes plan to add two new restaurants to their portfolio by the end of the year. Clearly, between their three kids and their ever-expanding business empire, these two will be in each other’s lives forever, even if they aren’t married.