Last night marked the grand finale of award season as the 96th Academy Awards ended, culminating in a series of lavish A-list parties celebrating Oscar winners in their remarkable achievements in film.

The star’s party hopped post-award Oscar ceremonies from the Governors Ball to the Vanity Fair Oscars Party and many more. Private after-parties were held for Warner Bros., Searchlight Pictures party at Dante Beverly Hills and Netflix threw its Oscar bash at Motherwolf in West Hollywood. Universal Pictures and Focus Features party celebrated Oppenheimer at Soho House. Apple Original Films threw a post-party for the Killers of The Flower Moon cast at The Sunset Tower, attended by Leonardo DiCaprio, Lily Gladstone, Martin Scorsese, and Members of the Osage Nation.

Related: The Oscars: Best Looks From The Red Carpet

Chef Wolfgang Puck and Wolfgang Puck Catering curated the menu once again for this year’s Governor’s Ball. Nominees, winners, and guests can anticipate an array of tray-passed dishes crafted by a team of 120 chefs. From smoked salmon Oscar’s matzah and WP signature pizzas to decadent Noir Reserve chocolates by Valrhona Chocolate. The pastry team created many of the desserts using this special chocolate, including the chocolate Oscar statues.

The 32nd annual Elton John AIDS Foundation Academy Awards® Viewing Party co-hosted by Elton John, David Furnish, Neil Patrick Harris, David Burtka, and Tiffany Haddishraised a record-breaking $10,800,000million in support of the Foundation’s lifesaving work to end the AIDS epidemic. The star-studded gala took place on Sunday, March 10 at West Hollywood Park in Los Angeles and featured an unforgettable show-stopping performance of “Are You Ready For Love” by R&B-Soul-Pop Trio Gabriels and Elton John

Related: Vanity Fair Oscar Party Photos: The Best Looks From The Viewing Party & Red Carpet

Giorgio Armani held its annual Oscar party on Saturday, March 9, hosted by Roberta Armani. This year’s event celebrated Martin Scorsese and his historic 10th Academy Award nomination for Killers of the Flower Moon. Lily Gladstone and Robert De Niro attended the bash with other guests that included Jeffrey Wright, Ke Huy Quan, and Jack Huston

Charles Finch and CHANEL hosted their 15th annual Pre-Oscar dinner in Beverly Hills. Nominees, actors, musicians, directors, producers, writers, and Hollywood influencers all gathered for an intimate dinner at the iconic Polo Lounge at the Beverly Hills Hotel. Margot Robbie, Kristen Stewart, America Ferrera, Robert De Niro, Ava Duvernay, Chloë Sevigny, Colman Domingo, Da’Vine Joy Randolph, Daniel Kaluuya, Sandra Hüller, Michael Keaton, Cord Jefferson, Celine Song, Jonathan Glazer, and many more were amongst the talent who attended.

RELATED: Oscar Week 2024 Parties & Events: The List

A star-studded host committee, Academy Awards nominees, and presenters, along with some of the most powerful industry influencers came together on Saturday evening, for MPTF’s 22nd Annual ‘Night Before’ benefit. Co-chaired by Sterling K. Brown & Ryan Michelle Bathé, America Ferrera & Ryan Piers-Williams, Jodie Foster, and Paul Giamatti, the annual event raised over $4.3 million.

“MPTF and I have such a rich, wonderful history together of taking care of our own. I’m so proud to support this incredible organization and help raise crucial funds to support our industry family when they need it most,” said Jodie Foster. America Ferrera stated, “I’m proud to be part of a benefit that brings our community together while helping sustain the important mission of MPTF.”

Sterling K. Brown noted, “I’ve been involved with MPTF for many years and am honored to chair the Night Before with my peers. This is not only a great way for us to celebrate together at the end of awards season and everyone’s great accomplishments but to support a cause like MPTF that helps many generations within our industry.”

Related: Oscars 2024: Backstage & Behind The Scenes Photos

On Friday Evening, Saint Laurent x Vanity Fair x NBCUniversal dinner and cocktail party hosted by Saint Laurent Creative Director Anthony Vaccarello, Vanity Fair Editor in Chief Radhika Jones and Chairman, NBCUniversal studio group and Chief Content Officer Dame Donna Langley to celebrate Oppenheimer, March 8, in Los Angeles. Guests included director Christopher Nolan, Cillian Murphy, Robert Downey Jr., Josh Hartnett, Gwyneth Paltrow & many more.

WIF kicked off festivities for Oscar weekend with the WIF Oscar Nominees Party celebrating the 75 women, both in front of and behind the camera, who have been nominated for an Academy Award this year at Catch Steak LA in Los Angeles. More than 45 nominees were in attendance including Danielle Brooks, Celine Song, Diane Warren, Robbie Brenner, Jeffrey Wright, Amy Durning, and more. Additional attendees included Erika Alexander, Eva Longoria, Lili Reinhart, Lake Bell, Zoe Lister-Jones, and many more

CAA threw its pre-Oscar party at the Sunset Tower Hotel, celebrating the agency’s nominated clients, including Margot Robbie, Cillian Murphy, Ryan Gosling, Da’Vine Joy Randolph, Steven Spielberg, Carey Mulligan, America Ferrera, Jeffrey Wright, Emily Blunt, Sterling K. Brown, Danielle Brooks, Justine Triet, Yorgos Lanthimos, Celine Song, Annette Bening, Jodie Foster, and Cord Jefferson, among others.

UTA celebrated its Oscar-nominated clients at Soho House Holloway in West Hollywood. The pre-party was attended by nominees Greta Gerwig, Paul Giamatti, Mark Ruffalo, Phil Lord, Chris Miller, Sandra Hüller, Tony McNamara and more, alongside UTA CEO Jeremy Zimmer, President David Kramer, and Vice Chairman Jay Sures, among other clients and the agency’s top brass. The event recognized UTA clients’ stellar year in film: nearly 30 of the company’s clients received nominations tied to the year’s top projects including Barbie, Anatomy of A Fall, Poor Things, The Holdovers, and more.

WME also kicked off Oscars weekend at one of LA’s most historic properties, the Hearst Estate in Beverly Hills. The soiree at the famous Godfather mansion was hosted by WME Co-Chairmen Christian Muirhead and Richard Weitz and attended by Oscar-nominated clients Christopher Nolan, Robert Downey Jr., Jennifer Lame, Ludwig Göransson, Kemp Powers, David Hemingson, Sean Wang, Jacqueline Durran, Andrew Wyatt and many more.

Events this week included MACRO 6th Annual Pre-Oscars Party, W Magazine and Louis Vuitton’s Academy Awards Dinner, 18th Oscar Wilde Awards, Vanities: A Night for Young Hollywood, South Asians At The Oscars Pre-Oscars Party, The Green Carpet Fashion Awards, ESSENCE Black Women in Hollywood Awards, Beyond Words, GBK Brand Bar’s Pre-Oscar Luxury Lounge, The Night Before the Oscars and Oscars Night at the Academy Museum viewing party.

Scroll through the gallery for the latest photos from the pre-Oscar events.