HERE ARE ALL THE NEW MOVIES RELEASED IN 1996

1)VAJRAM

STRR:Nagarjuna and Roja

Dir:SV krishne reddy

Response:A movie that requires to be

forgotten soon.SVK fails in all aspects

as a director and music director.Viswanath

gives some good appearance in vain.

2)DHARMA CHAKRAM

STRR:Venkatesh,Ramya and Prema

Dir:Suresh krishna

Response:A different movie in the career of

Venkatesh which makes him a strong contender

for best actor award.Music by MM Sreelekha is

very good.The picturising of songs in Canada

was just amazing.Inspite of a weak story line

Sureshkrishna kept audience under his grip.

The role of Ramyakrishna is nominal.

3)PELLI SANDADI

STRR:Srikanth,ravali and Deepthi Batnagar

Dir:Raghavendrarao

Response:Once again Raghavendrarao proved

to be the best.Rated to gross above Allari

Priyudu.taking the story line of HAHK the

SouthIndian showman made it again keeping

the viewers spell bound.All songs are just

superb.

4)SAMPRADAYAM

STRR:Krishna,Indraja

Dir:SV Krishna Reddy

Response:A consolation for SVK after his

VAJRAM.The story line is good mixed with

some good dialogues.A perfect movie for

the Superstar who lives to his image.Songs

were OK.

5)MUMMY MEE AYANA VACHADU

STRR:RajendraPrasad,Indraja

Dir:K.Ajay kumar

Response:A Rajendra brand movie.Nothing special

but fine for timepass.

6)VAMSANIKOKKADU

STRR:Balkrishna,Ramyakrishna,Aamani

Dir:Sarath

Response:The first best grosser of 96.The story is

very good with equally good performances by BK and

Satyanarayana.Music is equally good .It is a good break

for Sarath who came in the line of top directors.For BK

it is really a good movie at good time.

7)SOGGADI PELLAM

STRR:Mohanbabu,Ramyakrishna

Dir:Muthyala Subbayya

Response:Another hit for the Collection King.

A sentiment movie in which Ramyakrishna too

acted.Mohanbabu proves to be a versatile actor

once again.

THIS IS IN REFERENCE TO THE NEWS ABOUT BIG BOSS.

THIS MOVIE IS A DISASTROUS FLOP.IT NOT EVEN GROSSED 2.5 CRORES .

THE MOVIES OF CHIRANJEEVI THAT GROSSED THE 6 CRORE MARK ARE:

1)GANG LEADER(JUST BELOW 6 CRORES)

2)GHARANA MOGUDU

3)ALLUDA MAJAKA.

The buyers of Bigboss are totally washed out.As the result there are no

buyers for Riksavodu,which is released a week lately due to the lack of

buyers.The film was later distrubuted in many areas on percentage basis

and was released a week later than the given date.

ACCORDING TO CHIRANJEEVI'S FANS APART FROM NORMAL PEOPLE RIKSHAVODU IS

THE WORST MOVIE IN THE CAREER OF CHIRANJEEVI. In the collections point

of view.The first week collections were 78% in Apsara ,Vijayawada.this

shows the fate of the movie ,which was released in the days where there

is no other new movie.It is already taken away in all the A and B

centers,So the point of hit or average does not appear.It is a

disastrous flop in all A centers and B centers.It is not yet released in

C centers.

SOGGADI PELLAM:This is one more hit for Mohan babu,who has the credit of

having the movie that grossed the highest amount(PEDA RAYUDU) in the

history of Telugu film industry.It is the first hit for Muthyala

Subbayya after a long time.

DHARMA CHAKRAM:As expected this movie is a hit in A centers and having

mixed response in B centers.

Here is another interesting item regarding RIKSAVODU.It will never gross

3 crores in the coming 10 years.Leave the grossing of 4.2 crores in the

first week(Gharana mogudu ,the biggest hit of Chiranjeevi grossed

10crores in 100 days according to its producer.Can any one imagine the

worst movie of Chiranjeevi grossing 4.2crores in first week.If all the

theatres in AP where RIKSHAVODU is released are full it would have

grossed around 1.1crores)

VAMSANIKOKKADU:This movie is running house fulls in the sixth week in

all the theatres it is released.It is supposed to be the highest grosser

of all the movies so far released in 1996.

ORAY RIKSHA:This movie of R.Narayanamurthy is considered to be a hit in

Telengana areas where it is successfully running and an average movie in

other areas.This is directed by Dasari.

Thanks,

Anil.

Anil K. Sunkara

Bhimaraju Kalidindi (rkal...@ix.netcom.com) wrote:

: In <4fbiks$6...@lsi.lsil.com> skumar@sk65 (Kuppam Kumar) writes:

: >

: >

: >Sampradhayam is below average (The film is having these collections

: because of the title and krishna-sankranthi sentiment. ( He has given 3

: hits in a row for 3 sankraanthis)

: Number One, Amma Donga and what was the third one ?

Pachchani Kaapuram, if I am not mistaken.

: >Vamsaani kokkadu is average

: By Average, do you mean that the movie broke even ?

: Like No profit and No Gain ?

No. The box-office ratings, which I read in Superhit are like this:\

1. SuperHit - 3:1 returns for investment

2. Hit - 2:1

3. Above average 1.75 : 1

4. Average 1.25:1

5. Below Average 1:1

6. Flop , loss obviously

7. Utter flop , toatl wash out.

Now again, this varies from hero to hero. Also, sometimes u anticipate to make

a 2:1 atleast on a big hero's movie. In that case if u make only say 1.25:1, u will still consider it a loss. This is because of the interest rates the producers pay to the financiers. This happens only for big heroes, as the buyers pay at the muhurtham of the movie. So the interest accrues right from the date of

commencement of production.

A recent example for this is Big Boss. Obviously it got its investment in the first 3 weeks (6 crores), but could not sustain, hence it was considered the

biggest flop for chiru in recent times as the returns were the lowest ever.

somefacts if are interested :

Rikshavodu is above average in 'A' centers and a hit in B & C centers. Its first week gross is 4.2 crores.

More news:

Sooggadi Pellam is a flop(the result was attributed to Muthyalaa subbaiah, as he was known to be a flop director).

: >Kumar, Kuppam Sudheer

: Bhimaraju Kalidindi



For your kind information,

I was in India and that too in vijayawada. during the first 20 days of

rikshavodu. My brother has the details of the collections for all the

theaters in the vij area. The housefull broke in Apsara on the 25th day or so

that too for the noon show, which clearly disproves the fact that it had 78%

in the first week in apsara. BTW, rikshavodu had 100% in the first week in both

apsara and vekateswara deluxe which is opposite to apsara(near neighbour).

I know that some people cannot believe some facts. I can give you the

theatre wise collection in just Nazam for rikshavodu for the first week. I got

it with me from India. It came in superhit. I hope I have not lost it. Nizam

is just 1/5 of total collections of rikshavodu. The first week gross in

Nizam is 80 lakhs. That blows of the pits 1.1 crores straight away.

The time when Gang leader, GM were released the prices were really low and also

the theater release range for chiru was not that high. It increased with

gm.

Peadraayudu, is the highest grosser in the telugu film industry (20 crores)

but with inflation it still did not beat GM.

I had this argument with some one earlier indicating that I can get the stats.

I do have them. Peadraayudu ran gfor 100 days in 37 theaters far less compared

to GM ( 65 theaters). the no. of theaters for 200 days are 2. Out of which

one of them is theater in Madanapalli or so and is owned by mohanbabu himself.

I doubt if pedaraayudu grossed more than chanti with inflation taken into

account. Chanti grossed over 9 crores and is next to gm at that time.

In vijayawada, the record is still jvas, 207 days followed by shiva 205 days

.

Ofcourse the movies compared are the recent ones. Old movies as many know

used to run for 52 weeks very easily.

If u want a theater listing for pedaraayudu, I can post it.

Alluda majaaka ran for 100 days in 27 theaters. Grossed 14 crores.

I still repeat that sooggadi pellam and dharmachakram are flops.

In fact, one other thing is that, during the gang leader season, every chiru

movie grossed more that 7 crores. Now a days, 6 crores is child's play for

chiru movies.

Bigboss, did have that initial. Without that much guarantee no one

buys a chiru movie. Inspite of being a miserable flop, it ran for 40 days in

vijayawada. That really shows the range of chiru's pull.

As for the statement that rikshavodu did not have buyers for the first week.

Check out superhit afetr the first week week of its release. It reported the

ap collections as 4.2 crores in over 250 theaters. In fact, it gave area wise

split like Nizam, Ceeded, andhra etc etc

AHad it not been sold, it wld not have made this kind of money.

BTW, these are some of the prices for chiru movies area wise,

Nizam 1.5 crores , chiru gets the rights and distributes thru geetha arts.

Ceeded 2 crores most of the parts take fixed hire, especially chittoor.

Krishna 30-40 lakhs

Guntur 50-60 lakhs

Vizag 25 lakhs

East & West 60 lakhs

Also there are some other areas including out of the state karnaataka.

It can easily get another 50 lakhs. Plus u have audio, video, then tamil,

hindi rights etc.

Overall in ap alone its sold for more than 6 crores. However, I did not list

all the areas.

I think I shd list the following fact published in Jyothi chitra.

This shd enlighten some of my friends about how our movie industry

has become a crores market than the B.C lakhs market.

Nag has signed a movie with Sushmita sen, music by Ar Rahman produced by

Kumjumon (producer of tamil gentleman and premikudu.

Cost of tye movie unknown. sushmita gets 1 crore. Nag gets his usual 75

lakhs.

This movie is already sold in tamil for 5 crores, 4 crores in telugu

and supposedly 1.5 crores in all the 6 major territories of the hindi area.

That makes a total of 18 crores. Hoe does this figure sound?

The movie is being made in tamil (Rakshakan). Rakshakudu in telugu (dubbed)

and may be rakshak (dubbed) in hindi.

One more interesting thing. Vajram is a big flop. But it still grossed 45

lakhs in the first week in Nizam alone.

BTW, Vamsanikokkadu is slated to just manage a 50 + run in Raj in vijayawada.

Does that tell something!!!!!

Kumar

Anil Kumar Sunkara (asun...@cne.gmu.edu) wrote:

: THIS IS IN REFERENCE TO THE NEWS ABOUT BIG BOSS.









: Anil K. Sunkara

--

