Fubar spins the tale of a pair of gangly Beavis and Butt-head clones who spend their days shotgunning beers and running amok through the suburbs of Calgary. The title is a military acronym for total chaos and the film is rather loused-up-beyond-all-recognition itself.

Fubar is not a documentary, because its subjects are reprising roles they first honed on the Canadian comedy circuit. But neither is it quite a mockumentary, because it is largely improvised and offers indulgent floor space to a bunch of local headbangers. A disclaimer apologises to anyone who appeared in the film without twigging that it wasn't strictly the real deal.

Stars of the show are Dean (Paul Spence) and Terry (David Lawrence). They have hawkish noses, receding chins and luxuriant mullets that fall to their jeans. They don't believe in God, but they do believe in Merlin, and they worship at the feet of their former ringleader, Troy (Andrew Sparacino), who is now lumbered with a wife and mortgage.

When Troy fails to show up for a scheduled drinking binge, Dean and Terry throw an almighty strop - smashing bus shelters, grappling in the street and spray-painting the walls of his apartment block. "It's because they see you as their patriarch," explains the documentary film-maker. "Yeah, yeah, they're patriarchs to me too, man," says Troy.

Elsewhere, Dean has more serious problems to contend with. A cancerous testicle requires surgery, and Fubar duly embarks on one last big blow-out before swinging back into the hospital parking lot.

It's a fitfully successful film: formless and scattershot at times, and yet possessed of a winning, mongrel exuberance.

By the closing reel, Dean has endured a course of chemotherapy and is sitting in his wheelchair like some heavy-metal Nosferatu while Terry steers him through the cross-town traffic. He has lost his right testicle and his luxuriant mullet but has somehow managed to cling on to his ratty little moustache. "I can't explain it," marvels the doctor. "It's kind of a mind-boggling medical miracle." Either that or a gift from Merlin, still looking out for his old familiar.