Charles Robert Redford Jr. is an American actor, director, producer and activist. He is the recipient of various accolades, including an Academy Award from four nominations, a British Academy Film Award, two Golden Globe Awards, the Cecil B. DeMille Award and the Presidential Medal of Freedom. In 2014, Time named him one of the 100 most influential people in the world.Appearing on stage in the late 1950s, Redford's television career began in 1960, including an appearance on The Twilight Zone in 1962. He earned an Emmy nomination as Best Supporting Actor for his performance in The Voice of Charlie Pont (1962). His greatest Broadway success was as the stuffy newly-wed husband of co-star Elizabeth Ashley's character in Neil Simon's Barefoot in the Park (1963). Redford made his film debut in War Hunt (1962). He starred with Natalie Wood in Inside Daisy Clover (1965) which won him a Golden Globe for the best new star. He starred alongside Paul Newman in Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid (1969), which was a huge success and made him a major star. He had a critical and box office hit with Jeremiah Johnson (1972), and in 1973 he had the greatest hit of his career, the blockbuster crime caper The Sting, a reunion with Paul Newman, for which he was nominated for an Academy Award; that same year, he also starred opposite Barbra Streisand in The Way We Were. The popular and acclaimed All the President's Men (1976) was a landmark film for Redford.

In the 1980s, Redford began his career as a director with Ordinary People (1980), which was one of the most critically and publicly acclaimed films of the decade, winning four Oscars including Best Picture and the Academy Award for Best Director for Redford. He continued acting and starred in Brubaker (1980), as well as playing the male lead in Out of Africa (1985), which was an enormous box office success and won seven Oscars including Best Picture. He released his third film as a director, A River Runs Through It, in 1992. He went on to receive Best Director and Best Picture nominations in 1995 for Quiz Show. He received a second Academy Award—for Lifetime Achievement—in 2002. In 2010, he was made a chevalier of the Légion d'Honneur. Redford is also one of the founders of the Sundance Film Festival.

Sol turns thousands of years of human wisdom from the world’s spiritual traditions into a totally unique personality profile. To get your own profile, check compatibility with friends and much more, download the Sol App today.

Some of their strengths

Robert Redford has many admirable traits.

Based on spiritual traditions from around the world, they are someone who can be described as Intuitive, Confident, Extroverted, Passionate, Intelligent, Kind, and Creative.

Bold and Confident

According to Mysticism’s Astrology tradition, Robert Redford is someone who is a bold, confident, energetic, and optimistic person, who is able to combine personal warmth and charisma with intelligence. A person who is known for being diligent and strong.

Adventurous and Free

Based on Daoism’s Ba-Zi or ‘Chinese Zodiac’ tradition, people who know Robert Redford well know them as someone who can be talented, wayward and free, like a big river or the ocean.

Truthful and Kind

According to Hinduism’s Jyotisha or ‘Vedic Astrology’ tradition, many would also describe Robert Redford as someone who is honest, compassionate, imaginative, and instinctual.

A person who enjoys new challlenges, is a magnet for attracting other creative types, good at identifying opportunities, and who is good at forming loyal, lifelong friendships.

Wise and Deep

Based on the Mayan Tzolk’in or ‘Mayan Astrology’ tradition, Robert Redford is someone who tends to have an internal innate wisdom, and who people tend to see as an "old soul".

They are also someone who is curious, dynamic, and positive, and who enjoys inspiring and communicating with other people.

Creative and Leadership-oriented

According to Judaism’s Kabbalah tradition, Robert Redford tends to be someone who is a natural leader, with determination, motivational powers, and who takes obligations seriously. Who has charisma, a sense of humor, and who tends to attract attention.

Some of Robert Redford's challenges

While Robert Redford has many strengths, nobody is perfect. They also have some challenging traits they need to manage.

For example, Robert Redford can be Arrogant, Indecisive, Unrealistic, Status-seeking, Difficult, Perfectionist, and Irritable.

Arrogant and Status-seeking

One of Robert Redford's key challenges is that they are someone who can come across as arrogant and status-seeking.

Unrealistic and Indecisive

Robert Redford is someone who can be unrealistic, indecisive, and lacking in confidence, who can be impulsive when it comes to making important decisions, have difficulty collaborating with others, can be argumentative and not willling to accept criticism, and who can be disappointed by the high expectations they place on others.

Domineering and Stubborn

Finally, Robert Redford also can be too rebellious, not respond to criticism well, and be too emotional and extreme about things.