Max Rosenberg, the film producer who has died aged 89, specialised in low-budget horror flicks for the teenage market, creating such B-movie classics as The Curse of Frankenstein (1957), Dr Terror's House of Horrors (1965), and The Beast Must Die (1974); with strong commercial instincts and an eye for young talent, he fostered the careers of Terence Stamp, Donald Sutherland and Tuesday Weld, and established Peter Cushing as a household name in horror.

The son of a furrier, Max Rosenberg was born in the Bronx on September 13 1914. Young Max was educated at City College, New York, after which he attended St John Law School at Jamaica, New York.

He broke into the film business in 1939 when he obtained a job at the New York arm of Warner Bros as a buyer and distributor of foreign titles and art films. Six years later he teamed up with Joseph E Levine (the man behind the cult classic Godzilla) to form Motion Picture Ventures, an art-house distribution company. But by the early 1950s he had joined forces with Milton Subotsky and the two men had a successful spell producing children's television shows, including an award-winning series entitled Junior Science.

In 1956 Rosenberg and Subotsky produced Rock Rock Rock, the teen musical film which introduced a 13-year-old Tuesday Weld to cinema audiences. Rosenberg, however, had little admiration for the picture, describing it as "a bunch of songs connected to a stupid plot". In fact it was horror films that "mesmerised" him, an enthusiasm he shared with Subotsky.

In 1957 the pair decided to try their hand at horror, and travelled to England to make The Curse of Frankenstein (1957) after their blood-curdling script received a lukewarm response in Hollywood. Produced for $500,000, it made $7 million at the box office and started a revival of the gothic horror films which had been so popular during the 1930s.

In 1962, having made City of the Dead (1960), Rosenberg and Subotsky formed Amicus Productions in England, which became the main rival to Hammer. They then embarked on a wave of low-budget films that included Dr Terror's House of Horrors, The Deadly Bees (1966), They Came From Beyond Space (1967) and Torture Garden (1967), starring Beverly Adams.

In 1965 and 1966 he worked with Peter Cushing on Dr Who and the Daleks (1965) and again on Daleks Invasion Earth: 2150 A D (1966). Scream and Scream Again (1969) with Cushing, Vincent Price and Christopher Lee was followed by The House That Dripped Blood (1970). With a tag-line that read "TERROR waits for you in every room", The House That Dripped Blood assembled one of the largest groups of horror film actors, from Peter Cushing and Christopher Lee to Ingrid Pitt and Roy Evans (as The Hunchback).

Rosenberg's other films were no less captivating; Girl of the Night (1957) was about a sensitive, lonely call girl called Bobbie who is manipulated and ultimately used by her Madame. Others, such as Jamboree (1957), a basic non-plot movie centred on chart hits, and Just For Fun (1963), with Alan Freeman and the band The Tornados, became hits with the youth market.

His pictures were particularly suited to the "drive-in" movie market in America, and the teenage audiences delighted in the copious quantities of blood and gore supplied by Rosenberg's films. But in a break with his usual subject matter, Rosenberg also made a film version of Harold Pinter's Birthday Party (1968) starring Robert Shaw, Patrick Magee and Dandy Nichols. Latterly he produced Bloody Birthday (1981) and a remake of Cat People (1982).

In his latter years Rosenberg continued to rise early and travelled each day to his office on Wilshire Boulevard, often lunching with Billy Wilder and the actor-turned-producer Arthur Gardner. Dressed in Savile Row tweeds, Rosenberg still cut a dash in his eighties. A voracious reader, he would devour at least five books a week.