Roshon Bernard Fegan aka ROSHON is an American actor, rapper and dancer. In his acting career, ROSHON is best recognized for his role as Ty Blue on the Disney Channel Original Series Shake It Up. He also starred alongside Demi Lovato and the Jonas Brothers in the Disney Original movie Camp Rock.

Girlfriend of Roshon Fegan

Dashing and talented, Fegan is quite an attractive boy and has romanced quite a few other stars. Looking at his dating history, Fegan was in a relationship with his Camp Rock co-star Anna Maria Perez de Tagle for about a year from 2008 to 2009. He then dated Dancing with the Stars contestant Chelsie Hightower from 2012 to 2013.

In 2013, Fegan was briefly involved in his Shake It Up! co-star Caroline Sunshine before debuting with model Camia-Marie Chaidez. The couple flaunted their relationship on social media and were also spotted on the streets together. However, like Roshon’s other relationships, they were short-lived as the couple separated in 2014.

Roshon also dated fellow freestyle dancer Courtney Nicole Kelly, better known as Dytto. She is incredibly popular on social media with over 3.3 million followers on Instagram.

Also Read: Sean Giambrone Height, Age, Family, Girlfriend, Dating, Parents, Salary

As of 2017, Roshon is believed to be single.

Biography/Age of Roshon Fegan

Roshon was born on October 6, 1991 in LosAngeles, California, where he was raised by his parents. He attended Tom Bradley Elementary and Hollywood High School, however, he left the latter and became homeschooled in order to focus on his acting career. Fegan also honed his acting skills at BK Acting Studio and USC 32nd Street Performing Arts School.

Born to a father who is also an artist, Fegan knew from an early age that he was going to follow in dad’s footsteps. At 18 months, he was featured in his first national soda commercial in conjunction with Boyz II Men.

Fegan soon discovered other talents including drums, piano and guitar, rapping, dancing and acting.

By the age of 12, Fegan had already begun to build her filmography.

His debut was a small role as the Amazing Kid in Spider-Man 2. Two years later, he made his small screen debut playing a small role in an episode of Monk.

Roshon’s next role would be in the 2007 film Babyavant Drillbit Taylor (2008). His acting career began to gain momentum in 2008 when he appeared on Camp Rock as Sander Loyer. This was replaced by his starring role as Ty Blue in Shake It Up which brought him widespread recognition. During the show that ended in 2013, Roshon found time to star in other shows like Kickin’ It and Motorcity. In 2012, he participated in Dancing with the Stars where he made it into the top 6 before being eliminated.

Roshon had a role in the 2014 Direct to Video film Mostly Ghostly: Have You Met My Friend Ghoul? He also starred in ANT Farm, Parenthood, and Crazy Ex-Girlfriend. Beginning in 2017, Roshon began playing the recurring role of Isaiah Hambrick on Greenleaf, a hit TV series on OWN.

Roshon Fegan writes his own songs and runs his own label “3inaRo Entertainment” under which he released his EP I AM RO SHON. The name of his label 3inaRo refers to his three main talents; theatre, free dance and music.

Ethnicity/Parents of Roshon Fegan

Roshon’s father, Roy Fegan, is African American, while his mother Cion is from Manila, making Fegan’s ethnicity half Filipino, half African American.

“I was born and raised here in Los Angeles,” Roshon once spoke to the media about his heritage. “So that’s all I know, that’s my lifestyle; but I know there are a lot of people in the Philippines who watch every move I make and make sure they are proud of the moves I make; I try to keep that in mind at all times and try to make very, very wise decisions.

Roshon’s father, Roy, was born in Los Angeles, California on January 27, 1961. Some of his acting credits include Touched by an Angel, The Shield, Will & Grace, Hangin’ with Mr. Cooper, Martin, and more. However, he is best known for his role in the 1993 film The Meteor Man.

Roy also works behind the scenes as a director and producer. He is president of his son’s record company 3inaRo Entertainment.