Beginning his career, doing a cameo in the Spiderman 2 movie, Roshon Fegan came very far ahead than anyone ever imagined he would. Being the son of the actor Roy Fegan, it is no wonder he would also follow his father’s footsteps.

Other than acting, Roshon is a multi-talented celebrity with skills in singing, writing and producing songs, acts, dancing, playing many instruments. Therefore, if you know the extra-ordinary superstar, but still want to know more about his life, both personal and professional, then check out the section below.

Who is Roshon Fegan?

Roshon Fegan is an American actor, singer, and dancer who is best known for his role as Ty Blue on the Disney Channel series Shake It Up. In the sitcom series, he starred alongside Bella Thorne, Zendaya, and Davis Cleveland which lasted for three seasons (2010-2013). He also featured in the Disney Channel movie franchise Camp Rock with Jonas Brothers and Demi Lovato.

As for his singing career, Fegan’s singles include I Am, Oh OH OH, So Bad, Hate Me Or Love Me, Oh Well, and others. Furthermore, the What Still Remains actor writes his own music.

Who is Roshon Fegan’s Dating Currently? His Past Relationships and Affairs?

Currently, Roshon Fegan is dating the American dancer Dytto. The duo first started dating somewhere in 2018 and are together ever since. But did you know, the attractive star has also dated a few in the past as well. If so, who are they? let’s find out!

Well, some celebs have a relationship with one or two, some don’t even have one, and there is Roshon Fegan. The dashing actor has a fair share of romance with a number of beautiful ladies till now.

SOURCE: Zimbio

The couple began dating in 2018 and are together ever since. The duo definitely is not shy to demonstrate their love publicly and in fact, are quite open about it. Besides, going on a date to random places, they even attend events together.

Previously, the Insecure star dated actress Anna Maria Perez de Tangle. Anna and Roshon worked in the movie Camp Rock who also happens to be his first girlfriend. They two dated for a year from 2008-2009.

Following that, Fegan dated Chelsie Hightower, his co-dancer in Dancing with the Stars. The two first started dating in 2012 which also lasted for a year.

You May Also Like: Marlene Lawston’s Dating and Boyfriend!

Next, his lover became actress Caroline Sunshine, who was his co-star in the Disney Channel’s sitcom series Shake It Up. They dated for only a couple of months in 2013 before calling it quits.

Subsequently, the Camp Rock’s star’s sweetheart became model Camia Marie. Unlike Fegan’s past relationship, this time it did last a bit longer as the pair dated for about three years. However, like his every previous relationship this time also the cupid arrow did not last long and the duo ended their relationship in 2017.

https://www.instagram.com/p/BvzhXHngfto/?utm_source=ig_web_copy_link

Well, at just 27, he has dated many females and has a list of former girlfriends. We guess it is in one way an accomplishment on its own.

Roshon, besides, is active on social media and uses Instagram, Twitter, and Facebook. Likewise, he posts pictures and videos with his friends, family, co-stars and his works. And lastly, we hope that this time his love life lasts longer than previous.

How Much is Roshon Fegan’s Net Worth?

Through his successful career of many years in acting, music, and dancing, Roshan Fegan boasts a substantial net worth of $4 million, as of 2019. Typically, an average actor in the US earns $39.84 per hour and around $50,301 in a year. But there is little doubts that the actor earns a good sum of cash from his works.

Don’t Miss: Rukiya Bernard’s Net Worth and Salary!

The charming actor has been a part of numerous hit movies during his illustrious career. For instance, he played a short role in the superhero film Spider-Man 2. The movie starring Tobey Maguire and Kirsten Dunst accumulated an enormous box office collection of $783.8 million against the budget of approximately $200 million.

YouTube: Roshon Fegan’s acted movie Spider-Man 2 clip.

Correspondingly, Roshon acted in another movie Drillbit Taylor (2008) which is a comedy genre film. The movie featuring actors like Owen Wilson, Nate Hartley, and Troy Gentile went on to collect $49.7 million against the production cost of $40 million.

Body Measurements: Roshon Fegan

Roshon Fegan stands at a height of 5 feet 8 inches and weighs around 73 Kg. Similarly, his hair color is black while eyes are dark brown.

Quick Facts of Roshon Fegan

Where and when was Roshon Fegan born?

Los Angeles, California, the United States on October 06, 1991

WHo are Roshon Fegan’s parents?

Roy Fegan and Cion Fegan

What nationality does Roshon Fegan belong to?

American

What is Roshon Fegan’s ethnicity?

Mixed (African, American, and Filipino)

Where did Roshon Fegan receive his education?

Tom Bradley Elementary and Hollywood High School

What is Roshon Fegan’s zodiac sign?

Libra

Which is Roshon Fegan’s debut movie?

Spider-Man 2 (2004)

What is Roshon Fegan’s hair color?

Black

Which color eyes does Roshon Fegan have?

Dark Brown

How tall is Roshon Fegan?

5 feet 8 inches

How old is Roshon Fegan?

27 Years Old.

ncG1vNJzZmismJqwprjEm6qcpJ%2BosrV6wqikaKqfqLWwuoyfnKCZnmK0qr7Ln6minZ6ZeqKyxZqgq6tdo7K1edaoqa2gXZius7HEq2ShnZmctbV5wKCcZq%2BZoLZursioZg%3D%3D