Roshon Bernard Fegan, also known by his music name RO SHON (born October 6, 1991), is an American actor, singer-songwriter and dancer. He is best known for his role as Ty Blue on the Disney Channel original series Shake It Up and for his role as Sander Loyer in the Disney Channel movie franchise, Camp Rock with the Jonas Brothers and Demi Lovato. His 2014 release of his new single "Bout That" helped him transition from Disney star to up-and-coming artist and producer.

Early Life[]

Roshon Fegan was born on October 6, 1991, in Los Angeles, California. His father is African-American actor and producer Roy Fegan, whose television credits include The Shield, Married... with Children, The Meteor Man, and Will & Grace, among others. His mother is Filipina. Raised in Los Angeles, Roshon Fegan had studied at the BK Acting Studio and the USC 32nd Street Performing Arts School as well as attending Hollywood High School, before leaving to be home-schooled to accommodate his acting career.

Career[]

In 2009, Fegan started a new direction for Ro Shon as he released his single "Bout That" on iTunes. Though he had previously released several tracks he produced at the age of twelve, Ro Shon's newest single has a more mature sound. Ro Shon has written, mixed and produced his music independently. He tells KTLA during an interview that making his album without a record label, "...gives me complete freedom and creative control". He goes on to say: "Music is something I've done all my life, but I haven't really taken that step to [say], 'Here I am!' So now I'm taking those steps and people are hearing the songs I wrote and produced myself".

Fegan began his acting career at the age of 12 with a small role in the 2004 feature film Spider-Man 2, followed by an appearance in 2006 on the TV series Monk. In 2008, he appeared in the comedy film Drillbit Taylor and the VC FilmFest Award winning f beganilm Baby. In June 2008, Fegan gained popular notoriety as Sander Loyer in the Disney Channel original movie Camp Rock, which was the number one entertainment telecast on cable TV in 2008. with the Jonas Brothers. He also performed songs on the Camp Rock soundtrack as well as the DVD bonus track Camp Rock. In 2010, Fegan reprised his role as Sander in Camp Rock 2: The Final Jam, the sequel of Camp Rock. Roshon also co-starred on the Disney Channel original series Shake It Up! as Ty Blue, Rocky's older brother.

Fegan was featured on the 14th season of the ABC show Dancing with the Stars. Chelsie Hightower was announced as Roshon's ballroom dance partner. He stayed on for eight weeks and was placed in the top 6. He appeared in Sophia Grace clip "Girls Just Gotta Have Fun" as a DJ.

Personal Life[]

Roshon is a songwriter, producer, actor, artist and freestyle dancer who learned his moves by watching Michael Jackson and other influential dancers. A drummer since the age of two, Roshon also plays the piano and guitar. He has released a number of singles on iTunes and has finished his first self-produced EP I AM RO SHON under his own label, "3inaRo Entertainment". The name 3inaRo (pronounced "three-in-a-row") is a reference to being a triple-threat entertainer in his three passions: acting, freestyle dancing, and music. He currently lives in California with most of his family.

Filmography[]

Film Year Title Role Notes 2004 Spider-Man 2 Amazed Kid Minor role 2008 Drillbit Taylor Random Kid #2 2008 Camp Rock Sander Loyer Supporting role; Disney Channel Original Movie 2008 Baby Young Robbie Supporting role 2010 Camp Rock 2: The Final Jam Sander Loyer Supporting role; Disney Channel Original Movie

Television Year Title Role Notes 2006 Monk Third Boy "Mr. Monk and the Astronaut" (season 4: episode 14) 2008 Jonas Brothers: Living the Dream Himself "Hello Hollywood" (season 1: episode 7) 2010–2013 Shake It Up [Ty Blue Main role; Disney Channel Original Series 2011 Kickin' It Dan "Smooth" Brennan "All the Wrong Moves" (season 1: episode 7) 2012 Dancing with the Stars Himself Season 14 contestant; finished 6th 2012 Motorcity Darr Gordy Voice role; "Reunion" (season 1: episode 15) 2012 Make Your Mark himself / Host 2013 Oh Sit! Himself Musical guest (season 2: episode 7) 2014 A.N.T. Farm Hudson "the new york experiANTs" (season 3: episode 17)

Music videos Year Title Artist Notes 2008 Start the Party Jordan Francis From the Camp Rock soundtrack 2010 It's On (music video version) The cast of Camp Rock 2: The Final Jam From the film's soundtrack