Fil-Am Disney star Roshon Fegan is competing in the 14th season of the wildly popular Dancing With The Stars (DWTS), ABC’s hit dance competition, beginning March 19. His professional partner will be Chelsie Hightower.

“He’s a friend and fellow Disney artist of Anna Maria Perez de Tagle, who, incidentally, was reportedly offered in the past to compete in the show,” said Funfare’s Big Apple correspondent Edmund Silvestre who filed this report. “Anna Maria reportedly had to beg off because the show requires strenuous, rigorous dance schedule.”

Both Roshon and Anna Maria were previously featured in Funfare for starring in Camp Rock 1 and 2, with the Jonas Brothers and Demi Lovato.

At 20, the L.A.-born Roshon, whose mom Cion is Filipina and dad Roy is African-American, is the youngest contestant in the latest season of DWTS.

“Being an extremely talented dancer, he will probably have the upper hand on his competitors to win the mirror ball trophy,” said Edmund. “Fan favorites, though, often tend to be on the overweight or aged side, according to one newspaper. Two-time DWTS champ and mainstay Fil-Am dancer Cheryl Burke will be paired with telenovela star William Levy.”

The celebrity contestants (and their dancing partners) for this season are actor Jack Wagner (with Anna Trebunskaya), actress Melissa Gilbert (Maksim Chmerkovskiy), football superstar Donald Driver, TV host Maria Menounos (Derek Hough), actor Jaleel White (Kym Johnson), Cuban-American actor and model William Levy (Cheryl Burke), actress/TV host Sherri Shepherd (Val Chmerkovskiy), singer Katherine Jenkins (Mark Ballas), pop singer-songwriter Gavin Degraw (Karina Smirnoff), tennis legend Martina Navratilova (Tony Dovolani), actor/dancer Roshon Fegan (Chelsie Hightower), and singer Gladys Knight (Tristan MacMAnus).

Roshon with Camp Rock co-stars Anna Maria Perez de Tagle and Cody Linley.

More on Roshon from Huffington Post:

Most widely recognized for his roles on Disney Channel, musical artist Roshon Fegan, songwriter, producer and actor — quadruple threat! — currently stars on the Disney Channel original series Shake It Up! as Ty Blue.

Prior to this role, he appeared as Sander Loyer in the Disney Channel original movies Camp Rock and Camp Rock 2: The Final Jam, along with other Disney stars Demi Lovato and the Jonas Brothers. Lovato and the Jo Bros have since found worldwide fame outside of the House of Mouse. Could it be Fegan’s turn to shine?

Fegan also performed songs on the Camp Rock soundtrack, as well as the DVD bonus track Camp Rock. The aspiring singer/producer recently released his first self-produced EP, I Am Roshon, which contains two new tracks written and produced by Fegan himself, Got Me Like and Top of the World.

He writes and produces all of his own music under his independently-owned record label, 3inaRo Entertainment, where he serves as CEO.

What’s up?

• This interesting item was sent to Funfare Update by occasional contributor Leo Udtohan of Bohol:

Dear Anak,

Pinadala ko na ang P50,000 para sa tuition mo. Binenta na namin ang kalabaw. Ang mahal pala ng DOTA na subject! Wala na rin ang mga kambing…naibenta na rin namin para sa project mong…Nokia N991 ba ‘yon? Isinama ko na ang P7,000 para sa field trip n’yo sa Mall of Asia. Anak, malayo ba ‘yon?

Isasanla pa namin ang sakahan para mabili mo ang instrumentong iPOD. Syanga pala, napailaw n’yo na ba ang project mong San Mig Light? Eh, ‘yung libro na Facebook, nabili mo na ba?

Sana maka-graduate ka sa buwang ito, Anak.

Nagmamahal,

Inay at Itay

• It’s summer and travel time again. For travel tips and booking, try Rowena Coloma’s Travel Specialist Ventures especially family trips. Its office is at the ground floor of East Side Condominium, #121 Malakas St., Barangay Central, Diliman, Quezon City. Numbers to call are landlines 921-5742 (for international ticketing), 928-3858 (package tours), 441-8122 (Schengen, UK, US and Canadian visas) and 928-7487 (Canadian and European tours). Call Luchi Sta. Ana.

• Clarification: David Archuleta’s album (all-OPM covers, recorded during his recent stay here) is under Ivory Music & Video and not Sony Music, Inc. as wrongly mentioned in a recent Funfare story. Also, there’s no English version of Nandito Ako, the Aaron Paul del Rosario composition which David sings as theme song of his TV5 soap starrer with the same title.

• For the first time, Taytay, Rizal, will have three different schools together in a golden jubilee celebration tomorrow, March 3, at the Event Center of Thunderbird Resort & Casino in Binangonan. The schools are: Taytay Elementary School, Rosario Ocampo Elementary School and San Isidro Elementary School, all batch ’62. The celebration is spearheaded by Gener Gozum, over-all chairman. For inquiries, call Dr. Ofelia Tordesillas at 0917-8316605 or Mirrian Libramonte Cruz at 0918-9115414.

* * *

Friends gather for June T’s birthday

As usual in a gathering like that, nobody dared ask how old the celebrator was — June Torrejon, that is. The birthday cake, offered by Romulo’s Café where the lunch was held, only had one candle. The birthday girl extinguished the light with one big blow.

It was a fun gathering spiced up with tsismis which were all off the record.

Among those present were (front row, from left): Regal Matriarch Mother Lily Monteverde, Ronald Constantino, Marichu ‘Manay Ichu’ Maceda and Susan Roces; and (back row, also from left) your columnist, Dolor Guevarra, Lolit Solis, MTRCB Chief Grace Poe-Llamanzares, Pat-P Daza, Shirley Kuan, the birthday girl, Alvin Fortuna (Romulo’s Café PR executive), Balikbayan Baby K. Jimenez, Ian Fariñas and Salve Asis. Not in photo were Malou Choa-Fagar, Ethel Ramos and Chit Ramos. — PHOTO B Y BABY K. JIMENEZ