Published August 13, 2013 4:20pm

An actor, singer-songwriter, and dancer, Roshon was first noticed for his role as “Sander Loyer” in the Disney movie Camp Rock, a role which he reprised in its sequel Camp Rock 2: The Final Jam.

Filipino-American actor Roshon Fegan is a sky-climbing triple-threat.

At the age of 21, the Disney star has released his first record, "I Am Ro Shon," under his own label, and established Grand Vault Studios, his music and dance studio in Central Los Angeles in the United States, a report of the news site Asian Journal said.

An actor, singer-songwriter, and dancer, Roshon was first noticed for his role as “Sander Loyer” in the Disney movie Camp Rock, a role which he reprised in its sequel Camp Rock 2: The Final Jam.

He continued on to play “Ty Blue”in the original series Shake It Up!, a “hip, sarcastic older brother, who is popular at school, loves to dance, and knows how to charm the girls,“ his profile on the Disney Channel said.

Last March 2012, he placed 6th in the popular Dancing With The Stars.

Grand Vault Studios

In an interview with JustJaredJr., a version of the popular entertainment website JustJared made for a younger audience, the triple-threat said that “needed a place to work” for his music and dance rehearsals.

That place came in the form of Grand Vault Studios, a studio near the Staples Center and L.A. Live.

Known as the Federal Reserve Bank in the 20's, the old bank vault-turned-studio opened with a master class, offering artists “to work on their triple-threat talent”.

“If owning a dance studio and a music studio inspires others to express themselves like I do, I’m just excited, I’m proud,” Roshon said in another interview with Asian Journal.

He noted that his love of music and performing arts were part of why Grand Vault Studios was created.

Unique Filipino upbringing

Growing up, he was inspired to start his career by his mother, who was a singer, and his father, a singer-producer.

“My mom used to let me play with the pots and pans and instead of telling me to stop like most moms would she just let me do it. So the noise kind of turned into music,” he said to The Celebrity Cafe, an entertainment website.

In the same interview with Asian Journal, he proclaims his love of his parents' culture, and the Filipino's amazing capacity to support budding talents who represent the country well.

In an earlier interview on The FilAm Los Angeles, a content partner of GMA News Online, Fegan said he always keeps his actions in mind, as he has a young fanbase and is representing country internationally. — Rie Takumi/VVP/VC, GMA News