Roshon Bernard Fegan is a man of many talents. He is a songwriter, producer, actor, artist, and freestyle dancer. He got into acting at a very young age and luckily his father, famous actor and producer Roy Fegan, was there to guide him. You might know him from Disney Channel. He is best known for playing Ty Blue on “Shake It Up” and Sander Loyer in the “Camp Rock” movie franchise with the Jonas Brothers and Demi Lovato. “Camp Rock” became the number one entertainment telecast on cable TV in 2008, and at 17 he got the real taste of fame. He played small roles before that but with this role, he became a fan favorite.

He is 29-year-old now and has shifted his career path a little. He took music more seriously and started writing and producing his own music. He plays the keytar, the guitar, the piano, and drums. He mentioned that when he was 14 he had his own studio. He spent a lot of time there and has learned a lot. In 2011 Roshon released his first single “I AM”. A year later, he released his album ‘EP I AM RO SHON’, under his own label ‘3inaRo Entertainment’. The name 3inaRo (pronounced “three-in-a-row”) is a reference to his three passions: acting, dancing, and music.

In 2010, Roshon participated in the reality television show “Dancing with the Stars”. He was partnered with Chelsie Hightower and they had only a week to learn full dance choreography. It may seem impossible for us but somehow he managed to do it alongside other contestants. He stayed on the show for 8 weeks and was placed in the top 6.

He has also been public about his relationships. Roshon has dated his co-star from the movie “Camp Rock” Anna Maria Perez de Tagle, his co-dancer from “Dancing with the Stars” Chelsie Hightower, his co-star from the sitcom “Shake it up” Caroline Sunshine, and has dated model Camia Marie. Currently, he is in a relationship with Dytto, who is a dancer.

Roshon admits that the sole reason that he didn’t end up being involved in many scandals like other “Disney kids” is his father. He has been in the industry for over 30 years and raised his son to be responsible and have a good head on his shoulders.