Media News

New Delhi, October 14, 2010

The premiere of Disney's exhilarating rock 'n roll musical "Camp Rock 2: The Final Jam," starring Demi Lovato and Jonas Brothers, will be presented across Navratri and Dussehra weekend celebrating music and dance with a storyline that suggests life is about the way you play. The fun for kids, tweens and families begins FRIDAY, OCTOBER 15 - 3 PM on Disney Channel.

Disney Channel's popular hosts - Tara and Murtuza will be introducing all the fun in Camp Rock 2 The Final Jam with exclusive behind the scenes footage and cool trivia on the movie.

The movie soundtrack, featuring 15 songs spanning hip-hip, rock and pop/rock performed by the cast is available on iTunes. The Hindi version of the songs has been

composed by Sangeet and Siddharth Haldipur and sung by fresh new voices such as Apeksha Dandekar.

The sequel, choreographed by Rosero McCoy, is a tour de force for actress and recording artist Demi Lovato. It showcases both the music and charm of Kevin, Joe and

Nick Jonas, and includes their younger brother Frankie Jonas in his TV movie debut.

The highly anticipated sequel also brings back fan favorites from "Camp Rock," -- MariaCanals-Barrera ("Wizards of Waverly Place"), Meaghan Martin ("10 Things I Hate AboutYou"), Alyson Stoner ("Phineas and Ferb," Step Up 3D"), Anna Maria Perez de Tagle ("Fame"), Jasmine Richards, Daniel Fathers, Roshon Fegan (Disney Channel's upcoming "Shake it Up") and Jordan "J" Francis. "Camp Rock 2: The Final Jam" introduces two exciting new performers, Matthew Mdot Finley and Chloe Bridges.

The sequel follows Mitchie and her friends as they return to Camp Rock for another great summer of music and fun. But when big-money, state-of-the-art Camp Star opens across the lake, it lures away many instructors and campers -- putting the future of Camp Rock in jeopardy. Mitchie emerges as a leader determined to save the camp and challenges the egocentric Luke Williams and his fellow Camp Star campers to a Final Jam -- an end-of-summer performance duel, may the best camp win.

The movie was written by Dan Berendsen (Disney's "Hannah Montana The Movie" and "Wizards of Waverly Place The Movie") and the team of Karin Gist and Regina Hicks. It is based on characters created by Karin Gist, Regina Hicks, Julie Brown and Paul Brown. The director and co-producer is DGA Award winner Paul Hoen (Disney Channel's "The Cheetah Girls One World" and "Jump In").

The producer is Kevin Lafferty and the executive producer is Alan Sacks. "Camp Rock 2: The Final Jam" is a production of Coin Flip Productions, Ltd. and Alan Sacks Productions in association with Disney Channel.

Disney Channel is a 24-hour kid-driven, family inclusive television network that taps into the world of kids and families through original series and movies. It offers an

unparalleled blend of quality Disney entertainment and distinctive, originally produced programs that kids love and families trust and enjoy. This includes Disney's movies and

series, sitcoms, family dramas and live action adventure stories. For more information on Disney Channel India, please visit: http://www.disney.in/DisneyChannel.

For further information, please contact:

CMCG India

Malika Bhavnani

Mobile: 9820496099