Futebol is not just the ‘quantitative’, empirical fact of the game as it is played in Brazil and by Brazilians; it is also, moreover, a particularly Brazilian way of playing that expresses something wider, a ‘national character’ that is marked by a certain playfulness, a ludic excess which, through its sheer inventiveness, can bring about the ‘miraculous’ triumph over ‘rational organization’. The idea that football is, therefore, the expression of a ‘Brazilianness’ that is fully realized, furthermore, only through football (with the possible exception of samba music) appears very early on in a quickly growing corpus of ‘essayistic’ interpretations of Brazilian footballing styles. Yet when we think of ‘Brazilian’ football, we are really thinking about a particular period or generation, the ‘período áureo’ or Golden Years between Brazil’s first World Cup win in 1958 and the tricampeonato in 1970; the period, too, of Pelé and Garrincha, when the ‘Brazilian game’ appeared to have decisively transformed football itself, somehow transcending it by bringing to its fulfillment the hidden potentials of virtuosity and inventiveness.

Through the course of the 20th century sport mega events (SMEs) have developed into large, complex structures comprising a variety of proposed benefits at a large-scale level. The progressively significant place these events hold in national, regional and local strategies has led to these events being used as platforms and points of reference for a variety of social, political and economic issues, occasionally leading to SMEs superseding their places as solely sporting events. Contrary to these benefits at the macro level, an under researched area within this field has been how SMEs, and importantly the publicly and politically significant spaces they afford, have been utilised for personal and individual leverage by social actors, specifically celebrities. In the literature, celebrity culture can be conceptualised as a signifier of wider cultural processes and civil issues, offering opportunities to explore how society’s relationship with celebrity figures is indicative of wider social processes. While this area is a well-established field, this work intends to exploit a gap in the under researched adjoining of celebrity studies and SMEs. This paper will explore, in their role as sports celebrities, the involvement of Pele, Romario and Ronaldo with the 2014 FIFA World Cup in Brazil. Starting in the period prior to the selection of Brazil as host of the event, through multimedia texts and representation scrutiny will focus upon the changing positions of these three celebrities on the social and political spectrum, so too how the spaces and platforms created by SMEs for celebrities, intentionally or not, are variably exploited by these individuals. The narrative employed will also analyse how the actions of these three actors towards the event itself and broader aspects of Brazilian social dynamics were expressed, as well as how these expressions related to sporting bodies central to the event.