The Olympics is about sportsmanship, perseverance, pure athletic ability, national and international unity, and a sense of kinship among all people.

This article touches on none of those subjects. This article is to tide over a Canadian boy waiting for our first medal. Which, by the way will be won tonight (tomorrow in Beijing) in the pool. When the men swim the 4X200m relay. (You heard it here first)

Still though, no medals for Canadian Athletes at these, the 2008 Summer games in Beijing. No medals, but bragging rights for one Canadian athlete.

That athlete being Alexandra Orlando.

I was standing in line at the grocery store picking up milk, and bread. (Of course…You always think you have enough when you don't. Or you always think you need it when you don't. Isn't that a Jerry Seinfeld bit or something?)

Anyway...I was waiting my turn, standing around, looking at all the chocolate bars I wanted, and then I started the usual time waster when standing in lines. Magazine browsing.

You get your usual fix of ridiculousness out of the way first. "Riots: Toilet Paper Shortage," or "Oprah: The Alien Who Wants To Help." Then you move to other magazines, like People and Us to see who's adopting what kid from where or "Who's Bikini Bod Is All Bad." when I happened to see the cover of Chatelaine magazine. (Chataline is a Canadian Women's magazine for those of you who are interested)

Of course, you guessed it. Canadian Olympic rhythm gymnast Alexandra Orlando was donning the cover for the month of August. (Along with two other Canadian Olympians)

Normally that would be the end of the story, however when I returned home and flipped the Olympics on they were showing gymnastics. The men’s, not women’s. Just before the commercial break I was reminded to check CBC's website for some athlete blogs. Hey, why not, I was after all watching men’s team gymnastics. (In my defense they were flipping between that and swimming)

So, whose name popped out at me? You guess it. Alexandra Orlando. I decided I would type her name into Google to see what else I could find out about her. (Don't tell me you haven't done anything like that before. Bunch of liars)

To my surprise I found a couple of sites that happened to catch my eye. One being WebTvHub's "The 50 Most Beautiful Women of the 2008 Beijing Olympics" and an article from The Independent, that states "World-class pin-ups: Meet the Olympic contenders for the gold medal in glamour."

In their defense (and mine) I will quote The Independent; "In Beijing, it's speed, strength and stamina that matter. But in the age of the sports star, glamour counts, too."

Now there aren't any other Canadians in the top 50 of WebTVHub's list. However, we did manage to take the golden spot in the list. That's right. Alexandra Orlando is #1.

I did find it shocking that no other Canadian made the list, which is dominated by American athletes. After watching Canada, and specifically Lauren Bay Regula, who pitched a one hitter through five innings, to defeat Taiwan (Chinese Taipei) 6-1; I found it hard to believe she didn't crack the top 50. She is after all, the younger sister of the newest Boston Red Sox, left fielder Jason Bay. That's got to score her some points.

In all seriousness, as I mentioned before the Olympics is about athletic ability and international unity. Still these articles (this one included) are more for fun... and beautiful, talented women. There can't be anything wrong with that.