Sam Mendes is becoming the new Mike Nichols, an Oscar-wining director who used a career in the theatre as a jumping off point for Hollywood success. Cutting emotional dramas, satires and the occasional war film would allow both men to make their mark in the world of arts/entertainment.

A man of many talents, Sam Mendes was born Samuel Alexander Mendes on August 1, 1965 in Reading, Berkshire, England. He pursued higher education at Cambridge University, graduating in 1987. After completing his studies at Uni – as the British call it – Mendes would become a theater director and win multiple Tony Awards for his stage productions. Actors he collaborated with in the theatre such as Judi Dench and Ralph Fiennes, would later become instrumental to Mendes’ career in filmmaking.

1999 was the turning point for Sam Mendes in Hollywood. His debut feature film, American Beauty would take home five Academy Awards. It’s no surprise that the strongest elements of the film were the performances. Kevin Spacey and Annette Bening won two of the golden statues for playing an estranged husband and wife trying to raise a teenage daughter. An Oscar was also awarded to Mendes for his exquisite direction.

Alan Ball’s script contained a brutally honest snapshot of suburban life where the grass wasn’t always greener on other side of the white picket fence. Being a gay man, Ball wrote about repressed homosexuality and infidelity with an honesty that bowled over moviegoers. Mendes adapted those words into a tragic work of art that encouraged audiences to “look closer”, allowing for thoughtful introspection on their part.

His follow-up film, Road to Perdition (2002), featuring Tom Hanks as the lead, Michael Sullivan, would take the director’s dramatic sensibilities and place them in the Prohibition-era. The film is similar to American Beauty (1999) in that it also confronts a loss of innocence. A young boy catches his gangster dad at “work”, putting a strain on the bond between parent and child. Paul Newman also co-starred as Hank’s mafia figure boss. Another co-star, Daniel Craig would soon become a household name for 2006’s James Bond re-boot, Casino Royale.

Jarhead (2005) was Mendes’ next project, a war film in the vein of Stanley Kubrick’s Full Metal Jacket (1987) and Oliver Stone’s Platoon (1986) . The subject matter was a new challenge for Sam Mendes, since the source material was an actual memoir written by a United States Marine. Jake Gyllenhaal would play the lead character of Anthony Swofford in a film where the main focus was a soldier’s psyche rather than firing automatic weapons.

Revolutionary Road (2008) was a return to suburban storytelling for Sam Mendes – perhaps his most overlooked film. Now married to actress Kate Winslet, Mendes cast her in the 1950’s period drama opposite her Titanic (1997) costar, Leonardo DiCaprio. Unfortunately, many wrote this film off as a cheap gimmick, but as with American Beauty, only those who could “look closer” saw something special. Frank and April Wheeler of Revolutionary Road were drowning in a more symbolic way, being suffocated by post World War II social norms.

Perhaps the emotional exhaustion from Revolutionary Road had taken its toll on Sam’s marriage to Kate when the couple divorced two years later in 2010. Despite this personal loss, a once-in-a-lifetime career opportunity was on the horizon for Sam Mendes. He and Daniel Craig would team up for Skyfall (2012), one of the best James Bond films in the entire 50 years of the franchise! Roger Deakins’ cinematography gave Skyfall an unmistakable new style and the acting talents of old friends, Judi Dench and Ralph Fiennes would make the film an incredible success!

Filmmaker Sam Mendes is an artist, who like Sidney Lumet, Mike Nichols and David Mamet, has bridged the gap between the stage and screen. He has united art forms. He has provided audiences and critics with challenging stories of heartfelt drama. I am confident that Sam Mendes will continue to awe us with new projects for years, well into the future. In fact, a new James Bond film is on the way from Mendes called Spectre, due to be released this Fall, and like many, I can hardly wait!