A beautiful blended family! Kate Winslet has three children, Mia, Joe and Bear, from her three marriages over the years to ex-husbands Jim Threapleton, Sam Mendes and current husband Edward Abel Smith. The actress keeps her personal life mostly out of the spotlight, but she can’t help and gush over her kids every once in a while.

The Titanic star prides herself on being a very hands-on parent to her kiddos. In fact, Kate revealed she doesn’t “have a chef or a driver or things like that” because she wants to take care of her responsibilities on her own.

“I would be so unhappy if I had those things and I wouldn’t feel like I was being a real person anymore,” she said during a 2017 interview with Harper’s Bazaar. “Just because I am in a position where I can have those things, it doesn’t mean that I have to. It just wouldn’t be right for my family – I know that my kids would absolutely hate it. I want them to look back and remember my chicken soup and my packed lunches and that it was me on the school run.”

Kate is in a great place these days, but her love life has had many ups and downs through the years. She married her first husband, Jim, in 1998 when she was just 23 years old. They wed one year before Titanic was released, which led the actress to win an Oscar. They welcomed daughter Mia Honey Threapleton in 2000 and divorced in 2001.

She married Oscar-winning director Sam, who is known for his work on films American Beauty, Skyfall, 1917 and more, in 2003. That same year, she gave birth to their son, Joe Mendes. Kate and Sam were married for seven years before divorcing in 2011.

Kate’s current husband is English business magnate Richard Branson’s nephew, which is how they met in 2011 before tying the knot one year later. The auburn-haired beauty and Edward Abel’s son, Bear Blaze, was born in 2013.

For the most part, Kate’s brood is like any other family. The Holiday star gave an update about her life at home amid the coronavirus pandemic during an appearance on Jimmy Kimmel Live in January 2021.

“I think it’s rough on the teens,” the Ammonite actress candidly shared. “My daughter’s 20 and my son is 17 … my little guy is 7, but yeah, I think it’s hard on all of them.”

Luckily, her teen son, Joe, is “very musical” and has been making “a lot of music” while spending time at home. In addition, he’ll be learning to drive this year. “I’ll leave that to my husband,” Kate quipped, referring to hubby Edward Abel. “I get too frustrated … I think, ‘I’ll just stick to the baking.'”

As for their biological son, Bear, the Reader star gushed the adorable youngster is “very funny” and already told her to “sign [him] up” for acting.