Oracle Campus, United States

From series “Futuristic buildings of IT companies”

Initially, Oracle was known as one of the world's largest software manufacturers. Modern trends have contributed to the reformation of the company into a corporation. It develops hardware and cloud services today. The company's office is located in California. It is a real masterpiece of modern architecture. The office consists of several high-rise buildings of regular cylindrical shape. Their facade is completely lined with mirror tiles.

These buildings look like the pipes of a giant factory. The proximity to the water makes the architectural complex even more spectacular. Huge buildings are surrounded by a beautiful park with many trees, walking paths, and equipped recreation areas. From the windows of their offices, employees of this office can admire the peaceful surface of the water and the jets of fountains rising from it.

Oracle was founded in 1977. Larry Ellison is its founder. He served as the organization's CEO from its founding until 2014. Representative offices and offices of this company are located in 145 different countries of the world today. Oracle's headquarters are still located in the state of California, near San Francisco. The company has experienced several large-scale layoffs of employees in recent years. This gave rise to many rumors about its critical financial condition. The succession of layoffs is largely due to the reorientation of the company's activities, rather than to a difficult financial situation. Next - Googleplex Campus

Amazon Campus, United States

Googleplex Campus, United States

Re-use of this article is allowed. A valid link to www.orangesmile.com is obligatory.

Oracle Campus - interactive map

Useful staff nearby

ATM bankomat: 'Just ATMs Inc' located in 0.59 km ( check the route on the map).

Car rental office: 'Zipcar' is located in 0.26 km ( on the map).

Fuel station: 'Palo Alto Shell' in 0.6 km

Supermarket: 'Trader Joe's' in 1.75 km

Parking: 'L-63' in 0.7 km

Apotheek: 'express drug store' in 1.06 km

Police station: 'Fire & Police Facility' in 0.66 km

Cafe/restaurant: 'Ray's' in 0.45 km

Railway station: 'California Avenue Train Station' in 1.22 km