Oracle Corp.'s entry to Nashville's business community may seem like a whirlwind romance to observers.

But it follows two years of intense flirtation and negotiation with Tennessee leaders.

The software giant, rich from selling its global cloud platform and applications, banked $39 billion in 2020.

At the same time, the company founded by Silicon Valley engineers in 1977 left its home state to settle in Austin, Texas. Metro Council cleared the way Tuesday for Oracle to build a nearly identical 65-acre campus on the Nashville riverfront for 8,500 workers.

RELATED: Metro Council approves Oracle deal on East Nashville riverfront in final hurdle for $1.2B development

MORE: Unions cry foul on economic development deal: 'Demand accountability from Oracle'

OPINION: Oracle win would be transformational victory for Tennessee

COLUMN: Are Nashville's affordable housing aspirations impossible without Oracle? | Plazas

Here are a few things to know about the company, its plans and how this will affect Music City:

Why is water a key attraction?

Founder Larry Elliston is worth something like $100 billion so, naturally, one of his favorite hobbies is racing his $200 million luxury yacht Rising Sun.

He wasn't available for an interview about this but company officials indicated he's a fan of waterways in general.

It's no coincidence that the Austin campus was built on a lake and the matching Nashville offices will be on the Cumberland River.

Early design plans indicate water features will be integrated throughout the $1.2 billion development on the east bank of the river in a now-industrial area.

The parks and water features will be open to the public.

What does Oracle make?

Oracle Corp. is commonly called a "software giant" because it rolls off the tongue more easily than "integrated cloud applications and platform services" maker.

Company leaders break it down this way: "Our technology helps to land airplanes, discover new medicines, test new car designs, and enables many of the world's financial transactions."

Oracle is unique in that it has a global cloud "infrastructure platform" and a spectrum of cloud applications.

Got it?

Basically, it sells subscriptions to databases and apps that make it easier for many industries to do business.

Why are Tennessee leaders obsessed with Oracle?

Oracle will deliver lots of new tax revenue, thousands of high-paying jobs and major charisma.

Nashville alone expects to rake in $18 million more a year once its up and running.

The high-profile brand is almost certain to attract more successful companies and exponentially boost Nashville's tech scene.

For residents, that means higher property values and better job opportunities. The downside is that it guarantees a bump in the cost of living in town.

"This has been a two-year endeavor that allowed us to aggressively recruit this global brand," Tennessee Department of Economic and Community Development Commissioner Bob Rolfe said. "Governor Bill Lee and Mayor John Cooper have both been directly involved in a whole host of conversations to recruit Oracle."

Oracle's arrival will entice nearly 12,000 indirect support jobs and 21,000 construction positions, Rolfe estimates.

Will Oracle give back?

The tech giant is actively diversifying its workforce after an internal review documented an overwhelmingly white, male workforce.

Traci Wade, Oracle's director of diversity and inclusion, has a mandate to make the company meaningfully more inclusive.

"Diversifying our organization overall is critical," Wade said. "We're working with a recruiting organization. Hiring more diverse workers including Blacks, Hispanics and women is very much top of mind."

Community volunteer work is also a priority for employees.

Their initiatives include:

Oracle Academy: A training program to prepare college students for the working world and deliver new technologies to classrooms.

Oracle Education Foundation: Employee volunteers tutor local students in coding, physical computing and design thinking.

Partnerships with historically Black colleges and universities focus on advancing minority careers in engineering.

What's in the infrastructure deal?

Oracle Corp. negotiated a 25-year property tax discount with Mayor John Cooper — a fairly routine subsidy for such a large investment.

But, in a unique twist, Cooper extracted a $175 million up-front payment from the company to fund new infrastructure on the neglected riverfront.

That cash will be repaid via the temporary 50% property tax discount, but it will allow the city to move much more quickly on a comprehensive riverfront development for new homes, businesses, parks and greenways.

State officials will also present tax breaks and cash incentives to Oracle, but have not released the total incentive package yet.

A pedestrian bridge will connect the campus with Germantown on the other side of the river. The money will also fund new greenways and parks, roads and public utilities.

The campus will occupy about half of the River North development in East Nashville. Currently, 40 acres neighboring the site is under construction on a complex of offices, apartments and shops.

The work is already spurring major redevelopment on streets near the riverfront, particularly Dickerson Pike.

What are the community concerns?

The deal has drawn concerns from community activists and council members. Many have voiced concerns about Oracle's proposed job creation, commitment to diversity, as well as its actions to address affordable housing with a booming workforce.

Many of them are worried Nashville may not have the ability to absorb all 8,500 new jobs the company promised to create. Community advocacy group Stand Up Nashville demanded the company take actions to address Nashville's affordable housing problems and work to hire minority workers.

Among the 8,500 jobs, it remains opaque how many would be high-paying jobs or what the lowest hourly wage is — a concern shared by several council members.

Additionally, many council members have raised concerns about the lack of concrete actions the company has taken to address a slew of state bills targeting LGBTQ youths. Tennessee is the third state this year to pass and sign into law a bill barring transgender student athletes to compete under their gender identity. Several other bills have been passed by the state legislature, pending Lee's signature.

Oracle has signed a letter by the Human Rights Campaign opposing such legislation, but the company has not threatened to pull out.

At-Large Council member Bob Mendes questioned if the company intends to take further actions during a Tuesday council meeting.

"We get real criticism from well-meaning people that we are just engaging in nonsense theater and it doesn't actually mean anything," he told Oracle representatives. "How do you match (what you said)? Are we just being hypocrites?"

Sandy Mazza can be reached via email at smazza@tennessean.com, by calling 615-726-5962, or on Twitter @SandyMazza.