Building a vibrant future through education

Our education initiatives—Oracle Academy and Oracle Education Foundation—are helping students develop the skills they need to become technology innovators and leaders. These programs are helping young people not only to prepare for the future but also to play an active role in shaping it.

Explore our education programs and partnerships

Philanthropy for a what’s-next future

The same solution-oriented spirit that fuels our business success also drives our philanthropic efforts. That’s why we invest globally in nonprofit and social impact organizations whose work is critical to solving the challenges facing society today—and tomorrow.

Learn more about our philanthropy

Inspired action for changing times

Within Oracle’s creative, solution-oriented culture is a community of employees who strive to make the world a better place. Oracle Volunteers lead and participate in virtual and in-person projects with hundreds of nonprofits and public institutions year-round.

See Oracle Volunteers in action

Bold action for a sustainable future

At Oracle, we know that ensuring the health of our planet calls for bold and urgent action. We’re committed to building a more sustainable future and empowering our employees to do the same.

Learn more about sustainability at Oracle

Strengthening communities for healthier tomorrows

Across the globe, our health initiatives are advancing world wellness. We’re working to expand vaccine access, support clinical research, and close gaps in access to care. Through our nonprofit organization, Oracle Health Foundation, we deliver pediatric grants and school-based wellness programs to create healthier tomorrows and stronger communities.

Learn more about our health initiatives

Standing with the people of Ukraine

Oracle stands with the people of Ukraine and against the unlawful attack by Russia on their country. At the onset of the conflict, we moved quickly to support our colleagues and customers in the region and relief efforts on the ground.

Learn more about our efforts in Ukraine