Mercury Interactive Corporation, the leading provider of enterprise testing and application performance management solutions, has announced that Newport Group, Inc, an independent information technology research company, has named Mercury Interactive the number one worldwide load testing market leader with 54% market share in distributed environments.

The market share is based on product and related services revenues for the year 2000 and reflects an impressive 14-percentage point market share gain over 1999.

According to Newport Group`s recently published Annual Load Test Market Summary and Analysis report, Mercury Interactive captured an unprecedented 63% of the Web load testing product market in 2000 - more than seven times that of its closest competitor - up from 49% in 1999. In addition, Mercury Interactive dominated the hosted load testing services market, securing more than half the revenue generated by these services.

"Mercury Interactive has proven itself, yet again, to be the indisputable market leader across the board in the load testing space," said Billie Shea, analyst at Newport Group. "As more and more organisations rely on Web-based computing environments as business revenue generators and customer service tools, the need for reliable, scalable load testing solutions grows. Mercury Interactive continues to deliver the innovative load testing products and services needed to make these organisations successful."

According to Newport Group`s report, 73.4% of the $359.3 million in overall load testing tool and related services revenue for distributed environments was gained as a result of the need to test Web application environments. This revenue segment totals $263.8 million, a 114% increase over 1999. Mercury Interactive significantly outpaced the market growth in the Web load testing tools and related services space, increasing its revenue in this segment by 169% over 1999.

"Load testing has become an indispensable part of the development, deployment and management of applications by IT organisations of Global 2000 companies because of its significant business value and rapid return on investment," said Amnon Landan, chairman, CEO and president of Mercury Interactive. "We are pleased to be recognised again for our leadership in delivering the load testing solutions customers need to ensure the success of their mission-critical IT endeavours."

Newport Group`s Annual Load Test Market Summary and Analysis report is available directly from Mercury Interactive at http://www.mercuryinteractive.com/pdf/company/newport_load2000.pdf.

Scalability, reliability and performance are important issues when deploying any enterprise application. Since the volume of users and traffic levels can change in a matter of seconds, it is critical to eliminate potential performance issues prior to deployment to ensure a positive experience for all end-users.

Mercury Interactive`s load testing products include LoadRunner, the industry-standard load testing solution, Astra LoadTestT, for fast, simple load testing of Web applications, and LoadRunner TestCenterT, the industry`s first global load testing tool. All of these tools can be used to predict system behaviour and performance under a real-life user load. Using these tools, customers can exercise their business-critical applications by emulating the traffic of real users. Each of these users drives the application with real transactions while the tools measure response times, network delays and both server and application performance.

To help isolate performance bottlenecks and fine-tune performance within the application infrastructure, Mercury Interactive provides customised integrated real-time monitors that capture and display performance data from within the various tiers of the system during the load test. These capabilities enable customers to minimise test cycles, optimise performance and reduce overall IT costs.

In addition, LoadRunner TestCenter enables large organisations to manage multiple, concurrent load testing projects across geographic locations to control all aspects of large-scale load testing projects, including resource allocation and scheduling, from a centralised location accessible via the Web. This centralised approach provides a streamlined and consistent testing process, which can reduce resource costs and increase operating efficiency.

With ActiveTestT, Mercury Interactive`s hosted load testing service, customers benefit from the expertise of seasoned load testing experts who develop and run tests, from the company`s nine load server farms, located at Tier 1 ISPs worldwide. During the load test, ActiveTest experts, in conjunction with the customer, can quickly identify performance bottlenecks, pinpoint their causes and then fine-tune the performance of the sites to achieve the best possible user experience.