Inseminoid is a sci-fi horror movie directed by Norman J. Warren and released in 1981. The movie starts with a group of archaeologists on a remote planet called Xeno 1. The group is there to collect samples and assess whether the planet can be colonized by humans. However, they start experiencing strange incidents that eventually escalate to a fight for survival.

One of the researchers, Sandy (played by Judy Geeson), is impregnated by an alien creature. The creature enters her body and takes control of her mind, turning her into a lethal killing machine. She sets out to eliminate other members of the team in order to protect her unborn offspring. The rest of the team tries to fight back, but they soon realize that they are facing a formidable enemy.

The main character of the movie is a man named Mark (played by Robin Clarke). Mark is the boyfriend of Sandy and has a strong emotional connection to her, which makes it difficult for him when he realizes that she has turned against the team. Mark is smart and resourceful, and he does his best to protect himself and others from Sandy's attacks.

Another prominent character in the movie is Kate (played by Stephanie Beacham). Kate is a scientist and a no-nonsense type of person. She is focused on her research and does not let her emotions cloud her judgment. She becomes a leader figure when things start to fall apart, rallying the others and coming up with a plan to deal with the alien threat.

The movie has a dark and eerie atmosphere, with the setting of the remote planet adding to the feeling of isolation and danger. The practical effects used are very effective, with the alien creature being particularly impressive. The acting is decent, with Robin Clarke and Stephanie Beacham delivering solid performances.

Inseminoid is a movie that mixes sci-fi with horror, and manages to do it well. The concept of an alien creature impregnating a human and taking control of their mind is a classic horror trope, but the movie puts its own spin on it by setting it in a sci-fi context. The movie is not particularly original, but it still manages to be entertaining.

One criticism of the movie is that the pacing can be slow at times. The movie takes its time to build up the tension, which can be good for some viewers but might be a turn off for others. Also, some of the character motivations can be a bit unclear, which can make it hard to fully invest in their fates.

Overall, Inseminoid is a decent sci-fi horror movie. It has its flaws, but it also has some effective scares and a dark atmosphere. It is not a movie that will blow your mind, but it is a solid entry in the genre and worth a watch for fans of sci-fi horror.