LOS ANGELES MARSHALL BRICKMAN, who shared a 1977 Academy Award with Woody Allen for the screenplay of “Annie Hall,” will begin directing his first movie, “Simon,” on Feb. 26 in New York.

“Simon,” from an original script by Mr. Brickman, is, he says, “a contemporary comedy with bleak overtones about outer space, inner space and why nothing works. And I don't mean just the toaster. It's about why nothing works from the toaster to the government”

Alan Arkin will play the title character, whom Mr. Brickman describes as “a very intelligent fellow in the academic world whom life has passed by. He finds himself in a situation where all his best hopes and worst fears are realised.”

“Simon's” leading lady has not yet been cast, but the movie features Austin Pendleton, Ann Wedgeworth, Max Wright and, in a rare acting appearance, Richard Foreman, director of the avant‐garde Ontological Hysteric Theater, who also directed “The Threepenny Opera” for Joseph Papp.

Mr. Brickman, who has had “no sleep for the last six days,” hopes that his terrors come simply from being a first‐time director.

At Least There's Chinese Food

“I don't know when to worry about different things, so I'm worrying about everything at the same time,” he says. “I'm worrying about the script and the actors and the buttons on the costumes. At least the movie will be shot within a 50‐mile radius of New York, so we can all sleep in our own beds or the beds of friends. And we can eat Chinese food. I don't think a good movie can be made without Chinese food.”

Mr. Brickman, who is co‐author of “Sleeper” and the movie Woody Allen will release in April — known very tentatively as “Manhattan” — has absorbed a little of Mr. Allen's paranoia. He squirms when asked for specific details about the plot of “Simon.” Keeping financial information secret is not his concern, however, and he is happy to concede that “Simon's” budget is $3.5 million, “or just enough to buy lunch in New York.”

One Problem Solved

The film is being produced for Orion Pictures by Martin Bregman ('Serpico,” “Dog Day Afternoon”), who call?. it “a stunning subject.” What does that mean? “Oh,” says Mr. Brickman, “it means hers the film's producer.”

Mr. Brickman expects to survive his first movie “if I don't drown in the infinite sea of meaningless details.” He thinks that “the mystique of the director is a little bit overrated” and he has, he feels, solved the most important problem of a novice director “by hiring a good cameraman, Adam Holender, who shot ‘Midnight Cowboy.’”