Research Jobs vacancy notification announced by Gauhati University, Gauhati, Assam for the 2023-2024 academic calendar year. Eligible candidates may apply through email.

Date Posted: 17th October 2023

Hiring Organization: Gauhati University

Organization Profile: Gauhati University was incorporated by an Act of 1947. It started functioning on 26 January 1948 as an affiliating, teaching and residential university in a few temporary buildings in Guwahati, with K. K. Handique as the first Vice-Chancellor. Phanidhar Dutta, Sailandhar Rajkhowa and Sarat Kumar Dutta were selected as the Registrar, Treasurer and Secretary of University Classes respectively. The emblem of the University, selected from among many submitted, was designed by T. Mukherjee, a textile designer of Ahmedabad. Two Sanskrit words inscribed on it – Vidyaya Sadhayeta (meaning achievement through learning) – indicate the motto of the University.

Job Title:

Research Associate

Research Assistant

Field Investigator

Employment Type: Temporary

Project Title: Pratan Mantri Ujjwal: An Impact Assessment in Relation to the Life of Women in Assam and West Bengal

Sponsored by: ICSSR

Department: Geography

Essential qualifications: As per norms.

Research Associate: Post Graduate in Geography/ Economics/ Sociology/ Statistics with NET/SET qualification having knowledge in using SPSS, MATLAB, etc. (Preference will be given to the candidate with a Ph.D degree).

Research Assistant: Postgraduate in Geography/ Economics/ Sociology/ Statistics having experience in data collection an experiential knowledge of data analysis in Microsoft Excel, etc.

Field Investigator: Postgraduate in Geography having some experience and interest in field data collection in different place of respective states.

Job Location: Guwahati, Assam

Fellowship:

Research Associate: Rs. 40,000/- per month

Research Assistant: Rs. 32,000/- per month

Field Investigator: Rs. 30,000/- per month

Apply Mode: Email

Last Date: Within 5 days from the date of advertisement

Organization Website: www.gauhati.ac.in

How to Apply: lnterested candidates may submit their application with bio-data supported by testimonials of various examinations (HSLC) examination onward) and other qualifications/ experiences by email to the Project coordinator within five days from the date of advertisement.

Email ID: [email protected]

Organization Address:

Gauhati University,

Gopinath Bardoloi Nagar

Guwahati 781014

Assam, India

For Detailed Advertisement (Read Carefully): Click Here