Gauhati University is one of the premier institutions of higher education in Northeast India and one of the most sought-after postgraduate institutions. We have been a top ranking institute (placed within top 1.12% of all institutes, as per NIRF rankings) for six years in a row and is a NAAC A-Grade institution. In the recent NIRF 2021 rankings, we are placed at the top spot above all universities in the Northeast India. We are also the most diversified in our academics among all other institutions of higher education in the Northeast. This year, we have been selected for the prestigious NSS Award for the year 2019-20, which is being received by the Honourable Vice Chancellor of GU and the Programme Coordinator of NSS Cell, GU from the Honourable President of India at the Rashtrapati Bhavan, on 24th September, 2021. GU is among the two univetsities selected for this award in the entire country. Visit our GUWeb page for more information about these rankings, campus, streets, establishments, facilities etc.

Great Sanskrit scholar, Indologist and philanthropist Krishna Kanta Handiqui was the founder Vice Chancellor of Gauhati University. Some very illustrious sons and daughters of Assam have been our alumni which includes none other than Bharat Ratna Dr Bhupen Hazarika, noted litterateur and Gyanpeeth Award Winner Mamoni Raisom Goswami, eminent poet Dr Nirmal Prabha Bordoloi, famous academician Dr Maheswar Neog, prominent literary figure Dr Banikanta Kakati, academician, researcher of folklore, singer and lyricist Dr Birendra Nath Dutta to name a few. Other renowned alumni include well known personalities such as Padmasree Dr Jitendra Nath Gosawmi, an alumnus of the Physics Department, who has been the Chief Scientist of Chandrayaan Mission and also a Bhatnagar Awardee, and the former Chief Election Commissioner Sri Harishankar Brahma. Gauhati University has been also Alma Mater to other famous personalities like former Chief Ministers of Assam, Sri Prafulla Kumar Mahanta, Late Sri Tarun Gogoi, Sri Sarbananda Sonowal, and present Honourable Chief Minister of Assam, Dr Himanta Biswa Sarma. You can visit our alumni website at https://alumni.gauhati.ac.in to know about our alumni.

Being the oldest and the largest university in the entire Northeast, the university represents the academic and cultural background of the region, on which the other academic institutions of Northeast India started their journey. Being the pioneer educational institute, it extends its hand holding support to all subsequent academic institutions in this region.

Gauhati University has been serving as the Think Tank for development of entire Assamese Society throughout the history of the university.