This story is available exclusively to Business Insider subscribers. Become an Insider and start reading now. Have an account? .

"American Pie" was released in 1999 and created an entire new genre: the teen sex comedy.

While it hasn't aged in the best way, it spawned an entire franchise and jump-started many careers.

Jim's dad, played by Eugene Levy, turns 75 on December 17.

Advertisement

Jason Biggs played Jim Levenstein, a typical awkward high schooler with an affection for apple pie.

Biggs had only appeared in three films before securing the lead role in "American Pie" in 1999, though he had been nominated for a Daytime Emmy for his performance in "As the World Turns."

He reprised his role as Jim in 2001's "American Pie 2" and 2003's "American Wedding," in addition to appearing in films like "Loser," "Prozac Nation," "Jersey Girl," and "Eight Below."

Advertisement

Biggs, 43, is best-known now for his role as Larry in "Orange Is the New Black."

Biggs is mainly known for his TV roles now — he starred in 13 episodes of "Mad Love" on CBS before it got canceled in 2011.

Soon after, he secured the role of Larry, the fiancé of main character Piper, on one of Netflix's first original series, "Orange Is the New Black." He appeared in 22 episodes across four seasons.

Biggs then tried another sitcom, "Outmatched," which was canceled after one season in March 2020. He now hosts a game show on Fox called "Cherries Wild."

With the rest of the cast, he returned for 2012's "American Reunion."

Since 2008, Biggs has been married to fellow actress and "My Best Friend's Girl" co-star Jenny Mollen. They have two sons.

Advertisement

Alyson Hannigan played Michelle, another high school student who had some interesting experiences at band camp.

By the time "American Pie" was released in 1999, Hannigan was already a teen icon for her role as Willow on "Buffy the Vampire Slayer" for two years. She'd play Willow for the rest of the series until its end in 2003. She also appeared in three episodes of its spin-off, "Angel."

Hannigan also appeared in "American Pie 2" and "American Wedding," as well as "Boys and Girls" with her "American Pie" co-star Jason Biggs.

Advertisement

Hannigan, 47, starred on "How I Met Your Mother" from 2005 to 2014.

Soon after "Buffy" ended in 2003, Hannigan began starring on "How I Met Your Mother" ("HIMYM") in 2005 as Lily Aldrin. She appeared in over 200 episodes and was one of the show's core five stars alongside Josh Radnor, Cobie Smulders, Neil Patrick Harris, and her on-screen husband Jason Segel.

Since 2016, Hannigan has hosted the magic competition series "Penn & Teller: Fool Us." She also hosted "Girl Scout Cookie Championship" in 2020. Hannigan also co-hosts "Adorableness," a spin-off of "Ridiculousness," on MTV.

On the acting front, Hannigan has a voice role in the Disney Channel cartoon "Fancy Nancy," and she played Kim Possible's mother Dr. Ann Possible in the 2019 live-action adaptation of "Kim Possible." Hannigan also reprised the role of Michelle in "American Wedding."

Hannigan has been married to her "Buffy" co-star Alexis Denisof since 2003 — he also had a role on "HIMYM" as Sandy, a co-worker of Smulder's character, Robin — and they have two children together.

Advertisement

Thomas Ian Nicholas played Kevin, Jim's only friend with a steady girlfriend.

Before "American Pie," Nicholas had co-starred with future A-listers Kate Winslet and Daniel Craig in the 1995 box-office bomb "A Kid in King Arthur's Court."

After "American Pie 2" and "American Wedding," Nicholas played Frank Sinatra, Jr., in the TV movie "Stealing Sinatra." He also appeared in "Halloween: Resurrection" and the unofficial "American Psycho" sequel "The Rules of Attraction."

Advertisement

Thomas Ian Nicholas, 41, is now an actor and producer.

Besides "American Reunion" in 2012, Nicholas has appeared in various indie films. He played Abbie Hoffman in "The Chicago 8," (a story which would later be adapted in Aaron Sorkin's "The Trial of the Chicago 7" starring Sacha Baron Cohen as Hoffman). He also played Walt Disney in the 2015 biopic "Walt Before Mickey," Martin Scorsese in "Zeroville," and he produced and starred in the 2021 film "Adverse."

On the TV front, he recurred in the 2014 Fox series "Red Band Society."

Nicholas has been married to musician DJ Colette since 2007. They have two children.

Advertisement

Kevin's girlfriend, Vicky, was played by Tara Reid.

Reid was one of the more established cast members of "American Pie," as she had made her film debut over 10 years prior in the 1987 adaptation of the Stephen King novel "Salem's Lot." She also played Bunny in "The Big Lebowski" in 1998.

In the '90s and early 2000s, besides "American Pie 2," Reid appeared in multiple classics, including "Cruel Intentions," "Josie and the Pussycats," and "Van Wilder." She also appeared in 11 episodes of "Scrubs" from 2003 to 2005.

Reid was involved in one of the most 2000s relationships of all time: She dated "TRL" host Carson Daly from 2000 to 2001.

Advertisement

Reid, 46, appeared in six "Sharknado" films from 2013 to 2018.

Reid has mainly stuck to TV films over the last few years, most famously as part of the "Sharknado" franchise, playing April Wexler in all six films. She co-stars with another iconic actor of the '80s and '90s, "Beverly Hills, 90210" star Ian Ziering.

She also had her own reality series on E! from 2005 to 2006 called "Taradise." In 2011, she appeared on the UK version of "Celebrity Big Brother."

Reid played herself in a tongue-in-cheek cameo on "The Boys" in 2019. She was also in "American Reunion" in 2012.

Advertisement

Chris Klein played the jock of the friend group, Oz.

The same year he played the lovable himbo Oz in "American Pie," Klein played a similar character in "Election" opposite Reese Witherspoon.

Klein reprised the role of Oz in "American Pie 2," but he skipped "American Wedding." Instead, he appeared in the 2002 war drama "We Were Soldiers" and the 2003 film "The United States of Leland" with Ryan Gosling and Don Cheadle.

He also appeared in the 2005 rom-com "Just Friends" with Ryan Reynolds and Amy Smart.

Klein dated fellow teen star Katie Holmes from 2000 to 2005.

Advertisement

Klein, 42, currently stars on the Netflix series "Sweet Magnolias."

Klein's two biggest roles recently are Cicada in the fifth season of "The Flash" in 2018 to 2019, and as Bill Townsend in "Sweet Magnolias," which was renewed for a second season in July 2020. He plays the ex-husband of JoAnna Swisher's character, Maddie.

He also had a voice role in the 2021 animated film "Ron's Gone Wrong."

Klein has been married to travel agent Laina Rose Thyfault since 2015. They have two children.

Advertisement

Mena Suvari played Oz's love interest, the choir girl Heather.

The same year that Suvari appeared in "American Pie," she also appeared in that year's Oscars' best picture winner, "American Beauty," as the girl-next-door Angela — you may remember her iconic rose petal bathtub scene.

She also appeared in "Loser" alongside Jason Biggs, "American Virgin," "American Pie 2," "Beauty Shop," and "Rumor Has It" in the 2000s. In 2004, she appeared in seven episodes of "Six Feet Under" on HBO.

Advertisement

Suvari, 42, is now part of the "American Horror Story" universe as Elizabeth Short, aka the Black Dahlia.

In addition to "American Reunion," Suvari has continued to act in "American"-themed things — she appeared in two episodes of the first season of "American Horror Story" in 2011, and reprised the role in 2018's "American Horror Story: Apocalypse."

She's made various attempts at starring in TV series. She starred in the WE tv series "South of Hell," which was canceled after eight episodes in 2015. Suvari also starred in the 2018 Paramount+ series "American Woman" with Alicia Silverstone, which was canceled after one season. It was based on the childhood of "Real Housewives of Beverly Hills" star Kyle Richards.

Along with her "American Pie" co-star Chris Klein, Suvari had a small voice role in "Ron's Gone Wrong." Next year, she'll star in the Ronald Reagan biopic "Reagan" as the president's first wife, Jane Wyman. She is also set to appear in the thriller "Anne, with Love" with Danielle Harris.

In 2018, Suvari married her third husband, set decorator Michael Hope. She gave birth to their first child in April 2021.

Advertisement

Eddie Kaye Thomas played the wise-beyond-his-years Finch.

Thomas, like some of his co-stars, got his start in soap operas, appearing in "One Life to Live" in 1994. He also appeared in some other '90s classics like "Two Guys and a Girl," "Felicity," and "Law & Order."

Cinematically, he appeared in "American Pie 2" and "American Wedding," as well as "Freddy Got Fingered," and "Harold & Kumar Go to White Castle," among others.

Thomas also appeared in two episodes of "The X-Files," and he was a series regular in the short-lived WB sitcom "Off Centre" alongside Sean Maguire, John Cho, Lauren Stamile, and Jason George.

Advertisement

Thomas, 41, starred in the CBS series "Scorpion" from 2014 to 2018.

Since 2005, Thomas has had a recurring role on "American Dad!" as Barry Robinson, a role which also crossed over onto "Family Guy" for an episode.

He also starred in a sitcom called "'Til Death" from 2006 to 2010 on Fox. Soon after, he began starring on the gone-before-its-time HBO comedy "How to Make It in America" from 2010 to 2011 alongside Bryan Greenberg, Kid Cudi, Victor Rasuk, and Lake Bell.

From 2014 to 2018, he played Toby on the CBS procedural "Scorpion," which co-starred Katharine McPhee and Elyes Gabel.

In addition to reprising his role as Finch in "American Reunion," he also returned as Andy for the two "Harold & Kumar" sequels, "Harold & Kumar Escape from Guantanamo Bay" and "A Very Harold & Kumar 3D Christmas." Thomas also had a role in 2008's "Nick & Norah's Infinite Playlist."

Advertisement

Seann William Scott had a memorable role as the group's wild card, Stifler.

Stifler was easily the breakout character from "American Pie," which led to Scott getting cast in other teen comedies like "Road Trip" and "Dude, Where's My Car?" as well as mainstream films like "Final Destination" and "Old School." Scott even hosted "SNL" in 2001 ahead of "American Pie 2."

Scott also appeared in "American Wedding," "The Dukes of Hazzard," a few "Ice Age" films, and "Southland Tales" alongside Dwayne Johnson.

Scott also hosted the 2003 MTV Movie Awards.

Advertisement

Scott, 45, is set to star in a new Fox sitcom called "Welcome to Flatch."

Scott has ventured into more serious roles in addition to his comedic ones. He appeared in the 2019 horror film "Bloodline" as a murderous social worker and played an abusive stepfather in the 2019 drama "Already Gone."

He also starred in Courteney Cox's directorial debut, "Just Before I Go."

However, he hasn't totally left comedy behind. Scott has appeared in films like "Movie 43," "Goon," and its sequel "Goon: Last of the Enforcers," and, of course, "American Wedding." He also had a memorable episode of "It's Always Sunny in Philadelphia" as Country Mac.

Perhaps most famously, Scott replaced Clayne Crawford in the "Lethal Weapon" TV series after Crawford was fired. Scott played a new character, Wesley Cole, in the third and final season. Now, he's set to star in the upcoming Fox mockumentary series "Welcome to Flatch."

Scott married interior designer Olivia Korenberg in 2019.

Advertisement

Shannon Elizabeth played foreign exchange student Nadia, as part of the film's cringiest plot line.

Elizabeth's first big role was in "American Pie," and it led to her becoming a sex symbol of the era. She played similar roles in "Scary Movie," "Jay and Silent Bob Strike Back," and "Love Actually." Elizabeth also had a memorable role in "Johnson Family Vacation." She also reprised the role of Nadia in "American Pie 2."

Elizabeth appeared in nine episodes of "That '70s Show," and she also starred in "Cuts," a spin-off of "One on One," on UPN until it was canceled in 2006.

Advertisement

Elizabeth, 48, is still acting — she's also a professional poker player.

In the late 2000s, Elizabeth branched out from acting and began a career as a professional poker player, and a pretty good one at that. Around the same time, in 2008, she appeared on "Dancing With the Stars" partnered with Derek Hough. They came in sixth place and dated after the show.

Elizabeth returned for both "American Reunion" and "Jay and Silent Bob Reboot" in 2012 and 2019, respectively.

Advertisement

Jennifer Coolidge played the iconic role of Stifler's mom.

Coolidge had been steadily working before "American Pie," but this film was her true breakout and led to her securing roles in "Legally Blonde" and "Legally Blonde 2," "A Cinderella Story," "Best in Show," "Zoolander," "A Mighty Wind," "Click," and more. She also reprised her role as Stifler's mom in "American Pie 2" and "American Wedding."

She also appeared in episodes of "Friends," "Sex and the City," and had a starring role in "Joey."

Advertisement

Coolidge, 60, was nominated for a Golden Globe for her performance in "The White Lotus" in 2021.

Finally, Coolidge is starting to get the respect she's deserved for being a true comedy icon. In addition to her Golden Globe-nominated performance in "The White Lotus," she starred in Netflix's gay Christmas film "Single All the Way," had a recurring role in "Gravity Falls," and appeared the Oscar-winning film "Promising Young Woman." She also had a role in Ariana Grande's music video for "Thank U, Next."

Like the rest of the cast, Coolidge returned for "American Wedding" in 2012.

Coolidge is next set to appear in the Jennifer Lopez/Josh Duhamel action rom-com "Shotgun Wedding" in 2022, and, of course, "Legally Blonde 3."

Advertisement

Eugene Levy played Jim's unnamed dad.

Levy is the one who catches Jim ... enjoying ... an apple pie, in one of the film's most famous scenes.

Far and away, Levy is the one actor who has appeared in the most "American Pie" films — in addition to the main sequels, Levy appears in four of the direct-to-DVD spin-offs, including "Beta House" and "The Naked Mile."

Before he was Jim's dad, though, Levy already had an impressive résumé, with films like "Father of the Bride" and its sequel, "National Lampoon's Vacation," "Splash," and, famously, "Waiting for Guffman" under his belt.

After "American Pie," he appeared in even more comedic classics like "Best in Show," "Serendipity," "A Mighty Wind" (which won him a Grammy Award), and more. To a certain population, he may also be well-known for his role as the villain of the Mary-Kate and Ashley Olsen film "New York Minute." He also appeared in "Cheaper by the Dozen 2."

Advertisement

Levy, who turns 75 on December 17, co-starred with his son Dan in "Schitt's Creek" from 2015 to 2020.

What else is there to say about "Schitt's Creek" that hasn't already been said? It became a complete phenomenon and almost entirely swept the 2020 Emmys, with the four members of the Rose family each winning their category, including Levy, the first time that's ever happened.

As a producer and co-creator, Levy also won the trophy for Outstanding Comedy Series.

Levy has also recently been in "Finding Dory" in 2016, and he had a small role in Kacey Musgraves' film "Star-Crossed," based on her 2021 album.

The actor has been married to producer Deborah Divine since 1977. They share two kids: his "Schitt's Creek" co-stars Dan and Sarah Levy.

Advertisement

Natasha Lyonne played Vicky's more experienced friend Jessica.

The same year as "American Pie," Lyonne starred in one of the most iconic films of her career to date, "But I'm a Cheerleader," which has become an important piece of queer cinema.

Throughout the late '90s and 2000s, Lyonne also appeared in "Detroit Rock City" alongside her then-boyfriend Edward Furlong, "Scary Movie 2," "Kate & Leopold," and "Blade: Trinity." She also appeared in "American Pie 2."

Advertisement

Lyonne, 42, is gearing up for the second season of her acclaimed Netflix series "Russian Doll."

In 2011, Lyonne appeared in an episode of "New Girl," which kicked off a resurgence of her mainstream career. She appeared in "American Reunion" in 2012, and the following year began starring in Netflix's "Orange Is the New Black" as an inmate, Nicky. She appeared in 81 episodes of the series until its conclusion in 2019.

Lyonne has also appeared in episodes of "Portlandia," "Girls," "Inside Amy Schumer," "Documentary Now!," and "Big Mouth," and in films such as "Sleeping With Other People," "Honey Boy," "Ad Astra," "John Mulaney and the Sack Lunch Bunch," and "The United States vs. Billie Holiday."

But, most famously, Lyonne co-created, co-wrote, produced, directed, and starred in Netflix's time-loop series "Russian Doll," which originally aired in 2019. Fans are eagerly awaiting season two.

In addition to "Russian Doll," Lyonne has also directed episodes of "Awkwafina Is Nora from Queens," "Shrill," "High Fidelity," and Sarah Cooper's comedy special "Sarah Cooper: Everything's Fine."

Lyonne began dating "SNL" alum Fred Armisen in 2014, but the two appear to have broken up.

Advertisement

Chris Owen played the high school nerd, Sherman.

Owen has appeared in many of your favorite '90s films, like "Can't Hardly Wait," "She's All That," and "October Sky."

He was also in "American Pie 2" and "American Pie Presents: Band Camp," making him the only other actor besides Eugene Levy to cross over into the direct-to-DVD sequels.

Owen additionally appeared in multiple National Lampoon movies, including "Van Wilder," "Gold Diggers," "Dorm Daze," and "Dorm Daze 2."

Advertisement

Owen, 41, reprised his role as Sherman in "American Reunion."

Like the rest of the gang, Sherman returned for one last ride in "American Reunion."

He's been in various other films, but most recently he reunited with "American Pie" co-star Tara Reid for 2018's "The Last Sharknado: It's About Time." He also appeared the holiday TV film "A Cape Cod Christmas" in 2021.

Advertisement

John Cho is simply credited as "MILF Guy."

Yes, the future movie star appeared in a background role of "American Pie" (and "American Pie 2" and "American Wedding").

Soon after, though, Cho's career took off in a big way after he began playing Harold in the "Harold & Kumar" films, which began in 2004.

He also co-starred in "Off Centre" with Finch of "American Pie" from 2001 to 2002, and he recurred in "Kitchen Confidential" from 2005 to 2006.

Advertisement

Cho, 49, starred in Netflix's recently canceled adaptation of "Cowboy Bebop."

In 2009, Cho was cast as Hikaru Sulu (a role originated by George Takei) in the 2009 reboot of "Star Trek" starring Chris Pine. He also appeared in the two sequels, "Into Darkness" and "Beyond".

The same year as "Trek," Cho starred in the ABC drama "FlashForward" from 2009 to 2010, which developed something of a cult following before it was canceled.

Cho also starred in the 2012 reboot of "Total Recall," the popular 2018 thriller "Searching," and the 2020 reboot of "The Grudge."

On the TV front, Cho starred in the beloved-yet-short-lived sitcom "Selfie" alongside Karen Gillan. He also popped up in four episodes of "Difficult People" and starred in the reboot series "The Exorcist" on Fox.

Most recently, he starred in the highly anticipated live-action adaptation of the anime "Cowboy Bebop," but it was canceled by Netflix after a few weeks.

Cho has been married to actress Kerri Higuchi since 2006. They have two children.

Advertisement

Eli Marienthal played Stifler's younger brother.

The late '90s were big for Marienthal — in addition to "American Pie," he also appeared in the Michael Keaton film "Jack Frost," voiced the lead role of Hogarth in "The Iron Giant," and was in "Slums of Beverly Hills," which co-starred his fellow "American Pie" alum Natasha Lyonne.

Marienthal went on to appear in "American Pie 2," "The Country Bears," "Batman: Mystery of the Batwoman" as Robin, and "Confessions of a Teenage Drama Queen," which is his final movie role to date.

He also starred the eight aired episodes of the sitcom "Tucker," which aired from October 2000 to March 2001 on NBC.

Advertisement

Marienthal, 35, is a co-director of Back to Earth, a backpacking program for teenagers.

Marienthal didn't appear on-screen from 2004 to 2017, when he began starring on a web-series called "The North Pole," which ended in 2019.

Now, he's a co-director of a wilderness program for teenagers called Back to Earth with his childhood friend Jesse Sachs. They founded the company in 2014. Marienthal is also a PhD candidate in geography at UC Berkeley.

Advertisement

Casey Affleck played Tom, Kevin's older brother.

Affleck was already well-known by the time he had a cameo in "American Pie" from his roles in "Chasing Amy" and "Good Will Hunting" alongside his real-life older brother, Ben Affleck.

He continued to appear in successful films like "Ocean's Eleven" and its two sequels, "Hamlet," and "The Assassination of Jesse James by the Coward Robert Ford," as the titular coward. He was nominated for an Oscar for the film.

Affleck also appeared in "American Pie 2."

Advertisement

Affleck, 46, won an Oscar in 2017 for "Manchester by the Sea."

Affleck directed and co-wrote the film "I'm Still Here" with Joaquin Phoenix in 2010, starting a new phase of his career. He went on to appear in successful films such as "ParaNorman," "Ain't Them Bodies Saints," "Interstellar," and "Manchester by the Sea," which earned him an Oscar.

In 2010, Affleck settled two claims of sexual harassment out of court for an undisclosed amount of money, which was brought up again in the wake of #MeToo and his Oscar win.

"I contributed to that unprofessional environment and I tolerated that kind of behavior from other people and I wish that I hadn't. And I regret a lot of that. I really did not know what I was responsible for as the boss. I don't even know if I thought of myself as the boss. But I behaved in a way and allowed others to behave in a way that was really unprofessional. And I'm sorry," Affleck told the Associated Press in 2018.

Since then, he has continued to work, appearing in films such as "Our Friend," "Every Breath You Take," and "Slingshot" in 2022.

He was married to actress Summer Phoenix (sister of Joaquin and River) from 2006 to 2017. They have two kids.

Read next

Movies

Advertisement