Everyday members and celebrity supporters alike came out in celebration of PETA’s 35th anniversary. It was a remarkable evening to acknowledge 35 years of cutting-edge campaigns that have brought about monumental change for animals.

The event—hosted by Anjelica Huston and Pamela Anderson, with more than 35 sponsors, including Gardein, Daiya, Veggie Grill, and MooShoes—featured a gourmet dinner, silent auction, and star-studded awards ceremony.

PETA honored activists and celebrities for their dedication to our animal rights campaigns around the world. PETA’s 35th anniversary honorees were recognized for contributions to specific issues within animal rights:

PETA’s 35th Anniversary Humanitarian Awardees

Alicia Silverstone

RZA

While accepting his award, RZA said, “It’s an award that does not aim to reflect my art—it instead reflects my heart.”

Bill Maher

Jason Biggs

Jason Biggs thanked an unlikely source in his acceptance speech—SeaWorld: “Thank you, SeaWorld. Without you, those gorgeous orcas would be free to swim with their families in the oceans they belong in. Instead, they are jailed in your horrible excuses for theme parks, and as a result, I get to stand up here accepting this award.”

Fred Willard

James Cromwell

Said James Cromwell, “Those who have no voice, no vote, no clout could not have a better champion. When push comes to shove, my money’s always on PETA!”

Jane Velez-Mitchell

Jillian Michaels

Kate del Castillo

Maggie Q

Marco Antonio Regil

Mary Matalin

Mike White

Noah Cyrus

Shaun Monson

Tommy Lee

To top off the night, Sir Paul McCartney and Beck gave performances that had everyone on their feet!

During his concert, McCartney told the audience, “When I first heard the name, that’s what appealed to me, People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals. I thought that was really a very dignified, very cool title. They’ve got 35 years of saving so many animals. And we love them.”

He performed a number of hits, including “Let It Be,” “Hey Jude,” “Lady Madonna,” “Drive My Car” (performed with Beck), and an animal rights–themed song that he wrote called “Looking for Changes.”

Some other celebrities who joined in the celebration included the following:

Ariane Sommer, Bellamy Young, Bryan Fuller, Carrie Ann Inaba, Catherine Hardwicke, Christen Press, Constance Marie, Courtney Stodden, Daniella Monet, Davey Havok, Denise Roberts, Diane Warren, Emily Deschanel, Geezer Butler, George Lopez, Ireland Baldwin, Joanna Krupa, Joaquin Phoenix , John Salley, Jon Ingle (aka “Lady Bunny”) , Jorja Fox, Kalel Kitten, Kesha, Kevin Nealon, Kym Johnson, Miranda Cosgrove, Moby , Molly Shannon, Naomi Grossman, Nat Wolff , Otep Shamaya, Patrik Baboumian, Paula Poundstone , Rob Zombie, Russell Simmons, Sabrina Carpenter, Sela Ward, Seth Green, Simone Reyes, Sunny Leone, Tony Hawk, Tony Kanal , William H. Macy

Here are some more photos from the event: