The show formerly known as the MTV Movie Awards took a pretty dramatic left turn on Sunday night (May 7), reinventing itself not only as a dual Movie and TV Awards show, but one with a fairly pronounced social conscience. The results were occasionally mixed for MTV’s second-biggest night, but it certainly made the show an interesting sign of the times. Here were ten of the the best and worst moments from the night that was.

Best: Moonlight Winning “Best Kiss”

Probably not quite as important as the movie winning the Oscar for best picture, but for an award that 15 years ago went to Sean William Scott and Jason Biggs for torturedly smooching on a dare in American Pie 2 to now go to such a legitimately groundbreaking same-sex kiss maybe represents its own kind of progress. Nice reaction shots of Ashton Sanders and Jharrel Jerome boogieing to Big Sean later, too.

Worst: Adam Devine as host

The millennial answer to Jack Black, apparently, which probably means this won’t even be the last time we have him hosting this thing.

Best: Vin Diesel’s Fast and the Furious Generation Award Acceptance Speech

“In 2002, I was standing on this stage and MTV had given Paul Walker and I an award for Best Duo — and now 15 years later, I’m with my whole family and you’re giving us the generation award.” Simple but effective, and it’s hard not to get a little misty-eyed at all the “brother Pablo” reminiscences.

Best: Computer Games’ “Every Single Night” as background music

Can we make this song a hit already? The Criss Bros. should be playing this song live at the VMAs in a few months.

Worst: The endless acceptance speeches

Hard to fault them for their passion or their message, but you’d think Emma Watson and Taraji P. Henson were getting Nobel Peace Prizes for how invested and lengthy their acceptance addresses were. By night’s end, MTV was definitely switching to their rapid-fire nominee video packages to still try to meet their 10:10 end time — though Devine’s rambling Stranger Things parody didn’t help much either.

Best: The non-gendered award categories

It might’ve gotten a little self-congratulatory at points, but dropping the gender qualifications for acting categories — a pretty archaic tradition when you actually bother to think about it — does represent a cultural moment worth noting. Emma Watson claimed the evolution “says something about how we perceive the human experience,” and much to the surprise of people who still remember the MTV Movie Awards for Jim Carrey preaching Foghat to the ’90s kids, she’s probably not far off.

Worst: The La La Light/Moonland joke

Because if Amy Schumer and Goldie Hawn hadn’t made it, the takeaway from this MTV Movie and TV Awards would’ve undoubtedly been “Good show, but not becoming the 77th consecutive award show to parody the Oscars’ best picture disaster was a real missed opportunity.”

Best: “Thank you France for making the right decision.”

After making a somewhat awkward joke about Donald J. Trump (“The J stands for Jesus”), best host recipient Trevor Noah summed up public reaction to the biggest headline in world news this weekend with rare acceptance-speech economy.

Worst: That mostly incomprehensible Transformers: The Last Knight Trailer

Mark Wahlberg looked kinda pissed that he had to be there, too.

Best: The Stranger Things Kids

Still cute.