Blue Ribbon Baking Championship | Official Trailer | Netflix

For over 100 years, the American state fair has been the proving ground for the most wildly talented bakers across the United States. Now, for the first time ever, Blue Ribbon winning bakers from state fairs across the nation get the chance to compete against each other in the Blue Ribbon Baking Championship. Featuring host Jason Biggs and co-host and judge Sandra Lee, 10 award-winning pastry masters from across the US gather to compete in the biggest blue ribbon bake off yet - and the chance to win $100,000. Former White House pastry chef, Bill Yosses, and award-winning artisan baker, Bryan Ford, also serve as judges. Only the baker with the most delicious, inventive, and masterful delicacies will win the nation's ultimate blue ribbon.

Watch on Netflix: https://www.netflix.com/title/81701569

OFFICIAL TRAILER DEBUT & DATE ANNOUNCEMENT

BLUE RIBBON BAKING CHAMPIONSHIP

Series Premiere Date: August 9, 2024

Synopsis: For over 100 years, the American state fair has been the proving ground for the most wildly talented bakers across the United States. Now, for the first time ever, Blue Ribbon winning bakers from state fairs across the nation get the chance to compete against each other in the Blue Ribbon Baking Championship. Featuring host Jason Biggs and co-host and judge Sandra Lee, 10 award- winning pastry masters from across the

US gather to compete in the biggest blue ribbon bake off yet - and the chance to win $100,000. Former White House pastry chef, Bill Yosses, and award-winning artisan baker, Bryan Ford, also serve as judges. Only the baker with the most delicious, inventive, and masterful delicacies will win the nation's ultimate blue ribbon.

Format: Unscripted Series (8 x 45 mins episodes)

Hosts: Sandra Lee, Jason Biggs

Judges: Sandra Lee, Bryan Ford, and Bill Yosses

Executive Producers: Sandra Lee, Brien Meagher, Rhett Bachner, Aliyah Silverstein, Patrick J. Doody, Tanya Linton, Mike Sheerin

Production Company: B17 Entertainment