Visit NBCNews.com for breaking news, world news, and news about the economy

Actor Jason Biggs stopped by this morning's TODAY to tlak about returning to Broadway to star in the prize-winning play The Heidi Chronicles opposite Elisabeth Moss. The play focuses on feminist issues and ponders whether women can have it all. Watch the appearance below!

The first Broadway revival of the Pulitzer Prize and Tony Award-winning Wendy Wassersteinplay The Heidi Chronicles is now in previews, with an official opening on Thursday, March 19, 2015, at the Music Box Theatre (239 West 45th Street). BroadwayWorld brings you a FIRST LOOK at the cast in action below!

The show stars Golden Globe-winner and six-time Emmy Award-nominee Elisabeth Moss ("Mad Men," "Top of the Lake," Speed-the-Plow) in the title role. Moss is joined by Emmy Award-nomineeJason Biggs("Orange Is The New Black," American Pie) and Tony Award-nominee Bryce Pinkham (A Gentleman's Guide to Love and Murder, Bloody BloodyAndrew Jackson). In addition, Ali Ahn will play the role of Susan Johnston, Leighton Bryanwill play the roles of Jill/Debbie/Lisa, Tracee Chimo (Lips Together, Teeth Apart, "Orange Is The New Black," Bad Jews) will play the roles of Fran/Molly/Betsy/April, Elise Kibler will play the roles of Becky/Clara/Denise, and Andy Truschinski will play the roles of Chris Boxer/Mark/Waiter/Ray. Tony Award-winner Pam MacKinnon (Edward Albee's A Delicate Balance, Edward Albee's Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?, Clybourne Park) directs. The creative team includes scenic design by John Lee Beatty, costume design byJessica Pabst, lighting design by Japhy Weideman, sound design byJill BC Du Boff, projection design by Peter Nigrini, hair and make-up design by Leah J. Loukas, and casting by Daniel Swee. The Heidi Chronicles is the poignant coming-of-age story of three iconic decades of American culture: the 60s, 70s, and 80s. Through Heidi Holland, now a successful art historian, Wendy Wassersteinlooks back on the promises of a generation in the Pulitzer and Tony Award-winning work that established her voice in the canon of quintessential theater forever. In its first Broadway revival, a bold reimagining led by Tony Award-winning directorPam MacKinnon(Edward Albee's Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?), and Golden Globe-winner Elisabeth Moss("Mad Men") in the title role, The Heidi Chronicles charts 19 characters through 13 scenes in 3 decades and 4 cities, as three unlikely friends come to realize that the fight for what you believe in can bring you a long way... maybe.