Host Bryan Ford is joined by Chef Michael Carter AKA Chef Mike. Known locally as “The Flavor Regulator,” Mike is the Executive Chef at Down North Pizza in North Philadelphia. Mike started his chef journey as an inmate in prison, selling improvised meals to his fellow detainees. Now he runs his own restaurant as part of the Down North Foundation, which provides jobs and resources to the formerly incarcerated. Mike’s restaurant has established itself as a cornerstone of the community with its events and free meals, and the thoughtful eye towards history and local culture on display in its cuisine and decor. Join Chef Mike and Bryan for a very special episode of The Flaky Biscuit as they enjoy one of Mike’s favorite meals, chicken and dumplings. Watch Bryan make his version and Subscribe: Youtube Recipe from today's episode can be found at Shondaland.com Join The Flaky Biscuit Community: Discord Chef Mike IG: @coolhandmiz Bryan Ford IG: @artisanbryan Check Out the Down North Foundation at www.downnorthfoundation.orgSee omnystudio.com/listener for privacy information.

Host Bryan Ford is joined by actor and comedian Jason Biggs. With an extensive acting career that began at the age of five, Jason is best known for playing Jim Levenstein in the American Pie comedy film series, Leonardo in the first two seasons of Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles, and Larry Bloom in the Netflix original series Orange Is the New Black. He also starred in Boys and Girls, Loser, Saving Silverman, Anything Else, Jersey Girl, Eight Below, Over Her Dead Body, and My Best Friend's Girl. For this episode, Jason asked Bryan to make him a classic Italian-American dish that he eats every holiday season, stromboli. Watch Bryan make his version and Subscribe: Youtube Recipe from today's episode can be found at Shondaland.com Join The Flaky Biscuit Community: Discord Jason Biggs IG: @biggsjason Bryan Ford IG: @artisanbryan Don’t forget to check out your local food bank, volunteer or donate at feedingamerica.org.See omnystudio.com/listener for privacy information.

Host Bryan Ford is joined by Chef Roshara Sanders, also known as Chef Ro. Deployed to both Iraq and Afghanistan as a member of the 4th Engineer Battalion, Chef Ro started cooking professionally after she returned stateside and joined the 395th Combat Sustainment Support Battalion, where she cross trained as a food supply specialist. In 2016, NBC Black named Chef Roshara Sanders to their annual “28 Under 28” list, and in 2018 she was named to Forbes “30 Under 30.” In 2020, she became the first Black woman to be a chef instructor at the Culinary Institute of America in New York. She currently serves as a celebrity ambassador for Habitat for Humanity International. Today’s meal takes Chef Ro back to holidays with her Puerto Rican step family. Watch Bryan make his version and Subscribe: Youtube Recipe from today's episode can be found at Shondaland.com Join The Flaky Biscuit Community: Discord Chef Ro IG: @chefro137 Bryan Ford IG: @artisanbryan Support the National Restaurant Association Educational Foundation at chooserestaurants.orgSee omnystudio.com/listener for privacy information.

Host Bryan Ford is joined by Dan Pashman, host of The Sporkful podcast, and inventor of the pasta shape cascatelli. Dan is the creator of The Sporkful, which is a James Beard and Webby Award-winning podcast. The series and his pasta shape, cascatelli, were featured by the NY Times, NPR, CBS This Morning, People Magazine, Access Hollywood, and more. He’s also the creator and host of Cooking Channel's You're Eating It Wrong and a contributor to NPR and Milk Street Radio. Dan and his work have been featured on The Today Show, Radiolab, Guy's Grocery Games, NPR's Morning Edition, WTF with Marc Maron, Planet Money, Beat Bobby Flay, Freakonomics Radio, and more. Today he joins Bryan for his favorite holiday meal: latkes with cream and apple sauce. Watch Bryan make his version and Subscribe: Youtube Recipe from today's episode can be found at Shondaland.com Join The Flaky Biscuit Community: Discord Dan Pashman IG: @thesporkful Bryan Ford IG: @artisanbryan Don’t forget to check out the Suffolk YJCC at syjcc.orgSee omnystudio.com/listener for privacy information.

Host Bryan Ford is joined by artist and musician Mashonda Tifrere. After the release of her first album produced by Kanye West, Swizz Beatz, and Raphael Saadiq, Mashonda has been featured on and co-written many hits, as she’s worked alongside artists such as Jay-Z, DMX, and more. More recently, Mashonda partnered with Beyoncé’s BeyGOOD and Gucci’s Chime for Change in 2016 to launch Art LeadHER on International Women’s Day. Her mission in launching the organization was to combat gender bias and empower female artists and curators from around the world. Mashonda is also a Penguin Random House author, releasing “Blend: The Secret to Co-Parenting and Creating a Balanced Family,” in 2018. Watch Bryan make his version and Subscribe: Youtube Recipe from today's episode can be found at Shondaland.com Join The Flaky Biscuit Community: Discord Mashonda IG: @mashondatifrere Bryan Ford IG: @artisanbryan Don’t forget to check out Art LeadHER at artleadher.com.See omnystudio.com/listener for privacy information.

Host Bryan Ford is joined by comedian Hari Kondabolu. The NY Times called him “one of the most exciting political comics in stand-up today” in response to his 2018 Netflix special, Warn Your Relatives. His 2017 truTV documentary, The Problem with Apu, created a global conversation about race and representation, and is now used in high school, college and grad school curriculums around the country. Hari joins Bryan for a conversation about colonialism and civil rights over a thoroughly uncivil meal of krispies, cookes and mangos. Watch Bryan make his version and Subscribe: Youtube Recipe from today's episode can be found at Shondaland.com Join The Flaky Biscuit Community: Discord Hari Kondabolu IG: @harikondabolu Bryan Ford IG: @artisanbryan Don’t forget to check out The Innocence Project at innocenceproject.org.See omnystudio.com/listener for privacy information.

Host Bryan Ford is joined by cookbook author and LA Times food journalist— Ben Mims. Ben has written three cookbooks and has worked as a food editor and recipe developer for several food media publications, such as Lucky Peach, Food & Wine, Saveur, Food Network Magazine, and Buzzfeed/Tasty. Bryan and Ben get down on Deer Meat, a dish Ben’s father used to make using home grown beans hunted deer in his home state of Mississippi. Watch Bryan make his version and Subscribe: Youtube Recipe from today's episode can be found at Shondaland.com Join The Flaky Biscuit Community: Discord Ben Mim IG: @benbmims Bryan Ford IG: @artisanbryan To get involved with The Transgender Law Center visit trangenderlawcenter.org. See omnystudio.com/listener for privacy information.

Host Bryan Ford is joined by chef and TV personality, Ronnie Woo. Ronnie is the founder of The Delicious Cook, an LA-based private chef company that specializes in four-star dining experiences. His highly anticipated debut cookbook, Did You Eat Yet?, showcases the Asian-American cuisine he’s known for alongside charming personal notes. He was previously the chef and host of the cooking and relationship show, Food to Get You Laid, and he makes regular appearances on The Today Show, The Kelly Clarkson Show, Rachael Ray, Food Network Kitchen, among others. Recently, he appeared as a celebrity judge on Netflix's hit series Is It Cake?. Prior to his life as an author and celebrity chef, Ronnie earned his Masters in Marriage and Family Therapy, as well as a Masters in Business Administration, and was a model and personal trainer. Watch Bryan make his version and Subscribe: Youtube Recipe from today's episode can be found at Shondaland.com Join The Flaky Biscuit Community: Discord Ronnie Woo IG: @ronniecwoo Bryan Ford IG: @artisanbryan Visit SPCALA.com and NKLA.org to save a pet todaySee omnystudio.com/listener for privacy information.

Host Bryan Ford is joined by rapper and producer Kr3wcial. Kr3wcial is a New Orleans-based artist, and member of the acclaimed collective glbl wrmng. He’s performed at the world-renowned New Orleans Jazz & Heritage Festival, French Quarter Festival, BUKU Music + Art Project, and Pell’s national Am I Still Dreaming tour, as well as a sold-out appearance with Grammy-nominated Tank and the Bangas. Kr3wcial wrote glbl wrmng’s breakout 2021 single, “504,” and has since appeared in Complex, Essence, Okayplayer, 2DopeBoyz, Consequence, DJ Booth, at the NAACP Image Awards and the national championships for Red Bull Dance Your Style. In early 2022, he released Less Than Three, an EP featuring Chicago rapper Mick Jenkins, Montreal singer Kalipop, New Orleans vocalist BLÜ, and Grammy-winning rapper Pell. The project debuted in his self-designed 3D metaverse space, the “Kr3wniverse,” and was described by Gambit as featuring a “dynamic, soulful style.” Bryan makes Kr3wcial a classic family meal: sausage, corn, and rice. Watch Bryan make his version and Subscribe: Youtube Listen to Bryan’s rap collaboration with Kr3wcial: Butter My Croissant Recipe from today's episode can be found at Shondaland.com Join The Flaky Biscuit Community: Discord Kr3wcial IG: @ikr3wcial Bryan Ford IG: @artisanbryan Take a look at everything Son of a Saint is doing to give young boys the tools to become productive men at sonofasaint.org. See omnystudio.com/listener for privacy information.

Host Bryan Ford is joined by cookbook author and NYT food journalist, Priya Krishna. Priya’s the author of the best-selling cookbook Indian-ish, a tribute to her mom’s Indian-American cooking. As a journalist, her stories have been included in the 2019 and 2021 editions of "The Best American Food Writing." The dish she shares with Bryan today is Priya’s favorite thing to put over rice, and after you make it, it’ll be yours too. Watch Bryan make his version and Subscribe: Youtube Recipe from today's episode can be found at Shondaland.com and in Priya’s cookbook Indian-ish Join The Flaky Biscuit Community: Discord Priya Krishna IG: @priyakrishna Bryan Ford IG: @artisanbryan Don’t forget to check out South Brooklyn Mutual Aid at southbkmutualaid.com. You can read about the results of the strike at the New York Times on the NYT website or Reuters. See omnystudio.com/listener for privacy information.

Host Bryan Ford is joined by Adam Shapiro, actor and Pretzelmaker. He currently stars in Netflx’s Never Have I Ever, and the upcoming Peacock John Wick prequel series, The Continental. Adam founded Shappy Pretzel company in 2020 during the pandemic, and this year served 4,000 Shappy pretzels at the Oscars. Now selling nationwide over Goldbelly! Bryan and Adam talk about what makes a perfect Philly soft pretzel over another Pennsylvania classic— and a personal favorite of Adam’s— pizza fries. Watch Bryan make his version and Subscribe: Youtube Recipe from today's episode can be found at Shondaland.com Join The Flaky Biscuit Community: Discord Adam Shapiro IG: @shappyshaps Bryan Ford IG: @artisanbryan Don’t forget to check out Hilarity for Charity at wearehfc.comSee omnystudio.com/listener for privacy information.

Host Bryan Ford is joined by actor and musician Tristan Mack Wilds. The multi-faceted entertainer became widely popular from his breakout role as Micheal Lee on HBO’s The Wire and starring as Dixon Wilson on the hit remake 90210. In 2014, Wilds released his critically acclaimed debut album, New York: A Love Story, executively produced by iconic producer Salaam Remi. The album went on to receive a GRAMMY nomination for Best Urban Contemporary Album. He currently stars as "Alonzo Powers" on AppleTV+'s Swagger. Tristan joins Bryan for the “dish that raised him,” his mom’s Poor Man’s chili. This episode was recorded prior to the SAG-AFTRA strike. Watch Bryan make his version and Subscribe: Youtube Recipe from today's episode can be found at Shondaland.com Join The Flaky Biscuit Community: Discord Tristan IG: @mackwilds Bryan Ford IG: @artisanbryan Don’t forget to check out Lupus Foundation of America at lupus.org.See omnystudio.com/listener for privacy information.