Mad Max is a 1979 Australian dystopian action-thriller film directed by George Miller, produced by Byron Kennedy, and starring Mel Gibson as "Mad" Max Rockatansky, Joanne Samuel, Hugh Keays-Byrne, Steve Bisley, Tim Burns, and Roger Ward. It is the very first installment to the Mad Max franchise.

Plot[]

In a dystopian Australia, "a few years from now," Max, a member of a police unit, finds himself confronting a gangster, which eventually results in the gangster being killed. The gang leader decides to seek revenge for the death of the former leader.

Why It Rocks[]

The landmark of the Australian filmmaking.

Each and actors one of the actors gives amazing performances in this movie, especially for Mel Gibson as Max Rockatansky.

The idea of a film about a police officer going against the evil Outlaw motorcycle club of bikers is very original.

It was the amazing start of the Mad Max franchise.

A tons of awesome, and well-executed or action-packed, and chasing moments, such as Mad Max driving his black car, and crashing those gangsters of bikes, and at the beginning of the movie where the group of polices chase the Nightrider.

The settling looks pretty amazing, setting in plains of Australia looks pretty amazing set for this Mad Max movie.

Despite its low-budget, special effects are so good, especially the blood and gore effects.

Max Rockatansky and Jessie Rockatansky gives a share some amazing chemistry together.

Amazing directing by George Miller.

The soundtrack is pretty good, with tons of suspense and thrills that were performed by Brian May.

The ending is pretty epic, Max handcuffs Johnny's ankle to the wrecked vehicle, and sets a crude time-delay fuse utilizing a slow petrol leak and Johnny's lighter, and what happens next? Max throws Johnny a hacksaw, leaving him the choice of sawing through either the handcuffs or his ankle to escape. The vehicle explodes as Max drives away.

The movie spawned a franchise and even spawned a post-apocalyptic sequel name. Mad Max 2 (or The Road Warrior) is even amazing and more improved, if not better.

Hugh Keays-Byrne did a good performance as the villain Toecutter and later went on to play the villain Immortan Joe in the amazing fourth instalment Mad Max: Fury Road.

Bad Qualities[]

Although the 5.1 audio remix sounds very good, it surprisingly had many issues.

Due to the low budget, some of the effects haven't aged well.

Mad Max's character is meant to be an officer and a family man, but he looks so young it's hard to believe it.

Reception[]

On its release on April 12, 1979, it received polarized reviews from critics, and audience alike but re-received positive reviews from critics, audience, and none Mad Max fans alike, earning a 90% rating on Rotten Tomatoes.