Advertisements

Scientific Name

Zantedeschia elliottiana (W.Watson) Engl.

Common Name(s)

Golden Calla Lily, Golden Arum Lily, Golden Calla, Yellow Calla Lily, Elliott's Calla

Synonym(s)

Calla elliottiana, Richardia aurata, Richardia elliottiana, Richardia rossii

Scientific Classification

Family: Araceae

Subfamily: Aroideae

Tribe: Zantedeschieae

Genus: Zantedeschia

Flower

Color: Yellow

Bloom Time: Summer

Description

Zantedeschia elliottiana is a stemless herbaceous perennial with flowers and leaves that rise to 3 feet (90 cm) tall from underground tuberous rhizomes. Flowers bloom throughout summer. Each up to 6 inches (15 cm) tall flower structure features a yellow finger-like spadix surrounded by a showy yellow spathe born atop a leafless stalk. The very tiny and ornamentally insignificant true flowers are located on the spadix (males on top and females below). A spike of yellow berries infrequently follows the flowers. Long-stalked, arrowhead-shaped leaves are dark green, up to 11 inches (27.5 cm) long, and heavily spotted with white.

Advertisements

Hardiness

USDA hardiness zone 9a to 10b: from 20 °F (−6.7 °C) to 40 °F (+4.4 °C).

How to Grow and Care

It is easy to grow Calla Lilies. These plants do not generally require too much attention. Proper planting and location are about the only important things to consider when growing Calla Lilies. Care of them requires that they be planted in loose, well-drained soil. They prefer to be located in full sun or partial shade in warmer climates. Plants are typically planted in the spring. However, wait until the threat of frost has passed and the soil has warmed sufficiently before planting.

They should be planted rather deep, about 4 inches (10 cm) for greater results, and spaced approximately a foot apart. Once planted, the area should be watered well. Calla Lilies enjoy being kept moist and will also benefit from a monthly fertilizer dose throughout the growing season.

As with planting, there's not too much required for the care of Calla Lilies other than keeping them watered and fertilized. An adequate layer of mulch around the plants will help keep the area moist and free of weeds. They require a dormant period once flowering has ceased. During this time, you should refrain from watering as much to allow the plant to die back.

See more at How to Grow and Care for Calla Lilies.

Origin

This species is reportedly native to South Africa but may be of garden origin.

Links

Back to genus Zantedeschia

Plantpedia: Browse flowering plants by Scientific Name, Common Name, Genus, Family, USDA Hardiness Zone, or Origin

Photo Gallery

Click on a photo to see a larger version.