tuesDaY DhaKa: august <strong>20</strong>, <strong>20</strong>19; Bhadra 5, 1426 BS; Zilhaj 18,1440 hijri www.thebangladeshtoday.com; www.bangladeshtoday.net Regd.No.Da~<strong>20</strong>65, Vol.17; No.<strong>20</strong>2; 12 Pages~Tk.8.00 international Pakistan decries cross-border fire as Kashmir security eases >Page 7 art & culture Sonam Kapoor replies to trolls after told to 'shift to Pakistan' >Page 8 sport PSG demand 1 of 4 Real Madrid players in huge Neymar swap deal >Page 9 Attacked eight times since being Ducsu VP, bemoans Nur DHAKA : Claiming that he was attacked eight times by activists of Bangladesh Chhatra League (BCL) and the ruling party since June 30, Vicepresident (VP) of Dhaka University Central Students' Union (Ducsu) Nurul Haque Nur on Monday said his life is now at stake. "Now, I'm suffering from a sense of insecurity as I've received threats from ruling party men and Detective Branch at different times," he said while addressing a press briefing at Madhur Canteen on the DU campus at noon, reports UNB. Nur convened the press briefing against the backdrop of the attack on him at Ulania Bazar in Galachipa upazila of Patuakhali on the day of Eid-ul- Azha on August14. "On August 14, I was attacked by goons at Ulania Bazar on the way to my sister's house in Dashmina," he said, alleging that Galachipa upazila parishad chairman Shahin Shah led the attack at the behest of Patuakhali-3 MP SM Shahjada Saju. Demanding that punishment be meted out to the attackers, the Ducsu VP expressed the hope that law enforcers will find out the culprits and take necessary actions in this regard. Mentioning that criticism of the government's wrongdoings is the democratic right of a citizen, he said, "I always raise my voice against the lawlessness and irregularities. No one can stop me from protesting these irregularities." Four 'militants' held in city DHAKA : Members of Rapid Action Battalion (Rab-3) arrested four suspected members of a militant group named 'Allar Dal' from Hatirjheel area in the city Sunday night, reports UNB. The arrestees are Ibrahim Ahmed Hero, 64 and Md Shafiqul Islam Suruj, 38 of Pabna, Abdul Aziz, 50 of Gaibandha and Md Rashidul Islam, 28 of Kurigram. On secret information, the elite force members arrested the four in a drive around 11:30 pm, said a press release. Rab said the militant group named 'Allar Dal' was first established in 1995 under the leadership of militants Mehedi, Muminul Islam, Matin Mahbub, Mehedi Hasan and Mtinul Haque. After interrogating the arrestees, Rab came to know that they used to maintain communication and recruit members using social media platforms. Zohr 04:17 AM 12:<strong>08</strong>PM 04:37PM 06:33PM 07:55PM 5:34 6:30 Dengue deaths up again as 3 more die in 3 districts DHAKA : Three more people died of dengue in Khulna, Mymensingh and Faridpur districts on Monday, showing an uptrend in casualties by the mosquito-borne disease in the country, reports UNB. However, the number of patients taking admission to hospitals with dengue infections has marked a fall. Those died yesterday in the three districts were identified as Mizanur Raham, 40, son of late Md Akher Ali of Rupsha upazila in Khulna, Anwar Hossain, 46, of Kendua in Netrakona and Delwar Hossain, 35, a caretaker of a mosque and son of Sheikh Shafiuddin of Faridpur Sadar upazila. In Khulna, Mizanur was admitted to the hospital with dengue fever on August 15 and died at 7 am of Monday, said Dr Sailendranath Biswas, resident medical officer of Khulna Medical College Hospital. At least <strong>20</strong> new patients were admitted to different hospitals in the district in the last 24 hours till Monday morning while 69 patients are undergoing treatment. In Faridpur, Delwar Hossain died around 10 am after being diagnosed with dengue at Faridpur Medical College Hospital, said Kamda Prasad Saha, director of the hospital. Delwar's father Sheikh Safiuddin said they admitted Delwar to Faridpur Sadar Hospital with dengue and shifted him to Faridpur Medical College Hospital on Sunday night. DHAKA : Dhaka North City C o r p o r a t i o n (DNCC) will start its combing operation today to destroy Aedes mosquito and its breeding grounds while the Dhaka South City C o r p o r a t i o n (DSCC) launched month-long cleanliness drive from Monday. Noted educationist Prof Abdullah Abu Sayeed will inaugurate the DNCC's month long combing operation as the chief guest at Gulshan's Dr Fazle Rabbi Park at 10am today. DNCC Mayor Md Atiqul Islam will lead the first day drive, said DNCC's public relations officer ASM Mamun. "We will start the operation dividing each ward into 10 blocks for the programme . . . 10 cleaners will work in each block and an official will oversee the activities," DNCC information officer M Atikur Rahman told BSS. He said the DNCC staff will visit every house in every area during the combing At least 57 new patients were admitted to different hospitals in the district in the last 24 hours till Monday morning while 346 patients are undergoing treatment. In Mymensingh, Anwar Hossain, hailing from Kendua in Netrakona, was admitted to the Mymensingh Medical College and Hospital after having infected with dengue on August 11. He breathed his last around 5 am at the hospital, said Dr Laxmi Narayann Mazumdar, deputy director of the hospital. At least 1,615 new patients were hospitalised in 24 hours till 8 am on Monday across the country, according to Health Emergency Operation Centre and Control Room of the Directorate General of Health Services (DGHS). The number of dengue patients was 1,460 on Saturday, 1,719 on Friday while 1,929 on Thursday, 1,880 on Wednesday, 1,<strong>20</strong>1 on Tuesday and 2,097 on Monday last. Meanwhile, the number of new infections at district level also declined in the last 24 hours from Sunday's 972 to 858 on Monday. The government has so far confirmed the deaths of 40 people although unofficial estimates suggest the death toll is much higher. Currently, 6,733 patients are undergoing treatment at different hospitals and clinics. Of them, 3, 419 are hospitalised in the capital and 3,314 around the country. DNCC to launch 'combing operation' to eliminate dengue operation. They will check Aedes mosquito larvae in houses or establishments, he said, adding that action will be taken if Aedes larvae are found in offices, houses and under-construction buildings. A red sticker with the words - Aedes mosquito larvae has been found in this house - will be put on the house. If Aedes larvae are found in the house again during a second visit, legal action will be taken against the owners, he added. The operation at first will be carried out in 36 old wards of DNCC. It will be expanded to 18 new wards later, said M Atikur Rahman. The DSCC started cleanliness drive yesterday and a 10-member team has been assigned to conduct operation in 50 houses every day. They will destroy Aedes mosquito breeding places, said DSCC public relations officer Uttam Kumar Roy. As part of the month long programme, DSCC Mayor Sayeed Khokan will lead a cleanliness drive at Dhaka Medical College area today. Owners of 10 buildings in DNCC and DSCC were fined Tk 4.28 lakh after detecting larva of Aedes mosquito. SC order on journalists' wage board gazette today DHAKA : The Appellate Division of the Supreme Court (SC) will pass its order today on state plea against High Court order that imposed status quo on publishing gazette notification for implementing the recommendations of ninth wage board for journalists and employees of newspapers and news agencies. "Order tomorrow," said a four-member apex court bench headed by Chief Justice Syed Mahmud Hossain, reports BSS. Attorney General Mahbubey Alam and Deputy Attorney General Amit Talukder moved the state plea to stay the August 6 High Court order. Advocate AF Hasan Arif stood for daily Prothom Alo editor, publisher and president of Newspapers Owners Association of Bangladesh (NOAB) Matiur Rahman. Earlier on August 14, Justice Md Nuruzzaman of Appellate Division Chamber Court sent the state petition, which pleaded to stay the High Court order, to apex court regular bench for hearing on Monday. Attorney General Mahbubey Alam and Deputy Attorney General Amit Talukdar appeared for the state, while Advocate Hasan Arif appeared for the NOAB president and daily Prothom Alo editor and publisher Matiur Rahman. Terming the initial writ against publishing gazette notification for implementing the recommendations of ninth wage board, pre-matured, Attorney General Mahbubey Alam said the petitioner filed the writ as he does not want to pay the salary to journalists properly. "The government is like an umpire here. It would consider interests of both journalists and newspaper owners," he said. "Without journalists, the owners of newspapers do not have any existence," the court observed at the time. RAB members arrested four of an extremist group named 'Allahar Sarker or Allahr Dal'. Photo: Banglar Chokh The slum dwellers of Chalontika at Mirpur in the capital spend whole night under the open sky after destroying their shelters by a devastative fire. The photo was taken on Sunday. Photo: Star Mail Midday meal in all govt primary schools by <strong>20</strong>23 DHAKA : The cabinet yesterday approved the draft of the National School Meal Policy, <strong>20</strong>19 setting a target to bring students of all government primary schools under universal midday meal coverage by <strong>20</strong>23. The approval was given at a meeting with Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina in the chair at the Prime Minister's Office here, reports BSS. "We have a p p r o v e d National School Meal Policy, <strong>20</strong>19 aimed at bringing all the students of government primary schools under the midday meal coverage by <strong>20</strong>23," Cabinet S e c r e t a r y M o h a m m a d Shafiul Alam told a press briefing at the Secretariat. The policy will be turned into a law by <strong>20</strong>23, he said. In line with the policy, the government will form a National School Meal Authority to supervise the overall activities and an advisory committee comprising eminent personalities of the society to evaluate and give necessary advices to make it successful, he also said. The midday meal would have to meet 30 percent calories and 50 percent micronutrient of the primary school students aged 3 to 12 years, he added. As many as 1.40 crore students of 66,000 government primary schools across the country will be provided with midday meals by <strong>20</strong>23 and it will require Taka 2,835 crore per year for giving fortified biscuits to the students, Taka 5,560 crore for giving cooked foods in five days and biscuits in one day and Taka 7,475 crore to give egg, banana and bread, additional secretary (development) Md Gias Uddin Ahmed of the Primary and Mass Education Ministry told reporters. Referring to a survey, he said that the rate of presence of the students has increased by 11 percent in schools where cooked foods are being served and by 6 percent where biscuits are being given to the students. The government is currently giving a 75- gram pack of biscuit to nearly three million children at primary schools in 104 upazilas under the current project involving Taka 474 crore and it will end by December in <strong>20</strong><strong>20</strong>, he said, adding that the government is giving cooked midday meal to primary school students in three upazilas including Bamna and Islampur of Jamalpur (of Barguna, Jamalpur and Bandarban). Land owner held for FR tower design forgery DHAKA : The Anti-Corruption Commission on Monday arrested land owner of FR Tower SMHI Faruque in a case filed over the forgery in the design of the Banani's ill-fated building. ACC Public Relations Officer Pranab Kumar Bhattacharya said an ACC team, led by its deputy director Abu Bakar Siddique, arrested Faruq from Gulshan area, reports UNB. The commission arrested another owner Tasvir Ul Islam, also chairman of Quasem Industries Ltd , from Segunbagicha area on Sunday. Tasvir, also President of Kurigram district unit BNP, embezzled Tk 5.65 crore from GSP Finance Company (Bangladesh) Ltd through loan, said the ACC. The national anti-graft body earlier arrested assistant director of Rajdhani Unnayan Kartripakkha (Rajuk) Shah Md Badrul Alam on July 30 over the design forgery. It had filed two cases against 23 people for their alleged involvement in illegally extending Banani's FR Tower beyond the permitted number of floors. The building caught fire on March 27 last that left 25 people dead and 73 others injured. During investigation, the ACC found that the 23-storey FR Tower had no fire alarm while it has narrow exit points and staircases and the fire exits are blocked. The authorities had legally obtained permission for a 15-storey building but they made the FR Tower a 23-storey one over time. The ACC sued <strong>20</strong> and five people respectively in the two cases filed over illegal extension of FR Tower from 16th to 18th and 19th to 23rd floors. The accused also include Liakat Ali Khan Mukul, chairman of Rupayan Housing Estate Ltd, the housing company that extended the building illegally; Muhammd Shawkat Ali, member of Bangladesh Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (BCSIR); Syed Nazmul Huda, sub-divisional engineer of Public Works Department (PWD); and Shamsur Rahman, executive engineer of PWD.