Join us for a feature film screening and discussion about African-American music and culture, the importance of history to our spiritual well-being, and the healing power of music during times of unrest, both past and present with the documentary “Summer of Soul” (2021) from director Questlove.

Explore the language of cinema, watch movies in their original language, and practice your English-speaking skills through friendly moderated discussions at American Film Nights with America House Kyiv and KINO42. Join us Tuesdays at 19:00 at the KINO42 space in Kyiv from March 28 and through April. Learn more about our upcoming films and how to attend here.

Our next event will take place on April 25, at 19:00 at the KINO42 space in Kyiv (Kostiantynivska 11B.)

“Summer of Soul” (2021)

“Summer of Soul” is part music film, part historical record created around an epic event that celebrated Black history, culture, and fashion. Over the course of six weeks in the summer of 1969, just 100 miles south of Woodstock, The Harlem Cultural Festival was filmed in Mount Morris Park (now Marcus Garvey Park). The footage was never seen and largely forgotten — until now. “Summer of Soul” shines a light on the importance of history to our spiritual well-being and stands as a testament to the healing power of music during times of unrest, both past and present. The feature includes never-before-seen concert performances by Stevie Wonder, Nina Simone, Sly and the Family Stone, Gladys Knight and the Pips, Mahalia Jackson, B.B. King, The 5th Dimension, and more.

Rating: PG-13

Genre: Documentary, Music

Runtime: 1 hour 58 minutes

The film will be shown in English with English subtitles.

All America House Kyiv events and activities are completely free. Come one, come all, and bring a friend! Just don’t forget to register yourself and anyone else planning to come with you below by 17:00 on April 25 so we can save you a seat.

Spots are limited, but if you can’t make it this time, we’ll be happy to see you at our other events.

All film screenings and discussions will take place at KINO42, a cinema located in a shelter, so we’ll be both cozy and safe. The show will go on without interruption in the case of raids or electricity outages.

About the organizers:

America House is a cultural center and your main resource for American culture, education, and information in Ukraine with spaces in Kyiv, Lviv and Odesa. America House organizes a wide range of activities, including English-language programs, skill-building workshops, cultural events, art exhibitions, concerts and more. America House is a space where you can work and think creatively, build cultural bridges and become a changemaker.

KINO42 is an independent cozy cinema of 42 seats in a historical building in the Podil neighborhood.