Born on December 26, 1899, Udham Singh is one of the many freedom fighters who fill the youngsters with vigour and strength to do something for the nation. On this day in the year 1933, he was hanged on charges of murdering Michael O Dwyer, the former Lieutenant Governor of Punjab.

It is worth noting that while Reginald Dyer was the one who ordered the shooting at Jallianwalla, Dwyer condoned his actions.

advertisement

The name of Sardar Udham Singh is recorded as a revolutionary of Punjab in the fight for India's independence.

Early life of Udham Singh

Udham Singh was born as Sher Singh in the village of Sunam in Sangrur district of Punjab. His parents died while he was still a child. He was taken away by Central Khalsa Orphanage, Putlighar.

He was an eyewitness to the Jallianwala Bagh massacre -- the incident which painted the pages of Indian history in pitch-black.

Assassination of Dwyer

On March 13, 1940, a meeting of the East India Association and the Royal Central Asian Society was going on at Caxton Hall in London.

He attended the meeting with sole purpose of the assassination of Dwyer. Singh had carved the shape of the revolver by cutting the pages to fit it inside the book.

Upon the end of this meeting, Udham Singh fired on Michael O Dwyer but did not run away after shooting two times at the former Lt Governor of Punjab, who died on the spot. Singh, instead, waited for the officials to arrest him.

He was sued in Britain and on June 4, 1940, Singh was convicted of murder and hanged on July 31, 1940, in the Pentonville jail.

The remains of Udham Singh are preserved at Jallianwala Bagh, Amritsar.

The time when Udham Singh he acted in Hollywood movies

Yes, Udham Singh, the revolutionary freedom fighter acted in not 1 but 2 Hollywood movies.

Why? To earn extra money in order to support the Gadar Party -- an organisation Indians formed to end the British rule in India.

The movies in which he played a role are:

Elephant Boy (1937)

The Four Feathers (1939)

Alexander Korda's Elephant Boy is a movie on the story of 'Toomai of the Elephants' in Rudyard Kipling's The Jungle Book. It also went to win the Best director's award in the Venice Film Festival.

Zolton Korda's The Four Feathers was about a British officer who disguises himself as an Arab to save his comrades.

Interested in General Knowledge and Current Affairs? Click here to stay informed and know what is happening around the world with our G.K. and Current Affairs section.