The Samuel Dalembert era of the 76ers is over.

It ended when the Sixers traded the 6-foot-11 first-round pick to the Sacramento Kings for Andres Nocioni and Spencer Hawes, pending physicals.

"We are excited to add two players in Spencer Hawes and Andres Nocioni who will help us immediately and provide us with additional frontcourt depth," general manager Ed Stefanski said in a statement Thursday announcing the deal. "Spencer is a young seven-footer who will provide us with versatility at the center position, while Andres will provide us with a tough veteran presence."

Dalembert, the 26th overall pick in the 2001 NBA draft, never developed into the dominant center the Sixers hoped he could become. He only averaged 8.1 points, 8.3 rebounds and 1.9 blocks during his eight seasons in Philadelphia. What's more, he became unhappy with his role and asked for a trade last season.

"We are excited about the move," Dalembert's agent Marc Cornstein said Thursday. "I think that Sacramento is going to be great for Sammy. They play an up-tempo style. I think coach [Paul Westphal] would be a really good coach influence for Sammy. And I think . . . his strengths are really what Sacramento needs."

His best season came in 2007-08, when he averaged 10.4 points and 10.5 rebounds per game.

"I think Sammy's strengths are really what Sacramento needs, a shot-blocking defensive presence, rebounding, running the floor," Cornstein said. "So I think he is going to be a great fit for that team."

Apparently, Kings president Geoff Petrie agrees.

"We're excited about the acquisition of Samuel Dalembert," the Delaware County native said in a statement. "He will certainly bring a defensive presence and increase our ability to defend around the basket with his rebounding, shot-blocking and athleticism.

"I think he'll add a very different look to our team defensively, and we're really excited about having him."

The NBA's only Haitian-born player is scheduled to make $12.9 million next season, the final year of his contract. Dalembert also has a 15 percent trade kicker in his deal, which made it difficult for the Sixers to trade him.

"I can tell you that the Sixers and Sacramento Kings have been talking about trading Sammy long before Tuesday night," Cornstein said.

Stefanski and coach Doug Collins will hold a news conference Friday to discuss the deal.

In addition to pleasing Dalembert, the Sixers obtained an up-and-coming post player in Hawes and a physical combo forward in Nocioni.

Nocioni, a 6-7, 225-pounder, averaged 8.5 points for Sacramento last season. The native of Argentina is averaging 11.3 points, 4.7 rebounds and 1.3 assists during his six-year career with Sacramento and the Chicago Bulls. He does come with off-the-court baggage, serving a two-game suspension this past season after pleading no contest in California for drunken driving.

Hawes, a 7-foot-1 center, averaged 10 points, 6.1 rebounds and 1.2 blocks last season. He had a career-high 30 points to go with nine rebounds against the Los Angeles Lakers on New Year's Day.

Hawes was the Kings' first-round draft pick and 10th overall choice in 2007 following one season at the University of Washington. He averages 8.8 points, 5.5 rebounds and 1 block for his career.

Hawes and Nocioni were both reportedly unhappy in Sacramento.