Few tennis tournaments command the world's attention, like the French Open. One of the sport's historic four grand slams and the only one played on a clay surface, the event dates back more than a century and is synonymous with fast serves and high drama in the competitive game.

However, first-time finalist Carlos Alcaraz stole the limelight in the French Open Men's Singles this time, winning his first title at ClayCourt Major by edging a scrappy five-set final against Alexander Zverev. Third-seed Alcaraz, still only 21 years old, continues to rewrite the tennis record books, becoming the youngest man to win Grand Slam titles on all three surfaces.

In the Women's Singles finals this year, Iga Świątek eased past Jasmine Paolini in a dominant two-set win against Jasmine Paoline to clinch her fifth Grand Slam title. The world's top seed became the third player in the Open Era to win the French Open women's singles title three years in a row, following Monica Seles (1990-'92) and Justine Henin (2005-'07). She became the fourth woman to win the tournament four times, joining Henin (4), Steffi Graf (6), and Chris Evert (7). After Serena Williams in 2013, she is only the second woman to win the Madrid, Rome, and Roland Garros titles in the same year.

Article continues below

Looking forward to the finals? GOAL brings you everything you need to know about how to watch it live.

When are the French Open singles finals?

Men's Singles Final

Women's Singles Final

Where will the 2024 French Open be played?

Getty Images

The 2024 French Open will be played at Roland Garros, the tournament's traditional home, located in the 16th arrondissement of Paris.

Named for the famed French aviator Roland Garros, the venue was first constructed in 1928 for France to host their defense of the Davis Cup and has served as the home of the grand slam tournament since then.

The main court, Court Philippe Chatrier, was renovated in 2019 and ranks third in overall capacity for specialist tennis stadia worldwide, behind Arthur Ashe Stadium in New York and Stadium 1 at Indian Wells, California. The rest of the complex includes Court Suzanne Lenglen, previously known as Court A, and 18 additional courts, for a total of 20.

What channel shows the 2024 French Open?

Getty Images

The 2024 French Open will be shown on television and live-streamed by various channels and providers. NBC, the Tennis Channel, and Peacock will cover the event.

With coverage of major matchups from Paris and other sports and entertainment coverage throughout the year, subscribers can enjoy a rich selection of options with Peacock. Customers can subscribe to Peacock Premium with ads for $5.99 per month and Peacock Premium Plus without ads for $11.99 per month.

Those wanting to watch on NBC and the Tennis Channel can additionally watch with fuboTV, one of the leading streaming package providers in the United States. With a selection of tiered options, ensure you don't miss another moment with a subscription to fuboTV this year.

Recent French Open winners

Below, you can find a list of the recent winners over the past decade at the French Open in both the men's and women's singles events. Rafael Nadal has mostly dominated the former, with six successes, while Iga Swiatek is a three-time victor in Paris over the past four years.

FAQs

Getty

How expensive are tickets for the 2024 French Open?

Tickets for the 2024 French Open are sold directly through the event's official ticket portal and vary dramatically depending on the day and event included. However, tickets for the first week of the competition typically retail from €25.00 each.

Hospitality packages are also available directly through the official portal, which runs its own resale platform in an attempt to compete with other secondary market retailers.

Will Rafael Nadal play at Roland Garros in 2024?

Nadal, the legendary Spaniard who has helped define tennis this century in the men's game alongside Novak Djokovic and his other major rivals Roger Federer and Andy Murray, has confirmed he will retire this year.

However, his chances of a farewell at Roland Garros appear to drop as he struggles with persistent injury problems. Nadal and organizers hope that he will ultimately be able to pull through and compete by the end of May.

What is the best day to go to the French Open?

The best day to go to the French Open is somewhat subjective. If you want to see more tennis than a specific round or match, the opening week will ensure you catch plenty of action from the court.

But if you want to enjoy bigger encounters at the business end, you will be better off trying for a ticket for a day during the final week. This will allow you to enjoy history in the making.

How far is Roland Garros from central Paris?

Roland Garros is located in the 16th arrondissement, west of central Paris, and is approximately nine kilometers away on foot. Most people travel by car or public transportation to reach the stadium complex for the French Open.

Porte d'Auteuil and Michel-Ange serve the venue–Molitor on Line 10 of the Paris Metro, with Line 9 also intersecting at the latter station.