Iga Swiatek will be looking for her fourth French Open title in the past five years when she takes on Jasmine Paolini in the women's singles final Saturday in Paris.

Poland's Swiatek, ranked No. 1 in the world, breezed past American Coco Gauff 6-2, 6-4 in their semifinal match on Thursday.

The two-time defending champion at Roland Garros, Swiatek can become the fourth woman to win four French Opens in the Open Era (since 1968) joining Chris Evert (seven titles), Steffi Graf (six) and Justine Henin (four).

Paolini, the tournament's No. 12 seed, defeated 17-year-old Mirra Andreev 6-3, 6-1 in their semifinal to reach her first career Grand Slam final.

It's been a dozen years since an Italian woman has played for the French Open title, dating back to Sara Errani in 2012. (Incidentally, the doubles team of Paolini and Errani advanced to the this year's semifinals at Roland Garros with a win on Wednesday.)

When is French Open women's final?

The women's final will take place at Stade Roland Garros in Paris on Saturday, June 8 at 9 a.m. ET (2 p.m. local time).

How to watch French Open women's final

The French Open women's final will be broadcast live on NBC and also available online on Peacock.

Noah Eagle will handle the play-by-play, with analysis from Mary Carillo and John McEnroe.

Iga Swiatek's path to French Open women's final

Tournament's No. 1 seed

1st round: Defeated Leolia Jeanjean

2nd round: Defeated Naomi Osaka

3rd round: Defeated Marie Bouzkova

4th round: Defeated Anastasia Potapova

Quarterfinals: Defeated No. 5 Marketa Vondrousova

Semifinals: Defeated No. 3 Coco Gauff

Jasmine Paolini path to French Open women's final

Tournament's No. 12 seed

1st round: Defeated Daria Saville

2nd round: Defeated Hailey Baptiste

3rd round: Defeated Bianca Andreescu

4th round: Defeated Elina Avanesyan

Quarterfinals: Defeated No. 4 Elena Rybakina

Semifinals: Defeated Mirra Andreev

Swiatek vs. Paolina head to head

Iga Swiatek holds a 2-0 career advantage over Jasmine Paolina, winning on clay in Prague in 2018 and more recently, at the 2022 U.S. Open.

What does French Open winner receive?

Both the men's and women's singles champions will earn the same amount of money for winning the French Open.

First prize is just over $2.6 million (2.4 million Euros). The runner-up will receive just over $1.3 million (1.2 million Euros).