The settlement of Dava Göz situated about 15km SW of Khoy and 1.5km north of the Dizaj Diz town in NW Iran. Dava Göz is a small site at north of the Lake Urmia, measuring about 100×100m (ca. 1ha). The first season of archeological excavation primarily aimed to clarifying the chronology, settlement organization, and respond to some of the fundamental questions such as the transition process from Late Neolithic to Early Chalcolithic (Hajji Firuz to Dalma) and identifying different cultural horizon including Late Chalcolithic (LC1 and LC2 periods) and also outlining cultural condition of the region during prehistoric periods. The present paper is intended to expose briefly the main stratigraphic, architectural and material data from the site. The stratigraphy of the settlement is now well understood and covers the Late Neolithic/Transitional Chalcolithic (Hajji Firuz/Dalma=Period I) and Chalcolithic (Pisdeli=LC1=Period II and Chaff-Faced Ware horizon=LC2=Period III) phases of the regional culture of north of the Lake Urmia Basin. Actually, Dava Göz is one of the scant well excavated settlements that give new and fresh information on the developments of the Lake Urmia Basin communities between the sixth to fourth millennium BC (5400-3700/3600 BC), and on their relationships with the contemporary Caucasian cultures as well as with those located further west and south, in Eastern Anatolia and in the Syro-Mesopotamian region. The first preliminary result of excavation , suggest special function for Dava Göz. It seems clear that this site could be consider as winter land for some agro-pastoral groups of Lake Urmia Basin who trying to find some pasturelands and preparing same raw materials like obsidian for the settlements of Urmia region The implications of the findings will discuss along with limitations and future research directions.

Hasanlu archaeological joint project in partnership with Iranian-American archaeologist is the one of the rare long-term archaeological projects carried out in northwest of Iran. In the process of this project (1957-1978), the layers from the Neolithic period to the historical period have been excavated. The Seventh period of Hasanlu Tepe is contemporary of early bronze age and the beginning of massive economic and social mutation in the cultural developments context of Middle East. Cultural materials of this period in Hasanlu Tepe have illuminated the obvious cultural differentiation between southern area of Urmia lake and the whole of Iran northwest region. Although the short report on this period material have been published, but there is still very little awareness on this period around the pottery types and its distribution, burial traditions and relationship between neighbors. Therefore, the present study intends to introduce the general characteristics of the culture of the seventh period of Hasanlu by referring to the findings of Hasanlu project and other excavations carried out in this area. cultural materials of this period illuminates that during the third millennium BC, there have been a distinguished socio-cultural zone from the Kura-Araxes area with painted Orange and Red pottery characteristic in the southern part of Lake Urmia to the southern slopes of Sahand Mountains. Which on the one hand interacted with northern Mesopotamia in west and on the other hand interacted with the Kura-Araxes communities in whole of north, eastern and southern area.

Archaeological survey was conducted by the authors (Khazaie, BahramiNia and Masjedi) in Kojour in the south of Caspian Sea and in Alborz Mountain in summer 2011. Kojour was selected because of its suitable conditions for human occupation such as water sources, suitable soil, intermountain plains and finally its suitable elevation that protected this region from extensive environmental changes during prehistoric times such as glacial periods in high levels of Alborz Mountain as well as from Caspian Sea's water elevation changes. In our survey 47 archaeological sites were registered among which 10 sites had evidence from prehistoric times, 27 sites had evidence from historical times and 22 sites had evidence from Islamic times. Settlement pattern at the understudy area changed across the periods. Water sources and arable land with low slope and population were the most important factors of these changes.

The study of the Early Neolithic period in the Urmia Lake region, in Iranian Azerbaijan, was a problem: none of the studies published so far provides convincing evidence for the Early Neolithic settlements. There are some well-known and well excavated/surveyed Neolithic sites around the Urmia Lake such as Hajji Firuz, Yanik Tepe, and Ahrendjan Tepe. Contrary to what has been posited in the site publications, the materials from these sites date back to both the Early Pottery Neolithic and the Late Neolithic, c. 6500-5000 BC. There is, however, growing evidence for traces of an Early Pottery Neolithic occupation, generally at the same horizon with Jarmo II, Sarab, Guran II and Tepe Abdul- Hosein II in Northern- Central Zagros, c.7000-6000 BC. This paper revisits former studies on the basis of recently studied Ahrendjan- Qara Tepe in comparison to Hajji Firuz tradition. Moreover, it puts forward a new interpretation of the Early Neolithic period in the Urmia Lake region, rather than presenting some new data. In accordance with a diffusionist approach, the author finally concludes that both the Early and Late Neolithic sites of the region were affected by contemporary developments in the Northern-Central Zagros.

The study of the Early Neolithic period in the Urmia Lake region, in Iranian Azerbaijan, was a problem: none of the studies published so far provides convincing evidence for the Early Neolithic settlements. There are some well-known and well excavated/surveyed Neolithic sites around the Urmia Lake such as Hajji Firuz, Yanik Tepe, and Ahrendjan Tepe. Contrary to what has been posited in the site publications, the materials from these sites date back to both the Early Pottery Neolithic and the Late Neolithic, c. 6500-5000 BC. There is, however, growing evidence for traces of an Early Pottery Neolithic occupation, generally at the same horizon with Jarmo II, Sarab, Guran II and Tepe Abdul-Hosein II in Northern-Central Zagros, c.7000-6000 BC. This paper revisits former studies on the basis of recently studied Ahrendjan-Qara Tepe in comparison to Hajji Firuz tradition. Moreover, it puts forward a new interpretation of the Early Neolithic period in the Urmia Lake region, rather than presenting some new data. In accordance with a diffusionist approach, the author finally concludes that both the Early and Late Neolithic sites of the region were affected by contemporary developments in the Northern-Central Zagros.