Patrick Doyle composed the film score for the film adaptation of Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire.

Career[]

Patrick Doyle was born on 6 April, 1953, in Uddingston, South Lansrkshire, Scotland, Great Britain. He studied music at The Royal Scottish Academy of Music and Drama and graduated in 1975. He is a now a Fellow of the RSAMD. In 1987, Patrick joined the Renaissance Theatre Company as composer and musical director, and enjoyed working with some of the finest directors, as Derek Jacobi, Geraldine McEwan and Dame Judi Dench.

In 1989 director Kenneth Branagh commissioned him to write the film score for Henry V. The song "Non Nobis Domine", from the film, was awarded the 1989 Ivor Novello Award for Best Film Theme. This led to several more collaborations with Branagh, and Doyle composed the scores for his films, Much Ado About Nothing, Frankenstein, Dead Again, As You Like It, Love's Labour's Lost, Thor and more.

He has also composed numerous other film scores, including; Donnie Brasco, Carlito's Way, Eragon, Nim's Island, Calendar Girls, Gosford Park, and Sleuth.

Though a composer by trade, Doyle often makes minor cameo appearances in films which he composes for, such as Frankenstein and As You Like It. He also composed the score for, and voiced a minor character in, the Disney/Pixar film Brave.

Personal life[]

In 1997, at age 44, Doyle was diagnosed with acute myeloid leukaemia (ACL), a form of blood cancer that kills 85 percent of its sufferers within three years. While he was undergoing chemotherapy, he composed the score for his latest project, Quest For Camelot, and often received hospital visits and care packages from Branagh, Emma Thompson, Alan Rickman, and Timothy Spall, who himself had been diagnosed with the same disease only a few years earlier.[1]

Selective filmography[]

Year Work Award Category Result 1991 Dead Again Golden Globe Best Original Score Nominated 1992 Indochine César Best Music Written for a Film Nominated 1994 Mary Shelley's Frankenstein Saturn Best Music Nominated 1995 Sense and Sensibility Academy Best Original Score Nominated BAFTA Film Best Film Music Nominated Golden Globe Best Original Score Nominated 1996 Hamlet Academy Best Original Score Nominated Satellite Best Original Score Nominated 1999 East/West César Best Music Written for a Film Nominated 2001 Bridget Jones's Diary N/A 2005 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire Saturn Best Music Nominated Nanny McPhee N/A 2011 Rise of the Planet of the Apes Thor 2012 Brave Annie Music in an Animated Feature Production Nominated 2014 Jack Ryan: Shadow Recruit N/A 2017 Murder on the Orient Express 2022 Death on the Nile

Behind the scenes[]

Patrick Doyle's daughter Abigail has been singing professionally since age 11, and performed Underwater Secrets, the song of the Golden egg for the film adaptation of Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire.

Patrick Doyle scored for the following films, in which he also made minor cameo appearances, directed by Gilderoy Lockhart actor Kenneth Branagh, who starred alongside Sybill Trelawney actress Emma Thompson:

Henry V (1989), which also featured Robbie Coltrane (Rubeus Hagrid).

Dead Again (1991)

Much Ado About Nothing (1993), which also featured Imelda Staunton (Dolores Umbridge).

Doyle scored for the following films directed by Mike Newell, the director of the film adaptation of Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire:

Into the West (1992), which also featured Brendan Gleeson (Alastor Moody) and Jim Norton (Mr Mason).

Donnie Brasco (1997), which also featured Johnny Depp (Gellert Grindelwald).

Doyle scored for the 1994 film Mary Shelley's Frankenstein and the 2015 film Cinderella, which were directed by Kenneth Branagh and featured Bellatrix Lestrange actress Helena Bonham Carter.

Branagh starred in the former in addition to directing it.

Doyle scored for the 1995 film A Little Princess and the 1998 film Great Expectations, which were directed by Alfonso Cuarón, the director of the film adaptation of Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban.

He scored for the following films, which Kenneth Branagh directed and also starred in:

Hamlet (1996), which also featured Julie Christie (Rosmerta), Ray Fearon (voice of Firenze), and Timothy Spall (Peter Pettigrew).

Love's Labour's Lost (2000), which also featured Carmen Ejogo (Seraphina Picquery)

Jack Ryan: Shadow Recruit (2014)

Murder on the Orient Express (2017), which also featured Johnny Depp.

All Is True (2018)

Death on the Nile (2022), which also featured Dawn French (Fat Lady).

He scored for the following films directed by Kenneth Branagh:

As You Like It (2006)

Sleuth (2007), which also featured Jude Law (Albus Dumbledore).

Thor (2011)

Artemis Fowl (2020), which also featured Colin Farrell (Percival Graves).

Doyle has scored for various projects which featured several actors and actresses from the Harry Potter films:

Two more films with both Emma Thompson and Imelda Staunton:

Sense and Sensibility (1995), which also featured Alan Rickman (Severus Snape), Gemma Jones (Poppy Pomfrey), Robert Hardy (Cornelius Fudge), Elizabeth Spriggs (Fat Lady).

Nanny McPhee (2005), which also featured Kelly Macdonald (Helena Ravenclaw).

Jim Broadbent (Horace Slughorn) and Gemma Jones in the 2001 film Bridget Jones's Diary.

It was a Grammy Award nominee for Best Compilation Soundtrack Album for Motion Pictures, Television or Other Visual Media; though Doyle scored for the film, he was not listed as a recipient, two compilation producers were.[2][3]

Two more films with Kelly Macdonald:

Gosford Park (2001), which also featured Michael Gambon (Albus Dumbledore), Maggie Smith (Minerva McGonagall), Sophie Thompson (Mafalda Hopkirk), and Stephen Fry (UK audiobook narrator).

Brave (2012), which also featured Emma Thompson, Robbie Coltrane, and Julie Walters (Molly Weasley).

Julie Walters and Ciarán Hinds (Aberforth Dumbledore) in the 2003 film Calendar Girls.

Eddie Izzard (voice of Lord Voldemort in The LEGO Batman Movie) in the 2008 film Igor.

Tom Felton (Draco Malfoy) in the 2011 film Rise of the Planet of the Apes.

Notes and references[]

[]

Patrick Doyle on Wikipedia