Background

I was sitting in class on day at University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill at the UNC Hussman School of Journalism and Media. The class I was sitting in was Advertising Creative. A class discussion occurred as we were discussing brand stories when my professor, Gary, showed us an image of the logo for Lucent Technologies. The discussion morphed into one about the striking similarity between the logo used by Lucent Technologies and The Oppenheim Group, the brokerage featured on Selling Sunset. The conversation persisted for a couple minutes and concluded with Gary saying,

"Hey, this is super interesting, one of you should write a blog post about this."

Here I am, writing said blog post.

For Further Context

Lucent Technologies

Lucent Technologies is a subsidiary of AT&T’s equipment manufacturing business. It was founded in September of 1996, headquartered in Murray Hill, New Jersey. It was created to be AT&T’s competitor in the telecommunications sector.

The Oppenheim Group

According to their website, The Oppenheim Group was founded in 1889 under the name, The Stern Realty Co., and represents the 5 generations of family ownership since its' founding. The business is currently owned by Brett and Jason Oppenheim, but was founded by their great-great grandfather, Jacob Stern.

While The Oppenheim Group has an impressive heritage, they have rose to stardom more recently for the role it plays for all the stars in Selling Sunset, a Netflix series.

The Conclusion... [Drumroll]

I can't draw one. After doing much research into the logos and brand stories, not only do I not know which logo came first, but I also don't know the brand story behind either of them!

As someone who loves #Branding I am dying to know who had that red circle logo first? Additionally, I am really interested to know the brand story behind each of the logos, and compare and contrast them from one another? I am genuinely so curious to see how many different interpretations of a red, circular splatter there can be.

Be sure to let me know in the comments your thoughts and if you know of any more red circular logos!