France's Alcatel SA will acquire rival telecom equipment maker Lucent Technologies Inc. in a $13.4 billion stock swap that would form an industry powerhouse with a product line broad enough to entice customers in a consolidating telecom industry.

In brief THE DEAL: French telecom gear maker Alcatel SA is buying Lucent Technologies Inc. for $13.4 billion in stock.

GOOD FIT SEEN: Analysts see minimal overlap in areas of telephone and Internet market specialties and a chance to bolster their overall sales positions and substantial cost savings.

APPROVALS: Hoping to avoid political fears about a foreign buyer, the companies will place all their work on U.S. government contracts with a U.S.-controlled subsidiary.

Company leaders said yesterday that they plan to shed 10 percent of the combined work force - about 8,800 jobs - after the deal closes.

The combined business, to be based in Paris, will work to capitalize on fast-growing converged offerings such as ''triple-play'' Internet, phone and TV packages that have become popular in the telecom field, the companies said.

The new company will have annual sales of $25 billion - ahead of LM Ericsson's $19.9 billion - and an 18 percent share of the fiercely competitive market for telecom gear.

The tie-up will generate annualized pretax savings of $1.7 billion within three years, the companies said. Just over half the savings will come from job eliminations, with the rest by consolidating purchasing, research and development and support services such as sales and marketing.

The combination should add to per-share earnings in the first year, excluding restructuring charges expected to total about $1.7 billion and asset writedowns.

''Lucent was sooner or later going to have to do something to address the scale of their operations'' to stay competitive, said George Calhoun, a business and technology professor at Stevens Institute of Technology. He said Alcatel needed ''to become an A-list infrastructure company in the U.S. market.''

The new Alcatel-Lucent - whose new name is to be announced later - should be better equipped to weather both intense competition in the telecom equipment market and pricing pressures from larger telecom service providers emerging from a new wave of consolidation.

The deal comes as the industry's major U.S. customers have been rapidly consolidating the telecom field. In the past year, the former SBC Communications Inc. bought ATamp T Corp., while Verizon Communications Inc. acquired MCI Inc. Last month, ATamp T Inc. - the name SBC chose after buying ATamp T - proposed a $67 billion deal for BellSouth Corp.

''The newly formed company will be a key player in several key telecom markets,'' including services and wireless network equipment, Prudential Equity Group analyst Inder Singh wrote in a research note.

With about one-third of revenues coming each from North America, Europe and Asia, he wrote, the new company will have a geographic reach few competitors could match, likely forcing other mergers.

Lucent CEO Patricia Russo, who will head the combined company from Paris, told analysts during a conference call that in product and service areas where growth is expected, ''the combined company will be either No. — or No. 2.''

Alcatel Chairman and CEO Serge Tchuruk will become non-executive chairman.

Alcatel and Murray Hill, N.J.-based Lucent had tried to merge once before, but talks ended without a deal in 2001.

Though Lucent and Alcatel sought to depict the deal as a ''merger of equals,'' Alcatel shareholders will hold about 60 percent of the new compan Lucent shareholders 40 percent under the terms of the transaction.

The deal, which is set to be completed in six to 12 months, has been approved by the boards of each compan requires regulator governmental reviews in the United States, Europe and elsewhere, plus approval of both companies' shareholders.

(Published: April 3, 2006)