After an absence of 14 years, Pohl returns to his Heechee universe (The Gateway Trip, 1990, etc.) with a grab-bag yarn that updates many of the previous themes and ideas and adds a few new ones.

At the Gateway asteroid, loyal readers will recall, humans embarked hopefully in Heechee ships toward preprogrammed (but, to the occupants, unknown and random) destinations at which there was an equal likelihood of finding immensely valuable Heechee artifacts, tragic disappointment, or death. Two young prospectors, Stan Avery and Estrella Pancorbo, endure a disappointing, unproductive voyage, returning only to find that the guidance problem has been solved—hence, prospectors are superfluous. Their single option is to join a mission to the black hole at the galaxy’s Core, where the Heechee themselves are hiding in dread of the Foe, the life-destroying Kugel. Numerous other narrative strands fill out the big picture. A Heechee named Achiever leaves the Core to discover what the Kugel are up to inside their Kugelblitz. Superrich Gelle-Klara Moynlin, using advanced Heechee science, observes the explosion of the Crab Nebula and the fate of its sun’s inhabited planet. Superrich, insane Heechee-hater Wan Enrique Santos-Smith hatches plots to destroy the Heechee inside the Core. Fellow Heechee-hater Reverend Orbis McClune, stored electronically after his death and sold to Wan, wonders whether to assist the clearly mad Wan or resist him. And artificial intelligence Marc Anthony, the galaxy’s greatest chef, roams the spaceways as an undercover agent, keeping tabs on the Kugel and on Wan.

An astonishing eyeful, rich and absorbing, albeit undramatic, leaving scope for at least one more installment: a feast for Gateway travelers.

Are we not men? We are—well, ask Bigfoot, as Brooks does in this delightful yarn, following on his bestseller World War Z(2006).

A zombie apocalypse is one thing. A volcanic eruption is quite another, for, as the journalist who does a framing voice-over narration for Brooks’ latest puts it, when Mount Rainier popped its cork, “it was the psychological aspect, the hyperbole-fueled hysteria that had ended up killing the most people.” Maybe, but the sasquatches whom the volcano displaced contributed to the statistics, too, if only out of self-defense. Brooks places the epicenter of the Bigfoot war in a high-tech hideaway populated by the kind of people you might find in a Jurassic Park franchise: the schmo who doesn’t know how to do much of anything but tries anyway, the well-intentioned bleeding heart, the know-it-all intellectual who turns out to know the wrong things, the immigrant with a tough backstory and an instinct for survival. Indeed, the novel does double duty as a survival manual, packed full of good advice—for instance, try not to get wounded, for “injury turns you from a giver to a taker. Taking up our resources, our time to care for you.” Brooks presents a case for making room for Bigfoot in the world while peppering his narrative with timely social criticism about bad behavior on the human side of the conflict: The explosion of Rainier might have been better forecast had the president not slashed the budget of the U.S. Geological Survey, leading to “immediate suspension of the National Volcano Early Warning System,” and there’s always someone around looking to monetize the natural disaster and the sasquatch-y onslaught that follows. Brooks is a pro at building suspense even if it plays out in some rather spectacularly yucky episodes, one involving a short spear that takes its name from “the sucking sound of pulling it out of the dead man’s heart and lungs.” Grossness aside, it puts you right there on the scene.

A tasty, if not always tasteful, tale of supernatural mayhem that fans of King and Crichton alike will enjoy.

A tightly wound caseworker is pushed out of his comfort zone when he’s sent to observe a remote orphanage for magical children.

Linus Baker loves rules, which makes him perfectly suited for his job as a midlevel bureaucrat working for the Department in Charge of Magical Youth, where he investigates orphanages for children who can do things like make objects float, who have tails or feathers, and even those who are young witches. Linus clings to the notion that his job is about saving children from cruel or dangerous homes, but really he’s a cog in a government machine that treats magical children as second-class citizens. When Extremely Upper Management sends for Linus, he learns that his next assignment is a mission to an island orphanage for especially dangerous kids. He is to stay on the island for a month and write reports for Extremely Upper Management, which warns him to be especially meticulous in his observations. When he reaches the island, he meets extraordinary kids like Talia the gnome, Theodore the wyvern, and Chauncey, an amorphous blob whose parentage is unknown. The proprietor of the orphanage is a strange but charming man named Arthur, who makes it clear to Linus that he will do anything in his power to give his charges a loving home on the island. As Linus spends more time with Arthur and the kids, he starts to question a world that would shun them for being different, and he even develops romantic feelings for Arthur. Lambda Literary Award–winning author Klune (The Art of Breathing, 2019, etc.) has a knack for creating endearing characters, and readers will grow to love Arthur and the orphans alongside Linus. Linus himself is a lovable protagonist despite his prickliness, and Klune aptly handles his evolving feelings and morals. The prose is a touch wooden in places, but fans of quirky fantasy will eat it up.

A breezy and fun contemporary fantasy.