Nanzan University (南山大学, Nanzan daigaku?) is a private, coeducational university located in Aichi Prefecture, Japan. The main campus is in the Shōwa Ward of Nagoya City, with another in Seto City and a recently established satellite campus near Nagoya's Takaoka Station on the subway Sakura-dōri Line.

Contents

1 History

2 Organisation

3 Organization

3.1 Campuses

3.1.1 Nagoya

3.1.2 Seto

3.2 Faculties and Departments

3.3 Graduate Schools and Programs

4 Notable Alumni and Students

5 Affiliations

5.1 Sister Schools

5.2 Associated Schools

6 References

7 External links

History

Nanzan is named after the forested mountains near Goken'ya-chō (五軒家町?), known as Minamiyama (南山?), which literally means "southern mountain". The on reading for "南山" is Nanzan. Also, in Chinese poetry "南山" refers to Mount Lushan until the Tang Dynasty and Mount Zhong Nan thereafter. Notably, the word appears in the classical poetry collection Shi Jing and the works of famous poet Li Bai. Thus, the choice of name is a celebration of longevity, perseverance, and prosperity for both the school and its alumni.[2]

Divine Word Missionary Josef Reiners founded Nanzan Junior High School in 1932. Nanzan Foreign Language School was added to the Nanzan system in 1946 and eventually renamed Nanzan University in 1949. In 1995, Nagoya Seirei Junior College was subsumed by Nanzan when the two schools' organizations merged.[3] In 2008, Nanzan plans to open an elementary school, officially named Nanzan University Affiliated Elementary School.

In 1961, Czech architect Antonin Raymond was commissioned to design most buildings on the Nagoya campus. It was one of the largest projects that he would undertake. The campus was orientated on a north south axis across rolling hills and the eight buildings were arranged to suit the typography and harmonise with the landscape. In-situ concrete is used throughout the scheme and each building has its own concrete form, some with pilotis, others with shells.[4]

Located to the east of the campus is the Divine Word Seminary Chapel, constructed in 1962. This is a building that exploits the plastic capacity of concrete, with two intersecting shells forming a bell tower. These are punctured with vertical slots which allow light to radiate along the curved interior walls.[5]

Organisation

Nanzan University is part of Nanzan Gakuen (南山学園, Nanzan gakuen?), an educational complex of three high schools, a women's junior college, and the university itself. Among coeducational universities, Nanzan is the only Catholic missionary school in the Chūbu region.

Nanzan has a strong international focus, actively pursuing foreign exchange students. Western students primarily attend the Nagoya campus, while Asian students attend the Seto campus.

For many years, Nanzan has held an annual competition with its Catholic sister schools Sophia University (上智大学, Jōchi daigaku?) and Sapientia University (英知大学, Eichi daigaku?), primarily focusing on athletics. Combining the first two syllables in Japanese of the respective schools, the Nanzan-Sophia event is known as the Jōnan-sen (上南戦?), while the Sapientia-Nanzan event is known as the Einan-sen (英南戦?).

The humanities department offers priest training courses through its Christian studies curriculum.

Organization

Campuses

Nagoya

Nanzan's main campus is in the east of Nagoya, in Shōwa-ku. The Nagoya campus is home to the Faculties of Humanities, Foreign Studies, Economics, Business Administration, and Law. The campus is about a 10-minute walk from either Nagoya Daigaku (名古屋大学?) or Yagoto Nisseki (八事日赤?) station on the Nagoya Municipal Subway's Meijō Line. Alternately, campus is a 15-minute walk from Irinaka (いりなか?) on the subway's Tsurumai Line.

Seto

The Seto campus houses the Faculties of Policy Studies, and Mathematical Sciences and Information Engineering. It can be reached by taking the Linimo magnetic levitation train to the former station of the Aichi Expo, now known as the Expo Memorial Park Station (愛・地球博記念公園駅, Ai/chikyūhaku kinen kōen eki?). From there, campus is 10 minutes by school bus.

Faculties and Departments

Humanities

Christian Studies

Anthropology and Philosophy

Psychology and Human Relations

Japanese Studies

Foreign Studies

British and American Studies

Spanish and Latin-American Studies

French Studies

German Studies

Asian Studies

Economics

Business Administration

Law

Policy Studies

Mathematical Sciences and Information Engineering

Information and Telecommunication Engineering

Mathematical Sciences

Graduate Schools and Programs

Humanities

Christian Thought

Religious Thought

Anthropology

Educational Facilitation

Linguistic Science

International Area Studies

Economics

Business Administration

Business Administration

Management

Law

Policy Studies

Mathematical Sciences and Information Engineering

Notable Alumni and Students

Ryohei, R&B singer

HOME MADE KAZOKU, hip hop trio

Sakon Yamamoto, racecar driver (currently enrolled)

Kazuki Nakajima, racecar driver (currently enrolled)

Affiliations

Nanzan is a member of the ASEACCU (Association of Southeast and East Asian Catholic Colleges and Universities), an organization of Catholic institutes of higher learning in the Philippines, Australia, Thailand, Taiwan, South Korea, Indonesia and Japan. In addition to Nanzan, there are seven other Japanese members, including Sophia.

Sister Schools

Sophia University

Sapientia University

Toyota Technological Institute

Associated Schools

Nanzan Elementary School

Nanzan Boys' Junior and Senior High School

Nanzan Girls' Junior and Senior High School

Nanzan International Junior and Senior High School

Seirei Girls' Junior and Senior High School

Nanzan Women's Junior College

References

Media related to Nanzan University at Wikimedia Commons

Homepage of Nanzan University