Career success starts here.

A quality education at Oconee Fall Line Technical College is the first step to a great career.

With service to thousands of students (both credit and non-credit) annually, OFTC assists and guides students from all walks of life to increase their career readiness and earning power. OFTC offers more than 100 associate degree, diploma and certificate programs, in addition to, specialized training through continuing education, contract training, and workshops.

Residents of Bleckley, Dodge, Glascock, Hancock, Jefferson, Laurens, Telfair, Warren, Washington, Wheeler, and Wilkinson Counties of Georgia have the opportunity to attend classes at campuses conveniently located throughout the service area.

Our programs are guaranteed. Curriculum standards have been developed with direct involvement of business and industry. These standards serve as the industry-validated specifications for each occupational program. “If one of our graduates educated under a standard program or his/her employer finds that the graduate is deficient in one or more competencies as defined in the standards, the technical college will retrain the employee at no instructional cost to the employee or the employer.” This guarantee is in effect for a period of two years after graduation.

Students also have the opportunity to accelerate the power of their resume with membership in campus clubs and organizations. With opportunities ranging from Rotaract to the National Vocational Honor Society, Oconee Fall Line Technical College students can easily fulfill their need to serve and be recognized. When a prospective employer sees Student Government Association on a resume, they know the applicant is a team player with experience in getting things done.

The Oconee Fall Line Technical College Adult Education program offers services such as adult basic education (ABE), Georgia High School Equivalency (GED and HiSET) preparation and testing, English Literacy Programs (ELP), and Workplace Literacy Programs. Services are offered at many convenient locations throughout the 11-county service area.

Our programs use cutting-edge technology and offer easy access to lifelong learning for all Georgians.