Ramkumar is an Indian actor and film producer known for his work in Kannada cinema. He is the son of Shringar Nagaraj, producer of Pushpak (1987), Directed by Singeetam Srinivasa Rao starring Kamal Haasan and Amala. He made his acting debut in Director Rajendra Singh Babu's war film Muthina Haara (1987) . His first movie as Hero was Gejje Naada in 1993, a musical love story with a good measure of action, it was very well received by the audience and became successful. After the successful debut as Hero, Ramkumar started getting numerous movies in many genres, including action, love and family dramas, many of them were successful. He acted in and produced the film Pandavaru in 2006, a multi-starter. Along with his good looks, his acting skills were well appreciated. Ram kumar has acted in over 50 Kannada feature films. Ramkumar is the son of Shringar Nagaraj, a popular actor and a producer who produced the critically acclaimed, national award winning film Pushpaka Vimana in Kannada , Pushpak in Hindi, Pesum Padam in Tamil, Pushpaka Vimanamu in Telugu and Pushpaka Vimanam in Malayalam in 1987, Directed by Singeetam Srinivasa Rao, starring Kamal Hassan and Amala. Ramkumar, being a producer's son, was an avid movie buff in his childhood. He is married to Poornima, the daughter of actor Rajkumar. They have two children, son Dheeren and daughter Dhanya.Both are upcoming actors in Kannada film field. Following his initial brief roles in Muthina Haara (1987) and Aavesha (1990), Ramkumar came back in 1993 through the film Gejje Naada in a lead role opposite newcomer Shwetha. The film was declared a musical hit with his performance being lauded. The years 1995 to 1998 saw his highest number of films releasing, Thayi Illada Thavaru, Kavya, Thavarina Thottilu , Gaaya and No.1 proved to be very successful. In 1998, his movie outing with Director K.V. Raju, titled No.1, needs a Special mention, Ramkumar played the main lead that of a Tourist Guide based in North Karnataka, portraying the role, he spoke in both the local dialect of North Karnataka and Hindi fluently, for which his performance was greatly appreciated by both the masses and also the press. He was rewarded with the Best Actor Award for 1998 by the Cinegoers Association, Bangalore. In 1999, he starred in the multi-starrer films Snehaloka and Habba. Both the films were successful. He became a producer with the film Pandavaru in 2006 a remake of Malayalam movie Godfather, a multi-starrer with a host of prominent stars.