Description

The Gibson Les Paul Studio is celebrated by live performers and session players alike. The modern Studio covers even wider sonic territory with its coil-tapped 490R/498T humbucking pickups. This combination unlocks plenty of creative textures to flesh out musical ideas, from classic cleans and modern crunch to single-coil cluck. This Studio also benefits from an Ultra-modern weight-relieved body; this reduction of more than a pound in weight provides extra comfort for extended sessions and performances. A feature your fingers will thank you for is the SlimTaper mahogany neck, which re-creates the speed and playability that some of the ’60s Les Pauls are known for. Dependable Grover Rotomatic tuners keep this Gibson Les Paul Studio pitch-perfect and ready to rock. Classic mahogany/maple body is weight relieved for comfort

You can’t deny two fundamental guitar truths: that early Les Pauls were glorious, and that they were also heavy. That’s the tradeoff of strapping a solid slab of mahogany to your body. But Gibson has done something special with the modern Les Paul Studio’s Ultra-modern, weight-relieved body. It retains the chime and resonance of slab Les Pauls at a big reduction in weight. This just means you can enjoy yourself onstage for longer, and drag yourself out of bed more easily the next day, when you’re playing the Gibson Les Paul Studio.

SlimTaper mahogany neck plays fast and smooth

The neck on this Les Paul Studio is a breath of fresh air. Its SlimTaper profile conforms naturally to the hand for smooth leads up top and fast licks down low.

Plek’d for precision playability

This Les Paul Studio feels fast and precise, thanks in large part to its Plek fret treatment. Typically reserved for top-dollar custom guitars, this process levels the frets with pinpoint precision, providing you with the most playable fretboard you’re likely to own. Each note rings loud and clear, and the fret edges feel smooth as silk.

Gibson Les Paul Studio Solidbody Electric Guitar Features:

A stage and studio workhorse

Ultra-modern weight-relieved body allows for longer sets and sessions

Mahogany SlimTaper neck plays like a ’60s favorite

Rosewood fingerboard delivers classic Les Paul sustain

Coil-tapped 490R/498T humbucking pickups provide classic cleans and modern crunch to quacky single-coil cluck

Grover Rotomatic tuners are studio-stable

Nashville Tune-o-matic bridge is lightweight and tonally matched to the guitar

Plek’d for precision playability

**All photos shown are of the actual guitar for sale, not stock photos**