Keynotes - ASQED 2015

Tuesday Aug. 4

Where Things Are Going

Joachim Kunkel

EVP/GM Solutions Group at Synopsys

The number of devices connected to the Internet is forecasted to grow to 30 billion by 2020. The largest new device category will be connected "Things", leading the industry to refer to the next evolutionary step of the Internet as the Internet of Things (IoT). This represents a large business opportunity, not just for device manufacturers and service providers, but also for the semiconductor industry. This talk explores current trends when developing integrated circuits for Things, including architectures, design techniques, and process technologies.

About Joachim Kunkel

Joachim Kunkel has served as the Executive Vice President and General Manager of the Solutions Group of Synopsys since January 2015, responsible for Synopsys' DesignWare® intellectual property (IP), prototyping and FPGA implementation products. Previously he served in a number of senior positions at Synopsys including Vice President of Engineering of the Solutions Group from August 2003 to September 2006, Vice President of Marketing of the IP and Design Services Business Unit from May 2002 to August 2003, and Vice President and General Manager of the System-Level Design Business Unit from October 1998 to May 2002. From April 1994 to October 1998, he served as the Director of Engineering for Synopsys' system-level design products. Prior to joining Synopsys in 1994, Mr. Kunkel was a managing director of CADIS GmbH, a company he had co-founded in 1989 in Aachen, Germany, focused on the development of system-level design tools for digital signal processing and providing specialized design services for digital wireless communication systems. Mr. Kunkel holds an M.S. in Electrical Engineering from the Aachen University of Technology.

Internet of Things: Beyond the Hype

Mudasir Ahmad

Senior Director

Cisco Systems

More than 50 billion devices are expected to be internet enabled by 2020. From smart buildings to smart agriculture; smart healthcare to wearables, infinite applications for IoT have been proposed and are being implemented. While expectations are extremely high, there is considerable uncertainty around how these devices will work; how they will be connected and what the ecosystem will be. Critical to making IoT a reality is how they will be designed to account for so many use conditions, and how the design process itself would have to adapt to new, unforeseen challenges. This involves new design methodologies and even the use of IoT itself to design solutions for IoT. In this talk, details will be provided about the market opportunity for IoT, examples of IoT solutions being devised, the challenges involved and the new methodologies being developed to design robust, reliable IoT products for constantly evolving use environments.

About Mudasir Ahmad

Mudasir Ahmad is a Distinguished Engineer at Cisco Systems, Inc. He has been involved with mechanical design, microelectronics packaging design and reliability analysis for 15 years. He received his Bachelors from Ohio University, his M.S. degree in Mechanical Engineering from Georgia Institute of Technology and his Masters in Management Science & Engineering at Stanford University. Mudasir is leading the Center of Excellence for Numerical Analysis, developing new analytical algorithms, experimental design and reliability characterization of next generation 3D packaging, System-in-Package Modules and Silicon Photonics. Mudasir is also implementing Cloud Computing and Big Data Analytics solutions to streamline Supply Chain Operations and design for Internet of Things applications. Outside of Cisco, he is involved with programs at the Silicon Valley Chapter of the Components Packaging and Manufacturing Technology (CPMT) Society of the IEEE, and actively participates in IPC and JEDEC standards organizations. Mudasir has over 25 publications on microelectronic packaging, two book chapters, and 10 US Patents. He received the internationally renowned Outstanding Young Engineer Award in 2012 from the IEEE.

Cryptanalytical attacks on objects of daily usage

Professor Martin Novotny

Faculty of Information Technology

Czech Technical University in Prague

Cryptography finds its application area in many contemporary object of daily usage. GSM communication, credit cards, tickets for public transport or RFID tags employ cryptographic features either to protect privacy or to ensure trustworthy authentication. However, many such objects are vulnerable to certain cryptanalytical attacks. In our presentation we will discuss how FPGA-based cryptanalytical hardware may compromise GSM communication, or how standard laboratory equipment may be used for breaking SmartCard security. Finally, we would debate one of recent cryptographic challenges, namely protection of dependable systems against cryptanalytical attacks.

About Martin Novotny

Martin Novotný is an assistant professor at the Faculty of Information Technology at the Czech Technical University in Prague. He graduated in electrical engineering from the Czech Technical University in Prague, Czech Republic in 1992. He received his Ph.D. degree in information security from Ruhr-University Bochum, Germany in 2009. His research interests include arithmetic units, cryptanalytical hardware, efficient hardware implementations of cryptographic algorithms, and embedded systems.

The 50B Things Design Challenge

Jeff Shiner

Segment Marketing Director – Micron Technology

The massive economic value that IoT is expected to create is predicated on connecting billions of devices to a cloud-based infrastructure for real-time decision making that will drive efficiency and productivity improvements in every aspect of our lives. In this emerging landscape of IoT, hardware designers face a tough balancing act of power, performance, form-factor, cost, security and reliability requirements and trade-offs. Today, more than ever before, memory products and solutions play an increasingly critical role in sensing to analytics and storage of the IoT data. It's critical for designers to understand memory solutions and tools available to them, and the vital role these choices play in successful build-out of the IoT infrastructure.

About Jeff Shiner

Jeff Shiner is the segment marketing director for the Embedded Business Unit at Micron Technology. Jeff joined Micron in 2015 focused on the Interne of Things (IoT). In this role, he is actively involved in driving Micron's strategy and market develop initiatives targeted at emerging and existing markets that will benefit from the explosion in growth from the IoT. Jeff has nearly 20 years experience in the semiconductor industry both from sales and marketing sides. Before joining Micron, he held various sales, marketing and business development positions at AMD, Spansion and Cypress Semiconductor. He holds a bachelor degree in Industrial Engineering from Texas A&M University. He has authored various industrial related articles.