The Clonmel cyclone spear-heads a classy list of 'lefties' whose pace is a source of trepidation for all opposing full-backs.

Billy Woods (Shamrock Rovers) and Mark Rutherford (Bohs) are also fleet-footed wing wizards of genuine class, but as far as the Turner's Cross cognescenti are concerned, 26-year-old Cahill is a cut above the rest.

Their view is shared by most managers across the League as Cahill gives City an attacking dimension which other clubs crave, capable of turning defence into attack with one turbo-charged sprint.

Not surprisingly, Cahill ships plenty of stick from frustrated full-backs but Tipperary sportsmen are hardy and Cahill has only missed four games in five and a half years with City, and one of them was due to suspension.

Durable and direct, Cahill has given City outstanding value since signing from Northampton at the start of the '95-'96 season after making just 11 appearances in two years with the Cobblers.

In that time, he's won the FAI Cup ('98), League Cup ('99) and played in Europe five seasons out of six. "We've come close in the League but not close enough. Maybe this year will be different," he says.

This weekend, clubs take a time out from the League exertions for a shot at the Blue Riband and of tomorrow's eight-game Cup programme, the clash between City and the Hoops stands out miles above the rest.

Nothing gets the fervour stoked up more at the 'Cross than the sight of the Hoops in the Cup. It may be 14 years since the self-styled Cup kings last won the competition but they remain the team everyone wants to beat.

"For the fans, this is a the top draw of the lot. Rovers at home, the Cup doesn't come any bigger than this. There's a bit of spice to this one, especially after our recent 3-1 win over them in the league.

"We played them two years ago at this stage as well and got through 3-1 after a 1-1 draw in Dublin. We've a very good record against Rovers and we've no reason to fear them, especially at home."

For Cahill, the Cup is of secondary importance for City this season. "We've made up ground in the League after a terrible start where we took one point from four games.

"Losing to UCD last week was a massive set-back but we've got all the top teams to play again and with the young players coming through, such as Neal Horgan, Alan Carey and Colin Pat O'Brien, and Noel Hartigan back at his best, we'll be in the frame.

"Shels and Bohs have shown in the past two seasons that a good Cup run can have positive knock-on effects in the League. Maybe, it's our turn to have a shot at the two trophies this time."