But the 32-year-old Drogheda United star wants to carry on smashing records and Cahill intends that this summer's European venture for Drogheda will last longer than two games in the first qualifying round.

Cahill was a little-known, quiet lad from Tipperary who joined Cork City from Northampton Town in 1996 but since then he has made European football his summer home, as this will be his 12th consecutive season of European action. And if he plays for Drogheda against Levadia Tallinn at Dalymount Park tonight it will be his 35th appearance in Europe, a new record which leaves current players like Owen Heary (32) and Glen Crowe (25) in the shade, along with recent stars like Paul Doolin (27) and Pat Fenlon (21).

"I'm lucky enough to have played a lot of games in Europe, but I don't intend to quit now and I want to get lots more games under my belt, so hopefully we can get past Levadia over two legs and get through to face Dynamo Kyiv in the next round," says Cahill.

"It's a nice record to have, 34 games in Europe, but it could have been a lot more. The first seven years I played in Europe we never got past the first round, it was only with Shels in 2004 that I made the breakthrough and started winning a round or two.

"I've been luckier in the last while, in the last four seasons I got past the first round each time, with Shels and Drogheda, we beat decent sides like Hajduk Split, Glentoran and HJK Helsinki. So I think we have to approach this game against Levadia tonight, and the tie overall, in a confident frame of mind.

"Playing in Europe is great, a real career highlight. It's nice to win medals and trophies but playing in Europe is something else, coming from Ireland and playing your club football in Ireland you will never really get a chance to play for the national team, so playing on the European stage is the only way to test yourself against the best and prove yourself."

In Cahill's early experiences in Europe, it was a case of flop after flop as his club consistently came up short against usually mediocre opposition, with first-round exits against the likes of CSKA Kyiv, Lausanne Sports and Metalurgs Liepaja (with Cork) and then Hibs of Malta and Olimpija Ljubljana (Slovenia) with Shels, before that breakthrough in the summer of 2004 with Shels, Cahill playing in every minute of every game in the Reds' eight-match Euro run against KR Reykjavik, Hajduk Split, Deportivo La Coruna and Lille.

Experience

Drogheda have done well in Europe over the last two seasons but Paul Doolin's side face a very stiff test at Dalymount against a Levadia side who are not only in form domestically (one defeat in 15 in the Estonian league) but also have a decent European record, as well as the experience of players like Indrek Zelinski and Marek Lemsalu, who have over 180 Estonian caps between them.

"We know all about Levadia, we have seen the DVDs and Paul Doolin has had reports on them," says Cahill.

"They have players who can really cause you problems, home or away, as they showed when they beat Bohs 3-1 here in Dublin a few years ago.

"They have a lot of experience in the side and they know the European game, but we have lads with European experience too. And we have to make that count.

"I have learned a lot from playing in Europe over the last 12 years, I know you can't give the ball away easily, I know you just have to take your chances when they come along as you might only get one chance in a game.

"Levadia have been decent in Europe over the last while, they did well against Newcastle United and I think Red Star Belgrade only beat them by one goal.

"But if we have belief in ourselves, play to our potential and use the experience in Europe of people like Stuart Byrne, Graham Gartland and Shaun Maher, we have a good chance.

"We have to try and win our home game and have something to take over to Estonia next week. If we do our job and play to our potential we can win the tie and then start thinking about Dynamo Kyiv," added Cahill.

Drogheda boss Doolin has no major injury worries, with only long-term absentees Brian Shelley and Shane Barrett missing, as Dan Connor and Declan O'Brien were added to the squad after proving their fitness in a reserve game last week.