Town of Wasaga Beach Kicks-off 50th Anniversary Celebrations, Prepares to Welcome The Carpet Frogs to the Main Stage at Beach Area 1 on Saturday July 27

Thousands expected to attend four-day festival that begins tonight with the opening of the Midway

“We’re thrilled to welcome Canadian fan-favourites and local heroes The Carpet Frogs back to Wasaga Beach to help celebrate our Town’s 50th anniversary,” said Mayor Brian Smith. “That’s not all. We’ve got four days of family-friendly fun and live music lined up, with Barstool Confession, Boomerang and more. Help us celebrate on the longest freshwater beach in the world – grab your tickets and join us for a taste of the beach life, beginning today, at the Midway.”

Wasaga Beach – This weekend, the home of the longest freshwater beach in the world is turning 50, and the Town of Wasaga Beach is inviting everyone to help celebrate. The 50 Years of Sunshine festival begins today with the opening of the Midway and ends with an epic beachfront performance by Canadian fan-favourites, The Carpet Frogs, including openers by Barstool Confession and Boomerang.

Here are all the ways you can join in the fun:

Thursday July 25: Join us as we welcome the iconic Midway to town, beginning at 6pm.

Friday July 26: Retro roller Skate Party from 4:00 PM to 10:00 PM in the 140 Main Street Parking Lot – Bring your own skates, or book a pair of rentals here. Don't forget to head over to Summer Sets live music at the Beach Area 1 Entertainment stage, beginning at 6:00 PM.

Saturday July 27: Saturday’s itinerary brings a full line-up of activities, with something for everyone to enjoy.

At Beach Area 1, enjoy beach yoga at 8am; a pancake breakfast at 9am – presented by Kinettes Club of Wasaga Beach, craft tents beginning at 10am; break dancers and live performances beginning at 10am; a special presentation by the Collingwood Circus Club at 1:30pm; and a beer garden presented by Side Launch Brewing Company, beginning at 4:00 PM.

The Wasaga Beach Archives, located at 140 Main Street will also be hosting a 50 Years of Sunshine “Coffee with a Historian”, to share memories and coffee, beginning at 10:00 AM. You can meet Steve Collie, the owner of “After Dark Tours”, whose family has owned property in Wasaga Beach for a century and has hosted a number of Heritage tours of our area. Please email archives@wasagabeach.com or call (705) 300-0203 for more information.

The grand finale: To top it all off, Saturday evening beginning at the Town of Wasaga Beach presents The Carpet Frogs, on the beach and under the stars, with guests Boomerang and Barstool Confession. Get the best seats in the house – tickets for the Side Launch Brewing Company beer garden and VIP area are available here.

Sunday, July 28: Celebrations wrap up with the Midway’s final day.

For the full weekend line-up, visit www.explorewasagabeach.com/events.

To get tickets to what’s coming up next, and learn more about how we’re celebrating Wasaga Beach’s 50th Anniversary, visit www.50YearsofSunshine.ca

Getting Around This Weekend

With so many events going on, mind the traffic, and be aware that some municipal parking lots may be affected by these events. From Thursday to Monday, the Playland Park Lot will be closed to parking, due to the presence of the Midway, which will also impact the west end of the Nancy Island Lot. The east end remains open for use. The north end of the Third Street Lot will be impacted on Saturday, due to the concert seating. The Main Street Lot Parking will have capacity limited with the locating of the Roller-Rink. All other municipal lots are unaffected and open for parking, in addition to private and Wasaga Beach Provincial Park parking lots.

Media contact: