Muhammad Ali might never have become one of the greatest boxers of all time if his bicycle hadn’t been stolen when he was 12.

That’s among the many pivotal moments in Ali’s youth recounted in James Patterson’s and Kwame Alexander’s new book "Becoming Muhammad Ali."

The book, aimed at middle school readers, charts in prose and verse how the former Cassius Clay, a Black boy growing up in racially segregated Louisville, Kentucky in the 1940s and 1950s, became the first fighter to win the top heavyweight title three times.

The book, a joint project by JIMMY Patterson Books and HMH Books for Young Readers, began when the Ali estate approached Patterson, a Palm Beach resident, about writing a story about the boxer’s coming of age.

“Almost nothing is known about Muhammad Ali as a kid except that he wasn’t good at school,” Patterson said.

The estate chose him because they were familiar with his Max Einstein series that teaches kids about Einstein and science through the exploits of his young female heroine, Max, Patterson said.

It didn’t hurt that Ali’s widow, Lonnie, is a big fan of the best-selling novelist’s Alex Cross detective series.

Patterson asked Alexander, author of 34 books, including the Newberry Medal-winning novel "The Crossover," to collaborate with him because he knew that Ali’s story had profoundly impacted the writer.

Alexander had fallen out of love with reading after his father began making him read books he wasn’t interested in. His disinterest disappeared when he was 12 and he ran across Ali’s autobiography The Greatest: My Own Story while cleaning out the garage.

“I couldn’t put it down,” he said. “I became enamored of his confidence, his bravado, his intelligence and his use of rhyme.”

Patterson sees their partnership as an example of the interracial cooperation that’s needed to rectify the racial injustice that triggered the protests that followed the police killing of George Floyd.

“With this book you have a Black writer and a white writer getting together to write a book about a beautiful human being,” he said. “Symbolically, that’s what has to happen.”

Both writers also are committed to promoting literacy by writing books that young people want to read.

"Becoming Muhammad Ali" alternates between Patterson’s prose narrative recounted by Ali’s imaginary best friend Lucky and Alexander’s Ali-like poems in which the future champion steps in to tell his own story.

Finding the right voice for the book was key to telling the story.

“Kwame and I knew we didn’t want to write a flat biography,” Patterson said. “We struggled with that. The voice we got came out of the way Muhammad Ali would talk as an adult.”

When the teenaged Ali wants to impress a girl in the book, he says

“I’m so fast that last night

I turned off the light switch in my bedroom

and I got in bed before the room was dark.”

That's what Ali said about himself when he became a famous fighter.

But let’s get back to the bicycle. In the book, a distraught Ali is directed to a gym downstairs from the expo he was attending when he insists on reporting the theft to the police.

The gym happened to be run by policeman Joe Martin, who took young Ali under his wing and taught him the skills he needed to win.

Ali grew up in a loving family. But he also was extraordinarily disciplined. He ate healthily, went to bed early and ran to school rather than take the bus to build up his stamina.

But he wasn’t superhuman.

“We wanted kids to grasp onto a hero who was accessible and think that they could possibly achieve what they want to in life,” Alexander said. “So let’s show him not getting good grades and having a crush and being jilted. Let’s show ordinary kids they have something in common with this man who became a great human being.”

The book also emphasizes that part of the reason Ali fought so hard was to pave the way to a better life for others like him.

Both writers are proud of the book.

Patterson hopes it is read not only by youngsters today but remains on the reading list for years to come so that kids can be inspired by the champion who said

“I am the greatest

Not because I am better than anybody

I am the greatest

Because nobody is greater than me.”