Courteney Cox, born in Alabama, struggled finding her place in Hollywood, like so many actors looking for a big break, before she finally landed roles that would change her life. But she had a backup plan back home in case it all fell through.

Promoting her new Starz horror comedy series “Shining Vale,” Cox has made media rounds on Howard Stern, Jimmy Kimmel and Seth Meyers’ shows where she recently reminisced about her career, including her time on NBC’s smash hit sitcom “Friends.”

In the Sunday Sitdown interview with “Today” co-host Willie Geist, Cox spoke about her upbringing in Mountain Brook, her early modeling career (posing in Parisian department store catalogues) and what she remembers about playing Monica Geller.

Cox grew up the youngest of four siblings, and began taking local modeling jobs with the hope of becoming an actress, but as Geist puts it, “always with a solid backup plan.” She also worked at a local swimming pool store, where she said she was “a hell of a salesman.”

RELATED: 10 things we learned about Courteney Cox from the ‘Friends’ reunion

‘Friends’: Monica’s 10 best episodes

Which Alabama celebrities have the largest social media followings?

A New York modeling agency gave her work before she landed a role in Bruce Springsteen’s “Dancing in the Dark” music video, during which she appeared for 24 seconds. But even after that gig, she said there was a period when she couldn’t find work, after which her father told her, “CC, it’s a long fall from California to Alabama.’ He just thought I should come home and do what I do, sales.” But she said she then booked the part of Michael J. Fox’s girlfriend on “Family Ties,” paving the way for more opportunities.

Five years later, she booked “Friends,” one of the highest-rated shows on TV during its 10-season run on NBC, 1994-2004. The series provided a breakthrough role for Cox, who was born and raised in Birmingham, and cemented her fame as an actress. Her character, Monica Geller, was a neat-freak chef who could be bossy, obsessive, anxious, wacky, kind and caring -- sometimes all at once.

“I see it on TV sometimes, and I stop and go, ‘Oh my god, I don’t remember this at all. That is so funny,’” she said. “It doesn’t matter what generation is watching it. It holds up.”

Watch the entire “Today” interview in the video above.

After getting snubbed 10 seasons straight for playing Monica Geller on “Friends,” Cox finally landed an Emmy nomination. While not for her acting, the Birmingham native scored a nod for producing HBO Max’s “Friends: The Reunion,” which premiered in May 2021. The show was nominated for Outstanding Variety Special (Pre-Recorded), scoring Cox and her fellow castmates and executive producers recognition.