Roberto Rossellini, a master of the postwar wave of niotion‐picture realism in Italy, died suddenly yesterday at his home in Rome, apparently of a heart attack. He was 71 years old.

As director, producer and co‐scenarist, Mr. Rossellini filmed the classic “Rome, Open City” in the final months of World War II. He followed it over a long and busy career by more, than a score of others, including the prize‐winning “Falun” and “Il Generale Della Rovere.” He was also widely known for his love affair with Ingrid Bergman.

Their defiance of marital ties in 1949 both scandalized and titillated a vast public, and caused Miss Bergman's virtual exile from Hollywood for many years. Time modified popular judgement of their’ conduct and their careers.

Produced Propaganda Films

Mr. Rossellini was born in Rome on May 8, 1906, the son of a well‐to‐do‐architect who died. in 1931. With no more than a high‐school education, he picked up odd jobs in the film industry and won a directing role about the time that Italy entered the war, in 1940.

From the Allied invasion to the liberation of Rome in 1945, Mr. Rossellini made war‐propaganda films—under dire compulsion, he said—but he also collected documentary film. Some of this he incorporated into a picture that he began shooting immediately after the Americans arrived: “Open City.”

Most of the cast members were amateurs. The star was the then‐unknown Anna Magnani; one of the writers, a future director named Federico Fellini. Mr. Rossellini worked by inspiration, essentially without a Script, discarding most dialogue and making the camera tell the story.

What emerged ‘is still considered one of the stronger motion pictures ‐to come out of World War II. It was followed by “Palm” (1947‐48), a film about soldiers in those final months, which has been described as one of the more‐powerful antiwar films, and “Germany, Year Zero” (1948), which some critics thought was even better. s.

A Press Extravaganza

Miss Bergman, then the first lady of films, wrote to Mr. Rossellini asking for the opportunity to work with him. He summoned her to the volcanic island of Stromboli to make the‐picture that would bear that name.

It was a press extravaganza. Miss Magnani, his previous companion, objected loudly that the film had been planned for her. Miss Bergman‐and Mr. Rossellini, both married and parents; did not conceal their romance; a child, Roberto Ingmar, was,torn before Mr. Rossellini could ob‐. tain an annulment and Miss Bergman a divorce.

The affair drew’ denunciations from pulpits and from the floor of Congress. These were note immediately allayed by their marriage in 1950, and the birth of twin girls; Isotta and Isabella, in 1952.

“Strombtili” was a critical disaster, and so was another Rossellini‐Bergman film, “The Greatest Love.” But the New York Times critic Vincent Canby suggested in a 1971 essay that these ‘were important pictures, far ahead of their time in examining the modern problem of alienation.

While making a documentary for the Indian Government in Bombay, Mr. Rossellini had another. affair that caused scandal, with Sonali Das Gupta, the wife of an Indian director. This ended his marriage with Miss Bergman, who divorced him in .1957.

Both careers picked up ‘for a time. Miss Bergman ‘obtained film contracts, first in Europe, then in Hollywood. Mr. Rossellini made another prize‐winning war picture, “Generale Della Rovere” (1959), about cowardly collaborator who poses as a resistance hero, and becomes one. The star was Vittorio De Sica.

From then on, Mr. Rossellini turned almost entirely to making documentaries for public television, in Italy and abroad. It was often observed, by himself and others, that he had always worked in a documentary mode.

Films on Socrates and Louis XIV

“I no longer regard entertainment or art as important,” he said in a recent interview.”

Expressing a preference for so‐called educational films, he commented, “In sense, even ‘Open City’ and ‘Paisan’ were educational.”

Among his later productions, both for television, were “The Rise of Louis XIV” and “Socrates.” They drew mixed reviews, but Some critics were deeply impressed. Made for French and Italian television, they were edited for showing in movie houses here. Mr. Canby wrote of. “Socrates” that it was saintly if not espe cially congenial, and characteristically uncompromising.

In recent years, Mr. Rossellini gave courses in film‐making at Yale and at Rice. University in Houston, where he also produced a lengthy television film on science.

At the time of his death, the director was working on films about Karl Marx, and about the new art center in the Place Beaubourg in Paris.