Director: Stephen Finnigan; Screenwriter Ben Bowie, Stephen Finnigan, Stephen Hawking; Starring: Stephen Hawking, Jane Wilde; Running time: 94 mins; Certificate: PG

Conventional though the structure of Stephen Finnigan's scrupulous documentary is, offering a linear walkthrough of Stephen Hawking's life from childhood to the present day, there's an unexpected autobiographical angle that imbues it with immediacy. Hawking himself – in the familiar synthesised voice that he has opted to retain in lieu of more lifelike offerings – co-wrote and narrates the doc, which is described as "a personal journey told in his own words". The results are compelling and touching if only intermittently illuminating.

Hawking has been described as ambivalent towards the idea of being a disability rights champion, and early on here he expresses the understandable fear that he is as famous for his disability as he is for his discoveries. It's perhaps curious, then, that Finnigan focuses at least as heavily on the medical lows of Hawking's life as he does on the professional highs, with close family and caregivers discussing the diagnosis and gradual progression of his motor neurone disease. But it's a relatively sterile and polished exploration, scant on uncomfortable detail and leaning instead on the emotional realities of degenerative illness.

Despite the near-unavoidable blend of talking heads and archive footage employed to trace Hawking's simultaneously triumphant and tragic trajectory, Finnigan injects visual flair through a series of more abstract, reconstructed shots designed to show the world through Hawking's eyes. Some are lush, others terrifying: as his symptoms begin to emerge during his final year at Oxford, there's a palpable sense of dread as the camera's angles become disorienting, the room looming. But these moments are scant and Hawking feels overall more televisual than cinematic.

Hawking's first wife Jane Wilde, his university sweetheart and mother of his three children, is featured extensively, while his more controversial second marriage is touched on only briefly for understandable reasons. Later talking heads include Jim Carrey, shedding light on Hawking's wit and penchant for self-parody, and Benedict Cumberbatch discussing the challenges of his acclaimed performance in the BBC's 2004 Hawking.

The script by Finnigan, Hawking and Ben Bowie doesn't attempt to dig into the intricacies of Hawking's scientific discoveries, focusing instead on the more accessible and poetic idea of the mind as an escape from the body. As Hawking becomes gradually trapped inside his failing frame, his intellect is portrayed as a means of transcendence; an escape into the infinite. As a biopic, Hawking favours depth at the expense of breadth, but it does so with insight and elegance.

3