The pandemic upended New York City’s performing arts sector. Even after four years, the industry is still struggling to right the ship. Here’s how city cultural institutions are grappling with changes in audience viewing habits, diminished funding, and increased expenses.

POSTED IN Dance Music Theater

SHARE

After navigating over three years of virtual, hybrid and in-person programming, Tony Waag thought his dance organization was about to turn a corner last September.

“I was thinking, ‘Oh, well, everybody’s just going to come back, and we’re just going to go back to normal’ — whatever I thought normal was — but it was different,” said Waag, the founding artistic and executive director of the American Tap Dance Foundation (ATDF).

Instead, Waag felt that the whole world was still flipped upside down, and, as a result, his organization saw less participation from its community. The center’s youth program, for instance, saw a 50% drop in participation compared to 2019.

After careful consideration, the ATDF recently announced it was downsizing. The tap hub is canceling its annual festival this year and closing its West Village studios at the end of June.

One of the first industries to shut down at the pandemic’s onset and among the last to reopen, New York City’s nonprofit performing arts sector has had a tough go. Even after four years, many organizations are still struggling. Changes in audience viewing habits and funding, as well as increased expenses, have upended several city cultural institutions. And though many remain optimistic about the fate of performing arts, additional setbacks appear to be ahead.

“You have this perfect storm that happens this year when federal relief has gone out,” said Lucy Sexton, executive director of the advocacy group New Yorkers for Culture & Arts (NY4CA).

Sexton was referring to initiatives, like the Paycheck Protection Program and the Shuttered Venue Operators Grant program, which were designed to blunt the impact of the pandemic on organizations. “We did not get the level of relief long enough in order to fully get our feet back under ourselves,” Sexton said, adding that she’d like to see that level of funding continued for the sector.

Earned revenue, income from services like performances and classes, is one of the areas where many organizations are still struggling. While it’s been inching back year over year since its low in 2021 during the pandemic, earned revenue hasn’t quite returned to 2019 levels, according to Zannie Voss, the director of SMU DataArts, a national center for arts research.

Voss is an author of a SMU DataArts report slated for release this spring. The report tracks trends from 233 arts organizations from across the country over the last five years.

Nancy Umanoff, executive director of the Mark Morris Dance Group, said the nonprofit’s touring opportunities have been slow to return. One reason: Venues that would customarily present MMDG are producing fewer shows because of their own budget constraints.

“Touring is not back at the level that it was pre-pandemic,” said Umanoff. “It’s certainly continuing to build but much more slowly than we need in order to maintain a full-time company and to maintain that work.”

Even though shutdowns and many people’s fear of contracting COVID-19 have abated, audiences still haven’t returned to theaters in droves. Nationally, the arts and entertainment field sold less tickets this past December by 11% compared to 2019, according to a 2023 report by TRG Arts, an industry consulting company.

Attracting audiences has been top of mind for many New York City institutions, said Emily Sproch, a senior program officer with the Howard Gilman Foundation. (ALL ARTS is also a recipient of Howard Gilman funding.) Grantees aren’t only concerned with small audience sizes, but that, Sproch noted, “there’s certainly a sense from many organizations that audience’s buying habits have changed.”

National Sawdust, the music venue and nonprofit, based in Brooklyn’s Williamsburg neighborhood has seen a notable shift in the way concert goers are purchasing tickets. While sales have improved in the last few seasons, people are waiting until the last minute to spring for a seat. Its day-of sales have tripled since 2019, now totaling on average 35% of total sales, according to Ana De Archuleta, the institution’s managing director.

“We are basically risking Russian roulette, just to see if people are going to show up or not,” she said.

Corporate partnerships have been a bright spot for National Sawdust in the last few years as more companies were in search of venues to host parties, retreats and work events once more people were comfortable gathering. Google, the hair care company Prose and the GRAMMY Museum, among other corporations and brands, have rented National Sawdust for events at a steady clip — so much so that it’s helped subsidize the artists and nonprofits that also rent and use the venue.

But earned revenue streams aren’t the only line items that have vexed organizations. Shifts in funding abound. Voss’ recent research has identified that private contributions overall have flat-lined and haven’t kept up with inflation. (In the broader economy, while jobs continue to be plentiful and unemployment has been low, wage growth in the last few months has slowed.) When Voss homed in on individual giving specifically, she said, “I don’t really see that right now as a huge revenue engine for arts and cultural organizations across the board.”

Other reports indicate similar patterns. TRG Arts reported that philanthropic giving in the U.S. fell 5% last year compared to pre-pandemic charitable levels.

There are outliers, however, when it comes to this trend. Voss said foundation giving has been robust for entities whose mission is rooted in a specific ethnic, racial or cultural voice. “It was considerably higher in 2023 compared to pre-pandemic levels, and it was higher than that of non-BIPOC orgs,” she wrote in an email.

Kelley Nicole Girod, founder and executive producing director of Obie Award winning The Fire This Time Festival, said that in the wake of the murder of George Floyd, she experienced an influx of contributions though the organization has been a mainstay within the independent theater community for 15 years.

“There was a lot of funding that suddenly became available to us,” said Girod.

The new streams of money were pivotal to the organization, which once produced the festival in its early years for around $5,000.

But some of that funding is already going away, either because it was a one-time grant or individuals that contributed at the time are now experiencing donor fatigue. Girod likened the experience to the sudden burst of political engagement seen around a consequential election and the dip in off-years. “We need people to be engaged all the time, not just when it matters,” she said. “It matters all the time.”

Private dollars aren’t the only funding source that’s eluding performing arts nonprofits. This year, Cultural Institutions Group and Cultural Development Fund at the Department of Cultural Affairs had undergone cuts amounting to around $20 million.

The budget reductions, coupled with changes to DCLA’s Cultural Development Fund application review process, took some organizations by surprise. In March, Spectrum News NY1 reported that the Bronx Arts Ensemble received a notification, eight months into the fiscal year, that the music institution wouldn’t be receiving any funding after being recipients of DCLA money for many seasons.

In a statement provided to ALL ARTS, DCLA wrote: “The city alone has never been able to fully support the entire sector, even in the best fiscal circumstances. As the federal aid that kept these institutions afloat vanishes, we need our partners at all levels of government and private philanthropy to play a crucial role in bolstering these organizations, ensuring they not only survive but thrive in the years ahead.”

To address some of the challenges facing live performance in New York, another city agency, The Mayor’s Office of Media and Entertainment, created an industry council. The group is looking at additional access to affordable real estate for artists and organizations, strengthening public-private sector partnerships, and improving upon the sector’s accessibility and inclusivity, according to the agency’s press secretary. And in April, the Mayor and New York City Council Speaker Adrienne Adams announced a restoration of more than $22 million for cultural organizations in the city budget over the next few years.

“It’s good news,” Sexton said of the restoration. But she points out that for smaller groups, “it will not provide immediate relief and they’re in a lot of danger right now [of] falling off the map.”

The recent tightening of city dollars is just another blow to New York organizations at a time when they’re already dealing with a confluence of financial challenges, including sky-high expenses.

Choreographer Laura Peterson, who founded Open Arts Studio three years ago when many studios were still closed said demand for her space has overall been strong, but the electricity bill for her 1,246-square foot studio has climbed and her rent will be increasing. The business owner had to raise her rental prices by $1 to offset the mounting costs. Peterson said that she’s constantly monitoring the studio thermostat to ensure that renters are comfortable. “But then I think, ‘Oh, my God, my bill,’” Peterson said. “That has been a little bit of a challenge.”

Still, Peterson is determined to keep her space affordable and accessible to just about any performing artist, including adult dance groups and belly dancers, to name a few of the different communities that are welcomed at the studio. And Peterson wants to keep it that way. “I feel really proud,” she said. “I’m glad I did it and I would totally do it again.”

Peterson isn’t alone in wanting to stay the course despite the fact that the future of the city’s performing arts sector remains murky.

Umanoff, like many of the people interviewed for this story, believes that the field will get through this, but, as the last four years have proved, it’s not going to be easy. She said, “I believe that good art, important art, will survive. But I think this is going to be a long, rocky road.”