We’ve revised our Strategic Plan to ensure it’s in step with the needs of Letchworth today.

The past 14 months have been a time of significant challenge and change for the Foundation. We have had to adapt quickly to meet the needs of our town and our organisation during the pandemic.

In the community we saw the hardship and isolation that people faced as a result of the national lockdowns. However, alongside these difficulties we saw the emergence of innovation, social action, unity and collaboration across Letchworth Garden City on a larger scale and at a faster pace than ever before.

Our Property

We are the largest landlord in the Garden City. The income generated from our property funds our charitable commitments and allows us to reinvest in the property portfolio.

Our properties are primarily across the office, retail and industrial sectors, however we also have various miscellaneous holdings ranging from garden centres to sport fields spread across the 5,500 acre Garden City Estate.

We also have a number of unfurnished residential flats in Letchworth Garden City town centre, above the retail shops, for rent – consisting of one, two, and three bedrooms.

If you have any questions please contact the Property Team.

Grants & Funding

Our 2021 programme, Communities Looking Forward Grant, offers funding to registered charities and groups in Letchworth.

Our grants programme has £120k available for community groups and charities in Letchworth. Each grant has a limit of £10,000 per grant.

Through grants we fund charitable organisations that bring together mainly older, vulnerable or disadvantaged groups to make a positive contribution to their lives and the social fabric of the town.

If you have any questions about our Grant Applications, contact us on 01462 530366 or grants@letchworth.com.

Environment

We are responsible for the enhancement, management and maintenance of the majority of the 5,500 acre Garden City estate. From it's rural paths, industrial parks to the main shopping streets, we're committed to making sure all are cared for and in great condition.

Our dedicated Landscape and Environmental team oversee these areas. This includes the beautiful Garden City Greenway, permissive pathways, meadows, play areas and more.

If you have any questions or concerns about our green areas and maintenance across Letchworth, please contact us at response@letchworth.com.

Heritage Advice Service

We operate the ‘Scheme of Management’ as Freeholders of the Garden City Estate, and are committed to working with residents to preserve the unique appearance and character of Letchworth Garden City.

If you live in Letchworth Garden City and wish to make changes to your home, you may require our consent when making external changes to your home. Any proposed changes to your home needs to meet certain criteria as to how they look and are designed.

Find out more about what you need to do before applying to change your home, including printing off your own checklist.

If you want to talk to a member of our Heritage Advice Service about this process, call them on 01462 530335.

Our Venues

We invest in the community through our grants and the many services we provide such as Broadway Cinema & Theatre, Broadway Gallery & Studio, Heritage Advisory Team, the Garden City Greenway, International Garden Cities Institute, Garden City Collection, and Standalone Farm.

Letchworth’s iconic Broadway Cinema and Theatre is a popular venue within the town and we’re proud to be home to one of the UK’s last independent cinemas.

An ever-popular attraction of Letchworth, Standalone Farm provides hours of family fun on the traditional working farm. With a variety and mix of things to do, make a great day out for young families with little ones, from infants to young children.

If you have any questions, please contact the venue directly, or us at the Heritage Foundation at response@letchworth.com.

Sustainability Policy

We are proud of our role for Letchworth Garden City, taking care of a wide range of buildings, spaces, and activities. We believe that by working together to achieve the commitments in this policy, we will inspire and benefit future generations.

This policy aims to work in harmony with existing strategic objectives, charitable objects, the garden city principles, and Letchworth’s sense of place.