Editors note: This review is like 4 pages long because I wanted to tell a brief history of what proceeded the games launch and ended up writing a book about Pandemic studios. It’s all relevant information about Saboteur though so I would recommend reading the whole thing, but obviously if you just want a game review skip down a ways.

PART 1: HISTORY

Pandemic has always been a good studio, for their entire history, or at least what I know of it, they have been making big bombastic action games that center on the ability to either blow things up or go to war on a grand scale. The games have always been fun but never really too deep, and you got the impression that Pandemic and EA/Lucasarts were fine with that. They liked a studio that could do quick turn around on a game and have it sell well because it was fun. The problem was that Pandemic was too damn good at it; they released hit game after hit game during the PS2/XBOX era. With two Battlefront titles, Full Spectrum Warrior and finally Mercenaries: Playground of Destruction. Their success I felt was so grand because of what they were able to accomplish given the hard limitations. In Battlefront you had 30+ things running around on screen fighting, it was like actually invading Hoth, it was pretty awesome. Mercs let you destroy buildings with orbital strikes from fucking satellites, and the buildings actually blew up, any building not just plot critical ones. The point is that the game engines were great, so Pandemic never really felt the need to update them or start on new things, what they had worked, plus Lucasarts was there publisher and they have a great reputation for being nice and understanding to their dev studios.

At the dawn of this console generation though, the studio was purchased from Lucasarts by none other than EA. Pandemic of course had to build new game engines for the new hardware, but because there staff is less than a 100 people, well development was what you would call ‘abysmally slow’. Remember this is back in the Pre ’We love gamers and game makers!’ EA days. So EA after about 1 year had put up with about as much of Pandemics shit as they were going to and told them to release a game, so we had Mercs 2. Not a bad game really, it was just very apparent to anyone that played it that the game wasn’t finished. The A.I. was pathetic, you basically couldn’t die, and after 20 minutes you instantly were so overpowered that nothing in the game could hope to kill you ever. It was also ugly and every enemy said literally the same 3 phrases ‘The Merc is here!’ presumably because they didn’t have time to record three sets of dialogue based on what character the player chose to use. But through all that it still sold reasonably well and was fun because of the foundation of the game, you get to blow up anything, I once leveled a city block with a nuclear missile that only cost a million bucks, I had a billion dollars, that’s a lot of fucking city blocks. So the game was good but didn’t do great, Pandemic is already costing EA money, they then have to split their team of 200 employees to triple develop 3 games, Lord of the Rings Conquest, The Saboteur, and Mercs Inc.

Needless to say by 2009 things weren’t going well, so they shifted Mercs Inc. to the backburner, put their resources into Saboteur, and basically put a test of alpha code on a disc and released it as Lord of the Rings. So that game sold like shit and now Pandemic was on the hot seat at EA sense in 3 years they had yet to produce a game that sold well(not to mention they supposedly were working on a Dark Knight game that’s development was going so bad EA shit canned the whole project). It was around this time that Pandemic finally finished their new game engine, for time reasons Mercs 2 was made on Mercs 1’s game engine with some updates, while Lord of the Rings was made on Battlefronts engine with code updates. So finally Pandemic can really shine in the next gen with a completely original IP on a brand new game engine, big things were expected by EA, about 6 months before launch the following trailer was released for Saboteur.

Dark, brooding, adult, and very stylish, this looked like a good game from the onset. It had nudity but didn’t use it as a selling point; it was just there because it would have been in that time anyways. The music was refined and fit well with the game, the very cool black and white style that went to color after the death of the Nazi guard; it all just looked good; was Pandemic finally being allowed to grow up a little bit as a studio? Sure, but then the game didn’t demo well at E3, and even though critics and reviews thought it looked interesting, the people that buy games couldn’t give two shits, not with MW2, Uncharted 2, Batman, and a host of other big name games coming out just before it. So as we entered into the holiday season a new trailer was released.

http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uPhS1YgtqOg

What the fuck just happened? EA’s marketing team took over here, now the trailer featured, explosions gunfights a wise cracking Irishman, drinking, smoking and Flogging Molly music. Gone was the quite adult nature, giving way to a bad PG-13 action movie mentality. This approach only alienated fans of the original idea and didn’t bring anyone new in because basically that trailer makes it look like Mercs 3: Mercs in Paris. So about a month before release amidst 3 years and no hits, spiraling costs, shitty games, and no real good future outlook EA closed down Pandemic and sent their final game out into the world to die a slow death at retail in December. Mercs Inc. development was shifted to another EA studio and now I will never get Battlefront 3, sense Free Radical was supposed to do it but then Crytek bought them, and then it went back to Pandemic but EA wanted the rights so that got dumped, then Grin took over but then Bionic Command was released and Grin was closed on the strength of how much that game sucked.

Okay so now that you know the entire history of Pandemic and more important what has preceded the release of Saboteur it might be easier to understand some of the things that I say about it.

PART 2: GAME REVIEW

The Saboteur is a 2009 title developed by Pandemic Studios, shortly before there closing by publisher EA. In it you play Sean Devlin a hard fighting hard drinking Irishman who is living in Paris during the Nazi occupation. He then proceeds to Sabotage as much as he can to aid the French resistance, his reasons are his own, but you discover them over the course of the game. It’s a 3rd person action/stealth title that focuses heavily on massive environments and large scale destruction. It also has a neat Greyscale to it that slowly returns to color as you inspire and free the people of Paris.

Okay so what about the game itself; was it worth all this fuss? Is it a fitting tribute to a once great studio, or was it another victim of EA’s ‘Make money or die’ mentality to publishing? Well as far as I am concerned it’s the best game Pandemic has ever made, it’s highly polished with an emphasis on presentation and storytelling. Now take that with a grain of salt, because there previous few games have been nothing to write home about, so saying its better then there other games means what? Well let’s compare to its very obvious predecessor ‘Mercenaries 2’ and see if we can come to conclusion about it.

Mercs 2’s story is basically Mattias(the lead Merc) gets shot in the ass by a Venezuelan dictator, so he proceeds to wage an entire war against the country and caps it all off by nuking there capital. That’s it, no other character just tons of dead NPC’s, awesome. The Saboteur spends roughly the first 2 hours setting up the plot and story, introducing you to several characters and giving them all history and background so you can run into them later and actually have it mean something. Sean starts as an idealistic race car driver, but through betrayal, murder, and the invasion of Europe, he becomes the hero they needed, in the end he does it all for love though. I mean wow, are you fucking kidding me? Pandemic with this game really put effort into doing something good; they didn’t want to make the same crap again. That’s the feeling this game gives you, they really wanted it to be more. It was clearly rushed to release and a lot of what they wanted to do isn’t finished/doesn’t work as well as it could, but Christ at least they tried, which is more than a lot of devs can say these days.

Okay so the stealth mechanic is taken right from Assassin’s Creed, the plat forming is taking right from Infamous/Uncharted, the open world is taken from GTA, and the perks system is taken from Call of Duty. So what? If someone plays a bunch of great games and likes them and then wants to take parts from those games that worked and put them into their own, then I say more power to you. However you have a central issue that while it has a lot of great elements from great games none of them are particularly well polished so they sometimes don’t work, i.e. sometimes you’re standing directly behind a Nazi and it won’t give you the stealth kill option. For the most part they all work well enough to add something to the game, and certainly don’t hurt it.

Now the much lauded ‘color’ mechanic of this game is of course one of the big selling points, the world is black and white with only the red of the Nazi flag coming through. But as you do missions and free sections of town light returns as well as color. I thought this was purely a gimmick but it actually adds quite a bit to the game, say you’re being pursued by Nazi’s drive toward the color, staying in the black and white doubles the amount of Nazi’s chasing you, but heading to color significantly lightens the chance you will face heavy opposition. In a game with roughly 2000 side missions it’s great to have a sort of all purpose way of knowing whether you have been there or not. The game has a generally dark attitude to it with storytelling and presentation and this is greatly aided by the whole ‘color, not color’ mechanic. I mean walking from a bright sunshine world with doves in it to a dark rainy world with crows (it’s cool if doves fly from colored to black and white, they actually turn into crows when they cross over) in it really adds something to the game. It’s one of those hard to quantify things, but you just know you have to be more careful and it’s more dangerous when you cross into those areas.

You work out of a burlesque club, yeah that means there are naked ladies walking around. Often times that would be something that is treated pretty trashily, but again Saboteur comes through with a wholly ‘adult’ design to it. You can tell when they made you base in this area it wasn’t just an excuse to have tits, it was there to give the whole game a more grown up feel to it. Yes the premise and the action is pretty ridiculous I won’t deny that, but it’s presented in an adult way. Think ‘The Dark Knight’ comic book characters’ and action in a very real and serious world. As you walk around Nazi occupied zone’s you see soldiers getting grabby with women, old ladies being beaten, and if someone fights back the soldiers on the street line up and execute them, this shit is just happening all around you. Its little touches like that, that really make the difference for me as a player. You see the oppression around you, you get angry about it and go blow up a Nazi sniper tower.

So basically I would say this was a very ambitious project by a studio that probably should have been doing something safe at the time. It had tons of ideas in it all of which were good, but unfortunately EA felt no need to give them time to implement those ideas and give them polish. Still, what Pandemic was trying to do, does shows through in the game design. You could see a studio that really wanted to break into the upper ranks of dev houses. But the game has a great style, an adult feel, fun action, and just shit tons of content, I got 10 hours in the game and I am 3% complete right now. Best part is that the game is going to be dirt cheap quick because of its release circumstances so you can probably find it for a great price, and I would highly recommend the game to you.

It all comes down to this for me, which of these two trailers did you think looked like the better game?

Trailer 1: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=l2gClnlzo4o

Or

Trailer 2: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uPhS1YgtqOg

If you liked trailer 1 better then buy it because that’s really what the feel of the game is, the second is just something EA drummed up to try and excite you, but it’s not really the intent of the game at all.

Final note, install and enable the midnight show content when you get it, nothing takes you out of the game like stupid fuzzy circles over the naughty bits of all the NPC’s.

Peace.