Any day he pleased, British King George VI might sit down and write a letter to Prime Minister Chamberlain, urging him to go out and take steps to found a world organization for the Solution of Economic Problems. The trouble would be that in Britain “it isn’t done,” but in Belgium it is. Last week young, vigorous and thoughtful King Leopold III did it in a friendly letter which began “Dear Prime Minister” and was signed:

“Believe me, dear Prime Minister, your devoted LEOPOLD.”

It was the British and the French Governments who recently asked Premier Paul van Zeeland of friendly Belgium to help them find an international formula to extract Europe from its present economic bog. Van Zeeland began by parleying with President Roosevelt (TIME, June 14). Last week as the Premier busied himself in Brussels, shaping up material he has gathered for presentation to European leaders, the King’s letter came, as it was obviously intended to come, as a dramatic stroke to arrest world opinion, help pave the way for action. Next day in London the Laborite Daily Herald enthusiastically told His Majesty he had written “a letter which may alter world history!” London’s arch-Conservative Morning Post dryly said: “The very least that countries to which the appeal was directed can do is give to the proposal their urgent and sympathetic consideration.”

Meanwhile it was Belgian Week at the Paris Exposition and when Leopold III arrived from Brussels for the festivities, almost every French editor hailed his “idealism and courage.” In the streets of Paris he was wildly cheered. In Washington, Secretary of State Cordell Hull praised Leopold Ill’s “timely suggestion.”

No project so great as that envisioned by His Majesty can be compressed into an informal, friendly letter of reasonable length, but the encouraging lead which Leopold III gave to Premier van Zeeland was phrased in “the King’s own hand” thus:

“It is essential to create an organization for study, whose economic value would be marked by its triple characteristics—universality; permanence; independence. . . . It would have to be as independent as possible of nationalistic influence. . . . Neither lowering of customs barriers, nor any other partial measure would put an end to the disorders which threaten peace. If we are really to avoid war and bring back humanity to more peaceful sentiments, we must have the courage to face economic questions in their broadest aspect and find a solution for such great problems threatening peace as these:

1) the distribution of raw materials;

2) apportionment of the elements of monetary exchange; 3) distribution of employment; 4) establishing an equilibrium between agricultural and industrial nations.

“I do not delude myself about the difficulties,” concluded the King of the Belgians. “At the same time, I am convinced that the moment is favorable for the attempt.

“We would give humanity, especially the Far Eastern Countries, not words, but proofs that the Western countries have, above their more immediate problems of material nature, a spiritual force emanating from the spirit of brotherhood.”