This is part of new series from i on accents. Follow us on Twitter or Facebook for more.

Past the hilly inclines of Sheffield and south of York’s Shambles is the north east port city of Hull. Pointing out its geographical location has become more unnecessary in recent years, with forecasters featuring it more frequently on weather bulletins, and 2017’s City of Culture celebrations putting the city back on the map.

While Hull’s notoriety has waxed and waned, its linguistic identity has remained steadfast, aplomb with hidden consonants, elongated vowels and scores of words unique to the city. Under the radar, the settlement sometimes considered to be in Humberside – not Yorkshire – has fostered a dialect so distinct that dictionaries and viral YouTube videos have been made in its honour.

In the words of thousands of Hullensians born and raised in Hull: lezz av a skeg at ow people terk in ‘Ull.

Hull on the defence

Hull’s language has been shaped by its history of isolation, one it has spent on the defence. It was an early theatre of battle in the English Civil War, and the fledgling settlement was transformed from a stronghold into a town when it declared support for Parliament, deny Charles I entry into the town in 1642.

The plan didn’t work, and the King besieged the town, helping spark the conflict that ultimately created the modern day parliament.

“I love the fact that Hull is the birthplace of Parliamentary Democracy and the start of the Civil War, where Hull effectively told the King to sod off,” said BBC Radio Humberside DJ David Burns.

Its revolutionary history tends to pack more of a punch with Hullensians, who have distanced themselves from the town’s official name of Kingston upon Hull. Citizens of Hull may technically be called Kingstonians, but it is more common for the people of Hull to be named “Hullensians” or “Hullians” – the more contracted, the better. Salt of the earth Hullensians avoid bothering with the words altogether, blending verbs, altering vowels and losing consonants to state “Am Frum ‘Ull.”

This blending of words is the cornerstone of the dialect.

“Hull’s phrases have a much more guttural quality; which is to say many of the sounds come from right at the back of the throat and many of the individual words in the sentences sort of blend into one,” says Hullensian Stephen Campbell.

“So for example ‘Are you all right then?’ would come out as yawrythen,” he added.

The two vowels

The blending isn’t alien to other parts of neighbouring Yorkshire, it’s this feature, partnered with two distinct vowel sounds that puts the Hull accent on the map.

“The first thing people notice about the Hull accent is the goat vowel,” Lead Curator for Spoken English at the British Library Jonnie Robinson told i.

“The goat vowel, heard in the ‘o’ in hope, over and no, is pronounced like an ‘er’ in Hull, with the likes of “don’t becoming” “dern’t and “phone calls” sounding like “fern curls”.

Hull sounds

‘Err nerr’: Oh no

‘Fern curls’: Phone calls

‘Gerrover’: Get over here

‘Snerr’: Snow

‘Gizzit ‘ere’: Give us it here

‘Summat‘: Something

The second sound common to the area is seen in the nurse vowel, the accent and dialects specialist explains, with the vowel sound in the word nurse sounding more like “er” than “i”.

“The nurse vowel, heard in first, bird, comes out as berd and ferst,” explained Mr Robinson. “They’re the two distinctive, notable vowels that are very much in Hull, and not in the rest of Yorkshire.”

The “er nerr” sound is so widely used in the city that roadworks signs have been made to commemorate its usage.

“In 2018, a roadworks company installed an “er nerr, rerdwerks sign” to quell any moodiness about the resulting traffic, playing on these vowel sounds,” Mr Robinson added.

While neighbouring Yorkshire might not share the same intonations here, the alteration of the nurse vowel can be seen in the accents of two other English cities: Liverpool and Middlesborough.

They may be counties apart, but the areas have a shared cultural and historical heritage from one area in the continent: Scandinavia. Beginning in the Viking period, the area struck up a strong trading relationship with Denmark and Sweden, trading fish and timber until Hull’s fishing decline in 1975.

Hull City Archivist Martin Taylor told i: “I’m sure there are a number of Scandinavian influences at work. The immediate area of the East Riding, there is a strong Baltic influence, from Denmark in particular, in the whole area.

“Hull is here not just because of the fishing industry, but because of timber imports from the Baltic dating back in the Middle Ages. It resulted in a lot of Scandinavian settlements in port areas. To this day, Hull still has a Scandinavian church in the city centre, and it’s a lesser known fact that the first female pilot to fly to Australia, Hullensian Amy Johnson, had Swedish grandparents.”

The cultural influence bled into Hull’s pronunciation and dialect, with Scandinavian words and vowel sounds still present in the city today.

“I wrote a poem referring to ‘the Jutland sound’ in honour of a former Hull councillor from Denmark, who used to say Jutland is a part of Denmark that shares the same ‘o’ sound as Hull. He said it made it easier to speak in a Hull accent,” said poet Audrey Dunne.

The Hull dialect

Bain/Bairn: A baby or a child, derived from the Swedish word barn that means the same

Tenfoot: An ten-foot alleyway, usually found behind a house. In use in Hull since the 19th century, but origin unknown

It’s mafting: Overpowered by heat, in need of air. Found in glossary of words in Whitby – in 1876, origin unknown

Fishing historian Alec Gill MBE told i that Hull’s relationship to Scandinavia is most present in the north east’s place names.

“When the Vikings came in 850 AD, place names started to change,” he said. “Near to Hull, places with a -by and -thorpe ending started showing up when the Vikings landed, which are also seen in Scandinavia.”

Mr Robinson added: “Places ending in by, like Whitby and Grimsby, are known as a sheep farm in Scandinavian languages, while bain is similar to the Scandinavian word barn, which means the same thing in Swedish.”

‘Am frum ‘Ull’

Some features of the accent, like dropping the H’s from words, are more common than we think.

“For a city who drops their H’s, there’s a lot of words beginning with H in Hull,” said Alec Gill MBE, a historian who documents Hull’s fishing communities and beyond. “Two of our biggest roads are named Hessle Road and Holderness Road, and we’re on the Humber in a city called Hull. Dropping h’s are a key component of the Humber English.”

While Yorkshire clung onto h-dropping, pronouncing ‘Ull rather than Hull, social climbers began to reject it. While H’s were dropped across England before the 19th century, when Received Pronunciation was coined in 1869 by the linguist, A J Ellis, the term came to define the social elite. Those who transferred to the RP accent in the 20th century were considered to be the voice of education, authority, social status and economic power.

But in Hull, the RP accent was met with confusion and accusations of a lack of authenticity.

“Despite 150 years of social pressure, you only have to go to places like Yorkshire, to see the dropping of H’s still goes on,” Mr Robinson said.

Marketer Mat Ombler believes Hull’s h-dropping isn’t based so much on social rebellion as a wanton disinterest in anyone else trying to tell Hullensians how to speak.

“Hull has a complete disregard for consonants. We just don’t give a shit about them,” he said. “There’s almost a monk-choral twang to our accent, everything just bleeds into ‘ers’ ahs’ and ‘ohs.’

Thriving in a crap town

The accent’s definitive characteristics are widely known throughout the city, and proudly adopted by the vast majority of its residents. But while it might carry a lot of weight in the city, residents who escape its confines are all too often aware of an outsider’s view of Hull, all too often formed by dubious honours like being named: “the crappiest town in the UK,” – though of course, Hullensians did vote for their city for the title.

Some Hullensians who moved outside of the area have struggled with their accent. “I live in Hull, but my accent’s not as strong as it used to be. I work in Leeds, and it was probably due to being a bit self-conscious of its flatness and the fact that some words were difficult to understand (particularly the long A sound, e.g. eight, which comes out ‘eert’) that most likely prompted me refine it a bit,” Stephen Campbell admitted.

Little generational difference

While the accent’s exposure to the outside world caused some humiliation for those venturing outside of it, Hull’s geography and generations of families stubbornly staying in the city confines that have preserved the dialect.

“In 1990s, a landmark study into dialects was carried out by Paul Kerswell,” said Mr Robinson. “He was interested in language changes in the newly created town like Milton Keynes, and Hull, an old town with continuity population. In Milton Keynes, you get a new voice emerging. In Hull, you have the stability of generations. The contrast between the young and old in Milton Keynes was quite dramatic, as people sounded out new words, but in Hull, there’s just one or two slight differences.”

And as the city marks a new era in welcoming investment and tourism for the outside world, the accent’s identity could enter a state of flux. There is a chance for the Hull to be enriched by outsiders – but it depends on whether its residents will take a leap of faith and welcome new voices in.

“There’s almost a tribal attachment to the accent, where the young and old can understand each other,” Mr Gill agrees.

To ‘Ull and back

Since 2017, Hull has marked itself out as a city looking for change. Trialling a new universal basic income, rewilding its parks with butterflies and creating a new flooding defence system that will secure hundreds of jobs are at the top of the council and government’s priority list.

But it could be hard for its residents, already affected by austerity and economic deprivation, to have faith in what the outside world can offer.

“Hull has been defined by geographic isolation, by and large,” said Mr Taylor. “We are an hour from anywhere. That’s a big thing. Hull has a very clear sense of its own identity. It has a very clear sense of its own identity and history.

“But 2017 was amazing. There was so much investment, and the city centre transformed as part of this. The city of culture, and the influences that came with it, both built on and enhanced Hull’s sense of place and sense of identity,” he added.

For others, Hull is a city out on a limb, a renegade settlement which has a culture and influence that has thrived, no matter what others think of it. And after generations of incubation, the time might have come for its residents to export its rich linguistic tapestry.

“Hull is brilliant because it has that end of the line feel. To me it says Hull is strong, proud, unique. It says it’s not interacted with the Rest of the World as much as it would have liked, but I’m blaming the Rest of the World for that,” said the radio DJ.

“It stands out in a crowd and there is no other accent like it,” said Radio Humberside DJ Lucy Clark. “I’ve been in a pub in London chatting away and had someone come over to say, ‘excuse me, are you from Hull?’, as they could tell from my accent. There’s no getting away from it and I like that.”

The next feature in our accent series will be about Liverpool’s accent and dialect. Do you have an ancedote or some information to share about the Scouse accent? Email jasmine.andersson@jpimedia.co.uk