Arthur Wilkinson died in 1930.

Our database records art auction sales of works by Arthur Wilkinson from 1981 and in total 18 works by the artist have been offered for sale, of which 13 (72%) were sold. The highest price recorded for the artist is $1,430 for The Morning Chat sold by Leonard Joel in July 1990. No works have been offered for sale this year, and the last sale we have recorded for the artist was in 2023.

Details of works held in public galleries have been extracted from the online listings of their collections, and include the following Australian & New Zealand galleries:

Art Gallery of NSW, Art Gallery of South Australia, Art Gallery of Western Australia, Auckland Art Gallery, Australian War Memorial, Christchurch Art Gallery, Geelong Gallery, Heide Museum of Modern Art, Ian Potter Museum of Art, Monash University Museum of Art, Museum Of New Zealand, Museum of Contemporary Art, National Gallery of Australia, National Gallery of Victoria, National Gallery of Victoria, National Portrait Gallery, Queensland Art Gallery, Suter Art Gallery

We will endeavor to correct any errors or omissions when advised.

You are about to subscribe to the Australian Art Sales Digest, a comprehensive listing of art sold by public auction in Australia and New Zealand from the 1970s to the present time. We have over 600,000 lots listed of which about 400,000 have accompanying images. Lot descriptions, images and prices are included for reference purposes only.

As well as past auction results, the site lists forthcoming auctions, provides market statistics and graphs as well as art market news and opinion.

We do not buy, sell or auction works of art. The site is not an online gallery, and the only items that will be available for sale are those listed as coming up in forthcoming auctions.

The service is available by subscription. Fees:

A$65.00

One Month

Single User

A$495.00

One Year

Single User

A$760.00

One Year

Multiple Users

All subscription levels allow unlimited use of the site during the subscription period for the Single User or Company or Institution based on the subscription level selected.

Access for a "Single User" is for the single subscriber's personal use only and cannot be shared. We monitor subscriber access for unusually frequent usage and/or simultaneous logins, and reserve the right to cancel or uplift subscription rates when multiple unique logins are detected.

We do not automatically renew subscriptions, however you will be contacted prior to the expiry date and you may choose to renew if you wish.