A cultural icon's place in the public's heart is much like a politician's: He belongs to everyone and everyone acts as though they've elected him to Olympus. That's true for no one more than Fred Astaire, the American god of an American art form, the smooth soft shoe. Long after the curtain fell on his career, his audience remains as devoted as any fervent constituents.

And when people think you're messing with their legends, watch out. Indeed, Astaire's widow, Robyn, has found herself embroiled in controversy over the way she has handled guardianship of his image.In the 10 years since Fred Astaire's death, the storybook romance between the world's greatest hoofer and the first great female jockey, 46 years his junior, has produced a dark epilogue. In this Hollywood story, the widow can pay the rent with no problem. In fact, she's the one who has been cast as the villain.

Daggers have been drawn over the way Robyn Astaire has meagerly - and expensively - parceled out approval for the use of clips of his classic films. The furor was ignited when she prevented the Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts in Washington from using Fred Astaire clips for its televised tribute to Ginger Rogers in 1992 - the same honor Astaire himself had received in 1978.

Meanwhile, Robyn Astaire's pricey demands for the use of Fred Astaire's clips held up the 1994 MGM film anthology ``That's Entertainment! III,' according to sources close to the production. MGM blamed the delay on technological problems.

Then when Fred Astaire was seen dancing with Dirt Devil vacuum cleaners in commercials during Super Bowl breaks this year, the anti-Robyn din grew louder. Critics accused her of hypocrisy, saying she was selling out Fred Astaire's image. All along, she has been vilified - a rare distinction for anyone so close to the pantheon of old Hollywood stars.

``I was a little amazed at the controversy,' says Mike Merriman, chief executive officer of Royal Appliance Manufacturing Co. in Cleveland, which makes Dirt Devil products. ``There was John Wayne doing Coors Beer and there was no response. Maybe some people felt John Wayne is in a bar and the image fit, and there's a disconnect with Fred Astaire with a vacuum cleaner. But I think Fred trusted Robyn to safeguard his image.'

Fred Astaire Jr., who lives in San Luis Obispo, continues to be supportive of Robyn. He told People magazine: ``I'm behind Robyn 100 percent. I think my father knew how people exploited personalities (after their death), and he didn't want that to happen to him. Protecting him is Robyn's job.'

But Fred Astaire's daughter, Ava Astaire McKenzie, is prominent among her critics. She told Variety that she was returning her own Dirt Devil vacuum cleaner to the company, ``saddened that after (Fred's) wonderful career, he was sold to the devil' - the Dirt Devil. McKenzie declined to be interviewed for this story.

Veteran entertainment reporter Bob Thomas, author of ``Astaire: The Man, the Dancer' (St. Martin's Press, 1984), considers Robyn Astaire's critics ``misdirected,' particularly those who have failed to win her imprimatur for projects.

``They think maybe she was unreasonable in holding out her approval, but that's between her and them,' he says. ``That's business, and she can be just as tough as any shark in the agency world.'

Is Robyn Astaire the greedy ogre her critics contend, condemning her husband's image to obscurity in her misguided craving for money?

Or is she the protective widow, pining after the only person who really loved her and tending the fires of his lifelong perfectionism?

Astaire says she is perplexed and dismayed by her public image. She says she is harshly misunderstood and is doing nothing more than carrying out Fred Astaire's dying wish that she maintain the premium value of his life's work.

``I'm embarrassed for my husband, too,' she says. ``It reads like he married a terrible person, and that's not fair. He was a very intelligent man who knew exactly what he was doing, who was highly selective in the woman he chose to marry.'

What isn't in question is that Robyn Astaire's 10-year campaign to control the use of Fred Astaire's image has sharply reduced unauthorized uses.

``It's been a long, hard battle, and I do feel that I'm pretty much in control of situations,' she says. ``Word's out: Don't even think of using Astaire without permission.'

But not all suitors to the throne want to sell vacuum cleaners. Some are documentary filmmakers, who say they have been discouraged from including Astaire in anthologies about Hollywood's golden era.

Astaire's business representative, Thomas A. White, denies that she routinely bars the way for filmmakers.

``Lots of documentaries have been approved for television,' he says, without providing examples. White says Astaire screens every request - including those for commercial uses - and judges them according to their artistic merit.

Although Astaire wants to control all uses of film clips, her battle may finally have backfired. A federal appeals court recently ruled that a company that makes instructional dance videos didn't need Astaire's OK to use movie clips for its Fred Astaire Dance School series. The court said such videos were covered under the state's exemptions from an estate's control. Astaire is fighting the decision. Some documentarians say they may be emboldened by the ruling, which they say may give them more legal clout in using Fred Astaire's image without paying high fees.

If they're not, the price paid by Fred Astaire's estate may be higher than anyone intended - obscurity. Even Turner Entertainment, which holds the rights to most of Fred Astaire's complete movies, cringes at the difficulty of getting its hands on clips so it can promote them with new shows on old Hollywood and other original programming. White notes, however, that Turner is free to use trailers and posters under Fred Astaire's agreements with the studios.

When Fred Astaire died at age 88, he left Robyn the house and the Rolls-Royce, and she says she was well taken care of. But much of his fortune was depleted before they even met. Fred Astaire had passed on a chunk to his two children because he wasn't expecting to marry again so long after the death of his first wife, Phyllis, in 1954.

So Fred left Robyn the jewel of his estate - the right to manage his intellectual property and buff the sheen on his legacy. (When she dies, control goes to his children.)

If money were the only carrot in the deal, Astaire has had ample opportunities to cash in on her husband's image that she's rejected. She says she gave the nod to Dirt Devil because the company granted her artistic control and because Fred Astaire himself was no stranger to commercials - during his life, he appeared in ads for Chesterfield cigarettes and the now-defunct Western Airlines, among others.

``I know Fred would have done it. Period,' she says. ``I didn't change his work. All I did was substitute in each frame one of Fred's props for one of Dirt Devil's products. He'd take anything as a prop and dance with it. I think they're well done and people love them.'

But there's another reason why Astaire believes Fred would have wanted her to do the commercials - the money. She says she has spent more than $1 million on legal fees, earning a reputation for being difficult and litigious in the process. And the coffers need to be refilled.

``I've had to deplete much of my financial security over the years to prosecute infringers,' she says. ``And neither Fred nor I contemplated having to sustain the burden of nine or 10 years of costly litigation. I just feel Fred would have wanted me to do these commercials.'

Meanwhile, the jury is still out on the access Fred Astaire will have to future audiences.

Says Robyn Astaire: ``I'll never let people forget about Fred, and I don't think that I would even have that control. Fred is out there to stay. He's too special to the world. He belongs to the world.'

Be the first to know

Get local news delivered to your inbox!

* I understand and agree that registration on or use of this site constitutes agreement to its user agreement and privacy policy.