1. JAYA PRAKASH V, REGULATORY AFFAIRS, 218311.

2. About GE Healthcare  GE Healthcare is a subsidiary of General Electric Co., that focuses on new developments in health information technology such as more advanced medical imaging technology and patient monitoring systems.  Type : Subsidiary.  Industry : Health care ,Pharmaceuticals ,Electronic ,Manufacturing.  Founded : September 28, 1994; 24 years ago.  Headquarters : Chicago, United States.

3.  Area served : Worldwide.  Key people : Kieran Murphy, CEO.  Revenue : US$18.3 billion (2016).  Number of employees : Approximately 54,000.  Parent : General Electric.  Website : www.gehealthcare.com

4. Services :  Medical imaging  Electronic medical records  Medical diagnostics  Patient monitoring systems  Drug discovery

5. Products  PET  X-ray  CT  MRI  ECG  Ultrasound machines  Bone densitometry  Patient monitoring  Incubators and respiratory care systems

6. The group is divided into six business divisions 1) GE Healthcare Global Diagnostic Imaging deals with X-ray, mammography and molecular imaging tools. 2) GE Healthcare Clinical Systems provides technology such as electrocardiography, ultrasound and incubators for clinicians and administrators. 3) GE Healthcare IT is responsible for the products used by hospitals; these include imaging and electronic medical record (EMR) systems as well as financial software and services.

7. 4) GE Healthcare Medical Diagnostics produces and develops tools that aid medical imaging, such as the dyes used to highlight specific organs during a scan. 5) GE Healthcare Life Sciences focuses on drug discovery, the creation of new and stronger drugs, and the purification of pharmaceuticals. 6) GE Healthcare Surgery produces surgical technology, such as cardiac tools.

8. MRI  Magnetic resonance imaging.  MRI is a radiology technique.  That uses magnetism, radio waves, and a computer to produce images of body structures.  In1997 the first MRI exam was performed on a human being.  It took 30 minutes.

10. WHAT CAN BE DIAGNOSED BY AN MRI SCAN?  Most ailments of the brain, including tumours  Sport injuries  Musculoskeletal problems  Most spinal conditions/injuries  Vascular abnormalities  Prostate problems  Some gastrointestinal tract conditions  Certain ear, nose and throat (ENT) conditions  Soft tissue and bone pathology/conditions

12. WHO CAN’T HAVE AN MRI SCAN?  A cardiac pacemaker.  Certain clips in your head from brain operations.  A cochlear implant.  A metallic foreign body in your eye.  Had surgery in the last 8 weeks.  If you are pregnant.

14. PRINCIPLE  MRI makes use of the magnetic properties of certain atomic nuclei.  Hydrogen nucleus (single proton) present in water molecules, and therefore in all body tissues.  The hydrogen nuclei partially aligned by a strong magnetic field in the scanner.

15. Cont..  The nuclei can be rotated using radio waves, and they subsequently oscillate in the magnetic field while returning to equilibrium.  Simultaneously they emit a radio signal.  This is detected using antennas (coils).  Very detailed images can be made of soft tissues.

17. MAIN COMPONENTS OF MRI  SCANNER  An MRI scanner is a large tube that contains powerful magnets.  Static magnetic field coils  Gradient coils  RF (radiofrequency) coils  Computers  Recording hardware

18. ADVANTAGES OF MRI  No ionizing radiation.  Better contrast resolution.

19. DISADVANTAGES OF MRI  Very expensive.  Dangerous for patients with metallic devices placed within the body.  Movement during scanning may cause blurry images.