Strasbourg, September 9th 2008 - Alsace BioValley announces today that it has signed a partnership agreement with GE Healthcare, an activity of General Electric Company (NYSE: GE), to carry out a feasibility study for the setting up of a technology platform in different fields of molecular imaging. The platform will focus on research and the translational medicine and will be accessible to the region’s scientists as well as to industry partnerships.

This partnership between the Alsace BioValley Competitivity Pole and GE Healthcare aims to pool the partners’ know-how to boost further the growing dynamic for development in the region’s life sciences as well as to provide an instrument that will be indispensable to the development of tools for tomorrow’s medicine.

GE Healthcare will share its knowledge of the various imaging solutions and the different types of platform currently in operation in academia and industry.

The Alsace BioValley Competitivity Pole will ensure that the project will be tightly integrated with leading players in the area so that the tools that are available meet the needs of all concerned and contribute to the development of the Alsace region.

“We chose Alsace as a partner because it has a unique international position in the field of science and technology applied to research and biomedical development,” said Dominique Blanc, General Manager France of GE Healthcare. “Research in Alsace, both basic and applied, from biology to clinical, from chemistry to genetics has earned a worldwide reputation and is an excellent fit for the level of excellence that GE Healthcare looks for in its projects.”

“Signing a partnership agreement with a company as prestigious as GE Healthcare guarantees that Alsace BioValley will be able to create a molecular imaging platform that will be unique in France and an indispensable tool to drive the dynamic of research and translational medicine in Alsace,” said Nicolas Carboni, managing director of Alsace BioValley. “Setting up this type of platform which can model human and animal cells in different ways, will be yet another facility to attract talent and investment to our region.”

About the Alsace BioValley cluster The Alsace BioValley cluster brings together and encourages the development and growth of public and private entities based in Alsace, France, and involved in life sciences and healthcare. The Alsace Biovalley cluster includes the main aid agencies which offer simplified and effective access to all the regional services and aid.

Among Alsace BioValley’s missions are:

Help industry in Alsace obtain finance and the services of a body designated by the French government as world-class competitive pole of development Make the Alsace region even more attractive by accelerating the connections between industry, research and regional and national aid bodies Offer different products and services to the companies and laboratories in the area, including help with projects, search for partners, company incubators, enterprise creation, international expansion, economic intelligence, communication tools and scientific and market information Ensure that the region has a world-class infrastructure in place including specialized buildings, scientific service platforms, logistics, and shared services Offer an entry point to Biovalley, the single tri-national network of excellence made up of Alsace (France), the Basel region (Switzerland) and Fribourg (Germany).

Situated as it is in the heart of Europe, and hosting 200 companies, 60 laboratories and 15,000 employees, Alsace Biovalley believes it is a real catalyst and one of the largest European clusters for life science and healthcare.

About GE Healthcare GE Healthcare provides transformational medical technologies and services that are shaping a new age of patient care. Our expertise in medical imaging and information technologies, medical diagnostics, patient monitoring systems, performance improvement, drug discovery, and biopharmaceutical manufacturing technologies is helping clinicians around the world re-imagine new ways to predict, diagnose, inform, treat and monitor disease, so patients can live their lives to the fullest.

GE Healthcare’s broad range of products and services enable healthcare providers to better diagnose and treat cancer, heart disease, neurological diseases and other conditions earlier. Our vision for the future is to enable a new “early health” model of care focused on earlier diagnosis, pre-symptomatic disease detection and disease prevention. Headquartered in the United Kingdom, GE Healthcare is a USD 17 billion unit of General Electric Company (NYSE: GE). Worldwide, GE Healthcare employs more than 46,000 people committed to serving healthcare professionals and their patients in more than 100 countries. For more information about GE Healthcare, visit our website at www.gehealthcare.com.