Home Classic Doctor Who Classic Doctor Who DVD & Blu Ray UPDATED UK: Doctor Who – The Movie Blu-ray Cover & Extras Revealed...

Classic Doctor Who

Classic Doctor Who DVD & Blu Ray

UPDATED UK: Doctor Who – The Movie Blu-ray Cover & Extras Revealed – Out September

By

Diane Malkin

-

Doctor Who: The Movie starring Paul McGann is finally coming to Blu-ray accompanied by a stunning cover!

This upscale edition of the 1996 movie starring McGann’s eighth Doctor will be released on a 2 disc set on the 19th September 2016. The release comes in the 20th anniversary year of the movie.

The movie also features Daphne Ashbrook as Doctor Grace Holloway, Sylvester McCoy as the Seventh Doctor, John Novak as Salinger, Yee Jee Tso as Chang Lee and Eric Roberts as The Master.

This Blu-ray edition contains a huge amount of extras……..

Disk One

The Night of the Doctor

A mini-episode released in 2013 in the run-up to the show’s 50th-anniversaryy special. This marks Paul McGann’s second on-screen appearance as the Eighth Doctor.

The Seven Year Hitch

Documenting the return Doctor Who to the screen. Narrated by Amanda Drew.

The Doctor’s Strange Love

Writers Joe Lidster and Simon Guerrier discuss The TV Movie with comedian Josie Long.

Commentary #1

From director Geoffrey Sax (recorded 2001)

Commentary #2

By Paul McGann and Sylvester McCoy, moderated by Nicolas Briggs (recorded 2009)

Isolated Score

The option to view The TV Movie with the isolated music soundtrack.

Music Tracks

Four tracks from the production presented in full: In a Dream, All Dressed Up, Ride into the Moonlight and Auld Lang Syne.

Photo Gallery

Production Subtitles

Disc Two

Behind the Scenes

On set and on location in Vancouver, Canada during the filming of The TV Movie.

The Wilderness Years

In the years between the end of the classic series and the broadcast of The TV Movie, Doctor Who survived in print, video and audio, kept alive by fans who were determined not to let it die.

Tomorrow’s Times – The Eight Doctor

A look back at the contemporary coverage of The TV Movie in newspapers and other publications. Presented by Nicholas Courtney.

Philip Segal’s Tour of the TARDIS

Paul McGann Audition

Who Peter 1989-2009

The second part of this documentary, exploring the special relationship between Doctor Who and Blue Peter. Presented by Gethin Jones

Stripped for Action – The Eighth Doctor

Looking at the Doctor’s adventures in comic-strip form.

Electric Press Kit

Used by Fox in 1996, this includes a short documentary and interview segments to allow other broadcasters to put together their own packages about the TV Movie.

VFX Tests June 1994

Early video effects tests by Amblin Imaging in 1994, featuring the ‘Spider Dalek’ design.

VFX March 1996

Video effects presented as mute time-coded ‘work in progress’ shots from the CGI department.

Alternate Takes

BBC Trails

——————————————

Doctor Who: The Movie Synopsis

Whilst returning the Master’s remains to their home planet of Gallifrey, the Doctor (Sylvester McCoy) crash lands the TARDIS on Earth in end-of-century San Francisco. Gunned down by a street gang, the Doctor is rushed to the hospital where exploratory surgery by Doctor Grace Holloway triggers a regeneration. The Master has meanwhile taken over the body of a paramedic and infiltrated the Doctor’s TARDIS, which he plans to use in his latest scheme to take over the Doctor’s new body and destroy the world.

You can pre-order Doctor Who: The Movie now from Amazon.co.uk

Like this:

Like Loading...

Related

Diane is a huge Doctor Who fan. My first Doctor was Tom Baker. My favourite Doctor is David Tennant. Editor and writer for Blogtor Who, Peter Capaldi News and David Tennant News. She is a lover of theatre, blockbuster cinema and good British TV drama.