This article needs a big cleanup.

Our coverage of Series 9 of DWE is a bit off. Check out the talk page for an explanation!

These problems might be so great that the article's factual accuracy has been compromised. Talk about it here or check the revision history or Manual of Style for more information.

The following is a list of episodes of Doctor Who Extra. The initial instalment was screened in cinemas following the theatrical simulcast of the series 8 premiere, Deep Breath. Each instalment has a run time of just over 10 minutes. The ones subsequent to Deep Breath were exclusive to the BBC Red Button on television and BBC iPlayer online, and available immediately after the airing of each Doctor Who episode.[1]

Series Doctor Who Extra Related DW episode Narrator 8 Deep Breath Deep Breath Matt Botten Into the Dalek Into the Dalek Matt Botten Robot of Sherwood Robot of Sherwood Matt Botten Listen Listen Matt Botten Time Heist Time Heist Matt Botten The Caretaker The Caretaker Matt Botten Kill the Moon Kill the Moon Matt Botten Mummy on the Orient Express Mummy on the Orient Express Matt Botten Flatline Flatline Matt Botten In the Forest of the Night In the Forest of the Night Matt Botten Dark Water Dark Water Matt Botten Death in Heaven Death in Heaven Matt Botten 9 Last Christmas Last Christmas Matt Botten Prologue Prologue The Doctor's Guitar The Magician's Apprentice Missy and the Doctor The Grand Entrance Colony Sarff Hanging out with Clara The Witch's Familiar Missy and Clara Nicholas Briggs On Location in Tenerife The Doctor and Davros Dalek Clara Young Davros Water, Water, Everywhere... Under the Lake Becoming a Ghost The Fireball Cass & Lunn Meet the Fisher King Before the Flood Paul Kaye on Playing Prentis Slipknot on Tour Creating the Ghosts Peter on the Mire The Girl Who Died Through fire and flame Sleep No More Behind the Veil Heaven Sent Visualising Heaven Sent Series 9 in 81 Seconds Series 9

Doctor Who Extra episodes in the Series 8 format were released for every story in Series 9 on home media, as well as The Return of Doctor Mysterio and Twice Upon a Time.