Doctor Who has confirmed a new spin-off show, with former cast members set to return for a special adventure.

The BBC is preparing for the return of the iconic sci-fi show next month, and has now announced Tales of the TARDIS, a six-part series that “reunites beloved classic Doctor Who duos, as they board a very special TARDIS on a nostalgic voyage through space and time”.

The cast for the series includes former Doctors Peter Davison, Colin Baker and Sylvester McCoy.

Related: Doctor Who releases new behind-the-scenes footage of David Tennant regeneration

Maureen O’Brien, Peter Purves, Frazer Hines, Wendy Padbury, Katy Manning, Daniel Anthony, Janet Fielding, Nicola Bryant and Sophie Aldred will also reprise their respective roles.

The series, which will launch as part of The Whoniverse on November 1, will see each episode focus on a different duo, with new footage being merged with classic episodes to create an all-new experience.

“These Doctor Who legends step back into character to reflect on their adventures and in the process they discover something new, leaving viewers with a new insight into the story of each timeless pair,” reads the logline.

“Tales of the TARDIS is one of the greatest delights of my career,” said showrunner Russell T Davies of the series. “To see old Doctors and companions reunited, still fighting the good fight, is a perfect way to celebrate the Doctor’s 60th birthday.”

Related: Doctor Who confirms Loki boss for episode of Ncuti Gatwa series

“I’m delighted to welcome Tales of the TARDIS exclusively to BBC iPlayer, the home of Doctor Who, which is consistently one of our most popular programmes every single week of the year,” added Dan McGolpin, Director of iPlayer and Channels.

“Tales of the TARDIS will sit within The Whoniverse and features brand new and incredibly moving scenes with well-loved characters.

"It will be a fantastic starting point for a new generation to discover some of the most classic episodes and a joyous way for longstanding fans to catch up with old friends.”

Tales of the TARDIS will launch on November 1 on BBC iPlayer. Doctor Who returns for three 60th anniversary specials later in 2023. The show airs on BBC One in the UK and Disney+ elsewhere.

You Might Also Like