Sweeney Todd, the demon barber of Fleet Street, is an "artist with a knife" and a master scene-stealer. He first slashed his way into public consciousness in "The String of Pearls: A Romance", serialised in 18 parts in publisher Edward Lloyd's journal the People's Periodical and Family Library between November 1846 and March 1847. Todd's barber shop is the last stop for countless visitors to London, who bare their throats for a shave only to find themselves tipped from an ingenious mechanical chair on to the stone floor of the cellar below. If the fall doesn't kill them, Todd "polishes them off" with his razor. He then relieves the corpse of any valuables and drags it into the basement kitchen of his neighbour, Mrs Lovett the pie-maker.

The scents floating from Mrs Lovett's ovens as each batch bakes entice eager queues. Indeed, the pies are so delicious that pregnant women have been known to send their husbands the length of London to fetch one home. Relished by all, Lovett's pies are especially popular with hungry lawyers and their clerks from the nearby courts. "Upon my soul, Mrs Lovett," says her new assistant between bites, "I don't know where you get your meat, but it's as tender as young chickens."

It's uncertain who the author of "The String of Pearls" was. Lloyd was one of the main publishers of "blood and thunder books", also known as "penny bloods", designed to thrill readers with tales of highwaymen, high seas and heightened drama. He employed a stable of writers, some of whom switched assignments midcourse, but the main contenders for "The String of Pearls" seem to be Thomas Peckett Prest and James Malcolm Rymer. Whoever the writer was, the fact that the novel is named after the McGuffin of the tale, a piece of purloined jewellery, rather than Sweeney Todd, suggests the writer didn't anticipate the popularity of his razor-wielding antihero.

The main plot begins as standard Victorian fare, a romance about pretty Johanna Oakley and her sailor sweetheart Mark Ingesterie, but the story is hijacked. Sweeney Todd leaps from the novel hand-in-hand with the gleefully amoral Mrs Lovett in an ideal waste-not-want-not partnership. The ruthless, throat-cutting barber who turns his victims into pastries is simply more exciting than a pair of young lovers, whatever their trials.

This popularity resulted in a stage adaptation by George Dibden Pitt, which premiered at the Britannia Theatre in Hoxton at least three weeks before the serialised version reached its conclusion. A playbill for the production admitted that the story was based on the tale in Lloyd's People's Periodical, which, it claimed, was "founded on fact", adding that, "to adapt the story to general taste, some alterations have been judiciously made, enhancing its interest". Todd's story has been repeatedly modified and rewritten ever since, appearing in an impressive number of media, including radio, puppet shows, ballets, monologues, musicals, television and cinema.

The narrative core stays the same: a psychopathic barber who, with the help of his pie-making neighbour, butchers his customers for gain. Other elements - the star-crossed lovers, Todd's abused apprentice boy Tobias Ragg, a madhouse run by an unscrupulous superintendent, and St Dunstan's church, where parts unsuitable for pie-making are planked - also remain, but the order and manner in which they appear are up for grabs. Indeed, in early screen versions the transformation of man into meat filling is not always explicitly mentioned, though in the 1936 film (starring the aptly named Tod Slaughter) several pies are eaten, one by a seaman who - mouth full - muses on how Todd disposed of his victims. We must assume that, though censors balked at the depiction of cannibalism, audiences were already in the know.

Sweeney Todd is today part of London lore, as associated with the criminal life of the city as Jack the Ripper or Springheeled Jack. But was the barber simply the lucky product of a hack writer's fertile imagination? Or did Old Cut 'Em Up actually exist?

Like today's authors of crime fiction, writers of "penny bloods" frequently turned to actual criminal cases for inspiration. In his 1993 book Sweeney Todd: The Real Story of the Demon Barber of Fleet Street, Peter Haining states that Todd was born on October 26 1756 in Brick Lane, Stepney, claiming that an upbringing in a squalid part of London reminiscent of Hogarth's 1751 etching Gin Lane, combined with a stretch in Newgate prison for petty theft at the age of 14, helped to form Todd's personality. Haining's book influenced the 2006 BBC drama starring Ray Winstone, which portrayed Todd as a man warped by childhood abuse, parental rejection and sexual impotence. This notion of Todd as an actual historical character makes the tale more horrible - something the Britannia Theatre was aware of when publicising the first adaptation. Todd's various mistreatments and their results also chime with current concerns. But Haining's failure to back his theory with tangible evidence has resulted in it being largely dismissed by other historians.

Sweeney Todd's story does appear in the Newgate Calendar, originally a bulletin of executions produced by the keeper of Newgate prison, the title of which was appropriated by chapbooks, popular pamphlets full of entertaining, often violent criminal activities. But there is no account of Todd's surely remarkable trial and execution in official records, and thus no real evidence that he ever existed.

In Charles Dickens's Martin Chuzzlewit, published in 1844 (three years before Todd's appearance), the unfortunate Thomas Pinch worries that John Westlock will "begin to be afraid that I have strayed into one of those streets where the countrymen are murdered; and that I have been made into meat pies, or some such horrible thing."

Haining suggests that Dickens was inspired by knowledge of the "real" Sweeney Todd, but that he forbore to mention him lest some of his victims' relatives were still alive. It seems more likely that, as Robert L Mack suggests in what will surely become the definitive work on the subject, The Wonderful and Surprising History of Sweeney Todd, Dickens may have been aware of existing urban myths or folk tales partly inspired by the emigration of people from the countryside into industrialising urban centres, where they proceeded to be "swallowed up" by the city.

Dickens was the most successful novelist of the period, and the absence of copyright laws allowed his work to be frequently plundered for ideas by the authors of "bloods". Lloyd's publications had initially flourished through blatant plagiarisms such as "Nikelas Nickelbery" and "Oliver Twiss". Mack identifies several aspects of "The String of Pearls" indebted to Dickens, but it is Martin Chuzzlewit that holds the most tantalising connection. Chuzzlewit introduces readers to Poll Sweedlepipe, who is the landlord of an "easy shaver" and hairdresser. The hairdressing premises are "next door but one to the celebrated mutton pie shop". An illustration by Phiz shows the two establishments nestling side by side. Mack suggests that the proximity of the shops in the narrative, combined with Phiz's illustration and with earlier references to cannibalism in the text, could have provided inspiration for an author casting around for a plot.

The barber is both part of and outside the rapacious city. He reflects the increasing industrialisation of city life. As Stephen Sondheim's Todd puts it:

It's man devouring man, my dear! And who are we to deny it in here?

The barber's murders are mechanised by means of a cunningly devised revolving chair. And his alliance with Mrs Lovett is a perfect business model, a unity of supply and demand that allows her to produce mammoth quantities of pies. But he is also a loner, a strange character with "a short, disagreeable kind of unmirthful laugh, which came in at all sorts of odd times when nobody else saw anything to laugh at at all, and which sometimes made people start again, especially when they were being shaved". His role as murderer and purveyor of human flesh makes him the ultimate outsider.

Perversely, Todd's outsider status might account for some of his popularity. On stage and screen, the role has frequently been played for laughs. Slaughter winks and grins his way through the 1936 film, making the audience (safe in the knowledge of Todd's eventual comeuppance) complicit as they anticipate the next turn of the chair.

Johnny Depp's depiction of the demon barber in the new Sondheim/Tim Burton movie is predictably more suave. Director Burton's trademark comic-book Grand Guignol drips with blood, but we can still feel sympathy for Todd. Events have perverted his worldview until he believes:

There's a hole in the world like a great black pit And it's filled with people who are filled with shit And the vermin of the world inhabit it . . .

He thinks that the "bleeders" he kills are either vermin or living in a world so terrible they must surely welcome death:

Because the lives of the wicked should be made brief For the rest of us, death will be a relief We all deserve to die!

Todd's killing spree is an expression of his own death wish, and as his actions become more frenzied, his own death becomes inevitable.

These various interpretations depend on the lively combination of cut-throat and pie that characterises Sweeney Todd in the popular imagination and which is the mainstay of the myth's longevity. Todd may not eat Mrs Lovett's product, but he is intimately associated with cannibalism, a theme that dominates cautionary tales for children and fairy stories. In Jack and the Beanstalk, Jack climbs to the giant's castle where he's menaced by a giant who shouts:

Fee! Fie! Foe! Fum! I smell the blood of an Englishman. Be he 'live, or be he dead, I'll grind his bones to make my bread.

Hansel and Gretel and early versions of Sleeping Beauty are among fairy tales in which children narrowly escape the dinner plate. Cannibalism also abounds in Greek myths, where fathers such as Thyestes, Tereus and Cronus are each served, or choose to eat, their own sons.

In her collection of essays Signs and Wonders, Marina Warner writes: "The cannibalistic menace of the monster dominates fairy tales and modern fantasies - the man-eating ogres of legend haunt contemporary figures like Hannibal Lecter from Silence of the Lambs."

Sweeney Todd is not the only villain associated with cannibalism whose lasting place in the popular imagination has led to confusions over his historical status. Ayrshire cannibal Sawney Bean and his incestuous family were part of the inspiration for the films The Texas Chainsaw Massacre (1974) and The Hills Have Eyes (1977), both remade recently. The Bean clan would swoop on unwary travellers, robbing them of their valuables, killing them and then eating their flesh. A 1726 account states: "They left not a carcase behind 'em, but carried it to their den, where cutting it into quarters would pickle them, and live upon human flesh, till they got another prey of the same kind."

Bean and his family, like Todd, are absent from any official records of trials or executions. In her essay "A Taste of Scotland", Fiona Black conjectures: "Cannibalism has a long history as a means of political propaganda used by a dominant culture against those they wish to colonise . . . Sawney may be considered a colonial fiction used to demonstrate the savage and uncivilised nature of the Scots."

The propagandists knew what they were doing. Robbery, murder and cannibalism were a combination guaranteed to grab readers' attention. Despite this, it is unlikely that the anonymous, poorly paid author of "The String of Pearls" realised his creation would still be thrilling audiences 160 years later. The story is perfectly readable, but it is no match for Dickens, Wilkie Collins or even Bram Stoker. It is Sweeney Todd who lives on. The elements that compose him build on ancient fears and disparate myths. He steps forth, strops his razor and shocks generation after generation.

Sweeney Todd: The Demon Barber of Fleet Street (18) is released on January 25. Louise Welsh will explore the legend of Sawney Bean in BBC Radio Scotland's Case Reopened on February 4.