PALM BEACH GARDENS, Fla., January 26, 2010 – Former LPGA tour player Judy Dickinson has joined the 2010 EWGA (Executive Women’s Golf Association) Foundation Board of Directors. This year’s officers are President Margaret E. Downey, director of recruiting & staffing, CSX Transportation from the Jacksonville, FL Chapter; Vice President Beth P. Hecht, senior vice president, general counsel and secretary, Sun Products Corporation, Westchester, NY Chapter; and Secretary/Treasurer Sandra L. Cross, director, business development, The PGA of America from the Fort Lauderdale Area, FL Chapter.

Dickinson played on the LPGA Tour for 23 seasons and recorded four career victories. She was president of the LPGA Tour from 1990 -1992 and led the planning for the LPGA’s 50th Anniversary celebration in 2000. She has held several management positions with the LPGA including director of community relations for the ADT Championship and working on numerous special projects. Dickinson was the 1997 recipient of the EWGA Leadership Award which recognizes prominent individuals who have made longtime and outstanding contributions to women’s golf. Residing in Tequesta, Florida, she was married to the late Gardner Dickinson and has twin sons now in college.

“We welcome Judy to our talented and dedicated board of directors,” says Downey, serving as president of the EWGA Foundation Board for a second year. “Her experience and expertise will help us further the causes of the foundation, expand our resources and build a lasting legacy for future generations of women.”

Other board members include Nona Footz, managing director, RSR Partners, New York City Chapter; Karen Furtado, partner, Smallwood Maike & Associates, from the Southern New Hampshire Chapter; Lisa Lifer, director, global quality improvement for Merck & Co., Inc., Northern New Jersey Chapter; Janet McKinley consultant, from the Atlanta Chapter; and Pam Swensen, chief executive officer, EWGA.

Former EWGA Foundation Board member, Patty Sheehan, noted LPGA Hall of Fame member and president, Patty Sheehan, Inc. now serves as Goodwill Ambassador for the organization.

About the EWGA Foundation

Formed as a separate legal entity and supported by the EWGA (Executive Women’s Golf Association), the EWGA Foundation is a 501(c)(3) tax exempt organization. Its mission is to create and fund education and leadership programs for women of all ages. EWGA Foundation initiatives include: financial support for the development and refinement of the EWGA Golf Education curriculum; financial support to bring speakers with expertise in leadership development training and facilitation to EWGA meetings and gatherings; the Drive for Dreams program, to give the gift of golf; the Women On Par® scholarship program; and fundraising in support of LPGA-USGA Girls Golf (Girls Golf).

Over the past six years, the EWGA Foundation, through EWGA chapters and association-wide fundraising efforts, has raised over $400,000 in support of Girls Golf, one of the EWGA Foundation’s designated charities. EWGA members also serve as mentors and volunteers at more than 40 Girls Golf sites, making the EWGA one of the largest single contributors to the Girls Golf program aside from the USGA.

About the EWGA

Since its founding in 1991 as the Executive Women’s Golf Association, the EWGA has enriched the lives of more than 100,000 women connecting them to learn, play, and enjoy golf for business and fun. This tax exempt association delivers a wide range of golf, social and networking activities for both new and experienced golfers at over 125 local chapters throughout the United States and international chapters in Canada.

The EWGA is headquartered in Palm Beach Gardens, Florida. For more information about the association and its membership, visit www.ewga.com.