Improved Windies batting stymies Australia's progress

Exchange with Warner brings a spark

Malcolm Knox: Smith's men respect tourists into the dust

Former Tasmanian all-rounder Tony Benneworth tells against himself a story about how Garry Sobers shaped to hit him for six over long-off one day in Launceston in 1971, but was forced to adjust to Benneworth's late swing and hit him to the cover fence instead, whereupon he nodded to Benneworth as if to say, without a hint of sarcasm, "well bowled". Benneworth at least still treasures the memory.

Something of that spirit informed Monday's play at the MCG as the West Indies scaled new heights for them by forcing Australia to change their plans. At day's beginning, it would have been to rifle through the Windies' last four wickets, send them in again and bowl them out again, ASAP. But Australia took four hours to take those four wickets, and so forewent the follow-on, and lost three wickets of their own in the last session, and will still win this match by a massive margin, but might have to wait even until Wednesday. It is not exactly the biter bit, but it is at least a nibble. Even Bay 13 was quieted.

The cue was an accident. Three times in the morning session, Carlos Brathwaite elaborately gestured disgust at himself for losing his head and his wicket, only to be recalled twice because of James Pattinson's no-balls. Not until Nathan Lyon took an acrobatic return catch on the stroke of lunch was Brathwaite verifiably out. Meantime, he had shrugged off two blows to the helmet, and played with batsman-like time and authority for 59. Even his thrice-rehearsed self-recrimination indicated a certain jealousy of his reputation not always evident among the Windies on this tour. He is on debut.

An ounce of luck had proved worth a pound of effort, and a different mood came over the day. Opposite Brathwaite, Darren Bravo was playing as if to emphasise what he loves most about Test cricket compared with other forms, that as long as a man is good enough at what he is doing, there is no statutory limit on how long he does it.

It is another of Test cricket's undersold charms that some days and circumstances, the best thing a man can do is nothing. In the first hour, Bravo made only two runs, but his batting and body language said the same thing to Australia: I'm still here. Men have made triple centuries and marked their guard less often than Bravo this day. Passive resistance gradually evolved into passive aggression. At his best, he was as he seeks to be, the image of Brian Lara. He was last man out, on the stroke of tea, after more than a day's worth of batting.

By stumps, of roughly 35 hours of play in this series, Bravo had been off the field for less than four of them. His has been not so much a tour as a vigil.

Kemar Roach, Jerome Taylor and Jomel Warrican all were emboldened. Australia, for once, were neutered. Pattinson's overstepping, overthrows and later a short run symptomised rare sloppiness. This must all be corrected for handicap. Between no-balls, Pattinson bowled beautifully, and Lyon again demonstrated how a spin bowler might sometimes do his craftiest work before the ball lands, and Australia could afford to wait anyway. Class would out, and did.

In the last session, Australia's mission was quick runs at almost any price, which made them as unstoppable as kamikazes. The soul of Usman Khawaja's half-century is best characterised by the shot that ended it, a feathery leg glance past off-stump to the wicketkeeper. Steve Smith, in his unbeaten half-century, was even more non-conformist. Twice, he performed a kind of volleyball spike, but with two hands and a bat, both times bringing runs. Six-an-over was the going rate. This was one way to skin a Test cricket cat, Bravo's in the morning another. Only life itself has greater range than this sport.

Though Australia tumbled along, for once the West Indies did not play as if under the heel before they started. Nine of them warmed up on the ground at the tea break, not pressed now, but pressing. In the field, they hustled and bustled, a rarity. Jason Holder did Joe Burns with an outswinger, then Brathwaite gulled David Warner into a catch to gully, bringing him a maiden wicket to go with his maiden half-ton, and in his exultation he bowled over Holder before sliding into an imaginary corner flag, and all 26,000 at the MCG had to chuckle.

Again, this was in the context of what will be yet another runaway Australian win. This was one small battle, not the war. The West Indies are in as dire straits Tuesday morning as they were Monday morning, as they have been for 15 years. But at least this once, they could put an ingenue's smiling face on it. Perhaps the Australians even found it in themselves to nod and say with no note of patronising: well played.