Two men who died when a dinghy capsized on a fishing trip have been remembered as "good mates" who will be sadly missed.

Tony Benneworth, 67, a former Tasmanian cricketer and Liberal member for the state seat of Bass, and Anthony 'Tony' Long, 73, of Youngtown were fishing with another man aged 69 at Ansons Bay on Saturday afternoon

The trio's five metre dingy started taking on water, causing the boat to capsize, and the rescue helicopter was called just before 5:00pm.

Police say one of the men who died was not wearing a lifejacket, and the other man was struggling to inflate his.

The third man successfully managed to inflate his life jacket before swimming about 500 metres to shore.

He alerted another fisherman to the incident, who took his boat out to help — but one of the men was already dead by the time he was found.

Police said the body of the second man was found close to the shore shortly after.

Police have secured the boat on the shore, and are preparing a coroner's report.

Former Tasmanian Premier, Ray Groom remembered Mr Benneworth as a very conscientious member of parliament who "always had a smile on his face".

"Tony was a great friend, he was a real character, a big hearted person, jovial, he added some humour to the parliament and the parliament often needs a bit of humour when you're dealing with serious issues," he said.

Across the political divide, current Labor member for Bass, Michelle O'Byrne, said she was "terribly saddened".

"Despite our different politics and both contesting the 2001 federal election for Bass I always considered Benny a friend.

Anthony Long's son Chris praised the efforts of the people who assisted on the beach.

"To the people who took out a boat to assist in the recovery, thank you,'' he said.

"We are just shattered by our loss and send condolences to the family of Tony Benneworth.

"He loved his fishing and family and could never do enough to help us, he will be deeply missed by all his family and friends."

Mr Long and Mr Benneworth were both members of the Trevallyn Bowls Club, and vice president Andrew Baird said their deaths were devastating.

"Everyone is in complete shock here, it's a gutted feeling," he said.

Australian cricketing great David Boon said he worked with Mr Benneworth for many years in the banking industry.

"It's a really sad time for me and obviously everybody else," he said.

"Tony gave an enormous amount to Tasmanian cricket.

Ansons Bay locals said the conditions were calm at the time, but said the bar way near where the dinghy capsized was often difficult to navigate.

Community member David Vaughtin said the town has been shaken.

"Well the thing is, down here everybody knows everybody," he said.

"So word got around pretty quickly that there'd been an accident we didn't realise how bad it was for a while, but when we heard of the two drowning we were just all so devastated and shocked."