Benneworth History, Family Crest & Coats of Arms

Origins Available:

England

Loading...

Early Origins of the Benneworth family

The surname Benneworth was first found in Lincolnshire where they held a family seat as Lords of the Manor. The Saxon influence of English history diminished after the Battle of Hastings in 1066. The language of the courts was French for the next three centuries and the Norman ambience prevailed. But Saxon surnames survived and the family name was first referenced in the year 1150 when Roger de Benneword held estates in that shire.

Loading...

Early History of the Benneworth family

This web page shows only a small excerpt of our Benneworth research. Another 91 words (6 lines of text) covering the years 1214, 1275, 1455 and 1487 are included under the topic Early Benneworth History in all our PDF Extended History products and printed products wherever possible.

Loading...

Benneworth Spelling Variations

Until quite recently, the English language has lacked a definite system of spelling rules. Consequently, Anglo-Saxon surnames are characterized by a multitude of spelling variations. Changes in Anglo-Saxon names were influenced by the evolution of the English language, as it incorporated elements of French, Latin, and other languages. Although Medieval scribes and church officials recorded names as they sounded, so it is common to find one person referred to by several different spellings of his surname, even the most literate people varied the spelling of their own names. Variations of the name Benneworth include Benneworth, Benniworth, Benneyworth, Penneyworth, Penniworth, Penneworth, Pennyworth, Bennyworth, Benningworth and many more.

Loading...

Early Notables of the Benneworth family

Distinguished members of the family include

the Benneworth of Lincolnshire

Loading...

Migration of the Benneworth family

Searching for a better life, many English families migrated to British colonies. Unfortunately, the majority of them traveled under extremely harsh conditions: overcrowding on the ships caused the majority of the immigrants to arrive diseased, famished, and destitute from the long journey across the ocean. For those families that arrived safely, modest prosperity was attainable, and many went on to make invaluable contributions to the development of the cultures of the new colonies. Research into the origins of individual families in North America revealed records of the immigration of a number of people bearing the name Benneworth or a variant listed above: settlers, who arrived along the eastern seaboard, from Newfoundland, to Maine, to Virginia, the Carolinas, and to the islands.

Contemporary Notables of the name Benneworth (post 1700) +

Anthony John "Tony" Benneworth (1950-2018), Australian cricketer for the Tasmanian Tigers from 1971 until 1979 and later a politician who served in the Tasmanian House of Assembly from 1992 to 1998

Related Stories +