FAREWELL: Members of Riverside Cricket Club and Trevallyn Bowls and Community Club, formed a guard of honor for Tony Benneworth on Friday. Pictures: Paul Scambler

Tony Benneworth’s life “did not go unnoticed”.

Subscribe now for unlimited access .

or signup to continue reading

All articles from our website & app

The digital version of Today's Paper

Breaking news alerts direct to your inbox

Interactive Crosswords, Sudoku and Trivia

All articles from the other in your area

On Friday more than 800 people filled Launceston’s Church of Apostles to remember a man who was “larger than life”.

Here, Father Richard Ross shared an impassioned message for boat users to always wear a lifejacket, in the hope that Tony’s death would serve a purpose.

The 67-year-old, known to his friends as ‘Benny’, drowned while on a fishing trip at Ansons Bay in the state’s North-East on Saturday.

The incident also claimed the life of 73-year-old Tony Long of Youngtown.

Father Ross described the deaths as “cruel, unfair, painful and meaningless”, but said it was a story that needed to be to be shared.

“To name the elephant in the room, if someone, somewhere, dons a working lifejacket, because of the story of this week, and it saves a life – we may not hear that story – but Tony and Tony’s death will have saved a life,” he said.

“So we need to tell that story, as painful and as hard as it is.

“Because we hope that it makes a difference.”

RIP: Tony Benneworth OAM, 12/12/1950- 10/03/2018, was farewelled by more than 800 people on Friday at Launceston’s Church of Apostles.

Mr Benneworth was remembered as a man who had a “profound impact” on the Northern Tasmanian community.

His niece Lisa Benneworth, described him as a “gentleman” and a “true sportsman” who along with all of his passions, was first and foremost a family man.

“It is challenging to express the state of shock and despair we have been in since hearing the news,” she said.

“His personality resonated with so many people.

“It is evident by the sheer number of people in this church today what a deep sense of community there is in Launceston.

“The amount of people whose lives he touched cannot be underestimated.”

While there were many tears, Friday’s service also brought laughs as friends and family reflected on a life that was “lived to the fullest”.

Ms Benneworth spoke of the many “good yarns” shared over a glass of red wine with a man who had “personality in spades”.

Speaking about Linda – his wife of 30 years – Ms Benneworth said they were “always side by side to support each other”.

In a touching tribute, members of the various clubs and associations Mr Benneworth was affiliated with were asked to place symbols on his coffin.

They included a cricket bat, a motorcycle helmet and a club shirt from his beloved Trevallyn Bowls and Community Club.

Former Speaker of the House Graeme Page

Former Speaker of the House Graeme Page, placed a Tasmanian a flag signifying Mr Benneworth’s “remarkable” political career.

Speaking after the service, he said the Benneworth family had been overwhelmed with support since Saturday.

“He was just one heck of a guy,” he said.

“The family has been supported unbelievably since the tragic circumstances.

“They have had tributes from all over Australia.

“The family just cannot believe the man touched so many lives.

“If someone went down, he was the first one to pick them up.

“If you met Tony for a few moments, you were his friend, and he is going to be missed.”

At the conclusion of the service, members of the Riverside Cricket Club and Trevallyn Bowls and Community Club, formed a guard of honour outside the church.

Riverside Cricket Club past president Peter Scott

Riverside past president Peter Scott said it was an honour to show what Mr Benneworth meant to the club, on what was a very emotional day.

“The service was excellent and really summed up the man,” he said.

“We really want to celebrate a life well had, but very sad for the same token.

“He really drove change and didn’t just accept things for being the way that they are.

“He had the ability to motivate people and get things done.

“We have all learned so much from Tony.

“He has been a leader and what he has taught myself and other members of our community, that will be his legacy.

“To always challenge and try and improve things for the better.”

The funeral for Tony Long will be held on Monday at the Franklin Grove Centre, Youngtown, at 10.30am.

DAILY

Your morning news

Today's top stories curated by our news team. Also includes evening update.

WEEKLY

Note from the Editor

Get the editor's insights: what's happening & why it matters.

WEEKLY

FootyHQ

Love footy? We've got all the action covered.

WEEKLY

Sport

The latest news, results & expert analysis.

WEEKLY

Explore Travel

Every Sunday explore destinations, deals, tips & travel writing to transport you around Australia and the globe.

WEEKDAYS

The Echidna

Sharp. Close to the ground. Digging deep. Your weekday morning newsletter on national affairs, politics and more.

TWICE WEEKLY

The Informer

Your essential national news digest: all the big issues on Wednesday and great reading every Saturday.

WEEKLY

Motoring

Get news, reviews and expert insights every Thursday from CarExpert, ACM's exclusive motoring partner.

TWICE WEEKLY

Voice of Real Australia

Get real, Australia! Let the ACM network's editors and journalists bring you news and views from all over.

AS IT HAPPENS

Breaking news alert

Be the first to know when news breaks.

DAILY

Today's Paper Alert

Your digital replica of Today's Paper. Ready to read from 5am!

DAILY

Your favourite puzzles

Test your skills with interactive crosswords, sudoku & trivia. Fresh daily!

Advertisement

Ad

Advertisement

Ad