Monday, April 15th at 6:00 pm CDT, Reception 5:30-7:00

April 15th marks the anniversary of President Abraham Lincoln’s death. Evansville artist John Helfrich is remarkably skilled at creating technically accurate and realistic oil paintings, and he recently completed a new portrait of Lincoln, the beloved 16th President of the United States of America.

The unveiling of Helfrich’s most recent Lincoln portrait will take place at Inman’s Picture Framing, 2828 Lincoln Avenue in Evansville on Monday, April 15th. Doors open at 5:30 pm CDT for this very special event, with the art being unveiled at 6:00 pm CDT.

Helfrich’s most recent Lincoln oil painting was collected quickly at Inman’s, where it was on exhibit. A fortunate and astute art collector purchased it shortly after it was first displayed in the gallery.

Abraham Lincoln lived in nearby Spencer County, Indiana from age 7 through 21. He was a self-taught lawyer and is regarded as one of the greatest U.S. presidents, was an opponent of slavery, and successfully led the Union during the Civil War.

John Helfrich is a self-taught artist whose paintings display true elegance. He says, “Being diagnosed as agoraphobic, painting has provided me a way to connect with humanity that would otherwise be impossible for me. I have no achievements in competition to boast of. To me, competitions involving artists tend to breed animosity in an environment where we must raise each other up, not prove we are better. The look of true appreciation, excitement, or love in the eyes of a recipient of one of my paintings brings a higher premium than any dollar amount or number of ribbons ever could.”

Born in August 1969, I grew up in a large Catholic family. As I grew older, the artistic gene from my great grandma Veller became more prominent. I graduated from Mater Dei High School in 1987. Four days after my 18th birthday I joined the army.

After basic training, advanced infantry training, and airborne school, I was assigned to the 101st airborne division. During those four years with the Screaming Eagles, I graduated from Air Assault school, served a six month tour in Sinai Egypt and became a combat veteran during the Gulf War. I served another four years in the Indiana National Guard at which time I graduated number one in my class at Sergeant school and participated in the Sergeant exchange program with the British. Through the eight years of my military service, I never stopped drawing.

My style has changed over the years, beginning with collage and mixed media pieces which I still create occasionally, but I now focus mostly on my love of texture that I like to create with palette knives. I love the movement and building up of layers it creates. Palette knives, along with brushes, has become my signature way of painting. I feel each stroke on the canvas creates a type of dance in a painterly style with both texture and color.

My love of nature reflects in my work. My style of paintings are often based on soft colors and a quiet palette. At times I add a pop of color but most of my work shows a softer side of life. Florals, serene landscapes and objects in nature are my inspiration. They calm my soul and inspire me to be a better person and a better artist. I’ve had many people say my art creates a peace and a feeling of going back in time for them. This makes me feel like I am doing what I should with my art.

I often tell my beginner art students to think about the reason one weeds a garden. We remove what does not belong and that no longer serves us so we can then cultivate and nurture the garden. I encourage them to not allow fear and self doubt get in the way, and weed those type of things out. Above all, have fun and enjoy the process!

I am a wife, mother and Nana. I paint from my home studio in Evansville Indiana. You can find my art at Inman’s Picture Framing and my website, www.vickiwilsonart.com.

In the artist’s words…

I’ve always used creativity in my life. I started out like a lot of artists, drawing and coloring as a kid, then doing all the contests in school. My Dad is also an artist, so his illustrations and sculptures influenced my art, I’m sure. He’s always encouraged me to think outside of the box, to think “what if”. That phrase is still something I think daily in the studio and in life.

I went to college for graphic design and worked in that field for 11 years. After the birth of my son, I stayed home and opened up my art studio where I have been painting ever since.

My style is constantly evolving and changing. When I first started to paint it was important to me to paint in a representational and detailed style. About 80% of my work has remained that way until as of the last year or so. Now, as the years have passed I’ve matured in my skills and most importantly clarity. I find I get more and more enjoyment painting for myself. That involves expressing feelings, thoughts, imagination and storytelling through less literal means. I’m working towards creating more visceral work and pleasing myself for the majority of the time now. It’s my hope that my collectors continue to follow this new path I’m taking and walk along the journey with me to see where the road leads.

You may see options for framing online, but there are many reasons to choose a local framer. First, you get a personalized experience that you can’t get online. We help you through the entire process, sharing our knowledge of framing with you while you choose the perfect frame, mat color, and glass. You may have questions and we can answer them on the spot.

Another reason to choose a local framer is that you have the opportunity to see the mat and frame samples in person. There’s no guessing on color as sometimes colors aren’t a true representation on a computer. Like anything else, you get a better vision in person of how the frame will look with your piece. You just can’t get the same feeling shopping online.

I received my associate degree in visual communication/graphic arts from Ivy Tech. I did a small amount of freelance work, applied for a couple graphic design jobs but ultimately decided to stay in jewelry at the time where I had been working. I received certifications through DCA (Diamond Council of America) and GIA (Gemological Institute of America) and worked at Helzberg Diamonds and Kay Jewelers up until I delivered my first child, Sam. When he was small, I waited tables for awhile as I was also doing custom upholstery out of my basement. I decided to return to Helzberg when I was pregnant with my 2nd child, Katie. I continued to do some seamstress & upholstery jobs while she was little. I’ve always had a side hustle but ultimately my babies were first. I always said once I got my kids in school I’d focus on art again. I’ve always drawn and loved different artistic things but you just have a different life when your kids are little.

When Katie started kindergarten, I bought myself a huge set of watercolors. I always had my pencils, colored pencils, and pastels but I had never really done much painting. I started with watercolors and loved it for a while and I still do occasionally, but I feel like acrylics are more for me. Once I started with acrylics, I feel like it became an addiction.

My first art show was the 50 years in Evansville in 2019. I’ve always been shy and struggled with confidence and that’s the year I decided to start putting my stuff out there!

I feel in control of my own life when I paint or at least the acceptance of things I can’t control by doing something good. It’s hard to explain but it’s empowering for me. I have a lot of rejection from family members and painting everyday became a meditative practice for me. Something good, something that was by me and for me, something nobody could take from me. Out of all the things that have been taken from me, nobody could ever take this. It’s about the journey for me. The quest for happiness and acceptance and helping people around me to strive for the good also.

IN CLOSING

“As an artist I’m all over the map but I’ll try to explain myself… I’m a vivid dreamer and I truly believe in the meaning behind your dreams so I paint from my dreams often. I had a dream that red spiders were pouring from the walls. I know it sounds like you’d be scared but in my dream I was happy and curious. You should always pay attention to the emotions in your dream, not just the elements. I googled red spiders that morning and came across the red spider lily flowers. I was blown away by the deep meaning of them. I believe we heal through our subconscious and there’s meaning in everything around us so I pay attention to my dreams and my daydreams. Every feather you find, every color…It’s all trying to tell you something.”

Cynthia Watson, an award-winning artist, has called Evansville home for four decades, after spending her formative years in Indianapolis. Having honed her craft at Herron School of Art and Design, she is a proud mother of three and a doting grandmother of five.

As a versatile artist, Cynthia has expertise in oil, watercolor, acrylic, and mixed media. Recently, she has ventured into the captivating world of plein air painting, which involves capturing the beauty of nature in an outdoor setting. Additionally, Cynthia is a fervent advocate for exploring mixed media works that combine various mediums for a stunning result.

Cynthia finds immense joy in sharing her artistic knowledge and experience through teaching classes for both children and adults at her charming studio in downtown Evansville. During summers, she hosts children’s art camps, week-long day camps that encompass lessons on the color wheel, 3-point perspective, watercolor, acrylics, and even tie-dye projects.

SUMMER 2023 ART CAMP

June 12-16, 9:30a-2:00p

June 26-30, 9:30a-2:00p

July 10-14, 9:30a-2:00p

July 17-21, 9:30a-2:00p

All materials included except white t-shirt (for tie-dying)

Must bring own sack lunch.

Art show on Fridays at 12:30 to showcase art from the week for family and friends. 401 SE 6th St, Suite 209, Evansville, IN 47713

Call 812-484-9459 to reserve a session.

Cynthia also takes commissions. To commission a piece by Cynthia, contact Jessica at jessica@inmanspictureframing.com. Visit our online shop to collect a Cynthia Watson.