Artist aims to express the being behind the grotesque facade

By Roger Mcbain

His new show at Riverwind Gallery takes John Helfrich back to his first monstrous love.

The self-taught artist's first drawing of Frankenstein met with a dramatically different reception than what he expects his new show, Classic Monsters of the Silver Screen, to receive at its opening Saturday.

Helfrich remembers getting into lots of trouble when, as a child, he drew a picture of the famous sewn-together, reanimated movie monster on the back of a photograph ? his father's official Air Force portrait.

He saw Frankenstein as a sympathetic figure, the victim of a scientist's experiment. "It was one of the very first images I ever remember drawing," Helfrich said.

His parents' anger at his choice of canvas didn't discourage the young artist, however. Helfrich kept on drawing, using whatever he could to create all types of images. When he first attempted charcoal renderings, he tried barbecue briquettes, he said. He moved on to artist's charcoal, then pastels.

Helfrich tried landscapes and seascapes but, more than anything, he loved portraits that he created working from photographs and published images. That's still how he works, he said, sighting along his thumb to measure perspective and proportion as he translates the image from photograph to easel.

He was a rebellious teenager when he took a single art class at Central High School in the early 1980s, "and it didn't go really well for me," he said. The class was too academic, and "I felt there was no self-expression."

Helfrich continued creating his own art, however, through school and afterward, as he moved into a career as a meat cutter. At 45, the assistant manager of meats at Wesselman's Fulton Avenue store works at the easel in his living room whenever he can.

"It's like being hungry when I'm not painting," he said. "It's the most relaxing thing I do. The time just flies by."

These days, he works with oil paints, a medium he discovered after Jay and Norma Hill, Riverwind Gallery's owners, encouraged him to move beyond pastel. The Hills asked to meet Helfrich, he said, after their daughter came home with his portrait of Michael Crawford as the title character in Andrew Lloyd Webber's "Phantom of the Opera."

"They gave me my first solo exhibition, in 1992," he said. That first show offered an eclectic selection of still life, portraits, nudes and river scenes.

Since then, Helfrich's work has hung in 10 solo shows, mainly featuring celebrity portraits taken from iconic photographs. Subjects have ranged from movie stars to musicians. For his next show, he plans to feature a range of music icons, from Frank Sinatra and Billie Holiday to The Doors, he said.

Helfrich strives for a kind of photorealism in his painted renderings of iconic images, "but I try to put a little bit of myself in there, too," he said. "I want (viewers) to see how much passion is in the painting."

He paints to sell, and he sells it all. "Crazy as it sounds, I sell out every show," Helfrich said.

He's also done commissions for customers "around town and people across the country," he said. His pricing helps, with paintings selling from $75 to $200 for canvases ranging from 16 by 20 inches to 24 by 36 inches.

Even so, "I wouldn't have thought there would be a big market for such subject matter," he said.

The movie monsters featured in his Riverwind Gallery show remain a sentimental favorite. He wants to take viewers below the characters' scars, fur, makeup and the masks to reveal something deeper, he said. "Most of these monsters are unwilling participants in a world they don't understand."

if you go

What: "Classic Monsters of the Silver Screen," featuring artist John Helfrich's back-and-white oil paintings of iconic figures from horror films

Where: Riverwind Gallery, 10400 West Indiana 662, Newburgh

When: Saturday through Oct. 31, with an opening reception from 1 to 3 p.m. Saturday

Information:www.riverwindgalleryart.com or call 812-853-2537