Devere and Helen Helfrich spent many years researching the history of Klamath County, Oregon and the Klamath Basin. Devere Helfrich was editor and Helen Helfrich was assistant editor of the Klamath Echoes, a sixteen volume series of Klamath County, Oregon history published between 1964 and 1978. Devere and Helen Helfrich were the official photographers of the Professional Rodeo Cowboys Association for many years. The Helfriches also had a long-time interest in tracing and documenting early emigrant trails in the western United States. They authored or edited several books including Rodeo Pictures and Emigrant Trails West : a Guide to Trail Markers Placed by Trails West, Inc. along the California, Applegate, Lassen, and Nobles' Emigrant Trails in Idaho, Nevada, and California.

Devere Helfrich was born on April 16, 1902 in Lamonta, Oregon. Helen Grace Reed was born on October 29, 2907 in Bend, Oregon. Devere and Helen married on August 2, 1926. They had two daughters, Darle Bernice and Delores Helen. Devere and Helen Helfrich moved from central Oregon to Klamath Falls, Oregon in 1933, started and ran several businesses in Klamath Falls, and Devere began photographing rodeos in 1939. Klamath Falls was the Helfriches home base for the rest of their lives, although they spent many years following the rodeo circuit as the official photographers of the Pro Rodeo Cowboys Association. Devere specialized in action photography while Helen specialized in portraits. Devere Helfrich died in Klamath Falls, Oregon on September 1, 1981. Helen Helfrich died in Klamath Falls on July 30, 1989.

The collection includes research materials gathered by Devere and Helen Helfrich as editors of the Klamath Echoes, photographs used in that publication, part of the Helfrich's personal photography collection and annotated maps they used to trace emigrant trails in the western United States. The collection is arranged into three series. Series I: Documents includes a variety of types of research materials related to the creation of the Klamath Echoes. Series II: Images includes original photographs, copies of photographs and negatives. Some photographs appear to have been used in the production of the Klamath Echoes. Others are ones created by Devere and Helen Helfrich. Series III: Maps includes topographic maps of quadrangles throughout the western United States as well as other maps covering the same geographic area. Many maps are annotated with notes about emigrant trails traces.

Restrictions on Use

Before materials from the Shaw Historical Library may be quoted in print or otherwise reproduced in whole or in part in any publication, exhibit, broadcast or other manner, the user must obtain permission from the owner of the physical property and the holder of the copyright. Copyright status for collections in the Shaw Historical Library varies. Reproduction of any item must contain a complete citation to the original. Responsibility for any use rests exclusively with the user.

Preferred Citation

[item identification], Devere and Helen Helfrich Collection, The Shaw Historical Library, Oregon Institute of Technology, Klamath Falls, Oregon.