John Meillon

While the movie may be called Crocodile Dundee, it was actually John Meillon’s character, Wally, who stole the show as Dundee’s on-screen partner. It was such an important part of the movie that John would get to reprise the role of Wally in the Crocodile Dundee sequel that followed!

Unfortunately, Wally would pretty much be the final role he played. John passed away in 1989 from cirrhosis of the liver. He left behind a legacy filled with accolades for his work in theater. His career began early on as a child star on ABC’s “Stumpy.” Shortly after, he made his first appearance on stage. He went on to tour with the Shakespeare touring company at the age of 16. He has said that his work in theater really shaped his career and helped him learn discipline.

Mark Blum

Since his portrayal of Richard, the sleazy editor who continuously gets in the way of true love in the movie Crocodile Dundee, Mark Blum continued to rack up some great credits in the industry.

While the name Mark Blum might not immediately jog your memory, you have definitely seen him in various films and TV shows. Maybe you remember him as the journalist in "Capital News?" He also co-starred in newer TV shows, like "Mozart in the Jungle." When he wasn't acting in front of the cameras, he often took on roles on Broadway. Sadly, the much-loved actor passed away in 2020.

Reginald VelJohnson

Reginald VelJohnson has become one of the more famous character actors in Hollywood after his minor role as a limo driver in the first "Crocodile Dundee" movie. While his role may have been small, he did not let that stop him, and shortly after, his career started to blow up, and the roles kept on coming!

With co-starring roles in "Die Hard" and "Die Hard 2," and the unforgettable role in the hit show "Family Matters," he quickly became a household name. VelJohnson is well known for playing police officers on television and on the big screen. VelJohnson has an incredible 99 credits to his name.

David Franklin

David Franklin has acted in 21 films, and is no stranger to the TV world, he has been in over 20 T.V. shows since 1977. What a career! But don’t worry if you have trouble remembering him from the film "Crocodile Dundee" in Los Angeles - his career is so much more than that little piece.

David Franklin is typically remembered for his smashing roles as Meeklo Braca in the science fiction television series "Farscape," and as Brutus in "Xena: Warrior Princess." Perhaps you recognize him from "The Matrix Reloaded?" David Franklin also seems to have found the greatest weight loss program, as he has lost nearly 50 pounds ever since going on a diet containing only vegan food.

David Gulpilil

David Gulpilil is remembered for starring alongside Paul Hogan in "Crocodile Dundee" as Neville Bell. People were impressed with David, who showed some real talent on set. His career would go on to rise with appearances in films such as "The Proposition" and "Charlie’s Country." Despite his massive talent, David unfortunately had several run-ins with the law. Instances included violent offenses, such as an arrest for domestic violence for breaking his wife’s arm.

While he is not the nicest guy, he continues to wow audiences and is very talented. If you are the kind of person who can separate the actor and his talent from his personal life, then David Gulpilil might just be your guy. If not, then you’re probably hoping that Hollywood stops giving a pass to violent offenders on the basis of talent.

Ernie Dingo

Ernie Dingo played the role of Charlie in the second "Crocodile Dundee" film. After that stint, he continued to find success and went on to become a very busy character actor. While Dingo may not necessarily have reached star status in Hollywood, he has managed to stay really busy.

Ernie Dingo has over 34 credits to his name, with his most recent credit being on the TV show "Redfern." If you want to get a taste of his work, the best way to catch him onscreen is online since most of his gigs are pretty much under the radar in the US.

Rick Gonzalez

Rick Gonzalez has come a long way since playing bit parts in "Crocodile Dundee" in Los Angeles. He has had so many huge roles that it is almost impossible to remember Rick in a role as minimal as his in "Crocodile Dundee" in Los Angeles.

He went on to play many significant roles, such as Timo Cruz from "Coach Carter" and Ben Gonzalez on the hit TV series "Reaper." Don’t forget his role as Naps in "Roll Bounce." Currently, he plays a vigilante superhero named Rene Ramirez, “Wild Dog,” on the CW superhero drama series "Arrow."

Steve Rackman

Superfans of the "Crocodile Dundee" films will never be able to forget Steve Rackman as the meathead named Don, especially since he was the one and only guy to kiss Paul Hogan’s character in the first "Crocodile Dundee." Fans remember Rackman, and he would go on to reprise his role in all of the following "Crocodile Dundee" films before retiring and moving back to Australia.

Steve moved to Australia when he was just a teenager. From 1973 to 1978, he wrestled in Australia for World Championship Wrestling on the Nine Network. Fans of wrestling in the ’80s will never forget Steve Rackman for his time inside of the wrestling ring as the famous brawler crusher. Today, Steve is a personal trainer at the gym that he runs.

Terry Gill

Gill is a well-known character actor. Even though he only appeared in one of the "Crocodile Dundee" films, his character is remembered by anyone who has seen it! He portrayed the leader of a group of kangaroo hunters whom Dundee had to fight in the hotel bar. In that memorable scene, Dundee later used a dead kangaroo as a cover to scare the hunters. Since his role in "Crocodile Dundee," Gill would go on to act in a total of 71 films!

Terry was also seen in the recurring role of Detective Jack Grace in the women's prison drama Prisoner. He was also a regular cast member in "The Flying Doctors" and played another starring role in "Blue Heelers." He also had a guest role on "Neighbours." He passed away at the age of 75 in 2015.

Gerry Skilton

Crocodile Dundee heartthrob Nugget O’Cass was played by Gerry Skilton. Gerry went on to have appearances in all three of the "Crocodile Dundee" films. Unfortunately, those appearances would be the only roles on his resume. For some reason, Hollywood stopped sending Gerry audition notices and information, so unfortunately, Skilton had no choice but to retire from acting in 2001.

His last film was "Crocodile Dundee in Los Angeles" — just like so many other actors on this list. He reprised the character in 2010 for a proposed outback-adventure reality series, "Nugget Gets A Life," with permission from Paul Hogan, which he self-financed and had hoped to sell to a network.

Jonathan Banks

Jonathan Banks has probably had the biggest career success story after being a part of the "Crocodile Dundee" films. He has become one of the most in-demand character actors on television today. Prior to Dundee, he was in the films "Airplane!" and "Beverly Hills Cop." He got his first big break on the TV series "Wiseguys."

He has most recently hit it big in his role as a former police officer who turns into a hitman in the AMC series "Breaking Bad" and its spinoff, "Better Call Saul." This has even led to Academy Award recognition for the burly character actor, as well as five Emmy Award nominations for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series.

Paul Rodriguez

The "Crocodile Dundee" films will always remember Paul Rodriguez as Diego, in the third and final installment of the Dundee films. Born in Mexico but raised in Los Angeles, Rodriguez has developed into a diverse and multi-talented entertainer. When it comes to comedians, Paul Rodriguez has had quite a long and incredible career. Rodriguez has starred in many acclaimed films, like "Ali" and "Blood Work."

In 2004, he was ranked #74 on Comedy Central’s list of the "100 Greatest Standups of all Time." Aside from acting, he also received the "Humanitarian of the Year Award" for his contribution toward water conservation in the City of Fresno.

Jere Burns

Donning the ultimate ‘bad guy’ look, Jere Burns remains one of the most memorable cast members in "Crocodile Dundee in Los Angeles," playing the role of Arnan Rothman. Jere has had quite an impressive career since the ending of the Dundee trilogy.

He has gone on to get some huge TV roles on his resume - working on projects like "The Muppets," "From Dusk Till Dawn: The Series," and the hit TV series "Justified" as Wynn Duffy. Jere Burns has also appeared on Broadway! His Broadway credits include "Hairspray" and "After the Night and the Music."

Charles S. Dutton

Charles Dutton is well known as Leroy Brown in "Crocodile Dundee II," but that is just a small piece of his long-acting resume. He has gone on to star in many well-known films and television shows. Some of his best-known works are his roles as Fortune in the film "Rudy," Dillon in "Alien 3," and his starring role in the TV series "Roc," where he played the title character.

In 2002 and 2003, Charles picked up some Outstanding Guest Actor Emmy Awards for his roles in "The Practice" and "Without a Trace." He also had a nomination in 1999 for his guest-starring role as Alvah Case in the HBO drama "Oz," but he did not win. For his role in "Oz," he was also nominated for an NAACP Image Award.

Aida Turturro

Having a bit of a role in the third and final "Crocodile Dundee" film did not stop Aida Turturro from racking up some serious credits on her resume. Aida Turturro landed her first film in 1989, but it did not make her a well-known personality. She remains most well known for her starring role as the sister of Tony Soprano in the HBO series, "The Sopranos."

Aside from her role on "The Sopranos," Turturro has stayed quite busy with TV work on "Law & Order" as Judge Felicia Catano. She has a multitude of films under her belt, such as "True Love," "What About Bob?," "Jersey Girl," "Illuminata," "Sleepers," and "Deep Blue Sea."

Stephen Root

Can you believe that the amazing Stephen Root’s very first role was in "Crocodile Dundee II?" He portrayed a DEA Agent named Toilet, and the rest was history! Since then, Root has proved his worth as an actor, comedian, and voice actor and has landed some major roles.

He has starred as Jimmy James on the TV series "NewsRadio," as Milton Waddams in the comedy "Office Space" in 1999, and as the voices of Bill Dauterive and Buck Strickland in the animated series "King of the Hill." His resume also includes roles in the "Star Trek: The Next Generation" two-part episode "Unification" and in the movies "O Brother, Where Art Thou?," "DodgeBall," "The Man in the High Castle," and "Get Out." He also has a ton of supporting roles in a variety of HBO series.

Caitlin Clarke

Clarke landed a minor role in "Crocodile Dundee" as Simone. She would then go on to land a few more gigs in her short but sweet career. Caitlin got her to start stealing the hearts of kids everywhere when she played the beautiful and fierce Valerian in the "Dragonslayer" film pre-Dundee back in 1981.

She was best known for her role in "Dragonslayer" and later for her role as Charlotte Cardoza in the Broadway musical "Titanic" during the years 1998–1999. Sadly, the lovely Clarke passed away from cancer at only 52 years old, well before she ever really got to show off all of her many talents.

Hechter Ubarry

When Hechter Ubarry was just a kid living in New York, he discovered his acting and singing abilities. He was encouraged to study opera, and so he did with a cantor named Maurice Jampol. He gave him lessons despite Ubarry not having the funds to pay them. He always said he could pay him when he could, and luckily, he was able to!

He then utilized his skills and landed himself a role as the drug king Rico in "Crocodile Dundee II." After this amazing role, he started to receive many offers and would eventually return to Broadway. Hechter still performs live on Broadway and also stars in his own cabaret show, which has been running since 2000.

Peter Faiman

The man behind the camera when it all started was Peter Faiman, the director of the original "Crocodile Dundee" film. Though Faiman would go on to gain some serious honors in Australia, becoming a Member of the Order of Australia, he would never really get another major gig as a director.

In 1994, he assisted with the launch of the FX network in New York and was the coordinating director for the opening and closing broadcasts of the Sydney 2000 Olympic Games with the Sydney Olympic Broadcasting Organisation. Since returning to Australia in 2002, he has been a consultant for the Australian Broadcasting Corporation. There he has been acting as a producer on "Strictly Ballroom," "Spicks and Specks," and "The Pet Show."

Paul Hogan

For a while, it looked like Paul Hogan was destined to be a huge star in Hollywood. He scored the "Crocodile Dundee' trilogy as his first major series of gigs, and most would have assumed that would lead to instant fame. Hogan also co-wrote the movie, which was a massive success all over the world. He won a Golden Globe Award for Best Actor - Motion Picture Musical or Comedy and was also nominated for Best Actor at the BAFTAs.

The screenplay of the film was nominated for an Academy Award, a BAFTA, and a Saturn Award. Hogan also co-hosted the 59th Academy Awards with Chevy Chase and Goldie Hawn. A scandal linking him with offshore bank accounts and tax evasion would tarnish Hogan’s name, and soon after the scandal, the Australian star retired. His last role was a guest-starring part in the TV series "Open Slather."

Luis Guzmán

Many people have no idea Luis even starred in the second "Crocodile Dundee" film. The Puerto Rican-born American actor is easily recognizable for his many roles since, though. Luis has played character roles such as sidekicks, thugs, and policemen for much of his career, and he does it well!

Guzmán starred in the films "Out of Sight," "The Limey," "Traffic," "Boogie Nights," "Magnolia," and "Punch-Drunk Love." He’s also been successful on TV, starring in the HBO series "How to Make It in America" and the hit Netflix series "Narcos." He also starred in the medical drama "Code Black," where he portrayed nurse Jesse "Mama" Salander.

Clare Carey

Clare Carey has acted in many films, including, of course, "Crocodile Dundee in Los Angeles." However, that wasn’t her claim to fame. She is best known for her roles in episodic television. Most know her for her role as Kelly Fox on the sitcom "Coach" and her role as Macy Carlson, the Olsen twins' mother, on the ABC Family series "So Little Time."

She has had recurring roles on "Point Pleasant," "Jericho" as Mary Bailey, and "Crash" as Christine Emory. She also made a guest appearance in "Eli Stone" as a lawyer. Carey had a cameo role in the Showtime film "La Cucina." She also had a part in the "NCIS" episode "Life Before His Eyes" as Ann Gibbs, opposite Mark Harmon. She later guest-starred on "NCIS: New Orleans," playing villain Anne Boudreau, in the episode "Sic Semper Tyrannis."

Michael Lombard

Michael Lombard is best known for his performances in "Guiding Light," "Pet Sematary," and "The Thomas Crown Affair." But of course, fans of "Crocodile Dundee" will forever know him as Sam Charlton. He received a nomination for a Drama Desk Award for his stunning performance in "Otherwise Engaged." He also won an Obie Award for his performance in "What's Wrong With This Picture?" On TV, he played the role of Marshall Beck in all 15 episodes of "Filthy Rich" until 1983.

He had guest roles in a multitude of popular television shows like "Kojak," "The Mary Tyler Moore Hour," "The Rockford Files," "Three’s Company," "Riptide," "Spenser: For Hire," "Miami Vice," "The Cosby Show," and many episodes of "Law & Order" and all of its spinoffs. Sadly, Michael Lombard passed away in 2020, leaving behind him his legacy.

John Snyder

Snyder’s role was merely a pimp in the "Crocodile Dundee" film, but despite that fact, he has appeared in many TV series and films, dating from 1979 to 2004. Snyder played the role of a gas station attendant in the film "The Warriors." He took on the role of Soul Hunter #2 in "Soul Hunter" and Orin Zento in "By Any Means Necessary," episodes of "Babylon 5," and as Aaron Conor in the "Star Trek: The Next Generation" episode "The Masterpiece Society."

He also played the role of the Romulan Bochra in the episode "The Enemy." From 1979 to 2004, he appeared in many TV series and films. Aside from his work in stage and film acting, he has also done voice work in anime and video games for studios such as Animaze, Bang Zoom Entertainment, and New Generation Pictures.

Anne Francine

Anne Francine is a cabaret singer and actress. She played the role of Fran in "Crocodile Dundee." In addition, she played the Evil Queen in the live TV version of "Snow White!" Even still, most knew her due to her villainous role as Flora in "Harper Valley PTA." In 1954, she made her Broadway debut with Shirley Booth in "By the Beautiful Sea." She stepped in for the legendary Bea Arthur as Vera Charles in the 1966 Broadway production of "Mame," starring the late Angela Lansbury.

Incredibly enough, she and Lansbury reprised their roles in the 1983 Broadway revival. In 1987, she made her last appearance on Broadway as Mrs. Harcourt in the revival of "Anything Goes," starring Patti LuPone. Unfortunately, Fran was her last role, as she passed away in 1999.

Anne Carlisle

The actress, teacher, author, and model has starred in a handful of films and TV series. Anne Carlisle clearly wore many hats in the entertainment industry. She is best known for writing and portraying both the lead female and male roles in the film "Liquid Sky." In 1985, she also played the small role of Victoria in the Susan Seidelman film "Desperately Seeking Susan."

She played a memorable role as transvestite Gwendoline in "Crocodile Dundee" and starred in an episode of the TV series "Miami Vice." Carlisle also adapted and wrote a novel version of her cult film "Liquid Sky." Carlisle also posed for the famous Playboy Magazine in 1984.

Irving Metzman

Irving Metzman was actually born Douglas Kahn but changed his name to "Irving Metzman," the name of his character in the second play he did. He had planned to change his name for each appearance to that of his character in the play before, but he didn't follow through and has continued to be known as "Irving Metzman."

He is best known for his roles in "WarGames," "The Purple Rose of Cairo," and Irving the Doorman in "Crocodile Dundee." Irving is also a published playwright. The play Irving wrote, entitled "Partners," was published and appeared in Dramatics Magazine in its March/April 1979 issue.

Nancy Mette

Most people probably don’t remember, but Nancy Mette played the role of Karla, a New York prostitute, in the film "Crocodile Dundee." Since those days, she has maintained a very low-key Hollywood career, gaining a mere 19 acting credits. She’s had roles in projects such as "Meet the Hollowheads" and "Terms of Endearment." She may never have become a star, but Nancy Mette had found a unique niche in movies, playing small but demanding roles.

If a director needed to fill a minor role calling for a difficult line or a quirky delivery, he could always pick up the telephone and ask whether Mette was available. Her last role was as a guest star on "Monk." She has been married to Hollywood director Barnet Kellman since 1982.

Juan Fernández de Alarcon

Juan is a Dominican actor best known for his roles as the evil character in his movies. Fernández was born in Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic. He made his film acting debut in the film Salome and since then has gone on to star in over 30 movies. He is best known for "A Man Apart (2003)," "The Collector (2009)," and "Crocodile Dundee II (1988)." Aside from acting in movies, Juan also worked as a model for various designers.

He has worked for numerous high-end clients, including Yves Saint-Laurent, Nino Cerruti, Zandra Rhodes, Ossie Clark, and Giorgio di Sant'Angelo. Additionally, he’s modeled for various artists, like Salvador Dalí.

Dennis Boutsikaris

Dennis Boutsikaris has won the Obie Award two times! He was also the first American actor to play Mozart on Broadway in "Amadeus." It seems like "Crocodile Dundee II" paved the way for many incredible actors. Dennis has done over 140 recordings for Audiobooks for publishers around the world, portraying the works of authors such as Phillip Roth, Stephen King, Jeffrey Deaver, and Don Delillo. For his voice work, he won an Audie Award.

His film credits include lead roles in "*batteries not included," "The Dream Team," "Crocodile Dundee II," "Boys on the Side," and "In Dreams," among many others. Most recently, he was in the films "Cherry Crush," "The Education of Charlie Banks," and "Calling it Quits." In 2012, he co-starred in "The Bourne Legacy," the fourth film of the successful "Bourne" franchise. He is still going strong, as last year he starred in "Better Call Saul."

Paul Greco

Paul Greco can be best remembered as the leader of the not-so-tough gang, The Orphans, in the cult classic, "The Warriors." He is fondly remembered as one of two thugs out to kill Woody Allen's title character in Broadway’s "Danny Rose," and the New Yorker who does a double-take reaction to the guy from Australia, Mick Dundee (Paul Hogan) in Crocodile Dundee.

He then went on to appear in numerous films and television shows throughout the 1980s and 1990s, including an episode of Miami Vice. Sadly, he passed away from lung cancer in 2008 at age 53, with just 20 credits under his belt.

Serge Cockburn

Australian actor Serge Cockburn is pretty much only known for his role as Mikey Dundee in "Crocodile Dundee in Los Angeles," where he portrays the son of Crocodile Dundee. Serge's parents read an ad in the paper that a local production company, Bangalow Productions, was looking for a little boy to play Mick Dundee's son in "Crocodile Dundee in L.A." so they made a short video of Serge talking to his Grandpa about his pet lizard, Huffy. Casting director Maura Fay was "knocked out by his performance," and he scored the role.

Aside from his success in acting, Serge also plays soccer and loves reptiles. He has five pet snakes, a gecko, a pink-tongued skink, a blue-tongued lizard, and a dog! His only other acting role was three years after Dundee in "Danny Deckchair."

Alec Wilson

Actor and director Alec Wilson is probably best remembered for his roles in "Crocodile Dundee II" and "Crocodile Dundee in Los Angeles." Wilson played the character Denning in the second Dundee film that came out in 1988. Weirdly enough, in "Crocodile Dundee II," he played one of the bad guys. But he went on to play one of Mick’s friends, Jacko, in "Crocodile Dundee in Los Angeles."

Alec Wilson, like Paul Hogan, is also a fellow Australian, which made him a great choice for the film since he already had the accent. Those accents are pretty hard to do! Since his appearances in the Dundee films, he has been in a few more movies, but after 2013, he disappeared completely from the big screen.

Kaitlin Hopkins

Kaitlin Hopkins portrayed Miss Mathis in "Crocodile Dundee in Los Angeles." She went on to be quite the stage, screen, and television actress. Apart from film and television, Hopkins could always be found starring in plenty of theatre roles. In 1994, at the young age of 30, she was cast in the rock opera "I Was Looking at the Ceiling and Then I Saw the Sky" by Peter Sellars.

She spent the next year on tour, traveling the world with the production, performing in Paris, Hamburg, Helsinki, and Montreal, as well as at the Edinburgh Festival, among other locales. Currently, she stepped aside from acting and is the new Head of Musical Theatre at Texas State University.

Kenneth Welsh

Kenneth Welsh has such an extensive resume that you probably don’t even remember him from Dundee. He has played many historical figures, including Colin Thatcher, Harry S. Truman (not once but twice), Thomas Edison, James "Scotty" Reston, General Harry Crerar, and James Baker. He has made appearances on the TV series "Due South" and "Slings and Arrows."

He was nominated for a Best Actor Genie Award for his role as Reno Colt in the film "Reno and the Doc." In 1997, he directed the play "SoHo Duo" at the West Bank Theatre in New York City. His role as the Vice-President of the United States in the 2004 film, "The Day After Tomorrow," sparked major controversy due to his resemblance to Dick Cheney, who at the time was the actual Vice-President.

Matt Winston

Winston is an actor and producer who is probably less known for his role as the taxi driver in "Crocodile Dundee in Los Angeles" than any other credit. He is usually known for "Little Miss Sunshine," "Halloween H20: 20 Years Later," and "A.I. Artificial Intelligence." That being said, he is probably best known for his television roles.

He was on "Six Feet Under," "John from Cincinnati," and "Star Trek: Enterprise." Along with the company of Jeffrey Combs and Gary Graham, he is one of only three actors, aside from the regulars, of course, to appear in all four seasons of "Star Trek: Enterprise." He has been married to Amy Smallman since October 1998.

John Billingsley

John Billingsley played the role of Barry in "Crocodile Dundee in Los Angeles." Since his Dundee days, he’s had both small and large roles in film and television. John is definitely type-cast, and he frequently plays scientific characters, such as doctors or professors.

You probably know John as Doctor Phlox from the television series "Star Trek: Enterprise." In "Stargate SG-1: The Other Guys (2002)," he plays a scientist with a fascination for "Star Trek" (his character even states that he dresses up as a Vulcan at Star Trek conventions). In "Star Trek: Enterprise (2001)," he portrays the medical officer Dr. Phlox, whose shipmate is a Vulcan named T'Pol.

Nicholas Hammond

Lifetimes before his small stint in "Crocodile Dundee in Los Angeles" as a curator, Hammond portrayed the world-famous role of Friedrich von Trapp in "The Sound of Music," and the iconic Peter Parker “Spider-Man” on the TV series "The Amazing Spider-Man." When Nicholas was only 6 years old, his family moved to Europe. In 1959, his mother took him to see the musical "My Fair Lady" starring Julie Andrews in London.

After seeing this incredible piece, Nicholas decided he wanted to be an actor. His family returned to the US when Nicholas was 10 years old. It was then that he landed his first part (a small role in the movie "Lord of the Flies"). At a whopping six feet tall, he is the tallest actor to play Peter Parker/Spider-man. He retired from acting in 2016.

Keli Daniels

Keli Daniels had a rather small role in "Crocodile Dundee in Los Angeles," which is why she’s best known for her work in "American Crime Story," "The Fosters," and "Masters of Sex." Her daughter is actress Wyndoline (Wyni) Landry. Keli appeared in one episode (S.2 E.12) of the TV series "Switched at Birth" alongside her daughter. Keli starred in and wrote a one-woman show about her life as both a mother and actress called "Are We There Yet?"

She currently writes and performs all around LA on a very regular basis. She has also been teaching and coaching, both privately and in group settings, for the past 10 years. Keli has also done a number of commercials for big brands, such as Jif, Miralax, Sutter Health, and Alka Seltzer.

Lenny Citrano

Character actor Lenny Citrano is certainly very well known, he has starred on so many hit TV shows. His film and stage credits, though, tend to have him playing shady characters that ultimately get what's coming to them… but not without a few laughs thrown in first.

His television credits include hit shows like “Vegas,” “Justified,” “Friends with Benefits,” “Lie to Me,” “Castle,” “ER,” “Without a Trace,” “Crossing Jordan,” “Matlock,” “NYPD Blue,” “Babylon 5,” “Columbo,” “Cheers,” “Who's the Boss?,” “Murder She Wrote,” and “Baywatch.” He has also done voice-over work for video games like Red Dead Redemption. It is pretty funny that with such a successful acting career, he also holds a Bachelor of Science degree in Ornamental Horticulture.

Grant Piro

Piro has starred in a bunch of roles after "Crocodile Dundee in Los Angeles." He is best known as the host of a children’s TV show, "Couch Potato,' on the Australian Broadcasting Corporation. He has also become one of Australia's most respected theatre actors, with performances in "Under Milk Wood," "Moby Dick," "Whose Life Is It Anyway, and many more. His performance in the Melbourne Theatre Company's production of "Realism" got him critically recognized for his use of the acting technique known as biomechanics.

He appeared as several characters in the Rolf DeHeer film "Bad Boy Bubby," worked with director Scott Hicks on his films "Call Me Mr. Brown," "Sebastian," and the "Sparrow," and appeared in the French feature "L'Amour En Ambuscade" for Carl Shultz, and the films "The Outsider," "Falls," "The Condemned," "Darkness Save Your Legs," and "Crime & Punishment."

Maggie Blinco

In the first and second films of the "Crocodile Dundee" trilogy, Maggie Blinco played the character of Ida. Maggie’s up-and-coming career didn’t end after "Crocodile Dundee II" - thankfully for her, it continued to flourish. She went on to star in films such as "Flirting," "Cheek to Cheek," and "Doctor Doctor."

At over 80 years old, Australian actress Maggie Blinco feels she is in a category all her own as far as roles go. She has played her fair share of dementia patients of late but is excited to be playing a politically incorrect nanna in a new comedy. More recently, Maggie appeared in a short film called "BABA."

Paul, Linda, & Chance

During the days of shooting the Dundee films, the Hogans were nothing more than a picture-perfect family of three. But, of course, a lot can happen in a day, and that means so much more can happen and change over time. Sadly, this is the case for the Hogans. The divorce was very hard for all three of the family members, but especially for Chance.

Hogan and his first wife, Noelene Edwards, got married in 1958. They separated and then divorced in 1981 and remarried less than a year later. A second divorce in 1986 was considered one of Australia's messiest celebrity divorces. Hogan then married his "Crocodile Dundee" co-star Linda Kozlowski in 1990. Paul has five kids with his first wife and just one with his second. In October 2013, Kozlowski filed for divorce from Hogan, saying the pair had irreconcilable differences.

Tatyana Ali

Tatyana Ali may not look so familiar, or maybe she does, but certainly not from "Crocodile Dundee I." The ever-so-lovely Tatyana Ali starred only in the second film of the trilogy, "Crocodile Dundee II." She portrayed the role of “park girl.” Not so memorable.

But get ready for this! This beautiful actress and the adorable little girl from "The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air" are the same person! The little kid we watched grow up on “Fresh Prince” is now a major Hollywood star. Today, she is working on her new album and has starred in many box-office films. She is certainly creating quite the name for herself. Bravo!

Gregory Jbara

While we are talking about stars from the film "Crocodile Dundee II," let's move to Gregory Jbara. This star played the part of Young Cop in the second film. He is an award-winning actor with a massive career spanning 30 years. Jbara can be spotted in some of the biggest hit TV series, like “Frasier,” “Friends,” “Law & Order,” and “Nurse Jackie.”

His biggest and probably most well-known role is as Garrett Moore in CBS’s "Blue Bloods" (2011-2017). Born and raised in a suburban Detroit town, he stayed a New York resident through 1997. Jbara now lives with his wife Julie and their sons Zachary and Aidan in sunny Los Angeles.

Susie Essman

Susie Essman was also in "Dundee II" as the tour guide, which does not sound too big, but it was a major role considering the film was located in South Africa. Susie has come very far since her tour guide days in Dundee. She has been touring and doing shows at clubs throughout the country for more than twenty years. She was a guest on "The Tonight Show with Johnny Carson" in 1989. Her first major half-hour special was put on Comedy Central in 1992.

Much of her comedy draws from her Jewish background - because of this, she has been featured in documentaries such as "Heroes of Jewish Comedy" and "A History of Jewish Comedy." As both an actress and a writer, Susie has become very well-known for her roles in “Bolt,” HBO’s “Curb Your Enthusiasm,” and “Keeping the Faith.”

Gus Mercurio

Gus wore many hats. He was well-known as a character actor and as a former pro boxer. Gus Mercurio had also served in the United States Marine Corps and was a chiropractor! Mercurio was an international boxing judge, where he was even seen refereeing a world title fight, and was a well-known boxing promoter. He became the president of the Australian National Boxing Hall of Fame – where he was inducted in 2008.

As an actor, Gus was known for playing the role of Frank in "Dundee II." Thanks to the actor’s unique and raspy voice, wild personality, and natural talents, he was quickly recognized by TV production houses in Australia. Gus, of course, was not a stranger to the camera, appearing in several TV shows as well as hit films like "Crocodile Dundee II." Sadly, Gus passed away in December of 2010.

Carlos Carrasco

Carlos will always be remembered as Garcia from the second "Crocodile Dundee" film. Carlos is also doing very well in Hollywood, well enough to be cast in some of the biggest box-office films, like "Star Wars" and "Jurassic Park." Carlos spends his time being heavily involved in the Latino/Hispanic community in New York and Los Angeles.

Cultivating a career in arts administration, Carrasco has been the Executive Director of the Hispanic Organization of Latin Actors in New York, a panelist for the New York State Council on the Arts, and also a co-director of the JACK Arts Ensemble, based in Los Angeles. A man of many hats, for sure!

Jim Holt

Jim Holt is an actor with tons of credits to his name. He has many well-known productions on his resume, which, aside from "Crocodile Dundee II," include "Bodyline," "Anzacs," "A Country Practice," "Embassy, G. P.," "Heartbreak High," "Wildside," and recently in an episode of "Packed to the Rafters" (2009). Holt is also an established and talented magician who has had the unique opportunity to incorporate his talent into some television appearances.

He is married to a publishing executive - Robyn Holt - and they have an adult daughter named Hannah. From 2002 to 2006, he was based in Russia, while his wife Robyn was the Managing Director of Conde Nast Zao (Russia), the publishing house of Russian Vogue, GQ, Architectural Digest, and Glamour magazines.

Marilyn Sokol

Marilyn Sokol is an actress, comedian, singer, teacher, and writer/director. This multi-talented actress has won an Emmy Award, an Obie Award, and a Bistro Award. She went to Calvin Coolidge High School in Washington, D.C., followed by New York University. She began her professional entertainment career in 1966 as a belly dancer in the production of Man of La Mancha. The star won an Obie Award in 1972 for Distinguished Performance by an Actress for her performance in a Chelsea Theater Center production of "The Beggar's Opera."

She has worked consistently as a comedian, singer, and cabaret performer. From 2012 to 2013, she starred in the off-Broadway production "Old Jews Telling Jokes." She has taught as a Distinguished Lecturer in the theatre department at Lehman College. She currently plays the character Agnes Vertrulli on the popular web series Submissions Only.

Doug Yasuda

We may not all remember Doug’s role as Cato, the Kung Fu Tourist, when recalling the extensive star-studded cast of "Crocodile Dundee II," but Hollywood surely made a note of his talent, and he continues to work. Since his Dundee fame, he’s starred in numerous shows and films. Some of his most notable work includes RoboCop 3 as Kanemitsu’s aide and, more recently, roles on the shows “Odd Mom Out,” “Blacklist,” “Nurse Jackie,” “White Collar,” and “Blue Bloods.”

His extensive resume also boasts featured roles in Oceans Eight and Damsels in Distress. He currently resides in New York City, and as of 2018, he is still acting.

Colin Quinn

Can you believe this world-famous comedian played merely an onlooker at the mansion back in 1988’s "Crocodile Dundee II?" Amazing! Most people know him from his work on "SNL" and even more recent hits, like Amy Schumer’s "Trainwreck" and Adam Sandler’s "Grown Ups." Quinn has also become a major star for his one-man comedy shows, which portray his unique take on history and growing up in New York City.

As of 2015, he has written and starred in five shows: "Irish Wake," "My Two Cents," "Long Story Short," "Unconstitutional," and "The New York Story," two of which he has collaborated on with Jerry Seinfeld as director. Long Story Short was also filmed as an HBO special that aired in 2011, and "Unconstitutional" and "The New York Story" were released as Netflix specials.

Morgan O’Neill

In the film "Crocodile Dundee in Los Angeles," Morgan played the role of Matt. This actor/writer was born in Australia. He is an Australian writer, director, actor, and producer. He is also an accomplished professional musician. He even earned an honors degree in Literature from the University of Sydney and subsequently graduated from the National Institute of Dramatic Art (NIDA) with a BA in Performing Arts in 1998.

He has become a fixture of the entertainment industry, both in the U.S. and Australia, with television roles including "All Saints," "Water Rats," "Home and Away," and "Sea Patrol." O'Neill also appeared in "Joanne Lees: Murder in the Outback," "Supernova," "Little Oberon," and the 2012 Netflix movie "The Factory." He now lives in Los Angeles with his wife, Sarah Sonneville.

Brian Turk

After his small part as the driver in "Crocodile Dundee" in Los Angeles, Brian Turk is sadly no longer with us.

While not a major star, he was perhaps best known for playing Gabriel in the movie "Carnivàle," in the year 2003 or as Backstage Bull in "A.I. Artificial Intelligence" (2001). In 2019, he sadly passed away following complications with his medical condition. He was only 49 at the time.

Mike Tyson

Obviously, we all know this world-famous boxer who competed from 1985 to 2005. He kept his title as the undisputed world heavyweight champion for years and holds the record as the youngest boxer to win a heavyweight title at 20 years, four months, and 22 days old. We are pretty sure you don’t remember his special appearance as himself in "Crocodile Dundee in Los Angeles." Not many do. Anyway, he’s guest-starred as himself on tons of shows.

Tyson has stayed in the spotlight for years by promoting websites and companies. Ironically, though, Tyson had been known to shun endorsements and would accuse other athletes of putting on a false front to obtain them. He has put on entertainment boxing shows at a casino in Las Vegas and started a tour of exhibition bouts to pay off his numerous debts. Recently, he began playing himself as his own voice for the animated show Mike Tyson Mysteries.

Mark Adair-Rios

Quite memorably, Mark played a gang-banger in the film "Crocodile Dundee in Los Angeles." However, "Grey’s Anatomy" fans will remember him as David Morris from the show. He also played the GSC Tech for "Extant." His appearances on shows like “How To Get Away With Murder” and HBO’s “Big Little Lies” kept him a household name. Having just completed Murray Mednick's "Out of The Blue," Mark starred in "Nowhere on The Border" by Carlos Lacamara and "Haunted Heart" at the Lost Studio.

He also had a widely successful two-month run of "Idiot's Delight" at the Lilian Theatre and a 4-week long run of Mason Alexander's "And They Buried God" at the Theatre. He appeared in Carlos Lacamara’s "Becoming Cuban" at the Hudson Theatre. He also played the lead in Harold Pinter’s "A Night Out" and was featured in "Night School," both were part of the critically acclaimed Lost Studio Pinter Project.

Matthew Kimbrough

Kimbrough was the producer of the movie "Crocodile Dundee in Los Angeles." His first movie was the 1983 film "Eddie Macon's Run," where Mark Margolis also starred. Later in the 80s, he appeared in "Beer," "Biloxi Blues," and the comedy "Fletch Lives." In 1999, he was in The Limey with William Lucking. Also in that same year, he starred in the major hit "American Beauty" with Scott Bakula.

Continuing his record of having parts in widely successful movies, he starred in "Erin Brockovich," in 2000. In the 2001 movie "Joy Ride," he provided the brief appearance of the villain Rusty Nail, although another actor did the voice. In 2002, he appeared in the box office hit "Catch Me If You Can." Kimbrough has also been a guest star in "Mad Men," "Pitch," and "The Magnificent Seven."

Jay Acovone

From playing Eric in "Crocodile Dundee in Los Angeles" to becoming the go-to Hollywood actor for authoritative characters, Acovone made a name for himself in the entertainment industry. He usually plays villains, police or military, lawyers, and Mafia bosses. Acovone has over 100 credits to his name, spanning 40 years of roles in film and television.

His major TV credits include "Search for Tomorrow" as Brian Emerson, "Beauty and the Beast" where he played D.A. Maxwell for the entire three-season run, and "Hollywood Beat." Fans always remember him as Joe Smith in “General Hospital” or his guest roles on “24” and “CSI.” Along with his "Beauty and the Beast" co-star Linda Hamilton, he can be seen playing the officer pulling over the TX Terminator in "Terminator 3." In 2016, he acted in the motion capture video game "Mafia III," playing the role of an Italian Mafia boss, Sal Marcano. Most recently, in 2017, he played Ray Bruno in "Gun."

Steven Graves

Steven has countless movie and television production credits under his belt. He portrayed the role of Evil Barron for "Crocodile Dundee in Los Angeles." Then, he continued acting in Hollywood. His credits are vast, including the British series “Flambards” and “The Sandbaggers.” He is a native of Australia, and he is also very well known around there, as well as in the U.K., as a stage and theater actor, starring in "Camelot" at the West End’s Drury Lane, "The Undertaking" at the Fortune; " and "Much Ado About Nothing" at The Royal Exchange, among other credits.

You have probably seen him as N’ Goo Tuana in "Scooby-Doo" (2002). In the television movie "Sinbad and the Minotaur," he played the role of Al-Jibar. Steven Grives lives in Australia with his wife and five children.

Linda Kozlowski

How could we forget Linda Kozlowski and her role in Dundee as the beautiful Sue Charlton? Kozlowski and her co-star Paul Hogan had such amazing chemistry on set that they would end up becoming a romantic item, which led to Hogan divorcing his wife for this new relationship. The two would end up married for over 10 years and have one child together before calling their relationship quits.

Since that time, she has appeared in "Almost an Angel" in 1990, "Backstreet Justice" (with Paul Sorvino), "The Neighbor" (with Rod Steiger) in 1994, and "Village of the Damned" in 1995. In 2001, she starred again with Hogan in "Crocodile Dundee in Los Angeles," the least successful of the movie franchise. She has said she has left the acting business because of dissatisfaction with the roles she was getting.