Actor Kerr Smith looks completely unrecognisable two decades after starring in the hugely popular nineties teen drama Dawson's Creek.

Dawson's Creek was a show that focused on the journey of a group of close-knit friends in the fictional town of Capeside, Massachusetts, from high school to college. The show lasted from 1998 to 2003, with Kerr joining in season two and becoming one of the series' lead characters.

The now 51-year-old took on the groundbreaking role of Jack McPhee, a new student at the high school after he moved to Capeside with his twin sister Andie. Jack struggled with his sexuality during the series and ultimately came out as gay, becoming the first open-gay character to kiss on primetime television.

For all the latest on news, politics, sports, and showbiz from the USA, go to The Mirror US.

And with 20 years since the show's last episode, Kerr's appearance has obviously changed, with recent snaps showing him swapping his brunette mane for silver locks. The handsome actor continued his successful acting career following Dawson's Creek, starring in shows such as Charmed, CSI: NY, Eli Stone, The Fosters and Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. Most notably, he also played Principal Holden Honey in the hit teen drama Riverdale.

While he's not acting, he keeps himself busy by staying active during ski holidays, cycling, and fishing trips. He is also a certified pilot and started the holistic health and wellness business TerraLife Wellness with his wife, Lisa. He was previously married to film producer Harmoni Everett before they split in 2009.

As well as Kerr, Dawson's Creek made stars out of the rest of its cast, with James Van Der Beek going on to star in the likes of How I Met Your Mother and Ugly Betty. Joshua Jackson, who played Pacey Witter, has had roles in the limited series Little Fires Everywhere, When They See Us and Fatal Attraction.

Meredith Monroe is known for her recurring role as Haley Hotchner on Criminal Minds and Carolyn Standall on 13 Reasons Why. Meanwhile, Michelle Williams is one of Hollywood's finest actresses, having been nominated for five Academy Awards thanks to roles in Brokeback Mountain, Blue Valentine, and The Fabelmans.

Katie Holmes, who took on the role of Joey Potter in Dawson's Creek, also saw mammoth success in the likes of Coda, Don't Be Afraid of the Dark and Brahms: The Boy II. She made her directorial debut in the 2016 film All We Had. On the personal front, she was previously married to Tom Cruise for six years, and they have one daughter, Suri, together.