Dawson's Creek star Kerr Smith looks unrecognisable from his days on the huge hit show.

The iconic American drama followed the lives of a close-knit group of friends in the fictional town of Capeside, Massachusetts and it ran for five years with five seasons. Kerr joined the cast in season two and became a fan favourite quickly.

Kerr played the character of Jack McPhee, who struggled with his sexuality during the series and ultimately came out as gay, becoming the first openly gay character to kiss on primetime TV, breaking down barriers for future generations. It has now been 20 years since the final episode of the show and, unsurprisingly, Kerr looks worlds away from his Dawsons Creek character.

READ MORE: Gisele Bundchen, 43, strips to tiny string bikini to parade toned curves

READ MORE: Want more TV? Daily Star has just the thing for you!

In his latest snap Kerr has now sporting grey locks and a matching beard. After Dawsons Creek, Kerr went on to have a very successful career and recently appeared on the teen drama Riverdale as Principal Holden Honey.

He has also appeared in shows such as Charmed, CSI: NY, Eli Stone, The Fosters and Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. Dawson's Creek gained a huge amount of publicity before its debut.

Even though acting takes up a lot of his time he also has plenty of hobbies. He does thing such as ski holidays, cycling, and fishing trips.

He is also a certified pilot and started the holistic health and wellness business TerraLife Wellness with his wife, Lisa. He was previously married to film producer Harmoni Everett before they split in 2009.

Several television critics and consumer watchdog groups expressing concerns about its anticipated "racy" plots and dialogue. Columnist John Leo said the show should be called "While Parents Cringe", and went on to write, "The first episode contains a good deal of chatter about breasts, genitalia, masturbation, and penis size. Then the title and credits come on and the story begins."

Follow Daily Star on Threads here.

The hit show was soon accepted though and was nominated for fourteen awards, including ALMA Awards, Casting Society of America Awards, Golden Satellite Awards, TV Guide Awards, and YoungStar Awards. In 2000, the show was awarded a SHINE Award for consistently addressing sexual health issues on TV.