Tyumen weather in February (Tyumen Oblast, Russia)

Can you expect sunny skies in Tyumen in February? Use this page to get an overview of the month’s weather conditions.

Temperatures

Typically, February in Tyumen includes very low temperatures and low snowfall. Enjoy the winter season during this month. Expect the temperatures during the day to hover around -9°C. At night, they will likely drop to about -18°C. This month is particularly chilly, so wearing layers is necessary to stay warm and comfortable.

Precipitation

Tyumen in February usually receives low snowfall, averaging around 22 mm for the month. Expect the least amount of rain this month, providing an excellent opportunity for outdoor activities. Enjoy the freedom of clear skies and dry conditions. Looking at the last 30 years, the data shows about 10 days with snow.

Average sunshine

The city usually sees around 122 hours of sunlight, indicating a moderately sunny period.

If you're looking for dry conditions and comfortable temperatures, February may not be the ideal month to visit Tyumen. June, July and August generally stand out with the best circumstances. While January, February, March, April, October, November and December tend to showcase less optimal conditions.

For an in-depth look at the yearly conditions, visit our specialized Tyumen climate page with graphs.

Tyumen, monthly averages in February

Min Temperature -18°C

Max Temperature -9°C

Chance of Rain 33%

Precipitation 22 mm

Rainy days 10 days

Humidity 77%

Sunshine 122 hours

Percentage Sunshine

Where to go in Russia in February

Find out more about the weather in Russia and which places have the best travel conditions in this month.

Map not visible? Whoops sorry! Please refresh the page.

Legend perfect weather pleasant tolerable unpleasant poor

Perfect weather is subjective. On this map perfect weather has been defined with temperatures between 20°C and 29°C and not too much precipitation (less than 90 mm a month).

So, what should you wear in this month?

Visitors traveling to Tyumen should plan on bringing winter clothes, snow boots and a warm winter coat. There will be periods of snow.

What To Do

We rated the following activities from 1 (least suitable) to 10 (best) to do.

Swimming 5/10

Cycling 1/10

Walking 1/10

Camping 2/10

Outdoor sports 1/10

Interested in more climate information?

This site provides you with all the information you need about the climate in Tyumen.

Our site offers climate and forecast data for every country in the world. Are you going to Russia? On this website you can find historical weather averages for many cities in Russia. Not sure yet where to go? We now have a tool which recommends destinations that suit your ideal travel conditions. Find out where to go with our weather planner.