Left: Lafarge in 1902

Right: The Sealing of the Twelve Tribes, Trinity Episcopal Church in Buffalo

John La Farge (1835-1910) was an American painter, stained glass window maker, decorator, and writer.

Born in New York City to wealthy French émigré Roman Catholic parents, La Farge grew up in a cultured French-speaking household. He received a Catholic education at St. John's College (later Fordham) in New York and at Mt. Saint Mary's College in Maryland, where he graduated in 1853.

Uncertain about a career in law that he began to pursue, he went to Paris in 1856 and briefly studied painting with Thomas Couture. Returning to New York, he took a space in the new Tenth Street Studio Building. In 1859 he went to work with painter William Morris Hunt in Newport, Rhode Island, but soon left the studio to paint directly from nature, inspired by Newport's beautiful environment and his own advanced approach to aesthetics. It was in Newport during the 1860s and early 1870s that some critics suggest that La Farge produced the first impressionist experiments painted on American soil and also some of the most beautiful flower paintings ever created.

In the late 1850s and early 1860s, La Farge became a pioneer in collecting Japanese art and incorporating Japanese effects into his work. He may have purchased his first Japanese prints in Paris in 1856, and this interest was probably encouraged by his marriage in 1860 to Margaret Perry (with whom he had ten children), niece of the Commodore who had opened Japan to the West. By the early 1860s, La Farge was not only collecting Japanese prints, but was also making use of Japanese compositional ideas in his paintings to create effects which looked strange, empty, and unbalanced by Western standards. In 1869, La Farge published an essay on Japanese art, the first ever written by a Western artist, in which he particularly noted the asymmetrical compositions, high horizons, and clear, heightened color of Japanese prints.

La Farge began his career as a painter of landscapes and figure compositions. Hewas commissioned in 1876 to decorate H. H. Richardson's Trinity Church, Boston. This was the first real mural painting in America and marks an epoch in art: he is considered the father of the American mural movement. Thereafter, he engaged primarily in mural painting and designing stained glass.

(The LaFarge Decorative Art Company was dissolved in October 1885, leaving La Farge an independent agent.)

LaFarge achieved international fame for his stained glass at the 1889 Exposition Universale in Paris where he won first prize with his entry The Sealing of the Twelve Tribes. The French government offered to buy the window after the Exposition, but the window was a commission by a Buffalonian and the window was (and still is) installed in Buffalo. In 1901 he was awarded a gold medal at the Pan- American Exposition at Buffalo.

A lifelong Roman Catholic, he did much of his best work for churches. His splendid windows may be seen in the churches of Buffalo, N.Y., and Worcester, Mass., and in the chapels of Harvard and Columbia universities.

La Farge worked in many media. His watercolors and drawings are well known, particularly those commemorating his visit to the South Seas in 1886. His easel paintings are in many leading American museums. His writings and lectures on art are distinguished for their urbanity and judgment.

LaFarge's contributions to stained glass technique include the following:

The development and use of opalescent glass - now generally known as American stained glass - which he first patented in 1880

Incorporating molded glass embellishments into his creations, usually in the shapes of jewels or flowers

Plating, the layering of glass pieces directly on top of each other to achieve detailed depth and minimize the need for painting

Use of thin copper wire or foil to replace heavy lead lines, techniques that made possible the work of Louis Comfort Tiffany

For an instructive description of some of LaFarge's techniques, see Trinity Church, Boston - Condition Study

LaFarge and Tiffany

The opalescent era encouraged academically trained artists to design for glass.

We also find the phenomenon of the out-of-house designer, as well as the studio with designers working exclusively as a team of glass cutters, painters and fabricators. La Farge, Tiffany, and David Maitland Armstrong (1836-1918), painters and later designers of stained glass, never actually touched the window.

They may have provided designs and supervised execution, but they were not the artists who cut or painted the glass or assembled the window into its frame.

- Virgina Chieffo Raguin, Stained Glass from its Origins to the Present. 2003, p. 230

Beginning in 1874 in his work with stained glass, Lafarge discovered a new technique for creating stained glass. He began to layer two or more pieces of glass, rather than painting directly on the original pane, and thus he invented opalescent glass. He received a patent for his new product on February 24, 1880. Tiffany, a member of the family renowned for their silver firm, received several patents for variations of the same opalescent process in November of the same year. La Farge was persuaded by Tiffany with hints of a future partnership and possible collaborations to waive his patent. The promises never materialized while competition and animosity grew between the two artists.

LaFarge and Tiffany used intricate cuts and richly colored glasses within detailed, flowing designs. Plating, or layering glass layers, achieved depth and texture.

Both made windows for private homes as well as churches.

Eventually Tiffany became the darling of the Gilded Age industrialists and he created a glass and decorating studio that boasted more than a hundred workers. La Farge remained the lone artist who contracted out fabrication of his designs to smaller studios.

Both LaFarge and Tiffany secured their glass from the Kokomo glass factory in Kokomo, Indiana, after it became a reliable source for them in 1888.

Beyond Tiffany and La Farge, a plethora of stained glass studios developed in America around the turn of the century.

When La Farge died at the age of seventy-five in 1910, some compared him to Confucius, others to Hokusai, and still others to Leonardo or Michelangelo. Yet he died in a mental institution - deeply in debt, with few friends, a long-estranged wife, a favorite son who had sued him and shut him out, and a long-time secretary to whom he had been compelled to yield control of his estate. These seeming contradictions between the artist-genius and the flawed human being were aspects of a kaleidoscopic personality who had a strong influence on his contemporaries as an intellectual, an easel painter, an art historian, and a decorator - and who revolutionized the art of both murals and stained glass.

- James L. Yarnall, New Biography of John La Farge due February 2012 (Dec. 2011)

LaFarge murals:

Trinity Church, Boston, MA:

Jesus Teaches Nicodemus,

Christ with a Woman at the Well

La Farge windows in Western, NY:

Trinity Episcopal Church, Buffalo:

Five Chancel Windows

The Lord is My Shepherd Chapel

The Sealing of the Twelve Tribes Chapel

Jesus Appears to James Nave

The Good Samaritan Nave

St. Catherine's rose window

St. Peter's Episcopal Church, Niagara Falls, NY: The Annunciation

Outside of Western, NY: