841 relations: Adam Mickiewicz University in Poznań, Administrative divisions of Poland, Adolfowo, Chodzież County, Agnes Pihlava, Alzey, Anita Włodarczyk, Antoniewo, Greater Poland Voivodeship, Antoniny, Chodzież County, Atanazyn, École Franco-Polonaise, Łódź Voivodeship, Łobżenica, Łokacz Mały, Łokacz Wielki, Łomnica Druga, Łomnica Pierwsza, Łomnica, Czarnków-Trzcianka County, Łomnica-Folwark, Łomnica-Młyn, Łopuchówko, Łopuchowo, Greater Poland Voivodeship, Łoskoń Stary, Łuczywno, Ślesin, Śluza-Krostkowo, Śmieszkowo, Greater Poland Voivodeship, Śmigiel, Średnica, Greater Poland Voivodeship, Śrem, Śrem (disambiguation), Śrem County, Środa, Środa Wielkopolska, Środa Wielkopolska County, Świnków, Świętokrzyskie Voivodeship, Żelichowo, Greater Poland Voivodeship, Żerków, Żerków-Czeszewo Landscape Park, Żoń, Bagdad, Poland, Barycz (river), Barycz Valley Landscape Park, Basilica of Our Lady of Licheń, Będlewo, Berwick-upon-Tweed, Biała, Gmina Trzcianka, Biała, Gmina Wieleń, Białężyn, Czarnków-Trzcianka County, Białężyn, Poznań County, Białęgi, Greater Poland Voivodeship, ... Expand index (791 more) » « Shrink index

Adam Mickiewicz University in Poznań

Adam Mickiewicz University in Poznań (Uniwersytet im., Polish abbreviation UAM) is one of the major Polish universities, located in the city of Poznań, Greater Poland, in the west of the country.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Adam Mickiewicz University in Poznań

Administrative divisions of Poland

The administrative division of Poland since 1999 has been based on three levels of subdivision.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Administrative divisions of Poland

Adolfowo, Chodzież County

Adolfowo (Adolfsheim) is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Margonin, within Chodzież County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Adolfowo, Chodzież County

Agnes Pihlava

Agnieszka "Agnes" Pihlava (born Agnieszka Ćwiklińska; born 19 March 1980 in Leszno, Poland) is a singer who placed fourth in Idols Finland 2, the Finnish version of Pop Idol.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Agnes Pihlava

Alzey

Alzey is a Verband-free town – one belonging to no Verbandsgemeinde – in the Alzey-Worms district in Rhineland-Palatinate, Germany.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Alzey

Anita Włodarczyk

Anita Włodarczyk (Polish pronunciation:; born 8 August 1985) is a Polish hammer thrower.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Anita Włodarczyk

Antoniewo, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Antoniewo is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Lubasz, within Czarnków-Trzcianka County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Antoniewo, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Antoniny, Chodzież County

Antoniny (Antonienhof) is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Szamocin, within Chodzież County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Antoniny, Chodzież County

Atanazyn

Atanazyn (Athanasienhof) is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Szamocin, within Chodzież County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Atanazyn

École Franco-Polonaise

École Franco-Polonaise (EFP), full name École Franco-Polonaise des Nouvelles Technologies d'Information et Telecommunication (Franco-Polish School of New Information and Communication Technologies), was a private technical university, created in Poznań, Poland, in 1993 in cooperation with the city of Rennes and closed in 1997 after the French withdrew from their financial commitment.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and École Franco-Polonaise

Łódź Voivodeship

Łódź Voivodeship (also known as Łódź Province, or by its Polish name, województwo łódzkie) is a province (voivodeship) in central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Łódź Voivodeship

Łobżenica

Łobżenica (Lobsens) is a town in Piła County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, Poland, with 3,211 inhabitants (2004).

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Łobżenica

Łokacz Mały

Łokacz Mały is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Krzyż Wielkopolski, within Czarnków-Trzcianka County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Łokacz Mały

Łokacz Wielki

Łokacz Wielki is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Krzyż Wielkopolski, within Czarnków-Trzcianka County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Łokacz Wielki

Łomnica Druga

Łomnica Druga is a settlement in the administrative district of Gmina Trzcianka, within Czarnków-Trzcianka County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Łomnica Druga

Łomnica Pierwsza

Łomnica Pierwsza is a settlement in the administrative district of Gmina Trzcianka, within Czarnków-Trzcianka County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Łomnica Pierwsza

Łomnica, Czarnków-Trzcianka County

Łomnica (Lemnitz) is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Trzcianka, within Czarnków-Trzcianka County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Łomnica, Czarnków-Trzcianka County

Łomnica-Folwark

Łomnica-Folwark (Vorwerk Lemnitz) is a settlement in the administrative district of Gmina Trzcianka, within Czarnków-Trzcianka County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Łomnica-Folwark

Łomnica-Młyn

Łomnica-Młyn (Lemnitz-Mühle) is a settlement in the administrative district of Gmina Trzcianka, within Czarnków-Trzcianka County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Łomnica-Młyn

Łopuchówko

Łopuchówko is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Murowana Goślina, within Poznań County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Łopuchówko

Łopuchowo, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Łopuchowo is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Murowana Goślina, within Poznań County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Łopuchowo, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Łoskoń Stary

Łoskoń Stary, known also as Stary Łoskoń ("Old Łoskoń"), is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Murowana Goślina, within Poznań County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Łoskoń Stary

Łuczywno

Łuczywno is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Osiek Mały, within Koło County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Łuczywno

Ślesin

Ślesin is a town in Konin County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, Poland, with 3,324 inhabitants (2004).

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Ślesin

Śluza-Krostkowo

Śluza-Krostkowo is a settlement in the administrative district of Gmina Szamocin, within Chodzież County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Śluza-Krostkowo

Śmieszkowo, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Śmieszkowo (Lindenheim) is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Czarnków, within Czarnków-Trzcianka County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Śmieszkowo, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Śmigiel

Śmigiel (Schmiegel) is a town in Kościan County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, Poland, with 5,420 inhabitants (2004).

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Śmigiel

Średnica, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Średnica (Marienbusch) is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Czarnków, within Czarnków-Trzcianka County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Średnica, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Śrem

Śrem (Schrimm) is a town on the Warta river in central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Śrem

Śrem (disambiguation)

Śrem may refer to the following places in Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Śrem (disambiguation)

Śrem County

Śrem County (powiat śremski) is a unit of territorial administration and local government (powiat) in Greater Poland Voivodeship, west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Śrem County

Środa

Środa is the Polish word for Wednesday.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Środa

Środa Wielkopolska

Środa Wielkopolska (Schroda) is a town in central Poland, about southeast of Poznań, with 22,001 inhabitants (2009).

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Środa Wielkopolska

Środa Wielkopolska County

Środa Wielkopolska County (powiat średzki) is a unit of territorial administration and local government (powiat) in Greater Poland Voivodeship, west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Środa Wielkopolska County

Świnków, Świętokrzyskie Voivodeship

Świnków is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Smyków, within Końskie County, Świętokrzyskie Voivodeship, in south-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Świnków, Świętokrzyskie Voivodeship

Żelichowo, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Żelichowo is a village (German: Selchow) in the administrative district of Gmina Krzyż Wielkopolski, within Czarnków-Trzcianka County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Żelichowo, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Żerków

Żerków (German: Zerkow, 1943–1945 Bergstadt (Kr. Jarotschin)) is a town in Jarocin County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, Poland, with 2,076 inhabitants (2004).

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Żerków

Żerków-Czeszewo Landscape Park

Żerków-Czeszewo Landscape Park (Żerkowsko-Czeszewski Park Krajobrazowy) is a protected area (Landscape Park) in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Żerków-Czeszewo Landscape Park

Żoń

Żoń is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Margonin, within Chodzież County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Żoń

Bagdad, Poland

Bagdad (Bagdad) is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Wyrzysk, within Piła County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Bagdad, Poland

Barycz (river)

The Barycz (Bartsch) is a river in Greater Poland and Lower Silesian Voivodeships in western Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Barycz (river)

Barycz Valley Landscape Park

Barycz Valley Landscape Park (Park Krajobrazowy Dolina Baryczy) is a protected area (Landscape Park) in south-western Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Barycz Valley Landscape Park

Basilica of Our Lady of Licheń

The Basilica of Our Lady of Licheń is a Roman Catholic church located at the Shrine of Our Lady of Sorrows, Queen of Poland, in the village of Licheń Stary near Konin in the Greater Poland Voivodeship in Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Basilica of Our Lady of Licheń

Będlewo

Będlewo is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Stęszew, within Poznań County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Będlewo

Berwick-upon-Tweed

Berwick-upon-Tweed (Sooth Berwick, Bearaig a Deas) is a town in the county of Northumberland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Berwick-upon-Tweed

Biała, Gmina Trzcianka

Biała (Behle) is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Trzcianka, within Czarnków-Trzcianka County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Biała, Gmina Trzcianka

Biała, Gmina Wieleń

Biała is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Wieleń, within Czarnków-Trzcianka County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Biała, Gmina Wieleń

Białężyn, Czarnków-Trzcianka County

Białężyn (Belsin) is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Czarnków, within Czarnków-Trzcianka County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Białężyn, Czarnków-Trzcianka County

Białężyn, Poznań County

Białężyn is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Murowana Goślina, within Poznań County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Białężyn, Poznań County

Białęgi, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Białęgi is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Murowana Goślina, within Poznań County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Białęgi, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Biedrusko

Biedrusko (Warthelager) is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Suchy Las, within Poznań County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Biedrusko

Biernatowo

Biernatowo (Ascherbude) is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Trzcianka, within Czarnków-Trzcianka County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Biernatowo

Blękwit

Blękwit (Blankwitt) is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Złotów, within Złotów County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Blękwit

Bończa, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Bończa is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Lubasz, within Czarnków-Trzcianka County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Bończa, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Boduszewo

Boduszewo is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Murowana Goślina, within Poznań County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Boduszewo

Bojanowo

Bojanowo (also 1943–1945: Schmückert) is a town in Rawicz County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Bojanowo

Borówki, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Borówki (Waldtal) is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Szamocin, within Chodzież County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Borówki, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Borek Wielkopolski

Borek Wielkopolski (Borek) is a town in Poland, with 2,474 inhabitants (2004).

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Borek Wielkopolski

Borowo, Chodzież County

Borowo (Waldberg) is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Szamocin, within Chodzież County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Borowo, Chodzież County

Boruszyn, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Boruszyn is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Połajewo, within Czarnków-Trzcianka County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Boruszyn, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Brzeźno, Czarnków-Trzcianka County

Brzeźno (Briesen, 1939-45: Hohenbriesen) is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Czarnków, within Czarnków-Trzcianka County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Brzeźno, Czarnków-Trzcianka County

Brzegi, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Brzegi (Kienwerder) is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Krzyż Wielkopolski, within Czarnków-Trzcianka County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Brzegi, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Brzekiniec

Brzekiniec (Braknitz) is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Budzyń, within Chodzież County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Brzekiniec

Budzyń, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Budzyń (Budsin) is a village in Chodzież County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Budzyń, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Bugaj, Chodzież County

Bugaj (Wilhelmstreu) is a settlement in the administrative district of Gmina Margonin, within Chodzież County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Bugaj, Chodzież County

Buk

Buk (Buk, 1943-45: Buchenstadt) is a town in central Poland, situated in the Greater Poland Voivodeship (since 1999), previously in Poznań Voivodeship (1975–1998).

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Buk

Bukowiec, Chodzież County

Bukowiec (Gramsdorf) is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Budzyń, within Chodzież County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Bukowiec, Chodzież County

Bukowiec, Czarnków-Trzcianka County

Bukowiec (Buchwerder) is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Czarnków, within Czarnków-Trzcianka County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Bukowiec, Czarnków-Trzcianka County

Bzowo, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Bzowo is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Lubasz, within Czarnków-Trzcianka County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Bzowo, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Carl Friedrich Goerdeler

Carl Friedrich Goerdeler (31 July 1884 – 2 February 1945) was a monarchist conservative German politician, executive, economist, civil servant, and opponent of the Nazi regime.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Carl Friedrich Goerdeler

Chłapowski Landscape Park

General Dezydery Chłapowski Landscape Park (Park Krajobrazowy im. gen. Dezyderego Chłapowskiego) is a protected area (Landscape Park) in west-central Poland, established in 1992, covering an area of.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Chłapowski Landscape Park

Chełst, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Chełst is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Drawsko, within Czarnków-Trzcianka County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Chełst, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Chodzież

Chodzież (Kolmar in Posen) is a town in northwestern Poland with 20,400 inhabitants (1995).

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Chodzież

Chodzież County

Chodzież County (powiat chodzieski) is a unit of territorial administration and local government (powiat) in Greater Poland Voivodeship, west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Chodzież County

Chude, Poland

Chude (Rosenthal) is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Szydłowo, within Wałcz County, West Pomeranian Voivodeship, in north-western Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Chude, Poland

Ciążyń

Ciążyń (Hallberg) is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Czarnków, within Czarnków-Trzcianka County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Ciążyń

Cisze

Cisze (Wilsbach) is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Chodzież, within Chodzież County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Cisze

Ciszewo, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Ciszewo (Netzland) is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Chodzież, within Chodzież County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Ciszewo, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Ciszkowo

Ciszkowo (Kienrode) is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Czarnków, within Czarnków-Trzcianka County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Ciszkowo

Coats of arms of Polish voivodeships

This is a list of coats of arms of the voivodeships (first-level sudivisions) of Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Coats of arms of Polish voivodeships

Czarnków

Czarnków (Scharnikau, before 1939: Czarnikau) is a town in Poland in Czarnków-Trzcianka County in Greater Poland Voivodeship, previously in Piła Voivodeship (1975-1998).

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Czarnków

Czarnków-Trzcianka County

Czarnków-Trzcianka County (powiat czarnkowsko-trzcianecki) is a unit of territorial administration and local government (powiat) in Greater Poland Voivodeship, west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Czarnków-Trzcianka County

Czeluścin, Gniezno County

Czeluścin (Albrechtshagen) is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Czerniejewo, within Gniezno County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Czeluścin, Gniezno County

Czempiń

Czempiń (Karlshausen) is a town in Kościan County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, Poland, with 5,093 inhabitants (2004).

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Czempiń

Czerniejewo

Czerniejewo (German Schwarzenau) is a town and municipality in central Poland with 2,536 inhabitants (2005).

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Czerniejewo

Czerwonak

Czerwonak (Rotental) is a village in Poznań County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Czerwonak

Dąbie, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Dąbie (Eichstädt) is a town on the Ner River in central Poland with 2200 inhabitants, situated in Koło County in Greater Poland Voivodeship.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Dąbie, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Dąbrówka Kościelna, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Dąbrówka Kościelna is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Kiszkowo, within Gniezno County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Dąbrówka Kościelna, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Dębe, Czarnków-Trzcianka County

Dębe is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Lubasz, within Czarnków-Trzcianka County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Dębe, Czarnków-Trzcianka County

Dębiniec, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Dębiniec (Eichenau) is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Margonin, within Chodzież County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Dębiniec, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Dębogóra, Czarnków-Trzcianka County

Dębogóra (Eichberg) is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Wieleń, within Czarnków-Trzcianka County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Dębogóra, Czarnków-Trzcianka County

Dłużewo

Dłużewo (Karlshorst) is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Trzcianka, within Czarnków-Trzcianka County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Dłużewo

Długa Goślina

Długa Goślina is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Murowana Goślina, within Poznań County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Długa Goślina

Delitzsch

Delitzsch (Slavic: delč or delčz for hill) is a town in the Free State of Saxony in Germany.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Delitzsch

Dobra, Turek County

Dobra is a town in Turek County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, Poland, with 1,562 inhabitants (2004).

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Dobra, Turek County

Dobrzyca

Dobrzyca is town in Pleszew County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Dobrzyca

Dolsk

Dolsk (Dolzig) is a town of approximately 1,400 inhabitants (as of 2005) in the Greater Poland Voivodeship of Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Dolsk

Drawa National Park

Drawa National Park (Drawieński Park Narodowy) is located in north-western Poland, on the border of Greater Poland, Lubusz and West Pomeranian Voivodeships.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Drawa National Park

Drawski Młyn

Drawski Młyn (Dratzigmühle) is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Drawsko, within Czarnków-Trzcianka County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Drawski Młyn

Drawsko, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Drawsko (Dratzig) is a village in Czarnków-Trzcianka County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Drawsko, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Drzązgowo, Chodzież County

Drzązgowo (Kienwald) is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Chodzież, within Chodzież County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Drzązgowo, Chodzież County

Dual gauge

A dual gauge railway is a track that allows the passage of trains of two different track gauges.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Dual gauge

Dubin

Dubin (Dubin, 1943-45: Spitzwall) is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Jutrosin, within Rawicz County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Dubin

Dzierżążno Małe

Dzierżążno Małe (Klein Drensen) is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Wieleń, within Czarnków-Trzcianka County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Dzierżążno Małe

Dzierżążno Wielkie

Dzierżążno Wielkie (Groß Drensen) is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Wieleń, within Czarnków-Trzcianka County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Dzierżążno Wielkie

Dziewoklucz

Dziewoklucz (Siebenschlößchen) is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Budzyń, within Chodzież County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Dziewoklucz

Elżbiecin, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Elżbiecin is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Lubasz, within Czarnków-Trzcianka County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Elżbiecin, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Electoral districts of Poland

Electoral districts of Poland (okręg wyborczy) are defined by Polish election law.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Electoral districts of Poland

Elizaveta Ostrogska

Princess Elizaveta Ostrogska (1539–1582), also known as Elżbieta or Halshka, was a Polish heiress, the only child of Prince Illia Ostrogski and Beata Kościelecka.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Elizaveta Ostrogska

Erkner

Erkner is a town in the Oder-Spree District of Brandenburg, Germany, situated on the south-eastern edge of the German capital city Berlin.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Erkner

European Parliament constituency

Members of the European Parliament (MEPs) are elected by the population of the member states of the European Union (EU), divided into constituencies.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and European Parliament constituency

Examination board

An examination board (or exam board) is an organization that sets examinations, is responsible for marking them, and distributes results.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Examination board

Flags of Polish voivodeships

This is a list of flags of the voivodeships (first-level subdivisions) of Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Flags of Polish voivodeships

Folsztyn

Folsztyn (Follstein) is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Wieleń, within Czarnków-Trzcianka County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Folsztyn

Forests of Poland

Polish forests cover about 30% of Poland's territory, and are mostly owned by the state.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Forests of Poland

Gajewo, Czarnków-Trzcianka County

Gajewo (Putzighauland) is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Czarnków, within Czarnków-Trzcianka County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gajewo, Czarnków-Trzcianka County

Góra nad Notecią

Góra nad Notecią (Guhren, 1939-45: Netzguhren) is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Czarnków, within Czarnków-Trzcianka County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Góra nad Notecią

Górnica, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Górnica (Gornitz) is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Trzcianka, within Czarnków-Trzcianka County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Górnica, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Gębarzewko

Gębarzewko (Ebenfelde) is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Czerniejewo, within Gniezno County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gębarzewko

Gębice, Czarnków-Trzcianka County

Gębice (Gembitz) is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Czarnków, within Czarnków-Trzcianka County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gębice, Czarnków-Trzcianka County

Gębiczyn

Gębiczyn (Gembitzhauland) is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Czarnków, within Czarnków-Trzcianka County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gębiczyn

Głębocko, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Głębocko is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Murowana Goślina, within Poznań County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Głębocko, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Głęboczek, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Głęboczek is a village and sołectwo in Gmina Murowana Goślina, Poznań County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in western Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Głęboczek, Greater Poland Voivodeship

German minority in Poland

The registered German minority in Poland at the 2011 national census consisted of 148,000 people, of whom 64,000 declared both German and Polish ethnicities and 45,000 solely German ethnicity.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and German minority in Poland

Giecz

Giecz is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Dominowo, within Środa Wielkopolska County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Giecz

Gieczynek

Gieczynek (Hansfelde) is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Wieleń, within Czarnków-Trzcianka County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gieczynek

Ginterowo

Ginterowo (Günterhof) is a settlement in the administrative district of Gmina Trzcianka, within Czarnków-Trzcianka County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Ginterowo

Gmina

The gmina (Polish pronunciation, plural gminy) is the principal unit of the administrative division of Poland, similar to a municipality.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina

Gmina Łęka Opatowska

Gmina Łęka Opatowska is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Kępno County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Łęka Opatowska

Gmina Łobżenica

Gmina Łobżenica is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Piła County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Łobżenica

Gmina Łubowo

Gmina Łubowo is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Gniezno County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Łubowo

Gmina Ślesin

Gmina Ślesin is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Konin County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Ślesin

Gmina Śmigiel

Gmina Śmigiel is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Kościan County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Śmigiel

Gmina Śrem

Gmina Śrem is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Śrem County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Śrem

Gmina Środa Wielkopolska

Gmina Środa Wielkopolska is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Środa Wielkopolska County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Środa Wielkopolska

Gmina Święciechowa

Gmina Święciechowa is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Leszno County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Święciechowa

Gmina Żelazków

Gmina Żelazków is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Kalisz County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Żelazków

Gmina Żerków

Gmina Żerków is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Jarocin County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Żerków

Gmina Babiak

Gmina Babiak is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Koło County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Babiak

Gmina Baranów, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Gmina Baranów is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Kępno County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Baranów, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Gmina Białośliwie

Gmina Białośliwie is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Piła County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Białośliwie

Gmina Blizanów

Gmina Blizanów is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Kalisz County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Blizanów

Gmina Bojanowo

Gmina Bojanowo is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Rawicz County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Bojanowo

Gmina Borek Wielkopolski

Gmina Borek Wielkopolski is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Gostyń County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Borek Wielkopolski

Gmina Bralin

Gmina Bralin is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Kępno County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Bralin

Gmina Brodnica, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Gmina Brodnica is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Śrem County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Brodnica, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Gmina Brudzew

Gmina Brudzew is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Turek County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Brudzew

Gmina Brzeziny, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Gmina Brzeziny is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Kalisz County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Brzeziny, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Gmina Budzyń

Gmina Budzyń is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Chodzież County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Budzyń

Gmina Buk

Gmina Buk is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Poznań County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Buk

Gmina Ceków-Kolonia

Gmina Ceków-Kolonia is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Kalisz County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Ceków-Kolonia

Gmina Chocz

Gmina Chocz is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Pleszew County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Chocz

Gmina Chodów

Gmina Chodów is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Koło County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Chodów

Gmina Chodzież

Gmina Chodzież is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Chodzież County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Chodzież

Gmina Chrzypsko Wielkie

Gmina Chrzypsko Wielkie is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Międzychód County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Chrzypsko Wielkie

Gmina Czajków

Gmina Czajków is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Ostrzeszów County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Czajków

Gmina Czarnków

Gmina Czarnków is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Czarnków-Trzcianka County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Czarnków

Gmina Czempiń

Gmina Czempiń is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Kościan County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Czempiń

Gmina Czermin, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Gmina Czermin is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Pleszew County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Czermin, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Gmina Czerniejewo

Gmina Czerniejewo is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Gniezno County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Czerniejewo

Gmina Czerwonak

Gmina Czerwonak is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Poznań County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Czerwonak

Gmina Damasławek

Gmina Damasławek is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Wągrowiec County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Damasławek

Gmina Dąbie, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Gmina Dąbie is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Koło County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Dąbie, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Gmina Dobra, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Gmina Dobra is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Turek County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Dobra, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Gmina Dobrzyca

Gmina Dobrzyca is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Pleszew County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Dobrzyca

Gmina Dolsk

Gmina Dolsk is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Śrem County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Dolsk

Gmina Dominowo

Gmina Dominowo is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Środa Wielkopolska County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Dominowo

Gmina Dopiewo

Gmina Dopiewo is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Poznań County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Dopiewo

Gmina Doruchów

Gmina Doruchów is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Ostrzeszów County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Doruchów

Gmina Drawsko

Gmina Drawsko is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Czarnków-Trzcianka County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Drawsko

Gmina Duszniki

Gmina Duszniki is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Szamotuły County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Duszniki

Gmina Gizałki

Gmina Gizałki is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Pleszew County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Gizałki

Gmina Gniezno

Gmina Gniezno is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Gniezno County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Gniezno

Gmina Gołańcz

Gmina Gołańcz is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Wągrowiec County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Gołańcz

Gmina Gołuchów

Gmina Gołuchów is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Pleszew County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Gołuchów

Gmina Godziesze Wielkie

Gmina Godziesze Wielkie is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Kalisz County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Godziesze Wielkie

Gmina Golina

Gmina Golina is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Konin County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Golina

Gmina Gostyń

Gmina Gostyń is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Gostyń County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Gostyń

Gmina Grabów nad Prosną

Gmina Grabów nad Prosną is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Ostrzeszów County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Grabów nad Prosną

Gmina Granowo

Gmina Granowo is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Grodzisk Wielkopolski County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Granowo

Gmina Grodziec

Gmina Grodziec is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Konin County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Grodziec

Gmina Grodzisk Wielkopolski

Gmina Grodzisk Wielkopolski is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Grodzisk Wielkopolski County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Grodzisk Wielkopolski

Gmina Grzegorzew

Gmina Grzegorzew is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Koło County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Grzegorzew

Gmina Jaraczewo

Gmina Jaraczewo is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Jarocin County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Jaraczewo

Gmina Jarocin, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Gmina Jarocin is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Jarocin County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Jarocin, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Gmina Jastrowie

Gmina Jastrowie is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Złotów County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Jastrowie

Gmina Jutrosin

Gmina Jutrosin is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Rawicz County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Jutrosin

Gmina Kaźmierz

Gmina Kaźmierz is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Szamotuły County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Kaźmierz

Gmina Kaczory

Gmina Kaczory is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Piła County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Kaczory

Gmina Kamieniec

Gmina Kamieniec is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Grodzisk Wielkopolski County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Kamieniec

Gmina Kawęczyn

Gmina Kawęczyn is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Turek County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Kawęczyn

Gmina Kazimierz Biskupi

Gmina Kazimierz Biskupi is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Konin County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Kazimierz Biskupi

Gmina Kórnik

Gmina Kórnik (Kórnik Commune) is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Poznań County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Kórnik

Gmina Kępno

Gmina Kępno is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Kępno County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Kępno

Gmina Kłecko

Gmina Kłecko is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Gniezno County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Kłecko

Gmina Kłodawa, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Gmina Kłodawa is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Koło County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Kłodawa, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Gmina Kiszkowo

Gmina Kiszkowo is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Gniezno County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Kiszkowo

Gmina Kleczew

Gmina Kleczew is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Konin County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Kleczew

Gmina Kleszczewo

Gmina Kleszczewo is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Poznań County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Kleszczewo

Gmina Kołaczkowo

Gmina Kołaczkowo is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Września County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Kołaczkowo

Gmina Koło

Gmina Koło is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Koło County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Koło

Gmina Kościan

Gmina Kościan is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Kościan County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Kościan

Gmina Kościelec

Gmina Kościelec is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Koło County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Kościelec

Gmina Koźmin Wielkopolski

Gmina Koźmin Wielkopolski is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Krotoszyn County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Koźmin Wielkopolski

Gmina Koźminek

Gmina Koźminek is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Kalisz County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Koźminek

Gmina Kobyla Góra

Gmina Kobyla Góra is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Ostrzeszów County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Kobyla Góra

Gmina Kobylin

Gmina Kobylin is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Krotoszyn County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Kobylin

Gmina Komorniki

Gmina Komorniki is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Poznań County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Komorniki

Gmina Kostrzyn

Gmina Kostrzyn is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Poznań County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Kostrzyn

Gmina Kotlin

Gmina Kotlin is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Jarocin County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Kotlin

Gmina Krajenka

Gmina Krajenka is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Złotów County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Krajenka

Gmina Kramsk

Gmina Kramsk is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Konin County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Kramsk

Gmina Kraszewice

Gmina Kraszewice is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Ostrzeszów County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Kraszewice

Gmina Krobia

Gmina Krobia is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Gostyń County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Krobia

Gmina Krotoszyn

Gmina Krotoszyn is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Krotoszyn County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Krotoszyn

Gmina Krzemieniewo

Gmina Krzemieniewo is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Leszno County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Krzemieniewo

Gmina Krzyż Wielkopolski

Gmina Krzyż Wielkopolski is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Czarnków-Trzcianka County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Krzyż Wielkopolski

Gmina Krzykosy

Gmina Krzykosy is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Środa Wielkopolska County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Krzykosy

Gmina Krzymów

Gmina Krzymów is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Konin County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Krzymów

Gmina Krzywiń

Gmina Krzywiń is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Kościan County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Krzywiń

Gmina Książ Wielkopolski

Gmina Książ Wielkopolski is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Śrem County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Książ Wielkopolski

Gmina Kuślin

Gmina Kuślin is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Nowy Tomyśl County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Kuślin

Gmina Kwilcz

Gmina Kwilcz is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Międzychód County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Kwilcz

Gmina Lądek

Gmina Lądek is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Słupca County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Lądek

Gmina Lipka

Gmina Lipka is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Złotów County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Lipka

Gmina Lipno, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Gmina Lipno is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Leszno County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Lipno, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Gmina Lisków

Gmina Lisków is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Kalisz County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Lisków

Gmina Lubasz

Gmina Lubasz is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Czarnków-Trzcianka County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Lubasz

Gmina Lwówek

Gmina Lwówek is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Nowy Tomyśl County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Lwówek

Gmina Malanów

Gmina Malanów is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Turek County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Malanów

Gmina Margonin

Gmina Margonin is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Chodzież County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Margonin

Gmina Miasteczko Krajeńskie

Gmina Miasteczko Krajeńskie is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Piła County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Miasteczko Krajeńskie

Gmina Międzychód

Gmina Międzychód is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Międzychód County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Międzychód

Gmina Miłosław

Gmina Miłosław is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Września County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Miłosław

Gmina Mieścisko

Gmina Mieścisko is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Wągrowiec County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Mieścisko

Gmina Miedzichowo

Gmina Miedzichowo is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Nowy Tomyśl County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Miedzichowo

Gmina Miejska Górka

Gmina Miejska Górka is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Rawicz County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Miejska Górka

Gmina Mieleszyn

Gmina Mieleszyn is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Gniezno County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Mieleszyn

Gmina Mikstat

Gmina Mikstat is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Ostrzeszów County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Mikstat

Gmina Mosina

Gmina Mosina is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Poznań County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Mosina

Gmina Murowana Goślina

Gmina Murowana Goślina is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Poznań County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Murowana Goślina

Gmina Mycielin

Gmina Mycielin The gmina covers an area of, and as of 2006 its total population is 4,950.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Mycielin

Gmina Nekla

Gmina Nekla is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Września County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Nekla

Gmina Niechanowo

Gmina Niechanowo is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Gniezno County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Niechanowo

Gmina Nowe Miasto nad Wartą

Gmina Nowe Miasto nad Wartą is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Środa Wielkopolska County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Nowe Miasto nad Wartą

Gmina Nowe Skalmierzyce

Gmina Nowe Skalmierzyce is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Ostrów Wielkopolski County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Nowe Skalmierzyce

Gmina Nowy Tomyśl

Gmina Nowy Tomyśl is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Nowy Tomyśl County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Nowy Tomyśl

Gmina Oborniki

Gmina Oborniki is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Oborniki County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Oborniki

Gmina Obrzycko

Gmina Obrzycko is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Szamotuły County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Obrzycko

Gmina Odolanów

Gmina Odolanów is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Ostrów Wielkopolski County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Odolanów

Gmina Okonek

Gmina Okonek is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Złotów County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Okonek

Gmina Olszówka

Gmina Olszówka is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Koło County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Olszówka

Gmina Opalenica

Gmina Opalenica is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Nowy Tomyśl County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Opalenica

Gmina Opatówek

Gmina Opatówek is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Kalisz County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Opatówek

Gmina Orchowo

Gmina Orchowo is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Słupca County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Orchowo

Gmina Osieczna, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Gmina Osieczna is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Leszno County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Osieczna, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Gmina Osiek Mały

Gmina Osiek Mały is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Koło County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Osiek Mały

Gmina Ostrów Wielkopolski

Gmina Ostrów Wielkopolski is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Ostrów Wielkopolski County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Ostrów Wielkopolski

Gmina Ostroróg

Gmina Ostroróg is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Szamotuły County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Ostroróg

Gmina Ostrowite

Gmina Ostrowite is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Słupca County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Ostrowite

Gmina Ostrzeszów

Gmina Ostrzeszów is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Ostrzeszów County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Ostrzeszów

Gmina Pakosław

Gmina Pakosław is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Rawicz County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Pakosław

Gmina Pępowo

Gmina Pępowo is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Gostyń County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Pępowo

Gmina Perzów

Gmina Perzów is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Kępno County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Perzów

Gmina Piaski, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Gmina Piaski is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Gostyń County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Piaski, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Gmina Pleszew

Gmina Pleszew is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Pleszew County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Pleszew

Gmina Pniewy, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Gmina Pniewy is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Szamotuły County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Pniewy, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Gmina Połajewo

Gmina Połajewo is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Czarnków-Trzcianka County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Połajewo

Gmina Pobiedziska

Gmina Pobiedziska is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Poznań County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Pobiedziska

Gmina Pogorzela

Gmina Pogorzela is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Gostyń County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Pogorzela

Gmina Poniec

Gmina Poniec is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Gostyń County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Poniec

Gmina Powidz

Gmina Powidz is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Słupca County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Powidz

Gmina Przedecz

Gmina Przedecz is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Koło County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Przedecz

Gmina Przemęt

Gmina Przemęt is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Wolsztyn County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Przemęt

Gmina Przygodzice

Gmina Przygodzice is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Ostrów Wielkopolski County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Przygodzice

Gmina Przykona

Gmina Przykona is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Turek County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Przykona

Gmina Pyzdry

Gmina Pyzdry is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Września County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Pyzdry

Gmina Rakoniewice

Gmina Rakoniewice is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Grodzisk Wielkopolski County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Rakoniewice

Gmina Raszków

Gmina Raszków is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Ostrów Wielkopolski County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Raszków

Gmina Rawicz

Gmina Rawicz is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Rawicz County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Rawicz

Gmina Rogoźno

Gmina Rogoźno is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Oborniki County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Rogoźno

Gmina Rokietnica, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Gmina Rokietnica is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Poznań County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Rokietnica, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Gmina Rozdrażew

Gmina Rozdrażew is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Krotoszyn County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Rozdrażew

Gmina Rychtal

Gmina Rychtal is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Kępno County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Rychtal

Gmina Rychwał

Gmina Rychwał is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Konin County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Rychwał

Gmina Ryczywół

Gmina Ryczywół is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Oborniki County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Ryczywół

Gmina Rydzyna

Gmina Rydzyna (Reisen) is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Leszno County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Rydzyna

Gmina Rzgów, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Gmina Rzgów is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Konin County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Rzgów, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Gmina Słupca

Gmina Słupca is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Słupca County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Słupca

Gmina Siedlec

Gmina Siedlec is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Wolsztyn County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Siedlec

Gmina Sieraków

Gmina Sieraków is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Międzychód County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Sieraków

Gmina Sieroszewice

Gmina Sieroszewice is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Ostrów Wielkopolski County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Sieroszewice

Gmina Skoki

Gmina Skoki is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Wągrowiec County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Skoki

Gmina Skulsk

Gmina Skulsk is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Konin County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Skulsk

Gmina Sośnie

Gmina Sośnie is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Ostrów Wielkopolski County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Sośnie

Gmina Sompolno

Gmina Sompolno is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Konin County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Sompolno

Gmina Stare Miasto

Gmina Stare Miasto is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Konin County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Stare Miasto

Gmina Stawiszyn

Gmina Stawiszyn is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Kalisz County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Stawiszyn

Gmina Stęszew

Gmina Stęszew is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Poznań County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Stęszew

Gmina Strzałkowo

Gmina Strzałkowo is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Słupca County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Strzałkowo

Gmina Suchy Las

Gmina Suchy Las is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Poznań County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Suchy Las

Gmina Swarzędz

Gmina Swarzędz is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Poznań County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Swarzędz

Gmina Szamocin

Gmina Szamocin is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Chodzież County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Szamocin

Gmina Szamotuły

Gmina Szamotuły is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Szamotuły County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Szamotuły

Gmina Szczytniki

Gmina Szczytniki is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Kalisz County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Szczytniki

Gmina Szydłowo, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Gmina Szydłowo is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Piła County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Szydłowo, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Gmina Tarnówka

Gmina Tarnówka is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Złotów County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Tarnówka

Gmina Tarnowo Podgórne

Gmina Tarnowo Podgórne is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Poznań County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Tarnowo Podgórne

Gmina Trzcianka

Gmina Trzcianka is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Czarnków-Trzcianka County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Trzcianka

Gmina Trzcinica

Gmina Trzcinica is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Kępno County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Trzcinica

Gmina Trzemeszno

Gmina Trzemeszno is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Gniezno County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Trzemeszno

Gmina Tuliszków

Gmina Tuliszków is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Turek County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Tuliszków

Gmina Turek

Gmina Turek is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Turek County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Turek

Gmina Ujście

Gmina Ujście is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Piła County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Ujście

Gmina Wapno

Gmina Wapno is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Wągrowiec County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Wapno

Gmina Wągrowiec

Gmina Wągrowiec is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Wągrowiec County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Wągrowiec

Gmina Władysławów

Gmina Władysławów is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Turek County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Władysławów

Gmina Włoszakowice

Gmina Włoszakowice is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Leszno County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Włoszakowice

Gmina Wieleń

Gmina Wieleń is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Czarnków-Trzcianka County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Wieleń

Gmina Wielichowo

Gmina Wielichowo is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Grodzisk Wielkopolski County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Wielichowo

Gmina Wierzbinek

Gmina Wierzbinek is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Konin County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Wierzbinek

Gmina Wijewo

Gmina Wijewo is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Leszno County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Wijewo

Gmina Wilczyn

Gmina Wilczyn is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Konin County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Wilczyn

Gmina Witkowo

Gmina Witkowo is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Gniezno County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Witkowo

Gmina Wolsztyn

Gmina Wolsztyn is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Wolsztyn County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Wolsztyn

Gmina Wronki

Gmina Wronki is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Szamotuły County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Wronki

Gmina Września

Gmina Września is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Września County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Września

Gmina Wyrzysk

Gmina Wyrzysk is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Piła County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Wyrzysk

Gmina Wysoka

Gmina Wysoka is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Piła County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Wysoka

Gmina Zagórów

Gmina Zagórów is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Słupca County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Zagórów

Gmina Zakrzewo, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Gmina Zakrzewo is a rural German gmina (administrative district) in Złotów County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Zakrzewo, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Gmina Zaniemyśl

Gmina Zaniemyśl is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Środa Wielkopolska County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Zaniemyśl

Gmina Złotów

Gmina Złotów is a rural gmina (administrative district) in Złotów County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Złotów

Gmina Zbąszyń

Gmina Zbąszyń is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Nowy Tomyśl County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Zbąszyń

Gmina Zduny, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Gmina Zduny is an urban-rural gmina (administrative district) in Krotoszyn County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gmina Zduny, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Gniezno

Gniezno (Gnesen) is a city in central-western Poland, about east of Poznań, with about 70,000 inhabitants.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gniezno

Gniezno County

Gniezno County (powiat gnieźnieński) is a unit of territorial administration and local government (powiat) in Greater Poland Voivodeship, west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gniezno County

Gołańcz

Gołańcz is a town in Wągrowiec County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, Poland, with 3,349 inhabitants (2004).

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gołańcz

Golina

Golina is a town in Konin County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, Poland, with 4,366 inhabitants (2004).

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Golina

Golina (disambiguation)

Golina may refer to the following places in Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Golina (disambiguation)

Goraj, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Goraj is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Lubasz, within Czarnków-Trzcianka County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Goraj, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Goraj-Zamek

Goraj-Zamek (Goray) is a settlement in the administrative district of Gmina Czarnków, within Czarnków-Trzcianka County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Goraj-Zamek

Gorzów Wielkopolski

Gorzów Wielkopolski (abbreviated Gorzów Wlkp.; Landsberg an der Warthe; Łącbarg) is a city in western Poland, on the Warta river.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gorzów Wielkopolski

Gostyń

Gostyń (Gostyn, 1941-45: Gostingen) is a town in Greater Poland Voivodeship (from 1975 to 1998 in Leszno Voivodship), in Gostyń County.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gostyń

Gostyń (disambiguation)

Gostyń may refer to.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gostyń (disambiguation)

Gostyń County

Gostyń County (powiat gostyński) is a unit of territorial administration and local government (powiat) in Greater Poland Voivodeship, west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gostyń County

Grabów nad Prosną

Grabów nad Prosną is a town in Ostrzeszów County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, Poland, with 1,965 inhabitants (2004).

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Grabów nad Prosną

Grabówka, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Grabówka (Segenfelde) is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Budzyń, within Chodzież County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Grabówka, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Granówko

Granówko is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Granowo, within Grodzisk Wielkopolski County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Granówko

Granowo, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Granowo (Granowo, 1943-45: Granau) is a village in Grodzisk Wielkopolski County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Granowo, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Greater Poland (European Parliament constituency)

In European elections, Greater Poland is a constituency of the European Parliament.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Greater Poland (European Parliament constituency)

Greater Poland Regional Assembly

The Greater Poland Regional Assembly (Sejmik Województwa Wielkopolskiego) is the regional legislature of the Voivodeship of Greater Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Greater Poland Regional Assembly

Green Hill

Green Hill may refer to.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Green Hill

Groß-Gerau

Groß-Gerau is the district seat of the Groß-Gerau district, lying in the southern Frankfurt Rhein-Main Region in Hesse, Germany, and serving as a hub for the surrounding area.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Groß-Gerau

Grodzisk Wielkopolski

Grodzisk Wielkopolski (Grätz) is a town in western Poland, in Greater Poland Voivodeship (Wielkopolskie), with a population of 13,703 (2006).

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Grodzisk Wielkopolski

Grodzisk Wielkopolski County

Grodzisk Wielkopolski County (powiat grodziski) is a unit of territorial administration and local government (powiat) in Greater Poland Voivodeship, west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Grodzisk Wielkopolski County

Grzępy

Grzępy (Friedrichsau) is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Czarnków, within Czarnków-Trzcianka County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Grzępy

Gulcz

Gulcz is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Wieleń, within Czarnków-Trzcianka County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Gulcz

Guzdek

Guzdek is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Szczytniki, within Kalisz County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Guzdek

Hamm

Hamm (Latin: Hammona) is a city in North Rhine-Westphalia, Germany.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Hamm

Hamrzysko

Hamrzysko is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Wieleń, within Czarnków-Trzcianka County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Hamrzysko

Heliodorowo

Heliodorowo (Helldorf) is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Szamocin, within Chodzież County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Heliodorowo

Herburtowo

Herburtowo (Ehrbardorf) is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Wieleń, within Czarnków-Trzcianka County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Herburtowo

History of Poznań

Poznań, today Poland's fifth largest city, is also one of the country's oldest cities, and was an important political and religious center in the early Polish state of the 10th century.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and History of Poznań

Huta Szklana, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Huta Szklana (Glashütte) is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Krzyż Wielkopolski, within Czarnków-Trzcianka County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Huta Szklana, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Huta, Czarnków-Trzcianka County

Huta (Althütte) is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Czarnków, within Czarnków-Trzcianka County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Huta, Czarnków-Trzcianka County

Hutka, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Hutka is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Czarnków, within Czarnków-Trzcianka County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Hutka, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Ignacy Wyssogota Zakrzewski

Ignacy Wyssogota Zakrzewski (1745–1802) was a notable Polish nobleman, politician, art collector, Freemason, and the Mayor of Warsaw during the last years of the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth, in 1792 and 1794.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Ignacy Wyssogota Zakrzewski

III liga

III Liga (Trzecia Liga) is a Polish football league that sits at the 4th tier of the Polish football league system.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and III liga

ISO 3166-2:PL

ISO 3166-2:PL is the entry for Poland in ISO 3166-2, part of the ISO 3166 standard published by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO), which defines codes for the names of the principal subdivisions (e.g., provinces or states) of all countries coded in ISO 3166-1.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and ISO 3166-2:PL

Jacewko

Jacewko (Königswald) is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Chodzież, within Chodzież County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Jacewko

Jaktorówko

Jaktorówko is a settlement in the administrative district of Gmina Szamocin, within Chodzież County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Jaktorówko

Jaktorowo

Jaktorowo (Jaktorowo, 1939-45: Schönrode) is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Szamocin, within Chodzież County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Jaktorowo

Jan Kułakowski

Jan Jerzy Kułakowski (25 August 1930 – 25 June 2011) was a Polish politician and Member of the European Parliament for the Greater Poland Voivodship (2004–2009) with the Freedom Union, part of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe and sat on the European Parliament's Committee on Employment and Social Affairs.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Jan Kułakowski

Jan Masiel

Jan Tadeusz Masiel (born 28 March 1963 in Siemiatycze) is a Polish politician.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Jan Masiel

Janiszew, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Janiszew is located in the centre of Brudzew administrative district of Poland, near the Koźmin strip of Adamów Brown Coal Mine, on a small river called Struga Janiszewska.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Janiszew, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Jarocin

Jarocin (Jarotschin) is a town in central Poland with 25,700 inhabitants (1995), the administrative capital of Jarocin County.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Jarocin

Jarocin County

Jarocin County (powiat jarociński) is a unit of territorial administration and local government (powiat) in Greater Poland Voivodeship, west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Jarocin County

Jastrowie

Jastrowie (Jastrow) is a town in Poland of over 9,000 inhabitants in Złotów County, Greater Poland Voivodeship.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Jastrowie

Józefowice, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Józefowice (Josephsruh) is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Szamocin, within Chodzież County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Józefowice, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Józefowo, Chodzież County

Józefowo (Josephowo) is a settlement in the administrative district of Gmina Szamocin, within Chodzież County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Józefowo, Chodzież County

Józefy, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Józefy is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Szamocin, within Chodzież County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Józefy, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Jędrzejewo, Gmina Czarnków

Jędrzejewo (Putzig) is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Czarnków, within Czarnków-Trzcianka County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Jędrzejewo, Gmina Czarnków

Jędrzejewo, Gmina Lubasz

Jędrzejewo is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Lubasz, within Czarnków-Trzcianka County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Jędrzejewo, Gmina Lubasz

John Monash

General Sir John Monash, (27 June 1865 – 8 October 1931) was a civil engineer and an Australian military commander of the First World War.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and John Monash

Jutrosin

Jutrosin (Jutroschin) is a town in Rawicz County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, Poland, with 1,947 inhabitants (2014).

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Jutrosin

Kałądek

Kałądek is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Wieleń, within Czarnków-Trzcianka County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Kałądek

Kadłubek, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Kadłubek is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Trzcianka, within Czarnków-Trzcianka County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Kadłubek, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Kalisz

Kalisz (Old Greek: Καλισία, Latin: Calisia, Yiddish: קאַליש, Kalisch) is a city in central Poland with 101,625 inhabitants (December 2017), the capital city of the Kalisz Region.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Kalisz

Kalisz County

Kalisz County (powiat kaliski) is a unit of territorial administration and local government (powiat) in Greater Poland Voivodeship, west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Kalisz County

Kalisz Voivodeship

Kalisz Voivodeship (1) 1975–1998 was a unit of administrative division and local government in Poland in years 1975&ndash;1998, superseded by Greater Poland Voivodeship.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Kalisz Voivodeship

Kamińsko, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Kamińsko is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Murowana Goślina, within Poznań County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Kamińsko, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Kamiennik, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Kamiennik is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Drawsko, within Czarnków-Trzcianka County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Kamiennik, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Kamionka, Chodzież County

Kamionka (Kamionke) is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Chodzież, within Chodzież County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Kamionka, Chodzież County

Kamionka, Czarnków-Trzcianka County

Kamionka is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Lubasz, within Czarnków-Trzcianka County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Kamionka, Czarnków-Trzcianka County

Karcze, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Karcze is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Trzcianka, within Czarnków-Trzcianka County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Karcze, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Karl-Gustav Sauberzweig

Karl-Gustav Sauberzweig (1 September 1899 – 20 October 1946) was a German Army Oberst (Colonel) who transferred to the Waffen-SS during World War II and commanded the 13th Waffen Mountain Division of the SS Handschar (1st Croatian) in 1943–1944, and the IX Waffen Mountain Corps of the SS (Croatian) in 1944–1945, reaching the rank of Gruppenführer and Generalleutnant of the Waffen SS.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Karl-Gustav Sauberzweig

Karolinka, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Karolinka (Karlshöh) is a settlement in the administrative district of Gmina Margonin, within Chodzież County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Karolinka, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Kawczyn, Czarnków-Trzcianka County

Kawczyn is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Drawsko, within Czarnków-Trzcianka County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Kawczyn, Czarnków-Trzcianka County

Kórnik

Kórnik (Kurnik, 1939-45 Burgstadt) is a town with about 6,800 inhabitants (2006), located in western Poland, about south-east of the city of Poznań.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Kórnik

Kąkolewice, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Kąkolewice (Kunkolewo) is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Budzyń, within Chodzież County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Kąkolewice, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Kąkolewo, Leszno County

Kąkolewo (Kankel (Kreis Lissau)) is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Osieczna, within Leszno County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Kąkolewo, Leszno County

Kępa, Czarnków-Trzcianka County

Kępa (Kappe) is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Trzcianka, within Czarnków-Trzcianka County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Kępa, Czarnków-Trzcianka County

Kępno

Kępno (Kempen in Posen) is a town in Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Kępno

Kępno County

Kępno County (powiat kępiński) is a unit of territorial administration and local government (powiat) in Greater Poland Voivodeship, west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Kępno County

Kłecko

Kłecko (German: Kletzko, 1940-45 Klötzen) is a town in Gniezno County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, Poland, with 2,712 inhabitants (2004).

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Kłecko

Kłodawa

Kłodawa (Tonningen) is a town in central Poland with 6,699 inhabitants (2014).

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Kłodawa

Kierzkowice, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Kierzkowice (Kerzow) is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Chodzież, within Chodzież County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Kierzkowice, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Kiszkowo, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Kiszkowo (Welnau) is a village in Gniezno County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Kiszkowo, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Klaudia, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Klaudia (Klaudia) is a settlement in the administrative district of Gmina Margonin, within Chodzież County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Klaudia, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Kleczew

Kleczew is a town in Konin County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, western-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Kleczew

Klempicz

Klempicz is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Lubasz, within Czarnków-Trzcianka County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Klempicz

Klotyldzin

Klotyldzin (Klothildenhof) is a settlement in the administrative district of Gmina Margonin, within Chodzież County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Klotyldzin

Koło

Koło (during the German occupation called Wartbrücken in 1940–41, Warthbrücken in 1941–45) is a town on the Warta River in central Poland with 23,101 inhabitants (2006).

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Koło

Koło County

Koło County (powiat kolski) is a unit of territorial administration and local government (powiat) in Greater Poland Voivodeship, west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Koło County

Kościan

Kościan (Kosten) is a town on the Obra canal in west-central Poland, with a population of 23 952 inhabitants as of June 2014.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Kościan

Kościan County

Kościan County (powiat kościański) is a unit of territorial administration and local government (powiat) in Greater Poland Voivodeship, west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Kościan County

Koźmin Wielkopolski

Koźmin Wielkopolski (Koschmin) is a town in Krotoszyn County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, Poland, with 6,678 inhabitants according to the 2010 census.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Koźmin Wielkopolski

Kobylin

Kobylin (1943-45 Koppelstädt) is a town in Krotoszyn County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, Poland, with 3,130 inhabitants (2009).

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Kobylin

Kochanówka, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Kochanówka is a settlement in the administrative district of Gmina Trzcianka, within Czarnków-Trzcianka County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Kochanówka, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Kocień Wielki

Kocień Wielki (Groß Kotten) is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Wieleń, within Czarnków-Trzcianka County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Kocień Wielki

Komorniki

Komorniki is a village in Poland, located in Greater Poland Voivodeship, Poznań County, Gmina Komorniki (Poznań metropolitan area), with approximately 5,500 inhabitants.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Komorniki

Komorniki (disambiguation)

Komorniki may refer to the following villages in Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Komorniki (disambiguation)

Komorniki Festival of Organ and Chamber Music

The Komorniki Festival of Organ and Chamber Music (Ogólnopolski Festiwal Muzyki Organowej i Kameralnej - Komorniki) is a summer series of concerts held annually in Komorniki, Greater Poland Voivodeship, Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Komorniki Festival of Organ and Chamber Music

Komorzewo

Komorzewo (Grützendorf) is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Czarnków, within Czarnków-Trzcianka County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Komorzewo

Konin

Konin is a city in central Poland, on the Warta River.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Konin

Konin County

Konin County (powiat koniński) is a unit of territorial administration and local government (powiat) in Greater Poland Voivodeship, west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Konin County

Konin Voivodeship

Konin Voivodeship - a unit of administrative division and local government in Poland from 1975 to 1998, superseded by Greater Poland Voivodeship.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Konin Voivodeship

Konstantynowo, Chodzież County

Konstantynowo (Konstantinau) is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Chodzież, within Chodzież County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Konstantynowo, Chodzież County

Kosarzyn, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Kosarzyn (Hammermühle) is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Szamocin, within Chodzież County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Kosarzyn, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Kostrzyn

Kostrzyn (Kostschin) is a town in Poland, in the Greater Poland Voivodeship, with 8,398 inhabitants (2004).

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Kostrzyn

Kostrzyn–Słubice Special Economic Zone

The Kostrzyn–Slubice Special Economic Zone is in the centre of Europe, in western Poland, along the Polish–German border.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Kostrzyn–Słubice Special Economic Zone

Kowalewo, Chodzież County

Kowalewo (Schmiedenau) is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Margonin, within Chodzież County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Kowalewo, Chodzież County

Koziegłowy, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Koziegłowy (Ziegenhagen) is a large village in the administrative district of Gmina Czerwonak, within Poznań County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Koziegłowy, Greater Poland Voivodeship

Krajenka

Krajenka (Krojanke) is a town in the Greater Poland Voivodeship of Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Krajenka

Krajna

Krajna is a forested historical region in Poland, situated in the border area between the Greater Poland, Kuyavian-Pomeranian and Pomeranian Voivodeships.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Krajna

Kreis Birnbaum

The Kreis Birnbaum (Powiat międzychodzki) was an administrative district in Prussia (Kreis) in the west of the Grand Duchy of Posen and the succeeding Province of Posen, part of Regierungsbezirk Posen between 1815 and 1920.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Kreis Birnbaum

Kreis Koschmin

Kreis Koschmin (Powiat Koźmiński) was a county in the southern administrative district of Posen, in the Prussian province of Posen.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Kreis Koschmin

Kreis Krotoschin

Kreis Krotoschin (krotoszyński) was a county in the southern administrative district of Posen, in the Prussian province of Posen.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Kreis Krotoschin

Kreis Lissa

Kreis Lissa (leszczyński) was a county in the southern administrative district of Posen, in the Prussian province of Posen.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Kreis Lissa

Kreis Neutomischel

Kreis Neutomischel (nowotomyski) was a county in the southern administrative district of Posen, in the Prussian province of Posen.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Kreis Neutomischel

Kreis Obornik

Kreis Obornik (obornicki) was a county in the southern administrative district of Posen, in the Prussian province of Posen.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Kreis Obornik

Kreis Ostrowo

Kreis Ostrowo (ostrowski) was a county in the southern administrative district of Posen, in the Prussian province of Posen.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Kreis Ostrowo

Kreis Pleschen

Kreis Pleschen was a county in the southern administrative district of Posen, in the Prussian province of Posen.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Kreis Pleschen

Kreis Rawitsch

Kreis Rawitsch (rawicki) was a county in the southern administrative district of Posen, in the Prussian province of Posen.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Kreis Rawitsch

Kreis Samter

Kreis Samter (szamotulski) was a county in the southern administrative district of Posen, in the Prussian province of Posen.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Kreis Samter

Kreis Schildberg

Kreis Schildberg (ostrzeszowski) was a county in the southern administrative district of Posen, in the Prussian province of Posen.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Kreis Schildberg

Kreis Schmiegel

Kreis Schmiegel (Powiat śmigielski) was a county in the southern administrative district of Posen, in the Prussian province of Posen.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Kreis Schmiegel

Kreis Schrimm

Kreis Schrimm (Powiat śremski) was a county in the southern administrative district of Posen, in the Prussian province of Posen.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Kreis Schrimm

Kreis Schroda

Kreis Schroda (średzki) was a county in the southern administrative district of Posen, in the Prussian province of Posen.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Kreis Schroda

Kreis Wirsitz

Kreis Wirsitz was one of 14 or 15 Kreise (English: counties) in the northern administrative district of Bromberg, in the Prussian province of Posen.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Kreis Wirsitz

Kreis Wreschen

Kreis Wreschen (wrzesiński) was a county in the southern administrative district of Posen, in the Prussian province of Posen.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Kreis Wreschen

Krobia

Krobia is a town situated in the western part of Poland, in Greater Poland Voivodeship.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Krobia

Krosin

Krosin is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Połajewo, within Czarnków-Trzcianka County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

See Greater Poland Voivodeship and Krosin

Krosinek

Krosinek is a village in the administrative district of Gmina Połajewo, within Czarnków-Trzcianka County, Greater Poland Voivodeship, in west-central Poland.

Se