A teenage Westbury mother who died when a car crashed into a house in Plainview was on the way home after celebrating her birthday, one of her three brothers said on Tuesday.

Shakira Garcia, 19, was in the front passenger seat of a 2004 Acura in the early morning hours of Nov. 12 when the vehicle crashed into a house on Round Swamp Road, police said.

Garcia, who had a toddler son and lived with her mother and brothers, was pronounced dead at the scene, police said. The car’s other occupants, one of her brothers and a family friend, were taken to a hospital with nonlife-threatening injuries, police said.

At the time of the 4:15 a.m. crash, the three were on their way home after celebrating the birthdays of Garcia and a cousin at her aunt’s Staten Island home, according to Luis Ramirez, 28, another brother of the victim.

Ramirez, who also attended the party, said Tuesday that Garcia and the others in the Acura were hoping to find a place to eat at the time of the crash.

Nassau police said the car, traveling east, left the road while going around a curve and struck the home.

No one in the house was injured, authorities said. It remained unclear Tuesday who was driving and so far no charges have been filed, police said, as the investigation continues.

“We cut the cake, I gave her a hug and I wished her a happy birthday,” Ramirez said of his final moments with his sister. “Then we took a shot of tequila. That was the last time I spoke to her.”

Ramirez was home after returning from Staten Island when the phone rang, he said. On the line, was someone telling him about the crash but without any details. He rushed to the hospital, Ramirez said. When he arrived a Nassau detective was waiting for him and broke the news about his sister’s death.

The crash left Garcia’s son Jeremiah, 1, in the care of her mother, Olga Garcia, 50, Ramirez said, and the family is still struggling over the loss. Even little Jeremiah seems to sense something, or someone, is missing at the family’s Westbury home, according to the baby’s uncle.

“My mother is too sad over this. She’s distraught,” Ramirez said.

Jeremiah is “barely a year old. He doesn’t understand but he cries a lot,” Ramirez said, “almost like he’s looking for her.”

The family buried Garcia on Monday at Amityville Cemetery.

“Whenever you needed anything, she was there for you,” Ramirez said of his sister. “Sometimes we would have fights but we always had each others’ back. I’m just so sad over this.”