Biography: Tito El Bambino

Efraín David Fines Nevares (born October 5, 1981, better known as Tito “El Bambino”) is a reggaeton singer from Puerto Rico. He rose to fame as Tito of the duo Héctor & Tito. Tito and his partner released a number of hit songs in their native Puerto Rico, including “Amor de Colegio”...

Biography: Shakira

Shakira Isabel Mebarak Ripoll (born February 2, 1977), known professionally as Shakira is a Colombian singer, songwriter, musician, record producer, dancer, and philanthropist who emerged as a musical prodigy in the music scene of Latin America in the early 1990s. Born and raised in Barranquilla, Colombia, Shakira revealed many of her talents...

Biography: Sergi Lopez

Sergi López i Ayats (born 22 December 1965; Vilanova i la Geltrú, Catalonia) is a Spanish actor. Sergi López was initiated in theater in representations of typical Catalan nativity plays called Els Pastorets, in his native city. He started to study theater in Barcelona but ended his studies in France, in the...

Biography: Sara Ramirez

Sara Ramírez born August 31, 1975) is a Mexican-American actress and singer. She is known for her...

Biography: Sammy Sosa

Samuel Peralta “Sammy” Sosa (born November 12, 1968) is a former Major League Baseball right fielder. Sosa was born in the Dominican Republic. Although his officially registered birthplace is San Pedro de Macorís, Sosa was actually born in Consuelo. San Pedro de Macorís was “the largest town nearby.” Both Consuelo and San...

Biography: Christina Aguilera

Christina María Aguilera (born December 18, 1980) is an American pop singer and songwriter. Aguilera was born in Staten Island, New York, to Fausto Wagner Xavier Aguilera, a Sergeant in the U.S. Army at the time, and Shelly Loraine (née Fidler), a teacher of Spanish. Aguilera’s father was born in Guayaquil, Ecuador....

Biography: Charlie Sheen

Carlos Irwin Estévez (born September 3, 1965), known professionally as Charlie Sheen, is an American actor. His...

Biography: Carlos Mencia

Ned Arnel Mencía (born October 22, 1967), better known by his stage name Carlos Mencia, is a...

Biography: Cristiano Ronaldo

Cristiano Ronaldo dos Santos Aveiro, (born 5 February 1985), commonly known as Cristiano Ronaldo, is a Portuguese footballer who plays as a winger or a forward for Spanish club Real Madrid and serves as captain of the Portuguese national team. Ronaldo currently holds the distinction of being the most expensive player in...

Biography: Ruddy Rodriguez

Ruddy Rosario Rodríguez de Lucía (born March 20, 1967) is a Venezuelan actress, model and Businesswoman. Born in Anaco, Anzoátegui, daughter of Venezuelan Pedro José Rodríguez and Italian Rita de Lucía. She has a brother Romano and a sister Rina. She made 4 calendars (1992, 1993, 1994 and 1995) , being the...

Biography: Chayanne

Elmer Figueroa Arce (born June 29, 1968), best known under the stage name Chayanne, is a Puerto...

Biography: Celia Cruz

Celia Cruz (born Úrsula Hilaria Celia de la Caridad Cruz Alfonso on October 21, 1925 – July 16, 2003) was a Havana, Cuba born salsa singer, and was one of the most successful Salsa performers of the 20th century, with twenty-three gold albums to her name. She was renowned internationally as the...

Biography: Cameron Diaz

Cameron Michelle Diaz (born August 30, 1972) is an American actress and former model. She broke out...

Biography: Rosario Dawson

Rosario Dawson (born May 9, 1979) is an American actress, singer, and writer. She has appeared in films such as Kids, Men in Black II, Sin City, Clerks II, Rent, Death Proof, The Rundown, Eagle Eye, Alexander, Seven Pounds, and Percy Jackson and the Olympians: The Lightning Thief. Dawson was born in...

Biography: Carlos Santana

Carlos Augusto Alves Santana (born July 20, 1947) is a Mexican-American rock guitarist. Santana became famous in the late 1960s and early 1970s with his band, Santana, which pioneered rock, salsa and jazz fusion. The band’s sound featured his melodic, blues-based guitar lines set against Latin and African rhythms featuring percussion instruments...

Biography: Benicio del Toro

Benicio Monserrate Rafael del Toro Sánchez (born February 19, 1967), better known as Benicio del Toro, is a Puerto Rican actor and film producer. His awards include the Academy Award, Golden Globe, Screen Actors Guild (SAG) Award and British Academy of Film and Television Arts (BAFTA) Award. He is known for his...

Biography: Ricardo Chavira

Ricardo Antonio Chavira (born September 1, 1971) is an American actor, perhaps best known for his role as Carlos Solis on Desperate Housewives. Chavira was born in Austin, Texas, the son of a Bexar County judge, Juan Antonio Chavira. Raised in San Antonio, Texas, he graduated from Robert E. Lee High School,...

Biography: Andy Garcia

Andrés Arturo García Menéndez (born April 12, 1956), professionally known as Andy García, is a Cuban American actor. He became known in the late 1980s and 1990s, having appeared in several successful Hollywood films, including The Godfather: Part III, The Untouchables, and When a Man Loves a Woman. More recently, he has...