Piers Anthony is an English-American author of science fiction and fantasy novels. He has written several series, including Xanth, Cluster, Apprentice Adept, Incarnations of Immortality and several others. Before he became an author, Piers spent two years serving in the U.S. Army, edited the battalion’s newspaper and then worked as a public school teacher. He wouldn’t stay teaching for long, though, as he made a deal with his wife to sell a piece within a year or he would give up his dream. Towards the end of the year, Piers was able to sell a short story. Piers lives with his wife on a tree farm in Florida.

Piers Anthony made his debut as a novelist in 1967 with the novel Chthon, which was nominated for the Hugo and Nebula Awards. Anthony is an extremely prolific author, with at least one novel published for each letter of the alphabet. Below is a list of Piers Anthony’s books in order of when they were originally published:

Publication Order of Xanth Books

Publication Order of Xanth Graphic Novel Books

Publication Order of Apprentice Adept Books

Publication Order of Aliena Books

Publication Order of Aton Books

Publication Order of Battle Circle Books

Publication Order of Bio Of A Space Tyrant Books

Publication Order of ChroMagic Books

Publication Order of Cluster Books

Publication Order of Geodyssey Books

Publication Order of Hair Books

Publication Order of Incarnations Of Immortality Books

Publication Order of Jason Striker Books

(with Roberto Fuentes)

Publication Order of Kelvin Of Rud Books

(with Robert E. Margroff)

Publication Order of Metal Maiden Books

Publication Order of Mode Books

Publication Order of Of Man and Manta Books

Publication Order of PAKK Books

(with Kenneth Kelly)

Publication Order of Pornucopia Books

Publication Order of Return Of Aladdin Books

(with J.R. Rain)

Publication Order of Tarot Books

Publication Order of Trail Mix Books

Publication Order of Standalone Novels

Publication Order of Short Stories/Novellas

Publication Order of Short Story Collections

Publication Order of Non-Fiction Books

Publication Order of Curiosity Quills Anthology Books

Publication Order of Anthologies

Notes: The Jason Striker Martial Arts series and Dead Morn were co-authored with Roberto Fuentes. The Kelvin of Rud series, The Ring and The ESP Worm were co-authored with Robert E. Margroff. The Return of Aladdin series, Dolfin Tayle and Jack and the Giants were co-authored with J.R. Rain. Piers Anthony’s Visual Guide to Xanth was co-authored with Jody Lynn Nye. But What of Earth was co-authored with Robert Coulson. Pretender was co-authored with Frances Hall. Through the Ice was co-authored with Robert Kornwise. The Caterpillar’s Quest was co-authored with Philip Jose Farmer. The Willing Spirit was co-authored with Alfred Tella. Spider Legs was co-authored with Clifford A. Pickover. Volk was co-authored with Brad Linaweaver. Quest for the Fallen Star was co-authored with James Richey and Alan Riggs. Dream a Little Dream was co-authored with Julie Brady. The Secret of Spring was co-authored with Jo Ann Taeusch. The Gutbucket Quest was co-authored with Ron Lemming. Vicinity Cluster is also titled Cluster.

If You Like Piers Anthony Books, You’ll Love…

Anne McCaffrey

Terry Brooks

David Eddings