Article content

The Edmonton Oilers saw a busy draft weekend to a close with a pair of consecutive seventh round picks, Czech netminder Miroslav Svoboda (described here by Jonathan Willis) at #208, followed immediately by Russian defenceman Ziyat Paigin (alt. Paygin). The latter is a 20-year-old defender who played last season with Ak Bars Kazan of the KHL, for whom he played 33 games. His boxcars of 1-1-2, 2 PiM, +3, suggest limited ice time and modest success. Paigin also played for Russia at the World Juniors, where he won a silver medal.

Advertisement 2

Story continues below

This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

THIS CONTENT IS RESERVED FOR SUBSCRIBERS ONLY

Subscribe now to read the latest news in your city and across Canada.

Exclusive articles by David Staples, Keith Gerein and others, Oilers news from Cult of Hockey, Ask EJ Anything features, the Noon News Roundup and Under the Dome newsletters.

Unlimited online access to Edmonton Journal and 15 news sites with one account.

Edmonton Journal ePaper, an electronic replica of the print edition to view on any device, share and comment on.

Daily puzzles, including the New York Times Crossword.

Support local journalism.

SUBSCRIBE TO UNLOCK MORE ARTICLES

Subscribe now to read the latest news in your city and across Canada.

Exclusive articles by David Staples, Keith Gerein and others, Oilers news from Cult of Hockey, Ask EJ Anything features, the Noon News Roundup and Under the Dome newsletters.

Unlimited online access to Edmonton Journal and 15 news sites with one account.

Edmonton Journal ePaper, an electronic replica of the print edition to view on any device, share and comment on.

Daily puzzles, including the New York Times Crossword.

Support local journalism.

REGISTER / SIGN IN TO UNLOCK MORE ARTICLES

Create an account or sign in to continue with your reading experience.

Access articles from across Canada with one account.

Share your thoughts and join the conversation in the comments.

Enjoy additional articles per month.

Get email updates from your favourite authors.

Sign In or Create an Account

Email Address

or

Article content

The first thing that grabs one’s attention about Paigin is his immense size, currently listed at 6’6, 209 pounds.

We apologize, but this video has failed to load.

Try refreshing your browser, or

tap here to see other videos from our team.

Edmonton Oilers wrap up 2015 draft by selecting gigantic defender Ziyat Paigin 209th overall Back to video

International Scouting Services ranked this player at #112 overall, with a generally postive scouting report:

The big, lanky defender was an imposing figure on the back end for Ak Bars Kazan in the KHL and with Russia at the 2015 U20 World Championships. Paigin’s upside is based around his raw frame and active, intense defensive game. Long active stick and angles well, needs to focus on foot speed and mobility which will benefit when he adds muscle to his massive frame. Thrives in physical play, likes to finish hits and mix it up along the wall. Can be beat wide by quick opposition forwards catching him on the pivot. Decent skill-set on the puck, although at his best when he simplifies his game. Good shot although not much upside in this department at the next level.

Scouts’ comments include mixed reviews on his physical play and backhanded compliments like “good mobility for his size”, but consistently note his good net-front coverage and shot-blocking ability. Said one: “stayat-home d-man that keeps his game simple and boxes out well. PK work was strong all tournament. Knows his limitations and doesn’t try to do too much.”

Ziyat Paigin career statistics at Elite Prospects

The above suggests that Paigin has a contract through the 2016-17 season, but such are typically flexible in the KHL. At this point he looks to be a draft-and-follow, though there may be an option to bring over to the AHL at some future point as he develops.

Other picks/trades at the 2015 NHL Draft

Oilers draft C Connor McDavid No. 1 overall

Oilers acquire D Griffin Reinhart from the Islanders for the No. 16 and No. 33 picks

Oilers acquire G Cam Talbot and the No. 209 pick from the Rangers for the No. 57, No. 79 and No. 184 picks

Oilers send No. 86 pick to the Sharks as compensation for head coach Todd McLellan

Oilers acquire F Brad Ross, No. 107 pick from Maple Leafs for D Martin Marincin

Oilers acquire D Eric Gryba from the Senators for F Travis Ewanyk and the No. 107 pick

Oilers draft D Caleb Jones No. 117 overall

Oilers draft D Ethan Bear No. 124 overall

Oilers draft D John Marino No. 154 overall

Oilers draft G Miroslav Svoboda No. 208 overall

Oilers draft D Ziyat Paigin No. 209 overall

Follow Bruce McCurdy on Twitter

Article content

Share this article in your social network

Latest National Stories