EDMONTON, Alberta – Pekka Rinne was down, but not out Friday night.

At least not right away.

On Saturday morning the Predators goalie found out he'll be out for at least three games after the team placed him on injured reserve.

Last year's Vezina Trophy winner left during the third period of Friday's 5-3 victory against the Flames in Calgary after a collision with teammate Kevin Fiala.

The Predators called up Miroslav Svoboda from the ECHL's Atlanta Gladiators for Saturday night's game against the Oilers, and will recall Troy Grosenick from Milwaukee after they return home.

It wasn't clear whether Rinne was pulled as a precautionary measure or due to the league's concussion protocol. He remained in the game for 2 minutes, 43 seconds after the collision before he was summoned off the ice.

Predators coach Peter Laviolette said Friday it wasn't the team's decision.

"We didn’t pull him, so something was wrong," Laviolette said.

Rinne will be re-evaluated after the team returns to Nashville on Monday.

How it happened

Rinne and Fiala inadvertently collided, with Fiala running into Rinne's head, when the Flames' Sam Bennett tied the score 2 minutes, 20 seconds into the third. Fiala immediately motioned to the bench for a trainer after he and Rinne fell to the ice.

Rinne remained in the game and made a save after a brief on-ice meeting with the trainer before he was later removed.

Fiala was attempting to backcheck Bennett when he accidentally barreled into Rinne.

"(Bennett) made a move and I didn’t see Pekka and I couldn’t stop in time," Fiala said Saturday morning. "I tried to catch him instead of running into him."

Fiala didn't think much of the moment until after Rinne left the game.

"I thought he had a little pain maybe but I thought he was fine," Fiala said.

What happened next

Backup Juuse Saros came in cold and stopped all nine shots he faced, including one almost immediately, to help preserve the team's fourth straight victory Friday.

Afterward he seemed more focused on the well-being of his mentor, Rinne.

"Everything happened kind of quickly," Saros said. "I just hope 'Pekks' is OK."

Saros likely will be the team's starter until Rinne returns, which is fine by Laviolette and his players.

"We don’t ever wanna see that happen to 'Pekks,'" Laviolette said. "He's such a big part of our team.

"This is part of the game. It happens to all teams. It’s happening to us right now. Juuse has given us no reason to think he can't handle this."

Filip Forsberg echoed his coach's sentiments Saturday morning, and said losing the "best goalie in the league" will be made a bit easier by having Saros in net.

"You could call him the best backup goalie in the league or you could just call him one of the best goalies in the league," Forsberg said. "He could definitely be a starter on many other teams if he wasn’t behind the Vezina Trophy winner."

What of Saros?

Saros, 23, has been Rinne's understudy for a few years. He was 24-14 with a .923 save percentage and 2.41 goals-against average in 51 career regular-season games (45 starts) before Saturday.

"You hope the other guy is OK," Saros said. "At the same time you have to get ready."

Saros said that process won't be much different for him. He'll go about his business as usual until Rinne is ready to return.

"Just normally how I always prepare myself," he said. "There’s nothing different about that."

One big difference will be the spotlight shining on Saros, which Laviolette called a "great opportunity."

The new backup(s) plan

Svoboda, 23, will be up for just Saturday's game.

He has two professional games under his belt in North America and is 2-0 with a 1.50 goals-against average and a .946 save percentage. He was drafted by the Oilers in the seventh round in 2015.

He was called up because Grosenick was scheduled to start Sunday for the Admirals.

Grosenick, 29, played two NHL games with the Sharks in 2014-15, and was 1-1 with a .948 save percentage and 1.52 goals-against average. He is 3-0 with a .918 save percentage and 2.60 goals-against for the Admirals this season.

Reach Paul Skrbina at pskrbina@tennessean.com and follow him on Twitter @PaulSkrbina.

More: Predators healthy scratches itching to play, but understand their roles