E!, USA Network and Oxygen True Crime have revealed their programming slates for the 2024-25 season which include a docuseries that follows the daughter of Snoop Dogg and a true crime series about homicides in Philadelphia.

USA Network also confirmed new competition show from the producers of The Traitors, as revealed by Deadline last month.

At E!, the network will launch its untitled Cori Broadus and Snoop Dogg Project, a three-part docuseries that follows Snoop’s daughter Cori Broadus and her fiancé, Wayne Deuce. It’s produced by Death Row Pictures and 101 Studios.

E!’s returning slate includes Season 2 of House of Villains, E!’s most-watched freshman series since 2020; the entertainment news series E! News, hosted by Justin Sylvester and Keltie Knight; and Live from E! hosted by Laverne Cox.

Oxygen True Crime has seven new series and specials planned for the new season. Among them: Dateline: The Smoking Gun (w/t), in which murder investigations are dangerously close to going cold until law enforcement uncover clues that ultimately lead to justice; Philly Homicide (w/t), covering some of the Philadelphia’s most disturbing murders; A Plan to Kill (w/t), which examines the meticulous planning of unfathomable slayings; and The Girl on the Milk Carton (w/t), which explores the harrowing investigation of a young girl’s vanishing.

RELATED: Chrissy Teigen-Produced Safari Series & Manhattan Reality Show Lead Bravo Slate As ‘Watch What Happens Live With Andy Cohen’ Renewed Through End Of 2025 & ‘The Valley’ Returning For Season 2

Five additional series will return over the course of the year following the spring 2024 premieres of new series Deadly Waters with Captain Lee and Sins of the South. A fifth season of Accident, Suicide or Murder also premieres this spring.

Returning with all-new seasons in summer 2024 are Snapped, Snapped: Behind Bars, Killer Relationship with Faith Jenkins and Real Murders of Atlanta. Returning to the network in 2025 are Cold Justice, Prosecuting Evil with Kelly Siegler, New York Homicide and Fatal Family Feuds.

On USA Network will premiere The Anonymous, a competition series from Studio Lambert, the producers of The Traitors, this summer. The series is a social strategy game played in two worlds: the real world, where players interact face to face, and also the digital world, where players communicate behind a mask of anonymity known as Anonymous Mode. Here in individual private hideouts, each player is free to say whatever they want to advance their game. The question is: Can they stay anonymous or will the other players guess their identity, causing them to lose their power in the game?

Starting in September and through the end of 2024, USA will serve as the exclusive linear home of the WWE’s two tentpole franchises, WWE Monday Night RAW and WWE SmackDown, which returns to the network on Sept. 13 as part of a new multi-year partnership.

USA will also launch WWE Week on Sept. 9 by airing films from the Fast and the Furious franchise, Blockers, and the Peacock documentary Bray Wyatt: Becoming Immortal.