Contact USA Network: Find below customer service details of USA Network, including phone and email. Besides contact details, the page also offers a brief overview of the pay television network.

Head Office

USA Network

30 Rockefeller Plaza

21st Floor

New York, NY 10112

Customer Service

Phone: 212-664-4444

Email: [email protected]

Email: [email protected] (report closed captioning)

Email: [email protected] (for careers)

______

About USA Network

USA Network is a cable network programming service of NBC Universal Cable, a division of NBC Universal. Launched in 1977 as UA-Columbia/MSG, the channel’s movies and shows are viewed in more than 102 million homes across the US. The popular original series include Psych, Burn Notice, White Collar, Suits, Royal Pains, Graceland, In Plain Sight, Sirens, Fairly Legal, Airwolf, Weird Science, Playing House, and Pacific Blue. NBCUniversal owns and operates a number of news and entertainment television networks. Popular for its original programming, USA Network’s major competitors consist of Viacom, Discovery and FX Networks. Headquartered at Network City, the network’s own sister channels include Bravo, E!, NBC, OXygen ans Syfy.

Sign up for the newsletter to to receive updates on new releases and events. On the website’s homepage, you can see the trending and most popular titles. By clicking on the Schedule, you can see the titles along with time and synopsis. The entire ongoing shows and full episodes are listed on the website. Clicking on a title you can see the entire list of episodes that are part of it. Look for ratings code for age-appropriateness and type of content presented in the program. If you want to watch a series online, simply sign in with your TV provider. Current TV providers listed include Xfinity, DirecTV, Dish, Verizon, Spectrum, Cox, Mediacom and Optimum. Viewers can even watch live TV.

Besides shows and movies, viewers can enjoy preview clips, interviews and and behind-the-scenes videos. You can watch content on iOS, Android, Roku, Apple TV, and Xbox. You can watch original series and titles while on the go using the app. The app users as well can watch the latest episodes, live stream, filter shows by network and genre, resume watching favorite shows and save shows across all devices by creating an NBCUniversal profile.

Currently, USA NOW is only available to customers of participating US TV providers. Note that purchases of usage subscriptions on the website are nonrefundable. For more information or queries on subscription, schedule, technical assistance, career, or others, reach the USA Network support.