Reichskommissariat Zentralafrika is a colonial holding of the Greater Germanic Reich, administered by Reichskommissar Siegfried Müller.

History

The Congo Free State and Belgian exile

Initially, the territory of Zentralafrika was populated by a number of tribes, before being colonized by Belgium. In 1940, the Congo Free State would become the home of the Belgian Government-in-Exile until German forces arrived and subjugated African colonies granted to them in the peace following the Second World War, the Congo (renamed to Kongo) being one of the territories taken and reorganized into Reichskommissariat Zentralafrika.

Reichskommissariat Zentralafrika

During the subjugation of Africa and the Kongo Bush War, Oberleutnant Siegfried Müller served with distinction by hiring - and occasionally forcing - native Congolese tribesmen to infiltrate and help root out resistance groups, averting significant casualties from native guerillas. For this, he was appointed Reichskommissar of Zentralafrika.

Under Müller, Zentralafrika would quickly grow to be one of the most profitable aspects of the Reich. Open to foreign exploitation, many German companies would flock to the resource-rich Katanga region. At some time in the 50s prior to the German economic crash, the Congo river would be dammed, flooding the basin. Casualties from local natives from the flooding was severe; however, the resultant plantations surrounding the lake were also extremely profitable.

Apocryphically, Müller's wealth was so large that he would boast about how he didn't need men to put down rebellions-- he would simply pay off the rebels to join his army instead.

During the German Economic Crash, Zentralafrika's profits would drop somewhat; however, it as well as Reichskommissariat Ostafrika would be the only parts of the German economy to show profits during the depression.

Physical features

Zentralafrika is incredibly diverse, featuring beaches along its coast; dense tropical jungle throughout its core, and mountains to the southeast rich and plentiful in resources such as cobalt. Its most notable feature, however is a gigantic lake in the Northwestern part of the colony which has allowed for the establishment of large, fertile, and profitable plantations of various tropical foods.

Originally, the lake was originally a populated, low-lying area, but it was filled with water due to the Congo river being dammed in an attempt to create a shipping lane throughout the Sahara. The Germans constructed a city named Hitlerstadt as a model city in on one of the islands in the lake, a popular vacation destination for upper echelons of the Nazi party.

Government and native relations

Similarly to Reichskommissariat Südwestafrika, Zentralafrika is heavily reliant on African SS members to maintain order and prevent revolt. This is emblematic of Reichskommissar Müller's hands-off approach to governance, with power being handed to native chiefs and private corporations as Müller prefers to spend his time hunting Zentralafrika's numerous species of fauna rather than actually run the colony.

In-Game

In the aftermath of the German Civil War, Zentralafrika as well as the other two African Reichskommissariats will form the Afrika-Schild and declare war on the Union of South Africa. In the event of a victory in the conflict, Zentralafrika will be swiftly annexed by Ostafrika with Müller fleeing the continent. However, in the event of a total loss in the war, Zentralafrika will be replaced with an OFN Provisional Government.

Politics

National Spirits

Heart of Afrika

Resource Gain Efficiency: +20.00%

Construction Speed: +25.00%

Production Efficiency Cap: +15.00%

Production Efficiency Growth: +15.00%

Needed Consumer Goods: -5.00%

Controlling the great Congo Basin and the sprawling plantations surrounding it, and with extensive foreign investment, Zentralafrika controls the vast wealth of German Africa. German ships fill the various rivers and canals, taking these riches across the continent and to the heart of the Reich itself.

Hands Off Administration

Daily Political Power Gain: -0.10

Recruitable Population Factor: -5%

Stability: +20.00%

To call the leadership of Reichskommissar Müller light handed would be a great understatement. Being far more interested in going on safari and enjoying the pleasures of power, most plantations have been given over to private corporations, local chiefs and kings empowered, as well as extensive native recruitment into the SS and ample opportunity for slaves to earn their freedom.

Soldiers of Fortune

Division Organization: -10.0%

Division Recovery Rate: +15.0%

War Support: +10.00%

Hot Acclimatization Gain Factor: +20.0%

Unbeknownst to Germania, the Zentralafrikan Garrison is no mere garrison at all. Some of the finest mercenaries in the world, our soldiers fight in combat zones across the globe in the service of the highest bidder. OFN, Pakt, Triumvirate, Sphere, only wealth can secure our loyalty. Until someone else pays more, that is.

Lobster War

Daily Political Power Gain: +0.10 Needed Consumer Goods: -5.00%

Currently we are engaged in a conflict with the benighted degenerates of Brazil over our right to fish in their waters. While they incessantly insist on their "rights" under "international law", we, the Master Race in Afrika, laugh at their pretentions as our companies plunder their waters. This yields great financial and reputational benefits for us, as German officials and military men delight in eating our seafood. If, however, the Brazilians decide to get up and start insisting on these previous "rights" of theirs, we might have some trouble. That's because if we take a close look at treaty law, we really don't have much of a claim to fishing in Brazilian waters aside from the power of the Reich.

The Mercenary Army

Division Speed: +5.80%

Recruitable Population Factor: 1%

Supply Consumption: -5.8%

Reconnaissance: +9.6%

Division Attack: +9.6%

Division Defense: +3.2%