Beth Irene Donohoe Barrineau passed away Monday, January 15, 2018 at Brightmoor Nursing Center in Griffin, Georgia. A memorial service will be held at the Cairo First United Methodist Church on February 10, 2018. at 2:00 p.m. The Reverend Wayne McDonald will be officiating.

She was born in Washington, D.C. on August 20, 1927 to the late John Carroll Donohoe and Anna Irene Slavens Donohoe. She graduated from Calvin Coolidge High School in Washington, D.C. and was a legal secretary until she married. Beth married William Eugene Barrineau, Sr. on June 13, 1952. They were married for 42 years until his death on October 13, 1994. Due to his career in the Marine Corps they traveled throughout their marriage living in Kailua, Hawaii, Ft. Benning, Georgia and the Washington, D.C. area. While in Hawaii, Beth rekindled her love of art and had a very successful career painting landscapes and seascapes. She also loved music, especially the piano, and most enjoyed listening to her mother play. They retired to Cairo in 1974 where Beth was a homemaker until her children went to college. She then worked for Ithaca Industries in Cairo for several years rising to the position of Personnel Director. Beth was a long-time member of Cairo First United Methodist Church.

Beth is survived by: her three children and their spouses, Lindsey and Andy Jackson of Brooks, GA, Patty and John Singer of Old Town, ME, and Bill and Donna Barrineau of Lakewood Ranch, FL. She is also survived by her eight grandchildren: Stephen and Laura Jackson, Patrick and Amy Singer, Alex and his wife Libby, Jacob and Hannah Barrineau, and Kyle Thompson and his wife Nayla. She is survived by two great-grandchildren, Ethan and Haylie Thompson. She has one surviving sibling, Joseph S. Donohoe and his wife Lucy of Tucson, AZ.

In addition to her parents and husband, Beth was predeceased by three of her siblings, John C. Donohoe, Sharon L. Donohoe and Carolyn V. Daganhardt.

Memorials may be made in Mrs. Barrineau’s memory to: First United Methodist Church, 318 South Broad Street, Cairo, Georgia 39828.

The family will receive friends immediately following the memorial service at the church.