"Paris-Plage" redirects here. For the artificial beaches in Paris, see Paris-Plages.

For the treaty between France and the UK on immigration control on ferries, see Juxtaposed controls § Ferry.

Le Touquet-Paris-Plage (French pronunciation: [lə tukɛ paʁi plaʒ], Picard: Ech Toutchet-Paris-Plache), commonly referred to as Le Touquet ( ), is a commune near Étaples, in the Pas-de-Calais department, northern France. It has a permanent population of 4,213 (2021),[4] but it welcomes up to 250,000 people during the summer,[5] so the population at any given time during high season in summer swells to about 30,000.[6] Located on the Opal Coast of the English Channel at the estuary of the river Canche, the commune is one of the most renowned seaside resorts in France, with a wide range of sports and leisure activities.

The name 'Le Touquet' has been attested since the mid-18th century to designate the cape next to which the town was built. Alphonse Daloz[fr], a public notary in Paris, then bought the land on the cape, planted a forest and built a small palace there, and in 1882 founded the seaside resort as Paris-Plage. Ten years later, John Whitley, an English businessman, saw a lucrative opportunity to build a resort for (mostly) English and French elites. His first endeavour, 'Mayville', failed as the company behind it announced bankruptcy, but on the second try, Whitley bought the coveted land and launched a construction boom in the village. This rapid expansion contributed to the government's creation of a separate commune in 1912. Numerous prestigious hotels were built, and at its peak of prosperity in the Roaring Twenties, the resort boasted the biggest casino in France by revenue, the Royal Picardy, an ultra-luxury hotel with a sparkling water swimming pool, and hundreds of villas. The bustling town had good transport connections thanks to a tram line[fr] and a narrow-gauge train line to Étaples[fr], and, since 1936, a dedicated airport. Great Depression dealt some problems to the resort but it still remained popular with the British upper class. World War II, however, did not spare the settlement and brought destruction as the Germans deployed about 100,000 mines and the Allies bombarded the resort in 1944. After World War II, the upper class mostly fled to the French Riviera, and property was bought up by well-off locals.