Quality Meat Scotland (QMS) has today (21st October 2014) rewarded two brothers, who run a highly-respected French meat business, for their longstanding loyalty and commitment to Scotch Lamb PGI.

Xavier and Laurent Macquet run SA Macquet based in Fruges in the north of France where the company has a state-of-the-art plant. The Macquet brothers are continuing their family’s long heritage in the meat business where they have been trading for over a century.

During the past 20 years the company has firmly established its credentials as a leading lamb specialist in France.

Xavier Macquet said: “Macquet was founded by my family back in 1813. Since then, several generations have been involved in the business.

“In 1969 our father Jean-Marie created Créquy SA Macquet. At that time the first supermarkets were being established and we started to work closely with these early retailers to supply them with quality sheepmeat.”

These days Macquet, which has a turnover of €115 million, supplies its customers with more than 15,000 tonnes of lamb and employs more than 200 staff.

As well as being a huge supporter of Scotch Lamb, the company also supplies Scotch Beef PGI to retailers in France and to the hotel and restaurant trade. This year Macquet has also started to sell Scotch Lamb PGI to the food service sector in France.

The brothers received their award from Richard Lochhead, Cabinet Secretary for Rural Affairs, Food and the Environment. The presentation took place at the QMS stand at the SIAL Trade Fair, one of the largest food fairs in the world, where QMS has a significant presence with nine Scottish meat exporters, this week.

QMS Chairman, Jim McLaren, said: “Macquet are extremely valuable, staunch supporters of the Scotch brand and it is our pleasure to present them with an award as a gesture of our appreciation.

“The company, which works closely with our Export Development Manager based in France, David Chiffoleau, is very actively supporting Scotch Beef and Scotch Lamb in its marketplace.

“It is vital that we continue to build on our existing strong market presence in France and, of course, across Europe to ensure that retailers and consumers are aware of the quality and provenance which the Scotch Beef and Scotch Lamb labels guarantee.”

Mr McLaren added: “The Scots were pioneers of quality assurance and next year we will celebrate the 25th anniversary of our quality assurance schemes.

“These schemes underpin our brands and ensure the high standards of production, traceability and welfare that our customers around the globe expect.”