Since April 2021, Christophe Maquet has been Senior Executive Vice President for Veolia's Asia region and a member of the Executive Committee of the world's leading environmental services group for ecological transformation. In this role, he is at the head of 18,400 employees in 8 countries providing the resources necessary for people’s well-being, the attractiveness of territories and the performance of businesses.

From 2013 to 2019, he successively held the position of Veolia’s Director of Cooling Networks and Industrial Utilities for Asia and the Middle East, then that of Energy Business Line Director for Japan, South Korea, Singapore and Hong Kong, before being appointed Veolia Industrial Customer Director in Japan in 2017.

In 2019 and before returning to Asia, Christophe Maquet was the Executive Vice President for Veolia's Africa and Middle East region, leading 8,500 employees in some 15 countries.

Christophe Maquet joined Veolia in 2004 as financial controller of the Group's Energy activities.

Born in 1978, he graduated from the Ecole Polytechnique and the Ecole des Ponts et Chaussées.

After a few years in a Consulting Firm that brought him to different continents, Laurent Pelletier joined Veolia twenty years ago and has not quit Asia ever since.

He started in Shanghai in the water business, taking different positions in Pudong Veolia Water, acting at the end as a COO.

In 2010, Laurent moved to Hong Kong to take the position of CTO for Asia and support our operations and fast growth in the region.

In 2019, he took over the responsibility of Veolia Hong Kong and diversified Veolia’s portfolio of activities there, not only focusing on waste management but also energy optimization for buildings. In 2024, Macau was added to its responsibilities.

Paul Chong is the co-founder of the Southa Group of Companies back in 1979 in Hong Kong.

Under his leadership, Southa has grown into a key E&M contractor with expertise in large scale design-and-build MEP projects, industrial refrigeration, cremation and fire training facilities.

Paul joined the Veolia family when Southa established a joint venture with Veolia in 2019.

He holds a degree in mechanical engineering and is a veteran in the local electrical and mechanical industry. He has been very active in public service and sits/sat in various government and statutory forums including Vocational Training Council, Construction Industry Council, Employees' Retraining Board, BEAM Society, Green Building Council, Construction Workers Registration Board, Zero Carbon Building, Open University of Hong Kong, E&M Services Training Board, Energy Advisory Board. He is also a Life President of the Hong Kong Federation of E&M Contractors. He has been awarded by the Hong Kong Government with a Medal of Honour (MH) and Bronze Bauhinia Star (BBS) for his contribution.

Julien Watel joined Veolia in 2016 as district cooling and HVAC Expert at the Technical & Performance Department to support Business Units worldwide on Design & Construction, Commissioning, Operation & Maintenance and to promote and implement new solutions in Energy Efficiency services.

As a seasoned MEP construction and HVAC systems Expert with over 14 years of experience, he became Executive Director of Southa Holdings in 2019, the new joint venture between Southa and Veolia to promote in Hong Kong and Macau new energy services for buildings.

Prior to joining Veolia, Julien accumulated extensive experience in the management of HVAC execution for hospitals and pneumatic transportation systems in New Caledonia.

Julien holds a Master’s Degree of Engineering in Mechanical, Electrical and Thermal Industrial systems at Polytech MARSEILLE (France).

Vincent Deleu joined Veolia in 1995 as a Project Engineer for Waste Disposal Activities.

In his early career, his area of expertise in Waste Disposal Activities was predominantly in France, where he was the Operation Manager of a Waste-to-energy facility in Orléans (France) from 1999-2001, Project Director in 2001-2003 and Head of Projects from 2004-2010 for Waste disposal activities, Veolia France.

With his extensive expertise, he then moved to Veolia Hong Kong in 2010 and has been in charge of T· Park, Hong Kong's Sludge Treatment Facility as the General Manager since then. From 2022, Vincent is also responsible for the Waste Treatment & Recovery Business Line.

Dr. Kelvin Cheng has over 25 years of waste management and resource recovery experience within the local Hong Kong context. As a graduate chartered chemist of MRSC, Kelvin has massive analytical monitoring knowledge to serve the stringent environmental contractual requirements of the HKSAR.

He has accumulated extensive operation and management expertise demonstrating a through chain of portfolio from front line street cleaning, municipal solid waste collection, modernized transfer operations to landfill disposal. Kelvin has acquired significant knowledge on resource recovery, material recycling and bio-waste composting by optimizing the waste handling facility from an operational perspective. He is also promoting smart collections with AI & IoT applications toward the development of the Smart City.

Dr. Kelvin Cheng is an active member of MCIWEM, C.WEM, C. Environmentalist and the Vice President of the ECMA.

Norman Cheng（BASc, MASc, MBA, FHKIE, RPE, FCIWEM, C.WEM, CEng, CEnv, MHKIQEP） started his career as a graduate engineer in Veolia Water, and he is currently the Business Development Director of Veolia Hong Kong, responsible for strategic development of the company in the region, including but not limited to water, solid waste, and energy management activities. He has been in the field of environmental engineering for more than 20 years, specializing in the design, build, and operation of water, sewage, sludge, waste, and energy management facilities.

Norman is committed to serving the society, and is an active member in many professional institutions, namely the Hong Kong Institution of Engineers (HKIE), the Chartered Institution of Water and Environmental Management (CIWEM) Hong Kong Branch, and Hong Kong Waste Management Association (HKWMA).

Guillaume is the CFO of Veolia Hong Kong and Macau.

In 2022, he joined Veolia headquarters in Paris as Director of the financial long-term plan of the Group.

Previously, he was Head of FP&A for a French large-cap listed company, for three years. He started his career as a strategy and corporate finance consultant, in Paris.

He graduated from the Ecole Polytechnique and the Ecole des Ponts et Chaussées, and holds a Master's Degree from the Paris School of Economics.

Alex Ho joined Veolia in 2020. He became the CIO of Veolia Hong Kong and Macau in 2024 responsible for IT, Digital Applications and Cybersecurity.

He developed the digital strategy and implemented digital applications utilising new technologies such as BIM, Machine Learning, Image Recognition, and IoT integrations. He has been leading the cloud migration and cybersecurity projects contributing to the improved operations.

Alex is committed to the ever evolving digital technologies. He has more than 25 years in senior IT management positions in different industries such as Telecommunications, IT consulting, Property, Retail, Industrial Machinery and Infrastructures. Alex holds a Bachelor Degree in IT and a Master Degree in Business Administration.

Elizabeth Yeung joined Veolia in 2019. Currently serving as Human Resources Director of Veolia Hong Kong and Macau, she is responsible for all aspects within Human Resources of Hong Kong and Macau and is the driving force behind creation and implementation of human resource plans aligned with business strategy.

Elizabeth is a seasoned HR Professional with over 18 years of HR experience in different aspects within Human Resources across various business units from Technical & Operations, Quality Assurance, Supply Chain, Commercial Supporting functions to Centre of Excellence of Group HR in renowned multinational companies such as Nestlé S.A. and A.P. Moller - Maersk Group. She has in-depth experience in leading Organizational Design & Development, Performance & Talent Management, Education & Training as well as Industrial & Employee Relations.

Elizabeth holds a Master Degree in Business Administration and Human Resources as well as a Certification of Train-the-Trainer.

Julien Lannelongue is a procurement professional with numerous experiences in the Veolia procurement organisation.

He joined Veolia in 2009 as a Purchasing Coordinator for Water activities in Asia-Pacific. In 2011, he moved to Beijing as a Strategic Buyer to support the enhancement of procurement maturity in the zone.

He moved in 2014 to Veolia headquarters in Paris, managing several global procurement categories for the Group.

He is currently the Procurement Director of Veolia Hong Kong and Macau responsible for steering all aspects of procurement activities of the company in Hong Kong and Macau.