Obituary of Nicholas Brown

Nicholas M. Brown Jr. died on Thursday, October 16th, after quietly braving the challenge of Renal Cell Cancer for 2 years. Born December 21, 1954 in Wilmington, Delaware, he was the son of the late Nicholas and Helen Cerkownuk Brown. Nick was the former CEO of XL Capital, and NacRe Corp. Before that he was COO of St. Paul and Vice-president of Select Accounts at Aetna, where he began a career in the Insurance field in which he was a respected whiz and much-loved mentor to many. Nick was married for 31 years to his wife Kathy, who he met while an undergraduate at the University of Delaware. He became an adored member of the large Marasco clan, who reveled in his witty running-commentary. Nick had four kids: Christina, Matthew, Alexander and Jason--all of whom were by his side in his last days. He expressed many times his appreciation for the kindness and grace with which his kids saw him through the rough days of his illness. Great men give great gifts. Nick was a great man, and his gifts were many. Few who knew him are without a story of some brilliantly–timed bit of Nick Brown generosity. He gave the gift of his wisdom and his talent for fun to his nieces and nephews whose lives he influenced and whose efforts he championed. He gave the gift of his time, his wisdom and his generosity to many charitable organizations, in particular, his spear-heading of the special work of VFI, the Vocational Foundation Inc a non-profit foundation that has done so much to help NYC’s youth further their education. Nick cared deeply for education. He graduated Summa Cum Laude from the University of Delaware and held a Master’s Degree in Economics from Trinity College. But Nick was also an unofficial teacher to many: to colleagues in business, who so admired his insight and ethics; and to family and friends who always sought his wise counsel. “What does Nick think about it?” was a question many asked before making a big decision. Nick came from Delaware and never forgot his roots. He adored his sisters Jodi and Kim. And he maintained life-long friendship’s with many of his Delaware buddies. No fancy restaurant he ever ate in could trump his Mom Helen’s stuffed cabbage. Helen predeceased him, as did his Dad, Nick Brown, Sr. from whom he got his love of horses--a love that culminated in his starting Smith Ridge Stables, his pride and joy. The family will receive friends at the Hoyt Funeral Home, 199 Main Street, New Canaan, Sunday, October 19th, from 2-6 PM. A mass of Christian burial will be held on Monday, October 20th at St. Matthew Church, 216 Scribner Avenue, Norwalk at 10 AM. Burial will follow at Lakeview Cemetery, New Canaan. When a man of Nick’s accomplishment and talent dies at 53, it is a tragedy, without a doubt. But those who knew him feel so lucky to have had him in their lives and take comfort in the example of this great man. They trust that Nick will be rooting for them from afar and waiting for them in the winner’s circle.