FOLLOWING STELLAR displays in the under-19 and under-12 silver categories, at the recent Target USA Cup in the United States, Charlton’s Academy of Portmore is looking forward to making the most of invitations they received from a couple of Brazilian clubs.

Charlton’s Academy lost 6-2 to EARJ Panthers in the quarterfinal of the under-12 division, while the under-19s went all the way to the final, where they were defeated by illustrious Brazilian club, Flamengo.

However, Flamengo and EARJ Panthers, another Brazilian club, were so impressed with the quality and professionalism of the Jamaicans that they reached out and offered them invitations.

“In the quarterfinals for the under-12s we lost to a Brazilian team, who invited to host us after they were surprised to see how well we did.

“They learned that we only trained for one day, and they ask how our players played so professionally.

“So they were really impressed with the quality of football even though we lost 6-2,” said Shaun Charlton, founder of the Academy.

“The club that defeated us in under-19s was Flamengo FC, a big Brazilian club. They also have a feeder programme in Winona, Minnesota. They defeated us 4-3 in the final but they were really impressed with our display.

“We are actually in conversation with the president and club manager (Flamengo) for an invitation. We will continue to stay in dialogue for the invitation to Brazil, and we are also looking to go into tournaments in Canada and we are having that conversation.”

Charlton noted that there were also other opportunities coming out of the event for his players.

“Scouts were there and there were college coaches who were actually there at the final. We are actually awaiting word from the scouts and moving forward. I know we really getting some scholarship offers.”

In the under-19 division, Charlton’s Academy won two, drew two and lost their only game in the final. With the understanding that it was the first time the academy was travelling and participating in an international competition, Charlton was pleased to see his team come home with a silver medal.

“It was a historic event for us as it was our first year. We played in a highly competitive under-19 tournament. These teams are professional teams from Norway, Ecuador, Brazil, the USA, Canada, Iceland.

“We were placed in the silver category because of that. We went with 33 players and 12 staff members. The chaperones came from Canada and one of our coaches, a female coach, came from the USA, and to come back with a trophy representing Jamaica, is a great feeling,” he said.

He added that the players, who were commended by the tournament organisers for their discipline and professionalism, gained a lot of experience from the tournament.

“It was an eye-opener for the players. They were pleased to see the high-level of football out here internationally, and they applied themselves very well.

“That’s why they were surprised we were not a professional team and asked why we (players) were not in some of the national setup.

“I must also give credit to the St Catherine FA, who gave us their support in terms of getting us all the necessary documentation. Also to Precise Service Foundation out of Canada, the gear sponsor, and SoccerXpress who made our gear.”