BILLY Wingrove is best known as one of the Sidemen and half of freestyle footballing sensation F2Freestylers.

He's part of the coaching line-up for Soccer Aid 2024 — here's everything you need to know.

Who is Billy Wingrove?

Billy Wingrove was born on December 17, 1982, in London.

The Londoner is a life-long Tottenham fan — his father Alan even played for Spurs.

During his football career, Billy played for the likes of Enfield, Ware and Broxbourne Borough in the non-league system. But is best known for dazzling spectators with his fantastic freestyle flair.

Along with KSI, Miniminter, Zerkaa, Behzinga, TBJZL, Vikkstar123 and WS2, he is part of the British YouTube group Sidemen. They produce videos containing sketches, challenges and computer game commentaries.

The Sidemen channel boasts a whopping 21.2million subscribers.

Billy is married to his wife Katie, who is active on Instagram, often sharing pictures of her kids, husband and glammed-up nights out with her 37,000 followers.

They have two daughters and a son together, named Amelia Iris, Dustie and Roman.

Billy and Katie also run The Wingrove Family YouTube channel, which has 2.6million subscribers.

The channel says: "Please join our fam for hilarious challenges, fun football content and to follow us on this incredible journey by smashing that subscribe button and notification bell!"

Billy comes from a footballing family.

His dad, Alan Wingrove, was a professional footballer who played for clubs including north London rivals Spurs and Arsenal.

Billy's cousin Greg Lincoln was also part of the first team squad at the Gunners, but he never actually played for the club.

Is Billy Wingrove a famous freestyle footballer?

Along with friend and partner Jeremy Lynch, Wingrove runs the YouTube channel for F2Freestylers.

They have over 14m subscribers and often film with world stars including Neymar, Eden Hazard, Luis Suarez, Lionel Messi and even the NFL's Odell Beckham Jr.

They give tutorials and challenges on a wide range of skills, also recreating famous goals.

Alongside their channel, they have also performed their incredible football freestyle skills at stadiums around the world.

F2Freestylers often appear in adverts for some of the biggest global companies, including Coca-Cola, O2, Barclaycard and Disney.

What will Billy Wingrove's role at Soccer Aid 2024 involve?

Soccer Aid for Unicef is a charity football match that sees celebrities and former footballers take to the pitch in an 11-a-side game between England and the Soccer Aid World XI FC.

In 2024, Billy will act as the soccer and skills coach for both the England and World XI.

His duties will include helping the celebrity players develop the skills they need to play in their respective positions. Plus he may even teach the pros some of his freestyle flourishes to dazzle the crowd.

How to watch Soccer Aid 2024

Soccer Aid takes place on Sunday, June 9, 2024.

Kick-off is at 7.30pm.

The match is taking place in London at Chelsea's home, Stamford Bridge — the first time it has been held in SW6 since 2019, when the World XI won 3-1 on penalties after a 2-2 draw, sparking a five-game winning run for the visiting stars.

Soccer Aid will once again be shown free, live on ITV1 (England and Wales) and STV (Scotland).

It can also be streamed for free online with ITVX.

Unicef ambassador Dermot O'Leary and England and Arsenal legend Alex Scott will present the programme, with Sam Matterface on lead commentary and comedian Iain Sterling on co-comms.

If you would like to make a donation by text, you can donate £10, £20, £30 or £40 by texting TEN, TWENTY, THIRTY OR FORTY to 70818.

Texts cost the chosen donation amount, plus one standard rate message.

If you want to donate £5, you can do so online at the Soccer Aid and Unicef websites, or by phoning 0330 123 4442 (standard geographical charges apply from landlines and mobiles, connection charges may also apply).

You must be 16 or over to donate.

Donations open on Tuesday, May 14, 2024, at midday.

All donation routes close on Thursday, July 11, 2024, at midday.