Skoggy was founded in 2020 by a close-knit family of five, utterly passionate about the Earth’s creatures. From raising our rescue dogs to providing sanctuary for dozens of injured critters, such as raccoons, squirrels, and chinchillas, we’ve been involved with helping Mother Nature’s most in need for over 20 years.

We started our company out of the love we shared for animals and wanted to create not only the softest and most comfortable plushies but also the most personable. We design all of our products to join families and provide real companionship.

Our plush products are named after the word "Skog" which means "Forest" in Swedish. This is where the very first Skoggy Bears were found, deep in the Swedish woodlands. Our bears carry this name throughout each generation of new colorations and new animal designs to serve as a reminder of where we began.

The word has evolved now to mean so much more, such as friendship, family, and fuzzy! We like to use the adjective "Skoggy" to describe all which embody these traits.

Can you think of something Skoggy?

Sewn across the tags of every one of our plushies is what some might call a slogan, but what we like to call a promise:

"Your New Best Friend"

We are resolute in our mission to provide all of our customers everlasting companionship necessary in each of our lives, whether that's in a studying partner, a shopping buddy, a family member to fill an extra seat at the dinner table, or someone to sit on the sofa and watch TV with.

After launching our first product, the classic brown Skoggy Bear depicted in our logo, we expanded our line of products into a variety of colors sizes to fit any home and preference. It didn’t take long for our fans to request that we apply our unique Skoggy design to other animals as well.

We are on a mission to expand our line of products so that all of Mother Nature's creatures can be enjoyed as Skoggies. Our design team works tirelessly to ensure that our customers' are updated with new plushies available to them throughout each year.