In the United Kingdom, there is currently no specific offense of "domestic violence" or "domestic abuse." However, UK law recognizes a broad range of behaviors and actions that are considered to be acts of domestic violence or domestic abuse. The relevant legislation on domestic violence/abuse in the United Kingdom is as follows:

England and Wales

Domestic abuse

Preventing and Combating Violence Against Women and Domestic Violence (Ratification of Convention) Act 2017

Legislation that requires the government to lay a report before each House of Parliament setting out the steps required to be taken to enable the United Kingdom to ratify the Istanbul Convention and the timescale within which the government would expect the United Kingdom to be able to ratify the Convention.

Family Law Act 1996 (as amended by the Domestic Violence, Crime and Victims Act2004)

Legislation that enables victims of domestic abuse to apply to the family courts for civil orders (i.e., non-molestation and occupation orders).

Section 76, Serious Crime Act 2015

Legislation that criminalizes coercive and controlling behavior by a family member.

Protection from Harassment Act 1997

Legislation that criminalizes stalking and harassment.

Sexual Offences Act 2003

Legislation that criminalizes sexual offenses, including marital rape.

Domestic Violence, Crime and Victims Act 2004

Legislation that amends the Family Law Act 1996, the Protection from Harassment Act 1997, the Protection from Harassment (Northern Ireland) Order 1997 and the Criminal Justice Act 2003 to make provision in respect of various offenses relating to domestic violence including the offense of causing or allowing the death a child or vulnerable adult.

Domestic Violence, Crime and Victims (Amendment) Act 2012

Legislation that amends the Domestic Violence, Crime and Victims Act 2004 to cover cases of causing or allowing a child or vulnerable adult to suffer serious physical harm.

Children and Young Persons Act 1933 as amended on 3 May 2015, by Part 5 Section 66 of the Serious Crime Act 2015

Legislation that criminalizes neglect of and cruelty toward children.

Anti-social Behaviour, Crime and Policing Act 2004

Legislation that criminalizes a marriage that is conducted without the true consent of one or both parties either as a result of violence, threats, or coercion.

Female Genital Mutilation Act 2003

Legislation that makes it a criminal offense to "excise, infibulate or otherwise mutilate" the whole of any part of a girl's labia majora, labia minora or clitoris.

Other related legislation

s.18, 20 and 47 Offences against the Persons Act 1861

Legislation that criminalizes physical violence against another person, with or without violence (including but not limited to punching, slapping, pushing, kicking, head-butting and hair pulling). The law also covers threats to kill, attempts to choke and false imprisonment.

s.39 Criminal Justice Act 1988

Legislation that criminalizes common assault.

Malicious Communications Act 1988 (as amended by the Criminal Justice and Courts Act 2015)

Legislation that criminalizes the posting of intimate images, messages or defamatory/insulting materials ("revenge porn").

Criminal Justice and Courts Act 2015

Legislation that amends the Malicious Communications Act to make provision in respect of the offense of disclosing private sexual photographs or films with intent to cause distress.

s.113 Civil Partnership Act 2004

Legislation that enables victims of domestic abuse in the context of civil partnerships, to apply to the family courts for civil orders.

Scotland

Domestic Abuse (Scotland) Act 2018

Legislation that makes all domestic abuse toward a partner, whether psychological or physical, a criminal offense.

Criminal Justice and Licensing (Scotland) Act 2010

Legislation that criminalizes stalking.

Abusive Behaviour and Sexual Harm (Scotland) Act 2016

Legislation that criminalizes the disclosure of intimate images of another person without their consent.

Matrimonial Homes (Family Protection) (Scotland) Act 1981

Legislation that enables victims of domestic abuse in the context of married couples and co-habitees, to apply to the family courts for civil orders (e.g., matrimonial interdict, exclusion order, etc.).

Domestic Abuse (Scotland) Act 2011

Legislation that introduced an additional layer of protection for victims of domestic abuse, namely a domestic abuse interdict (order). Breaching a domestic abuse interdict carries higher penalties and may act as a more significant deterrent.

Northern Ireland

Domestic Violence, Crime and Victims Act 2004

English legislation that amends the Family Law Act 1996, the Protection from Harassment Act 1997, the Protection from Harassment (Northern Ireland) Order 1997 and the Criminal Justice Act 2003 to make provision in respect of various offenses relating to domestic violence including the offense of causing or allowing the death a child or vulnerable adult.

The Family Homes and Domestic Violence (N.I.) Order 1998

Legislation that allows victims of domestic violence to apply for protective civil orders (non-molestation orders and occupation orders).

The Protection from Harassment (NI) Order 1997

Legislation that prohibits the act of harassment.

Sexual Offences (Northern Ireland) Order 2008

Legislation that criminalizes sexual assault and rape.

R v R [1992] 1 AC 599

Determined under English law that it was possible for a man to rape his wife.

R v Brown [1993] UKHL 19, [1994] 1 AC 212

Determined that a person cannot "consent" to having anything more than "transient or trifling" injuries inflicted on them. In theory, this case should mean that the "rough sex" defense should not be possible for defendants in the UK, but this defense has been evoked by defendants in the UK in circumstances where a woman has been killed. The use of this defense has resulted in lesser charges of manslaughter — a lighter sentence than murder — being imposed, or the woman's death not being investigated as a crime.[1]It is anticipated that the use of this defense will be banned by the passing into law of the Domestic Abuse Bill ("Bill"), which at the time of writing is being considered by the UK Parliament.[2]

R. v Uddin (Tohel) [2017] EWCA Crim 1072

Determined that the words "or otherwise" in the definition of a "vulnerable adult" in Section 5(6) of the Domestic Violence, Crime and Victims Act 2004 (describing the main offense under the Act), envisaged a third category of potentially vulnerable adults who were not suffering from an illness, disability or old age, i.e., "battered wives."

R v Allen [2017][3]

Defendant was imprisoned after admitting manslaughter, coercive behavior and stalking on the basis that his controlling and abusive behavior had led to his ex-partner's suicide.

R v Ward [2018] EWCA Crim 1464

The court identified aggravating factors in relation to false imprisonment and Section 18 of the Offences against the Persons Act 1861 (grievous bodily harm) including: gratuitous degradation of the victim; abuse of power over the victim in his own home; previous violence or threats toward the victim in the context of a series of offenses; and threats made to stop the victim reporting the offending.

R v Broadhurst [2019] EWCA Crim 2026

The defendant in this case was cleared of murder, having admitted to manslaughter of his partner after leaving his injured and bleeding partner to die after claiming she was injured during "rough sex." This case has been considered the catalyst for the introduction of a clause in the Bill that bans, in most circumstances, the use of the "rough sex defense," which — as noted above — has been sought to be used as a defense for serious harm.

R v Cooksey [2019] EWCA Crim 1410

The defendant was sentenced to six years' imprisonment for, amongst other offenses for which he received concurrent sentences, false imprisonment of his girlfriend, which occurred when the defendant attacked his girlfriend, punching her repeatedly in the ribs and face, and refused to allow her to go to work or leave their apartment without him for the following week. The defendant applied for leave to appeal against his sentence and in refusing the application, the court of appeal noted that, "This court treats more seriously incidents of domestic violence than used to be the case,particularly where it is coupled, as here, with coercive and controlling behavior in a domestic setting."

R v Challen [2019] EWCA Crim 916

The court of appeal quashed the defendant's conviction for murder (a wife who killed her husband by striking him multiple times with a hammer). In reaching this decision, the court decided that there was evidence of an abusive relationship and that coercive control was capable of being relevant to the defenses of provocation and of diminished responsibility.