Frank Kozik is one of the most famous modern rock posters artists, and he is widely credited for helping revive the genre.

His very colourful posters take inspiration from old Xeroxed posters as well as from more classical techniques, his nods to Warhol are also e noticeable feature.

A real music passionate, he started the cult label Man’s Ruin Records, with its “no written contract” policy, which hosted many of Josh Homme’s first records (Kyuss,Qotsa,Desert Sessions).

Finally his most well-known illustrations may be those that ended up as the artwork for multi-platinum punk-rockers the Offspring on their album Americana.

Here are a few samples of his work.

From the start, rock music has been paired with a strong visual identity defined by the look of the artists, their live shows and the artwork of their records of course but also by the posters created for their live shows. Originally these posters were a way to promote concerts with original illustrations and they would be displayed in the street or at concert venues, nowadays they are more and more limited edition posters on high-quality papers who are only available after the show and have no real impact on promotion (except on the internet maybe).

Technically speaking many evolutions have occured, silkscreen posters were common in the 50’s but vanished in the 70’s replaced by the xeroxed-DIY punk flyers before making a comeback in the late 80’s and becoming more and more prominent in the recent years. From the nineties on, all types of media and printing techniques shared the scene showing a certain maturity both in the scene and in the craftsmanship of rock poster artists.

This maturity has led bands to really collaborate with artists to create posters that convey the public image they want to show. Queens of the Stone Age is a good example of this : their first records were released on a label called Man’s Ruin Records owned by one of the most sought after poster artists of the time, Frank Kozik and this situation surely helped Josh Homme realise how images could help his band forge a strong visual identity. Afterwards Queens of the Stone Age, just as Pearl Jam, were a strong support for poster artists all around the globe gaining in return a real iconography.

Following these examples, many bands try and have limited edition posters for their shows and even the dance-pop bands pay to have their own posters (see Emek’s recent poster for LMFAO) showing that the poster culture has spread in the mainstream.

Notes :

As a single post to present interesting artists and the various techniques used for those litographs would have been too short, I’ll try and publish rock posters from around the world these next few weeks both from artists I like or from artists you have submitted me. I think I’ll concentrate on the modern aspect of it but I’m open to suggestions.

If you are really interested I can only advise you to read those two books : The Art Of Classic Rock and The Art Of Modern Rock.