ATLANTA--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Leading Supply Chain and Omnichannel Commerce Solutions provider Manhattan Associates Inc. (NASDAQ: MANH) today reported revenue of $254.6 million for the first quarter ended March 31, 2024. GAAP diluted earnings per share for Q1 2024 was $0.86 compared to $0.62 in Q1 2023. Non-GAAP adjusted diluted earnings per share for Q1 2024 was $1.03 compared to $0.80 in Q1 2023.

“We are very pleased with our solid start to 2024 and better than expected first quarter results. Manhattan’s fundamentals are strong, as demand continues to drive favorable pipeline and revenue momentum,” said Manhattan Associates president and CEO Eddie Capel.

“While macro volatility persists, we are optimistic about our growing market opportunity. Our global teams are executing very well for our customers and are focused on delivering leading innovation across supply chain execution, Omni-channel solutions, and retail point of sale markets,” Mr. Capel concluded.

FIRST QUARTER 2024 FINANCIAL SUMMARY:

Consolidated total revenue for the three months ended March 31, 2024, was $254.6 million, compared to $221.0 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023.

Cloud subscription revenue was $78.0 million for the three months ended March 31, 2024, compared to $57.2 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023.

License revenue was $2.8 million for the three months ended March 31, 2024, compared to $5.4 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023.

Services revenue was $132.2 million for the three months ended March 31, 2024, compared to $116.2 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023.

GAAP diluted earnings per share for the three months ended March 31, 2024, was $0.86, compared to $0.62 for the three months ended March 31, 2023.

Adjusted diluted earnings per share, a non-GAAP measure, was $1.03 for the three months ended March 31, 2024, compared to $0.80 for the three months ended March 31, 2023.

GAAP operating income was $57.6 million for the three months ended March 31, 2024, compared to $47.1 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023.

Adjusted operating income, a non-GAAP measure, was $79.7 million for the three months ended March 31, 2024, compared to $63.7 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023.

Cash flow from operations was $54.7 million for the three months ended March 31, 2024, compared to $58.7 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023. Days Sales Outstanding was 74 days at March 31, 2024, compared to 70 days at December 2023.

Cash totaled $207.5 million at March 31, 2024, compared to $270.7 million at December 31, 2023.

During the three months ended March 31, 2024, the Company repurchased 293,592 shares of Manhattan Associates common stock under the share repurchase program authorized by our Board of Directors, for a total investment of $73.4 million. In April 2024, our Board of Directors approved replenishing the Company’s remaining share repurchase authority to an aggregate of $75.0 million of our common stock.

2024 GUIDANCE

Manhattan Associates provides the following revenue, operating margin and diluted earnings per share guidance for the full year 2024:

Manhattan Associates currently intends to publish in each quarterly earnings release certain expectations with respect to future financial performance. Those statements, including the guidance provided above, are forward looking. Actual results may differ materially. See our cautionary note regarding “forward-looking statements” below.

Manhattan Associates will make this earnings release and published expectations available on the investor relations section of the Manhattan Associates website at ir.manh.com. Following publication of this earnings release, any expectations with respect to future financial performance contained in this release, including the guidance, should be considered historical only, and Manhattan Associates disclaims any obligation to update them.

CONFERENCE CALL

Manhattan Associates’ conference call regarding its first quarter financial results will be held today, April 23, 2024, at 4:30 p.m. Eastern Time. The Company will also discuss its business and expectations for the year and next quarter in additional detail during the call. We invite investors to a live webcast of the conference call through the Investor Relations section of the Manhattan Associates website at ir.manh.com. To listen to the live webcast, please go to the website at least 15 minutes before the call to download and install any necessary audio software. The Internet webcast will be available until Manhattan Associates’ second quarter 2024 earnings release.

GAAP VERSUS NON-GAAP PRESENTATION

Manhattan Associates provides adjusted operating income and margin, adjusted income tax provision, adjusted net income, and adjusted diluted earnings per share in this press release as additional information regarding the Company’s historical and projected operating results. These measures are not in accordance with, or alternatives to, GAAP, and may be different from similarly titled non-GAAP measures used by other companies. The Company believes the presentation of these non-GAAP financial measures facilitates investors’ ability to understand and compare the Company’s results and guidance, because the measures provide supplemental information in evaluating the operating results of its business, as distinct from results that include items not indicative of ongoing operating results, and because the Company believes its peers typically publish similar non-GAAP measures. This release should be read in conjunction with the Company’s Form 8-K earnings release filing for the three months ended March 31, 2024.

Non-GAAP adjusted operating income and margin, adjusted income tax provision, adjusted net income and adjusted diluted earnings per share exclude the impact of equity-based compensation – net of income tax effects. They also exclude the tax benefits or deficiencies of vested stock awards caused by differences in the amount deductible for tax purposes from the compensation expense recorded for financial reporting purposes. We include reconciliations of the Company’s GAAP financial measures to non-GAAP adjustments in the supplemental information attached to this release.

ABOUT MANHATTAN ASSOCIATES

Manhattan Associates is a global technology leader in supply chain and omnichannel commerce. We unite information across the enterprise, converging front-end sales with back-end supply chain execution. Our software, platform technology and unmatched experience help drive both top-line growth and bottom-line profitability for our customers.

Manhattan Associates designs, builds and delivers leading edge cloud solutions so that across the store, through your network or from your fulfillment center, you are ready to reap the rewards of the omnichannel marketplace. For more information, please visit www.manh.com.

This press release contains “forward-looking statements” relating to Manhattan Associates, Inc. Forward-looking statements in this press release include, without limitation, the information set forth under “2024 Guidance” and statements identified by words such as “may,” “expect,” “forecast,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “plan,” “believe,” “could,” “seek,” “project,” “estimate” and similar expressions. Prospective investors are cautioned that any of those forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance and involve risks and uncertainties, and that actual results may differ materially from those contemplated by those forward-looking statements. Among the important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those indicated by those forward-looking statements are: economic conditions, including inflation; disruption and transformation in the retail sector and our vertical markets; delays in product development; competitive and pricing pressures; software errors and information technology failures, disruption and security breaches; risks related to our products’ technology and customer implementations; global instability, including the wars in Ukraine and the Middle East; and the other risk factors set forth in Item 1A of the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2023, and in Item 1A of Part II in subsequent Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q. Manhattan Associates undertakes no obligation to update or revise forward-looking statements to reflect changed assumptions, the occurrence of unanticipated events or changes in future operating results.

###

MANHATTAN ASSOCIATES, INC.

SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION

1. GAAP and adjusted earnings per share by quarter are as follows:

2. Revenues and operating income by reportable segment are as follows (in thousands):

3. Impact of Currency Fluctuation

The following table reflects the increases (decreases) in the results of operations for each period attributable to the change in foreign currency exchange rates from the prior period as well as foreign currency gains (losses) included in other income, net for each period (in thousands):

Manhattan Associates has a large research and development center in Bangalore, India. The following table reflects the increases (decreases) in the financial results for each period attributable to changes in the Indian Rupee exchange rate (in thousands):

4. Other income includes the following components (in thousands):

5. Capital expenditures are as follows (in thousands):

6. Stock Repurchase Activity (in thousands):

7. Remaining Performance Obligations

We disclose revenue we expect to recognize from our remaining performance obligations ("RPO"). Over 98% of our RPO represent cloud native subscriptions with a non-cancelable term greater than one year (including cloud-deferred revenue as well as amounts we will invoice and recognize as revenue from our performance of cloud services in future periods). Maintenance contracts are typically one year and not included in the RPO. Our RPO as of the end of each period appears below (in thousands):