Lilly Pulitzer Selects Manhattan Associates To Enable Omni-Channel Retailing

Manhattan Selection Based on Depth of Experience and Capabilities in Omni-Channel Retail and Distribution

King of Prussia, PA (GLOBE NEWSWIRE) - Supply Chain Commerce solution provider Manhattan Associates (Nasdaq:MANH) today announced that Lilly Pulitzer, the iconic women's apparel brand and retailer, has selected Manhattan Associates' Enterprise Order Management and Store Order Fulfillmentsolutions to aid in creating a seamless customer experience by supporting its omni-channel retail capabilities. Manhattan's solutions will enable the company, a subsidiary of Oxford Industries, to build on brand loyalty by improving the shopping experience for their customers across channels, create a single view of customer transactions and inventory, and allow Lilly Pulitzer shoppers to control how and when they take delivery of the brand's celebrated products.

Tweet this news! .@LillyPulitzer selects @manhassocnews to enable omni-channel retailing www.manh.com/news/lilly-pulitzer

"With our growing business, the omni-channel capabilities Manhattan's solutions provide will afford us the ability to expand our market reach, drive online traffic to our new stores, and create a seamless experience for our customers," said Keary McNew, chief information officer, Lilly Pulitzer. "Manhattan's depth of experience—both in terms of products and people—with large and successful omni-channel retailers was critical in our selection process. It's important we uphold the promise of the Lilly Pulitzer® brand and retain the loyalty of our customers; Manhattan's solutions enable our channels to operate together in making this happen."

As Lilly Pulitzer's store network and e-commerce business grow, the company is focused on making its products seamlessly available to its loyal customers through any channel they choose. Orchestration of orders and network-wide inventory – enabled by Manhattan's solutions – will be critical in ensuring the availability of products to meet customer demand and the fulfillment of online orders via paths that best suit each customer's preference. Additionally, enablement of cross-channel returns and call center order capture will help create a consistent experience for the company's customers across touch points.

"We are honored to be a partner of the venerable Lilly Pulitzer brand. Their selection of our products and teams to help execute their vision of the customer experience is a validation of our long-standing investments and successes in omni-channel enablement," said Eddie Capel, president and chief executive officer, Manhattan Associates.

Receive up-to-date product, customer and partner news directly from Manhattan Associates on Twitter and Facebook.

About Lilly Pulitzer

Lilly Pulitzer designs and distributes apparel and accessories for women, children and men. It all started 50ish years ago with a simple shift dress in Palm Beach, Florida. Today, Lilly Pulitzer provides a collection of modern resort wear inspired by the authentic Palm Beach lifestyle. Lilly Pulitzer can be found online and in 22 company-operated retail stores, over 70 Signature Stores and major department stores nationwide. For more information on products, distribution and the Lilly Pulitzer® story, please visit http://www.lillypulitzer.com and http://blog.lillypulitzer.com or follow us on Facebook, Twitter, and Pinterest. Sugartown Worldwide LLC d/b/a Lilly Pulitzer is a wholly owned subsidiary of Oxford Industries, Inc. (NYSE:OXM).

About Manhattan Associates, Inc.

Manhattan Associates (Nasdaq:MANH) brings companies closer to their customers. As the leading enabler of Supply Chain Commerce, Manhattan Associates designs, builds and delivers market-leading supply chain solutions for its clients around the world. Manhattan Associates helps drive the commerce revolution with unmatched insight and technology solutions, connecting front-end revenue and relationships with back-end execution and efficiency – optimized on a common technology platform.