PARIS and ATLANTA, Feb. 18, 2014 (GLOBE NEWSWIRE) -- Supply Chain

Commerce Solutions provider Manhattan Associates (Nasdaq:MANH), today

announced that France Boissons, a leading beverages distributor and

wholly owned subsidiary of Heineken France, is deploying Manhattan's

Warehouse Management (WMS) and Supply Chain Intelligence (SCI)

solutions at its distribution centers (DCs) in France. The Manhattan

solutions, so far deployed in in six DCs (in Caen, Montpellier,

Toulouse, Marseille, Bordeaux and Rennes), will enable France Boissons

to improve service levels for its 60,000 trade customers at the same

time as allowing the drinks distributor to fulfil customer orders more

profitably.

The solutions have already helped France Boissons to modernize and

optimize processes throughout its supply chain network. DC operatives

are able to operate much more efficiently and flexibly and the business

is able to quickly respond to changes in demand and better capitalize

on the sales opportunity presented by peak seasons and product

promotions / event-driven demand spikes. The company is also seeing

improvements in order fulfilment accuracy meaning it has raised the bar

on the service levels it provides to its customers: hotels,

restaurants, cafes, bars and clubs. This will improve brand loyalty and

in turn drive revenue growth.

Ga&euml;l Prigent, head of Supply Chain, France Boissons, commented,

"We are faced with several critical supply chain challenges every day:

the seasonality, the diversity and the value of the products associated

with a single customer order and fulfilling every order in a way which

meets our customers' service expectations. To help us manage these

challenges we needed a reliable and robust supply chain solution that

could manage the volume fluctuations, enable operational efficiency

improvements and give us improved visibility across our supply chain

operations."

Henri Seroux, managing director at Manhattan Associates France,

explained, "Manhattan provides the expertise and technology to help

clients deliver on their brand promise. We're delighted to see France

Boissons already seeing some of the benefits of our Supply Chain

Commerce solutions."

Manhattan's WMS, which is integrated with Vocollect's voice solution,

has been instrumental in driving performance improvements in France

Boissons' distribution operations. Manhattan's Supply Chain

Intelligence solution enables France Boissons' management to respond

quickly to important developments or exceptions as they occur by

monitoring and analyzing supply chain data.

Receive up-to-date product, customer and partner news directly from

Manhattan Associates on Twitter and Facebook.

About France Boissons

France Boissons is a wholly owned subsidiary of Heineken France and one

of the market leaders in the distribution of out-of-home beverages.

Headquartered in Rueil-Malmaison, it has 60,000 clients, 23

subsidiaries, 80 distribution centers and almost 3,000 employees.

Thanks to strong partner brands and a range of exclusive own brands,

France Boissons boasts an extensive portfolio of high quality products

spanning multiple categories including beer, wine, coffee, water, soft

drinks and spirits. As a service focused organization also, France

Boissons is the professionals' "preferred distributor partner". For

more information, please visit www.france-boissons.fr.

About Manhattan Associates, Inc.

Manhattan Associates brings companies closer to their customers. We

design, build and deliver market-leading Supply Chain Commerce

Solutions that drive top line growth by converging front-end sales with

back-end supply chain execution and efficiency. Our software, platform

technology and unmatched experience help our customers around the world

adapt to the challenges of the omni-channel marketplace. For more

information, please visit www.manh.com.