Three more stories from the Reverend W. Awdry's bestselling "Railway Series", read by Michael Angelis, narrator of TV's "Thomas & Friends Four Little Engines". This book introduces four new engines: Skarloey, Rheneas, Sir Handel and Peter Sam, together with The Thin Controller. "Percy the Small Engine" - Percy is the youngest, and probably cheekiest, of all the engines. In these stories he plays a joke, wins a race with a helicopter - and saves the day! "The Eight Famous Engines" - In these stories, Percy's curiosity gets the better of him, Gordon gets to visit London, and then all the engines go to England. This title includes music, sound effects and original Thomas songs.

"synopsis" may belong to another edition of this title.

Product Description:

Rev W Awdry - Thomas Railway Stories: Percy the Small

Synopsis:

This book features a collection of stories featuring Thomas the Tank Engine. "Four Little Engines" - This book features the first appearance of the Skarloey Railway, and introduces four new engines, Skarloey, Rheneas, Sir Handel and Peter Sam together with the Thin Controller. Rheneas is away being mended, and the Skarloey Railway has recently acquired Sir Handel and Peter Sam. It features the titles: "Skarloey Remembers", "Sir Handel", "Peter Sam and the Refreshment Lady", and "Old Faithful". "Percy the Small Engine" - Percy lives on the Island of Sodor with many other locomotives, and is the smallest, youngest and probably cheekiest, of all the engines! In these stories he plays a joke, get's helped with his work by Duck, wins a race with a helicopter and saves the day after the rain.It features the titles: "Percy and the Signal", "Duck Takes Charge", "Percy and Harold", and "Percy's Promise". "The Eight Famous Engines" - featuring eight of the most popular engines, in these stories Percy's curiosity gets the better of him, Gordon gets to visit London, James' self-importance gets the better of him, and all the Engines go to England. It features the titles: "Percy Takes the Plunge", "Gordon Goes Foreign", "Double Header" and "The Fat Controller's Engines".

"About this title" may belong to another edition of this title.