Julia Roberts: Then

In 1990, Julia Roberts had already earned a best supporting actress nomination for her performance in Steel Magnolias. Her leading lady role in Pretty Woman scored the then 23-year-old a best actress nom in 1991, a best actress Golden Globe win and propelled her career as an A-list star.

Julia Roberts: Now

Since entertaining worldwide audiences as a prostitute who stayed at the Beverly Wilshire and fell in love with her client, Roberts career has skyrocketed to her being one of the top actresses in Hollywood. She went on to star in Sleeping With the Enemy, The Pelican Brief, My Best Friend's Wedding, Stepmom and Erin Brokovich, which earner her a best actress Oscar win in 2001. Following her win, Roberts has appeared and starred in numerous films, including Ocean's Eleven, Mona Lisa Smile, Closer, Eat Pray Love and 2013's August: Osage County, which scored her a best supporting actress nomination.

Richard Gere: Now

Since starring as Edward Lewis opposite Julia Roberts in 1990 (which also nabbed him a Golden Globe best actor nom), the actor rekindled his onscreen romance with the actress again in 1999's Runaway Bride, starred in Unfaithful, and earned Golden Globe nominations for his performances in 2003's Chicago and 2013's Arbitrage. Most recently, Gere appears in the 2015 flick The Second Best Exotic Marigold Hotel.

Jason Alexander: Now

Since his supporting role in Pretty Woman, Alexander continued to star in Seinfeld, which earned the actor four best supporting actor Golden Globe nominations and seven best supporting actor Emmy noms. The actor has appeared in numerous television programs and films since the early 90s, including The Hunchback of Notre Dame, Duckman, Dilbert and Hachi: A Dog's Tale.

Hector Elizondo: Then

Hector Elizondo was a TV and film actor for nearly 20 years prior to his role in Pretty Woman, including Popi and American Gigilo. His role as Barney Thompson opposite Julia Roberts and Richard Gere scored the actor a best supporting actor Golden Globe nomination.

Hector Elizondo: Now

Following Pretty Woman, Elizondo went on to earn five Emmy nominations, one Emmy win and appear in numerous TV and film projects, including Chicago Hope, Cane, Monk and The Princess Diaries. Since 2011, Elizondo has appeared on Last Man Standing.