While beauty is somewhat subjective, every gentleman knows a showstopper when he sees one. The silver screen has bought us some of the most beautiful women in the world and although it was a difficult task to pick a few out of an incredibly decent bunch, we’ve rounded up 10 of the most beautiful women from the past 100 years. Enjoy, gentlemen.

Grace Kelly has one of the most famous – and beautiful – faces in the world and we’re pretty sure you’d be hard pushed to find someone who disagrees. This beauty made waves in the acting world when she was just 20 years old and had continued success until she married Prince Rainer III aged 26, when she then retired from acting to take on official duties as Grace of Monaco.

This Italian beauty made her debut into fame when she was just 14 years old, after she entered into a beauty pageant – and the rest is history. Although she wasn’t internationally recognised for her acting skills until the 60s, Loren then went on to win some of the highest acclaimed awards; including a Grammy and five Golden Globes.

As famous for her wild love life (she was married 8 times) as she was for her acting skills, Elizabeth Taylor is undoubtedly one of the most beautiful women from the past 100 years. Since first gracing our screens as a child star, she had an impeccable career which saw her win two academy awards, amongst others.

Brigitte Bardot was (and still is) the very definition of a sex symbol; she embodied everything a woman wished she was and a man wished he was with. Bardot wasn’t just a pretty face; she stared in 47 films, performed on the stage in musicals and recorded up to 70 songs – what a woman.

When the press coin a term just to describe you – which they did for Rita Hayworth – you have to be pretty special. Hayworth was referred to as “love goddess” because of the glamour and class that she oozed at every turn. Her film repertoire was up there with Brigitte Bardot’s: she stared in 61 films over 37 years.

No list like this one would be complete without a blonde bombshell and rather than going down the usual Marilyn Monroe route, we’ve chosen Jayne Mansfield. Although her acting skills started to be overlooked by her blonde hair and large assets and her career started going down the pan, she remained a well-known celebrity – and a Playboy playmate.

Lauren Hutton isn’t conventionally beautiful in the womanly way that Sophia Loren and Grace Kelly were, but she is still an absolute show stopper. A world-renowned model – she graced the cover of Vogue more than once – and actress, she defines contemporary beauty in more ways than one.

Cindy Crawford has perhaps one of the most recognisable and well-known faces in the world and has been gracing the covers of magazines and screens for nearly 30 years. A true beauty by nature and a true professional by heart, Crawford and her incredible looks never fail to impress.

There are no two ways about it; Penelope Cruz is an incredible woman. She is the very definition of a classic beauty and has everything in her favour; from her body to the way she talks. She’s been on the scene as an incredible actress for years and continues to have us in awe of her every time we set eyes on her.

With her gorgeous Elfin features and incredible skills as an actress, no one can deny the draw of Natalie Portman. She first came into our lives in the controversial film, Leon, and we haven’t been able to take our eyes off her since. Portman is undoubtedly one of the most beautiful women in our world today and we’re pretty sure she’ll be at the top of that list for a long time to come.