Welcome to Baptist Board, a friendly forum to discuss the Baptist Faith in a friendly surrounding.

Your voice is missing! You will need to register to get access to all the features that our community has to offer.

We hope to see you as a part of our community soon and God Bless!

Most of your modern translations such as the NASB, NIV and others are based on the United Bible Societies Greek text or the Nestle Aland text, I dont trust the editors of these texts such as Bruce Metzger, Kurt and Barbara Aland, or Eberhard Nestle to decide what the accurate and best readings are of the New Testament considering that they are heretics and apostates. For example Metzger questions that Peter even wrote the epistles that bear his Name

“KURT ALAND denied the verbal inspiration of the Bible and wanted to see all denominations united into one “body” by the acceptance of a new ecumenical canon of Scripture which would take into account the Catholic apocryphal books (The Problem of the New Testament Canon, pp. 6,7,30-33). “

Kurt Aland also doubted the canonicity of several New Testament Books.

Not the kind of guy I want editing the Greek text behind my bible translation.

See page 5 and following of this link http://www.bibelgriechisch.info/Aland.pdf

Eberhard Nestle (1851-1913)

“Nestle, of the popular Nestle-Aland Greek New Testament (nearly 30 different editions now), rejected the infallibility of the Bible, and believed it was no more than a normal piece of literature. He claimed that authors of the New Testament never expected their writings to be read by others let alone be taken as the authoritative word of God.”

Kurt and Barbara Aland

“Partner with Eberhard Nestle (above), he and his wife are also contributors the UBS. Aland does not believe in verbal inspiration of the Bible, and that the Old Testament and the gospels are full of myths that were not inspired by God but merely a naturalistic process. Kurt Aland does not believe that the canon of Scripture is complete or settled.”

The Heretics Behind Modern Bible Versions Supported By James White

The people behind modern textual criticism are largely apostate heretics and the evangelicals involved are piggy backing off of unbelieving scholarship.

Textual Criticism Drawn From the Wells of Infidelity

And how are you able to determine of the Critical Greek text is an accurate representation of the originals or not? The end result, how much different is it really from the Majority/TR/Bzt Greek texts? Does it have any errors of doctrines within it?

I am reminded of a person who was incensed that in the Christian School the first graders were not learning "Christian phonics."

The teacher responded, "How is the "T" pronounced differently as a Christian than that of a non-christian?"

Ultimately, a translation may certainly be marginalized when documentation of biased translation is produced.

Personally, I don't use the NIV except in rare occasions. It drifts (imo) too far away from the original intention. But that is purely subjective and I really would rather use the NASB or the ESV for serious study and then compare the work with the KJV. I have never had a conflicting presentation of the truth when using those three either in combination or as stand alone.

If one wants the most serious study, they will use multiple sources (translations) and especially those which retain a formal translation over someone attempting to style the translation work into some presentation that is perhaps agenda driven.

But frankly, it is all of very little consequence.

The typical "christian" doesn't even open their Bible in typical week weakly worship much less daily feast at the table set before them by the Word.

I’m sorry but I fail to see the relevance of your post to the OP?

Fortunately you don’t have to trust these people. They have been quite transparent in the development of the Critical Greek Text. Sources have been footnoted, evidence has been compiled, ancient texts have been published and even digitalized, theories have been expounded.

You can choose to believe it or not... the choice is yours.

But to denigrate men of God (who have spent their whole lives studying ancient languages so that we might taste just a bit of what others in the distant past have written and lived by, the Word of God), to demean them is un-Christ-like.

Disagree all you like, but stop spreading slander about men you have never met or studied.

Rob

Please show examples of how I have slandered any of the men above.

Which one did I slander and what did I say about them that is slander?

David Cloud is most certainly more of a bigger scholar than you Rippon.

David Cloud has written a encyclopedia for Christianity, a Bible dictionary, has written commentaries on several books of the Bible, has written hundreds upon hundreds of weekly and daily articles on different issues relating to Christianity, has written and published several books on several different issues relating to Christianity, in his book “for love of the Bible”, Cloud makes mention in the preface that he had hundreds of books of the history of the Bible and textual criticism that he consulted when writing that book.

For you to say he’s not a bible scholar is folly and is a blatant slander. He is one of the most studied men alive in Christianity today, as for your charge he is a heretic, I don’t agree with everything David Cloud says, but I would consider him far more sound in the faith than most people on the BB here.