Hi all,

I need to use this book for an upcoming seminary class. I find a resource with the same name and author (Kurt Aland) in my Logos library, but it only has the Bible texts laid out side-by-side to each other.

If you have the print book for this, can you please tell me there are additional explanatory text or footnotes outside of the scriptural texts? Are those additional notes worth buying the print version? (There doesn't seem to be a Kindle version for this.)

Thanks in advance,

Peter

Peter,

I don't know which version you already looked at. The Greek-English edition at Amazon has a look into which does give a good impression. I personally own the Greek-only version of it in paper which does look mostly like the Greek-language pages seen there.

The Logos version of all synopsis resources work with dynamic text, which means you can choose which version of the text you want to see (any language and translation). The structure Aland saw in the gospels and the pericope numbering stays the same. E.g. you'll find the cleansing of the temple in no 25 and no 273 - the paper book will cross-reference those, Logos however won't.

Unfortunately, the dynamic text feature will strip the text of all footnote markers and apparatus marks. Aland's book does not contain explanatory text, but it has the full apparatus of NA 26 (no longer available in Logos, afaik, but very much alike to NA 27 with apparatus) - which means to get near what the printed edition provides, one would probably need a layout with the synopsis book plus NA text plus NA apparatus.

In addition, the printed book in its Greek-only version includes additional cross-references for the pericopes and sometimes material from non-canonical "gospels" and early church documents such as Clement's letters. But this seems to have been stripped out of the Greek-English version I see on Amazon (which has English in addition to Greek but is only half the size of the Greek-only's 650 pages letter format). Logos' dynamic text will give you the English anyway.

Thus I think, if you own the NA 27 apparatus and build a layout like I suggested, you are probably good to go without buying the paper book. But in the end this depends on how in-depth the instructor will work with the book in class.

Hope this helps,

Mick

Have joy in the Lord!