Super Bowl champion linebacker Clark Haggans, who spent the majority of his NFL career with the Pittsburgh Steelers, died Monday at 46, the organization confirmed. His cause of death has not yet been released. Pittsburgh radio host Colin Dunlap first reported the passing of the longtime starter and prolific pass rusher Tuesday night.

Haggans’ rise to prominence began during his collegiate career at Colorado State, where he is a member of the athletic department’s Hall of Fame. Though he departed from the program 24 years ago, he remains the Rams’ all-time sack leader with 33 to his name. He also amassed 54 career tackles for loss, which ranks second in Colorado State history.

Haggans joined the Rams as a walk-on, helped lead the program to conference championships in 1997 and 1999 and is now regarded by the university as one of the greatest defensive players to pass through Fort Collins.

At the conclusion of his collegiate career, Haggans was a fifth-round pick in the 2000 NFL Draft. The Steelers selected him at No. 137 overall, reuniting him with fellow Colorado State alumnus Joey Porter and creating a prolific linebacker tandem.

Four years later, Haggans earned a starting role. He recorded six sacks in that 2004 campaign and tallied nine more during the 2005 season, which ended with a Super Bowl XL victory. In total, Haggans racked up 332 tackles, 32.5 sacks, 12 forced fumbles, three fumble recoveries and one interception throughout his time with the Steelers.

After his eight seasons in Pittsburgh, Haggans became a free agent and joined the Arizona Cardinals. He accounted for five sacks in each of the 2009 and 2010 seasons and ultimately spent four years with the organization.

Get offseason and recruiting information on your favorite college team for $1 for first month.

Haggans closed his playing career with the San Francisco 49ers and made his third Super Bowl appearance before retiring from football. By the end of his 13 years in the NFL, Haggans racked up 520 total tackles with 46.5 sacks.