The Great Gildersleeve was created by the actor who played the part, Harold Peary. Gildersleeve was a character on the highly popular Fibber McGee and Molly show from 1937-1941. Peary played a number of roles on the Fibber McGee and Molly show, but eventually became the next door neighbor that Fibber had a constant rivalry with. Usually a rivalry to see who was more comedically pompous. But Harold Peary was growing a bit tired of his work on the Fibber McGee and Molly show. He was a good singer, but his talents weren’t being used to full effect. So in true show business fashion, they created a spin-off show for the Gildersleeve character. It is believed that this is the first, and certainly the most successful, spin-off radio show.

In 1941, the comedy show The Great Gildersleeve hit the airwaves, and there it lasted until 1958. Peary was an ultimate radio professional. He could voice act, had a great deep radio voice, and could sing. Before Gildersleeve and Fibber he bounced around doing various radio jobs, sometimes playing half a dozen parts in for one show, or singing, and the character of Gildersleeve was his idea.

In the Great Gildesleeve, Throckmorton P. Gildersleeve left on a train from the town of Wistful Vista (home of Fibber McGee and Molly) and set up shop in Summerfield. In Summerfield, Gildersleeve set about to raise his niece, Marjorie, and his nephew Leroy. Gildersleeve became the water commissioner, eligible bachelor extraordinaire, and general all around windbag. As nephew Leroy would say "What a character!"

The rivalry that worked so well on Fibber McGee and Molly, between Gildersleeve and Fibber was recreated between Gildersleeve and Judge Horace Hooker (known as "the Old Goat" by Gildersleeve), played by Earle Ross. The feud between these two started on the first day of the program and lasted until the end. Other characters included Peavey the pharmacist, playing the sympathetic friend for Gildersleeve’s problems and schemes. Peavey’s line "Well, I wouldn’t say that" became one of the best remembered lines from the show. Gildersleeve’s, cook, Birdie Lee Coggins, could be counted on to pop Throckmorton’s self important bubble on occasion.