HMC

The Headmasters’ and Headmistresses’ Conference (HMC), founded in 1869, is the oldest association of the heads of independent schools in the English-speaking world. In addition, it can reasonably claim to be the most historically influential institution of its kind anywhere.

Members of the Conference are the Heads of leading independent schools in the British Isles (currently 275) and, since 1928, school overseas (currently 59). The Conference has been in continuous operation since it was founded.

The Archive

HMC holds an almost complete set of administrative records of the Conference since its establishment in December 1869. The records are of two kinds: stitched, leather-bound volumes of printed documents (1869-1996); and loose leaf papers (1997- ).

The contents include: the proceedings of the annual meeting of members, including attendees (1869- ); reports of the Committee, including correspondence of the Chairman and of the Secretary of the Conference (1877- ); lists of members (1879- ); annual accounts (1879- ); versions of the constitution of the Conference (1906- ); minutes of sub-committees (1911- ); minutes of divisional meetings (1943- ); and a small number of occasional printed declarations, statements and special reports issued by the Conference from time to time.

Organisation of the records

Between 1869 and 1910, there are two classes of document, each printed annually for private circulation among the members: (a) the proceedings of the Conference (also known as the Annual Meeting); and (b) the report of the Committee.

From 1911 the proceedings of the annual Conference continued as before but the annual report of the Committee gave way to termly bulletins that brought together in instalments the combined administrative records of the Committee, its sub-committees and divisions.

Conservation and digitisation

The original printed volumes are in good condition with collections of the most recent loose leaf papers being selected for permanent binding from time to time. The records were first digitised and stored on CD in 1999. In 2014 the complete run was re-scanned to better atomize the documents, allowing this system to benefit from a powerful boolean search facility.

Access

The recent records of the Conference are closed for 30 years. Researchers may consult the printed records upon prior appointment at the HMC offices in Market Harborough, Leicestershire, UK.

HMC records held elsewhere

A substantial but partial set of the working papers of the Conference secretariat for the period 1904-74 is held at The Modern Records Centre, University of Warwick (ref: MSS 58).