Movie: Savyasachi

Rating: 2/5

Banner: Mythri Movie Makers

Cast: Naga Chaitanya, Nidhhi Agarwal, R Madhavan, Bhumika Chawla, Rao Ramesh, Vennela Kishore, Satya, Thagubothu Ramesh and others

Music: M M Keeravani

Cinematography: Yuvaraj

Editor: Kotagiri Venkateswara Rao

Fights: Ram-Lakshman

Producers: Naveen, Y Ravi Shankar, Mohan Cherukuri

Story, dialogues, screenplay, and Direction: Chandoo Mondeti

Release date: November 2, 2018

Mythri Movie Makers, Tollywood's leading production house that produced three hits in a row, producing a film with Naga Chaitanya itself generated good interest among film lovers.

Added to this, the concept of “Savyasachi” is also unique as per the trailer. The director is also successful maker. All in all, the film has generated right buzz.

Let’s find out whether it meets the expectations.

Story

Vikram Aditya (Naga Chaitanya) is born with Vanishing Twin Syndrome that makes his left hand powerful. It is like Vikram having another person in his body. He is an ad filmmaker and lives with his sister and her family.

Upon returning from New York with his girlfriend Chitra (Nidhi) after finishing an ad film there, he gets to see that his sister’s house is blasted, his brother-in-law is killed and his niece Maha is abducted.

A guy (Madhavan) calls Vikram and tells him that he’s got Maha. Why has he abducted Maha and what is his motive and how does Vikram reach him?

Artistes’ Performances:

Naga Chaitanya has played a typical role. In some scenes, he acts as an ad filmmaker, in some scenes, he’s college student, in other sequences he’s fighter. Various shades, but he looks and acts same all through.

Madhavan has completely dominated Chaitanya with his terrific performance. Madhavan is mostly seen in operating from one place but his demeanour is superb. Despite bad characterization, he steals the show with his act.

Bhumika plays weepy sister role. Nidhi Agerwal has played routine heroine role and she hardly impresses.

Vennela Kishore and Shakalaka Shankar have provided some comic relief. Tagubothu Ramesh has played serious role.

Technical Excellence:

The film is lavishly shot and made with rich production values. The cinematography of Yuvaraj is good. He has shown his mark in key sequences.

Veteran music composer M M Keeravani has given regular songs. His remix version of “Ninnu Road meeda choosinadi lagayathu” is shot in routine manner.

Action stunts by Ram Lakshman are neat. Editing is completely bad.

Highlights:

Unique concept

Madhavan

Drawback:

Boring first half

Aimless direction

Clumsy scenes

Stereotype characters

Analysis

Director Chandoo Mondeti has written a unique concept – a guy’s hand having special powers due to Vanishing Twin Syndrome. This concept can be made it into a thriller or a hilarious comedy like Nagarjuna’s “Hello Brother”.

But Chandoo has made it a hotchpotch of commercial movie, with unnecessary and boring romantic track for nearly one hour in the first half. By suppressing the unique point, he has narrated the movie with regular scenes and silly comedy scenes.

When he opens main point by introducing Madhavan character, the movie turns into shoddy version of Aravind Swamy’s thread in “Dhruva”, Arjun’s angle of “Lie” and “Abhimanyudu”.

The novelty factor wears off in the second half with Chaitanya and Madhavan playing typical cat and mouse games that we have already seen in the above movies.

What could have been unique point has lost in this melee. It is due to the shoddy narration by Chandoo Mondeti and his inane screenplay writing.

The entire first half is dealt on romantic thread between Naga Chaitanya and Nidhi with outdated scenes. The college scenes and the ad filmmaking scenes, their meeting and separation all happens with no coherence. Just before 15 minutes, the film becomes serious and reveals Madhavan’s character.

Even the concept of Vanishing Twin Syndrome sounds silly when the main conflict point is revealed. Naga Chaitanya has not done anything extraordinary by having extra power to his left hand. So what is this fuss all about? Even Madhavan’s backstory why he has targeted Naga Chaitanya and his family sounds trivial.

The director who presented a good thriller in his debut film “Karthikeya” has written shoddy screenplay and his narration lacks dhum. It seems too many corrections were made to this film as many scenes don’t sync well.

All in all, “Savyasachi” is a film that has unique concept but dull narration and mediocre sequences have killed it. The high production values fail to save this.