Savyasachi Review, Rating

Telugu360 Rating : 2.5/5

Naga Chaitanya’s Savyasachi has created a strong buzz for its intriguing teasers and trailers. The film draws its plot on vanishing twin syndrome concept, a first of its kind story-line in Tollywood. Madhavan is playing Naga Chaitanya’s nemesis in this film.

Let’s find out if Savyasachi gives a much needed relief for Naga Chaitanya. Here is our review.

Story :

Vikram Aditya ( Chay) , an Ad. Film maker, meets his client and ex-lover Chitra ( Nidhhi Agerwal) after six years. They refresh sweet memories from college life, go to New York City for their next Ad shooting. When returned, Vikram finds his sister’s family was attacked, niece was kidnapped.

Arun Raj ( Madhavan ) had been a talented youngster , but he dislikes the society around him for a reason. Arun attacks Vikram’s family and kidnaps his niece. Rest of the story is the mind game between Arun and Vikram.

Analysis :

Savyasachi film has an interesting story that has been diluted with dull narration. The core conflict point written for protagonist Vikram , Antagonist Arun characters is decent. But the filler part which consists of ‘College scenes and love track’ is boring. The mind game in second half is not much engaging but pre climax scenes were good. Vanishing twin syndrome concept has been used effectively. Two songs in first half shaped up well, in second half there is a nice remix song but it was timing bad. As a director, Chandoo has failed to impress the audience with his narration

Production values by Mythri movie makers are grand. In Songs and action blocks the lavishness is visible. MM Keeravani music is partially impressive. Cinematography by Yuvaraj is nice, captures vibrant New York city for a short duration in the film. Ram-Laxman composed two fights in a decent manner.

Performances:

Chay as Vikram got an interesting role, he performed well. R Madhavan as disgruntled genius Arun performed adequately . Heroine Nidhhi Agerwal has very limited role, looks okay. Yester heroine Bhumika played elder sister to Chay , she is good. Vennela Kishore comedy has limitations. Shakalaka Shankar as NRI is hilarious.

Positives:

Storyline

2-3 Songs

Chay and Madhavan performances

Pre-Climax

Negatives:

Boring college episodes in first half

Lack of engaging narration

Mind game between Chay/Madhavan is not interesting

Verdict :

Savyasachi movie has a pretty average first half and partially engaging second half, Naga Chaitanya might have to wait longer for his elusive hit. This film may find some traction with masses

Telugu360 Rating : 2.5/5

Release Date : 1st Nov, 2018

Director : Chandoo Mondeti

Music Director : M.M. Keeravani

Choreography : J. Yuvaraj

Producer : Mythri Movie Makers

Starring : Naga Chaitanya, R. Madhavan, Nidhhi Agerwal