Written and directed by Chandoo Mondeti, Savyasachi is a 2018 Telugu-language action thriller movie. Vikram’s world isn’t quite his own — a touch he can’t control, a past he can’t recall; his invisible twin, Aditya, holds the reins of his left hand. When Vikram’s life takes a dangerous turn, the line between him and his phantom brother blurs. Can one man fight with two shadows, or will a deadly secret tear him apart?

Here’s how you can watch and stream Savyasachi via streaming services such as Amazon Prime Video.

Is Savyasachi available to watch via streaming?

Yes, Savyasachi is available to watch via streaming on Amazon Prime Video.

Vikram suffers from a strange condition: his left hand seems to have a mind of its own. Diagnosed with vanishing twin syndrome, he discovers his twin brother, Aditya, whom he cannot see and who controls Vikram’s left hand. His life takes a dramatic turn when things begin to get violent. To save himself and his loved ones, Vikram must find the connection to his ghostly twin and confront his past.

The cast of Savyasachi features Naga Chaitanya Akkineni as Vikram and Aditya, the twin brothers. On the other hand, R. Madhavan plays the role of Arun Raj, Nidhhi Agerwal appears as Chitra, and Bhumika Chawla essays Siri.

Watch Savyasachi streaming via Amazon Prime Video

Savyasachi is available to watch on Amazon Prime Video. The renowned streaming service has a wide selection of content to watch, be it movies, TV shows, documentaries, reality, or sports events. How to date Billy Walsh, The Devil’s Hour, and Wilderness are some of the international titles available to watch with an Amazon Prime Video subscription.

You can watch via Amazon Prime Video by following these steps:

Go to Amazon Prime Video

Select ‘Sign in’ and ‘Create your Amazon account’

Sign up for a Prime Video membership:

$14.99 per month or $139 per year with an Amazon Prime membership

$8.99 per month for a standalone Prime Video membership

Amazon Prime is the online retailer’s paid service that provides fast shipping and exclusive sales on products, so the membership that includes both this service and Prime Video is the company’s most popular offering. However, you can also opt to subscribe to Prime Video separately.

The Savyasachi synopsis is as follows:

“A twin brother of the protagonist is absorbed due to Vanishing Twin Syndrome and controls his left hand. When his life is threatened, the twin brother that never existed protects him like a shield.”

NOTE: The streaming services listed above are subject to change. The information provided was correct at the time of writing.