Background

André Romele Young, known worldwide as Dr. Dre, is a famous American rapper who comes from Compton City in California. He was born in 1965 as the son of Theodore and Verna Young and is of African-American descent. His zodiac sign is Aquarius. He started in the music industry at a young age, earning a prestigious reputation as a rap D.J. during the ‘80s, participating in the group World Class Wrecki’ Cru until 1986, after which he joined the famous rap band N.W.A. Although he gained much more well-founded recognition with the band, he left them in 1991 to begin his career as a music entrepreneur, creating Death Row Records with his partner Suge Knight. Through this label, he released several singles such as ‘Deep Cover,’ and ‘Let Me Ride,’ among others, and collaborated with artists like Snoop Dogg.

As he grew and produced more music, he released his first album “The Chronic,” which would mark a historic milestone within the rap industry since “Billboard” magazine would categorize it as the “eighth best-selling album in history.” Dr. Dre obtained special recognition for the theme and won a Grammy Award for Best Rap Song with ‘Let Me Ride.’ With time, he craved complete independence and started his own label, Aftermath Entertainment, with which he would make his first gold record “Dr. Dre Presents: The Aftermath,” and with which he would sign Marshall Mathers, famously known as Eminem. He traced a path that stands out for his talent and countless collaborations with influential artists and legends of rap.

Young has also been on the big screen in productions such as “The Wash” and “Training Day.” In the latter, he had the opportunity to work with Denzel Washington. His creative passion as an entrepreneur cannot be ignored. In 2008, he founded a giant, highly-recognized hearing aid company that the technology giant Apple would purchase for a substantial sum of money in 2014. Dr. Dre has continued to participate actively in the music industry. His most recent appearance was in the 56th edition of the Super Bowl halftime show, where he performed with several rap legends, among them, his first protégé, Eminem.

Dr. Dre married successful lawyer Nicole Young, in 1996, and had two children, Truice and Truly Young. He now has eight children in total. However, in June 2020, the marriage came to an end, and he is currently one of the most coveted bachelors.