Andre Romelle Young (born February 18, 1965, [2] [3] [4] Compton, California, USA), better known as Dr. Dre, is a rapper, songwriter, audio engineer, record producer, entrepreneur and American actor. He is the founder and owner of Aftermath Entertainment and co-founder of Death Row Records. Throughout his career, he has produced many albums in partnership with Snoop Dogg, Eminem, 50 Cent and Nate Dogg.

Dr. Dre began his music career as a member of World Class Wreckin 'Cru, and later rose to fame with joining the N.W.A. dangerous on the streets. Her debut album, The Chronic, released by Death Row Records, was one of the best-selling American albums of 1993, and Dre won the Grammy Award for "Let Me Ride." In 1996, he left Death Row and set up his own production company, Aftermath Entertainment. In 1996 he produced an album, Dr. Dre Presents the Aftermath, and in 1999 he released a solo album, 2001, for which he received a Grammy Award for Best Producer the following year.

During the year 2000, his career focused on producing for other artists, while contributing vocals to the pieces of other artists. Rolling Stone named him one of the highest paid people of 2001 and 2004. Dr. Dre also starred in several films, including Set It Off, The Wash, and Training Day.

Inspired by Grandmaster Flash's song "The Adventures of Grandmaster Flash on the Wheels of Steel", he often visited a club called The Eve After Dark to watch more DJs and rappers sing in direct. Thus, Dre became a DJ in that club, initially under the name “Dr. J ”, based on the nickname of Julius Erving, his favorite basketball player. At the club, she met rapper Antoine Carraby, who later became DJ Yella in the N.W.A. [15] He later took the name Dr.Dre, a mixture of Dr. J and his first name, referring to him as the "Master of Mixology." Some time later he joined the World Class Wreckin 'Cru, singing for Kru-Cut Records in 1984. The group would become the stars of the electro-hop scene that dominated the late 1980s, West Coast hip hop, and the first "Surgery" will accompany Dr. Dre on tour, and it will be sold to 50,000 children in the Compton area. [17] Dr. Dre and DJ Yella also sang for a local radio station, KDAY, earning high ratings during rush hour on The Traffic Jam. Dr. Dre's older recordings were released in 1994 on an album called Concrete Roots. Stephen Thomas Erlewine of the Allmusic website described the assembled music as "produced several years before Dre established a distinctive style", as "surprisingly generic and captivating" and "only for dedicated fans".

Frequent absences from school brought him the position of diver of the school swimming team. After high school, he attended Chester Adult School in Compton, following his mother's requirements to get a job or to continue his education. After a brief appearance on a school radio station, he returned to his father's and grandparents' residence before returning to his mother's home. He later dropped out of Chester to prepare to perform at Eve's After Dark nightclub.

N.W.A. and Ruthless Records (1986–1991)

In 1986 he met Ice Cube, with whom he collaborated to produce songs for Ruthless Records, a record label that produced rap songs, compiled by rapper Eazy-E. N.W.A, along with a few other rappers, like Ice Cube, are considered the basic artists of the gangsta rap style, an important genre of hip hop, intertwined with determined lyrics about urban crime and the life of a black gangster. Unconstrained by racist political issues followed by artists such as Public Enemy or Boogie Down Productions, N.W.A favored uncompromising themes and lyrics, providing strong descriptions of street violence.