Dr. Dre Biography

Andre Romelle Young, known professionally as Dr. Dre is an entrepreneur, record producer, and rapper from the United States. He co-founded, co-owned, and served as president of Death Row Records. He is the founder and CEO of Aftermath Entertainment and Beats Electronics. He is well known for the song “Still D.R.E.”

Dr. Dre was born in Compton, California, on February 18, 1965. In 1985, he joined the World Class Wreckin’ Cru and eventually rose to stardom as a member of the gangsta rap group N.W.A. The trio made explicit hip hop lyrics famous by describing the violence of street life. Dre is credited with helping to create and popularize West Coast G-funk, a hip hop subgenre defined by a synthesizer base and sluggish, heavy beats, in the early 1990s.

Dre’s solo first studio album The Chronic (1992), published on Death Row Records, became one of the best-selling American music artists of the year. For the single “Let Me Ride,” he won a Grammy Award for Best Rap Solo Performance, as well as multiple other awards for “Nuthin’ but a ‘G’ Thang.” That year, he produced Snoop Doggy Dogg’s debut album Doggystyle and mentored producers such as his stepbrother Warren G (whose multi-platinum debut Regulate…G Funk Era was released in 1994) and Snoop Dogg‘s cousin Daz Dillinger (whose double-platinum debut Dogg Food by Tha Dogg Pound was released in 1995), as well as upcoming producers Sam Sneed and Mel-Man.Dr. Dre departed Death Row Records in 1996 to start his own record label, Aftermath Entertainment. In 1996, he released Dr. Dre Presents the Aftermath, a compilation album, and in 1999, he released 2001, a solo album.

Dre focused on producing other musicians in the 2000s, occasionally adding vocals. He co-produced Eminem’s and 50 Cent’s albums after signing them in 1998 and 2002, respectively. Many other rappers, including the D.O.C., Snoop Dogg, Xzibit, Knoc-turn’al, the Game, Kendrick Lamar, and Anderson, have enlisted his help in producing albums and managing their careers. Dre Paak has also appeared in films including Set It Off, The Wash, and Training Day.He has six Grammy Awards under his belt, including Producer of the Year for Non-Classical Music. On Rolling Stone’s list of the 100 Greatest Artists of All Time, he was ranked number 56. With an estimated net worth of $800 million in 2018, he was the second-richest figure in hip hop.

Dre’s alleged brutality against women has been extensively reported. He was fined $2,500, given two years of probation, 240 hours of community service, and a spot on an anti-violence public service message after assaulting television anchor Dee Barnes. A civil case was settled without going to court. Michel’le, the mother of one of his kids, accused him of domestic violence during their relationship in 2015. Surviving Compton: Dre, Suge, &amp; Michel’le, her 2016 biopic, depicts their toxic relationship. Dr. Dre allegedly beat Lisa Johnson, the mother of three of his children, several times, including while she was pregnant. A restraining order was issued against him. Dre allegedly punched former labelmate Tairrie B at a party in 1990 in response to her song “Ruthless Bitch.” He apologized to the ladies “I’ve wronged” two weeks after the release of his third album, Compton, in August 2015.

Dr. Dre Discography

Top Videos

Frequently Asked Questions

What Is Dr. Dre Biggest Hit?

Dr. Dre’s biggest hit is “The Next Episode,” which was released in 2000. The song peaked at number two on the Billboard Hot 100 chart and has been certified six times platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA). “The Next Episode” was Dre’s second solo single and his first to reach the top ten on the Hot 100. The song features Snoop Dogg, Kurupt, and Nate Dogg, and samples “The Humpty Dance” by Digital Underground.

Which Album Of Dr. Dre Is The Most Famous?

The most famous album of Dr. Dre is “The Chronic”. It was released in 1992 and was an instant classic. It is considered one of the best rap albums of all time.

Why Is Dr. Dre So Famous?

Dr. Dre is a highly successful American rapper, record producer, and entrepreneur. He is best known for his work with the hip hop group N.W.A., and his subsequent solo career. Dr. Dre has sold millions of records worldwide, and has won multiple Grammy Awards. He is widely considered to be one of the most influential figures in the rap industry.

Did Dr Dre Produce All Of His Albums?

No, Dr. Dre did not produce all of his albums. He has produced some of his most popular and successful albums, such as “The Chronic” and “2001,” but he has also worked with other producers on many of his other albums. Some of the other producers that have worked with Dr. Dre include Scott Storch, Mel-Man, and Mike Elizondo.

What Was Dr. Dre’S First Album?

Dr. Dre’s first album was ‘The Chronic’. It was released in 1992 and is considered one of the most influential albums in hip hop history. It features many of Dr. Dre’s classic hits such as ‘Nuthin’ but a ‘G’ Thang’, ‘Dre Day’, and ‘Let Me Ride’.

Most Searched For Dr. Dre Songs