HIS tough-talking style saw him become Britain’s top cop.

Talent spotted by top brass as a 21-year-old rookie, Sir Paul Stephenson’s swiftly climbed the ranks.

The former grammar school headboy and champion swimmer – known as Rusty because of his tanned complexion – made sergeant in 1982 just seven years after joining Lancashire police.

Sir Paul’s reputation as a brilliant officer saw him promoted to inspector the following year and superintendent by 1988.

His big break came when he was appointed assistant chief constable of Merseyside Police in 1994.

This is where he carved out his tough reputation by cutting Liverpool’s gun crime, corruption and combating terrorism.

Five years later, he was made deputy chief constable of Lancashire Police. Once, when asked what the secret to his success was, he said it came from a Tesco manager at a nearby store: “Keeping queues down and customers happy.”

Along the way Sir Paul was awarded the Queen’s Policing Medal for services to policing and in 2005 he was appointed deputy com­­missioner of the Metropolitan Police.

In 2008, the married dad-of-three was given a knighthood in the Queen’s Birthday Honours List.

The same year he was appointed acting commissioner of the Met after Sir Ian Blair was sacked by London Mayor Boris Johnson over the force’s failings in the shooting of Jean Charles de Menezes.

Sir Paul finally became Britain’s top policeman in 2009 – commissioner of the Metropolitan Police Service on a salary of £253,000,

Cementing his no-nonsense approach after his appointment, he declared: “It’s time we all shut up and get on with our jobs.”

He was tested soon into his appointment with the G20 protests in April, during which newspaper seller Ian Tomlinson died.

In December 2010 Sir Paul had an operation to remove a pre-cancerous tumour from his leg, which resulted in a fracture. While recovering he spent 20 days at a Champneys health spa, costing £12,000.

The PR consultant who looked after the spa chain was former News of the World executive editor Neil Wallis, who was arrested last week on suspicion of phone hacking.

Last night senior colleagues hailed Sir Paul’s contribution to policing.

Sir Hugh Orde, president of the Association of Chief Police Officers, said: “I’ve known Sir Paul since 1982 and he is one of the finest officers I have worked with.

“Throughout his time in the service, Sir Paul made an outstanding contribution to national policing.

Peter Smyth, chair of the Met Police Federation, added: “I think it is a sad day for Paul and a sad day for the Metropolitan Police.”

Sir Paul’s life could have been so much different.

On leaving school, he became a trainee manager at a shoe factory.

But once he heard brother Mike’s exciting stories about life on the beat, he followed him into the force.

In an interview two years ago, he told us: “Mike was my inspiration and though he died two years ago, he will always be that to me.”