When I was a kid I would probably have loved this.

I can’t remember if I’ve seen this film before. I know that I once saw its sequel, Son of Paleface, becausei remember my curiosity about what had happened in the first film, but if I have seen this before I remembered nothing of it.

This wasn’t the first film to be named The Paleface, the title having been used for a 1922 Buster Keaton silent film, but other than being comedies set in the Wild West, the two films have nothing in common. This film starred Bob Hope and Jane Russell and was a massive success, still highly-regarded today, as well as including an Oscar-winning song, ‘Buttons and Bows’, that i remember hearing many times over when I was growing up, and which was instantly familiar.

Of course you realise that I’m not going to support the consensus. This is not to say that I thought the film was bad: it was perfect for its era. But the qualities that made it so popular then have been overtaken by time. Once upon a time I would have howled with laughter at Bob Hope: the slick patter, the fast one-liners, the coward-forced-into-heroism persona. But fash then and fast now are two very different things, and a couple of the comedic set-pieces written for Hope – the routine with the roughneck wanting to have his tooth pulled and the shoot-out at sundown – were stretched out so long that they ceased being funny long before the inevitable punchline.

My biggest problem was set by the film’s long and serious introduction. Jane Russell plays notorious woman outlaw Calamity Jane, all in buckskins. Jane is sprung from jail on the secret order of the Governor, who offers her a pardon if she’ll take on the mission of finding and stopping a gang running enough rifles to the Indians to kill everyone in the Territory. Jane accepts but finds her contact, who was supposed to pose as her husband, murdered. She makes her way alone to carry on with the mission, aware that gunslingers are on her trail, out to kill her.

This takes up the first ten minutes and it’s a wholly serious standard Western. Then Jane crosses the path of inept dentist ‘Painless’ Peter Potter, played by Hope. She inveigles him into substituting as her husband, unaware of why this beautiful (and stacked) brunette has suddenly fallen for him, marries him, and takes him out West on the wagon train. Consumation of the marriage is consists of belting Hope on the back of his head with the butt of her revolver every (few) times she lets him kiss her, leaving him with the imoression that ecstacy has taken place.

But that’s the problem. Hope and Russell are the stars but they’re starring in two different movies. Russell’s appearing in a straight dramatic Westen and Hope in a Bob Hope film, and for me The Paleface never reconciles the two comfortably enough. There’s a constant seesawing back and forth throughout the first seventy minutes, which comes to a point of tension when Jane is happy to let Potter be killed in the aforementioned shoot-out to let the bad guys assume they are safe from the Federal Agent trailing them and free her from suspicion. The real problem though is the final twenty minutes when the two films have to merge and the two tones mix like oil and water.

And, given Jane’s willingness to callously sacrifice Potter for her own ends, it’s then a bit much for the film to have her suddenly decide that she actually does love him and wants to save him.

Yes, once again I am out of step. Nevertheless, the film was not only a great success but it was the highest grossing spoof Western until overtaken by Mel Brooks’ Blazing Saddles in 1974, which says something.

One final point. The film surprised me by being in colour when I had expected black and white. This drove me to pause it after only a couple of minutes whilst I checked to see if I was watching a colourised version. This led me to catch sight of a YouTube comment about the level of Gay humour in the film. It sounds improbable, and without the notion being put in my head I would probably not have noticed but there are some moments when a Gay subtext shows its face through the undergrowth. It could be simple comedy being misinterpreted but it could equally be something else being presented with an appearance of innocence for those with eyes to catch the message. After all, you’ve got Jane Russell as a co-star and precious little heterosexual action…