Mr F. J. [Francis James] Garrick, of Garrick, Cowlishaw, and Fisher, solicitors, died last night, aged 57. He had been an invalid for two years. The actual cause of death was bronchitis. He arrived in Canterbury in 1862, and took an active part in politics. He was a member of the Provincial Council and Provincial Solicitor, and represented St. Albans in the General Assembly from the formation of that electorate to 1887.

Christchurch, June 10.

The funeral of the late Mr F. J. Garrick took place at Papanui to-day. A very large concourse was present of the leading representatives of the legal profession, the Chamber of Commerce, the City Council, and other bodies.

Mr F. J. Garrick sat in the House of Representatives for three sessions. Having been elected for St. Albans in 1884, he was defeated by Mr W. P. Reeves, the present member, at the general election in 1887. During his comparatively brief parliamentary career, Mr Garrick took a decidedly foremost position, and was unquestionably one of the ablest debaters the House has boasted of late years. His speeches, whether delivered impromptu or otherwise, were always noticeable for that completeness and readiness which few men can attain without careful preparation; everything was in order, and what he had to say was said with machine-like precision in respect of method as well as matter. He was a terribly fast speaker, too, all his points of punctuation being the merest shadows, and many an honest reporter laboured in vain when “St. Albans” was on his feet. In 1886, when what is known as “the district railways scandal" was under discussion, Mr Garrick made a great speech, in which the whole question was summed up and discussed in a most masterly style. In politics Mr Garrick was a supporter of the Stout-Vogel Government, but was suspected of leanings toward the Atkinson party (then in Opposition)—a circumstance which probably had a great deal to do with his defeat in 1887. Several times when rumours were rife of a concerted attack on the Government, Mr Garrick was named as likely to lead it, but whether they were true or not he continued to support Sir Robert Stout. In 1885, when Mr Hislop came so near defeating the Government on a no-confidence motion, Mr Garrick withstood a great deal of solicitation (and, it is said, an offer of the Attorney-Generalship), and was true to his party. Generally speaking his politics were liberal, though he played the role of the critic more than that of the statesman, so that his policy was not definitely stated. The deceased gentleman was a brother of a well-known Queensland politician.