In 1907, Rudyard Kipling received the Nobel Prize in Literature “in consideration of the power of observation

Born – December 30, 1865

Birthplace – Bombay, India

Nationality – British

Zodiac Sign – Capricorn

Death – January 18, 1936

Death place – Middlesex Hospital, England

Famous as – Author & poet

Noble prize – 1907

” I keep six honest serving-men (They taught me all I knew); their names are What and Why and When And How And Where and Who,” said by one of the greatest poets of Victorian Epoch. Joseph Rudyard Kipling, also called Rudyard Kipling, was an English poet, short story writer and a novelist, chiefly remembered for his works for children and support for British imperialism. He was born in British India in the middle of the nineteenth century, he was sent to England at the age of six for his further education. Later he returned to India to begin his career as a journalist but soon gave it up to return to his home country, where he concentrated full time on writing. After his marriage, he lived for some years in Vermont, USA. In the New Yorker, Charles McGrath remarked “Kipling has been variously labelled a colonialist, a jingoist, a racist, an anti-Semite, a misogynist, a right-wing imperialist warmonger; and—though some scholars have argued that his views were more complicated than he is given credit for—to some degree he was all those things. That he was also a prodigiously gifted writer who created works of inarguable greatness hardly matters anymore, at least not in many classrooms, where Kipling remains politically toxic.” He was a prolific writer whose children’s books are revered as classics of children’s literature. It is believed that at one point he was offered poet laureateship and on several occasions considered for knighthood, but he refused them. However, he accepted the Nobel Prize in Literature, which made him the first English writer to receive the honour.

Read more: Planning to Prepare for UPSC? Here is a list of 5 Books Recommended by Toppers

Kipling was born to two iconic parents: John Lockwood Kipling and Alice MacDonald. He was born in Bombay, India in 1865. His father was a principal of the Jeejeebyhoy School of Arts and mother had some connections in the Pre- Raphaelite movement. After being sent to England,

The young writer’s reputation soared. Kipling’s official biographer, C.E. Carrington,” declares Cantalupo, “calls 1890 ‘Rudyard Kipling’s year. There had been nothing like his sudden rise to fame since Byron.’” “His poems and stories,” writes O’Toole, “elicited strong reactions of love and hate from the start—almost none of his advocates and detractors were temperate in praise or blame. Ordinary readers liked the rhythms, the cockney speech, and the imperialist sentiments of his poems and short stories; critics generally damned the works for the same reasons.”

Kipling’s Literary Achievements

In 1907, Rudyard Kipling received the Nobel Prize in Literature “in consideration of the power of observation, originality of imagination, virility of ideas and remarkable talent for narration which characterize the creations of this world-famous author” and In 1926, he received the Gold Medal of the Royal Society of Literature

Kipling’s Famous Quotes

Here, we have presented a few one of the most pointed and enduring Rudyard Kipling quotes

“Everyone is more or less mad on one point “- A Plane Tales from the Hills 1888

“An ounce of demonstration is worth a ton of theory” – From Sea and Sea

“As the creeper that girdles the tree trunk,

The law runneth forward and back

For the strength of the Pack is the Wolf,

And the strength of the Wolf is the Pack- The second Jungle book 1895

“He wrapped himself in quotations- as a beggar would enfold himself in the purple of Emperors” – The Finest Story In the World 1891

“If you can dream—and not make dreams your master; If you can think—and not make thoughts your aim;

If you can meet with Triumph and Disaster, And treat those two impostors just the same;” – if 1895

Check our Instagram : Ownguru

Facebook : Ownguru