Rajan Khosa is a writer, director, and a producer by profession who works in the Indian film industry. He has also worked in the films of UK and Europe. He completed his professional studies from “Film and Television Institute of India (FTII) which is situated in Pune, and he also did a course from Royal College of Art (RCA) which is in London. After that, he studied for few tears in the National Institute of Design which is in Ahmedabad, India. His most successful films were Dance of the Wind and Gattu . In his film “Dance of the Wind” in which Kittu Gidwani played the lead role. Its producer was Karl Baumgartner. This film made him won a large number of National and International awards. It released in 25 different countries of the world and received major success everywhere.

His next most successful film “Gattu” was an Indian film that was made under the production of Children’s Film Society, India. Its writer was K. D. Satyam. The lead roles of the film were played by Naresh Kumar , Jayanta Das , Mohammad Samad , Sarvasva Singh Pundir, Zoya Arshad, and Harshit Kaushik. It released into the Indian theatres on 20 April 2012 but premiered at the International Children’s Festival on children’s day that is 14 November 2011. It showed the story of an orphan boy named Gattu who is nine years of age and works in garbage recycling business run by his uncle. The film was a big blockbuster hit of the box office. It was a major success for his career as a film director.

He received a large number of prestigious awards during his lifetime. In 1985, he got the “National Film Award for Best Short Fiction Film” for his film titled Wisdom Tree. In 1997, he won the audience award at London Film Festival and Festival of Three Continents for his film Dance of the Wind. Then in 1998, he was honored with Gold Plaque award at the Chicago International Film Festival in the category of Best Music and Netpac award at the International Film Festival Rotterdam for the same film. For his film Gattu, he received many awards such as Colors Screen Award, audience award at Los Angeles International Film Festival, New York Indian Film Festival award, Bronze Castle Award and Pemio ASPI Award at Castellinaria Film Festival – Switzerland, audience award at Seoul International Youth Film Festival – South Korea, and many more.