AC Milan have appointed Carlo Ancelotti as their new coach in place of Fatih Terim, who was sacked after only four months in charge.

"It was a decision made during the night, when I didn't get any sleep," Milan vice president Adriano Galliani said on the club's official television station Studio Milan.

"I thought again and again what I should do and finally I decided that this was the best decision to take."

Terim heard about the decision in Istanbul, where, ironically, he was giving a call about motivation and team building. He was handed his mobile phone during a media gathering with local journalists and looked shocked as he took in the implications of the call.

The news follows weeks of speculation about Terim's future. The Turk, as he is known in Italy, had been criticised for being too-attack minded by starting with Andriy Shevchenko, Filippo Inzaghi and Rui Costa.

Terim had also insisted that good football was more important than results, claiming last month: "I firstly want my team to play attacking, positive football. At the moment, winning is only secondary."

The 42-year-old Ancelotti takes over with Milan lying fifth in Serie A standings with 15 points, five points off the top following their 1-0 defeat by Torino on Sunday.

Milan, who won the last of their 16 Serie A titles in 1999, said in a statement on their website that Ancelotti's appointment marked the start of a new era.

"The club and Terim departed on good terms. Terim's reaction when he was informed that he had been excused was kind and polite.

"A new chapter has begun. Ancelotti returns to his Milan, where he was a key player. From today it will be a new team."

Ancelotti was sacked by Juventus at the end of last season after twice guiding them to the runners-up position in Serie A, but is regarded as a Milan legend having helped the club win the European Cup in 1989 and 1990.

He had also been linked with a return to Parma, who he coached from 1996-98, following the resignation of Renzo Ulivieri last week.

Terim led Turkey to the European Championships for the first time in 1996, and coached Galatasaray to four Turkish championships and the Uefa Cup in 2000.

He managed Fiorentina last season but resigned towards the end of the campaign after problems with the board, having coached La Viola for only 20 games.

Milan midfielder Cristian Brocchi believes Terim, who received a vote of confidence from Galliani after a 1-1 draw with bottom-placed Venezia in mid-October, faced difficulties from the start.

"From the beginning there was a lot of external pressure on Terim as well as many dubious episodes that made one think there wasn't 100% faith in him," he told Studio Milan.

"But Milan didn't play as it should have done. If we had won all the easier games, which instead we either lost or drew, we would now be comfortably in first place and this certainly weighed on the board's decision."