An unstoppable talent pool of great sailors

The Canary Islands have perfect conditions for sailing, and are famous the world over for their sailors. Having a great climate has been a determining factor in making the islands an important wellspring of sailors and Olympic medal winners for Spain. Canarian-born Luis Doreste was the first Spanish sportsman to win two gold medals. Doreste is accompanied by a long roster of Canarian sailors who complete an endless list of wins for the Canary Islands, including Olympic gold medals and world and European championships.

Joaquín Blanco, Gustavo Doreste and Francisco Acevedo were the first Olympic sailors from the Canary Islands to join the Spanish national team. They took part in the Montreal games in 1976. That marked the beginning of an idyllic relationship between sailing and the islands, one which has lasted until the present day. The archipelago has accumulated up to 28 regatta sailors who have represented Spain on 53 occasions in the last 12 Olympic Games. And Canarian sailors have won 7 gold medals for Spain.

The seven Canarian Olympic medals

The first Olympic gold medal for sailing for the Canary Islands was won by Luis Doreste. He won it in Los Angeles in 1984, in the 470 class, alongside another Canarian sailor, Roberto Molina. This was followed by a gold medal for his brother, José Luis Doreste, in Seoul 1988, competing in the Finn class.

Barcelona ‘92 consecrated Luis Doreste as a world leader in sailing. The Canarian regatta sailor became an Olympic champion for the second time, making him the first Spanish sportsman to attain two Olympic golds. This time he was competing alongside the Canarian Domingo Manrique, in the Flying Dutchman class. Meanwhile Patricia Guerra, sailing with Theresa Zabell, also won an Olympic gold for the Canary Islands in the Barcelona games.

The archipelago's seventh Olympic gold medal was won by Fernando León, in the 1996 Atlanta games, competing in the Tornado class with Pepote Ballester. This Canarian sailor had been very close to the Olympic podium in Seoul in 1988, when he finished fourth in the 470 class. He also took part in the Barcelona games in 1992, in the Soling class, accompanied by King Felipe VI, and coming in sixth.

Canarian sailors “are very intuitive”

“In comparison to other destinations, the Canary Islands have wind conditions that allow one to sail practically all year. Moreover, the variety of the waves makes the regatta course more attractive and demanding. As does the year-round good weather, of course. The temperature - in particular that of the water - makes sailing here more agreeable and pleasant”.

For Luis Doreste, these three characteristics have been decisive in making Canarian sailing prominent on the international scene throughout history. In addition, “Canarian sailors are very intuitive, unlike those from English-speaking countries, who are more theoretical”, and this enables them to adapt with ease to the different regatta courses.

Between Los Angeles ‘84 and Atlanta ‘96, Canarian sailors won 7 gold medals. A historical milestone that is difficult to repeat “because sailing has changed a great deal”, explains Luis Doreste. “It has become professionalised to levels that are extremely demanding, both physically and mentally. It’s difficult to reach the top level and sportspeople become frustrated if they don’t achieve results”, Doreste admits at the same time as he feels it is essential that there be “support so the talent doesn’t slip away, and to prevent youngsters from losing heart - which is the essence of this sport, after all”.

Even though sailing was more about technique and tactics before, and now speed is the priority, “the Canary Islands are still a competitive destination for hosting training and turning out good sailors”, says Luis, because “we have a wide variety of areas that are viable for the demands of the new boats, which call for calmer waters with fewer waves”.

After more than 50 years of sailing, Luis confesses he is still “hooked to sailing. I still have the bug. And it’s a sport that allows you to be competitive and stay active despite your age, by taking on posts that require less of you physically”. Not only has sailing given him great sporting successes - for Luis, the thing that draws him to this sport is “the permanent contact with nature, getting to know different people at each regatta and escaping routine every single day”.