Alan Rudolph is very quirky, and generally audiences like his work or don't. Probably more don't.

But I do, even his early films under the wing of his mentor Robert Altman. To be honest, two of Rudolph's early films — "Welcome to L.A." and "Remember My Name," both produced by Altman — look more like Altman movies than Rudolph movies.

Rudolph really found his own voice with the brilliant "Choose Me." He followed that with the less satisfactory but still interesting "Songwriter," "Trouble in Mind," "Made in Heaven" and "The Moderns."

"Love at Large," unfortunately, falls into the pattern — interesting, but flawed.

The setting is the Northwest (it was filmed in Oregon), where Rudolph employs the wet, cloudy, smoky atmosphere to great advantage, from rain-soaked streets to dew-soaked car windows. He also achieves an almost black-and-white look to some early scenes. (Actually, the film might have been more effective in black and white.)

Tom Berenger, affecting the same gravelly voice he used in "Platoon" (he sounds like he's doing a bad Nick Nolte imitation) is a rumpled private eye hired by sophisticated but spacey Anne Archer to follow a man she suspects may not be faithful to her. (One of the film's best running gags has Berenger repeatedly telling Archer to call him by his first name.)

But Berenger, klutz that he is, follows the wrong guy, which embroils him in a mystery totally unrelated to Archer's. Meanwhile, Berenger is also being followed, by Elizabeth Perkins.

To tell any more would spoil the surprises, and certainly there are many to enjoy. That's one of Rudolph's strong suits — he never takes us down an expected path. Or, if he does, it's only to put a twist on a cliche as a punchline.

Rudolph has developed some annoying habits, though. His camera doesn't hold still for a minute. It's always roving, slowly zooming in and out or circling his subjects. That's fine when it adds to the mood, but too often it seems a pseudo-artistic device.

What's more, his characters here are all over-the-top parodies of '40s film noir. (When Berenger punches somebody out, he doesn't just fall down. He rolls down the stairs and flies out the window.)

At first that's OK, but after awhile, Archer and O'Toole, for example, are less funny than they are merely artificial. Because we don't know much about these people they soon become superficial caricatures. That's OK for a Mel Brooks off-the-wall parody, but not a film with more serious notions.

Still, there are some wonderful moments to be had here — some witty dialogue, terrific atmosphere and mood, goofy little jokes subtly played and winning performances by Berenger and Perkins.

Unfortunately, the story is far too fragmented and there is a major plot hole toward the end that badly mars the overall effect.

Still, fans of Rudolph will find much to enjoy, though even they are not likely to leave it without quibbling.

"Love at Large" is rated a soft R for a few profanities, some violence and sex.