Recently, the Tamil film industry has garnered attention for releasing some captivating movies. Amid all the releases, a movie from the past was recently re-released in theatres. This film was none other than Sivagamiyin Selvan, starring Sivaji Ganesan, Vanisri and Latha in the lead roles.

According to reports, Sivaji Ganesan’s Sivagamiyin Selvan was re-released after 50 years at the Chennai Albert Theatre on Sunday. This theatre earlier screened old films like Vasantha Maligai, which also received immense appreciation from viewers. Sivaji fans thronged to the Sunday evening screening of Sivagamiyin Selvan.

They put garlands on the film poster, worshipped the actor with candles and watched the film with cheers. The Sunday evening show was a houseful at the Albert Theatre. It is quite surprising that a film released 50 years ago still garnered a huge response from viewers.

Sivagamiyin Selvan is a 1974 Indian Tamil film directed by CV Rajendran. It also featured AVM Rajan, SV Ranga Rao, SV Sahasranamam, TK Bhagavathi and MN Rajam in the supporting roles. It is the only film in which Sivaji Ganesan and Latha acted together. The music for the movie was composed by MS Viswanathan. It is a remake of the Hindi film Aradhana, released in 1969, and features Sharmila Tagore and Rajesh Khanna as the main leads.

Earlier, Sivaji Ganesan’s Vasantha Maligai was released at the Albert Theatre in Chennai. In 1972, Vasantha Maligai was released in three theatres in Chennai, and the first 271 shows were housefuls in all three. This was an achievement at that time, as the film ran successfully for almost 750 days in theatres. After having a successful run, the superhit film was re-released several times.

The film ran in Chennai for 100 days when it was re-released in 2019. Every day at 3:00 and 6:30 p.m., two shows were presented at the Albert Theatre.

The owners of the theatres have disclosed that more people attended Vasantha Maligai than viewed the new movies on Friday, Saturday, and Sunday. Vasantha Maligai is the remake of the Telugu movie Prema Nagar. The romantic movie won the hearts of the audience with Sivaji Ganesan and Vanisri’s outstanding performances. The film was directed by KS Prakash Rao and produced by D. Ramanaidu under the banner of Vijaya Suresh Combines.