Sivaji Ganesan (October 1, 1928 – June 21, 2001) was a famous Tamil film actor. His given name is Villupuram Chinnaiya Manrayar Ganesamoorthy. He made his Tamil film debut with Parasakthi.

Biography

‘Shivaji’ was born as the 4th son of Ganesan, Chinnaiya Manrayar and Rajamani Ammal. He is survived by his wife Kamala and sons Ramkumar, Prabhu and daughters Shanti and Thenmozhi.

Film career

Shivaji Ganesan used to act in stage plays before coming to the screen. After seen, Sivaji played the role Emperor Sivaji in Kanda Hindu Rayam, his father started to call him “Sivaji”. The name has remained the same ever since.

‘Sivaji’ Ganesan has acted in more than 300 Tamil films. He has acted in nine Telugu films, two Hindi films and one Malayalam film. He has a good voice, clear and emotional Tamil accent and excellent acting skills. Actor Tilak was known by most people as the acting emperor. However, there are critics who say that his acting is more or less theatrical, and that his acting is more or less theatrical. In particular, it was understandable to viewers to exaggerate emotions due to technical shortcomings in stage plays of the time.

His historical heroes like Manogara, Raja Raja Cholan and Karnan are famous for their verses.

Similarly, Veerapandiya Kattabomman accepted the roles of national leaders like Kappalottiya Tamilan and made them act effectively.

And has acted in the roles of all the gods of the ancient gods. Thiruvilaiyatal, Saraswati Sapatham, Thiruvarutselvar Kandan Karuna, Thirumal Perumai and the people who saw Siva Perumal as the lingam when he acted as Sivaperumal in the film are also known as Shivaji Ganesan.

Paired with other stars

Even though he was a leading hero, Sivaji did not hesitate to act with other stars. Gemini Ganesan has acted in many films in which Sivaji Ganesan played the lead role, such as “Pasamalar”, “Pava Mannippu”, “Barthal Pasi Theerum”, “Veerapandiyak Kattabomman”. Major Sundararajan has also acted in many character roles with Sivaji. Sivaji Ganesan has only acted with MGR in one film, Kundukkili.

Political career

He was involved in Dravidian movement politics till 1955 and joined the Congress party from 1961. In 1982, he became a member of the upper house of parliament. Following differences with the Congress Party in 1987, he left it and started a new party, the Tamil Progressive Front. However, his influence as an actor did not support politics. Towards the end he withdrew from politics.