Virtu Ferries

Virtu Ferries is a Maltese company founded in 1988 that operates ferry services from Malta to Sicily by catamaran. The company is part of the Virtu Holdings. It has a subsidiary Venezia Lines which runs seasonal services from Venice. It carries over 250,000 passengers and 25,000 vehicles annually. In 2010 the MV Jean de La Valette replaced the Maria Dolores as the flagship, and it carries about 800 passengers and 200 vehicles. It operates the Valletta - Pozzallo route across the Malta Channel, almost daily all-year round. Virtu Ferries currently operates exclusively catamarans. All vessels fly the Maltese flag. [Wikipedia]

Vodohod

Vodohod is a Russian cruise company and river cruise line operator, founded in 2004 by the Volga Shipping Company and named after Ivan Kulibin’s "water-going vessel” or "water-goer”. The company has its headquarters in Moscow and Saint Petersburg, Russia. After merging with Volga Flot Tour company operates more than 50 passenger ships along rivers of Volga, Don, Kama, the Moscow and Volga-Don canals, the Volga–Baltic Waterway, Northern–Western rivers, lakes Ladoga and Onega. The company is also planning the launch of two, twin Finnish-built expedition ships under the codename Project Vega for delivery in 2021 and 2022. The company is in the top three companies (along with Mosturflot and Infoflot) of the consolidated Russian river cruise market (the first five companies carry about 80% of the total passenger traffic). [Wikipedia]

Weiße Flotte Stralsund

The Weiße Flotte ("White Fleet") is a shipping company with its head office in Stralsund, Germany, that offers passenger and car ferry services as well as excursions by boat, especially along the Baltic Sea coast of the state of Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania. [Wikipedia]

Western Ferries

Western Ferries (Clyde) Ltd (also known as Western Ferries) is a private ferry company with its headquarters in Hunters Quay, Scotland. It currently operates on the Firth of Clyde running a year-round, high-frequency vehicle carrying service between Hunters Quay, near Dunoon, and McInroy's Point, on the outskirts of Gourock in Inverclyde. [Wikipedia]

Wightlink

Wightlink is a ferry company operating routes across The Solent between Hampshire and the Isle of Wight in the south of England. It operates car ferries between Lymington and Yarmouth, and Portsmouth and Fishbourne and a fast passenger-only catamaran between Portsmouth Harbour and Ryde Pier. It is jointly owned by Basalt Infrastructure Partners and Fiera Infrastructure. [Wikipedia]

Windstar Cruises

Windstar Cruises is a cruise line that operates a fleet of small luxury cruise ships. Its six yachts carry just 148 to 310 guests and cruise to 50 nations, calling at 150 ports throughout Europe, the South Pacific, the Caribbean, and Central America. In May 2014, Windstar added to its sailing yachts by adding the Star Pride power yacht, followed by Star Breeze and Star Legend in May 2015. The additional capacity opened up new itineraries such as voyages to Iceland, the Panama Canal, and Costa Rica and allowed Windstar Cruises to sail Tahiti year round. [Wikipedia]