The Paediatric and Neonatal Surgery Department at Noah’s Ark Children’s Hospital for Wales in Cardiff

The Paediatric and Neonatal Surgery team in Cardiff looks after babies, children, and teenagers who need specialist surgery.

We are a team of Consultant Paediatric Surgeons and we work closely with a wonderful group of Advanced Nurse Practitioners, Specialist Nurses, surgical trainees and fellows, and the incredible wider team of doctors, nurses and staff in the Children’s Hospital.

We provide emergency care for babies and children who have illnesses that might need an urgent operation or procedure, and we provide elective care for less urgent illnesses that need to be reviewed in clinic before an operation or procedure is planned at a future date.

Within our team we sub-specialise to provide the best possible care to every child we look after. This sub-specialisation means that children with specific problems affecting the kidneys and bladder, lungs, upper gastrointestinal tract and lower gastro-intestinal tract, are looked after by a surgeon who has expertise in that specific condition.

Many of the common surgical conditions affecting children are looked after at hospitals around Wales where the child can receive care closer to home.

However, some of the rarer and more complex conditions need to be looked after at Noah’s Ark in Cardiff.

Our main surgical ward is called Owl Ward (Ward Gwdihw) and this is set up to provide all the care and help that children and families need while they are in hospital.

Starfish Outpatient department is where our clinics are located and this is where we are likely to see our patients for assessments and reviews.

As a team we are continuously looking to further improve the care we provide to our patients and we do this in many ways. We are pioneers in minimally invasive surgery techniques (keyhole surgery) for many operations and we are fortunate to have a newly built operating theatre suite fitted with superb, high definition, keyhole surgery equipment. We are heavily involved in education and research so that we can enable every parent, doctor, or nurse, who looks after one of our patients to contribute and help with their care. We also draw on expertise from around the country and around the world so that we can ensure that the children we look after in Wales get the best surgery possible.

We also run few multidisciplinary clinics for specific conditions where children need an input from different specialties. Those clinics are set up to save parents few journeys and see all doctors at one clinic appointment.

Multidisciplinary Team clinics:

Differentiation of Sexual Development (DSD)

Inflammatory Bowel Disease (IBD),

Neuropathic Bladder Clinic (Joint 45 clinic),

Surgery and Gastroenterology joint MDT clinic

Oncology MDT