A little bit of country, a hometown connection, and a free concert and fireworks show all come together on Friday, March 31, as Springtime Tallahassee presents its Music Festival on Kleman Plaza in downtown Tallahassee featuring Easton Corbin. One of country music’s most successful artists, Corbin is making the trip back to the state of his roots, as he grew up on his grandparent’s farm in Gilchrist County, southeast of Tallahassee.

“Corbin has made a lasting impression on the country music landscape and we know he’ll leave a lasting impression on Tallahassee,” said Springtime Tallahassee President Steve Lastowski. “His hit 'I’m a Little More Country Than That,' resonates with anyone who’s driven down a country road in northwest Florida, and the Southern hospitality he brings ties in perfectly with what our organization is all about.”

Corbin’s list of hits also includes “Roll With It,” “Lovin' You is Fun,” “Baby Be My Love Song,” All Over the Road” and “Are You With Me.” He surged onto the music scene in 2009 and has an upcoming fourth studio album expected to be released this year with its lead single, “A Girl Like You.”

With three Breakthrough Artist of the Year awards followed by multiple award nominations by the Country Music Association, Academy of Country Music and the Country Music Association, Corbin is recognized worldwide and performed before sold out crowds in 2016 on Carrie Underwood’s The Storyteller Tour.

The Springtime Tallahassee Music Festival starts at 6 p.m. on Friday with opening acts and the opening of the Beer & Wine Garden. Corbin takes the stage at 9 p.m. New this year is a Fireworks Finale at 10:30 p.m., which will light up the sky as revelers celebrate “Living It Up in the City,” the theme for this year’s Springtime Tallahassee.

The free Music Festival, now in its third year, is one more way that Springtime Tallahassee — a nonprofit, member supported organization — delivers a major economic impact and family friendly events for Tallahassee, drawing attendees from across the state and beyond. Previous concerts have attracted as many as 10,000 attendees, the vast majority of whom are back in downtown Tallahassee the next morning for the Springtime Tallahassee Jubilee, parade and related events that draw more than 150,000 people.

“From the formation of Springtime Tallahassee in 1967 as a way to help keep Tallahassee as the state’s capital, our members have demonstrated their love for the community,” said Lastowski. “We’re also committed to bringing people together. By the end of the concert or parade, you’ll become friends with the people standing near you. That’s what makes this a true community event.”