July 30, 2014

Charlea Mills

On Monday, Cassville was abuzz with anticipation of the arrival of one person.

For the many fans of Easton Corbin, Nashville country star, Monday night was a dream come true. No matter the crowds or the heat in the Cassville Event Center, it was all worth it for the chance of a lifetime to see one of country’s up and coming greats in their hometown.

After getting into town in the late morning, Corbin took some time to rest before the show of a lifetime for many. He said, “We got in around 10 or 11 this morning, ate at a great little barbeque place, and then I came back and crashed.” The band fueled up on BBQ Station and met a few people in town before the pre-concert festivities began.

In an interview before the concert, Corbin said that Cassville was similar to his hometown of Trenton, Fla. He said, “For me, I come from a small town with one stoplight. It’s a great opportunity to come to a small town like where I grew up where I can have a positive affect on the young kids.”

Corbin went on to say, “I like that way of life. If I had my choice, I’d live 30 to 45 minutes outside of a town in the country.”

When asked the advice that he has for young people wanting to pursue music and entertainment, he said, “For me, growing up we had a small country band. We went all over the place playing...a big part is playing and practicing as much as you can.” Corbin began playing guitar in his early teens, citing Merle Haggard as his biggest role model. Haggard’s was also the first record he owned.

The driving force for the concert part of The Next Crop Project, was a partnership between Dodge Ram and the Future Farmers of America. Corbin’s involvement with the free concert was because of the benefit that he received from FFA growing up. He said, “The FFA is a great organization. The first year I did it was sixth grade, the first year that I could. It instills hard work, value and team work. When you commit, it affects not only you, but the people who depend on you.”

Farming was always a part of life for Corbin. Both sides of his grandparents owned farms in both livestock and produce. Corbin showed beef cattle when he participated in FFA and remembers the experience fondly. That type of upbringing also helped him become who he is today. He said, “It influences my singing, who I am and what I am as an artist.”

Corbin’s set lasted a bit over an hour for the 1,000 fans in the building. After, the star stayed on stage to sign autographs the many waiting fans rushing to the stage, a move showcasing the singer’s thoughtfulness from his small town upbringing.

The free VIP-only concert tickets were split 500 with the Cassville, Purdy, and Southwest FFAs and 500 to Country Dodge. To be chosen for the concert, Country Dodge participated in a test drive event to raise money for the local FFAs.

The pre-show FFA Feed also allowed people to listen to the 221 Band, buy a commemorative t-shirt and win a meet and greet with Corbin before the concert, all to benefit the local FFA and youth sports leagues.