Easton Corbin’s Grandfather Dies

The singer's grandfather died in Corbin's Florida hometown at the age of 92.

Easton Corbin Pays Homage to Hometown Police Deputies Shot and Killed at Restaurant

The singer is honoring the memory of two police officers who were sadly killed in his hometown of Trenton, Fla.

Carrie Underwood Gets Unique End-of-Tour Gifts From Tourmates

Carrie Underwood performed the final date of her Storyteller Tour on Monday night (Nov. 28), and the singer shared her appreciation for her fans — and openers the Swon Brothers and Easton Corbin — on social media.

Easton Corbin Honoring Military Families on Tour

Easton Corbin is helping to honor military families this year while on tour with Carrie Underwood.

Carrie Underwood Pranks Easton Corbin (On His Birthday, No Less!)

Carrie Underwood isn't well-known as one of country music's practical jokers, but after spending some time with Brad Paisley, she's clearly learned a thing or two.

Carrie Underwood and Tourmates Go ‘Fishin’ in the Dark’ [Watch]

On the inaugural date of her Storyteller Tour, Carrie Underwood and her tourmates Easton Corbin and the Swon Brothers treated the audience to a cover that brought them back a few years: the Nitty Gritty Dirt Band’s “Fishin’ in the Dark.”

Easton Corbin in Syracuse

Country music star Easton Corbin is coming to Le Moyne College in Syracuse, NY. This is going to be a rockin' outdoor show right on campus. The concert is slated for Saturday, October 4th, 2014.

Easton Corbin Gets Steamy in ‘Clockwork’ Video [WATCH]

Some days it's good to be a country music star. Easton Corbin gets steamy in the new video for 'Clockwork.' Watch him lock lips several times with a beautiful blond. I bet he was loving his job that day!

Easton Corbin 'Clockwork'

Are you looking to listen to Easton Corbin's new song &quot;Clockwork&quot;? We have the back story, and the song info here.

Easton Corbin Coming To The Turning Stone And Soon!

Easton Corbin In The Showroom @ Turning Stone - January 23rd, 2014 at 8:00pm I am pleased to announce, although it may be old news to some of you Super Fans, that for the first time ever Easton Corbin will be performing at the Turning Stone Resort and Casino.

The Band Perry Announce We Are Pioneers World Tour

The Band Perry will begin their first headlining tour this fall in Sweden. The We Are Pioneers Tour kicks off on Nov. 8 in Gothenburg and will continue through 10 European countries (20 shows total) before returning to North America in 2014.