Felton Bridge needs a New Roof

By Bruce McPherson, County Supervisor 5th District

Felton, and all of Santa Cruz County, has a treasure in the backyard, and the quest is on to repair and preserve this treasure.

At 35 feet high, the Felton Covered Bridge over the San Lorenzo River it is considered the tallest covered bridge in the United States. It was built in 1892-93 at a cost of $4,677. The bridge was registered as a California State Historical Landmark in 1957 and was listed in the National Register of Historic Places in 1973. When it was nominated to the National Register in 1973, it was one of only 11 covered bridges remaining in California. In 1988 the Felton Covered Bridge was one of 10 projects to receive a National Historic Preservation Award.

Until 1937, the bridge provided the only access to the San Lorenzo Valley area. This changed when an iron bridge on nearby Graham Hill Road was constructed.

As the new bridge was being built, the Felton Covered Bridge was scheduled for demolition. However, the citizens of Felton protested in support of its preservation and the bridge was saved. This action is said to have been the first Western example of preserving a by-passed bridge. The Felton Volunteer Fire Department has maintained the bridge through funds raised from an annual pancake breakfast.

Once again, Felton residents are mustering to save the bridge. The bridge roof has been damaged by bad weather and tree limbs and is badly in need of repair. The late Bill Burton championed the repair project, supported by many Felton residents. Burton successfully sought a grant from Caltrans to repair the roof. That project has recently received approval under the National Environmental Protection Act.

The project consists of removing damaged hand-split redwood barn shakes and replacing them with new hand-split redwood barn shakes to match existing historical shakes. All work has to be done in accordance with federal historical rehabilitation standards. The workers will have access to the roof using railed catwalks on both sides of the roof line. Debris netting will span the underside of the catwalks to prevent construction material from entering the San Lorenzo River.

Sounds so easy, right? If we have to replace all of the shakes, we will need about 9,000 to do the job (we don’t know exactly how many we need at this point). However, the plan is to only replace the damaged ones. Oh, did I mention that shakes have to made from old timber, which is not readily available? And, each of the shakes has to be hand hewn. Not too many folks have the knowledge or the tools to do that.

Fortunately, we have some remarkable people helping in our quest. First, Mary and Kelly Wood, who own the Roaring Camp property, have offered to donate downed timber that could be found on their property for the cause. Lud McCrary of Big Creek Lumber has offered to make shakes. Steve Liebenberg has offered to help locate and make shakes.

Judy Anderson and John MacDonald of the Felton Business Association are spearheading a Felton Remembers Parade and Festival that will feature the FeltonCovered Bridge.

We’re hoping to involve the community in making shakes — or contributing funds, if necessary. I will keep you informed and hope that you will share in the celebration for this wonderful historic treasure.

(Visited 115 times, 1 visits today)