Sultan Ben Zoukan ben Mostapha ben Ismaiil Al Atrash Edit Profile

Sultan Pasha, Sultan Basha

also known as Supreme Commander of the Great Syrian Revolt

revolutionist politics

Sultan Pasha, the Supreme Commander of the Great Syrian revolt was born in 1888 in Quouraya, Souweida State - Syria. In 1910, Sultan with his father (the village's chief) of the mountain (Djebel) organized a revolt and fought the Turks. In 1922, Sultan commanded his first revolution of "Tal al-Hadid" in Souweida against the French mandate to kill general Gouraud, but this act was failed.

Background

Syria was under the domination of the Ottoman Empire for 4 centuries, and after Turks under the french mandate. But Syrian people, especially in Mount of Arab (Jabal al-Arab), southern Syria, never accepted this domination. In 1916, the Great Arab Revolution against the Turks was commanded by Al Sharif Hussein of Makkah. Sultan Al Atrash participated in this Revolution, and was the first to enter Damascus with his men, after the battle of "Tilal al-Manea", near Damascus, and was the first to raise the Arab flag on the top of Government building in Damascus (Saraya). This flag was made by female members of Al Atrash family.

Education

He never been to a real school back then, but he has been raised by his father, who tutored Sultan the horse-riding, shooting, fishing and martial arts. He learnt to read and write with the help of some teachers in Al Kottab (an Arabian old-fashioned method of education), and continued his studies by personal readings (self education).

Career

He formed a group of Arabs freemen fighters "Mujaheddin", carrying the Arab Flag, made by Al-Atrash family. They occupied The Castle of Basra - Al Sham, Damascus on September 25, 1918. He also led the battle Tilal Al-Manih "Manih Hills". He led the Great Syrian Revolution in 1925, as he gathered around him the finest fighters of the nation and the most prominent national leaders, with a peerless national consensus, fought battles against the French occupation.

Achievements

Works

Revolution

The Great Syrian Revolution

Politics

Revolutionist