Sultan al-Atrash, (1891-1982) (Arabic: سلطان الأطرش) Commonly known as Sultan Pasha al-Atrash (Arabic: سلطان باشا الأطرش) Prominent Arab Druze leader, Syrian nationalist and Commander General of the Great Syrian Revolution (1925-1927). He fought against the Ottomans, French, and even against the Syrian government in days of dictatorship. One of the most influential figures in Syrian and Druze history, he played a major role in deciding the destiny of Jabal ad-Druze and of Syria in general.

Family

Sultan al-Atrash was born in Al-Qrayya, a village 20 km south of Sweida known for the famous Druze family of Al-Atrash, which had nominally governed the region since 1879. His father Zuqan led a fierce battle against the Ottomans near Al-Kefr in 1910, where he faced the forces of Sami Pasha al-Farouqi. He was captured and later executed in 1911. Sultan's mother was Sheikha al-Atrash.

Role in the Arab revolt

Sami Pasha used military force and trickery and succeeded at last in occupying Jabal el Druze. He sent hundreds of young Druze to fight in the Balkans, and Sultan was among them. However, during the first World War, the Ottomans left Jabal el Druze in peace as they feared rebellion. Sultan was then able to get in touch with Pan-Arab movements and especially with the Arab Revolt in Hijaz. As the revolt started he raised the Arabic flag on the citadel of Salkhad and on his own house.

As the Arab forces reached Aqaba, he sent a thousand men to join the revolt. And he joined them himself with another 300 men when they reached Bosra. His forces were the first to enter Damascus and raise the Arabic flag on the government house on September 29, 1918.Sultan was a good friend to the Hashemite Emir Faisal, the leader of the Arab forces in the revolt, he was given for that the titles of Emir and General in the Syrian army, which is the equivalent of the title of Pasha. And Faisal, later king of Iraq, helped Sultan a lot during his exile years.

The newly-independent kingdom of Syria didn't live for long, as it was occupied by France after the Battle of Maysalun on July 24, 1920. Sultan was gathering his men to fight the French but the quick succession of events cut his efforts short, as French forces entered Damascus, and the country was divided to five states, Jabal el Druze being one of them.

The Adham Khanjar incident

On July 7, 1922, French soldiers captured Adham Khanjar, a Lebanese Shiite rebel who was seeking refuge at Sultan's house while he was away. Khanjar was wanted for attempting to assassinate General Gouraud. Upon his arrival home, Sultan demanded the release of Khanjar, but the French refused. A few days later, Sultan and his men attacked a French convoy they thought to transport Khanjar, who was sent to Damascus in another convoy. The French responded by destroying his house and ordering his arrest. Sultan had to flee to Jordan and launched raids against French posts. But he returned ten months later after he was pardoned.

The Syrian Revolution of 1925-1927

In 1925 revolution started in Druze Mountain to include the whole Syria and part of Lebanon. Unanimously, leadership was assumed to Sultan Pasha al-Atrash, This revolution is considered one of the most important revolutions against the French mandate because it included the whole Syria and contained fierce battles between the rebels and French forces.

Causes

Among the myriad of causes cited by historians for the Syrian Revolt lies the confrontation between the Druze political elite - led by the Atrash clan - and the colonial authorities based in Damascus. The major point of contention between both camps is said to have been the degree of autonomy the French were willing to give the rulers of the Jabal.

For example, under the guise "modernization," the French colonial authorities sought to overthrow the traditional/"feudal" political elite, and impose their own subordinates as governors of the province. This campaign also sought to impose other aspects of "civilization" upon the Druze community, such as a secular judicial system - all of which were meant to undercut established norms and practices in the interest of expanding the influence of the colonial authorities.

The straw that broke the camel's back is said to have been Damascus' appointment of Capt. Gabriel Carbillet as governor of Jabal el Druze. According to Michael Provence, author of "The Great Syrian Revolt and the Rise of Arab Nationalism", Carbillet "zealously sought to break the grip of Druze 'feudalism' in the region." In implementing his agenda, Carbillet "conscripted the sheikhs for forced labor on modernizing projects such as road-building." Consequent protests by members of the community "were met with repression, villages raised militia, and the regional capital Suwayda was besieged."

Revolution

On August 23, 1925 Sultan Pasha al-Atrash officially declared revolution against France, and soon Damascus, Homs and Hama attended the revolution, Al-Atrash won many battles against the French at the beginning of revolution. Such battles as Al-Kafir Battle in the July 21, 1925, Al-Mazra'a Battle in August 2, 1925, and the battle of Salkhad, Almsifarh, Suwayda and others. After rebel victories against the French, France sent thousands of troops to Syria and Lebanon from Morocco and Senegal, equipped with modern weapons, compared to the few supplies of the rebels. This dramatically altered the results and allowed the French to regain many cities after fierce resistance lasted until the spring of 1927, The French sentenced Sultan al-Atrash toexecution, but he had escaped with the rebels to Transjordan and he was eventually pardoned. He later returned to Syria in 1937 after the signing of the Syrian French Treaty. He was met with a huge public reception.

The results

* Replacement of High commissioners and military officers in SyriaFor example High Commissioner Maurice Sarrail was replaced with Mesio (de Jouvenal), after rebels had attacked Al-Azem Palace in Damascus

* Damascus was bombarded severely, and a quarter of the city burned.

* France sent one of the most prominent leaders General Gamlan after growing strength of the rebels and the victories.

* Reunification of Syria after divided into four small countries: Damascus, Aleppo, and Alawites Mountain, Jabal Druze

* French agreed to the holding of elections won by the opposition, led by Ibrahim Hanano, Hashim al-Atassi

Role after the revolution

Al-Atrash participated actively in the Independence Intifada in 1945, that led to the country's independence. In 1948 he called to establish a unified Arab Army for the Liberation of Palestine, already, hundreds of young people volunteered and went for participation in 1948 war.

During the rule of Adib Shishakli, Al-Atrash had many harassments because of his opposition to government policy, He left Druze Mountain again to Jordan in December 1954, He came back as Al-Shieshkli regime fall down.Al-Atrash supported the Arab unity between Egypt and Syria in 1958, and firmly refused the process of separation in 1961. Al-Atrash is also known for his contributions to social life and development in Druze Mountain.

Al-Atrash's popularity

Sultan Pasha al-Atrash, is one of the most popular prominent leaders in Arab history and the Syrian, in particular.Atrash had very huge popularity between DruzeAl-Atrash these days has many statues in Druze Mountain in main squares in addition to his photos in most houses, Al-Atrash also is widely mentioned in local folklore of poems and popular songs. Atrash is considered by Druze as a symbol of patriotism, courage and secularism.Reasons for this include:

* Atrash is known for his secularism when he raised the slogan "Religion is for God, nation is for all: ("al deen le allah wa al watan le al jamee"')" when he led the revolution against the French, which was comprised of rebels belong to many religions. His speeches and publications were entirely devoid of religious symbols.

* Atrash strongly rejected the French offer of the Druze Mountain independency. He demanded a national Syrian unity.

* Known for simple living and humility.

* Atrash refused to accept any political office after independence of Syria in 1946.

President Gamal Abdel Nasser honored Sultan Pasha al-Atrash, During the Syrian Egyptian unity with the highest medal in the United Arab Republic, during his visit to the province Suwayda.

In 1970, Syrian President Hafez al-Assad Honored Prince Sultan Pasha al-Atrash for his historic role in the Syrian Revolution.

Death