Click to read the article in Turkish

Main opposition Republican People's Party (CHP) İstanbul MP Sezgin Tanrıkulu has released a written statement for the press on the occasion of the third anniversary of July 15 coup attempt.

Making a statement in the capacity of "Parliamentary Commission to Investigate July 15 Coup Attempt member", Tanrıkulu has reminded the audience that a Commission to Investigate Coups was established in the 26th Term of the Grand National Assembly of Turkey (TBMM).

"However, the story of this commission is, in itself, a historical document, manifesting the unwilligness to disclose the relations with the coup", Sezgin Tanrıkulu has indicated in his statement.

Stating that he damns the coup plotters and he says democracy unconditionally, the MP has underlined that Turkey has been ruled under conditions of coup since July 15, 2016 and said the following in brief:

'Transparent working of commission prevented'

"The executive board of the commission, which was established by mutual consent, was formed by the [ruling] Justice and Development Party (AKP) while it could have consisted of all parties.

"The commission was also prevented from setting its agenda and working in a pluralist and transparent manner.

'Requests for broadcasting rejected'

"Likewise, our insistent requests for the broadcast of commissions world were also systematically rejected.

"In fact, when our live broadcasts on Twitter became effective, we were threatened that the broadcasts in questions would be banned, otherwise, the commission would be abolished.

'Chief of Staff and Intelligence Chair not heard'

"The witnesses and public officials, whom we wanted to invite to the commission, were not summoned.

"While the then Chief of Staff and Undersecretary of National Intelligence Organization (MİT) had to be heard before the commission to shed light on the coup, it was indicated that the Prime Minister did not allow it.

"Therefore, the people in question, who were of critical importance to shed light on the incidents behind the coup attempt, did not come to the commission or they were prevented from doing so.

'Erdoğan said, "End works of commission"'

"Troubled with the works of commission, AKP and Dear Erdoğan said in early December, 'The works of commission should be ended' while there was still time, while it was possible to give extra time.

"In this way, the commission was rendered non-operational. Hence, as of this date, the commission has not worked." (EKN/SD)

* Photograph: Anadolu Agency - Archive