"Wow!"

We must have uttered this single word to ourselves on 100 different occasions during the time we spent playing through Ubi Soft's masterful new action-adventure, Prince of Persia: The Sands of Time. This breathtaking 3D sequel to creator Jordan Mechner's classic titles is very faithful to its predecessors and simultaneously new and innovative in remarkably creative ways. It bears some resemblance to other outstanding adventure games such as Ico and yes, even Zelda, but mostly it's a spectacular extension -- in, fact, the evolution of -- the Prince of Persia franchise. It's also one of the very best titles of the year.

Gameplay

It was almost 15 years ago that the original Prince of Persia shipped and dazzled players. Here was a smart and stylized action-adventure game during a period of relatively primitive, shallow software. This title featured elegant and challenging environmental puzzles, deadly traps, brutal swordplay and astonishing acrobatics. It had an intriguing premise, a Persian Prince on a quest to rescue his princess from the evil Vizier Jaffar and with only an hour to do it -- a time clock counted down to zero during the entire quest. Fun and intuitive, it defined a genre and became a classic.

Ubi Soft's Prince of Persia: The Sands of Time, the 3D grandson of the original, is every bit as clever, as well made, as wholly entertaining and enjoyable -- and then some. This long-in-development sequel not only retains the established play mechanics and charm of its 2D predecessor, but it actually betters them -- and by a considerable amount. A commendable accomplishment given that the first is considered by many to be one of the greatest videogames ever created.

Total Prince Coverage!

Looking for more than just the review? Maybe you want to know what version of the game to buy? Be sure to check these out:

Head-to-Head Comparison

Complete Strategy Guide

Inside Look w/Movies

Desktop Wallpaper

Join Insider Today

The title features a very intelligent, thoughtful presentation. Prince's story is told through a variety of crisp, ambient full-motion video cut-scenes and witty in-game dialogue. The character talks to himself, yes, and he even acknowledges this oddity sometimes, which is amusing. This direct method of storytelling works tremendously well because it never breaks us from the action. Plus, because the story often unravels from the very lips of our hero, we always know what he's thinking and feeling and it makes him more real and more likable.

Prince, as it turns out, is not the cliché hero. He has his own agenda. He's proud, if not conceited. He wants to please his father. And it's this ambition that starts all of the trouble. The game begins in medieval Persia shortly after the Prince and the king have defeated the Maharajah and looted his palace. When the Prince takes a mysterious dagger he accidentally unleashes the Sands of Time, an evil force that infests the kingdom and transforms its inhabitants into demonic beings. The character's quest is, ultimately, to set right his own stupid mistake and reverse the dark magic. No easy task.

The quest seems just as insurmountable from a purely gameplay perspective. Prince will travel through the entirety of the palace, a huge, hulking thing that stretches up, down, and all around. He'll use his wits, his acrobatics, and his sword, avoid traps and kill enemies, engage in high-rise platforming, balance on beams and swing on poles, climb and hang, dangle and flip, shimmy and slide, run, summersault and fight, fall and rewind, slow time and… fall in love? Well, he does meet a beautiful princess along the way and an intriguing sub-story unfolds. As to just what happens, our lips are sealed.

The control and play mechanics that define this adventure are the absolute epitome of intuitiveness. Prince is moved tightly around with the analog stick and can jump or roll depending upon his situation. He can also run on and up walls with the right shoulder and eventually slow and rewind time with the left. These acrobatic and magical moves are seemingly complicated, but are manipulated so effortlessly that we wonder why other developers haven't figured out the formula. Certainly the overly clunky Tomb Raider, which feels positively robotic by comparison, could have benefited from this superb control implementation and execution.

It's this phenomenal sense of freedom that surrounds movement and the way in which it can be used to interact with the wholly giant, but still linear 3D world that makes the experience so exceptional. Prince can run across a wall, reach its end, jump from it onto a ladder, slide down to a ledge, shimmy across it, leap outward onto a post and then to a pole, swing and flip outward, bounce back and forth between two structures, land swiftly on the ground and keep running, and the entire amazing sequence can be executed easily and with little practice.

Meanwhile, malfunctioned processes in other games feel smooth and intuitive in this one. Just as Lara Croft struggles to move a crate, Prince can easily push it in any direction. Just as Kain can only shimmy to the end of a corner, Ubisoft's warrior can go around it and continue onward. It's all so good that it makes almost everything else out there feel archaic and wrong.

As ever, the puzzles in Sands of Time are always environmental based and usually involve getting Prince from Point A to Point B. It's important to remember that Point A might be the ground floor and Point B the highest palace peak. There are some thrilling challenges in place and a great degree of satisfaction gained upon successfully completing them.

The puzzles, sometimes downright intense, are almost always logical; they make sense. And because of that they can be understood and solved in a logical manner, which again is refreshing when so many adventure games throw logic directly out of the window -- ahem, Resident Evil. Prince might be required to move a series of mirrors around a room to reflect beams of light in a particular path or he might simply have to figure out how to get across an abyss without dying. Both are engaging for different reasons, neither less important. The puzzle elements seamlessly mingle with the control and are perfectly brilliant throughout the entire adventure.

When Prince is not leaping from walls or dodging floor spikes, he can usually be found in battle with a small variety of relentless enemies. Ubi Soft has worked hard to make sure the battle system performs and it shows. Prince can wield one of several different powerful swords he obtains throughout his adventure, and he can strike at enemies with it, dodge, leap over them and swipe, jump from walls and slice, and more. The battles are certainly daunting and usually engrossing but a couple of minor drawbacks keep them from the superior polish that the rest of the game exhumes.

The first is the camera, which shoots the action cinematically and without flaw during the exploration scenarios, but can be cumbersome in battle. It may not showcase the fights from the appropriate angle, or it may run into a wall and stick. This doesn't happen very often, but occasionally. Beside, the camera can be manually zoomed back to shoot the action from afar, but this can cause other vision barriers.

The other is that these duels with enemies can become too routine -- too predictable. There is a formula to them, and a noticeable one. They arrive always after long bouts of exploration and puzzle solving and they can seem like a chore by comparison. And y et, the battle system in place is still more refined than most.

Prince can get through most of the game in slow motion and even rewind time. These two abilities arrive as welcomed additions to the original title, which often forced us into unavoidably dangerous situations and then made us retry again and again after failing. In Sands of Time if the hero accidentally takes a fall to his death, all we need to do is hold the left shoulder button and the unfortunate mistake can be rewound on the fly -- the only stipulation being that we haven't wasted all of our Sand power (the Prince can find and refill this magic throughout the world). This addition makes what could be a frustrating experience far less so, and it also allows us to be more daring and more experimental in our methods of puzzle solving and platforming.

The Sands of Time delivers a respectable play length, especially if the closest comparative product is the all-too-short Ico. It took us almost 15 hours to beat the game the first time through. Some will be able to complete it in less time and others will spend significantly more with the adventure. The bulk of the offering is unparalleled in design, enthralling and completely encapsulating, but the very end seems anticlimactic -- not poor -- when positioned next to the rest of the experience.

In an effort to extend replay value and to give long-time fans of the franchise something extra to cheer about, the PlayStation 2 version of Sands of Time also features the original game in all of its classic emulated glory. It's an excellent unlockable, if for nothing more than nostalgia purposes, and the original game is still enjoyable. Meanwhile, the disc also includes a single level from one of the classic Prince games reborn in full 3D -- another intriguing extra.

Graphics

Sometimes a game has a superb art style and other times it has pioneering technology. Very few games have both, but The Sands of Time is one of them. The title, developed out of Ubisoft's Montreal studio, is a real visual stunner. Again we're reminded of Ico, with its stretching architecture and saturated, hazy style, but really the game is just the perfect 3D realization of the long-standing Persia franchise.

The Sands of Time drops us into a rich, vivid, detailed world engulfed by a gargantuan palace that seems to spread outward in every direction. The play locales are huge. Ubi has done a fine job of providing different locations and environments within the context of this overworld, as it were. There are underground ice caverns, water-filled dungeons, vegetation-engulfed courtyards, nerve-breaking high-rise platforms and much more, and all of them are brought to life with realistic geometry, ambient lighting, and animated interactive objects. Buildings explode, bridges collapse, and all of that good stuff.

There are also subtle extras that make big differences like dripping water, light beams that shine through windows, pretty reflections and transparencies, and more. And don't even get us started on how fantastic the rewinding or slowing of time looks because there are not enough words.

Character models do not have the most polygons we've ever seen, but the developer has worked well with the limitations and as a result Prince, his mysterious female companion, and the many enemies encountered throughout the adventure appear to be more detailed than they actually are. This is a feat of expert artistry and impressive texture application mixed with what has to be some of the most fluid, believable animation in a videogame. This is not an understatement. Moving Price through the world is partly so enjoyable because of his silky smooth motion. Whether he's flipping through the air or running on walls, it looks gorgeous. Indeed, we could state that just as the original Persia took videogame animation to new levels of realism, so does this sequel.

The camera system, cumbersome in early demos of the game, has been polished up considerably with the final version so that the action is shot cinematically from the appropriate angle. It's a very dynamic setup that works, for the most part, with very little trouble. In some cases, the camera will follow behind the character's back as he zips over a wall. In others, it will actually shoot the action from the far end so that it appears the hero is running toward the view screen. We also have full freedom of the camera with the left analog stick. Visibility can be blocked in battles, however, which is a minor annoyance.

The Sands of Time runs at 30 frames per second with the occasional -- but still unfortunate -- dip. It sadly doesn't support a 16x9 widescreen mode. However, even with these tiny drawbacks the game is incredible looking -- call it awe-inspiring, even.

Sound

Impressive. From the moody intro music to the fitting Middle Eastern-influenced in-game melodies, the tunes in the game sound great. Ubisoft has added in occasional guitar riffs and modern drumbeats to give the old-style soundtrack an updated edge and this too works very well.

Voice dialogue is well-acted and crisp, not to mention modest and playful. In one scene, as the hero bickers with the princess, he says to himself in disbelief, "She thinks this is a game." There is quite a lot of dialogue in the game and most of it takes place during actual gameplay as Prince talks to himself while exploring.

The title features excellent quality sound effects that will boom in full surround sound. Whether it's the clank of a sword, the crumbling of a wall, the deep hum and follow-up bang of rewinding time or the growl of an enemy, it's clear and crisp and it may or may not echo realistically depending upon the size and depth of an environment.