All there is to know about Prince of Persia: The Sands of Time PC

Before you start looking for a cheap Prince of Persia: The Sands of Time cd key, you should familiarize yourself with this title. It's development was overseen by Kudosoft, while Ubisoft took on the role of the publisher. Prince of Persia: The Sands of Time release date for PC was on December 2, 2003. The genre of the game can be described as action and adventure. Should you be under 18 or buying for someone underage, we encourage you to familiarize yourself with Prince of Persia: The Sands of Time age rating details. The American organization, ESRB, categorized the game as ESRB Teen, taking into account portrayals of Blood, Suggestive Themes and Violence. As of today, 1,660 of GG.deals users wishlisted this game, which might give you a rough idea of the current demand for this product.

If you are short on free time, you should consider the fact that on average it takes 8 hours 40 minutes to finish the main story of the game. Don't forget to take a glance at the Prince of Persia: The Sands of Time reviews written by the critics and the gamers. The game has earned a Metascore of 89 derived from critics' reviews, while users on Metacritic have given it 8.5/10. Looking at the feedback from Steam users, this product has 3,755 gamer reviews, 85% of which are positive. If this title has captured your attention, you may be in the market for a discounted Prince of Persia: The Sands of Time Steam key. Luckily, GG.deals provides excellent resources to help you spot the best offers.

Prince of Persia: The Sands of Time PC sale & discount - all in one place

With the help of GG.deals, PC gamers will instantly find where to buy Prince of Persia: The Sands of Time PC key at low cost. This is made possible by our price comparison tools as well as our vast assortment of gaming coupon codes. We've spotted the presence of this game in 15 stores and our roster of 29 offers will help you spot the best bargain. The recommended price is currently 9,99€. Luckily, we've managed to find a better deal. Based on our findings, the best Prince of Persia: The Sands of Time price on PC is 1,95€, which is 80% off. You can take advantage of this cheap key on Instant Gaming.

All prices listed on GG.deals include payment surcharges to make sure that both official distributors and keyshops are treated equally. They are also inclusive of all eligible coupon codes so you can maximize your Prince of Persia: The Sands of Time discount. If you're looking for an even better deal, you may be able to reduce the price on the Steam Store by 4% if you make your purchase with a discounted Steam gift card.

Cheap Prince of Persia: The Sands of Time PC key - browse price history, find a historical low, create price alerts

While the 80% discount may look good enough for you, it's good to ensure that you're getting the best deal there is. To help our users shop smartly, GG.deals monitors Prince of Persia: The Sands of Time price history. On this page, you'll find a graph depicting all price fluctuations. Additionally, GG.deals presents information about the cheapest price ever recorded for each game, also known as the "historical low". The best Prince of Persia: The Sands of Time PC price of all time was documented on May 11, 2021 on Kinguin, when it was possible to get the game for just 1,21€.

Keeping an eye on price trends may give you an insight into what kind of Prince of Persia: The Sands of Time sale one can anticipate in the upcoming months. This is where price alerts on GG.deals prove to be incredibly useful and you can set one up by using the "Create Alert" button.

Where can I download Prince of Persia: The Sands of Time after the purchase?

Most stores in our Prince of Persia: The Sands of Time price comparison will provide your code as soon as the payment is approved. The launcher you need to use to redeem your key may differ, depending on the offer you have picked - the game is currently available on Steam, Ubisoft Connect, GOG and Epic Games Launcher. After you've activated your code, you will be able to download Prince of Persia: The Sands of Time on the platform of your choice and play the game whenever you want.

Can I buy Prince of Persia: The Sands of Time on Steam?

Yes, you can purchase this title on Steam. Price comparison on GG.deals includes 6 offers with Steam DRM. Pick one to ensure that your Prince of Persia: The Sands of Time download will take place on Valve's platform.

Is Prince of Persia: The Sands of Time Steam Deck compatible?

Valve has assessed that Prince of Persia: The Sands of Time is Steam Deck playable. The game will run on your Deck, but the current status doesn't guarantee flawless performance or optimization tailored specifically for the hardware.

Is Prince of Persia: The Sands of Time on Game Pass or other subscription services?

Unfortunately, Prince of Persia: The Sands of Time is not available on PC Game Pass at the moment. Although Microsoft’s gaming service grants access to a variety of titles, this specific game is not part of the selection.