"This is SPARTA!" wouldn’t work this time, the Prince of Persia is far more powerful than Xerxes himself, and that Sparta dude… well he would want to sharpen his skills more if he were to face the Prince.

Ubisoft’s newest title Prince of Persia: The Sands of Time, is a unique game in the action/adventure genre, and without question, it sets the scale right this time, by bringing life to the genre, after it had withered.

Sands of Time offers a lot and is a very promising game, one of the most unique story lines that I ever played, the incidents and the adventure you go through make it an experience nonetheless. Remotely related to the DOS games series under the name Prince of Persia (there are 2 games on the PC) the game takes off with you playing the Prince himself. The Prince and his father (Persia's King) have come to conquer India (which is an Arabic country at the time). You wouldn’t have won the war without some inside information, and that is when the Vizier makes an appearance as he helps your father to overrun the city with your army. But as with all youth, the young prince is full of pride and wants to impress his father.

So in the middle of this havoc he sets on a quest of his own to get something of great value for his father from the vault of the Indian King; and that is where the Dagger of Time makes its first appearance, as you get to see it's magnificent and awesome powers.

Running back all the way to your father to impress him with what you find, you find the Vizier with your father gazing upon a massive hour glass. With the help of some evil scam by the Vizier, the evils of the hour glass are released. None survive the sands' release and everyone turns into undead like creatures, with you, the Vizier and a mysterious girl that accompanies you later in the game, surviving such an attack. The Vizier runs out of the palace after he tries to steal your dagger, and from here your nightmare starts. Everyone in the castle who turned into those creatures are now trying to kill you and your friends.

Visuals in the game are more than astounding; specially the caves level where you can see wells and waterfalls. More than once I was utterly amazed by the simply magnificent environment. Not only outside the castle but indoors; architectural design is fully detailed and well designed, you couldn’t imagine anything more Arabian or Indian. Clearly Ubisoft haven't left anything to chance.

Even the voice acting is put to a good use, the actors are passionate and you can feel it from the output. Sounds are as glamorous as the graphics itself, it adds to the feel of the Arabian atmosphere and completes the image.

What would a game talking about time be without some Matrix effects, right ? That is where your dagger comes in handy throughout the levels you collect sand balls which will fill up your sand dagger's tank. Each tank will give you the ability to rewind time to a certain point, and the side tanks are for slowing down time, or generating some devastating defensive attacks where you get to freeze all your enemies.