2. Contents 1. Introduction. 2. Process Solving. 3. Environments. 4. Systems. 5. Behind Scene. 6. Hall of Fame. 7. Student Community.

3. Introduction Ansys was founded in 1970 by John Swanson. Swanson sold his interest in the company to venture capitalists in 1993. Ansys went public on NASDAQ in 1996. In the 2000s, Ansys made numerous acquisitions of other engineering design companies, acquiring additional technology for fluid dynamics, electronics design, and other physics analysis.

4. Ansys Inc. is an American public company based in Canonsburg, Pennsylvania. It develops and markets engineering simulation software. Ansys software is used to design products and semiconductors, as well as to create simulations that test a product's durability, temperature distribution, fluid movements, and electromagnetic properties.

5. What is it? ANSYS is a program that deals with Finite Element Analysis, mainly solves a problem by approximation. It is now mostly used by various high class companies, UG, PG Students. Most Ansys simulations are performed using the Ansys Workbench software, which is one of the company's main products. Typically Ansys users break down larger structures into small components that are each modeled and tested individually. A user may start by defining the dimensions of an object, and then adding weight, pressure, temperature and other physical properties.

6. Environments Basically ANSYS has 2 environments: 1. APDL 2. Workbench

7. ANSYS Parametric Design Language In APDL, one can analyse various one and two dimensional structures like beams, truss, etc., It is a scripting program, where one can control various actions using coding or through navigation. In APDL with various coding, location of node, elements change in stress, displacement even Bending moment diagram, shear force diagram can be made.

9. Workbench The ANSYS Workbench environment is an intuitive up-front finite element analysis tool that is used in conjunction with CAD systems and/or DesignModeler. ANSYS Workbench is a software environment for performing structural, thermal, and electromagnetic analyses. The class focuses on geometry creation and optimization, attaching existing geometry, setting up the finite element model, solving, and reviewing results. Within workbench it is of many systems like structural, thermal, fluid flow fluent, electromagnetic, topology optimisation, rigid dynamics etc.,

11. Structural System

12. Thermal System

16. Company with ANSYS ● Airbus ● Ferrari ● Nebia ● Audi ● NVIDIA ● Dyson ● Medtronic

17. Solution using ANSYS- Real World Problem Startup Nebia is poised to transform the experience of taking a shower. Using CFD solutions from ANSYS, Nebia was able to analyze the thermal effects of hundreds of thousands of variables in its showerhead design

18. How ANSYS change design? Velocity Temperature

19. Behind the scenes ● Validation ● Calibration ● Analysis ● Prototype Testing ● Product Testing

20. Hall of Fame A competition conducted by ANSYS to bring out the best from it.

22. How ANSYS CFD Fetched Japan a Gold Medal ? Ansys simulation of team speed skater reports that they had unique strategy to cut wind resistance of 15%. Miho Takagi Ayano Sato Nana Takagi Time: 2:50.87 8 th December 2017

23. Student’s Community A place where beginners and professional meets. It offers student version for free.