2. • Ansys, Inc. is an American multinational company with its headquarters based in Canonsburg, Pennsylvania. It develops and markets CAE/multiphysics engineering simulation software for product design

3. Introduction • Welcome to the ANSYS Workbench introductory training course! • This training course covers the basics of using Simulation in performing structural and thermal analyses. • There are some differences in ANSYS APDL and ANSYS Workbench. • User interface of Workbench is much easier than APDL.

4. Course Objectives • To teach the basics of using Simulation in the following areas: • General understanding of the user interface, as related to geometry-------- • import, meshing, application of loads and supports, and post-processing. • Procedure for performing FEA simulations, including linear static, modal, and Heat analyses.

5. About ANSYS ANSYS, Inc. • Developer of ANSYS family of products • Global Headquarters in Canonsburg, PA - USA (south of Pittsburgh) • Development and sales offices in U.S. and around the world • Publicly traded on NASDAQ stock exchange under “ANSS”

6. • Ansys Workbench: where better decisions are made • The real world happens all at once. To validate your design ideas, you need tests that provide real-world scenarios. And in the real world, physics doesn’t take turns. The Ansys Workbench platform lets you integrate data across engineering simulations to create more accurate models more efficiently. • Ansys Workbench makes it easier to make more informed design choices by coordinating all your simulation data in one place.

7. About ANSYS Workbench • What is ANSYS Workbench? • ANSYS Workbench is a new-generation solution from ANSYS that provides powerful methods for interacting with the ANSYS solver functionality. This environment provides a unique integration with CAD systems, and your design process, enabling the best CAE results.

8. DesignModeler FE Modeler CFX-Mesh Simulation DesignXplorer (VT) ANSYS Workbench

9. Analysis types in Workbench • Analysis types available in Simulation:† • Linear Stress: • Determines deflections, stresses, factors of safety, etc. based on standard strength of materials concepts under static loading

10. • Modal: • Determines natural frequencies of a system (free vibration), including the effects of loading on a pre- stressed structure.

11. • Heat Transfer: • Steady-state thermal analyses to solve for temperature field and heat flux. Temperature- dependent conductivity and convection allowed. Thermal-stress analysis supported as well.

12. • Harmonic: • Determines structural response of system under sinusoidal excitation as a function of frequency.

13. • Linear Buckling: • Determines failure load or safety factor for buckling and its buckling mode shapes. • Shape Optimization: • Indicates areas of possible volume reduction based on load paths through the part using Topological Optimization technology. • Nonlinear Structural: • Calculates deflections and stresses of system under static loading, accounting for large deflection effects, plasticity, and contact nonlinearities.

14. Types of licenses • Types of licenses available for Simulation: • ANSYS DesignSpace Entra • All DesignSpace capabilities but for parts only. • ANSYS DesignSpace • Structural capabilities are linear static, modal, and buckling analyses of assemblies. Thermal and shape optimization included. • ANSYS Professional • Linear structural (including harmonic) and thermal analyses • ANSYS Structural • All structural capabilities, including linear and nonlinear • ANSYS Mechanical (including ANSYS Multiphysics) • All structural and thermal capabilities • (Other ANSYS licenses are supported for meshing only)

15. Getting started • After starting ANSYS workbench •Analysis System which includes different Types of analysis like static structural, modal

16. Select required system • Static structural analysis •Sequence of operations like engineering Data means material properties, geometry

17. Material properties

18. Geometry • There are two options for geometry 1. Create geometry in ANSYS Design modeler 2.Import from other design software in particular format like igs, step, etc.

19. Analysis

20. Analysis outline