On a cold November night in 1977, Ranger Doug Green, Fred LaBour and Bill Collins tore a dollar bill into thirds. They’d just finished their first gig together at the now-defunct Nashville bar Herr Harry’s Franks N Steins, playing classic cowboy songs for “about seven inebriates,” said LaBour, a bassist who goes by the stage name “Too Slim.” They earned $25 that night and divided it between the three of them: eight bucks each, and a piece of that torn $1.

Those dollar bill fragments disintegrated after years of being carried in pockets and billfolds, but Riders in the Sky are still going strong, with rich harmonies and a playful sense of humor that's drawn fans from acclaimed songwriter and composer Randy Newman to scientist and television personality Bill Nye.

On Friday, the band – Green, LaBour, Paul “Woody Paul” Chrisman, who joined in 1978 and Joey Miskulin, who began playing with the band in the late ‘80s – will release their 41st album. Called “40 Years the Cowboy Way,” it combines classics like Marty Robbins’ “Big Iron” and new, original Western songs. Said Green, "We feel like we have a mission to keep this style fresh and alive, because it was almost forgotten."

Listeners weren't quite sure what to do with Riders in the Sky in the band's early days. Singing cowboys and groups like Sons of the Pioneers had largely fallen out of favor. "When Riders in the Sky started, they were one of the few (Western bands)," said Michael McCall, a curator at the Country Music Hall of Fame and Museum. "They took a dying American art form and devoted themselves to it. They keep a connection to the roots of country music, and that's important.... They're also entertaining as hell."

Green was inspired to form a cowboy band after seeing Sons of the Pioneers at a music festival in Tulsa in the early '70s. "It was dance music, broken hearts and drinking beer all day long, then they came out and sang about the Timber Trail and wide open spaces," he remembered. "It just hit me like a hammer and reminded me of when I was a kid growing up in the 1950s: Cowboys were so cool."

While the Riders' sound is influenced by the cowboy singers of yesteryear, the group has always blazed their own trail, coming together from diverse backgrounds to become one of country music's most enduring and endearing acts.

Green was a music historian, LaBour a former puppeteer, the Chicago-born Miskulin was a child prodigy on the accordion and Chrisman, a fiddler who earned a Ph.D in theoretical plasma physics from MIT, occasionally puts his education to use by turning a pickle into a sodium vapor lamp onstage, or repairing the tour bus engine with a guitar string.

"We were so weird 40 years ago, and so out of date, and we've stayed weird and out of date," said LaBour. "But it's more fun now than it ever was. The friendship we have among the four of us and what we've been through, there's a different resonance to the songs, even songs we've done a billion times."

In the beginning, their stage show was R-rated. "It was the '70s,' shrugged LaBour. But then people started bringing their wide-eyed kids, which put an end to his jokes about "interspecies relationships and cocaine."

These days, the show is family-friendly – a move that’s contributed to the band’s longevity – and it’s not unusual to see three generations of Riders in the Sky fans in the audience. "(Western music) is entertaining; the rhythm is fun. Kids get it instinctively," said LaBour. "It's entertaining; the rhythm is fun. It also hits a strong nostalgic chord for people. We always hear 'My dad sang these' or 'These are the songs we sang on car trips.' "

On and off-stage, the quartet's main goal is to crack each other up. When asked if he’s considered retirement, Chrisman proclaimed “I would be happy to die on stage.” Green immediately retorted, to laughter from his bandmates, “You have, several times.”

Sobering, Green added, "As you do get older, you realize there will be an end at some time. I hope we can do this many more years, but you never know. It’s just a special thing to get onstage with these guys and still be doing it knowing that, at some point, we won’t be able to."

If you go:

7 p.m. Friday and Saturday at the Grand Ole Opry House (2804 Opryland Drive). Tickets ($40-$99) available at opry.com. Riders in the Sky will sign copies of their new album in the Opry store after Friday's show.

8 p.m., May 4 at the Franklin Theatre ($33.50-$43.50). Tickets available at franklintheatre.com.

Country Music Hall of Fame salute

On Saturday at 2 p.m., the Country Music Hall of Fame and Museum will salute Joey Miskulin during its Nashville Cats series, which celebrates musicians who have made significant contributions to Nashville and its music.

Miskulin, an accordion player Cowboy Jack Clement dubbed "the greatest in the world," began learning the instrument at the age of 5 while growing up in Chicago. By 13, he was performing for polka king Frank Yankovic.

He's played on recordings by Johnny Cash, U2, Emmylou Harris, Shania Twain, Garth Brooks, and many, many more. When Miskulin began playing with Riders in the Sky as "the CowPolka King" in the late 1980s, said Paul Chrisman, it was a "quantum leap" for the band.