DEMING – Totsie Slover, host of “The Real West from the Old West” radio show on KOTS-AM 1230 in Deming, invites you for an evening of entertainment. The Cowboy Way will perform a free concert at 6 p.m. on Thursday, Nov. 29 at Luna Rossa Winery, 3710 W. Pine Street.

The Cowboy Way is the International Western Music Association “Duo or Group of the Year."

Jim Jones is a native Texan, a student of the west and a life-long devotee of all things cowboy. His award-winning songwriting, guitar-picking and unique vocal style keeps him in demand at music venues throughout the country.

Jones has produced eight Western Americana albums and three award-winning children’s character education videos. He has written three western novels, Rustler’s Moon, (2009); Colorado Moon, (2011) and Waning Moon, (2013).

His eighth Western Americana albums have been award winners. Borrowed Time, released in April of 2012, produced Western Writers' of America 2013 Spur Award, winning Western Song of the Year, “Texas is Burnin’” and 2014 Western Writers' Spur finalist for Western Song of the Year, “Race with the Wind." His song, “Cowboys of New Mexico,” was the New Mexico Music Awards 2009 Western Song of the Year.

Jones was named the Western Music Association Male Performer of the Year for 2014 and won the Academy of Western Artists 2015 Western Song of the Year with “The Fires of Goliad."

Doug Figgs is a horseshoer, a cowboy, and a Western music singer/songwriter. In the last few years he has turned his attention to his love of music with the emphasis on western themes.

The Western Music Association named him the 2015 Songwriter of the Year and his song “Socios” was named WMA Song of the Year. He also won the Academy of Western Artists 2015 Western Male Vocalist of the Year and the coveted Spur Award for Best Western Song from the Western Writers' of America in 2014, “Charlie & Evangeline.”

He has toured the southwest extensively and continues to turn out his own variety of western music, from hard driving songs with a tinge of southern rock, to beautiful ballads and everything in between.

Figgs released his CD “Partners” in 2014 and just released his brand new CD “A Cowboy Like Me” in Feb. 2016.

Mariam, a native of Germany, jokingly states: “I always felt I was accidentally switched at birth and grew up in a strange land far, far away, where there were no roaming cattle, no wide open spaces, no singing cowboys."

Making the best of his “dis-location," Mariam cut his musical teeth on a wide variety of musical styles, from classical, jazz and pop to rock, country and blues. He enjoyed a colorful career as a multi-instrumentalist; at home, on stage, as well as in the recording studio. He gained a reputation as a diverse session player, award-winning arranger and producer.

When his travels brought him to New Mexico, he felt he’d finally returned to his true home land. Realizing how much he loved horseback ridin’, back-porch pickin’ and two-steppin’ on Saturday nights, he quickly caught on to the cowboy way.

Currently calling Socorro, New Mexico home, Mariam is a private music teacher, collaborator on Doug Figgs’ projects and provides the lead guitar and third harmony vocal for The Cowboy Way.