Bruce Willis, 52, was born in West Germany, where his father was in the US military, and raised in New Jersey. He studied theatre at Montclair State College, and in 1984 was cast as the lead in Sam Shepard's Fool For Love off-Broadway. He went on to star in the award-winning TV series Moonlighting, which ran from 1985 to 1989. In 1988, he won the part of John McClane in the blockbuster-movie Die Hard, paving the way for a highly successful career as a film actor. Die Hard 4.0, the third sequel to that first film, has just gone on general release. He has three daughters with ex-wife Demi Moore.

When were you happiest?

I'd say you've never seen me happier than at this particular moment.

What is your earliest memory?

My mother and father taking me to Washington DC. I remember being at the Washington Monument with all the flags around it. I described it to my mother and she said we went to Washington DC in April or May of 1958, so I'd just turned three - I've done the maths.

Which living person do you most admire, and why?

I most admire the young man or woman who is fighting overseas. I don't need to know his or her name, but anybody who has a job that puts them in harm's way and potentially causes them to make the ultimate sacrifice, or to sacrifice any body part, for what they believe is their responsibility to their country, is my biggest hero.

What is the trait you most deplore in yourself?

I am trying as hard as I can to remove judgment from my life, especially pre-judgment, which is where the word prejudice comes from. I haven't completely got shot of it, but I'm doing pretty well. I remind myself that this is how I want to live my life.

Aside from a property, what is the most expensive thing you've bought?

A ski mountain in Idaho. I don't tell a lot of people about that.

What is your most treasured possession?

My daughters. They are not my possessions, but they are my angels. They are my three favourite people on earth and I could sit and talk to them all day long, all year long, and goof around with them. I have just as much fun with them today as I have every day that I've spent with them.

Where would you like to live?

If I could, I'd live in New York full-time - I'd make that my base - but I'd like to explore eastern Europe more, and I haven't spent a lot of time in South America.

Is it better to give or to receive?

I take much more pleasure in giving than I do receiving.

What would your super power be?

Flying.

Who would play you in the film of your life?

I'm not sure the actor's born yet. He would be a pretty young kid right now. But a good actor, hopefully.

What is your most unappealing habit?

Due to an accident on the first Die Hard, I suffer two-thirds partial hearing loss in my left ear and have a tendency to say, 'Whaaa?'

What is your favourite smell?

Night-blooming jasmine.

What is your favourite word?

'Rinse.'

What is your favourite book?

The Histories, by Herodotus.

What is your fancy-dress costume of choice?

Cutaway white tie and tails.

Cat or dog?

Dogs - mutts, actually. I have two.

What is your guiltiest pleasure?

The luxury of doing nothing.

What do you owe your parents?

Bringing me to the US to live, when they could have stayed in Europe.

What or who is the greatest love of your life?

I'm going to have to say my desire to express myself as an artist. Acting doesn't always get discussed in terms of artistic expression, but if you ask any actor, they are going to tell you that it's a way of expressing themselves artistically.

How do you relax?

I play with my kids. I watch movies on TV, I watch sports. I eat food lying on the couch. When I'm not working, I love chocolate Häagen-Dazs milkshakes. And I turn off the news.

What single thing would improve the quality of your life?

Lower taxes.

Where would you most like to be right now?

Hailey, Idaho.

How would you like to be remembered?

As a guy who didn't always succeed, but who tried as hard as he could to do the best job that he could.