WOODY Allen’s “Scoop” is the sorbet between courses.

The film’s a trifle; a loopy recycling of previous bits gussied up by funny non-sequiturs.

Like most recent Allen comedies.

Here, the writer-director borrows from the good, “Love and Death,” “Manhattan Murder Mystery” and “Annie Hall,” and the not-so-good, “The Curse of the Jade Scorpion.”

On the plus side, Allen, who turns 71 this year, finally casts himself as a father figure.

Now that’s progress.

Although several rungs below “Match Point,” last year’s superb change-of-pace drama, “Scoop” has its moments.

The first half holds up well. Whimsy wends through the story.

Any time you see a dead guy attempting to bribe the boatman on the River Styx, you know you’re not in for a dysfunctional family downer.

Scarlett Johansson brightens the supernatural mystery-romance as bubbly Sondra Plansky, a vacationing college journalist who gets “the scoop of the decade” from recently deceased British newsman Joe Strombel (Ian McShane).

(Not even death can stop a dedicated reporter from pursuing a good lead.)

Since Joe’s sailing to the afterlife, he can’t pursue the tip — from a newly dead secretary — that Peter Lyman may be the notorious “Tarot Card Killer.”

A respected member of the English aristocracy, Peter is played by Hugh Jackman as a pretty stick figure.

Joe’s apparition appears to Sondra during Splendini’s (Allen) magic act, and he encourages the ambitious student to chase the story and find the truth.

To allow Allen more screen time, Sondra enlists Splendini, aka Sid Waterman, to masquerade as her wealthy father.

He serves as a kind of cut-rate Dr. Watson. And the game is afoot through the streets of London.

Allen’s anxiety-driven one-liners ring with too much familiarity, but some still earn laughs.

For example: “I was born into the Hebrew persuasion, but when I got older I converted to narcissism.”

Others play like repetitive fill.

“Scoop” meanders more than most Allen movies. Gaps in logic nag. The last part plays out like a piece of confetti in an arbitrary breeze.

Johansson, who portrayed a vulnerable seductress in “Match Point,” displays good comic timing as a scattershot young journalist who becomes smitten with the handsome murder suspect.

Audiences new to Allen’s tricks will probably find “Scoop” an eccentric but imaginative entertainment.

Others will find the shaggy dog story merely an excuse to escape from the heat.