Scoop was the second Allen film to be set in London. Like he does in New York, Allen enjoys the finer neighbourhoods, even for low down characters. The lovely West London is the setting for the film. There is also an excursion to a beautiful property in Oxfordshire.

There is a little nod to tourist sites, notably the Royal Albert Hall. But like Match Point, the story is not particularly ‘London’. In fact, none of the three main leads are British. Oh well.

Here’s the filming locations for Scoop.

St Bride’s Church

Fleet St, London, EC4Y 8AU

Opening scene, the church where we see a funeral.

Ealing Studios

Ealing Green, London W5 5EP

The scene of the afterlife were filmed at these legendary studios.

The Dorchester

53 Park Ln, Mayfair, London W1K 1QA

Sondra interviews a rock star and ends up in a room in the same hotel.

Holland Villas Road

London W14

Sondra stays with the Fultons. We see inside first, but the garden and outside. It looks like number 2 or so.

Shepherds Bush Empire

Shepherd’s Bush Green, Shepherd’s Bush, London W12 8TT

This legendary rock venue was redressed for the magic show – establishing shots and crowd shots. Backstage is also used.

CityPoint

1 Ropemaker St, London EC2Y 9HU

Peter Lyman’s office.

Pelham Galleries

23 Berkeley Square, Mayfair, W1J 6HE

The antiques gallery where Sondra and Sid fail to find Peter.

The Reform Club

104 Pall Mall, St James, SW1Y 5EW

The club reception.

Royal Automotive Club

89 Pall Mall, St. James’s, London SW1Y 5HS

The pool inside the club.

Craven Terrace

Lancaster Gate, W2 3EL

Sid and Sondra walk up the street, ending up at a laundromat at 28. We see this street a few times, including reading papers at a newsagent across from the laundromat.

We later find out that Sid is staying at the Elysee Hotel at 25-26.

Haseley Court

Great Haseley, South Oxfordshire, Oxfordshire, OX44

Lyman estate, interiors and surrounds.

Westbourne Grove (cnr Denbigh Rd), W11

Sondra and Vivian go shopping.

8 Bassett Road

Ladbroke Grove, W10 6JJ

Peter Lyman’s London home. We assume the interior and exterior match.

Mitre

24 Craven Terrace, W2 3QH

Across from Sid’s hotel.

Holland Park

Ilchester Pl, Kensington, London W8 6LU

Peter gives Sondra a birthday gift.

97 Golborne Rd

W10 5NL

Indian restaurant where our heroes spot Peter.

Kensington Court (near Thackerey Street)

Kensington, W8

We follow Peter as he turns from Thackerey Street onto Kensington Court. He is not near the restaurant where Sid and Sondra saw him. It’s a 40 minute walk away, and Lyman is doubling back on himself.

Royal Albert Hall

Kensington Gore, Kensington, London SW7 2AP

Peter walks along the west side of this legendary venue. The walk makes some sense here. He is a few minutes from where we last saw him.

Queen Alexandras House

Bremner Road, Kensington Gore SW7 2QT

The scene of the murder. We assume interiors match the exteriors. We also see it in the day.

The Observer

3-7 Herbal Hill, Farringdon, EC1R 5EJ

Real offices of the London paper. No longer there.

The Westway

Paddington

We see Sid driving along this major highway. He is right at the start. Paddington Green Police station is in the background.

Unknown filming locations. Not many this time. If you want to help us find others, here’s our running list from other films.