After a bank robbery goes wrong, outlaw Billy Two Hats (Desi Arnaz Jr.) is captured by Sheriff Gifford (Jack Warden). Billys partner, Arch Deans (Gregory Peck), rescues him, but during the escape Deans gets shot in the leg. The wound leaves Deans unable to ride a horse, but Billy refuses to leave him behind. Instead, he builds a horse-drawn cot for him, and they continue together. The apparatus slows them down, however, making them even more vulnerable to capture from the pursuing sheriff.

Contents

Billy two hats official trailer 1 jack warden movie 1974 hd

Plot

Cast

References

Billy Two Hats is a 1974 Western film directed by Ted Kotcheff. It stars Gregory Peck, Jack Warden and Desi Arnaz, Jr.

Filmed on-location in Israel, Billy Two Hats is from a script by Scottish writer Alan Sharp, the screenwriter of Rob Roy and Ulzanas Raid.

An aging outlaw helps a young half-breed learn the ropes.

Plot

Following a bank robbery in the American west, the partner of Scottish outlaw Arch Deans is killed and his young Indian half breed friend Billy Two Hats is captured.

While Billy is being transported, Deans gets the drop on Sheriff Henry Gifford at a remote trading post, enabling Billy to escape. As they flee, the sheriffs friend, the trading post owner, named Copeland, takes down his old long-range buffalo rifle and fires a shot that kills Deans horse, breaking his leg. Billy builds a travois on which Deans can ride, dragged behind Billys horse.

Billy and Deans encounter Spencer and his wife, Esther, at their remote homestead. Deans persuades Spencer to take him in his wagon to get horses on the condition that Billy stay with Esther to protect her and the homestead from marauding Indians. Billy is also to keep a look out for the pursuing Gifford.

Billy and Esther spend their time together talking and develop romantic feelings for each other. Esther, a young mail-order bride from the East, is unhappy with her older abusive husband. She falls in love with the young good looking Billy. Gifford finds the two in bed together, assumes Billy raped the woman, becomes enraged, and beats him. Esther attempts the explain but cant because she stutters uncontrollably when distressed.

Deans and Spencer encounter trouble on the trail, four drunken Indians demand whiskey from them, ambush their wagon in a canyon, killing the horse and besiege them. Spencer is killed.

Gifford, Esther and Billy then set out after Deans. They find Deans near death. With Esthers help Billy kills Gifford. Deans dies of his wounds.

Cast

Gregory Peck as Arch Deans

Desi Arnaz, Jr. as Billy

Jack Warden as Gifford

David Huddleston as Copeland

Sian Barbara Allen as Esther Spencer

John Pearce as Spencer