Billy Two Hats is a television program that appeared on TV in 1970 . Billy Two Hats stopped airing in 1970.

It features Norman Jewison as producer, John Scott (composer) in charge of musical score, and Brian West as head of cinematography.

Billy Two Hats is recorded in English and originally aired in United States. Each episode of Billy Two Hats is 100 minutes long. Billy Two Hats is distributed by United Artists.

The cast includes: Jack Warden as Sheriff Henry Gifford, Sian Barbara Allen as Spencer, Gregory Peck as Arch Deans, and Sian Barbara Allen as Esther Spencer.

Billy Two Hats Quotes

Sian Barbara Allen as Esther Spencer

(Sian Barbara Allen) "Well, Indians don't fight in the dark. It's against their religion."

(Gregory Peck) "Did they seem all that religious to you?"

(Sian Barbara Allen) "Billy Two Hats? How did you get a name like that?"

(Unnamed) "Well, my mother was a Kiowa and I don't know who my father was except he was white. My mother didn't know too much about him neither, except she told me he was kind of important. She said that in his room he had two hats; one for special and one for ordinary. That impressed my mother a whole lot. And when I was a kid it impressed me."

(Sian Barbara Allen) "How many (Indians) do you think there are?"

(Gregory Peck) "Four, I think."

(Sian Barbara Allen) "How do you know there's four?"

(Gregory Peck) "I counted their feet and divided by two."

(Sian Barbara Allen) "Once she gets excited she can hardly speak, so I give her a whack. It shakes her brain box up a bit."

Jack Warden as Sheriff Henry Gifford

(Jack Warden) "Who's out there?"

(Unnamed) "Oh, just a lot of nothing."

(Jack Warden) "Can he wash?"

(Unnamed) "Ah -- it's a mighty fancy 'breed, washing and all that."

(Unnamed) "Well, go on, but don't let him use a whole lot of water."

(Jack Warden) "Wash up. But don't waste any water."

(Unnamed) "Mighty fancy 'breed ya' got there, sure enough, Henry."

(Jack Warden) "Yeah, he's fancy all right. Thinks this old man of his is comin' to cut him loose."

(Unnamed) "Ain't you forgot something?"

(Jack Warden) "What?"

(Unnamed) "Swear me in as your deputy."

(Jack Warden) "All right, raise your hand."

(Unnamed) "Which one?"

(Jack Warden) "Hell, I don't care -- all right, you're sworn."

(Unnamed) "Is that all there is to it?"

(Jack Warden) "That's all."

(Unnamed) "Well, hell, that ain't much."

(Jack Warden) "Well, it ain't much of a job."

(Jack Warden) "Watching out for the old man, huh, breed? Well, he's not out there. He's down in Mexico leaning up against some cantina bar, puking up all that money you and him and your dead partner stole. Yeah, all that money. Four hundred twenty dollars. You had to kill somebody at that. I don't like no kind of law breaker, breed. But the kind I hate worse is a cheap one. And cheaper than you and your friend, they just don't come."

Gregory Peck as Arch Deans

(Gregory Peck) "You remember, Billy -- he asked me why I came back for you. Well, I don't know for sure. Except I been on my own for too long --"

(Gregory Peck) "You know the Bible, Billy?"

(Gregory Peck) "Well, there's a bit in it, from the Book of Ecclesiastes, that says 'Two are better than one because they have good reward for their labor. And if they fall, the one will lift up his fellow. But woe to him that is alone when he falleth, for he hath not another to help him up. And if one shall prevail against him, two shall withstand him.'"

(Unnamed) "That's in a book?"

(Gregory Peck) "Aye. That, and a LOT more, Billy."

Add or Update Quotes

If you have a quote to add or change and want to let us know, please fill in the form below. Include the time in the film/video if possible so we can find it.