Picatinny Arsenal, NJ

Picatinny Arsenal, NJ 07806 | Post Operator: DSN: 880-4939, (973) 724-4939

Picatinny Arsenal: Overview

The Picatinny Arsenal is an installation that is maintained by the U.S. Army. The primary command at this post is the United States Army Armament Research, Development and Engineering Center. The mission of this entity is to facilitate the growth of military technology through research and development. The U.S. Army Explosive Ordnance Disposal Technology Directorate is also assigned to the Picatinny Arsenal. The purpose of this organization is to develop implements and solutions for Army EOD personnel.

This post was established in 1880 and was known as the Picatinny Powder Depot at that time. Throughout the years, the mission of this installation evolved from the production of gunpowder to advanced research and development. Along the way, it was tasked with producing powder and, at time, explosive ordinance for the war effort. For example, the Picatinny Arsenal produced bombs and artillery shells for use in World War II.

Picatinny Arsenal: Education

A military career is demanding and it requires a great deal of training to become proficient at your job duties. Having said that, it is obvious that the military values higher education, which is why it provides such great benefits to service members. Take advantage of these benefits by earning a degree from an online school while stationed at Picatinny Arsenal. Online schools provide a high-quality education in a convenient format. So, you can earn a degree on your time no matter where you are. Learn more by requesting information from a number of these schools. Start by clicking the "Find A School" button below:

Picatinny Arsenal: Location

The facility is in northern New Jersey in close proximity to Lake Denmark. Both Rockaway, NJ and Lake Telemark, NJ are near the installation. Picatinny Lake and the Green Pond are also nearby. Other communities in the area include Dover, NJ, Morristown, NJ, Hopatcong, NJ, East Hanover, NJ, Florham, NJ, Kinnelon, NJ, Madison, NJ, Lincoln Park, NJ, West Caldwell, NJ, Wayne NJ, Livingston, NJ, Summit, NJ, Pompton Lakes, NJ, Wanaque, NJ, and Verona, NJ.

Picatinny Arsenal: Interesting Facts