Leuven, Belgium – May 25, 2016. Materialise NV (NASDAQ: MTLS), a leading provider of Additive Manufacturing (AM) software and sophisticated 3D printing solutions in the medical and industrial markets, now links its cloud software to GROW and Fabnami, a British and Swiss 3D printing platform. Materialise Cloud is part of the Materialise Magics 3D Print Suite, an extensive portfolio of software solutions for 3D Printing.

Materialise has developed an advanced software suite that facilitates 3D printing models for a wide range of users. A part of this software is available in the cloud, which means that online software platforms do not need to develop all 3D printing functionalities themselves and can focus on their core activities. They can connect to the cloud engine and streamline their business workflow by integrating automated tools into their process that help to prepare models for 3D Printing. Materialise's best-in-class software in the cloud is available via a pay-per-use system.

GROW has developed a range of desktop and cloud-based applications to bridge the gap between CAD designs and industrial production, to protect industrial designs and to facilitate distributed manufacturing. To support design owners in the journey to series production and to provide them with immediate access to best-in-class technology, GROW has partnered with Materialise. By integrating proven tools from Materialise, GROW's project.AM platform can offer users free access to market-leading tools to repair, optimize and analyze their designs when first uploaded to the project.AM platform.

"We are delighted that, from the launch of project.AM, our users will have free access to these market-leading tools from the Materialise Cloud," states Ray Coyle, CEO of GROW. "Materialise is the leading name in Additive Manufacturing software for business and we are proud to make such high quality AM utilities available to our OEM and contract manufacturer clients."

Fabnami offers a comprehensive 3D printing enterprise software as a service (SaaS) to automate sales and streamline business processes in service bureaus and production facilities. Fabnami's ecosystem is built on proprietary algorithms that perform a broad range of printer-specific measurements, design rule verifications and manufacturability checks. Offered as a web API, turn-key e-commerce platform and internal company service orchestration tool to support sales, engineering and operations for 3D printing service bureaus and facilities. To extend the range of its supported file formats and provide on-demand mesh repair capabilities, Fabnami integrates Materialise Cloud.

"Having been many years in the business of computational geometry for 3D printing, we have come to appreciate Materialise's achievements in the field, and we are proud to offer their technology to our clients. By integrating Materialise Cloud with Fabnami, we are able to dramatically improve the level of automation, and reduce the manpower costs associated to sales and engineering," explains Benoit Valin, founder at Fabnami.

By relying on the Materialise Magics 3D Print Suite, GROW offers industrial designers access to the best 3D printing technology in the market and Fabnami streamlines their e-commerce platform, improving the 3D Printing workflow of service bureaus.

For more information about Materialise Magics 3D Print Suite software, please visit:

http://software.materialise.com/3d-printing-software

For more information about Materialise Cloud, please visit:

http://software.materialise.com/cloud

About Materialise

Materialise incorporates more than 25 years of 3D printing experience into a range of software solutions and 3D printing services, which together form the backbone of the 3D printing industry. Materialise's open and flexible solutions enable players in a wide variety of industries, including healthcare, automotive, aerospace, art and design, and consumer goods, to build innovative 3D printing applications that aim to make the world a better and healthier place. Headquartered in Belgium, with branches worldwide, Materialise combines the largest group of software developers in the industry with one of the largest 3D printing facilities in the world. For additional information, please visit: www.materialise.com.

About Materialise's Software Division

Materialise Software provides companies with a platform of software tools that manage and control the 3D printing process more efficiently, allowing them to meet the highest standards of the most demanding industries. Materialise Software's suite of solutions, Materialise Magics, includes industry-leading data preparation and design optimization tools, programs to integrate 3D printing into production environments, and software and control systems used by machine manufacturers to better bridge the gap between applications and 3D printers. These solutions are open by nature, empowering co-creation and collaboration between different players in the 3D printing and manufacturing eco-system and providing the industry a solid foundation on which to expand and grow. For additional information, please visit: http://software.materialise.com/

Materialise HQ Press Office

Technologielaan 15

3001 Leuven

BELGIUM

Kirsten Van Praet

Copywriter

Phone: +32 16 39 66 66

Email: Kirsten.vanpraet@materialise.be

Visit: www.materialise.com

Vanessa Palsenbarg

Corporate Communications Manager

Phone: +32 16 39 66 37

Email: press@materialise.com

Twitter: @belgiancanuck or @MaterialiseNV

About GROW

GROW is a London-based Additive Manufacturing platform that offers a suite of desktop and cloud based applications that enable a complete, secure AM workflow, from design to final manufacture. By bridging the gap from CAD to production in a secure, encrypted environment, GROW enables efficient collaboration on AM projects without compromising design security. GROW's unique, patent pending STLX technology enables build process data to be included in the design file and read directly by the hardware, reducing human input, errors and inconsistencies in final product.

Looking for more information? Have a look at https://grow.am/home.

About Fabnami