LEUVEN, Belgium--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Materialise NV (NASDAQ:MTLS), is proud to announce the signing of an agreement that will see Canon Lifecare Solutions distributing software solutions from the Materialise Mimics Innovation and Care Suites in Japan.

With this agreement, users of workstations and 3D printers offered by Canon Lifecare Solutions will be able to benefit from Materialise’s open and flexible software solutions. Included in the offering will be the newly launched Materialise Mimics inPrint, which allows clinicians to 3D print in hospitals by connecting data from all modern imaging systems to the ever expanding range of 3D printers on the market.

Materialise Executive Vice President, Hilde Ingelaere states, “At Materialise, we have devoted more than 25 years to identifying meaningful applications of 3D printing and developing the backbone of software and solutions needed to successfully bring them to market. We see incredible potential for 3D printing in medicine, a vision which we share with Canon Lifecare Solutions. By distributing our software solutions, Canon Lifecare Solutions will help accelerate our aim of helping the medical community better integrate 3D printing into their workflow and begin unleashing the benefits it offers, which include potential cost savings and patient care improvement.”

Canon Lifecare Solutions President, Mr. Koji Ishiwata added, “We at Canon Lifecare Solutions believe in working as closely as possible and as flexibly as possible with local partners in various markets in order to serve our customers. We are proud to now count Materialise as one of these partners, and are honored to be offering software solutions from the Materialise Mimics platform to our customers to empower meaningful applications of medical 3D printing.”

Since their foundation, Materialise has been providing leading-edge, 3D visualization and printing solutions to their extensive list of hospital, academic and medical device customers. Materialise’s open and flexible platform of software and services forms the foundation of certified medical 3D Printing, in clinical as well as research environments, enabling medical professionals to revolutionize patient treatment and make the world a better and healthier place.

About Materialise

Materialise incorporates more than 25 years of 3D printing experience into a range of software solutions and 3D printing services, which together form the backbone of the 3D printing industry. Materialise’s open and flexible solutions enable players in a wide variety of industries, including healthcare, automotive, aerospace, art and design, and consumer goods, to build innovative 3D printing applications that aim to make the world a better and healthier place. Headquartered in Belgium, with branches worldwide, Materialise combines the largest group of software developers in the industry with one of the largest 3D printing facilities in the world. For additional information, please visit: www.materialise.com.

About Materialise’s Medical Division

Materialise Medical, which has pioneered many of the leading medical applications of 3D printing, enables researchers, engineers and clinicians to revolutionize innovative patient-specific treatment that helps improve and save lives. Materialise Medical’s open and flexible platform of software and services, Materialise Mimics, form the foundation of certified Medical 3D Printing, in clinical as well as research environments, offering virtual planning software tools, 3D-printed anatomical models, and patient-specific surgical guides and implants. For additional information, please visit: http://medical.materialise.com/

About Canon Lifecare Solutions

Canon Lifecare Solutions is a Japanese medical equipment trading company selling diagnostic imaging equipment and infection control devices to hospitals and clinics, and automatic dispensing and packing machines used in pharmacies. Canon Lifecare Solutions has the experience and know-how in medical imaging services starting with X-ray equipment and now offers the latest in medical systems including digital radiography, medical cloud services and ophthalmology devices, in addition to 3D workstations for domestic customers.