Václav Havel was born October 5, 1936 in Prague to Václav Havel and Božena Havlová. The family owned the Lucerna Palace and the Barrandov terraces in Prague. His uncle Miloš was an entrepreneur in the film industry. Young Václav spent the war years mainly at the family summer estate, Havlov, near Tišnov. It is here that he experienced the liberation of Czechoslovakia by the Soviet Army. Since he was a young boy he has been interested in arts and public affairs. When the communist coup took place in February 1948, he was studying at a boarding school in Poděbrady. The family property was confiscated and his uncle Miloš went into exile. Because of his family background, Václav Havel was not allowed to study at a grammar school but a vocational school for chemical laboratory assistants. Afer completing secondary school in 1954, which he managed by attending evening classes, he applied for admission to the performing arts university, but in vain. Instead, he was enrolled as a student of the Faculty of Economics of the Czech Technical University between 1955 - 1957. He began to develop his career as an artist in the literary group Thirty-Sixers, which has been independent of the official cultural scene since its foundation. After completing his compulsory military service, he began working as a stagehand, and later became a dramaturgist and the core author of the Theatre Na zábradlí. Václav Havel became one of the best known and most played Czechoslovak playwrights abroad. He was also active in the editorial board of the literary magazine Tvář (Face). In 1964 he married Olga Šplíchalová, with whom he had been in love for many years. His critical speech at the 4th congress of the Czechoslovak Writers‘ Union in 1967 marked Havel‘s involvement in the events of the Prague Spring. The reform movement of the 1960s was however quashed by the occupation by the Warsaw Pact armies in August 1968 and the subsequent normalization. While he became a respected and frequently staged author abroad and his plays were being awarded with numerous awards, in Czechoslovakia his plays were banned. He withdrew from public life and his brief work experience at the Trutnov brewery became a theme for his famous play, „Audience“. The declaration of Charter 77 marked a turning point in the scattered and fragmented activities against the communist regime. Václav Havel was one of the authors of the declaration and he became one of the first three spokesmen of Charter 77. He had been investigated and bullied by the StB, but Charter 77 led to his first prison sentence. He was held in detention for five months, from January until May 1977, pending trail. In October he was sentenced to fourteen months of imprisonment for harming the interests of the republic abroad. He served his longest prison term in 1979-1982 for his activities in the Committee for the Defense of the Unjustly Prosecuted (VONS). In December 1988 he was able to make a legal public appearance at the opposition demonstration at Škroupa Square in Prague. This was the first permitted demonstration during the normalization era. Less than a month later, however, he was arrested in relation to the demonstrations during Palach‘s Week. Increasing pressure from international groups and the Czechoslovak public contributed to his earlier release. In June 1989 he was involved in the petition, Several Sentences. Although he was arrested again in autumn 1989, the rising anti-regime activities of the opposition could no longer be stopped. Two days after a brutal putting down of a permitted student demonstration on November 17, he was involved in the founding of the Civic Forum. and he became an unofficial leader of the Velvet Revolution. On December 29, 1989 in the Vladislav Hall of the Prague Castle, Václav Havel was elected, by unanimous agreement, the first free president of the country, which still bore the name Czechoslovak Socialist Republic. After the dissolution of Czechoslovakia he was reelected president of the Czech Republic. His term ended in 2003 after 13 years. Even after stepping down from office, Václav Havel has remained a respected public authority.