Ministry Biography

Al Jourgensen, a producer, singer, and instrumentalist, created the American industrial metal band Ministry in 1981 in Chicago, Illinois. Ministry began as a synth-pop band, but by the late 1980s, they had transformed into one of the forerunners of industrial metal. The lineup of Ministry has changed repeatedly, leaving Jourgensen as the only original member remaining. Nivek Ogre, Chris Connelly, Gibby Haynes, Burton C. Bell, and Jello Biafra, as well as guitarists Mike Scaccia and Tommy Victor, bassists Paul Barker, Paul Raven, Jason Christopher, Tony Campos, and Paul D’Amour, drummers Bill Rieflin, Martin Atkins, Rey Washam, Max Brody, Joey Jordison, and Roy Mayorga, and rappers and producers DJ Swamp. The band is well known for their hits “Jesus Built My Hotrod”, “Just One Fix”, and “Thieves”.

Three of Ministry’s studio albums, The Land of Rape and Honey (1988), The Mind Is a Terrible Thing to Taste (1989), and Psalm 69 (1992), were commercial successes in the late 1980s and early 1990s. The first two albums were certified gold, while Psalm 69 was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America. Psalm 69 was followed by Filth Pig (1996), a stylistic change for the band that garnered Ministry its highest chart position on the Billboard 200 at number nineteen, despite critical acclaim and the beginning of the band’s financial collapse. Because of the poor reception to their second album, Dark Side of the Spoon (1999), Warner Bros. dropped Ministry from their roster, and the band went on sabbatical in the early 2000s, when Jourgensen sought rehab after years of substance addiction.

Ministry revived in 2003 with Animositisomina, which turned out to be their final album with Paul Barker, who had quit the band early the following year after nearly two decades as an official member. On Psalm 69, Ministry reverted to their thrash/industrial roots and released the “Bush Trilogy,” which included Houses of the Molé (2004), Rio Grande Blood (2006), and The Last Sucker, all of which were critical of then-US President George W. Bush (2007). The band’s commercial viability was effectively revived by these releases. Ministry reassembled in 2011 and released Relapse the following year, despite the fact that The Last Sucker was supposed to be the band’s final album. Mike Scaccia, a longstanding guitar contributor, died of a heart attack on December 23, 2012, and was posthumously included in Ministry’s next album, From Beer to Eternity (2013), which was also supposed to be their final album, as Jourgensen believed his death would mark the end of the band. Despite this, Ministry has produced two more albums since then: AmeriKKKant (2018) and Moral Hygiene (2021), and as of October 2021, they are working on new material for their sixteenth studio album.

The band has received six Grammy nominations and has performed at numerous music festivals, including the second annual Lollapalooza tour in 1992, co-headlining Big Day Out in 1995, and three appearances at Wacken Open Air (in 2006, 2012 and 2016).

Ministry Discography

Top Videos

Frequently Asked Questions

What Was Ministry’S Biggest Hit?

“Mind” was Ministry’s biggest hit, reaching the top of the charts in both the United States and the United Kingdom. The song was released as a single in 1988, and it quickly became a favorite among fans of the band. “Mind” is a catchy, upbeat track that features some of the best-known lyrics from Ministry front man Al Jourgensen. The song is about the power of the mind, and how it can be used for good or for evil. Ministry’s message in “Mind” is one of hope, urging listeners to use their powers for good instead of succumbing to negativity.

How Many Albums Of Ministry?

Ministry has released 15 studio albums, six live albums, two compilation albums, three EPs, and two DVDs.

What Is Genre Of Ministry’S Songs?

Ministry’s songs are mostly in the industrial metal genre, with some elements of electronic music and punk rock. The band’s earlier work is often classified as industrial metal, while their later work is sometimes classified as industrial rock. Ministry’s musical style has evolved over time, but has generally remained within the industrial metal genre.

What Is Ministry’S Best Album?

There are a lot of great Ministry albums, but their best album is probably “The Land of Rape and Honey.” This album is full of dark, heavy, and industrial sounding tracks that are sure to get your head banging. If you’re a fan of industrial metal, then this is the album for you.

Most Searched For Ministry Songs