Since their first engagement together as musicians for a church camp in Petersburg, Michigan in August, 1986 until now, the ministry God has given Phil & Kim has expanded and flourished until it is a full-time livelihood that involves their entire family. Their boundaries of influence have expanded until they have sung and played all over the United States (as well as internationally) into their 36th year of ministry. Their constant, persistent attention to cutting-edge arranging, musical excellence, and a proper balance of spiritual emphasis are the keys to success God has helped them tap.

Phil & Kim’s actual base of ministry began during their college days. Phil is a 1986 graduate of God’s Bible School & College, Cincinnati, OH. This is the famous, 100+ year old college that is well-known within Christian education ranks for having been the American college where Oswald Chambers (“My Utmost For His Highest”) taught. Phil also completed professional trumpet studies at College Conservatory of Music, University of Cincinnati and earned a Bachelor of Sacred Music degree with a double major in trumpet performance and music education. Kim attended Union Bible College, Westfield, IN where she was very instrumental in arranging most of the music that was performed by the college’s traveling music groups.

Since that time, many ministry opportunities have come across their pathway. They have always maintained a public performance ministry, which for the first fourteen years included doing music presentations for church camps and extended-length revival campaigns. They have also held the positions of Ministers of Music, Hobe Sound Bible Church, Hobe Sound, FL; Director, Music Division, Union Bible College, Westfield, IN; and Phil was Dean of Enrollment Management at his Alma Mater, God’s Bible School & College, Cincinnati, OH.

In January, 2000, Phil & Kim transitioned to a new, all-concert ministry. They began recording professionally and currently utilize America's top-selling choral arranger, Bradley Knight (Dallas, TX) as their primary producer. This new emphasis began to expand their boundaries rapidly. Their home has seen the addition of four children across the years and the children are now very actively involved in the ministry. Their two oldest daughters are quite proficient on the violin and play at each of their concerts. Their entire family sings together in an ensemble. Kim is well-known for her phenomenal mastery of the piano and the extraordinary talent God has given her is a part of each concert, as well as trumpet solos from Phil.

On February 1, 2019, they signed an exclusive booking agreement with JEFF ROBERTS & ASSOCIATES of Hendersonville, TN, which now represents them in all personal appearances. Then, on April 12, 2021, The Collingsworth Family signed a recording agreement with Gaither Music Group, Nashville, TN which now markets their recordings internationally, both digitally and physically, via GMG's agreement with UNIVERSAL MUSIC GROUP/CAPITOL CHRISTIAN as exclusive distributor. This new agreement also added The Collingsworth Family to appear regularly on the GAITHER GOSPEL HOUR's internationally syndicated television shows, distributed to more than a dozen commercial television networks.

Their ministry is featured regularly on the nation’s largest gospel music syndicated radio program, The Gospel Greats with Rodney Baucom. Their music is also regularly featured on XM/Sirius Satellite Radio's Enlighten Channel 65, GMT (Gospel Music Television), The DayStar Television Network, INSP, and is featured each year, at Christmas, in prime-time specials on the Trinity Broadcasting Television Network. The Collingsworth Family has appeared on many of the Gaither's Homecoming Series live concert events around the nation, making appearances with the Gaithers in some of their largest venues in the US and Canada, as well as taping many of their filming events at the Grand Ole Opry, Nashville, TN; The Billy Graham Library, Charlotte, NC; and at their hometown studio, Alexandria, IN. The CFam Personal Appearance Schedule shows the broad appeal their family emphasis has, performing in all types of venues across the US, the Cayman Islands, Sweden, Norway, Canada, etc. They annually make appearances at The Brooklyn Tabernacle, Brooklyn NY; The Billy Graham Training Center, Asheville, NC; Shadow Mountain Community Church, El Cajon, CA; and at many festivals and celebrations such as The Great Smokies PraiseFest, Sevierville, TN; Branson PraiseFest, Branson, MO; The National Quartet Convention, Pigeon Forge, TN; Gaither's Family Fest, Gatlinburg, TN; etc.

The rapid expansion they have seen occur with the transition to an all-concert ministry is a direct result of the emphasis they have placed on the power of prayer. Each Tuesday evening, they hold a private prayer meeting in their home for the specific purpose of praying for the salvation of their children and the expansion of their ministry. Since the beginning of these weekly prayer meetings in 2000, the doors of opportunity for ministry have opened to them, crossing all evangelical denominational boundaries. Phil & Kim’s entire purpose is to give the talent God has loaned them back to their Creator as a sacrifice of praise.