General collection information

This database contains an index to cemetery and burial details posted on Find a Grave® from the United States. The records are dated between the 1600s and the present. Find a Grave® provides users a virtual cemetery experience, with images of grave markers from around the world, photos, biographies, and other details uploaded by volunteers. You may find obituaries and links to other family members included as well.

Using this collection

Records in this collection may include the following information:

Name

Gender

Birth date

Death date

Cemetery name

Burial location

Relatives' names and relationships

Biographical information

Obituary

Photos

This index can be used to find out when your ancestor died and where they were buried. You also may find names of your ancestor's relatives, which may add names to your family tree.

When viewing a record in this database, navigate to the corresponding memorial on Find a Grave® by clicking the image or the Find a Grave® URL. The corresponding memorial may contain more information or images that have been recently added by Find a Grave volunteers.

Corrections to memorials can be submitted on the Find a Grave® site by clicking the "suggest edits" tab on each memorial.

Collection in context

The individual records were created by volunteers who submitted information to Find a Grave®. The gravestones that provided the information are primary historical sources.

Find a Grave® got its start in 1995 when founder Jim Tipton built a website to share his hobby of visiting the graves of famous people. The website attracted thousands of visitors and soon grew beyond a collection of notable graves, as volunteers began uploading images of headstones, burial information, and personal memorials from around the world.

Find a Grave® volunteers both make and fill requests for headstone images. You can become a "Graver" yourself with the Find a Grave® mobile app. It's free and available here.

Bibliography

Find a Grave. "Home." Accessed November 18, 2022. https://www.findagrave.com/.