Michael grew up in southern California. From a young age, he was encouraged by his father that he "would make a great dentist," and he has! He completed his DDS degree in 1988 from USC in Los Angeles and moved to Redding with wife Julie to begin a life in rural northern California. Four sons, 2 daughter in laws, two granddaughters, one grandson and 30+ years later, Mike and Julie happily call Redding their home for life!

Many of the staff have been with Dr. Mike for years. His patients are like family. He treasures watching them grow, caring for their dental health into the next generation. Dr. Mike was honored to have his oldest son Jonathon (Dr. Jon) join the practice in 2019. Together working side by side, their joy is to serve the community they both love so dearly . Son David and wife Sarah returned to Redding after completing college degrees. David is an Edward Jones Advisor and Sarah retired from teaching to care for their baby girl Riley. Son Adam is in dental school at OHSU in Portland, planning to join the family practice when he graduates in 2024. Son Philip graduated from college, moved home to Redding and married Gabi, his Texas sweetheart, in 2022. Philip currently works as a Financial Advisor with Bank of America. Dr. Mike’s wife Julie helps run the dental office from home, juggling their home, church and professional lives. Truly it is a family owned and operated dental practice!

Dr. Jon feels fortunate to be practicing in the home town where he grew up with the family he loves. Jon attended Redding Christian School from Kindergarten through high school, playing about every sport offered. He then attended Simpson University, on a soccer scholarship, majoring in Biology. He went on to Louisville Kentucky for dental school, eventually marrying his junior high sweetheart, Janelle Gaddy. Upon graduation from the U of L in 2019, Jon and Janelle returned to Redding to join the Dinius family dental practice and to begin their family. Mila was born in July 2020, giving Dr. Mike and Julie their first grandchild! In February 2022 they became a family of four with their baby boy Logan. When not treating patients, Jon and Janelle enjoy playing tennis, running, working in their garden or exercising their Labrador Cash. Dr. Jon feels blessed to be back home, raising his family and investing in the community near and dear to his heart.