Job Title: Software Engineer/Senior software Engineer

Primary Skill: NO SQL (Mark Logic, Mongo DB, Cassandra)

Location: Hyderabad/Pune/Coimbatore

Mode of Work: Work from Office

Experience: 3-7 years.

About the Job :

We are looking for a Software Engineer who will be responsible for Marklogic development and should be able to develop and support MarkLogic solutions.

Know your team:

At ValueMomentum’s Engineering Center, we are a team of passionate engineers who thrive on tackling complex business challenges with innovative solutions while transforming the P&C insurance value chain. We achieve this through strong engineering foundation and continuously refining our processes, methodologies, tools, agile delivery teams, and core engineering archetypes. Our core expertise lies in six key areas: Cloud Engineering, Application Engineering, Data Engineering, Core Engineering, Quality Engineering, and Domain expertise.

Join a team that invests in your growth. Our Infinity Program empowers you to build your career with role-specific skill development leveraging immersive learning platforms. You’ll have the opportunity to showcase your talents by contributing to impactful projects.

Responsibilities:

Understand requirements and analyze.

Understand the functional/non-functional requirements.

Participate in client calls and prepare the clarification list to seek clarifications.

Prepare the list of requirements and seek review input from the key stakeholders.

Update requirement traceability matrix.

Create an Impact analysis document to understand the impact on the existing functionality when required.

Requirements:

Bachelor’s degree in computer science, Mathematics, Engineering, or similar discipline or equivalent

2-6 years of total technical experience in NOSQL Database with Mark Logic in development team

Strong technical experience in XML, XPATH, XQUERY, XSLT languages and unit testing, Code Versioning, and best practices

Good Knowledge on Mark Logic Data Hub framework for ingestion and Harmonization

Experience in content loading using MLCP and Bulk transformation using CORB tools.

Should have good experience using ML Gradle or Roxy.

Knowledge on semantics and triples

Good knowledge on REST API’s and Mark Logic Modules

Mark Logic 9 version experience and usage of TDE views is plus.

Having experience in any NOSQL (Cassandra, Mongo DB) database is a plus.

Domain Wise – Solution design in areas such as insurance.

Excellent verbal and written communication skills.

Strong analytical and problem-solving skills.

Need to be excellent team player in Agile Methodology

About ValueMomentum:

ValueMomentum is a leading solutions provider for the global property & casualty insurance industry, supported by deep domain and technology capabilities. We offer a comprehensive suite of advisory, development, implementation, and maintenance services across the entire P&C insurance value chain. This includes Underwriting, Claims, Distribution, and more, empowering insurers to stay ahead with sustained growth, high performance, and enhanced stakeholder value. Trusted by over 75 insurers, ValueMomentum is one of the largest standalone insurance-focused solutions providers to the US insurance industry.

Our culture – Our fuel

At ValueMomentum, we believe in making employees win by nurturing them from within, collaborating and looking out for each other.

People first – Empower employees to succeed.

Nurture leaders – Nurture from within.

Enjoy wins – Recognize and celebrate wins.

Collaboration – Foster a culture of collaboration and people-centricity.

Diversity – Committed to diversity, equity, and inclusion.

Fun – Create a fun and engaging work environment.

Warm welcome – Provide a personalized onboarding experience.

Company perks & benifits: