Rabbi Dovid Baruch was sick for 20 years. 7 months ago he was niftar, two weeks after catching the coronavirus. He left behind a widow and seven children still at home, who desperately need our help…

From when he fell ill, 20 years ago, his wife heroically supported him, with simcha and thanks to Hashem for every additional day of life. Thirteen children were born to them; for each one she thanked Hashem, as well as for each bris milah, each bar mitzvah, and each wedding. She didn't complain, regardless of the difficulty.

Seven months ago, he contracted the virus; but in his state of health, he wasn't able to survive it. After two weeks of being on a ventilator, in a coma, he returned his pure neshamah to its Creator.

His widow has been struggling tremendously these last seven months. She's been trying to cope with the challenge of feeding her family, paying the phone bills, the electricity, the property tax. She been trying and trying- but now she's collapsing…It's hard to ask for help from the public, but it's even harder to face 7 children and not to be able to give them even the most basic essentials. Her sense of responsibility to her family overpowered her sense of shame, but she burst out crying when she was forced to appeal to the public for help. We can't turn her away. How can we not open our hearts to these children? They're teetering on the brink of despair, and we can help bring simcha and hope back into their lives.

In such times as we're living through now, when no one has any guarantees for their health or safety, the best hishtadlus is to help out, to support those who have been affected, to show Hashem that we're vital for the economy; we're necessary for the functioning of this world. If we help again and again, and show Him that we're the emergency aid, no doubt this will be a protective shield for us during this period.

This isn't "just another" Corona casualty out of tens of thousands. No! It's a merit, an opportunity to help.

Help the Baruch family: the future of a widow and her seven children is in your hands!

Donations can also be made to Kupat Ha'ir Fund #5195, by phone 1-888-587-2842, or by mailing a check to American Friends of Kupat Ha'ir, 4415 14th Avenue, Brooklyn NY 11219.