Pitch Perfect is a musical comedy, starring Anna Kendrick (as Beca), that was released in 2012. This classic film is loved by many, and it was recently added to Netflix. A recent re-watch made me realize how much this movie still holds up today.

It’s objectively corny, but I mean, of course it is. It’s a movie centered around acapella groups having “riff-offs,” but it’s entertaining regardless.

Rebel Wilson is a huge source of comic relief in this franchise, with her character Fat Amy. Pitch Perfect also has a lot of satire in it, without being borderline offensive. This movie has a few classic stereotypes, like the dumb blonde, the pretentious brunette, and her artsy love interest. Again, it’s all corny, but it’s entertaining! Trust!

The riff-offs in the first Pitch Perfect are definitely the best. The main competition scene genuinely keeps you on the edge of your seat. It’s impressive how the performers can all make music together without any instruments, and the flow and harmony of their voices is insane.

Anna Kendrick is a pretty okay singer, but when she sings with her group, it makes her sound ten times better. Her love interest in the movie, Jesse (played by Skylar Astin), is very charming. He has a nice voice and a confident energy, so I think everyone had a crush on his character when they were kids.

Pitch Perfect 2 is similarly pretty solid. The main plot is that the Barden Bellas, the female acapella group from the first movie, have lost their performing privileges. Following their redemption arc keeps you wanting to continue watching, and it’s got the same essence as the first movie.

However, the third movie is where it all goes downhill. Full disclosure: I hadn’t even watched this movie before I started working on this article.

In Pitch Perfect 3, we basically completely forget about Jesse and Beca, and we don’t see any of the after-effects of their breakup, even after four years together. The movie centers instead around Hailee Steinfeld’s character of Emily. A huge part of the watchability for Pitch Perfect is the nostalgia. Everybody loves Beca, and shifting the focus off of her is just weird.

The plot of the third movie is also so hard to follow. They win championships, reunite, and…something happens, I guess?

They really could’ve left the franchise alone after two movies. They arguably could have just stopped after the first one and called it a day. There’s a reason the third isn’t available on any streaming platforms.

So please feel free to re-watch those first two Pitch Perfect movies this summer! But let’s just pretend that the third movie doesn’t exist.

Okay? Okay.