Munich

The capital city of Bavaria and also the third largest city of Germany, the city has some of the oldest buildings of the century and various museums. The famous event of the city is its annual Oktoberfest. The city is as expensive as London or Paris.Munich is home to 1.5 million inhabitants.

Berlin

Germany's capital city and the largest city of the country, the city's Holocaust memorial and Berlin wall's graffitied remains reminds of the 20th century. Berlin is popularly known for its art scene at gold colored,swoop roofed. The city is home to the famous Berlin Opera and Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra and the Museum Island is titled as for the UNESCO world Heritage Site.

Frankfurt

The largest city located in the Federation state of Hesse, Frankfurt is the central city of germany on the back of river Main. Frankfurt is known as the financial and the business capital of Germany and also houses the European Central Bank. The city has a population of 7.5 million people. The city is home to rich collections of buildings, museums, art and culture.

Hamburg

The free city, Hamburg is the second largest city in Germany, Hamburg is home to 18.4 million inhabitants. It is a major port city and the transportation hub located in the northern region of Germany and is connected to the North Sec visa Eibe river. Hamburg is also an imortantcutual and commercial centre of Europe.

Dortmund

The largest city (area wise) of the Ruhr, Germany's largest Urban region and home to approximately 5.1 million inhabitants. The city is located in the North Rhine-Westphalia region of the country. Dortmund is popularly known for its Westfalen Stadium. It is the birthplace of the Borussia soccer team.

Stuttgart

The capital city of Baden Württemburg, situated to the southwest of Germany. Stuttgart is the manufacturing hub also home to the headquarter of top automobile companies in the world i.e. Mercedes Benz and Porsche. The city has many parks around the center. Stuttgart encompasses the largest zoo and botanical gardens in Europe.

Dresden

It is amongst the 16 political centres of Germany, Dresden is the capital city of Saxony located in the eastern region of Germany. The city is famous for the celebrated art, classic architecture of the old town and museums. Dresden still remains the cultural capital even after the World War II destruction.

Bonn

Founded during the first century BC, city have remains of roman settlements The city is located in the western Germany on the bank of the Rhine River. The city is famously known for its central Beethoven House which is both a memorial and a museum in honour of the composer's birthplace. It is one of the oldest cities of Germany.

Magdeburg

The central city of Germany located on the Elbe River, Magdeburg is the capital city of Saxony; it is also the burial place of Otto the Holy roman emperor. The city's Museum of Cultural History has evidence of the city's medieval times. It is home to around 2.3 million inhabitants.