Modern Times Group MTG AB, the international entertainment-broadcasting group, today announced that it has entered into a strategic partnership with the Norwegian public service broadcaster NRK to launch a brand new sports channel – ‘SportN’ – in Norway. ‘SportN’ will provide Norwegian viewers with the very best in local, national and international sports entertainment, and will be available before the end of the year. The new channel will be included in the Viasat pay-TV package to subscribers via Viasat’s DTH satellite platform, as well as through third party cable and IPTV networks.

SportN will replace Viasat Sport 1 in Norway and feature a mixture of Viasat and NRK sports content, including NRK’s coverage of this Winter’s Olympic Games in Turin, as well as Viasat’s coverage of matches from the UEFA Champions League, the French and Dutch premier football leagues, Formula 1 Motor Racing, the US and European Golf tours, and the Ice Hockey World Championships, to name but a few. Viasat now provides a dedicated sports channel for each of the Scandinavian countries, featuring a wide range of the most popular local and international sports events. Hans-Holger Albrecht, President and CEO of MTG, commented: “The launch of SportN reflects our shared commitment with NRK to make the best in sports entertainment broadly available to Norway’s TV viewers and sports fans. We see this as the beginning of a successful cooperation to leverage NRK and Viasat’s combined sports content portfolios and the channel will be unrivalled in terms of the breath and depth of available sports content.” For further information, please visit www.mtg.se, email info@mtg.se, or contact: Hans-Holger Albrecht, President & CEO tel: +46 (0) 8 562 000 50 Matthew Hooper, Corporate Communications tel: +44 (0) 20 7321 5010 Modern Times Group is an international entertainment-broadcasting group with operations in more than 30 countries around the world. MTG is the largest Free-to-air and Pay-TV operator in Scandinavia and the Baltics, the largest shareholder in Russia´s fourth largest television network, and the number one commercial radio operator in the Nordic region. The Viasat DTH satellite TV platform offers digital multi-channel TV packages of 50 own-produced and third party entertainment channels to viewers in 19 countries across Europe and Viasat TV channels now reach over 60 million people every day. Modern Times Group MTG AB class A and B shares are listed on the Stockholmsbörsen O-list under the symbols ‘MTGA’ and ‘MTGB’.