Good Omens

ON-SALE DATE: FEBRUARY 28, 2006

AVAILABLE IN HARDCOVER FOR THE FIRST TIME IN SIXTEEN YEARS

THE HILARIOUS CONTEMPORARY CLASSIC BY TWO OF TODAY’S MOST BELOVED WRITERS

“The Apocalypse has never been funnier”

--Clive Barker

With great pride William Morrow is pleased to announce the new hardcover publication of GOOD OMENS. First published in 1990, Neil Gaiman and Terry Pratchett’s brilliantly dark, screamingly funny take on the last judgment of humankind has in the past sixteen years grown from cult favorite to contemporary classic, a book adored by fans of both of these enormously talented and successful authors.

This new publication of GOOD OMENS is made even more special by the use of two different black and white dust jackets portraying the book’s central characters, the “demon” Crowley and the “angel” Aziraphale. Included with the original text is a foreword by the authors, the authors’ answers to “Frequently Asked Questions” about the book, and a piece by Gaiman regarding Pratchett, and one by Pratchett speaking of Gaiman.

According to The Nice and Accurate Prophecies of Agnes Nutter, Witch (recorded in 1655, just before she blew up her entire village and all its inhabitants – they’d gathered to watch her burn and got more of a show than expected) the world will end on a Saturday – next Saturday, as it happens. So the armies of Good and Evil are amassing, the Four Bikers of the Apocalypse are revving up their hogs, Atlantis is rising, frogs are falling, tempers are flaring and everything appears to going according to Divine Plan.

However, the somewhat fussy Aziraphale and the fast-living Crowley – each of whom rather favors the lifestyle of Earth’s mortals – are not especially looking forward to Rapture. Thing is, if they’re going to prevent that from happening, they’ve got to find and kill the Antichrist, and, er, someone seems to have misplaced him…

ABOUT THE AUTHORS:

Neil Gaiman is the critically acclaimed and award-winning creator of the Sandman series of graphic novels, and author of the New York Times bestselling novels Anansi Boys, American Gods, and Coraline; as well as the novels Neverwhere and Stardust, the short fiction collection Smoke and Mirrors, and the New York Times bestselling children’s books The Day I Swapped My Dad for Two Goldfish and The Wolves in the Walls. Originally from England, Gaiman now lives in the United States. Visit www.neilgaiman.com

Terry Pratchett is the internationally bestselling author of more than thirty books, including his phenomenally successful Discworld series, the latest of which, Thud! was a New York Times bestseller. His young adult novel, The Amazing Maurice and His Educated Rodents, won the Carnegie Medal, and Where’s My Cow? his Discworld book for “readers of all ages” was also a New York Times bestseller. His novels have sold more than forty million copies worldwide. Named an Officer of the British Empire “for services to libraries,” Pratchett lives in England. Visit www.terrypratchettbooks.com

GOOD OMENS

Neil Gaiman and Terry Pratchett

Terry Pratchett and Neil Gaiman

William Morrow/An Imprint of HarperCollinsPublishers

On-sale: February 28, 2006

$29.95

ISBN: 0-06-085396-4

Contact: Jack Womack

Publicity Manager

William Morrow/An Imprint of HarperCollinsPublishers

(212) 207-7033; fax (212) 207-7921

jack.womack@harpercollins.com

Bonus Content