link, about how the Good Omens book was inspired by Richmal Crompton’s Just William books, the Good Omens part starts at 7:38 :)

I: William’s influence stretches across genres. Neil Gaiman and Terry Pratchett’s apocalyptic novel Good Omens published in 1990 began life as an thought experiment - what if William wandered into 1976 horror film The Omen, in which an American diplomat finds his infant son swapped for the Antichrist.

Neil: If the baby swap had just been a little bit messier and the kid had gone off somewhere else, he would have grown up as somebody else. And then there was a beat and I thought: I should write it, it will be called William the Antichrist. And I loved the idea of William the Antichrist, I started writing it, sent it to a couple of friends, one of whom was Terry Pratchett, who called me up a year later and said, ‘Yeah, that William the Antichrist thing, you're doing anything with that?’ And I said, ‘No, I've written 5000 words of it and now I'm up to my eyes in Sandman.’ And he said, ‘Do you want to do it together?’

I: As Neil Gaiman explained to me, it turned out to be an inspired pairing.

Neil: I think for me and for Terry, it was such a delight to just go, okay, here is this thing that formed us. Here is a thing that shaped us. Here is an author whose plotting and whose prose style actually built what we do, and now we're going to go back with love. So the first draft of Good Omens was a William book. It was absolutely in every way it could be a William book. It had Violet Elizabeth Bott, it had William and the Outlaws, it had Mr. Brown.

I: Over time, the writers realized that they would have more creative freedom if they, in their own words, filed off the serial numbers. William and the Outlaws becoming Adam and the Them. And while the novel spins off in ineffable directions undreamt of by Richmond Crompton, the spirit of William is never far away.

Neil. The joy for me was occasionally just getting to construct perfectly William's sentences. I do remember the one of him when Anathema tells him that she has lost a book, he tells her that he's written a book. It was about a pirate who became a famous detective, and it was eight pages long,and particularly it would cheer her up. And then he says he'd he'd given it to one of the other kids, probably Brian. Brian said he'd never been so cheered up. And that's a William sentence.

I: Good Omens would go on to huge success, not only as a novel, but also a blockbuster TV series, as well as an audiobook read, of course, by Martin Jarvis. Martin has been reading William on the radio since the 1970s.