Question: It is becoming increasingly more difficult to turn the key of my 2003 GMC Sierra pickup into the start position. A certified auto technician advised me to have the ignition switch replaced immediately. A non-certified tech said to remove the 15 extra keys from the ring on the ignition switch key and the problem will not get any worse. The ignition key does work better when I lift up on it while turning the key. Should I change the switch or just simply remove the extra keys from the key ring? Does the weight of extra keys on a key ring damage the ignition switch?

Answer: Before renewing the ignition lock cylinder, you might try unloading the key ring a bit and lubricating the lock cylinder's bore. Silicone spray or powdered graphite are the most easily found lubricants, or Master Lock 2300D or 2305 lock lubricant should help the lock work more smoothly. Everyone has a preferred lock lubricant, for a variety of reasons- the most important thing is to not mix lubricants as this can gunk things up. Trying a spare key or renewing the original may also make a difference. A heavy key ring does take its toll on an ignition lock cylinder, so it's best to split a big load of keys to a second ring. If there isn't a large difference in rotation effort, the lock cylinder should be replaced.

Renewing the cylinder is a fairly easy job but one needs to disable the SRS (airbag) system before working on the steering column. If you're inclined to attempt this be sure to locate and follow published deactivation procedures before attempting repairs. Your tech's advice to do so soon is good advice as the cylinder needs to be able to turn to the start position in order to unlatch it for removal. A missing key or stuck cylinder really complicates the process and may result in considerably more work and parts requiring renewal.

Q: Before purchasing a Prius, I'd like to know what is realistic mileage to expect for long trips. I annually drive thousands of miles on visits to friends and relatives around the entire U.S. Therefore, I can make accurate estimates of my Camry's mileage because of long freeway runs each day and daily fill-ups I record. I see claims of high mileage city/road for the Prius but I think the road values are probably estimates based on dynamometer tests rather than true long-distance record keeping. I would think the small gasoline engine it relies on to recharge the battery isn't particularly efficient nor can it handle long mountain climbs. Any information on this?

A: You're correct that federal mileage estimates for a vehicle don't always match the driving conditions or methods one may actually encounter. In 2008 the EPA revised its calculations, better considering acceleration rate, higher speeds, air conditioner use, and cold weather operation, resulting in lower and more realistic numbers. In the case of the Prius, the numbers were knocked down an average of 9 mpg. The current highway rating of 48 mpg is surprisingly spot-on with feedback from several Prius owners I surveyed. The current 1.8L engine is super efficient with a 13-1 compression ratio, variable valve timing, and with an electric water pump and A/C compressor, is less encumbered than any other engine. The 98-horsepower engine, combined with electric thrust yields 134 horsepower, but more importantly, a very wide torque band. Long grades aren't a problem, according to most owners.

BRAD BERGHOLDT IS AN AUTOMOTIVE TECHNOLOGY INSTRUCTOR AT EVERGREEN VALLEY COLLEGE IN SAN JOSE, CALIF. READERS MAY SEND HIM EMAIL AT UNDER-THE-HOODEARTHLINK.NET; HE CANNOT MAKE PERSONAL REPLIES.