1975 25 hp Johnson... Ignition switch has 4 posts all together... No "M" terminals... It cranked over sluggish... Left the key in run position... Both coils started smoking...What did i do wrong... How can I avoid that in the future when I work on my 115hp Evinrude?

As "Racer" states in not so many words... you've expertly destroyed the magneto system of your engine. Coils, points, condensers, probably some wiring will need replacing.

The ignition is self contained. Battery voltage is NOT to be supplied!

What you did wrong was to guess as what to do which usually results in unfortunate encounters.

You need a marine ignition switch with six (6) terminals marked B, C, A, M, S, M, a service manual which should be studied thoroughly, and a proper wiring diagram (normally in the manual)

B = Battery..... C = Choke..... A = Accessory..... M = Magneto..... S = Starter Solenoid..... M = Magneto.

The two "M" terminals =..... 1st "M" = Wire from one set of magneto points or power-pack if so equipped..... 2nd "M" = Wire to other set of points or ground if power-pack equipped. Key OFF = Two Ms connected, ignition grounded/shorted out.----- Key ON = Two Ms NOT connected, ignition engaged.

A strong suggestion here is NOT to do anything to that 115hp you mention without asking advice here and/or having a service manual for that model also.

Hopefully your mistake has not been too awfully expensive. We'll try to help you with whatever problems you encounter in the future.

no nothing confusing, it seems i get advice that can go either way, for instance that wiring i tried came from a repair manual and a self proclaimed "boat mechanic". which that seems to be the wrong way. its pretty much trial and error for me with these outboards i don't know anyone that's into boats but me really and you tube, hell of a way to teach yourself something new but it is what it is. thanks for the very valuable info. what are the chances i just simply fried an old coil and not the entire magneto system? i cant seem to find new coils for that 25, but i do have the coils, and power pack on its way for that 1978 Evinrude 115hp.

my 1972 StarCraft came with a 1972 Evinrude 85hp /w prop drive and i am going to be putting a jet pump on the 115hp. seems that the 85hp would enough motor but there isn't a jet pump for it. The 85hp and boat have an electric shift the 115 does not will the plug from the throttle control work on the 115? or do i need a different throttle control that has the 2 handles on it? is there a way that i can wire a push button starting system instead of a key switch? if i am not going to use the 85hp should the throttle control that is on the boat come out and go with the motor?

anyway tons of questions, thanks for your in site into the key switches. i'll start new wire harnesses for the 115 and 25. I would ultimately like to put push button starting systems with the motors i do get up and running. is that a feasible idea or do i just need to stick with keyed switches? (I'm a master plumber not an electrician, which shouldn't mean to much, but ...)

Thanks again.

1. Your 85 and 115 have very different electrical systems and are not compatible.

2. The controls came with new motors and are SUPPOSED to go with used motors. However, that seldom is the actual case

3. You can use push buttons to start and stop your 115. You need wiring diagrams to know what the heck you are doing

4. Back to the coils. They are readily available right here at iboats. Yes, $$$ but that's what happens when we screw up. You might get away with not replacing the points--just depends.

If the old 85 has the electric shift lower unit, a great deal of the resale value on that motor is keeping it with the controller that it uses. I would pull that off as a package and keep it together for resale, or reuse on another boat if that's what you have in mind.

My advice to you right now sir, is read, read, read. Spend some time on these forums, mining for information from the guys who replied above here, Get the factory manuals for the motors you own or buy and read them. Make yourself familiar with what you have and how it works, BEFORE you tear into things.

1978 evinrude 115hp ignition wiring using a push button iginition switch

i have a 1978 evinrude 115hp im trying to get running the wiring was pretty shot when i got it the power packs and coils failed on the ohm meter so i replaced 2 power packs and 4 coils how do i wire it with a push button ignition with out the remote throttle control, or standard key ignition switch. not sure where to go from here. i can get it to turn over but i believe i still have no spark. with out the throttle control wired to the motor and no existing ignition switch. ive looked at several wire diagrams and still nada when it comes to wiring a push button switch i was thinking push button start with toggle switches in place of the keyed switch.