Barbara J. Robinson, a Berwyn resident and author of several well-known children’s books, died at her home on July 9. She was 85.

Robinson was known throughout the country for her beloved Christmas book ‘The Best Christmas Pageant Ever.’

The book, published in 1972, was made into both a popular TV movie that starred Loretta Swit and a play that is still performed in schools and churches throughout the country, according to her obituary that appeared in Sunday’s New York Times.

Considered by Publishers Weekly as ‘one of the best Christmas books ever,’ the popular story won many awards and recognitions, including a Georgia Children’s Book Award and recognition as an ALA Notable Children’s Book and a Library of Congress Children’s Book.

After the success of ‘The Best Christmas Pageant Ever,’ Robinson went on to write other children’s books, including ‘The Best School Year Ever’ and ‘The Best Halloween Ever.’ She also was known for writing short stories for publications such as Good Housekeeping, Redbook and Ladies’ Home Journal.

Robinson spent the latter part of her life traveling the country, speaking to children and teachers about writing.

Catherine Balkin, founder of Balkin Buddies, a group that brings authors in to speak at different schools and organizations, wrote in a blog entry that Robinson was ‘funny, charming and kind.’ She added that ‘this well-loved author will be missed by a great many students, including those who are now adults.’

Additionally, the Easttown Library said Robinson was ‘an important part of the fabric’ of the library since the 1970s. She served as secretary of the Library Board of Trustees from 1973 to 1981, and she was a major donor for the construction of the current library.

‘Her role at library was being a wonderful friend and a wonderful financial contributor,’ said Dennis Leeper, a member of the library’s board of trustees and president of the Easttown Library Foundation. ‘She would come in and talk about her love of reading and writing. She had a willingness to talk about it.’

In 2003, when the current Easttown Library was opened, Robinson inaugurated the Barbara Robinson Story Time Room by reading one of her stories to a group of children and parents. Robinson was also named a Library Champion by the Easttown Library Foundation on her birthday in 2008 for her service and financial support for the library.

‘One thing we did that meant a lot was naming her Library Champion in 2008,’ said Leeper. ‘In the process of talking to her about it, I found out her birthday was October 24, so we structured the ceremony to be on her birthday. I think she really liked that she celebrated her 80th birthday as Library Champion of the year.’

Born in Portsmouth, Ohio, on Oct. 24, 1927, Robinson grew up with a love of books. According to a short biography Robinson wrote for the group American Writes for Kids, Robinson said that after seeing her mother’s passion for reading she ‘grew up with, and quickly adopted, the notion that reading was the only way to fill up every scrap of loose time you could snatch.’

Robinson attended Allegheny College where she studied theater, and spent most of her adult life in Pennsylvania, marrying John F. Robinson of Berwyn in 1949.

Robinson is survived by two daughters, Carolyn Robinson and Marjorie Pinto-Leite, and three grandchildren: Tomas, Marcos, and Lucas.

A private burial service will be held at the Newtown Square Presbyterian Church on Aug. 3. In lieu of flowers, contributions may be made in Robinson’s honor to the Newtown Square Presbyterian Church or the Easttown Library.

‘She was a lovely person, the kind of person you feel really blessed to have met,’ said Leeper. ‘We lost a friend.’

Follow us on Facebook and Twitter:

www.twitter.com/wcdailylocal www.facebook.com/dailylocalnews