BOCA RATON, FLA. — To ABC viewers, he’s recalled as a “Secret Millionaire” featured in a March 2011 episode of the now-concluded reality television series. A successful real estate figure, Marc Paskin sought out people and organizations in Detroit deserving of his financial help. Today, his philanthropic side is balanced with ownership stints of small radio stations, which dates to 2015.

Now, Paskin is re-entering radio ownership by agreeing to take Beasley Media Group‘s remaining properties in this upscale South Palm Beach County city.

Paskin, who has a residence in Naples and has been living in Hawaii, through his Marco Broadcasting of Florida, has agreed to acquire WWNN-AM 1470, licensed to Pompano Beach, Fla., and associated FM translators W237BD at 95.3 MHz in Boca Raton and W245BC at 96.9 MHz in Lauderdale Lakes, Fla.

Those FM signals are likely of greater value to an operator than the AM, which from 1963-1997 was famed R&B and Soul station WRBD. The 96.9 MHz signal covers all of Broward County north of Interstate 595, including Fort Lauderdale; the 95.3 MHz signal reaches northern Broward County and southern Palm Beach County, including Delray Beach and Boynton Beach.

As of today, the three facilities are home to “South Florida’s FM MoneyTalk Radio,” featuring a variety of financially focused programs and a morning show anchored by Steve Kane.

This will likely change under Marco Broadcasting, which is buying the two FM translators and WWNN for $1.25 million. A 10% earnest money deposit has been made by Paskin’s company, which is being held by Hadden & Associates, the broker representing Beasley in this transaction.

Beasley’s legal counsel is Sally Buckman of LermanSenter; Marco’s legal counsel is Francisco Montero of Fletcher Heald & Hildreth.

What will Paskin likely use WWNN and the two FM translators for? A music format is likely, but what variety of music is perhaps the bigger question. With his entry into broadcast media ownership in 2015, Paskin acquired what is today KKCL-AM 1550 and named it “KBUD.” It featured Classic Rock and marijuana-themed programming elements but was short-lived.

Paskin was also involved in the operation of KXXP-FM 104.5 in White Salmon, Wash., near the Portland, Ore., metropolitan area. He operated the A. Wray Fitch-owned FM via an LMA until its sale to Bustos Media Holdings for $700,000. Today, it is Latin Urban reggaeton-focused “Urbana 104.5.”