London-born Michael Anderson began his career in films as an office boy at Elstree studios. By 1938, he had progressed up the ladder to become assistant director for distinguished film makers Noël Coward, David Lean and Anthony Asquith. Shortly after, during wartime with the Royal Signals Corps (Army Kinematograph Service), Anderson made the acquaintance of Peter Ustinov. Upon demobilisation, the 24-year old up-and-coming director secured the release from the military of his 'favourite corporal' and mentor to work as first assistant on School for Secrets (1946) and Vice Versa (1948). For Ustinov's third venture, Private Angelo (1949), Anderson both co-directed and co-wrote the screenplay, but the picture that first put him on the map was to be the patriotic wartime drama Mai 1943 - Die Zerstörung der Talsperren (1955), based on true events. Britain's most successful film of 1955, in turn, led to Anderson being hired by Mike Todd to direct the all-star blockbuster In 80 Tagen um die Welt (1956). A hugely popular box-office hit and winner of five Academy Awards, it elevated Anderson into the realm of more ambitious international productions.

His strong visual style -- in no small way complemented by a fruitful and long-standing collaboration with the cinematographer Erwin Hillier -- became ideally suited for suspenseful thrillers and action subjects like Flüsternde Schatten (1958), the sub-Hitchcockian psychological whodunnit Ein Mann geht seinen Weg (1961) or the underrated maritime drama Die den Tod nicht fürchten (1959) (based on a novel by Hammond Innes and originally intended for Alfred Hitchcock who went on to do Der unsichtbare Dritte (1959) instead). Another little gem is the intricately plotted spy thriller Das Quiller Memorandum - Gefahr aus dem Dunkel (1966), tautly directed and noteworthy for supremely well captured Berlin exteriors (a familiarity which stemmed from Anderson having spent some of his early childhood in Berlin and Hillier having worked at Ufa in the 20s before collaborating on Fritz Lang's classic thriller M: Eine Stadt sucht einen Mörder (1931)). According to Hillier, Anderson also had a reputation for being "superb at handling actors". This is reflected in his films which have often featured big name stars like Gary Cooper, Charlton Heston, Laurence Olivier or Alec Guinness.

Moving into science fiction, Anderson made style triumph over content with his (for the time) expensively made dystopian thriller Flucht ins 23. Jahrhundert (1976). Though not a big success with critics, the picture won at the box office and helped MGM out of its financial doldrums. Also in this genre, but with less distinction, Anderson directed Millennium - Die 4. Dimension (1989) and a miniseries, Die Marschroniken (1980). A foray into the world of comic strip heroes, Doc Savage - Der Mann aus Bronze (1975), proved to be one of his rare failures. His more recent work of note has included the Gemini Award-winning TV movie Die junge Katharina (1991), based on the early life of Russia's Catherine the Great. Vanessa Redgrave, who played Empress Elizabeth, was also nominated for a Primetime Emmy in the Supporting Actress category.

In 1957, Anderson received the Silver Medallion for outstanding work from the Screen Director's Guild of America and was in 2012 also honoured with a Lifetime Achievement Award from the Directors Guild of Canada. A Canadian resident since the 1970s, Anderson passed away at his home on the Canadian Sunshine Coast in British Columbia on April 25 2018 at the age of 98.

A former salesman and journalist, Ken Annakin got into the film industry making documentary shorts. His feature debut, Viel Vergnügen (1947), was a comedy about a Cockney family on vacation. It was made for the Rank Organization and was a modest success, spawning three sequels, all of which he directed. He worked steadily thereafter, mainly in light comedies. One of his more atypical films was the dark thriller Brücke der Vergeltung (1957), based on a Graham Greene story about a wealthy businessman who embezzles a million dollars from his company, kills a man who resembles him and steals his identity so he can escape to Mexico. It boasted an acclaimed performance by Rod Steiger as the villain and a distinct "noir" feel to it, unlike anything Annakin had done before (or, for that matter, since).

In the 1960s he was one of several British directors--e.g., Guy Green, John Guillermin--who specialized in turning out all-star, splashy, big-budget European/American co-productions, shot on the Continent. He was one of the directors of the epic World War II spectacle Der längste Tag (1962) and went solo on Die letzte Schlacht (1965), both of which were financial--if not exactly critical--successes. He also directed Die tollkühnen Männer in ihren fliegenden Kisten (1965), which was less successful. His final film was Genghis Khan: The Story of a Lifetime (1945), a film that was started in 1992 under Annakin's direction but never completed. In 2009 it was restarted again and Annakin was hired to assemble the existing footage for release, but died before completing the job. Italian director Antonio Margheriti finished up and the film was released in 2010.

Former journalist and film critic Leslie Arliss began his film career as a screenwriter in the 1930s, mainly for Gainsborough Pictures. He continued as a writer for ten years, leaving Gainsborough in 1941 when he was offered a chance to direct at Associated British. It wasn't long before he returned to Gainsborough and brought with him a young actor named James Mason, and the films they made together there garnered both of them public recognition. Their first, Der Herr in Grau (1943), was quite popular with wartime audiences, who found Mason's villainy just what they needed to hiss at during the depths of the war. Their next two films together, Cornwall Rhapsodie (1944) and Die Frau ohne Herz (1945), were also wildly successful, especially the latter with star Margaret Lockwood gaining attention for her appearance in a succession of low-cut (for 1945) dresses. It became the #1 box-office film in Britain for 1946.

Arliss then left Gainsborough for London Films, producer Alexander Korda's company; unfortunately, his tenure there was anything but productive. He and Korda did not get along at all and fought constantly (he was taken off of Korda's Bonnie Prince Charlie (1948), which was completed by Anthony Kimmins--and even Korda himself--but to no avail; it was one of the major flops of 1948). Arliss left London Films under less-than-amicable conditions and it was three years before he made another film. His latter work was a considerable step down in quality from his earlier films, and he wound up his career directing television.

British film director Anthony Asquith was born on November 9, 1902, to H.H. Asquith, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, and his second wife. A former home secretary and the future leader of the Liberal Party, H.H. Asquith served as prime minister of the United Kingdom from 1908-1916 and was subsequently elevated to the hereditary peerage. His youngest child, Anthony, was called Puffin by his family, a nickname given him by his mother, who thought he resembled one. Puffin was also the name his friends called him throughout his life.

Asquith was active in the British film industry from the late silent period until the mid-1960s. As a director he was highly respected by his contemporaries and had a long and successful career; by the 1960s he was one of only three British directors (the others being David Lean and Carol Reed) who were directing major international motion picture productions. However, Asquith's proclivity for adapting plays for the screen caused an erosion in his critical reputation as a filmmaker after his death. He was faulted for what was perceived as his failure to focus, like his contemporary Alfred Hitchcock, on the cinematic. Asquith was known as an actor's director, and solicited some of the finest film performances from Britain's greatest actors, including Edith Evans and Michael Redgrave.

Although Asquith's first love was music, he lacked musical talent. He channeled his artistic ambitions toward the nascent motion picture, and was instrumental in the formation of the London Film Society to promote artistic appreciation of film. Asquith traveled to Hollywood in the 1920s to observe American film production techniques, and after returning to England, he became a director.

Among his best-known films is Der Roman eines Blumenmädchens (1938), an adaptation of George Bernard Shaw's stage play, which he co-directed with its star, Leslie Howard. The film was a major critical success, even in the United States, winning multiple Academy Award nominations. Nobel Prize-winner Shaw, who had been a co-founder of the London Film Society along with Asquith, won an Academy Award for best adapted screenplay for the film. Asquith had a long professional association with playwright Terence Rattigan, and two of Asquith's most famous and successful pictures were based on Rattigan plays, Der Fall Winslow (1948) and Konflikt des Herzens (1951). Asquith directed the screen version of Rattigan's first successful play, French Without Tears (1940), in 1940.

Asquith's most successful postwar film was, arguably, his adaptation of Oscar Wilde's play Ernst sein ist alles (1952). More than a half-century after it was made, Asquith's film remains the best adaptation of Wilde's work. Ironically, Asquith's father H.H., while serving as Home Secretary, ordered Wilde's arrest for his homosexual behavior. Wilde's arrest, for "indecent behavior", led to his incarceration in the Reading jail and destroyed the great playwright, personally. The Wilde incident stifled gay culture in Britain for the first two-thirds of the 20th century. Another irony of the situation is that H.H.'s youngest son, Anthony, himself was gay.

By the 1960s Asquith was directing Hollywood-style all-star productions, including the episodic Der gelbe Rolls-Royce (1964), once again from a screenplay by Rattigan, and the Richard Burton-Elizabeth Taylor potboiler Hotel International (1963), also with a screenplay by Rattigan. It is based in an incident in the life of Laurence Olivier, a frequent Asquith collaborator. In 1967 Asquith was tipped to direct the big-screen adaptation of the best-selling novel In den Schuhen des Fischers (1968) set to co-star Olivier and Anthony Quinn, but he had to drop out of the production due to ill heath. He died on February 20, 1968, at the age of 65.

The British Academy Award for best music is named the Anthony Asquith Award in his honor.

London-born Robert S. Baker served as an artilleryman in the British army during World War II, posted to North Africa (where he met future partner Monty Berman), and later joined the army's film and photography unit, becoming a combat cameraman in Europe. At war's end he and Berman formed Tempean Films to make movies, their first being a Terry-Thomas / Norman Wisdom comedy, Date with a Dream (1948). The company churned out a string of lower-budget "B" pictures, including comedies, mysteries and thrillers, many of them directed by Baker. In 1959 they made a somewhat edgier film than their usual fare, Eine Stadt sucht einen Mörder (1959), a fictionalized account of the notorious Whitechapel serial killer. The next year they came out with an even grittier crime thriller, Verbrecherzentrale Sidney Street (1960), about a real-life 1911 shootout between police and a gang of Russian criminals in east London. They next turned out Der rote Herzog (1961), an anemic "adventure" film, which was followed by Das Geheimnis von Monte Christo (1961), one of the lesser entries in the string of pictures based on the classic Alexandre Dumas novel.

Berman and Baker concentrated on television in the 1960s, their main project being as producers of Simon Templar (1962) series. Baker later joined Gideon's Way (1964) as a producer. When that series ended Baker and "The Saint" star Roger Moore formed Bamore Productions, which produced a feature spin-off of that series, Hermetico - Die unsichtbare Region (1968), and then the Moore / Tony Curtis "crimerighting playboys" series Die 2 (1971). Baker later produced the series Simon Templar - Ein Gentleman mit Heiligenschein (1978) and Die Rückkehr zur Schatzinsel (1986).

Laslo Benedek was brought to Hollywood from Hungary--where he had been a writer, editor and photographer--by MGM, and his first few films were undistinguished programmers. His third, however, was quite a bit better: Der Tod eines Handlungsreisenden (1951), the screen version of Arthur Miller's classic play. Although trashed by critics at the time for, among other things, its "staginess" (Benedek said that he wanted to keep the work's theatricality intact), overlooked is the fact that Benedek drew out convincing, evocative performances from Kevin McCarthy, Cameron Mitchell, Fredric March and Mildred Dunnock.

Benedek's next film, however, is the one he'll be remembered for: Der Wilde (1953). This granddaddy of all biker flicks is amusingly tame--some might even say lame--by today's standards, but it caused quite a commotion in its day (it was banned in England and was railed against by conservative religious and social pressure groups in the US as yet one more example of how Hollywood was "corrupting the youth of America"). The film is actually not all that much, being rather slow-going and the "bikers" coming across more like bratty teenagers than dangerous rampaging hoods, but it struck a chord with young people and parents alike--for different reasons, of course--and was far and away the most successful film of Benedek's career.

Compton Bennett started out as a bandleader and then became a commercial artist. He turned out a few amateur films that caught the attention of producer Alexander Korda's London Films, and they hired him in 1932 as a film editor. During World War II he directed a few instructional films for the British military and some propaganda shorts for the general public. His feature debut as a director was Der letzte Schleier (1945), which was a big success. MGM took note, and he was brought to Hollywood to make films for them. The films he made there weren't particularly well-received--his most successful, König Salomons Diamanten (1950), was lauded mainly for its impressive action scenes, which were in fact directed not by Bennett but by Andrew Marton, who received co-director credit--and he returned to Britain a few years later. While there he divided his time between films and television, with an occasional foray into directing theatrical productions. In 1957 he turned out two well-received films, After the Ball (1957) and The Flying Scot (1957). He made his last feature in 1960 and, apart from an occasional foray into television, retired. He died in London in 1974.