HOLLYWOOD -- Her small role in 'Back to the Beach' with Frankie Avalon and Annette Funicello has re-opened the doors to Connie Stevens' film career.

Until the lightweight summer comedy came along in August, the blonde singer-actress wasn't exactly fighting off producers clamoring for her talents.

She had not, in fact, made a motion picture since her teacher role in 'Grease II,' a 1982 bomb. And for a decade before that Stevens had abandoned movies for her nightclub and concert act.

Now she is being offered several scripts and already has completed another film, 'Tapeheads,' with John Cusack and Tim Robbins.

'It's the most amazing thing that's ever happened to me,' said Stevens, who probably is still best remembered for her role as Cricket in the early 1960s series 'Hawaiian Eye' in which she co-starred with Robert Conrad, Troy Donahue and Anthony Eisley.

'I was hardly in 'Back to the Beach,' but I was featured prominently in the trailers that promoted the movie in theaters and on TV. They generated a tremendous momentum.

'As a result I've been offered three pictures, two movies of the week and a guest shot on a television special. Also, I've been contacted about a variety talk show of my own for a major company.

'In 'Tapeheads' I play another mother role, but I want to get back to playing virgins again.'

Stevens laughed.

'I'm tired of standing at the back of the line of available performers. I want to be a movie actress again,' she said. 'I guess the people in this business forgot me and a new generation of directors and producers have come along.

'I couldn't believe it when one 25-year-old network executive told me he saw 'Back to the Beach' and didn't know I did comedy. My God, that's practically all I've done.

'Every career has a dormant period, but that's what separates the girls from the women. You just wait it out and tough it out and it all comes around again. I've made a good living doing concerts and in Vegas. Now I hope to stay on an acting roll.'

Stevens is talking to Conrad about a two-hour TV film of 'Hawaiian Eye,' bringing it up to date with the old cast, including Eisley and Poncie Ponce. They both have production companies and a script is in the works.

But Stevens currently is more interested in her avocation, the Windfeather organization that she helped establish in 1982 to provide basic needs for American Indians.

Since then she has raised a quarter of a million dollars to develop waterwells on Indian reservations in the West, especially the Papago tribe in Arizona.

'I've been working for Indian causes for a dozen years,' Stevens said. 'I began by raising money for college scholarships for eight brilliant Indian students who would otherwise not have had the opportunity.

'I know I'm blonde and I was born in Brooklyn, but I'm part Iroquois and I'm a history buff. My great-grandmother on my mother's side was Indian.

'I realize I'm not an authority on the subject, but we've ignored the plight of Native Americans while worrying about the welfare of people in other parts of the world. All I can do is help raise funds.

'Visits to many reservations have opened my eyes. I've talked to thousands of teenagers on Wyoming reservations who have no idea who they are or about their history.

'It takes money to upgrade their education and it takes only $15,000 to dig wells to help these people. There was only one working well on the Papago reservation and it served thousands of people, many of whom had to travel miles to get the water.

'Right now I'm involved in our Cowboys for Indians Rodeo here in the Los Angeles area in October. Dozens of rodeo cowboys will compete. Bobby Conrad, Burt Reynolds, John Voight, Doug McClure, Lee Majors, Frankie Avalon and Tony Danza are all participating.

'The money we raise -- and we hope it will be about $200,000 -- will go toward a fund to build a Native American school that will help Indians help themselves to escape the abject poverty they live in now.

'When you think about it, my personal career isn't anywhere near as important as this work.'