Robert De Niro was seen spending some quality time with his son Julian in New York City, just over a week after he confirmed the birth of his seventh child.

While stepping out for lunch with his 27-year-old, whom he shares with 70-year-old ex-girlfriend Toukie Smith, the actor, 79, wore a light grey polo shirt, black zip-up jacket and a pair of matching slacks.

The two-time Academy Award winner completed his laid-back ensemble with a grey face mask, blue baseball cap and black tennis shoes.

Julian, who walked down the sidewalk alongside his father's side, sported a maroon t-shirt, charcoal grey sweatpants, black high top Converse sneakers.

The duo were seen chatting away after grabbing a bite to eat as they enjoyed the warm spring weather.

On Thursday, Robert revealed to CBS Mornings' host Gayle King via a phone call that his newborn's name is Gia Virginia Chen-De Niro.

He and partner Tiffany Chen's baby girl was born on Thursday, April 6, weighing 8 pounds, 6 ounces.

'This baby is planned,' Robert said, adding that they both wanted the baby and are 'over the moon.'

'She was brought here by love,' Gayle said Robert told her in their phone call.

The legendary star shocked the world when he revealed he had 'just had a baby' after Tiffany, who is believed to be 45 - was seen with a baby bump in March.

Gayle revealed that she had interviewed Robert earlier this month with Sebastian Maniscalco about his new movie About My Father.

During the interview, she asked him a question if his kids ever said he was embarrassing him, to which he responded: 'All the time.'

After news broke of his exciting new addition, Gayle called him to ask why he did not tell her about his newborn earlier, to which he said it didn't come up in the interview.

The follow-up came after he announced the surprising new addition to his family, telling ET Canada: 'I just had a baby.'

Robert revealed his happy news in a new interview, after he was asked by a reporter what it was like to be a father of six children. That is when he said he did not have six, but rather seven children, then shared that he recently welcomed a new child into his life.

He did not share the name of the baby or the gender at the time of the interview.

They were photographed holding hands in July 2021 and in March of this year she appeared pregnant when leaving Giorgio Baldi in Santa Monica, California.

His rep confirmed to DailyMail.com that De Niro did not make a mistake and that he does indeed have seven children.

The Godfather actor has six other other children; Drena, 51, and Raphael, 46 with his ex-wife Diahnne Abbott, Elliot, 25, and Helen, 11, with ex-wife Grace Hightower, and twins Aaron and Julian, 27, with former girlfriend, Toukie Smith.

Tiffany and Robert are thought to have first met in 2015 when they worked on the film The Intern together.

The film also starred Anne Hathaway as a workaholic CEO, with Robert working at her company as a senior intern.

ROBERT DE NIRO'S CHILDREN

By Heidi Parker

1. DRENA DE NIRO, 51

Drena De Niro is an American actress and filmmaker who is the daughter of Diahnne Abbott and adopted daughter of Robert after their marriage in 1976. She has appeared in several of her father's films including 1999's On The Run, 2002's City By The Sea and 2002's Showtime. She also starred in 2014's Welcome To New York.

Drena De Niro at the Hands Of Stone film premiere in New York in August 2016

2. RAPHAEL DE NIRO, 46

Raphael De Niro is an American real estate broker and former actor. He often works with celebrity clients, including Jon Bon Jovi, Renée Zellweger, Travis Kalanick and Kelly Ripa. De Niro is the son of Robert and actress Diahnne Abbott.

Raphael De Niro at the Skyfall film screening in New York in November 2012

3. AARON KENDRICK DE NIRO, 27

De Niro's son is a product of the relationship between the actor and Toukie Smith, a former actress and model. His parents are both in the limelight. He carries mixed ethnicity, with his father having Irish, Italian and French roots. His mother is African-American.

Aaron De Niro at The Central Park Conservancy Opens the Peter Jay Sharp Children's Glade on Earth Day at The Peter Jay Sharp Children's Glade in April 2007 in New York

4. JULIAN DE NIRO, 27

Julian is the twin brother of Aaron and his mother is also Toukie Smith. He works as an actor and has appeared in In Dubious Battle (2016) and The First Lady (2022).

Julian De Niro attends The Sign In Sidney Brustein's Window Gala performance celebration at Virgin Hotels New York City on May 4, 2023 in New York City

5. ELLIOT DE NIRO, 25

Elliot is De Niro's son from his second marriage to actress and philanthropist Grace Hightower. De Niro and Hightower separated in 2018, nearly 20 years after De Niro first filed for divorce from his second wife. Elliot has special needs and his father has spoken about it, saying tennis really helps the child.

Elliot, in the red and black jacket, with dad Robert in March 2023

6. HELEN GRACE DE NIRO, 11

She is the daughter he has with his estranged wife Grace Hightower. Robert has been seen spending time with the girl in New York City amid the split as he walks with her and their dogs.

Helen Grace backstage at the hit Carole King musical Beautiful on Broadway at The Stephen Sondheim Theater in September 2015 in New York City

7. GIA VIRGINIA

Gia Virginia Chen-De Niro was born on April 6, 2023 weighing 8 pounds, 6 ounces, he told Gayle King on CBS Mornings.

The Heat actor said 'this baby is planned,' adding that he and partner Tiffany Chen both wanted the baby and are 'over the moon.'

Gia's first photo was shown on CBS Mornings

Advertisement

Tiffany had a small role as a Tai Chi instructor who helps out Robert's character.

Robert was spotted with Tiffany in August 2021 as they enjoyed a vacation in the South of France together.

The pair's romance was evident as they were seen holding hands while strolling through the sunshine and were later seen kissing on a yacht.

They were also pictured together in New York in June and attended the Philbrook Museum of Art in Tulsa on July 31, in pictures which appeared on social media but were later deleted.

At the time, the Raging Bull actor was locked in a bitter divorce battle with his now ex wife Grace Hightower.

In April 2022, a judge ruled that his ex-wife, 66, should receive $1 million annually and that the couple will split the proceeds after selling their $20 million home.