August 16th, 2023

De Niro Con is now scheduled for April 2024. For more information please visit http://tribecafilm.com/denirocon.

TRIBECA FESTIVAL ANNOUNCES PLANS FOR ROBERT DE NIRO TRIBUTE AND THREE-DAY FAN EVENT IN CELEBRATION OF THE FILM ICON’S 80TH BIRTHDAY

EVENTS WILL TAKE PLACE AT SPRING STUDIOS IN NEW YORK CITY THIS FALL

Select Photos Available HERE

Getty Images Available HERE

Video Footage Available HERE

Social Teaser by New York Nico Available HERE

NEW YORK – (June 7, 2023) – Tribeca Festival today announced “De Niro Con,” a three-day fan event in celebration of Robert De Niro’s 80th birthday. The events will take place at Spring Studios in New York City from September 29 - October 1, 2023.

The multi-day fan experience will feature special appearances by De Niro himself, along with recreations of iconic film sets, immersive installations, classic film screenings, musical performances, and panel conversations. It will also include special appearances from co-stars and frequent collaborators. The full programming lineup will be announced this summer.

"It's hard to know what to get Bob for his 80th birthday. He's already got a gold watch, so we decided to celebrate him and his enduring legacy with a fun filled fan event as well as pay tribute to his unwavering dedication to his films, art, and the city he loves," said Jane Rosenthal, CEO Tribeca Enterprises & Co-Founder Tribeca Festival.

“De Niro Con” was announced at a private ceremony at the Tribeca Grill ahead of the 2023 Tribeca Festival opening night. New York City Mayor Eric Adams presented De Niro with a key to New York City for his service to supporting arts and activism. Other guests in attendance included Martin Scorsese, Matt Damon, Zazie Beetz, Mark Ruffalo, Brendan Fraser, Dianna Agron, Billy Porter, Julian Schnabel, Debra Messing, Noah Centineo, Piper Perabo, and New York Nico.

“Bob’s a visionary – he saw the potential for massive resurrection of this part of the city,” said Scorsese. “Tribeca Festival is an indomitable institution and a beacon, and Tribeca itself is the most vibrant, alive location. It’s the place to be and will continue to grow. It’s amazing he did all of this without having the keys until now so there’s more to come!”

“From Mean Streets and Taxi Driver to Raging Bull and Goodfellas, Robert De Niro’s work remains an iconic part of New York City, as much as he is himself,” said Mayor Adams. “Robert has starred in, directed, or produced over 140 movies, received two Academy Awards, and delivered art that will stand the test of time. Despite his success, Robert has never forgotten his roots as a lifelong New Yorker, co-founding the Tribeca Festival and helping revitalize and reenergize our city after 9/11. Thanks to him, New York City will continue to be the place to film, produce and make television and movies for years to come. For his decades of contribution to film and philanthropic support of New York City, I am honored to present Robert De Niro with a Key to the City of New York.”

“The Tribeca Festival has served as a symbol of New York’s resilience, rebirth, and renewal for 22 years and continues to play a vital role in revitalizing our downtown economy,” Governor Hochul said. “New York’s creative industry continues to be an economic powerhouse, supporting hundreds of thousands of jobs and benefitting countless small businesses, from caterers and set designers to local theaters and hotels. On behalf of New York, we thank Robert De Niro and Jane Rosenthal for their support of the arts and their contributions to our state.”

De Niro is a Hollywood titan with countless awards and accolades, including two Academy Awards and a Screen Actors Guild Life Achievement Award. He has received the Kennedy Center Honor and a Presidential Medal of Freedom from U.S. President Barack Obama. Born and raised in Greenwich Village, De Niro established Tribeca Productions from a small coffee warehouse alongside his longtime producing partner Jane Rosenthal in the 1990s. Additional De Niro investments and projects include the Tribeca Grill, Nobu, and Locanda Verde restaurants, The Greenwich Hotel, and the Tribeca Film Center. In 2001, De Niro founded the Tribeca Festival with Rosenthal to spur the economic and cultural revitalization of lower Manhattan following the attacks on the World Trade Center, as well as the first hotel in the neighborhood in the wake of September 11. He is widely recognized as an iconic New Yorker and has contributed to the writing of key pop culture references of the City—Frank Sinatra’s “New York, New York” and Jay-Z’s “Empire State of Mind.”

For the latest updates on Tribeca, follow @Tribeca on Twitter, Instagram, Facebook, and LinkedIn.

About the Tribeca Festival

The Tribeca Festival, presented by OKX, brings artists and diverse audiences together to celebrate storytelling in all its forms, including film, TV, music, audio storytelling, games, and XR. With strong roots in independent film, Tribeca is synonymous with creative expression and entertainment. Tribeca champions emerging and established voices, discovers award-winning talent, curates innovative experiences, and introduces new ideas through exclusive premieres, exhibitions, conversations, and live performances.

The Festival was founded by Robert De Niro, Jane Rosenthal, and Craig Hatkoff in 2001 to spur the economic and cultural revitalization of lower Manhattan following the attacks on the World Trade Center. The annual Tribeca Festival will celebrate its 22nd year from June 7–18, 2023 in New York City.

In 2019, James Murdoch’s Lupa Systems bought a majority stake in Tribeca Enterprises, bringing together Rosenthal, De Niro, and Murdoch to grow the enterprise.