I think that the late (Friday) Nicolas Roeg was not just a serious film-maker, but a maker of serious (aka adult) films. Thus, I wish that I could like the films he made. Alas,…

Roeg was daring in, among other ways, presenting titles that seemed to invite easy critical dismissal: Don’t Look Now (1973), Bad Timing (1980), Insignificance (1985). The timing of the three points of the triangle in “Bad Timing” is not notably bad. The working title of “Illusions” would have been somewhat better. The tagline of “A Terrifying Love Story” might have been better still.

The movie was (in)famously denounced as “a sick film made by sick people for sick people.” Most of the way through struggling to make sense of the extremely disjointed movie, I thought that attack extreme, and I don’t think that the movie was made by sick people. It sees to be about a sick (mentally ill) woman (Milena, played by Theresa Russell in her first Roeg movie) who has nearly died of some mixture of drugs brought into a Vienna hospital by an American research psychoanalyst Alex Linden (Art Garfunkel) who insists he is a “friend” not the boyfriend of the young woman and through most of the movie seems to have barely gotten out of a tempestuous relationship intact.

From fairly early on the very un-Viennese Harvey Keitel’s Police Inspector Netusil seems to be badgering the well-contained American. Alex has flashbacks of the relationship in the hospital, in Milena’s somewhat torn-apart apartment, and in timing the drive between his apartment and hers with the inspector. In her vibrant (and sane!) 2005 interview for the Criterion edition of the movie, Russell reports that the movie was shot chronologically, then carved into flashbacks from the arrival (and emergency tracheotomy) at the hospital, a reorganization about which she had initial misgivings.

As in “Memento,” a fairly banal story is so fragmented and strewn in deliberately misleading order that it looks experimental (or in a more skeptical alternative, “artsy”). Other Roeg films I’ve seen recently (The Man Who Fell to Earth, Insignificance) also struck me as excessively disjunctive—and also as beautifully shot. I haven’t seen “Don’t Look Now” since it first came out, but I’m pretty sure that the creepy mysteriousness in it also derives heavily from hyper-cutting.

I have to say that Russell and Garfunkel were daring, beyond the extensive nudity and sex scenes. Their characters, who become obsessed with each other, are disturbed (and disturbing). Milena is something of a Pandora of unknowability for Alex who wants to own her and to obliterate her past (including her marriage to a cipher of a character played by Denholm Elliot who lives in Bratislava, Slovakia, then Czechoslovakia.) Having just read Julian Barnes’s Brooker Prize-winning A Sense of Ending with a clueless, buttoned-up man and a woman he wants to please and totally fails to figure out (40 years ago and now), the sick relationship seems very British to me, even set in Freud’s city with some zither music in the middle to recall “The Third Man” (which was a British film with two American males and an inscrutable European…).

On the Criterion Edition disc, I really liked the Theresa Russell interview and found Roeg and producer Jeremy Thomas in the 27-minutes of their recollections more tolerable than I found them on “The Man Who Fell To Earth” Criterion edition. (They still came across as pompous to me, however.) I skipped the 16 deleted scenes (snippets), the stills galleries, and the original theatrical trailer. That is, for those who like the movie, there’s a lot to treasure on the disc. For most, 123 minutes of the movie is already too much.

©2011, Stephen O. Murray

Cinematographer-turned-director Nicolas Roeg died, at age 90, on Friday, stimulating me to dig out what I wrote about “Insignificance” (1985) and “The Man Who Fell to Earth” (1976).

From the retrospect about “Insignificance” (1985) and the commentary track on “The Man Who Fell to Earth” I have developed a dislike for Roeg. The posh accent does not help, but the pomposity and pretentiousness made me switch off the commentary track more than once. (Recorded separately, screenwriter Buck Henry who played a major part in the movie also struck me as pretentious. David Bowie, also recorded separately had some interesting things to say that were if not always scene-specific were at least related to the movie, as many of the musings by Roeg and Henry were not.)

Having been seriously bummed out by the ending of “Walkabout” that I had suppressed from my memory, and underwhelmed by “Insignificance” and annoyed by listening to Roeg, could I give “Fell” a fair viewing? I think so. There are images of it that had stuck with me, and positive feelings toward David Bowie as an actor form his turn as “Mr. Lawrence” and for Candy Clark from “American Graffiti” (once upon a time). Plus knowing that Roeg made movies for adults, not pimply adolescents longing for realities other than the stürm und drang of their adolescences (though fanboys of the “Space Oddity” flocked to the movie when it was released, long ago).

Based on the two Roeg movies I screened this week and memories of varying degrees of vagueness of his first three attempts at directing (codirecting in the first instance), I have concluded that Roeg is like Win Winders in having lots of visual style and very little narrative competence. Even with small casts and circumscribed locations, his movies obscured what was going on with intrusive cutting (see also “Damages,” the third season of which I’ve started watching on DVD…).

The jump cuts and extreme zooms distract (and, I think, aim to distract) from rather simplistic stories in “Insignificance” and the first four movies he directed. Bowie plays a refugee from a distant planet (presumably orbiting around a different star than our sun) who lands in Lake Fenton, a New Mexico lake (I think in a tiny space capsule). Desertification is occurring on his home planet (and is happening on ours as well…). How he thinks he can transport water back home is never broached.

With some advanced technology for taking pictures and recording sound, the alien who calls himself Thomas Newton visits NYC patent lawyer Oliver V. Farnsworth (Buck Henry), who is able to recognize in the calculations Newton pays him $10K to examine that they can lead to Big Money. Newton puts Farnsworth in charge of World Enterprises and uses some of the money it makes to build a space vehicle and launching pad.

Alienated physics professor Dr. Nathan Bryce (Rip Torn) is a conceivable confidant for the alien, who hires him to work on fuel economy (for the rocket), but it strains my credulity for the alien (whose concern for his wife and two children succumbing to the drought back on Anthea [played by White Sands. New Mexico) show up rather often, whether these are what the alien images is happening or sees across space (never mind time, even at the speed of light…) to be captivated by Mary-Lou (Candy Clark) who works as a mad, bellhop, and elevator operator in a New Mexico hotel.

It strikes me as ludicrous that someone who hurtled through space is made nauseous by an elevator ride, but a ghastly one with a shook-up Mary-Lou leaves him prostrate, and she carries him to his room, where he throws up (he was already bleeding from the mouth). She attaches herself to him more firmly than a leech does.

The alien’s human suit includes a penis (both Bowie and Clark display their genitalia and Bowie’s naked derrière is frequently on display in the movie), though the body underneath does not have hanging parts.

The movie is, perhaps, more a paranoid thriller than a sci-fi movie (though I just mentioned its most sci-fi aspect!). Just before his going-home launch, Newton is seized by the US government and tortured. (The notion that the US government engaged in torture was alien to most people back in 1976, despite some publicity about atrocities committed in Vietnam at ground level as well as indiscriminate napalming from above.) When I first saw it, I thought that Farnsworth was defenestrated by goons employed by a rival conglomerate. This time, I thought they were government agents, but either way, the US government and a very big business collaborating in murder of a US citizen is more thinkable now than in the year of the US bicentennial (some signs of which appear in the background in the movie).

So, the innocent extraterrestrial is trapped and corrupted (the New Mexico setting makes an analogy to the use of liquor to subdue Native Americans jump out at me: at first Newton refuses alcohol, but eventually is putting away a couple of bottles of gin a day—which fits with his British passport, I guess…). Hatred and the American penchant for violence remain incomprehensible to him, though he watches a dozen television sets simultaneously (with the movie’s eye moving in repeatedly to clips from “The Third Man” and “Love in the Afternoon”).

For being a more intelligent/evolved species, Newton seems not to have done much research or given much thought about those on the planet to which he goes. Though the last part of the movie, set decades later, is perfunctory, I still thought the movie went on for too long.

But for about an hour and a half, I was impressed anew with the visual flair (which, I guess, has to include the montage cutting). The range of music is Kubrickian, with prominent segments of Holst’s “The Planets,” Roy Orbison (whom Bowie thinks among the most alien of pop performers), Bing Crosby, the Kingston Trio, Louis Armstrong, Artie Shaw, Stomu Yamashta, and John Phillips (formerly of the Mamas and Papas) who is credited as the movie’s “musical director” and sings four songs (including covering Gene Pitney’s “Hello Mary-Lou”).

Anthony Richmond also shot the alarming, creepy “Don’t Look Now”, “Bad Timing”, and “Heart of Darkness” for Roeg (and “The Indian Runner” for Sean Penn, “Bastard Out of Carolina” for Anjelica Huston, “Sympathy for the Devil” for Jean-Luc Godard, etc.), Roeg marveled at Richmond’s ability to shoot in very cramped spaces in his commentary.

There have been multiple DVD releases of the movie (and a Criterion Blu-Ray that has gone out of print). In addition to the commentary track that I found mostly annoying, the Criterion DVD has an additional disc of bonus features. I don’t want to hear anything more from Roeg, but would be mildly curious about screenwriter Paul Mayersburg reportedly very candid interview and the 2005 Candy Clark and Rip Torn discussion of the movie. There’s also a 50-minute an audio-only 1984 recording of Walter Tevis (who also wrote the novels on which “The Hustler” and its sequel, “The Color of Money” were based) and another of producer Brian Eatwell and costume-coordinator May Routh (most of Clark’s clothes came from JC Penney).

“The Man Who Fell to Earth” is a cult film, and Criterion served its cults well. I am not a member of that cult and don’t think the movie is a “good movie” but it is a striking artifact of mid-1970s distrust of the collusion between the US government and very Big Business (before Republican-appointed justices purporting to care about “original intent” gave corporations unlimited expenditures to elect their lackeys under the guise of “free speech”)… that has become more pervasive in the intervening three and a half decades).

©2011, Stephen O. Murray

I can remember the rising arc of cinematographer Nicolas Roeg’s career as director — Performance (1970), Walkabout (1971), Don’t Look Now (1973), The Man Who Fell to Earth (1976). I heard very little about him or his movies after that, though I was very taken with the 1990 adaptation of “The Witches” from Roal Dahl. Ihe directed an adaptation of Roal Dahl’s “Witches” in 1990 with Anjelica Huston that I adored. I saw none of the visual flair for which Roeg was famed during 1970s in the only other movie directed by Roeg I saw, the tv adaptation of Tennessee Williams’s “Sweet Bird of Youth” with Elizabeth Taylor and Don Johnson. (1989). He went on to directed a few made-for-tv movies (including a 1993 not very good one of Conrad’s “Heart of Darkness” with Bob Hoskins). Already when he was shooting “Insignificance,” he had a promising future behind him, a verdict that gives me no pleasure, since a director aiming to make movies for adults and of a keen eye is not something of which we have too much.

He just died at the age of 90, which stimulated me to excavate reviews of his movies that I wrote in 2011. Here’s the first:

Titling something “Insignificance” pre-empts criticism that the product (play turned into a movie) is insignificant. Celebrity is not insignificant in our society — and more pervasive, it seems to me, now than in 1985 (when the movie was released) or 1954 (when it is set). Nuclear annihilation is also not an insignificant subject and nuclear weapons are more widely diffused now than in either then. And then there’s the discussion about epistemology (how do we know what we believe we know) and the shape of the universe…

Joltin’ Joe DiMaggio has lost some of his iconic status, though still a legend and the holder of a record that seems like to continue to stand (hits in consecutive games). (Joe) McCarthy is still the byword for bullying investigations. Einstein remains an iconic for brains and Marilyn Monroe for being a movie star about whom men salivated… and for being a vulnerable woman who played dumb blondes but was not so dumb (whether canny or smart is the alternative remains open to question).

Except for Monroe and DiMaggio, who were married to each other for a while during the early 1950s, none of these characters met each other, let alone being together in a Manhattan hotel room on hot summer night in 1954.

One of the irritating aspects of the movie is that the models for the characters are screamingly obvious, but they are referred to as Ballplayer (Gary Busey), Senator (Tony Curtis), Actress (Theresa Russell), a preternaturally sweaty Senator (Tony Curtis), and Professor (Michael Emil). Actress is clad in the dress that blew up in “The Seven Year Itch.” Professor has Einstein’s wild hair, glasses, mustache, and a Princeton sweatshirt. Tony Curtis’s Senator looks more like Roy Cohn than like Cohn’s boss, and Busey neither looks nor sounds at all like DiMaggio (whose Mr. Coffee pitches I remember; I only saw him bat in old clips).

The characters are too tied to iconic models to exist as independent characters, yet all of them are unbelievable to me as versions of these icons (Emil’s Einstein being the easiest to accept, having the genial modesty of the original). Moreover, the script does not imagine anything very interesting for these imagined interactions.

There are some flashbacks and the opening scene is on location filming the subway vent skirt-raising, but most of the movie takes place in the hotel (Roosevelt, if I remember correctly) and most of that in one room with a reproduction of a neoclassical Picasso painting of a mother and a child. The last provides grist for the Ballplayer to talk about his wandering wife’s inability to have a baby.

Roeg manages to get not only recurrent blood (from the Actress) but images of nuclear annihilation into the movie. Both seem gratuitous to me, though Einstein was dismayed about atomic bombs.

Because I have no trouble remembering Tony Curtis with Marilyn Monroe in “Some Like It Hot” (apparently there are people who have never seen it, nor anything else with Marilyn Monroe in it!), Curtis’s character thinking the Actress is a look-alike takes on additional comedy, though his character lacks the gallantry of the one who was onscreen with the real Marilyn Monroe.

In an interview for the Criterion edition, director Nicolas Roeg and producer Jeremy Thomas are unbearably smug about how clever they were and their movie was. They ramble on for 13 minutes and there is a 14-minute on-set featurette from the time (1985). There is also a trailer and a booklet with a fatuous essay about Roeg’s career and a more interesting 1985 exchange between Roeg and Terry Johnson who adapted her play for the screen and is articulate about the differences between stage-plays and screenplays. Roeg does not comment on his gratuitously showy editing (he was a cinematographer, not an editor, though as a director he seems to have been obsessed with making the editing jagged…): The zooms are particularly annoying IMHO. And for slow-mo explosions, Antonio had closed the book with “Zabriskie Point” IMO.

The (monaural) soundtrack is early (and unpromising!) Hans Zimmer, btw. And Russell was married to Roeg at the time.

Though clearly not up to playing Marilyn Monroe, I don’t blame Russell (29 years younger than her then-husband who cast her in a series of movies), but something went badly wrong in Roeg’s artistic career. (I liked her as the title character in “Black Widow,” a 1987 movie made by another director whose career is puzzling, Bob Rafelson.) (More recently, she was in the ensemble in the 2005 miniseries “Empire Falls.”)

Johnson and Roeg mistake confusion for complexity. If they had a point, they failed to make it.

©2011, Stephen O. Murray

I can’t say that I “found” Bertrand Tavernier’s 1981 movie “Coup de Torchon” (Clean Slate; Oscar-nominatd for best foreign-language film) engaging. It is not a good sign that even after watching it, I can’t remember whether I saw it on its initial release (I think so, and that it is/was not at all a good choice for a date movie; if I did see it, it was on a blind date that my landlord set up with a single mother who loved French films). Among the things it is, it is too long (for me; I also think “Brokeback Mountain,” “Munich,” and “The New World” are too long). The running time is 128 minutes, which is not only too long for a film noir, but too much time spent with Lucien Cordier, this film’s anti-hero.

What else is it? It is a movie based on American hard-boiled writer Jim Thompson’s* Pop. 1280 transferred from the American South of before the Civil Rights Era to Bourkassa, Senegal of 1938. The grubby Texas sheriff could not translate to France (Tavernier recalls in a lengthy 2000 DVD bonus retrospect—in English that is somewhat difficult to understand), but a police chief in a colonial backwater had similar untrammeled (unsupervised) latitude. Corruption goes with the turf, though much more small-scale extortion of off-the-record fines than the kind of running the town of Orson Welles in “Touch of Evil.” It is a movie when a lethargic nobody sets out on a well-covered set of slayings.

Although “Coup de Torchon” does not look like “Touch of Evil,” and Philippe Noiret was not as obese as Orson Welles ca. “Touch of Evil,” like Welles’s sheriff, Noiret’s policeman Lucien Cordier also has erotic relations with women far more attractive than he is—a very uninhibited Isabelle Huppert (or is that redundant)? and a more proper Irène Skobline as a new school-teacher. Although at the outset, it seems that Lucien Cordier has no authority and is held in great contempt by his superiors and by local white lawbreakers, there is never any serious investigation of his crimes (no Charlton Heston figure to the rescue). The “lawman” gets away with murder—six times. (Tavernier expresses puzzlement that the population in the title of the French translation was reduced to 1795, but there is a scene in which the official view that the Africans do not count as human is expressed, and Lucien reduces and/or causes to be reduced the white population by five.)

It is not clear to me whether he takes literally the advice of one of the superiors who literally kicks him around to take out the pimps, or realizes that he can get away with murders and embarks on rounds of “social cleansing.” (wiping the slate clean of the title, though there is also a literal text to be wiped off a blackboard within the film). The new schoolteacher (Irène Skobline) opines that he pretends to be stupid, and he shows considerable savvy in diverting any suspicions from himself. As a police chief who never jails anyone, Lucien is a joke. When he turns to “social cleansing,” he is not at all bumbling.

The first three murders fall short of judicial standards of “justifiable homicide,” but can be rationalized (even the priest seems to endorse his choice of starting points… and I didn’t fail to notice that Lucien signs a confession “Jesus”). But then there is one that is only expedient of someone who is not someone who “deserves to die” by any stretch of the imagination. (Lucien tells the man why he has to die, and persuades me not at all.).Tavernier says that it shocks American audiences more than French ones. Not least in being the calmest of the slayings, it is the most shocking and least defensible. There is some perverse comedy in the other slayings and, as I’ve noted, the ones before this are of bad/evil men, but this one may be realistic but is appalling. I don’t understand how Jean Renoir can have viewed the movie being about “redemption through crime.” Lucien makes the place better for himself (and I definitely see crimes), but I do not see any “redemption.”

Philippe Noiret was playing against type, his lovable basset hound screen persona. His Lucien is lazy and very laissez-faire until he starts shooting people. Noiret manages to leave viewers guessing about whether he let himself go in the tropics or was always lazy, and whether he is dull-witted or hiding a canniness (he’s definitely better at setting up alibis than the jealous husband in Quai de Orfèvres!) and waiting patiently for revenge at all the slights he has received, including those of his wife (Stéphane Audran, the wife of Claude Chabrol) and her live-in sponger lover who claims to be her brother (Eddy Mitchell). If he is meant to be an angel of death, he is probably the homeliest one in screen history! He strikes me as quite a soulless killer (though I’m not sure why killers should be soulful!). His lack of ambition makes him more menacing, I guess.

Isabelle Huppert (who also starred in Tavernier’s “The Lace Maker”)is quite randy. The Rose whom she plays is sweet, is treated badly by her brutish husband (Victor Garrivier), and exploited by Lucien. Complicit as she is in four of the slayings, she is a sympathetic character. Similarly, Irène Skobline, in her only major screen role (she played another supporting role in Eric Rohmer’s “Chloe in the Afternoon”)as Anne, the teacher, becomes an accomplice after the fact, but is relatively sympathetic. As the brother of one of the two disappeared pimps (one of whom he also played), Jean-Pierre Marielle (Jacques Sauniere in “The Da Vinci Code”) is excellent (being expertly confused by Lucien) in the sequence that provides “black humor” that is funny (there is much sardonic humor in the movie, including Lucien’s direct statement that going after the real criminals in the colonial milieu is forbidden to him, but I would not classify the movement (or that statement!) as a “comedy”).

Tavernier explains the use of steadicams (tracking being out of the question on location in Senegal), the subdued late afternoon colors, and the literal decentering of images (avoiding usual visual compositions) in the bonus feature. Pierre-William Glenn provided the wilted look he wanted. (Senegal also looks plenty dry in the two (postcolonial) Senegalese movies I’ve seen in the last year, Hyenas and Touki-Bouki). Tavernier also presents an alternative ending (going much farther in wiping the slate clean!) that was shot and explains why he did not use it, in a separate bonus feature (sitting in the same place as in the lengthy interview one). And there’s a theatrical trailer.

Being shot in color—even unsaturated color—disqualified the film from being a noir for me. The setting is too rural (a town of 12800!) and too much of it occurs during daytime to be a prototypical neo-noir, though the amorality of the characters is certainly noirish, Audran is a noir wife, and a policeman who is a serial killer doing “social cleansing” fits in the universe of noir amoralism. Tavernier claims that the movie is “African noir” despite the focus being almost entirely on the French there (and it is officially a French movies, submitted for Oscar consideration by France, had a French director and crew, and French stars… and is in French). The Africans are mostly backdrop (Tavernier explains that he wanted to de-exoticize Africa without getting into why this required having no black African characters with any degree of agency.)

I think that the opening with a total solar eclipse (which Lucien watches frightening some Wolof boys) was a bad idea (quite aside from there not having been any total solar eclipses in Senegal in 1938!). It strikes me as a far too blatant metaphor both for the blotting out of morality and the marginality of Africans in their own land.

I also find the shooting of a man who has done nothing bad (in general or to Lucien in particular) as so reprehensible, so damning of the antihero, that I wanted not to watch the rest of the movie. (In fact, I did not finish watching it until the next day.)

* Screen adaptations of Thompson writing include Stephen Frears’s “The Grifters,” Stanley Kubrick’s early “The Killing.” and Sam Peckinpah’s relatively late (and very graphically violent) “The Getaway.” In Tavernier’s interview, he recalls that Thompson listed his major influences as Miguel Cervantes, Karl Marx, and Richard Wright. I can see some of the naturalistic violence of Wright, but the other two would not have occurred to me…

+++

Characters without much sense of individual definition asserting existence through “actes gratuités”—particularly murder—is a well-established French trope, most notably in André Gide’s Les caves du Vatican (translated as “Lafcadio’s Adventures”) and Albert Camus’s L’étranger (The Stranger). Both of those authors observed the boredom and malfeasance of French colonial officials in Africa (as did Georges Simenon, who wrote of crimes there and many a killer).

Especially given the American distaste for the notion that we are responsible for what we fail to challenge, I was surprised to see that the IMDB cumulative rating for “Coup de Torchon” was #2 among Tavernier movies, with “‘Round Midnight” in eighth place.

©2006, 2019 Stephen O. Murray

“Cinéma noir” is a French term, often applied to mostly nocturnal movies showing the underbelly of American cities. Arguably (an argument I will make soon), the genre began with some French films directed by Marcel Carné and Jean Renoir in the late 1930s, rather than Hollywood movies of the 1940s.

The end and, especially, the beginning of “Quai des Orfèvres” (Jenny Lamour) do not seem in noir territory. For one thing, both are daylit. From the title, French audiences know and knew that crime was going to be involved. The “quay of the goldsmiths” is where Paris’s homicide investigators operate, so the title registers in the same way titling something “Scotland Yard” would. The movie does eventually get to very cold rooms on the Quai des Orfèvres, but begins in overheated rehearsal facilities, where some new songs for a music-hall revue are being rehearsed. The rising star is chanteuse Marguerite whose stage name is Jenny Lamour (played by Suzy Delair, writer-director Henri-Georges Clouzot’s significant other). Her conservatory-trained accompanist/husband Maurice (Bernard Blier) is exceedingly jealous. His jealousy seems pathologically intense but also not without justification. Jenny is a very friendly gal (it was the 1940s, OK) and very determined to rise further from her harshly impoverished childhood.

A hunchbacked, lecherous movie producer Georges Brignon (Charles Dullon) regularly brings attractive young women to Marguerite and Maurice’s downstairs neighbor Dora (Simone Renant) to be photographed in the nude (wearing only high-heeled pumps). Dora is a good friend to Marguerite, but pretty obviously wants to be more than a friend, though Marguerite is completely oblivious to this. Brignon finds Marguerite attractive and invites her to lunch with him. Maurice learns of this and storms into the private dining room to tell Brignon to leave his wife alone. Brignon remarks that jealous husbands usually appear after rather than before his dalliances, and Maurice tells him—in front of multiple witnesses in the employ of the restaurant—that if Brignon attempts any more trysts with his wife that Maurice will kill him. Marguerite laughs at Maurice’s jealousies and tells him that he is too stupid to get away with murder, that he could not construct an alibi.

There can’t be many filmgoers who at this point lack certainty that Brignon is going to be killed. Sure enough, Maurice finds Brignon’s home address written in lipstick. His setting up an alibi at another music hall with a girlie show (the standing-room audience is all men in their overcoats, but the seats have almost as many female as male occupants). When Maurice gets to Brignon’s house, Brignon is lying in a pool of blood, already dead. Thus, the audience knows that Maurice meant to shoot Brignon, but that someone had already killed him. And complicating matters further, Maurice’s car is stolen while he is inside, making getting back to the theater before the end of the show very difficult (which provides a raison d’être for a nocturnal slog through Paris streets).

The police, in the person of a stiff and fairly forlorn detective named Antoine (played by the great French stage star Louis Jouvet) grinds away at his three prime suspects: Dora, Marguerite, and (especially) Maurice. The movie has shifted from backstage shenanigans, to murder, to police procedural, with Dora, Marguerite, and Maurice attempting to cover up various incriminating evidence. Maurice is less tough than the two women. The police procedures are heavy-handed and the interrogation room has no heat. (The policemen wear overcoats but Maurice is in shirt sleeves.)

The detective has a son by some African mistress from his days in colonial Africa and this adds some interesting touches. Antoine has considerable world-weariness, but, like Joseph Calleia’s unvain Inspector Slimane in “Algiers,” is patient enough to get his man in the end.

There is a lot more plot, and rich characterization. There may be too much love and altruism for noir hopelessness, but Maurice feels doomed and suffers more than pangs of jealousy.

I think that the movie takes much too long to get going, that half the first half hour could easily have been cut, but after that, the unglamorous Paris and the very attractive Dora and Marguerite (with the unrequited lesbian passion recognized by Antoine) and the closing in on Maurice are very well presented. The cinematography of Armand Thirard is not as flamboyant as in some German and American noirs, but is atmospheric.

Clouzot is often referred to as “the French Hitchcock,” and “Quai des Orfèvres” includes not only an icy blonde (Dora) but the recurrent Hitchcock motif of the wrong man (Maurice is not innocent or very nice, but he didn’t kill Brignon…). Allegedly one of Hitchock’s aims in “Psycho” was to top Clouzot’s 1954 “Diabolique” (which also had strong lesbian undercurrents).

Clouzot was plagued by ill health, and had been banned from making films immediately after World War II, because of (false) allegations that the previous movie he directed “Le Corbeau” (The Crow) was shown in Germany as anti-French propaganda—even though it was banned by the Vichy government for portraying the climate of anonymous denunciations of Nazi-occupied France.

Until the botched Hollywood remake made “Diabolique” more difficult to see, it was Clouzot’s most famed triumph. Martin Scorcese propelled a re-release of “Le Salaire de la peur” (Wages of Fear) that was a great success. (Both were also lensed by Armand Thirard.)

The Criterion DVD of “Quai des Orfèvres” looks and sounds great. It includes a very well-done 17-minute segment from a1971 broadcast of “Au Cinéma Ce Soir” with recollections by Clouzot, Blier, Delair, and Renant. While acknowledging that Clouzot was demanding and at times intimidating, all three justify his harsh treatment and treasure the experience of making the film. (Clouzot was like Hitchcock in story-boarding every shot in advance, as well as in cowing actors.) Renant is very winning, and Clouzot is amusing and bemused talking about the source material (a pulp novel, Legitimate Defense, by Stanislas-André Steeman, whose L’ Assassin habite… au 21, (The Murderer Lives at #21) had also been the basis for a considerably changed 1942 adaptation

There is also a 3 1/2-minute French trailer, and a gallery of images of posters for the movie (in several languages). The white subtitles are enclosed, so that even those against white backgrounds are readily legible. Regrettably, I have not seen the essay by Luc Sante that was issued in the Criterion package.

©2005, Stephen O. Murray

My favorite 20th-century French poet, Jacques Prévert (1900-1977), adapted the 1927 doom and gloom novel Le Quai des Brumes (Port of Shadows), by (the prolific pulp novelist) Pierre Dumarchais (writing as Pierre Mac Orlan) for the screen in a 1938 noir melodrama directed by Marcel Carné (1909-1996), a year after their serial killer farce “Drôle de drame” (with Michel Simon, best remembered as the title character in Jean Renoir’s black comedy “Boudu Saved from Drowning”). Carné and Prévert and “Quai des Brumes” star Jean Gabin went on to make the even more celebrated fatalistic “Le jour se lève” (Daybreak) the next year and their greatest (not to mention longest) film, “Les enfants du paradis ” (Children of the Paradise) during the Nazi occupation (the movie was released in 1945).

In “Le Quai des Brumes” Simon plays a Le Havre port owner named Zabel, who is being threatened by a baby-faced petty gangster named Lucien (played by Pierre Brasseur, real-life father of Claude Brasseur, handsome star of Godard’s “Bande à part” and of “Black Widow”). Zabel is also the lecherous guardian of the 17-year-old Nelly (a radiant young Michèle Morgan, best known for her postwar role as a blind beauty in the adaptation of André Gide’s “La Symphonie Pastorale”).

These characters will each have significant interactions with the film’s central character and antihero, Jean, played by Jean Gabin (1904-1976), who to me looks somewhat like Spencer Tracy, but had romantic(though often violent) leading man roles that Clark Gable (or Charles Boyer…) played in Hollywood movies. Gabin had played leading roles in two great Jean Renoir films before appearing in “Quai des Brumes” (“The Lower Depths” and “Grand Illusion”) and in the title role as the doomed gang leader “Pépé le Moko” in 1937. I can’t imagine what Pauline Kael had in mind in asserting that “Quai des Brumes” began “the Jean Gabin era” in French films. It seems to me that it came in the middle, that if there was a “Jean Gabin era,” it ran from 1937-39 (though his popularity was revived in 1954 in Jacques Becker’s 1954 “Touchez pas au grisbi” and he went on to appear as Inspector Maigret in various adaptations of Georges Simenon novels. (I also disagree with Ms. Kael that “Le jour se lève” is “infinitely superior” to “Quai des Brumes”—or even superior except in having a simpler and more predictable plot.

The film begins with a signpost “Le Havre, 20 km” (which the Criterion DVD subtitles “Le Havre, 12 miles” for those metrically challenged, who are likely also not to know what or where the port of Le Havre is, IMO) in the fog, illuminated by head lights. A truck driver is flagged down by a soldier (Gabin) with whom he tries with little success to make conversation. On the outskirts of Le Havre, a small dog is on the road. Jean grabs the wheel to swerve to avoid the dog, which outrages the driver. They get out of the car to duke it out, but Jean asks “Are we really going to fight over a dog?” The driver is happy to make peace and gives Jean not only a cigarette, but the pack.

The dog follows Jean (through the rest of the movie). Jean helps (or at least keeps from falling) a drunk, who appraising that Jean is a deserter, takes him to a lonely waterfront bar that is run by a character (played by Edouard Delmont) in a Panama hat who is called “Panama” (he says he got the hat in Panama, but Panama hats are really made in Ecuador (as I know from having been to the village most famed for weaving them, Monte Cristo, as well as in Panama). Why Panama… and the despondent painter Maurice (Robert Le Vigan) or the painter’s girlfriend (Nelly) help the deserter is any viewer’s guess. (Jean says his hot temper has gotten him in trouble in the past, so, presumably, he beat up or killed someone before going on the lam.)

Nelly makes a dramatic, quintessentially noir entrance in a shiny raincoat. (It is foggy, but not raining, BTW.) She is a rather innocent femme fatale, but, nonetheless, proves to be fatale.

There are some papers that the vicious hood Lucien wants that he thinks that either Maurice or Zabel has. I have no idea what is on them… or what happens to them (though seeing that neither Maurice nor Zabel has possession of them). Zabel is very afraid of Lucien, and more than delighted to hear that Jean has “slapped him silly” (slapping instead of punching is a peculiarity for me of French gangster movies, but the encounter between Jean and Lucien shows the literal meaning of “slapped silly.” Jean was coming to the defense of Nelly, who was being manhandled by Lucien. Lucien turns out to be a coward—a typical noir villain who is all the more dangerous after being showed up.

There is much more plot (too much more!) including a suicide (banned from movies released in America at the time) and Jean and Nelly waking up in a double bed (even married couples were not allowed to be shown in the same bed by the Hollywood Production Code—into the 1960s—, let alone a 17-year-old girl and a 33-year-old-man who are not married to each other, and although the age of consent in France was 15, I suppose some will see child sexual abuse herein).

The location shots of the Le Havre harbor are particularly good, though they do not match very well visually with the scenes filmed on studio sets. Actually, both (not to mention the road at the start of the movie) are strangely depopulated (deserted city streets, particularly by night are a signature noir element). Gabin’s charisma does not work on me (no doubt pat of why I am puzzled that so many people do so much to help him!) . There are many other (more!) interesting characters, though it is Gabin who is onscreen most of the time. (If Gabin reminds me of Spencer Tracy, Morgan, at least before going to bed with Jean, reminds me of a young Barbara Stanwyck—though Morgan seems older than 17.)

Genre considerations

The introduction to the DVD collection of production stills and Francophone posters invokes “poetic realism.” Certainly Prévert was a poet, but this introduction characterizes “poetic realism” as showing “the invisible poetry in everyday life.” In addition to being oxymoronic, I do not see everyday objects (there is no everyday behavior IMO!) being poeticized in the movie. To me the movie is “naturalism”, that is, more lurid than “realism. Perhaps fog is “poetic” to some, but looking over my computer screen at it, I don’t find it so.

As Nathaniel Rich wrote, cinéma noir” is “an amorphous, foggy term” coined by the French film critic Nino Frank in 1946. Rich’s characterization of films “punctuated by violence and pervaded with a profound sense of dread and moral uncertainty. The heroes tend to be cynical, tough, and overwhelmed by sinister forces beyond their control. Stylistically, film noir is distinguished by its stark chiaroscuro cinematography…. Films are shot in black and white, lit for night, favor oblique camera angels and obsessive use of shadow, and, most importantly, take place in a city… exploring the rotten underside.”

It seems to me that “Quai des brumes” fits this description quite well. Though appearing three years before what is widely considered to be the first film noir (the third, version of The Maltese Falcon, directe by John Husto), and being French, I can check off my own checklist (which includes the same elements as Nathaniel Rich’s, but in a different order of priority) of noir attributes:

(1) it was shot in black and white (a sine qua non for my conception of a noir),

(2) mostly nocturnally,

(3) set in seedy and/or industrial sections of a city (usually a port city)

(4) amidst anomie, dread, and violence,

(5) with sinister forces (and fate?) dooming the tough protagonist (antihero),

(6) has a femme fatale (a woman who proves fatal for the protagonist whether she loves him or double-crosses him—or does both (though I don’t consider this a criterial feature of noirs, only a frequent one), and

(7) a cowardly but plenty dangerous bully,

(8) features nightclubs and

(9) fog (6-9 are recurrent but not defining features).

Movies are a collaborative art/craft, and the parentage of the American noir seems to me very mixed. There are no DNA tests to sort out genealogy of film genres, but it seems to me that “Quai de Brumes” and “Pépé le Moko” are noirs—and French films known to some in Hollywood (especially since ” Pépé le Moko” was remade, pretty much shot by shot, in 1938 as “Algiers” with the even more fatalistic Charles Boyer taking the role Gabin originated (both have poignant shots of a ship leaving without the protagonist who wanted/needed to be on it, and so does “Le quai des brumes”). And these Carné/Prévert films relate to the earlier Renoir films I’ve already mentioned (both in look, setting in “les bas-fonds,” and in personnel, plus one scripted by Prévert for Renoir, the black comedy “The Crime of M. Lange.” I might also note that Carné succeeded in keeping the unhappy ending in contrast to many Hollywood noirs with incongruous happy endings tacked on.

DVD

Given Criterion’s track record, I assume that they have used the best available print of each frame, though the best is not always very good. The sound is clear (mono), and the bonus features not extensive (there is another essay by Luc Sante that I (regretfully) have not seen; an original theatrical trailer, and quite an interesting and extensive gallery of production stills and quite an astounding range of French film posters (all but one of which list Simon above Morgan).

©2005, Stephen O. Murray

I first read the first translation into English of Boris Pasternak’s Dr. Zhivago (published in 1958) when I was 13 or 14. I saw David Lean’s 1965 film version when it came out (with my family, when I was 15) then again at a Fairmont drive-in when I was 16 (or possibly 17) and once or twice more before last weekend. I was reading the 2010 retranslation by Richard Peuear and Larissa Volokkonsky (about a fifth of the way through) when I watched the movie on our local PBS station’s broadcast, then finished reading the book.

(first edition, yes, Italian)

Even with the newer, more complete translation, I think the movie was better than the book. The movie has a lot of characters, the book even more, and none who were dropped by screenwriter Robert Bolt (A Man for whose adaptation of his own play won another Oscar the next year) seemed at all essential. The final appearance (to Zhivao, as to the reader) of Stralinkov, who in an earlier life had been Lara’s husband, might have been included, but I see no point in showing Yuri back in Moscow, with a third woman (Marina) devoted to him. She does not appear until the text is 95% over.

The frame of his half-brother (played by Alec Guiness) talking to a young woman he supposes to be the offspring of Yuri and Lara is an addition to the screenplay, though his searching out and helping her is mentioned near the end of the book.

The suffering en route twice to the Ural Mountain town of Yuriatin [modeled on Perm} are more graphically shown in the movie, and the Varykino estate where Uri and Tonya and their son, and then Lara and his daughter have idyllic refugees with Yuri are also much more vivid onscreen than on the page. I think that Ralph Richardson as Tonya’s father and Rod Steiver as Komaovsky, Lara’s seducer and, later, protector, are mugh more vivid onscreen, too.

I remember that there was condescension to Geraldine Chaplin’s Tonya at the time of the film’s release, but she is everything the book’s character is: pretty, conventional, and deeply in love with Yuri, though she knows he does not lover her nearly as much (though the book’s Dr. Zhivago avers his duties to his wife more). In the title role, Omar Sharif did not look like Pasternak’s description (blond-bearded: early on, his hair is brown, later, it is jet black). In both versions Zhivago is a gifted diagnostician who is buffeted by tumultous history, not a hero. I guess that the quality of his poetry has to be taken on faith in the movie, whereas the novel ends very awkwardly with an anthology of his poems. It is difficult to judge poetry in translation, seemingly especially Russian to English (e.g., Pushkin’s).

The movie has one great musical theme that is repeated and repeated and repeated (with not much variation of instrumentation), even more so than the one Maurice Jarre provided for “Lawrence of Arabia. The book, of course, does not have a musical soundtrack, nor is Pasternak’s prose as striking as the cinematography of Freddie Young. And it is easier to keep the characters straight when one sees them rather than having to remember the various forms of reference/address (family name, given name, nickname, never linked together).

The core, the cinematography, the art direction, the costume design, and the adapted screenplay all won Oscars. Adjusted for inflation it was (as of 2016) the eighth highest-grossing in North America film. It was #39 on the American Film Institute’s 1998 list of greatest films. Reviewing it for its 30th anniversary, Roger Ebert wrote that it was “an example of superb old-style craftsmanship at the service of a soppy romantic vision”, and wrote that “the story, especially as it has been simplified by Lean and his screenwriter, Robert Bolt, seems political in the same sense ”Gone with the Wind” “is political, as spectacle and backdrop, without ideology.” I think the book is also rather detached from historical judgment of the revolution. Both portray the Russian Civil War as a succession of horrors, whih is more than I’d say for either book or movie Gone with the Wind.

Rhett (Clark Gable) and Scarlet (Vivien Leigh) in GWTW (1939)

Pasternak’s book is less than half as long as Margaret Mitchell’s, the Zhivago movie not quite as long as GWTW (the highest box-office movie adjusting for inflation). The two are similar in more than being romances set against civil wars: Lara is more domestic than Scarlett O’Hara and loves more men. Tonya is a sweet nebbish married to the weak but much-desired (not least by Scarlett!) Ashley Wilkes. And Zhivago is a less-dashing but similary mustachioed, if less cynical, variant on Rhett Butler. In both movies, the romance swamps any historical analysis. GWTW romanticized slavery, Zhivago did not reomanticize the ancient régime, the revolution, or the civil war (IMO). (The “Tara theme” Max Steiner supplied for GWTW is almost as overused as “Lara’s theme” is in “Zhivago.”)

When first I saw “Zhivago” I was bestotted by Julie Christie, and still cannot be objective, though Geraldine Chaplin and Vivien Leigh are more “my type.” Lara is far less selfish than Scarlett, whereas Lara is a survivor who is more sympathetic than Scarlett. (Tonya is selfless, reminiscent of Melanie in GWTW.

Komarovsky (Rod Steiger) liquoring up Lara (Julie Christie)

Both movies have iconic scenes and iconic performances (I think Rod Steiger should have been considered for best supporting actor award — [Tom Courtenay was and Olivia de Haviland was for GWTW; I don’t think Omar Sharif was slighted, though he won a Golden Globe award for best actor in a drama; Julie Christie won the best actress awards (Oscar and Golden Globe) for another movie, “Darling” that yearl and Steiger was nominated for the best actor Oscar for “The Pawnbroker”).

In sum, I think the movie version of “Dr. Zhivago” was better, a pretty great movie, based on a historically important, interesting if sprawling novel that was not really a great book. The book’s dialog (admittedly, in translation) seems klunky to me, in many instances not anything I can imagine anyone saying. The movie’s dialog sounds human to me (admittedly, it was written in English). Though a lot of the book’s incidents were included, and I’d say it was a pretty faithful adoption with some simplifications that jettisoned what should have been cut from the novel). I think that turning Tonya’s father from an agronomist into a physician was a good decision. The only cut I question is eliminating the final appearance of Pasha/Strelinkov at Varykino after Lara left (i.e., with only Yuri there). The addition of Yuri thinking he glimpses Lara in Moscow drew some scorn in 1965, but seems to me an echo of mistaking a group for Tonya and her father and son when he is walking back to Yuriatin after deserting the band of retreating partisans who had dragooned him into service as their medical officer, as well as to Yuri’s first glimpse of Lara when they were both children in Moscow.

©2018, Stephen O. Murray

Sean Penn’s 2001 film of the 1958 novel The Pledge by Friedrich Dürrenmatt is a portrait of a policeman’s self-destruction. It is not an action-filled thriller. It is not “about” catching or stopping a serial killer.

The man who entices and murders eight-year-old girls becomes the focus of Detective Jerry Black’s life after his official retirement from the Reno police force. We have seen and heard before that detectives have to be able to think like criminals to thwart them. We have seen and heard of more than a few breaking laws to uphold the rule of law, to destroy villages to save them, etc. Such dangers need to be regularly considered, but the policeman metamorphosing into what he (and sometimes she) is trying to eliminate is a relatively minor component of the disintegration of (ex-) Detective Black.

After the most bravura cinematic scene in the film — in which in a long-distance shot Detective Black (played by Jack Nicholson) crosses a barn covered with gobbling turkeys and tells the parents that their daughter has been murdered — a scene in which the audience cannot hear what is said, the scene justifying the title occurs. The dead girl’s mother coerces a promise from Detective Black that he will find the man who killed the girl. The mother demands that he swear this on his salvation, as she holds a cross made by her slain daughter.

This pledge is extremely serious to Swiss Calvinists (Dürrenmatt’s background). There is no indication that Detective Black believes that he has a salvation to pledge, though he reminds the police chief played by Sam Shepard that they are old enough to remember when promises meant something.

In my view, Jerry risks and loses his salvation not by making that pledge but by breaking another that is only implicit. Not wanting to give away the ending, I will return to interpreting what I consider a trinity of endings in a distinct section below.

First, though, some evaluative comments:

Whether it is his greatest performance since “Chinatown,” his greatest performance since “The Shining,” or his greatest performance since his Academy Award-winning performance in “As Good As It Gets” (his previous film), Jack Nicholson is exceptionally self-effacing getting very deep into the role of Jerry Black. That he can go through a whole movie without smirking is amazing, but only part of his accomplishment herein. Without the voice-over crutch that tells audiences what the perspective of so many jaded detectives is, Nicholson shows what Jerry Black is feeling.

In addition to Nicholson’s awe-inspiring performance are a series of intense performances in single-scene roles by Mickey Rourke(!), Vanessa Redgrave, Helen Mirren, and Benicio Del Toro (it could be argued that the last is in two or three scenes), and another compelling performance across a large range of emotions by Robin Penn Wright.

Personally, I would have liked there to be more about what turned Jerry Black into the person he is on his retirement day. Although it is easy to understand why he does not return to the child psychologist (played by Helen Mirren, an icon of the frustrations of catching serial killers…), it is unfortunate for Jerry Black that he did not enlist continued consultation from her.

English cinematographer Chris Menges (whose most memorable work has been in “The Mission” and “The Killing Fields”) provides some beautiful mountain and lake scenery (supposed to be Nevada, I think it is British Columbia, but the story is Swiss in origin, so who cares?). There are, perhaps, too many scenes of Jerry fishing. If so, this is the editor and director’s fault, not the cinematographer’s. However, I am not certain that these scenes and/or their length are harmful. The respites (for the audience as well as the character) arguably have a function, specifically to show that he is not completely obsessed with the killer (he is very obsessed, but not completely, you know?)

Some gimmicky camera work does not seem to me to advance the exploration of the character(s). I’m not sure if there is a technical term for the opposite of deep focus (blurry deep focus?). There are an inordinate number of shots from above, some very tight closeups, and (I think) too many lingering shots

so many fishing scenes necessary as calm, lucid interludes?

I thought there was a little too much foreshadowing, but given that a number of viewers were audibly perplexed after the screening, it is clear that what happens is opaque to some.

Composer Has Zimmer (The Lion King, As Good As It Gets, The Thin Red Line) provided rather obtrusive, sometimes obvious, but often effective music.

Endings

Late in the film it occurred to me that Jack Nicholson was back in Antonioni country. I was thinking of “The Passenger” in which he discards an old self. The photography of objects and various long shots (especially the aforementioned turkey barn one) recalled Antonioni (especially “Eclipse”). The most direct Antonioni predecessor occurred to me only later: “Blow Up.” That most commercially successful of Antonioni films was also about an obsessive attempt to figure out what happened, whether there was a crime (here, whether there is going to be another crime).

There is no doubt in my mind that Detective Black correctly identified the killer. Surely, the reason he did not show up for his rendez-vous became known to his former colleagues. But that doesn’t much matter to Jerry. At least it does not matter as much as that what he has done is very horrible, and he knows that he deserves to have lost everything by it.

I have practically no doubt that he loved both the girl and her mother. An obvious answer to Robin Wright’s final charge, “I thought you loved her,” is that he did. Human motivation is not so simple that the only two possibilities are that he loved her or he used her for bait. I think that both are true, which makes the latter more horrible. An argument could be made that he is saving not only her but some other possible target. Self-righteous policemen playing God, judging predators and taking action against them, are familiar, but not such a mixture of God and Abraham (even though he is not the biological father, I except that he has become a de jure as well as de facto father).

If I am wrong and the mother is right, what Jerry does is more horrible still, but to me the final dissolution (actually returning to and expanding upon the opening shot) only makes sense if Jerry knows that he has gambled his earthly salvation, his adopted family, to save his (quasi-)adopted daughter and her agemates. How this weighs in the equation with his pledge to the dead girl’s mother and his eternal salvation, I do not pretend to know. The original Calvinist doctrine of predestination would be a comfort in comparison to what seems the despair and annihilation of Jerry at the end.

©2018, Stephen O. Murray