Mad Max, starring Mel Gibson, is streaming for free on Tubi

By Chad Langen |

George Miller’s post-apocalyptic action flick Mad Max, which stars Mel Gibson in one of his most iconic roles to date, has become a cult classic since it was released in 1979. For those who have yet to experience the adrenaline-fueled thrill ride, there’s good news: it’s currently streaming for free on Tubi. With the Anya Taylor-Joy-led prequel Furiosa arriving next year, now is the perfect time to check out the acclaimed genre feature.

Mad Max follows the character of Max Rockatansky (Mel Gibson), a cop in a dystopian future where society has crumbled, and gangs roam the highways. After his partner is killed by a violent gang known as the Acolytes, Max sets out on a path of revenge, seeking to bring justice to those responsible. The film is jam-packed with intense car chases, brutal violence, and memorable performances.

Although Mel Gibson gained global fame for his breakout role in the movie, the Oscar-winning star wasn’t originally cast as Max Rockatansky. In fact, the role was initially offered to Steve Bisley, who turned it down to instead play the character of Jim Goose. After auditioning several other actors, director George Miller was impressed by Gibson’s performance and ultimately chose him for the part.

Mad Max was made on a shoestring budget, with most of the stunts and car chases done practically without the use of CGI. This led to some dangerous situations for the cast and crew, including a stuntman being severely injured during a motorcycle stunt. Despite the various difficulties during shooting, the film was a massive box office success, earning over $100 million worldwide.

In addition to cementing Mel Gibson’s status as an action movie icon, Mad Max spawned several sequels, including Mad Max 2: The Road Warrior, Mad Max Beyond Thunderdome, and 2015’s Mad Max: Fury Road. A new entry in the wildly popular franchise, Furiosa, is currently in production and is scheduled to release next summer. The upcoming film, which serves as both a prequel and a spinoff, will focus on the character of Imperator Furiosa in her early days before the events of Fury Road.

Director George Miller has promised that the upcoming movie will be a high-octane thrill ride, with stunning visuals and intense action. Like in Fury Road, Mel Gibson will not be reprising his iconic role as Max in the film. Additionally, Charlize Theron will not be returning to the role of Imperator Furiosa in the film, with Anya Taylor-Joy taking on a younger version of the character in the latest franchise entry.

In the forthcoming movie, Furiosa is snatched from the Green Place and falls into the hands of a ruthless warlord. Now, she must survive a series of trials if she ever hopes to find her way back home. The film, which stars Anya Taylor-Joy, Chris Hemsworth, Tom Burke, Daniel Webber, and Angus Sampson, is set to arrive in theaters on May 24, 2024.

In the meantime, if you’re craving a classic and critically acclaimed action movie to stream for free, Mad Max on Tubi is a great place to start. Along with Mel Gibson and Steve Bisley, the film stars Joanne Samuel, Hugh Keays-Byrne, Tim Burns, Roger Ward, David Bracks, Lisa Aldenhoven, David Cameron, and Bertrand Cadart. George Miller directed the feature from a screenplay he wrote with James McCausland.