The classic 1987 sci-fi action film Predator was such a badass movie! It’s a true masterpiece of action cinema and it featured an all-star lineup of buff tough guys including Arnold Schwarzenegger, Carl Weathers, Sonny Landham, Bill Duke, Richard Chavez, Jesse Ventura, Shane Black, and more. The actors played a group of characters that had an unforgettable dynamic.

First up is Schwarzenegger's character, Dutch. He's the leader of the group, a tough-as-nails soldier who's seen it all. But what sets Dutch apart is his resourcefulness and ingenuity. He's not just a brute force; he's a strategic thinker who's able to outsmart the Predator and use his environment to his advantage.

Then there's Blain, played by Ventura. He's the muscle of the group, a giant of a man with a big personality. He's always chomping on a cigar and has a quick wit that keeps things lively. Blain is also responsible for one of the most iconic lines in the movie, "I ain't got time to bleed."

Billy, played by Landham, is the tracker of the group. He's a Native American who's in tune with nature and has a sixth sense for danger. Billy is a stoic character who doesn't say much, but when he does, it's always impactful. He's also responsible for one of the most memorable scenes in the movie, when he faces off against the Predator armed only with a machete.

Mac, played by Duke, is the emotional heart of the group. He's a tough soldier, but he's also deeply affected by the loss of his comrades. Mac is the one who delivers the emotional gut punch of the movie when he screams, "You're bleeding, man!," after Blain is killed.

Hawkins, played by Black, is the team's resident jokester. He's always cracking wise and trying to lighten the mood, even in the most dire of situations. At one point he tells a dirty joke that causes the rest of the team to groan in disgust, which is pretty funny.

There's Anna, played by Elpidia Carrillo. She's a guerrilla fighter who's been captured by the team, but she soon proves to be an asset. Anna is smart and resourceful, and she's able to help the team understand the Predator's motivations and tactics.

Then, of course, Dillon, who’s played by Carl Weathers. He is a CIA operative who recruits Dutch and his team for a mission in the jungle. Dillon and Dutch have a complicated history. He genuinely believes that the mission in the jungle is necessary to protect American interests, and he's willing to put his own life on the line to see it through. Dillon is also a slippery character who's willing to bend the rules if it means getting the job done.

During a recent interview with GQ, Weather talked about working on this film and how it was a constant competition for the cast to be the most badass-looking character in the film. When asked to share some stories about his time on the movie, he said:

“You know, there's a great line: what happens in Vegas stays in Vegas. What happened during Predator stays in Predator. But, yes, all is true. There were nightclubs. We were a bunch of young guys. We were all in our own way trying to one up each other. Of course, with training, Arnold had an entire gym there, so we were going to the gym working out to get all puffed up before scenes. Nobody wanted to look any weaker than the other guy. So, you know, it was competition constantly, competition in front of the camera, competition behind the camera, competition at night.

“Young guys around other young guys in a movie that’s about physicality with lots of time on our hands in a beautiful location like Puerto Vallarta, Mexico. What do you expect, really? You expect a lot of fun, a lot of grab-assing, a lot of kidding each other, a lot of setting each other up for jokes, trying to pull pranks on each other. It all existed. But i think it also added something to the movie, this camaraderie, this sense of fun.”

There’s no doubt that these actors all had an amazing time working on this movie. You can tell while watching the movie that they were loving every minute of it!