EastEnders ' Sonia Fowler has dropped a big hint her mum Carol and daughter Bex are soon returning to Albert Square.

Sonia, who is a nurse, was recently rocked by the shock arrival of her father, Terry Cant, and they are attempting to build a relationship with each other.

And Sonia (Natalie Cassidy) made a reference to her mum and daughter meeting him soon too in a recent episode of the BBC soap.

Terry was trying to show off his salesman skills after watching Billy Mitchell on his market stall.

He managed to sell a pair of boxing gloves, and Kathy Beale watched on as Sonia approached, catching Terry boasting about his skills.

“I don’t do the hard sell,” Billy said, defending himself.

Get the news you want straight to your inbox. Sign up for a Mirror newsletter here.

"It’s not about selling the stuff, it’s about selling yourself," Terry bragged.

“What’s all this?” asked Sonia.

“Your dad’s showing Billy how it’s done,” said Billy.

“He’s certainly got the gift of the gab, he’s managed to wear you down,” Sonia replied.

Kathy then pointed out Terry had managed to “wear down” Sonia too, as he managed to get her to let down her guard.

“Yeah, I can’t wait for Bex to meet him now,” Sonia said.

“Although I do have to tell mum he’s back first.”

“Good luck with that one," Kathy told her.

Bex left the Square last year to go travelling to India, and Sonia briefly joined her.

Carol, on the other hand, has not been spotted in the soap since 2015, and fans are certainly keen for her to return.

One tweeted: "Bring back Carol Jackson #EastEnders."

“An #EastEnders Carol Jackson return needs to happen. Even if it's only for a few episodes,” added another.

“Bring back Carol and Bianca right now #Eastenders,” demanded a third.

Elsewhere, EastEnders spoilers tease a deadly showdown is on the cards for Ben Mitchell, as he plots revenge on former lover Paul Coker's killer.

One of his killers ,Simon Atmore, has been released from prison after a sentencing appeal, leaving Ben devastated.

Five years ago, Simon and his friends brutally beat up Ben and boyfriend Paul in a vile homophobic attack.

The hate crime left both Ben and Paul injured, but Paul could not be saved in heartbreaking scenes.

The unprovoked attack changed Ben's live forever with the loss of partner Paul, but all of the culprits were sent to prison.

Now, Simon's release has triggered painful memories for Ben as well as the knowledge that justice has not been served for his first love.

With Paul not able to live his life like he should be, the fact his killer is able to get back to normal just does not sit right with Phil Mitchell's son.

Despite his husband Callum Highway pleading with him not to get involved, it isn't long before Ben is seeking revenge.

Do you have a story to sell? Get in touch with us at webcelebs@trinitymirror.com or call us direct 0207 29 33033.