Thirukkural in Simplified Form

Thiruvalluvar, commonly known as Valluvar, was a popular Tamil poet. He is best known for writing the great text Thirukkuṛaḷ. Valluvar is also regarded to be a great sage as well as a Siddha Purusha, since he has also performed some miracles during his life time, like changing a rock into a golden bar by […]

Kandar Anubhuthi

Kandar Anubhuthi is the collection of wonderful songs sung by the great Tamil Saint Sri Arunagirinathar. These bhakti songs were sung during 15th century AD, and these songs were written in praise of Lord Muruga, and also in these songs, Arunagirinathar had requested Lord Muruga, to give enough strength to the people, in order to […]

Thiruvisaippa

Thiruvisaippa is a great master piece in the Shaivite Texts. This holy text is supposed to be composed during the 10th century, by the following great Shavite Saints who are also the staunch devotees of Lord Shiva: Thirumaligai Thevar, Senthanar, Karuvur Thevar, Ponnthuruthi Nambi Kata Nambi, Kandarathithar, Venattadigal, Thiruvaliyamuthanar, Purshottama Nambi, Sethiyar. Out of the […]

Thirukkovaiyar

Thirukkovaiyar is one of the ancient Shaivite Holy Texts composed by the great Shaivite Saint Sri Manikkavacakar. This work was supposedly written during the 9th century AD, and this text was praised by the then kings, scholars and even by the great Lord Shiva himself!This text is considered to be one of the PRECIOUS DIAMOND […]

Sri Divya Prabhandham, Collection of 4000 Tamil Songs by Alvar saints

Sri Divya Prabhandham also called as Nalayira Divya Prabhandham is a collection of 4,000 Tamil songs composed by the Alvar saints, and it was compiled in an appropriate manner by the Vaishnavite Saint Sri Nathamuni, during the 10th century AD. This work was written in the form of poems, which was sung by the Alvar […]

Thirumurai

Thirumurai is a divine collection of songs written in praise of Lord Shiva, in the wonderful Tamil language, before few centuries ago, by various Shaivite Saints like Appar, Sambandhar, Sundarar, Karaikal Ammaiyar, Cheraman Perumal, Sekkizhar and Nambi. Some of the Marvellous songs from Thirumurai are as follows:- I offer my humble salutations and I bow […]

Thirupugazh Songs

Thirupugazh is a rich treasure which contains beautiful poems penned by the famous Saint and Muruga Devotee, Sri Arunagirinathar during the 15th-century AD, and this text tastes like a sweet honey. This holy text is considered as one of the famous poems in the Tamil literature, and it was highly praised by the great kings, […]