Bob Franklin is a fan-made character created by Heroic412229. He is the grandfather of both Sid and Rana and husband of Sandra Franklin.

Appearance[]

Bob is a tall, brown-skinned man with gray hair and a gray beard on his face. He also has a burn mark on his left cheek from the accident that happened to his family. He wears a blue, worker's t-shirt with a patch pocket on it. He wears khaki pants, a brown belt, and black boots. He also wears light blue glasses on his face to help with his vision. He also carries a whistle with him for his sports coach job.

Personality[]

Bob is a stern and hard-working man who tries his best to keep the house afloat and make sure that everyone living in it is safe and happy. This is due to what happened to his other family when he was a child and didn’t want the same thing to happen to his current family.

He’s very close-minded, strict, cynical, surly, and stubborn. He tends to keep to himself and doesn’t seem to trust many people besides his loved ones. He also can be very overprotective and always keeping a watchful eye on those he’s trying to protect.

Despite that, he’s very fun-loving, compassionate, and playful when hanging out with them. He genuinely cares about them and only wants to keep them from harm’s way. He also cares about his family’s friends, though he doesn’t approve of Alex’s attitude. He can also relate to both him and Clover due to their similar personality traits to his own, but that doesn’t stop him from caring about the rest of his loved ones.

He can also be very fanatical, excitable, and enthusiastic when it comes to sports, due to being a sports teacher. He can also give great advice to others when needed. Of all the sports he loves, his favorites are both basketball and baseball. He also loves to eat kimchi and other sour foods as well.

Due to his tragic past, Bob has a great fear of fire and death respectively. This causes him to panic when near fire or even when both of them are mentioned at times.

Over the years, he’s learned to be less grouchy and let his loved ones fend for themselves. He also learned to not let his past define him and either stay in the present or look forward to the future. He still has his flaws, but they’re toned down and less present than before.

History[]

Early Life[]

When Bob was a child, he had a loving family who would be there for him and care for him a lot and vice versa. He was also taught how to play sports by his dad and even he started learning how to cook by his mother. One day, during his time of cooking, he accidentally started a huge fire that engulfed the building they were in. They tried to escape, but the fire blocked the exit, so they tried to go out the window, but they were too high up from the ground. Luckily, the fire department was able to rescue Bob before the fire got worse, but it wasn't so lucky for his family since the burning debris blocked the window before the rest of them could escape.

After the fire was put out, Bob tried to find his family, but they were gone. Traumatized and filled with guilt over what happened, Bob had made an oath to himself that next time, he would be able to protect his family no matter what. He was then taken in by another family named Franklin and they were just as loving as his other family.

During his school years, he met Sandra who was made fun of for failing a science fair project and felt pity for her. When she found out that he was one of the only ones who didn't make fun of her during the science fair, she fell in love with him and they started dating, got married when they were full grown adults, and had daughter who would then have children of her own after meeting a man of her own.

Powers and Abilities[]

Weaknesses[]

Relationships[]

Trivia[]

Gallery[]