John Cleese has reached a $24 million settlement in his acrimonious divorce from his third wife.

The Oscar-nominated comedy actor is giving Alyce Faye Eichelberger pounds $16 million in cash and assets, which include an apartment in New York, a pounds $4 million mews house in Holland Park in west London, and a half share in a beach house in Santa Barbara, California.

Ms Faye Eichelberger, an American psychotherapist, will also receive pounds $1.2 million a year for seven years. The papers to finalise the settlement were lodged in a court in California last week.

Cleese, 70, who is in the New Forest writing a one-man comedy show to be called My Alyce Faye Divorce Tour, has revealed his anger at the settlement, which will make his former wife, to whom he was married for 16 years, richer than him.

"What I find so unfair is that if we both died today, her children would get much more than mine," he said.

"At least I will know in future if I go out with a lady, they will not be after me for my money"

When he met Ms Faye Eichelberger in 1990, she was living in a council flat in London with two sons from a previous marriage.

His former wife, who is 64, was represented in the legal negotiations by Fiona Shackleton, who also acted for the Prince of Wales and Sir Paul McCartney in their respective divorces.

In her divorce testimony, she claimed Cleese was a "world-renowned celebrity" and she was used to "being entertained by royalty and dignitaries in castles." She wanted half the Monty Python star's earnings since their 1992 wedding, half his nine properties, and $1.8 million a year to live on.

In March, a judge in the United States ruled her claim "excessive" and reduced the interim payments he had been making from around $200,000 a month to pounds $110,000.

Michael Winner, the former film director and Cleese's closest friend, said: "It is an extraordinary world which means John is left with much less than his former wife even though he is the star who did all the work. The settlement defies human belief. John is extremely cross about it and I don't blame him.

"John has worked all his life and will now have to continue working because he has seen a huge chunk of what he has worked for going to his former wife who he rescued from a council flat."

He has remained friends with his two previous wives, Connie Booth, who co-wrote and starred in Fawlty Towers, and the American actress Barbara Trentham. He has two adult daughters.

The terms of his divorce from Miss Booth after a 10-year marriage were not made public. His divorce from Miss Trentham cost him pounds $5 million in 1988.