Book Synopsis

It is hard to determine what dominated more newspaper headlines in America during the 1960s and early '70s: the Vietnam War or America's turbulent racial climate. Oddly, however, these two pivotal moments are rarely examined in tandem.

John Darrell Sherwood has mined the archives of the U.S. Navy and conducted scores of interviews with Vietnam veterans -- both black and white -- and other military personnel to reveal the full extent of racial unrest in the Navy during the Vietnam War era, as well as the Navy's attempts to control it. During the second half of the Vietnam War, the Navy witnessed some of the worst incidents of racial strife ever experienced by the American military. Sherwood introduces us to fierce encounters on American warships and bases, ranging from sit-down strikes to major race riots.

The Navy's journey from a state of racial polarization to one of relative harmony was not an easy one, and Black Sailor, White Navy focuses on the most turbulent point in this road: the Vietnam War era.

Review Quotes

"" is well researched and relies heavily on primary sources, particularly from the navy. Sherwood's main sources for the book are the JAGMAN (the Judge Advocate General's Manual) investigations of the racial incidents. The investigations provide a detailed report of the incidents and any recommendations for corrective or disciplinary action."-- "Journal of American Ethnic History"

"A scholarly, readable, and thought provoking account of a troubled period in American history. Readers interested in the Navy, the Vietnam conflict, and race relations will find this authoritative study invaluable."-- "Journal of Military History"

"A valuable contribution to the growing historiography on racial and ethnic minorities in wartime. . . . Sherwoods good writing, voluminous research, and perceptive conclusions should make his book the standard treatment of its subject."-- "American Historical Review"

"A well-constructed narrative that examines the origins and events of the naval version of the Civil Rights movement in the early 1970s . . . A valuable contribution to both our understanding of the dynamics of the United States Navy and the Civil Rights movement toward the end of the Vietnam War era."--Ronald Bruce Frankum, Jr., Millersville, Pennsylvania

"Based on naval archives and scores of Vietnam veterans (both black and white), this book examines racial unrest in the turbulent Vietnam-era Navy and the Navy's efforts to control it."-- "Columbia College Today"

"Highly Recommended"-- "The Hook"

"In Black Sailor, White Navy John Darrell Sherwood offers an intelligent and much-needed examination of the racial turmoil in the navy in the later years of the Vietnam War."-- "International Journal of Maritime History"

"John Darrell Sherwoods Black Sailor, White Navy is an important contribution to social/cultural military history."-- "The Journal of American History"

"Sherwood's contribution to our understanding of the racial tension that the navy experienced as the Vietnam War ended for American troops should interest military historians and students of the Vietnam War."--Ron Milam, Military History of the West

"U. S. Naval Historian Center historian John Darrell Sherwoods examines the racial situation in the Navy during the sixities and seventies and the Navys attempts to deal with it."-- "The VVA Veteran"