Blob monsters. Amorphous, often implacable due to their unique (lack of) anatomy, these creatures range from mindless eating machines to tricksy shapeshifters. Usually Nigh Invulnerable, and sometimes capable of Voluntary Shapeshifting. Often based on jellyfish, amoebas and similar invertebrates, this creature can be found throughout horror, fantasy and speculative fiction environments. Often acidic, it is usually defeated by being frozen, or by heroes who take advantage of its chemical composition with a stream of Techno Babble.

If it has anything resembling a mouth, Phlegmings are assured.

A recent sub-variant has become popular on the various internet art sites—that of the "Goo Girl" (Deviant ART or Danbooru) or "Slime Maiden" (Pixiv) -- which is effectively the Blob Monster given the Cute Monster Girl treatment. Jamanen and Melona being the poster girls of this variant.

In video games, these will sometimes be The Goomba, although sometimes some palette-swapped varieties are harder. They're also generally are resistant to drowning, especially if it's the player-controlled character. Sometimes, they can split into smaller ones when killed.

Makes a good Monster of the Week. See also Mega Microbes. Compare Muck Monster and Grey Goo. Related to the Rubber Man and Talking Poo.

Examples of Blob Monster include:

Advertising

In The Nineties, the ads for Capri Sun juice drink featured kids/teens who would move about as silvery goop sliding across the ground and reappear drinking Capri Sun.

An Italian advertisement about some snacks involves a Blob parody where a giant monster made of chocolate swallows grains of puffed rice, leaving the titular product behind.

Anime and Manga

The true forms of Pride and Father in Fullmetal Alchemist; blobs of some black, shadowy substance that can manifest eyes and mouths.

Majin Buu from DragonBall Z is a humanoid Blob who also has an absurdly powerful Healing Factor.

Many of the Machine Mutants from Dragon Ball GT definately count as this. More particularly the antagonist Baby who used his liquid ability to go from body to body until he found a body strong enough to have as a permanent host. Once he finds a host he's able to explore the host's full potential.

Tetsuo from Akira turns into a fleshy version this when his psychic power rages out of control.

One of these served as the very first Monster of the Week that the main character fights in Magical Girl Lyrical Nanoha.

The "cells" from Pokémon: Lucario and The Mystery of Mew.

Yellow Temperance and Notorious B.I.G from JoJo's Bizarre Adventure.

The Slime Sisters that work under Wilhelm in Mahou Sensei Negima, who are extremely resilient to physical attacks, capable of shape-shifting, and possess some control over water.

Queens Blade has the ever-popular busty Melona.

Sailor Moon

In the Monster of the Week category is Jamanen, known as Jellax in the dub.

Interestingly, slimes are a slightly recurring type of monster; the later episodes feature a bunny slime-girl named Peropero who manipulated malevolent hard candy. And in one of the closing episodes, an entire army of female humanoid slimes are born from the many unused demon seeds.

Naruto

Suigetsu is able to switch from human form to a living mass of water, and can do this to individual parts of his body. He apparently needs to drink a lot, and becomes closer to a traditional kind of blob monster if he has access to a significantly large body of water.

Konan seems to have a similar ability, only instead of turning into water she turns into paper.

The Three Tails filler arc features an androgynous antagonist dressed in a skin tight 'slime suit' covered with a slippery residue, although he exhibits the normal abilities associated with normal slime creatures such as puddling up and stretching.

He later turns into quite the Body Horror by fusing with his dead comrades, although they later get crushed by the Three Tails.

Cowboy Bebop: The little black beastie from the spare fridge in the back of the Bebop.

Fairy Tail features Juvia Loxar as a water variant who starts out as an antagonist before joining the titular guild. Doing so protects her from most physical damage, but some magical attacks can still injure her.

Some of the illegals from Dennou Coil.

One shows up as an early Monster of the Week in Brigadoon Marin and Melan. It starts out as a puddle of pink goop, but it grows bigger and stronger by consuming zoo animals from the inside out. The only way to kill it is to dehydrate it.

The Pretty Cure series features a surprising amount of these in both shapeless and shapely form, no less. Heartcatch for instance, features a large gel-like female creature made of water although she mainly weeps. In the Fresh season however, one of the villains creates a shadowy facsimile of Setsuna who morphs her body into tentacles as well as melting into the shadows of her opponents to ambush them.

The Moopi in Phoenix

Arguably, any Logia user from One Piece can potentially be this if it's a solid Logia. The more fitting examples include Honey Queen (unknown water-like liquid), General Gasparde (candy), Admiral Akainu (lava) and Caribou (mud).

A much straighter example appears in the Punk Hazard arc in the form of a gigantic creature called a "Slime."

A favorite motif of Hayao Miyazaki and Studio Ghibli films:

An Umibozu appears briefly in Pom Poko

The cursed gods (sort of) and the decapitated Deer/Forest spirit in Princess Mononoke

No Face and the Stink Spirit actually a river god suffering from pollution in Spirited Away

The Witch of the Waste's familiars in Howl's Moving Castle.

A hallucination (of the Shadow) and Lord Cob in Tales From Earthsea

Fujimoto's familiars in Ponyo on the Cliff by the Sea.

Bachilus from Birdy the Mighty.

Oasis from Kyouran Kazoku Nikki.

A few of the Nightbreed appearances in Nightwalker qualify as this.

The ELS in Gundam 00: Awakening of the Trailblazer are a variation. They are made of metal, and are just as tough and hard as that implies, but can shapeshift as easily as a blob monster when they wish. They can even combine together or split apart. Unlike most creatures of this type, though, they are not Nigh Invulnerable. If a part of an ELS dies, it generally stays dead, and they don't appear to be able to "regenerate" damage or instantly heal wounds (presumably, they'd need to gather an appropriate amount of raw material first.)

Regenerating, powering up or changing into other forms, this is what Hellsing's Alucard usually regresses into, though he never actually constructs any form of weaponry from it, usually resorting to bestial forms and familiars to get the job done.

Comic Books

The X-Men had a villain named The Blob, who was a morbidly obese mutant who couldn't be hurt by anything (and in some continuities, could "suck up" attacks into his folds of flesh). Other, more appropriate examples include a student who was essentially a walking pile of biogenic paraffin wax with a brain, and a sentient puddle in a body suit.

Some versions of Batman villain Clayface portray him like this.

Mentioned twice more on this page, Spider-Man's villain Sandman. Another, less featured villain is Hydro-Man, who—you guessed it -- is living water. Both of them can make themselves look perfectly human. On one occasion the two accidentally combined into a mud monster, much to the later embarrassment of the former. Hydro-Man, probably due to a lack of imagination, is on the B-List of the B-List, but Sandman is still active and considered a formidable threat today.

A particularly nasty version is the Spider-Man villain Skinhead; a neo-nazi who can turn into a giant, flesh-eating blob (and he really does eat flesh, the first thing he does after his transformation is devour his fellow gang members). Fortunately, his skeleton remains intact and vulnerable.

Let's not forget the Venom/Carnage symbiotes in their natural state...

And let's not forget New Mutants' Mercury, who is described as a "female T-1000".

The Teen Titans foe Plasmus (one of the Brotherhood of Evil) is a humanoid blob of acidic protoplasm.

The Blood Syndicate features Spanish superheroine Aqua-Maria, a meta human made out of living water with a bit of a language barrier to deal with.

Empowered's teammate Protean. Not a villain, but certainly a fratboyish Jerkass. He owes his power to an alien sexually-transmitted disease.

The Saturninans, from Mystery Comics, are amoeba-like aliens and possess several useful abilities such as shape-shifting and telepathy. They fought the hero Lance Lewis.

The Military Cook from Sturmtruppen made one by accident when his "mess" was struck by a lightning bolt. It devoured several soldiers before being defeated.

The Sinestro Corpsman Slushh is a blob monster that is made up of a powerful acid contained by a transparent membrane. One of his methods of attack is to grab an enemy and pull them inside of him where they dissolve quickly. He's done this lots of times before judging by the number of bones floating about inside him.

Fan Works

A good chunk of the Touhou story Imperfect Metamorphosis revolves around the local Blob Monster, also known as Rin Satsuki.

In a BBC Sherlock fic, called Aliens and Army Doctors, Sherlock and Mycroft are members of an alien species like this. They come in peace.

Film

B.O.B. from Monsters vs. Aliens is indestructible and can eat anything, but is really a decent guy, if not very bright.

The Smooze from the My Little Pony movie.

Hexxus from Fern Gully emerges from its tree prison as a tiny bit of living sludge. Absorbing the tree leveler's exhaust lets him transform into more threatening forms.

The Blob, a 1950s B-Movie, is the Trope Maker.

As well as the Bloodier and Gorier 1980s remake.

The film Angry Red Planet features a blob monster with a single eye which spins like a radar dish on top of its Man-of-War like body. Naturally green in color, it is electrocuted in the end. However, a small piece of it latches on to one of the astronauts and it continues to live (and try and eat the poor infectee).

Ivan Ooze from Power Rangers: The Movie would sometimes transform into a sentient puddle of pink protoplasm with his face on it, and some of his warriors were literally created from his phlegm (they splatted really good).

The shapeshifting liquid metal robot T-1000 in Terminator 2 could mimic everything it touched, from a floor to a human being (complete with clothes) and even in human shape it was malleable enough to simply walk "through" the bars of a prison door by flowing around them. He was defeated by John, Sarah and T-800 by weakening him with liquid nitrogen and later throwing him into a pool of molten iron.

The T-X from Terminator 3 had a Super Tough robotic skeleton with a Blobby cover; although she couldn't alter her shape as freely as T-1000, she could also mimic any human she touched.

In the third Spider-Man movie, fleeing convict Flint Marko is transformed into living sand. He was able to literally pull himself together to become Sandman, but the process is simultaneously awesome and traumatic-looking.

The aliens from It Came from Outer Space (1953) are aware they're repellent to humans in their natural state as huge, one-eyed blob creatures covered in wispy fronds, so they try to repair their spaceship covertly. Unfortunately their actions in doing so (taking hostages and copying their bodies, stealing equipment) are regarded as hostile.

The final stage of evolution, in the movie Evolution, was a gargantuan critter that looked a bit like a starfish, but was described by the science-geek characters as a "giant amoeba".

The Stuff from The Stuff.

Fantastic Voyage had antibodies and white blood cells attacking a team of miniaturized doctors (though in all fairness they were just doing their job).

Caltiki: The Immortal Monster is such a beast—and intensely radioactive.

X: The Unknown is radiation-devouring, equally radioactive, living mud.

The Unknown Terror features a flesh-devouring fungus that acts like this. Why? Because it's portrayed by SOAP SUDS.

Death Bed: The Bed That Eats. The title monster is more or less this, as it consumes its victims with yellow ecotoplasm and dissolves them in stomach acid. It's a weird movie.

The Parasite Eve movie adaptation of the novel featured this in slime girl form in a particularly surreal scene of the Mitochondria Eve taking form while she danced and promptly had sex with the bystander witnessing it.

Literature

H.P. Lovecraft's Shoggoths, created and hypnotically controlled by Ancient Astronauts who forced them to shapeshift in ways that made them functionally equivalent to heavy construction machinery. No, really. This being from a Lovecraft Cosmic Horror Story, guess what happened afterwards.

The Vom in Bloodhype was one of these. It was defeated by letting it absorb some of the titular drug.

The Barbapapas were a family of friendly shapeshifting blobs.

The Clone.

The Vermicious Knids from Charlie and the Great Glass Elevator by Roald Dahl.

Several Goosebumps books featured different blobs:

Monster Blood, and its sequels.

Egg Monsters from Mars.

The Blob that Ate Everyone (duh).

The Horror of Camp Jellyjam (King Jellyjam).

The slithersucker, a giant slime mold from the coffee-table-book version of The Future Is Wild, seems like a biologically-feasible homage to these critters.

Joseph Goebbels nearly gets devoured by a giant single-celled organism in the basement of a Mad Scientist in the Alternate History novel by Brad Linaweaver, Moon of Ice.

The "Skinners" in The Realm of the Gods by Tamora Pierce. Nightmarish blobby monsters made of Chaos that are Immune to Arrows, only slightly less immune to a lot of magic and suck the life out of anything they touch. The Darklings in the same book, created by Orzone to be his spies, are likewise small, shadowy blob creatures but gain sentience and independence and do a Heel Face Turn.

A 1953 issue of Weird Tales features a short story entitles "The Slime"—an ancient life form with retractable tentacles.

In Stephen King's short story "Grey Matter" (published in the collection Night Shift), a man slowly changes into a Blob Monster after drinking a can of contaminated beer.

In Blue Moon Rising by Simon R. Green, a Blob Monster that also probably qualifies as an Eldritch Abomination shows up and needs to be Killed With Fire.

Stanley G. Weinbaum's 1935 story "Parasite Planet" has monstrous Venusian blobs called "Doughpots" that ooze through the jungles of Venus absorbing anything that gets in their way.

Ian McDonald's short stories in the "Chaga Saga" should count. Alien (and heavily metaphorical) blobs, chagas, are absorbing Africa at 50 meters per day, and no-one really wants to deal with it.

Slime by William Essex. The living toxic waste of the title is more of a Muck Monster than an actual blob, but it's close enough. Someone even jokingly name-drops The Blob at one point when the protagonist is trying to warn everyone.

The Dresden Files: One of the short stories opens with Harry having just wrapped up a case involving Slime Golems.

Live-Action TV

The Quatermass Experiment featured such a monster—an alien amoeba which absorbs organic matter that comes in contact with it. What's disturbing is that it retains their brains in full functionality after it absorbs them.

Odo, of Star Trek: Deep Space Nine, in his natural state. And his species, the Founders, in their natural state—when they are healthy.

Also, a Founder can take a lot of energy—one shot from Klingon blaster can kill a human (or Klingon) -- but literally hundreds of them were needed to bring down the Founder impersonaing General Martok.

And in one episode, Odo is subject to some substance which turns him into literal Blob Monster (i.e with similar personality).

Rover, from The Prisoner.

The Secret World of Alex Mack: The title character is infamous for morphing herself into a silvery goo in order to sneak around.

Second season gave her the ability to absorb anyone or anything in her mass and carry it with her.

Terminator: The Sarah Connor Chronicles has a "female T-1000" known as the T-1001 posing as Catherine Weaver, and is shown to be far more deadly than her predecessor when it comes to terminating.

Became the butt of a running joke in the fandom when she first displayed her apparently more effective shapeshifting power when she morphs out of the form of a urinal and busts out a cheesy pun.

An actual T-1000 made a recent[when?] appearance in the show as well, resembling nothing more than a vague humanoid, faceless blob before killing the person closest to it to assume a default form.

Spoofed in Monty Python's Flying Circus, whose science fiction episode had a man-eating blancmange from 2,200,000 light-years away. It plays tennis well (at least so long as its opponents are Scotsmen) but has the weakness of being edible.

Makuin of the Blob from Tensou Sentai Goseiger. Despite what the above says, he is not a Monster of the Week, but rather a full-fledged enemy commander.

The Monster of the Week in an episode of Eureka. Carter tries to kill it with a Freeze Ray, cause "it worked in The Blob". It doesn't work, of course. A salt bomb, on the other hand, works perfectly.

Tabletop Games

Dungeons & Dragons has a lot of these, to the point where "ooze" is a primary creature type. Black Puddings, Ochre Jellies, Green Slimes, Gray Oozes... if it can be sneezed it has a stat block and a challenge rating.

The most iconic example, though, would have to be the ever-bizarre Gelatinous Cube. Cube-shaped so it could completely fill a dungeon corridor and thus eat organic materials off the walls and ceiling (but more importantly totally block off a corridor), and gelatinous because it was transparent, the better to surprise adventurers with. Lore Sjoberg describes it as, "evolutionarily adapted to graph paper." The justification, like with many monsters, is "A Wizard Did It" -- that is, the cube was created as a living mop, and as such grows to fit the corridors.

Another example is the Mimics and various other shapeshifters, whose malleability mixed with chameleon-like powers allow to disguise as many things.

The Gibbering Mouther: a Blob that has evolved eyes and teeth. Lots of eyes and teeth. Possibly inspired by Lovecraft.

The Aoa from the third edition "Fiend Folio" is a variant: it resembles a large blob of mercury, but it floats around detecting and intercepting arcane magic and spellcasters to consume the magical energy for sustenance. Apparently, some spellcasters summon them as servitors and keep them sated on the residual energy of their demesnes.

And more disturbingly, you if you take the Oozemaster Prestige Class.

On the high end, there are the demon lord Juilbex "the Faceless Lord", and the god Ghaunadaur "That Which Lurks". Who may be one and the same depending on the source.

Creatures serving the latter (possibly created from more humanoid followers) include Ghaunadan - a sapient ooze who can transform into humanoid form for a while.

Spelljammer has sapient "Plasmoid" species inspired by Dralasites from Star Frontiers (see below).

Star Frontiers has Dralasites as one of Player Character species. As such, their shapeshifting is very limited. Also, wildlife of Volturnus includes Dropper - those lurk on cavern ceilings to drop a pseudopod on critters passing below.

Warhammer 40,000: One of the more nightmarish examples of this trope can be found in some varieties of Chaos Spawn—doomed by their failure to adequately serve the Chaos Gods to live a mindless existence as a blob of organic matter endlessly mutating limbs, eyes, mouths, wings, tentacles and every appendage you can imagine -- and some you can't.

Rogue Trader has Sandslime - a Yu'Vath construct that's ridiculously hard to kill, doesn't starve and can infect and convert into more sandslime whoever it attacks.

Mortasheen has several, including the standard Plazm, the Akira-homaging Ectozyme, the not even technically alive Grenzo, the this-trope-combined-with-Big Creepy-Crawlies Chimerinsect and the MY BRAIN IS MADE OF FUCK Shumoth

Scion presents the Hekatonkheires of Greek mythology as huge (as in, aircraft carrier huge) blobs of protoplasmic muck that can change shape at will (for example, to create a hundred giant tentacles with which to crush their enemies, leading to the common legend). Since they are basically fluid, no physical attack can do so much as scratch them. There are three, and most of the Dodekatheon agree that if all three were to attack Olympus together, Olympus will fall.

Video Games

There are some Pokémon that are blob-like in shape; examples include the Grimer family and Ditto, the latter of which is famously capable of breeding with anything.

The third and fourth games of the Disgaea series have the Slime monster species, appearing as featureless blobs wearing horned skulls. As with some of the other examples, they boast an extremely high amount of resistance to physical attacks, and also take halved damage from non-elemental attacks, but are vulnerable to magic.

Slimes are an iconic, early-game enemy in the Dragon Quest series. Though there are tougher varieties, including those made of metal. And surprisingly, no Phlegmings.

Blob-like enemies are present in Final Fantasy and many other JRPGs, with varying levels of difficulty. Some are early-game enemies like the Dragon Quest slimes above, others may be quite tricky, being immune to weapon attacks or regenerating.

The reocurring Flan species of monsters is this. Always resistant to almost any physical damage and weak to magic elemental damage, usually the opposite of which they tend to use.

The Legend of Zelda has a myriad of blob enemies, including Bots, Bits, Zols, ChuChus, and other similar creatures.

The Like-Likes, man, the Like-Likes!.

Morpha in Ocarina of Time.

Toby in the old arcade game The Glob.

Kira's blob from Arcana Heart gives her the appearance of an imposing Mighty Glacier. Without it, she's only a hair above three-and-a-half feet tall.

Abyss, the Final Boss from Marvel vs. Capcom 2.

Visceroids Up Until Command & Conquer 3 Count too

Wizardry 6-8 have enemy slimes, though not invulnerable to standard weapons and magic.

The Bio-Devils from Mega Man. Only shots directed at their eyes will do any kind of damage to them.

They also existed in Mega Man X (once), Zero (twice, although it's the same enemy only rebuilt) and arguably ZX (in which the creature is made out of magma). Maybe also Legends.

And then Mega Man Battle Network provides us with Proto/Alpha, the A.I. Is a Crapshoot Psycho Prototype McGuffin Final Boss of the third game.

As well as Mercury from Mega Man V.

The various blobs, jellies, oozes, and such in Nethack aren't immune to normal damage, since that would make them too difficult, but the black pudding splits into two every time you hit it with a melee weapon, just like the D&D monster of the same name.

And of course, a well-prepared player can turn this into a near-Game Breaker. See: Pudding farming.

Ultima also has slimes that, while they can be attacked in the normal ways, a non-lethal attack had a chance of causing a second slime to split off.

The eponymous protagonist of the Wii game De Blob, naturally.

He had an entirely different, much blobbier design in the obscure PC tech demo that started the franchise.

The "VasBioInvasion" mod for Unreal Tournament 2004 has you fighting sentient Biorifle blobs who can merge with each other to become absolutely massive in size.

Lufia's prequel game Rise of the Sinistrals uses red blobs as The Goomba. And for a special boss which is near undefeatable.

The Kingdom of Loathing has black puddings as food. Occasionally, one will turn out to be alive.

There's also the acid blobs in the Dungeons of Doom, and Lumpy the Sinister Sauce-Blob, the Big Bad of the Sauceror's Nemesis Quest.

In the Avernum series, slimes are one of the more annoying monsters a low-level party can face. Some have an acidic touch, while others split when struck.

Metroid Fusion brings us the X Parasites, nasty floating amoeba-like aliens that can take the shape of any creature they've infected and killed. The Ing of Metroid Prime 2 are similar, and blobby Phazon creatures show up in Prime 3, too.

Gish from titular game is one of the first blob-like characters to have blob-like characteristics. Unlike most other blobs featured as main characters, Gish has a different looks and attitude.

Loco Roco, which came out after that, had a blob-like main character too, but compared to Gish, it had nothing much else in common.

Jelly Blobs in Zombies Ate My Neighbors. Popsicles kill them instantly.

The player character in The Ooze.

Typing in "blob" in Scribblenauts will give a invinceable blob monster. The only things that can kill is fire, and the Exploding Barrel Gun.

Early on in Space Quest IV, you encounter a green slime in a sewer. If it touches you, it will attack you and strip the flesh from your bones.

Slimes and oozes appear as monsters in World of Warcraft. The Temple of Ahn'Qiraq instance featured a giant ooze boss that had to be frozen with frost damage before it could be harmed.

Blizzard's policy regarding Blob Monsters seems to be, "If it's liquid and even slightly viscous, you can make a Blob Monster out of it." Among the more unusual examples in the game include blobs made out of oil, beer, wine, embalming fluid, blood, tree sap, and even honey.

Slime-blobs appear as "Sluggies" in Yoshi's Island, where one of them becomes a boss that is nigh-invincible except for its heart, located at its core; you have to pelt the slime repeatedly with eggs to deform it temporarily so you can hit the heart.

The irritating oozes in Might and Magic VII were completely impervious to physical damage and varied from merely resistant to immune with Cleric spells. Even when you have the expensive, damage-rich elemental spells in your Sorcerer's arsenal, they're as hardy as ever. They alone make the plot-critical Red Dwarf Mines particularly steep for a novice party to face.

"Blob" is the term in a Paradox Interactive game (e.g. Europa Universalis) for a nation that has taken a LOT of land. Some AI nations likely to be blobs are France, Austria and Ming China.

England/Great Britain, Portugal and Spain tend to develop blob colonies.

Slimes are a minor recurring enemy in the Castlevania series, first appearing as Chest Monsters in Vampire Killer.

The blob from A Boy and His Blob for the NES, remade for the Wii. The blob can change shape by eating jellybeans. In the Wii version, a lot of the enemies are more or less blob-like.

In the little-known and extremely hard to find SNES game Smartball, the player character was a sentient blob. Made even more interesting since it was essentially a puzzle-platformer set in a high-fantasy world, where you'd expect to be fighting blobs, not playing one as the hero.

The Jell in Monster Rancher is a vaguely humanoid blob that can morph into a variety of things ranging from a spike-covered top to a helicopter. They look even more blob-like in Monster Rancher 3.

The The Blob look-alikes from the first level of Alien Syndrome are exactly this.

Gels in Fate are very wimpy monsters—even your pet kills them easily—although poisonous and electrified variants turn up as you go deeper into the Dungeon.

A character named simply The Blob was playable in the 16-bit claymation fighting game Clay Fighter. He was an unshaped mass of clay, and his attacks mostly revolved around changing shape, such as transforming into a boot when the kick buttons were pressed, or turning into a buzzsaw and flying at the opponent.

Player Character version: Arakune (of BlazBlue) Was Once a Man.

Master of Orion and its sequel has a Space Amoeba as one of the random event monsters. In the latter, if you don't defeat the monster, you're treated to a Cutscene of it enveloping the planet.

A number of Shin Megami Tensei games feature Slimes and Blobs, usually as low-level enemies. Some other demons, such as Abaddon, are pretty blob-monsterish too.

Common Shadows in Persona 3 and Persona 4 are shapeless splotches of moving darkness with eyes, which pull themselves over surfaces with huge grasping hands (in the latter game, they can also float above-ground). They only reshape themselves into predetermined forms, such as knights or minotaurs or tanks, when confronted by a foe. Even then, Mayas (the lowest enemy type) never get any alternate shape.

Guild Wars: Eye of the North introduces Oozes, blobs that inhabited the underground. Some of which explode. They also have a minipet version and a tonic that turns you into one temporarily.

Mundus, Final Boss of Devil May Cry, begins as a living statue of a god, but once you defeat his first two forms he begins to degenerate until he ends up a horrid blob. Argosax the Chaos, Final Boss of Devil May Cry 2, appears as one before ascending into his better-looking, constantly sex-changing One-Winged Angel, The Despair Embodied. The penultimate boss in 3,Arkham, turns into one after briefly assuming the guise of Sparda.

And of course, the Nightmare boss from the original, a huge black blob with a vulnerable core.

Ooziums from Advance Wars: Dual Strike are giant slimes. They're immune to indirect attacks, and instantly kill any unit they attack, simply by moving onto their space and absorbing. The upshot is that they can only move one space a turn, allowing you to surround and destroy them fairly easily; their special attack means they can't counterattack. If you fail to kill it, however, you're going to lose a unit.

The title goos from World of Goo, though they don't absorb or meld together, instead linking together to form structures.

In the Adobe Flash game Amorphous+, you fight absolutely nothing EXCEPT for these. Unfortunately, they come in many varieties—one explodes into deadly acid on death, another tries to rip your heart out, yet another explodes into a firey explosion while it's counterpart explodes in a freezing blast, a metal version that attacks with Combat Tentacles (and is only vulnerable when doing so!), etc.

The Calcinites in X-Com: Terror From The Deep are amorphous blobs who reside inside a diving suit.

City of Heroes has Hamidon, which is an endgame raid boss and one of the game's most powerful enemies.

The Shivans appear to be blobs of alien protoplasm wrapped around human skeletons.

The Deadly Rooms of Death series houses both massive blob monsters, and tiny ones. Named, inventively enough Tar, Mud, and Gel, with the smaller versions being Tar Babies, Mud Babies, and Gel Babies.

Slime monsters in Secret of Mana, who also will split every so often; the blue ones freeze you in place and the red ones set you on fire.

Not to mention Shade and that thing in the Mana Fortress.

Delve Deeper has both slimes and slime cubes.

Jelly-Chan from Stretch Panic is transformed into one based on her love of sweets.

The slimes of Shining in the Darkness.

Belch of EarthBound. Stinky, foul, and overall disgusting he serves as the image of this page.

Dwarf Fortress both plays this straight and subverts it: some randomly generated creatures do not have organs and thus only die via Chunky Salsa Rule. However, other ones, as well as "blood men", are made of liquid but have no way to pull themselves together: on the lightest contact they just split apart.

Giant sponges became the horror Carp once was. They are almost impossible to kill - sponges have no vital organs and don't bleed. Whatever attacks them is stuck for good. Of course, they are sessile and don't have anything with which to attack, but any creature may "ush" (lean onto adjacent creature), and a critter that weighs half a ton tend to crush bones when it hits. Also, due to a bug, they can charge when "threatened".

Glurps in Mario & Luigi.

Minecraft has slime enemies, which split into smaller ones if you hit them.

Chaos from Sonic Adventure, although his general shape is somehow bound to the number of chaos emeralds he ingested, and his brain is always vulnerable.

World Heroes seems to love these as just about every game except 2 Jet featured a doppelganger a la Terminator 2 in the form of Geegus and his better half, Neo Geegus and a surprise final boss that actually used its shapeshifting powers quite frequently with Dio and Neo Dio.

Parasite Eve's Mitochondria Eve qualifies as this in the first game, not only with her giant slime blob, but in a particular scene of her in the sewer and infecting a wandering crocodile in the process.

Quake: Spawns. They are this trope plus Demonic Spiders. Blobs of blue goo, capable of moving ridiculously fast by bouncing around, which makes them extremely dangerous if you let them charge at you. On top of that they explode when they die, with force equal to rocket launcher shot.

Vindictus has Blood Jellies and Ice Jellies as minor mobs. There's also a Blood Jelly miniboss called Greed, which depending on your play style may actually be harder than that mission's actual boss.

MARDEK has an Ooze monster type, which includes Water Drops, Blood Clots and Lava Bubbles, among others.

Rise of the Robots features a slime girl variant as the final boss known as The Supervisors, not unlike the T-1000 of Terminator fame.

Kirby would fit the trope if he didn't have arms and legs! His blobby companions, Goopy and Chuchu are more blob-like.

Kirby 64 has Magman?

Alice: Madness Returns features such creatures as the primary Mooks of the game.

The variously-colored Puyos in Madou Monogatari and its More Popular Spinoff Puyo Puyo.

In The Tower of Druaga, the enemies include six different colored slimes.

RuneScape has the cave slimes and jellies. The former is a poisonous blob of ooze and the latter is a cube of gelatinous material that appears to have items inside of it.

The Legend of Zelda: Majora's Mask has a blob monster (with a frog monster inside, controlling it) as a miniboss in Great Bay Temple. If the blob absorbs you, the frog pummels you inside before kicking you out. Naturally, it is defeated by shattering it with Ice Arrows.

The recently final released character of Skullgirls, Double, a rare slime girl variant, is pretty much a mimicking dark blob disguised as a nun.

Helbreath has smiles as one of the weakest enemies in the game.

Call Of Cthulhu: Dark Corners Of The Earth featured a classic Lovecraftian monster in the Shoggoth - in this guise, a huge, semi-sentient mass of acidic slime that infested the inside of a refinery. The touch of it was so painful and damaging that J Edgar Hoover had to perform a Mercy Kill on a hapless victim.

The first-person RPG Anvil of Dawn features mud-like goo girls as sturdy enemies near the end of the game.

Monster Girl Quest has Slime Girls. Their amorphous bodies let them regenerate from physical damage, but make them vulnerable to fire and pollution.

Slime girls are a recurring enemy type in the Violated Hero series, with each game having at least one.

The Slime in Desire Dungeon is a particularly voluptuous example of the slime girl variant. She is too slow to attack normally, instead splitting into two and trapping you with her adhesive body when you attack.

Slimes in Lust Grimm are yet another example of slime girls. They have low HP but resist all elements - coupled with the minimal EXP you get for defeating them, this means that it's best to avoid fighting them.

Web Animation

Homestar Runner: One of the animals Strong Bad makes up is a big vomit-like blob named Da Huuuuuudge with Strong Bad's face.

The sign on the animal's cage is priceless: "Please, for the love of Pete, DO NOT feed Da Huuuuuudge."

Web Comics

The Amoeba from The Incredible and Awe Inspiring Serial Adventure of The Amazing Plasma-Man

Carbosilicate amorphs of Schlock Mercenary, of which the title character Sergeant Schlock is one. And between lack of fixed shape and being evolved from nanotech memory storage systems there's a whole lot of Bizarre Alien Biology. The only thing more dangerous than a carbosilicate amorph (already, in the words of one of his commanders, "a bundle of assassination-made-easy") is an amorph using pseudopodia to Multi Wield several weapons, each large enough that most humanoids would use it with two hands or carry on a shoulder. While he can change shape, texture is fixed, and e.g. trying to walk in a humanoid suit without having any skeleton is hard and looks like "a drunk bundle of bungee cords".

Not completely invulnerable short of vaporization, however:

The Goo, apparently a science experiment gone wrong, was the first major enemy the heroes fought in El Goonish Shive.

And then it came back bigger, stronger and more deadly than before as a part of the inter-dimensional Evil Overlord's plan to kill his dimensional counterparts. It does have a vital organ (the core that controls the whole thing) - but then, it's about the size of a marble and buried somewhere deep inside several tons of animated sludge.

In Girl Genius, a long-forgotten and sealed underground Mad Scientist's laboratory houses a number of Glowy Monsters that look like luminous globs with tentacles... who can lash out with whip-like tongues that inject people with digestive acids/enzymes which dissolve organic matter within seconds.

Fred and Persephone of General Protection Fault are sentient slime molds, who can apparently paralyze humans (and aliens) and manipulate them like puppets.

The webcomic Unicorn Jelly has a world full of sentient and non-sentient liquid-crystal beings.

Synthea from the webcomic of the same name was put into a stasis pod, and woken up with experimental biotechnology by a good Mad Scientist far in the future. The result was a green jelly-like body with a confused amnesiac human mind. She can change shape at will, streching bodyparts, creating mallets, etc., although this is not perfect, as her body drips and oozes constantly—her "at rest" state is a puddle, and she is stuck sleeping in a big barrel. She's also more or less immortal—she has survived being cut into pieces and having an exploding weapon go off INSIDE her head with nothing more than a headache.

Ditto for Myrrh from The Wotch, a maid who tried to clean up a pile of magical ingredients (with a pinch of ginger) that her insane Wizard master left out. The mess fought back, and the resultant mass vaguely took on the maid's shape, memories, and personality (with a slightly better body). Originally a bit of fanart from a sub-comic that was made a bit character in the main comic, later became a secondary character, a roommate for Unlucky Everydude Ming.

Slauf/Slough the demon from Building 12.

A Modest Destiny has a textbook example.

Alien Dice has a couple blob monsters running around, including one of Lexx's ooponents.

Tales Of Gnosis College has a bonus sequence called Goo Girl Genesis which is Exactly What It Says on the Tin. A female undergraduate is turned into one of these as a mad science experiment.

Web Original

More than one student at the Super-Hero School Whateley Academy in the Whateley Universe fits the model but subverts the trope. Aqueous is living water. Plasmoid can't even get out of his room by himself. Jimmy Trauger is widely regarded across the campus as cannibalistic because he defended himself against a powerful bully by becoming several hundred pounds of carnivorous protoplasm and teaching said bully a valuable lesson. But none of these kids is a villain. Or a hero. Just someone stuck with freaky powers and a freakier body.

SCP Foundation's "tar baby". Since its lack of solid parts limits its mobility, trying to freeze it actually makes it more dangerous.

And also SCP-861, SCP-171...

Lastly SCP-999, the only slime-blob-endorphin monster that is considered safe and manages to make SCP-682 to LAUGH by tickling him.

The "God Slime" in this story over on Everything2, from their March of the Monsters.

Mortal from The Insane Quest is one of these.

Western Animation

Both The Powerpuff Girls and Jenny in My Life as a Teenage Robot had to fight giant blob creatures which were near invincible. The former got rid of him by finding the cat that he was looking for and letting him go, the latter by freezing it with chemicals and then destroying it.

The Powerpuff Girls also has the [Boys].

The bacteria monsters in "The Giant Bacteria", an episode of Swat Kats, which divide whenever hit. They're melted by getting electrocuted.

Dexters Laboratory had the the giant unnamed pink blob with several eyes that starred in a few episodes.

Thrakkazorg from The Tick (animation) animated series. Who also made a clone of the hero who was part this.

The "meta-microbe" mutated by the Big Bang as well as Aquamaria in Static Shock.

The Horrible Gelatinous Blob in Futurama is a recurring character, and at one point the creators admit that given the appearance of his son his first name really is "Horrible Gelatinous".

There are also the Trisolians, who are a race of aliens with water-like bodies.

The Herculoids had two of them, Gloop and Gleep.

The "Marabounta" in Code Lyoko is a Cyberspace example.

One of the villains in the second season of Dynomutt Dog Wonder was named The Glob.

The Spectacular Spider-Man's Sandman, a victim of a Freak Lab Accident that turned him into living sand, after a Big No and a little well-deserved fretting, very much enjoys the results, since Spider-Man's punches have no effect, and he's now capable of rudimentary shapeshifting, weaponry included. It's mentioned in a later episode that he can only eat "raw silicates", and later yet he proves able to change his size by picking up more sand.

The Silver Surfer animated series has a two-part episode all about this, featuring amorphous aliens called 'Virals' accidentally born from an unstable cure created by the Watchers. Anyone who entered the Universal Library with selfish intentions or attempted to use the information with such an attitude would eventually mutate as well, operating as a collective with the ability to 'control their evolution'.

Ben 10 has an alien form for the Omnitrix called Upgrade which requires Ben to turn into a blob in order to possess technology. There's also an episode which explains a feud between the Plumbers and a muddy alien race called Sludges who can also pass themselves off as humans.

Alien Force plays it straight with the alien hero, Goop.

Batman Beyond has the memorable Femme Fatale, Inque, a metahuman that exists as an amorphous shapeshifting black blob.

Totally Spies!! has an interesting spoof of the T-1000 which includes a liquid metal machine that can change into anything it touches, even as the smallest of drips, it can instantly duplicate one's appearance and size.

Played straight twice in Martin Mystery.

Interesting example in Buzz Lightyear of Star Command in which Mira's race of Tangeans were shown to have evolved from blue blobs.

TMNT: Fast Foward presented us with the sinister shadow alien, Sh'okanabo.

Also within in the series was a superhero variant; an alternate version of Michelangelo called "Blobboid".

One episode of M.A.S.K. had the heroes facing a giant amoeba-like monster that behaved just like the blob from the 1950s movie.

From Wakfu, the Dripples ("Flaqueux" in French) in episode 5. Not so much monsters, though, than cute Peaceful Villagers.

There's also an authentic Blob Monster coming out of a broken potion flask in episode 7.

The Exo Squad episodes "The Greatest Fear" and "Flesh Crawls" gives us a Neosapien transformed by Neo Mega medical experiments into one of these, with the added ability to turn into anyone.

Jonny Quest the Real Adventures features a shapeshifting blob-like bio computer in the episode "DNA Doomsday" who was giving a test mission to launch a group of Nuclear Missiles, and failed to realize it was a simulation. For added Nightmare Fuel, it could change parts of its body into people it had come into contact with.

Teen Titans features two of these: Plasmus, who is just a normal guy that becomes a mindless, muck-consuming monster whenever he's awake, and the implacable Madame Rouge.

Cybersix has Terra, the Monster of the Week of Episode 3. Its eventual death was a massive Tear Jerker.

Casper Scare School: one of the students at scare school is a blob-like monster. He is a background character most of the time.

In Darkwing Duck, Gosalyn is transformed into this in "Slime Okay, You're Okay".

If you count living water as a Blob Monster, then The Liquidator, a recurring villain and member of the Five-Bad Band, would also qualify.

Arnim Zemo's Doughboys in Avengers Earths Mightiest Heroes.

The Simpsons: Homer Simpson transforms into one of these in a Halloween Episode, after eating some mysterious space goo.

The classic The Incredible Hulk cartoon has an experimental blob monster escape. It was indestructible and could eat anything it touched. Its one weakness? Gamma radiation.

The G.I. Joe episode "The Germ" had an experimental virus come into contact with some experimental chemicals and turn into a gigantic one.

G.I. Joe: Renegades has the Bio-Viper, which are near-indestructible and can regenerate by consuming living matter.

Family Guy: Peter finds a genie and is given 3 wishes. His second is to have his own theme music, which plays constantly and can't be turned off. This leads to his being threatened with having every bone in his body broken, so of course Peter uses wish #3 to have no bones. He even refers to himself afterwards as an amorphous blob (comic).

The DNA Mimic in Godzilla the Animated Series.

My Little Pony the Movie: The Smooze, a world-devouring blob unleashed by three witches.

Captain America is briefly seen fighting one in the first episode of The Superhero Squad Show.

The monster of the week for the second episode of Sym-bionic Titan has the gang fight against a giant goo monster that seems to be defeated at the start but a piece of it manages to spy on them and alert its still-conscious mass to invade their school, turning into red-eyed silhouettes of the heroes to combat them, the heroes themselves having to resort to their new environment to fend them off and the episode ends with it being defeated by the power of mass phone calling due to a weakness in vibrations

A shapeshifting blob appears in Tom And Jerry Tales in the episode Invasion of the Body Slammers, where it assumes the form of a deranged form of Jerry to terrorize Tom, frequently exhibiting a very|wide grin

Real Life