Majin Buu (魔ま人じんブウ, Majin Bū , lit. "Demon Person Boo") has many forms, all of which are linked below. However, each form has a different personality and goals, essentially making them separate individuals. All of Majin Buu's forms are simply referred to as "Majin Buu" in the series, but the various forms get their common names from various Dragon Ball Z video games.

Kid Buu - The original and pure form of Majin Buu.

Future Kid Buu - Future counterpart of Kid Buu from Shin Budokai - Another Road.

Xeno Majin Buu - Alternate world counterpart of Kid Buu from an unknown timeline.

Clone Kid Buu - Clone replica of Kid Buu created by Android 21 from FighterZ.

Huge Buu - The result of Kid Buu absorbing South Supreme Kai.

Innocent Buu - The first form of Buu to appear on-screen, and the result of Kid Buu absorbing the Grand Supreme Kai. This Buu split into the completely physically identical Good Buu, and skinny Evil Buu.

Good Buu - The result of Innocent Buu expelling all of the evil in his body, becoming pure good. He is identical in appearance to Innocent Buu, however he lacks any evil whatsoever and is a different life-form. According to Dragon Ball Online, he later split into the completely physically identical Mr. Buu, and the female Miss Buu.

Mr. Buu - Male result of Good Buu splitting in order to create males and females of the Majin race.

Miss Buu - Female result of Good Buu splitting in order to create males and females of the Majin race.

Evil Buu - The result of Innocent Buu expelling all of the evil in his body in physical form.

Future Innocent Buu - Future counterpart of Innocent Buu from Shin Budokai - Another Road.

Future Good Buu - Future counterpart of Good Buu from Shin Budokai - Another Road.

Future Evil Buu - Future counterpart of Evil Buu Shin Budokai - Another Road.

Super Buu - The result of Evil Buu absorbing Good Buu. He is the same overall entity as Innocent Buu, however he looks and acts completely different due to Buu's evil resurfacing and overcoming the Grand Supreme Kai's positive influence.

Future Super Buu - Future counterpart of Super Buu Shin Budokai - Another Road.

Uub - Human reincarnation of Kid Buu.

This disambiguation page lists articles associated with the same title. If an internal link led you here, you may wish to change the link to point directly to the intended article.

Quick Answers