Quick facts for kids

Majin Buu Dragon Ball character

Cosplayers of Son Goku and Majin Boo, Dragon Ball Z at Anime Expo

First appearance Dragon Ball chapter #460: "Majin Buu Appears?!", March 1, 1994 (Weekly Shōnen Jump 1994) Created by Akira Toriyama Voiced by Japanese

Kōzō Shioya

English (Funimation dubs)

Josh Martin (as Fat/Good and Kid Buu)

Justin Cook (as Super and Evil Buu)

English (Ocean Group dubs)

Scott McNeil (as Fat/Good Buu)

Brian Dobson (as Super and Kid Buu), Corby Proctor (in GT)

English (Bang Zoom! dub)

Spike Spencer Information Race Majin Relatives Bibidi (creator)

Uub (reincarnation) Abilities Super strength

Super speed, agility, reflexes

Stamina

Healing

Flight

Energy sensing

Energy projection

Energy absorption

Durability

Telepathy

Telekinesis

Stretching

Morphing

Multiplication

Magic Transmutation

Teleportation

Majin Buu (Japanese: 魔人ブウ, Hepburn: Majin Bū), generally spelled Majin Boo in subtitles of the Japanese anime, and rendered as Djinn-Boo in the Viz Media manga, is the final antagonist in the Dragon Ball manga series created by Akira Toriyama, before the release of Dragon Ball Super. He is introduced in chapter #460 "Majin Buu Appears?!", first published in Weekly Shōnen Jump magazine on March 1, 1994. Majin Buu is a genie-like magical life form awoken by the evil warlock Bibidi that terrorized galaxies by destroying entire planets, millions of years before the events of Dragon Ball take place. He was temporarily sealed away and brought to Earth; however, Bibidi was killed and Buu remained hidden. During the events of Dragon Ball Z, he is revived by Bibidi's son Babidi in order to carry on his father's plan to conquer the entire universe.

Creation and design

When first introduced, Buu is overweight and wears gloves, boots, a vest, and a cape. His appearance, magical powers, how he appeared from his ball, longevity, and how he is summoned to Earth by an evil warlock using the life-force of his victims are all somewhat genie-esque, an aspect further implied in the Japanese word "Majin" in his name, which can read as "Djinn", which led to Viz Media rendering his name as Djinn-Boo for the English manga release. His trousers, in all forms he takes, bear the same "M" symbol like many other characters associated with Babidi in this part of the manga; whether this is short for Buu's title of "Majin", Babidi's title of "Madoshi" in the original Japanese or something else is unclear. In a 2007 interview printed in Shonen Jump, Akira Toriyama stated that Buu's design was inspired by adaptations of One Thousand and One Nights (Arabian Nights) that he watched as a child.

Majin Buu's manner is very naive and childlike, taking joy in fighting and scaring people. Throughout the series, he is always referred to by either Majin Buu or simply Buu, no matter what form he is in. However, each form has been given their own names in guidebooks, video games, or by fans, to distinguish between them. The first fat form seen is referred to as "Innocent Majin Buu" (無邪気な魔人ブウ, Mujakina Majin Bū). When Buu expels the evil inside him, it takes on a taller and much skinnier, frail form referred to as "Pure Evil Majin Buu" (魔人ブウ 純粋悪, Majin Bū Junsui Aku). When this Buu absorbs the fat one, he transforms into a muscular version of himself, referred to as "Evil Majin Buu" (魔人ブウ 悪, Majin Bū Aku), with English media referring to him as "Super Buu".

Voice actors

In the original Japanese, Buu and all his forms are voiced by Kōzō Shioya in all media. He said he looked at the character as a self-centered three-year-old. Even through all the different forms of the character, Shioya explained that he tried not to deviate too far from the personality of the original while subtlety showing that he changed form.

In the Funimation dub, Josh Martin voices Fat and Kid Buu, while Justin Cook voices Evil and Super Buu. Meanwhile, in the Ocean Group dubs, Fat Buu is voiced by Scott McNeil, while Evil, Super, and Kid Buu are voiced by Brian Dobson.

Powers and abilities

Being the final villain faced by the protagonists in the original Dragon Ball series, and the franchise at the time, Buu is the most powerful of them all, possessing vast superhuman strength, speed and reflexes beyond comprehension. He is able to channel his inner ki energy for devastating offensive techniques capable of destroying planets or star systems.

Buu also holds the unique ability of being able to transform objects or living things into chocolate or other sweet foods which he then consumes to satiate himself, using the antenna on his head, and he is shown to be capable of magically altering an object's appearance.

Buu is also able to instantly recover and regenerate from severe trauma and even combustion at a sub-molecular level, and heal wounds from other people. His body is soft but flexible, able to stretch his limbs and any part of his body on indefinite lengths, as well as changing shape into whatever he desires.

He is also capable of detaching a large part of his body for various purposes, like ensnaring his targets like a lasso rope, and making clones of himself. This also allows him to absorb other people to obtain their power. Buu can instantly emulate techniques used on him, launching Goku's signature Kamehameha many times, and capable of using Instant Transmission, in his original form. Buu is also revealed to possess godly ki after absorbing the two Supreme Kai, granting him a tremendous surge in power, retaining it after reverting to his pure state.

See also