This week’s Postcard Friday, a first in two weeks due to vacation, takes us to Saxony and to a viaduct that once existed. When traveling on the Highway B 283 from Aue to Markneukirchen and Klingenthal in the western part of the state, one will find remnants of a railroad bridge spanning the Zwickau Mulde as you travel around the curve. That is in connection with this railroad viaduct. The viaduct features a steel trestle with Howe lattice truss spans that spanned both the river and a parellel railroad line that once connected Klingenthal with Aue. The bridge was built around 1890 and used to serve a 12-gauge railroad line that had connected Zwickau with Carlsfeld, located at the border with Czechia. The line was abandoned in the 1960s and as East Germany needed the steel for its industry, in order to continue its operating economy- termed Marktwirtschaft (economy based on planned need for employees in certain sectors), the steel structure was removed in the early 1980s. Since then are the stone piers visible from the highway.

In fact, a total of three bridges of its kind spanning the Zwickau Mulde between Bockau and Schönheide were removed during the late 1970s and early 1980s for two reasons: the aforementioned reason and because of the construction of the Eibenstock reservoir, which was completed in 1984 with the purpose of flood control and providing recreation for the area. This spelled doom to both the Zwickau-Carlsfeld line as well as the line between Klingenthal and Aue via Schönheide and Bockau. Especially for the latter as the line originally travelled through the area where the reservoir is now located, thus effectively cutting the line in half. The line between Aue and Eibenstock continued service until 2008; the other from Schönheide to Klingenthal ceased operations by 2019. This railroad viaduct, as shown in the postcard, represents the prosperous rail line that once was but was cut up by the Politbüro in Berlin and the Communist party that dominated East Germany, its economy and the way of life until the Fall of the Wall in 1989.