Idyllically situated on a plateau in the middle of the Nature Park Erzgebirge / Vogtland is the mining- and embroidery-town Eibenstock. Framed by the 1,018 m high Auersberg Mountain and the Eibenstock dam, this town with approx. 5,000 inhabitants has developed in recent years into a tourist center in the Erzgebirge. This is proven by its certification as a state-recognized resort and family-friendly place.

In the Middle Ages the town had already acquired the right to be called a “Bergstadt” (mining town with special privileges defined by means of a charter from the ruling monarch) and thus played a central role in the Auersberg area. In addition to the mining of iron ores, Eibenstock was mostly known for its tin mining. The tin was reported to have a very fine gloss and was even used by Venetian glassmakers for the manufacture of their mirror glass products.

Centuries of mining had formed the history of Eibenstock, where even today, an attentive guest can encounter numerous historical witnesses of the mining industry. After its shutdown, at the end of the 18th century, a new skill found its way to the Auersberg region: “Tambourieren” (a kind of artistic embroidery). The intricate embroidery that evolved gave the tranquil mining town worldwide fame, a U.S. consulate and an attractive urban development. Impressive buildings, such as the town hall, built in the Art Nouveau style, are evidence of that flourishing time, and are now interesting tourist attractions.

Especially families and those who want an active holiday get their money’s worth, besides the many nature lovers seeking tranquility. The many leisure facilities in the town offer a great deal of holiday activities, such as the “Badegärten” spa with pools and sauna landscape, Wurzelrudi’s Adventure World with an all-weather bob sled run, maze, tubing and children’s playground, equestrian with large indoor riding arena, mini golf hall with pit-pat, embroidery-show workshop, playgrounds and climbing courses, mining heritage trail, an observation tower at the Bühl hill and in the winter season a ski arena, cross-country ski runs, sledding and horse-drawn sleigh rides.

With its hotels, pensions, hostels and many private rentals, the town offers a wide range of accommodations in various categories. Due to its central location, Eibenstock is an ideal base for reaching all the attractions and things to do in the Auersberg region. Thanks to an extensive network of hiking trails, this can also be done on foot or by bicycle. A constant companion is the healthy fresh mountain air in the woods and meadows.