The Zwickauer Mulde arises east of Schoeneck in Vogtland and has two source rivers: the Red Mulde and the White Mulde. Both source rivers empty into the Muldenberg valley dammed reservoir after approx. 3 km. The Zwickauer Mulde emerges from this reservoir and flows mostly northeast through the forested region of Vogtland and Erzgebirge, until it empties into the largest reservoir in Saxony, the Eibenstock dam.

From Eibenstock the Zwickauer Mulde flows to Aue, where it merges with the Schwarzwasser River. The combined river, still called the Zwickauer Mulde, then curves to the northwest in the direction of Zwickau, the fourth largest city in Saxony, from which it takes its name. Near Zwickau the Zwickauer Mulde leaves the Erzgebirge, and near Wechselburg, the Chemnitz, a large tributary, empties into the Zwickauer Mulde.

Finally, after about 165 km, in Sermuth, a district of Colditz, the Zwickauer Mulde joins the Freiberger Mulde to become the Mulde River.

Along the Zwickauer Mulde River, upland fields of meadow and lower wetlands with unique flora and fauna have been preserved. The towns and villages along the river course provide insight into the remarkable history and culture of Saxony. Old town centers and castles, historical palaces, and museums attract tourists.

There are no signs at the beginning of the cycling route along the Zwickauer Mulde near Schoeneck. Here you go over forest paths and roads, also through quiet and moderately busy streets. The new well-developed section in Erzgebirge between Wolfsgrün (near Eibenstock) and Aue has a length of 12 km and offers connecting routes to the nearby towns. Direction signs point you farther along the river 100 km as far as Sermuth.

Places along the way:

Schöneck: www.stadt-schoeneck.de

Muldenhammer with Morgenröthe-Rautenkranz: www.gemeinde-muldenhammer.de

Schönheide: www.gemeinde-schoenheide.de

Eibenstock with Neidhardtsthal, Wolfsgrün, Blauenthal and Sosa: www.eibenstock.de

Zschorlau: www.zschorlau-info.de

Bockau: www.bockau.de

Lauter-Bernsbach: www.lauter-bernsbach.de

Aue: www.aue.de

Bad Schlema: www.kurort-schlema.de

Hartenstein: www.stadt-hartenstein.de

Wilkau-Haßlau: www.wilkau-hasslau.de

Zwickau: www.zwickau.de

Glauchau: www.glauchau.de

Waldenburg: www.waldenburg.de

Penig: www.stadt-penig.de

Lunzenau: www.lunzenau.de

Wechselburg: www.wechselburg.de

Rochlitz: www.rochlitz.de

Colditz: www.colditz.de

Colditz / OT Sermuth: www.colditz.de