Actress Jyothika was born on October 18, 1978, to a Punjabi father and a Muslim mother from Maharashtra. Her father is a film producer named Chander Sadanah, and her mother is Seemah Sadanah. The actress graduated from the Learner’s Academy in Mumbai and later studied in Psychology at Mumbai’s Mithibai College. She made her acting debut in the Hindi film Doli Saja Ke Rakhna, directed by Priyadharshan, although it did not perform well financially. She was nominated for Best Female Debut at the 44th Filmfare Awards for her recent debut.

Then, the actress married actor Suriya while she was a rising star with several films lined up throughout her career. The duo has collaborated on seven films, the first of which was Poovellam Kettuppar in 1999. They married on September 11, 2006, after dating for several years. They have two children, a daughter Diya who was born in 2007 and a son Dev who was born in 2010.

Following her marriage, the actress took a sabbatical from performing to focus on her personal life. Her career peaked between 2003 and 2007, when her her last Malayalam film was released, and she thereafter performed few television commercials before returning to the profession after nearly seven years. Actress Jyothika is highly recognized for her flexibility in acting, since she can play any role. As a result, in order to honor the actress and her accomplishments, here are the top ten best movies she has done.

Top 10 Best Movies

1. Mozhi

Mozhi is a 2007 Indian Tamil musical romantic comedy film written and directed by by Radha Mohan and produced by Prakash Raj. The film stars Prithviraj, Jyothika, Prakash Raj and Swarnamalya. The plot of this film revolves around Karthik (Prithviraj), a film musician. He falls in love with Archana (Jyothika), a deaf and mute girl, but she regard him as a friend and disapproves of his love. The remainder of the story is centered on Archana accepting Karthik‘s love.

The actress had done such an incredible job with her character in this film that she didn’t have a single line of dialogue and yet she communicated the emotions extremely effectively, with only her acting and gestures. According to reports, actress Jyothika reached the final round of the National Film Award for Best Actress for her work, however she was narrowly defeated. Mozhi was the first Tamil film to be released on home video in the United States.

2. Kushi

Kushi is a 2000 Indian Tamil-language romantic comedy film written, directed and produced by S.J. Suryah. Vijay, Jyothika, Mumtaj feature in the film, with Vijaykumar, Vivek among others playing, supporting parts. On May 19, 2000, the picture was released. The film is about two college students who fall in love and realize that the only thing standing in their way is their ego.

The actress played a young woman with anger issues and a charming personalities with empathy in the film, which earned her the Filmfare Best Actress Award in Tamil and Cinema Express Award for Best Sensational Actress at the Cinema Express Awards.

3. 36 Vayadhinilie

36 Vayadhinile is a 2015 Indian Tamil-language comedy drama film directed by Rosshan Andrews and produced by Suriya Sivakumar under his production business 2D Entertainment, marking his production debut. Actress Jyothika makes her cinematic comeback after an eight-year layoff, while other notable actors include Rahman, Abhirami, Nasser, Delhi Ganesh and Siddhartha Basu.

The plot is, Vasanthi (Jyothika), 36, works as a UD clerk at the Revenue Department, while her husband Tamizhselvan (Rahman), works at all India Radio. Tamizhselvan wishes to immigrate to Ireland, but Vasanthi is unable to follow him because most Irish employers decline her employment applications due to her age.

The actress portrays a strong woman who is a government employee, a loving wife, a good mother and a responsible daughter-in-law who soon discovers her true identity and expands her ambitions, gaining respect from her family and society. The actress received the Filmfare Critics Award for Best Actress and the Behindwoods People’s Choice Award for Best Actor Female.

4. Kaakha Kaakha

Kaakha Kaakha is a 2003 Indian Tamil-language action thriller film written and directed by Gautham Vasudev Menon. Suriya and Jyothika star, with Jeevan portraying the antagonist. The plot revolves around a police officer who murders a violent gangster, after which the gangster’s savage brother pledges vengeance on him and his family. Actress Jyothika plays a loving woman called Maya who is kidnapped on her wedding night by criminals, and her portrayal exudes elegance, patience and love. This film earned the actress the Best Actress Jury Special Award at the ITFA Awards.

5. Chandramukhi

P. Vasu wrote and directed the 2005 Indian Tamil-language psychological horror comedy film Chandramukhi. Superstar Rajinikanth and Jyothika who portrayed the title character and Prabhu featured in the lead roles, with an ensemble supporting cast. It is around a lady who suffers from dissociative identity disorder, which affects her family, and a psychiatrist who plans to solve the case while putting his life in danger.

The actress had a great role in this film, where everyone would admit that no one could have done the roles of Chandramukhi and Ganga with such precision. Her parts were very different from one another, as Ganga she had to be all nice and serene, and as Chandramukhi, she had to act like a mentally disturbed dancer seeking vengeance. For this film, actress received the Tamil Nadu State Film Award for Best Actress, the Honorary Kalaimamani Award, the Film Fan’s Association Awards for Best Actress, and the Dinakaran Award for Best Actress.

6. Sillinu Oru Kadhal

Sillunu Oru Kadhal is a 2006 Indian Tamil-language love drama film directed by N. Krishna based on ac Durai’s main premise. Suriya, Jyothika and Bhumika feature, with Shriya Sharma, Sukanya, Vadivelu, and Santhanam providing assistance. The story is basically about Gowtham (Suriya), Kundhavi (Jyothika) marry, and she discovers a diary from his college days five years previously. She believes he would prefer to marry Aishwarya (Bhumika), his college sweetheart, and arranges for them to meet again.

The feelings conveyed by the actress in this film are extremely realistic and honest. She had actually inhabited the character, and for this film, the actress was nominated for best actress at the Filmfare Awards, but was narrowly beaten.

7. Naachiyaar

Director Bala’s 2018 Tamil-language action crime film Naachiyaar was written, produced and directed. Jyothika played the titular role, with G.V Prakash Kumar and Ivana in supporting roles. The story follows a police officer who is attempting to establish the truth after a young guy is accused of sexually abusing his underage girlfriend. The actress portrayed a fearless police officer, allowing the audience to see her from a new perspective. Although the picture did not win any prizes, it was a watershed moment in the actress’s career.

7. Perazhagan

Perazhagan is a 2004 Indian Tamil-language film directed by Sasi Shanker and produced by AVM Productions that stars Suriya and Jyothika in multiple roles. Vivek, Manorama, and Manobala are among the supporting actors. The story is a hunchedback phone booth operator falls in love with a blind street dancer and wants to help her regain her sight, while his lookalike is a constable’s son who falls in love with the commissioner’s daughter.

Jyothika has once again nailed her roles as Priya and Shenbagam. One is a modern affluent college student, whereas the other is a blind young and destitute woman. For this film, the actress received the Best Actress Award for the Tamil Nadu State Film Awards.

8. Maayavi

Maayavi is a 2005 Tamil-language action drama comedy film directed by Singampuli and starring Suriya, Jyothika and Sathyan where Jyothika acts as a fictitious version herself. The storyline is that Abhes Balaiya (Suriya), a thief abducts Jyothika, an actress, with the help of buddy Sathyaraj (Sathyan), in order to teach her a lesson. Nevertheless, Jyothika eventually grows fond of him after discovering his true character. This film did not win any awards, but the characters performed and the overall tale won the hearts of the audience.

9. Dhool

Dharani wrote and directed the 2003 Indian Tamil-language masala film Dhool. Vikram Jyothika and Reema Sen appear in the film. Important parts are played by Vivek, Shivaji Shinde, Telangana Shakuntala and Pasupathy, among others. Arumugam(Vikram), a kind-hearted but rugged peasant, comes into the city to see Minister Kaalaipandi.

Arumugam wishes to present him with a petition demanding that the chemical industry in his village cease dumping poisonous waste into the river. Jyothika is the film’s female lead. She’d played a sweet rural girl called Eashwari. Although the actress did not win an award for this film, her diverse village-based character brought her even closer to the audience.

10. Snegithiye

Priyadarshan directed the 2000 Tamil-language mystery thriller film Snegithiye. Tabu, Jyothika, Sharbani Mukherjee and Ishita Arun portray the sole female characters in the film. Vasu (Jyothika) and Radhika (Sharbani), two closest friends, strive to dodge Radhika‘s scheduled marriage by pretending to love Ramesh, a fictional man, they run into difficulties when a man named Ramesh steps into their lives.

Then Vasu and Radhika become involved in Ramesh‘s murder case and seek justice. Because the film depicts a lot of wonderful characteristics in female friendships, which many films do not, the picture was warmly accepted by the public, particularly women, due to the originality of the tale.

Source: IMDb