Jyothika, who recently starred in the hit 2024 movie Shaitaan, recently spoke about why she has been seen so sparsely in Bollywood movies.

Known for starring in movies of multiple languages, Jtothika has mainly appeared in Tamil productions, as well as Telugu and Malayalam films.

She hasn’t starred in many Hindi films despite starting her acting career with Doli Saja Ke Rakhna, which was directed by Priyadarshan and also starred Akshaye Khanna.

Recently, in an interview with News 18, the Shaitaan actor spoke about why she hasn’t been a regular in Hindi films, saying that she didn’t receive a single movie offer from Bollywood in 26 years!

Talking about the same, Jyothika said, “I didn’t receive an offer from Hindi films even once. I drifted into South films 27 years ago and have only worked in South films ever since. My first Hindi film (Doli Saja Ke Rakhna) didn’t run well in theaters. It’s all very formula-based. Your first film needs to run for you to get more offers. When I started my career, there was an entire bandwagon of girls working with big production houses. Even my film was produced by a big banner, but as fate would have it, it didn’t run. Luckily, I had signed a South film and diverted from Bollywood.”

She further added, “I got a lot of films based on how my performance was received. That stark difference between both industries was definitely there. People in Bollywood also thought that I was a South Indian and they assumed I don’t want to do Hindi films anymore. It was a journey and I’m still grateful about it. I did some fabulous work there. It’s not like I refrained from doing a Hindi film. It’s just that I wasn’t offered any script in so many years.”

Apart from starring in Shaitaan alongside Ajay Devgn and R. Madhavan, Jyothika will next be seen in Srikanth, which also features Rajkummar Rao, Alaya F, and Sharad Kelkar.

Srikanth, a biopic based on the life of Srikanth Bolla, the visually-impaired founder of Bollant Industries, is releasing on 10 May, 2024.