Tripti Joshi

(Editor)

I am a Teacher who started creating online content for my students from 2016 so that they can get access to free knowledge online.

Vadim Pisarev

Share on FacebookTweet on TwitterShare on LinkedInShare on Reddit

Sign in

Vadim pisarev

Vadim Pisarev is a famous Ukrainian dancer, People's Artist of Ukraine, Art Director of Donetsk State Academic Opera and Ballet Theatre named after Solovyanenko, founder and director of international festival World Ballet Stars.

Contents

Vadim pisarev

Peer gynt e grieg vadim pisarev ballet 1

Biography

Education

Awards

Family

Dance

Choreographic School

World Ballet Stars

References

Peer gynt e grieg vadim pisarev ballet 1

Biography

Vadim Yakovlevich Pisarev was born on February 1, 1965 in Donetsk.

Education

in 1983 he graduated from the Kiev State Choreographic School, where his teachers were Irina Bulatova and Vladimir Denisenko

in 1984 - 1985 Vadim Pisarev received trainings at the Bolshoi Theatre (Moscow) with such teachers: V. Nikonov, R. Struchkov, A. Messerer

in 1991 he practiced in Maryinsky Theatre (at that time Kirov Opera and Ballet Theatre), (Saint Petersburg)

in 2001 - graduated from Kiev National University of Culture and the Arts

Awards

At the 1st all-Ukrainian competition of ballet dancers and choreographers in 1984 in Kiev Vadim Pisarev won the first prize and was awarded with a gold medal. In June of the same year he won second prize and silver medal at the International Ballet Contest in Helsinki, Finland, and a bronze medal in November 1984 in Paris, France at the 1st International Ballet Contest. In 1984 Vadim Pisarev was awarded the title of Honoured Artist of the Ukraine.

In 1985 Vadim Pisarev won the Gold Medal at the Fifth all-Soviet Union Ballet Contest in Moscow.

In 1986 he won the Gold Medal at the International Ballet Competition in Jackson, Mississippi (United States), and the same year was awarded the title of People's Artist of Ukraine.

In 1988 he was awarded the Lenin Komsomol Prize. Prior to this, he went on tour in the USA, together with the Moscow Ballet (1987) and with Donetsk Opera and Ballet Theatre Company (1988)

In 1990 he won the Moscow public prize "The Best USSR Dancer"

In 1995 - UNESCO prize "The Best Dancer of the World"

In 1996, commissioned by Norwegian government, Vadim Pisarev staged the ballet Peer Gynt and played the lead role with the Donetsk troupe at the celebrations of the 1000th anniversary of the first capital of Norway, Trondheim. For this performance he was awarded the Norwegian press prize "Golden Rose"

In 1996 Vadim Pisarev won the Ukrainian "Man of the Year" award

In 1997 he prepared a special show and participated in the celebration of the 3000th anniversary of Jerusalem. Same year Vadim Pisarev received the diploma "Golden Skif".

In 1998 Pisarev was awarded the Theatre Union of Ukraine prize called "Triumph".

In 1999 awarded the Order of merit, III grade. Same year, Vadim Pisarev was awarded the Kazakhstan "Prize of Traditions" and won all-Ukrainian prize "Recognition"

In 2001 awarded the Commander's Cross - Order of Saint Stanislaus, III grade.

In 2003 awarded the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine honorary diploma "For Significant Personal Contribution to the Development of National Culture and Art, and High Professionalism"

In 2004 awarded the Order of Merit, II grade.

Vadim Pisarev is the Honorary Citizen of New Orleans and Baltimore

Family

Vadim Pisarev is married with three children. His wife is prima ballerina, People's Artist of Ukraine Inna Dorofeeva. His eldest son Andrey has followed in his father's steps and became a ballet dancer; recently he won a gold medal at prestigious XI International Ballet Competition in Moscow.

Pisarev likes picking mushrooms and fishing.

Dance

He performed leading roles in ballets:

Don Quixote

Swan Lake

Nutcracker

Giselle

Walpurgis Night

Paquita

Sleeping Beauty

Peer Gynt

La Bayadere

Le Corsaire

Spartacus

Romeo and Juliet, etc.

In 1996 Vadim Pisarev was appointed the Art Director of Donetsk State Academic Opera and Ballet Theatre named after Solovyanenko.

Choreographic School

In 1992 Vadim Pisarev, together with his wife, prima ballerina of Donetsk Opera and Ballet, People's Artist of Ukraine Inna Dorofeeva, established the Donetsk Opera and Ballet Theatre Choreographic School, also known as Vadim Pisarev Ballet School. It is the first Ukrainian non-governmental educational institution of this kind. Gifted children from Donetsk oblast' and other regions of Ukraine learn ballet skills at Vadim Pisarev' school, there's also a school board for non-resident students, with partial allowance. Graduates of the school become students of prestigious dance institutions over the world, such as the Saint Petersburg Academy of Russian Ballet named after A. Vaganova, Moscow Ballet School, Stuttgart Ballet Academy (Germany), Zurich Academy of Dance (Switzerland), etc.

In 1997, Vadim Pisarev Choreography School was awarded the Sergei Diaghilev Medal.

World Ballet Stars

The festival was established in 1994, since then more than 400 outstanding dancers from 35 countries of the world have visited Donetsk, and over 70 ballets by famous choreographers have been performed. The festival is traditionally held in early October of each year in Donetsk and cities of Donetsk oblast.

References

Vadim Pisarev Wikipedia

(Text) CC BY-SA

Similar Topics