Jessica Buchanan was born to Victoria and Clint Buchanan… but kidnapped shortly after her birth. Allison Perkins kept the baby for weeks before she was finally returned to her mother’s arms. Growing up a privileged life at Llanfair, Viki instilled fairness and kindness in her daughter and she grew into a strong, independent teenager…

Husband: Antonio Vega

Children: Megan Buchanan (deceased; with Will Rappaport), Brennan Buchanan

Mother: Viki Davidson

Fathers: Mitch Laurence (biological; deceased), Clint Buchanan (adoptive)

Siblings: Kevin Buchanan (half-brother), Joey Buchanan (half-brother), Megan Gordon (half-sister; deceased), Natalie Buchanan (half-sister), Cord Roberts (adoptive half-brother)

Grandmothers: Olympia Buchanan (adoptive; deceased), Eugenia Lord (deceased)

Grandfathers: Asa Buchanan (adoptive), Victor Lord (deceased)

Niece: Sarah “Flash” Roberts (adoptive)

Nephews: Duke Buchanan (deceased), CJ Roberts (adoptive)

Aunts: Meredith Lord Wolek (deceased), Tina Clayton Lord

Uncles: Tony Lord (deceased), Todd Manning, Bo Buchanan (adoptive), Ben Davidson (adoptive), Flynn Laurence, Miles Laurence

Cousins: Starr Manning, Jack Manning, CJ Roberts, Sarah “Flash” Roberts, Danny Wolek, Brian Kendall (deceased), Drew Buchanan (adoptive; deceased), Matthew Rappaport (adoptive), Tommy McBain

Mother-in-law: Carlotta Vega

Brother-in-law: Cristian Vega

Sister-in-law: Adriana Cramer

Significant Romantic Relationships: Cristian Vega, Will Rappaport, Seth Anderson, Antonio Vega (married), Tico Santi (1st husband/annulled)

Read Jessica’s One Life to Live Blog

Over at the official One Life Live website, Jessica Buchanan Vega Brennan has posted her latest blog. No, we don’t mean the actress that…

One Blog to Write: Jessica Buchanan Writes About Grandpa

On the official One Life to Live website, Jessica Buchanan recently blogged about the death of her grandfather. Here’s what has to say …

One Life To Live Blog: Jessica Reflects on Asa’s Death

On the official One Life to Live website, Jessica Buchanan wrote about the death of her grandfather, Asa. We aren’t referring to the act…

Do you know what an evil, lying tramp Shawna is? Yeah. That’s…

Jessica: Do you know what an evil, lying tramp Shawna is? Rex: Yeah. That’s why I like her.