Building Together

As One TM

Every construction project takes place in a unique environment. This presents an exciting set of challenges that can only be overcome through utilizing clear communication, planning, discipline, transparency, the best safety practices and most importantly, teamwork. We have a passion for hard work, building long lasting relationships and creating an exceptional project experience.

Why UBG?

We are Unified

Unified Building Group (UBG) is a nationally licensed construction company that specializes in new and renovation projects of all sizes and types. Our core capabilities & focus range from, real estate, site acquisition, investment, pre-construction, construction management, design build to complete building lifecycle facilities management and maintenance. Unified specializes in projects in the telecommunications, corporate real estate, educational, power, energy, health care, restaurants, residential and commercial industries. Our team has a combination of over 310 years of construction industry experience. Together, we formed Unified Building Group to change the way the industry builds, collaborates and executes on projects. With branches in, Arizona, California, Colorado and Florida we are here to serve you!

Our Story

Full Turn-Key solutions

Construction Services

We strongly believe a project is best served when we’re involved at the conceptual phase.

More Info

Facilities Services

We will work with you to understand your business and facilities needs and goals.

More Info

Building Systems

Modular Building Systems reduces the time of project delivery and ultimate total cost and increase quality.

More Info

More than a story, a legacy.

Unified Building Group (UBG) believes that building with purpose, honesty and candor are the foundation for project success, integrity and trust. Our company and culture are built on our relentless adherence to our values: Loyalty, Communication, Safety, Quality, Teamwork and Integrity. Unified Building Group believes in Relationships above all, Teamwork, Our Communities, Innovation and Sustainability. We execute this through transparency, trust and above all ALWAYS doing the right thing. At UBG our goal is to serve the best interests of our clients, not our own, communicate and to outperform our industry in ways that raise clients’ understanding of what is truly possible.

Read More

Building Together As One™

over

980

Million Dollars in Completed Projects

with

310

Years of combined experience

and

33

States with Completed Projects

Featured Projects

EV Charging Station

EV Charging

National Shelter Deployments

Building Systems

Five on Black – Downtown Denver

Restaurants

Zayo Group Corporate HeadQuarters

Commercial

Like what you see?

View All

Hear from our customers

"A great partner in a market filled with Homogenized GCs offering the same services with same labor pool. UBG stands apart using lean manufacturing principles applied to the construction market."

Daniel Nyce

General Manager,

Randall Construction

" I am an architect and principal of verso LLC. I have always been impressed with Unified Building Group's work ethic and project delivery. Every project I have worked on with UBG is on-time and beautifully executed. They deliver a fabulous product and always go above and beyond to make the entire project team happy"

Ely Merheb AIA LEED AP

Founder verso llc

"Unified Building Group was able to handle the setbacks and pressure with ease, grace, and professionalism. The entire team was very dedicated; they not only cared about this project but also cared about their people and our organization. New Summit considers UBG a part of the New Summit Family and welcome them into our educational community."

Kim McClelland

Principal and Executive Director of New Summit Charter Academy

"We contracted with John Albert and Unified Building Group to build our first school. In such a competitive market, I believe John’s leadership and his team’s ability to attract highly-skilled workers made all the difference. We hope to continue the partnership with UBG as we expand our present school and build other ones in the near future."

Mike Miles, CEO

Unified Building Group

We'd love to hear from you

888-255-3878

office@unifiedbuildinggroup.com

Unified Building Group

We'd love to hear from you

888-255-3878

info@unifiedbuildinggroup.com

We're ready for your next project.

Whether you’re looking for an estimate, would like to solve a problem, or just want to let us know how we did, you’ll find a few ways to contact us right here.