Communities from across the globe uniting in prayer and meditation on one day for one moment as one humanity, creating a unified-field of world peace. Join millions of others in collectively becoming the change we want to see in the world.

From an inspired state of inner peace, take practical action locally toward creating a world that is more loving, kind and connected. This might be cleaning up your local water supply, planting trees, or petitioning your local city council.

Join a local UNIFY community chapter to get involved in ongoing activities that contribute to world peace and the connected life. Think globally, act locally and build the foundation in your community.

The world is awakening and there is a need and desire for a change. Yet the cycle of conflict continues. Are we missing something? What if we’ve been looking for peace everywhere, but within? When peace is found within it ripples out into our family, community and beyond. Perhaps world peace also starts on the inside. This UPLIFT film features thought leaders like Bruce Lipton, Helena Norberg-Hodge, Andrew Harvey, Dean Radin, Cynthia Jurs, Charles Eisenstein, H.H. Swami Chidanand Saraswatiji and many more.

Over the course of 9 years and 77 campaigns,

we have unified over 100 million people around the globe.

WORLD PEACE DAY

SEPTEMBER 21

World Peace & Prayer day has been a unifying moment for indigenous traditions since 1997. UNIFY has coordinated and supported indigenous nations uniting at sacred sites around the planet, leading up to a global synchronized ceremony.

​

WOMEN'S DAY

MARCH 8

On International Women’s Day, UNIFY celebrates the divine feminine across the planet. Our Global Sisterhood campaign has united women from all backgrounds to a common moment of shared experience via Sister Circles.

​

YOGA DAY

JUNE 21

In 2015, the United Nations declared June 21st (the summer solstice) as International Yoga Day, celebrating the ancient tradition and nearly 2 billion practitioners worldwide. On this day, millions of people do yoga in cities and communities across the globe.

​