Abraham Lincoln was born in Hardin County, Ky., on Feb. 12, 1809.

His family moved to Indiana in 1816, and Lincoln lived there the rest of his youth.

His mother died from a milk sickness when he was 9.

His father remarried, and Lincoln was quite close to his stepmother, who urged him to read.

His party was Republican.

Lincoln lost the first time he ran for public office: a seat in the Illinois House in 1832. He finished eighth of thirteen candidates.

His wife was Mary Todd Lincoln, who was brought up in a wealthy family; her parents disagreed about her marriage to Lincoln because of his poor background.

Lincoln had four children: Robert Todd Lincoln, Edward Lincoln, Willie Lincoln and Tad Lincoln; only Robert Todd Lincoln survived into adulthood.

Robert Todd Lincoln, who served as Secretary of War under Presidents Garfield and Arthur, was present when three presidents died. He was at his father's deathbed. He was an eyewitness to President Garfield's assassination in 1881. And he was present, though not an eyewitness, when President McKinley was shot in 1901.

Lincoln was to participate in a duel on Sept. 22, 1842. It was called off at the last minute by friends from both sides.

Lincoln was a lawyer, and his largest collected legal fee was $5,000, the sum he received for successfully defending the Illinois Central Railroad. When the railroad refused to pay, Lincoln sued to collect.

Lincoln received the nickname "Rail Splitter" at the Illinois Republican Convention in Decatur on May 9-10, 1860.

Lincoln served as president March 4, 1861, to March 3, 1865; he was assassinated soon after beginning his second term.

His vice presidents where Hannibal Hamlin and Andrew Johnson.

Lincoln is the only president to hold a patent. His application for a "new and improved manner of combining adjustable buoyant chambers with steam boats or other vessels" was granted on May 22, 1849.

Lincoln established the U.S. Department of Agriculture on May 15, 1862.

Lincoln declared Thanksgiving a national holiday; the first Thanksgiving was celebrated Nov. 26, 1863.

Lincoln created a national banking system with the National Banking Act of 1863; it resulted in a standardized currency.

West Virginia and Nevada became states while Lincoln was president.

Lincoln suffered from depression yet was well-known for telling stories and jokes to friends and family.

Lincoln was the tallest U.S president at 6-foot-4.

Lincoln was the first president to have a beard.

A week before his death, Lincoln dreamed of someone crying in the White House. He searched, found a man in a room near a coffin and asked who passed away. "The president," said the man. When Lincoln looked in the coffin he saw his own face.

Lincoln was the first president to be assassinated. He was shot in the head by John Wilkes Booth in Ford's Theatre in Washington, D.C.

Booth's brother, fellow actor Edwin Booth, once saved the life of Lincoln's son, Robert Todd Lincoln. Or Edwin Booth at least saved Robert Todd Lincoln from serious injury when he grabbed Robert Todd Lincoln's collar and pulled him to safety after Robert Todd Lincoln lost his balance on a train platform in 1864 or 1865 in Jersey City, N.J.

Robert Lincoln had two daughters and one son. The son died as a teenager. Abraham Lincoln's great-grandchildren lived long lives but had no descendants. The last of Lincoln's direct descendants died in 1985. Sources: Lincoln Home National Historic Site, Springfield, Ill. (nps.gov/liho/); the Abraham Lincoln Presidential Library and Museum, Springfield (alplm.org); A Lincoln Library (alincoln-library.com); fordstheatre.org; and historynet.com.

Share

Share this article

What To Read Next

Get Local

ADVERTISEMENT