Abraham Lincoln was born on February 12, 1809 in the Kentucky woods.

When Abe was two years old, the Lincoln’s moved to Knob Creek Farm.

Just before Abe’s 8th birthday, his family moved to Gentryville, Indiana.

Abe memorized Aesop’s Fables, Robinson Crusoe, and Pilgrim’s Progress.

He liked reading law books and memorized political speeches from newspapers.

When Abe was eighteen, his sister, Sarah died during childbirth. Abe missed her a lot.

Abe wanted to work using his mind-not his muscles. Abe was a ‘floating piece of driftwood’ when he got to New Salem, IL

in 1831.

By the time he left New Salem six years later, Abe was an able boatman, honest postmaster, solider, and more all while studying with the schoolmaster and borrowing books from a lawyer.

Abe joined the New Salem Debating Society to learn to speak his ideas- he had decided to be a politician.

People laughed at how he looked, but on the second try Abe was elected to the Illinois General Assembly in 1834- Abe was twenty-five.

Abe helped to make laws about taxes, schools, and improvements such as widening rivers and digging canals. Abe joined a campaign to make Springfield the capital of Illinois.

One of the most important issues was abolition, or ending slavery. Lincoln was certain that slavery was wrong!

When Abe was twenty-eight, he tucked his new license to practice law in his silk stovepipe hat. Abe trotted out of New Salem to Springfield- this was April 15, 1837.

Lincoln met Mary Ann Todd in Springfield and they were married on November 4, 1842.

Mr. Lincoln ran for the U.S. House of Representatives in 1846 and was elected- he was thrilled to be going to Washington D.C. Lincoln did not run for a second term in congress- instead, he returned to IL and practiced law.

Lincoln continued to debate the issue of slavery. He said, “A house divided against itself cannot stand.” Lincoln ran against Stephen A. Douglas in the 1858 U.S. Senate race and won by 14, 000 votes but the legislature gave Stephen Douglas the election, instead.

Lincoln was now famous and the presidential election of 1860 was approaching. The election was held on November 6, 1860 and just after midnight, it was clear that Lincoln would be the 16th president.

Because of divided issues on slavery, the nation divided itself into two parts: the Union and the Confederacy which meant The Civil War had begun.

Over time Lincoln realized that the only way to save the nation was to get rid of slavery. Finally, on New Years day, 1863, Lincoln signed the Emancipation Proclamation that freed slaves in the Confederacy.

On November 19th of 1863, Lincoln gave the Gettysburg Address, which Lincoln made it clear that he believed a new, better nation could be born out of war. “This nation, under God, shall have a new birth of freedom.”

November 8, 1864 Abraham Lincoln was reelected as the President of The United States of America.

The South surrendered which ended the Civil War on April 9, 1865. This meant that four million people who had been slaves were suddenly free!

On April 14th Abraham Lincoln and Mary Todd went to see a play at Ford’s Theatre in Washington. John Wilkes Booth crept in and shot at the back of Lincoln’s head.

The next morning Mr. Lincoln was pronounced dead shortly after 7 a.m.

During Lincoln's life, these are things

that were happening in the world

1826- The world’s first photograph was taken by French physicist Joseph Niepce.

1827- Matches were invented by coating the end of a wooden stick with phosphorous.

1829- the first sewing machine was invented by a French tailor.

1833- Great Britain abolished slavery.

1852- Harriet Beecher Stowe published Uncle Tom’s Cabin.

1858- The theory of evolution was presented by Charles Darwin.

1865- Lewis Carol wrote Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland.