865 relations: A-135 anti-ballistic missile system, Aban, Russia, Abram Markson, Academy maniacs, Acleris hastiana, Acleris kochiella, Administrative divisions of Irkutsk Oblast, Aerial Forest Protection Service (Russia), Aero Mongolia, AeroBratsk, Aeroflot, Aeroflot accidents and incidents in the 1960s, Aeroflot accidents and incidents in the 1980s, Aeroflot Flight 3519, Aeroflot Flight 3739 (1988), Aeroflot Flight 902, Aerospace manufacturer, Afanasy Shchapov, AH6, Aida Vedishcheva, Air Berlin, Air Bishkek, Airbus A310, AiRUnion, Akashi Motojiro, Alcohol consumption in Russia, Aleksandr Belyavsky (actor), Aleksandr Cherepanov (general), Aleksandrs Dibrivnijs, Aleksei Yushchuk, Alexander Amfiteatrov, Alexander Andreyevich Baranov, Alexander Bocharov, Alexander Chernin, Alexander III of Russia, Alexander Kolchak, Alexander Mayer (ice hockey), Alexander Men, Alexander Odoevsky, Alexander Osminin, Alexander Radishchev, Alexander Shulgin (musician), Alexander Sibiryakov, Alexander Zaïd, Alexei Fedchenko, Alexei Fridman, Alexei Khvostov, Alexey Negodaylo, All Shall Perish, Allium altaicum, ... Expand index (815 more) » « Shrink index

A-135 anti-ballistic missile system

The A-135 (NATO: ABM-3 Gorgon) anti-ballistic missile system is a Russian military complex deployed around Moscow to counter enemy missiles targeting the city or its surrounding areas.

See Irkutsk and A-135 anti-ballistic missile system

Aban, Russia

Aban (А́бан) is a rural locality (a settlement) and the administrative center of Abansky District of Krasnoyarsk Krai, Russia.

See Irkutsk and Aban, Russia

Abram Markson

Abram Leontievich Markson (Абрам Леонтьевич Марксон; 1888–1938) was a Russian and Soviet violinist and conductor.

See Irkutsk and Abram Markson

Academy maniacs

Artyom Alexandrovich Anoufriev (born October 4, 1992) and Nikita Vakhtangovich Lytkin (born March 24, 1993) (Артём Александрович Ануфриев и Никита Вахтангович Лыткин) are two serial killers from Irkutsk, Russia.

See Irkutsk and Academy maniacs

Acleris hastiana

Acleris hastiana is a moth of the family Tortricidae.

See Irkutsk and Acleris hastiana

Acleris kochiella

Acleris kochiella is a moth of the family Tortricidae.

See Irkutsk and Acleris kochiella

Administrative divisions of Irkutsk Oblast

*Ust-Orda Buryat Okrug.

See Irkutsk and Administrative divisions of Irkutsk Oblast

Aerial Forest Protection Service (Russia)

The Aerial Forest Protection Service (Авиалесоохрана, or Avialesookhrana) is a Russian government agency charged primarily with the aerial management of forest fires.

See Irkutsk and Aerial Forest Protection Service (Russia)

Aero Mongolia

Aero Mongolia is one of the two national airlines of Mongolia.

See Irkutsk and Aero Mongolia

AeroBratsk

JSC AeroBratsk (АэроБратск) is a minor Russian charter airline headquartered in Bratsk and based at Bratsk Airport,Federal State Unitary Enterprise "State Air Traffic Management Corporation", Airline Reference, Vol.

See Irkutsk and AeroBratsk

Aeroflot

PJSC AeroflotRussian Airlines (ПАО "Аэрофло́т — Росси́йские авиали́нии"), commonly known as Aeroflot (Аэрофлот, English translation: "air fleet"), is the flag carrier and largest airline of the Russian Federation.

See Irkutsk and Aeroflot

Aeroflot accidents and incidents in the 1960s

Following is a list of accidents and incidents Aeroflot experienced in the 1960s.

See Irkutsk and Aeroflot accidents and incidents in the 1960s

Aeroflot accidents and incidents in the 1980s

Following is a list of accidents and incidents experienced by Aeroflot during the 1980s.

See Irkutsk and Aeroflot accidents and incidents in the 1980s

Aeroflot Flight 3519

Aeroflot Flight 3519 was a Tupolev Tu-154B-2 airline flight on a domestic route from Krasnoyarsk to Irkutsk on December 23, 1984.

See Irkutsk and Aeroflot Flight 3519

Aeroflot Flight 3739 (1988)

Aeroflot Flight 3739 was a Soviet domestic passenger flight from Irkutsk to Leningrad (now Saint Petersburg) with a stopover in Kurgan.

See Irkutsk and Aeroflot Flight 3739 (1988)

Aeroflot Flight 902

Aeroflot/Far East Flight 902 was a flight on scheduled domestic service from Khabarovsk to Moscow with intermediate stops at Irkutsk and Omsk in the Soviet Union.

See Irkutsk and Aeroflot Flight 902

Aerospace manufacturer

An aerospace manufacturer is a company or individual involved in the various aspects of designing, building, testing, selling, and maintaining aircraft, aircraft parts, missiles, rockets, or spacecraft.

See Irkutsk and Aerospace manufacturer

Afanasy Shchapov

Afanasiy Prokopievich Shchapov (Афанасий Прокофьевич Щапов in Russian) (May 10(17).1830 &ndash; February 27(10.3).1876) was a Russian historian accused of "Siberian nationalism" and persecuted by tsarist authorities.

See Irkutsk and Afanasy Shchapov

AH6

Asian Highway 6 (AH6) is a route in the Asian Highway Network in Asia and Europe.

See Irkutsk and AH6

Aida Vedishcheva

Aida Semyonovna Vedisheva (Аида Семёновна Ведищева, born Ida Solomonovna Weiss, Ида Соломоновна Вайс, 10 June 1941, Kazan) is a Soviet singer.

See Irkutsk and Aida Vedishcheva

Air Berlin

Air Berlin PLC & Co.

See Irkutsk and Air Berlin

Air Bishkek

Air Bishkek (Эйр Бишкек) was an airline based in Bishkek, Kyrgyzstan, with its operational base at Manas International Airport.

See Irkutsk and Air Bishkek

Airbus A310

The Airbus A310 is a medium- to long-range twin-engined wide-body jet airliner that was developed and manufactured by Airbus, then a consortium of European aerospace manufacturers.

See Irkutsk and Airbus A310

AiRUnion

AiRUnion was a Russian airline alliance.

See Irkutsk and AiRUnion

Akashi Motojiro

Baron was a general in the Imperial Japanese Army and the 7th Governor-General of Taiwan from 6 June 1918 to 26 October 1919.

See Irkutsk and Akashi Motojiro

Alcohol consumption in Russia

Alcohol consumption in Russia remains among the highest in the world.

See Irkutsk and Alcohol consumption in Russia

Aleksandr Belyavsky (actor)

Alexander Borisovich Belyavsky (Алекса́ндр Бори́сович Беля́вский, 6 May 1932 – 8 September 2012) was a Soviet/Russian actor who appeared in more than one hundred films.

See Irkutsk and Aleksandr Belyavsky (actor)

Aleksandr Cherepanov (general)

Aleksandr Ivanovich Cherepanov (– 6 July 1984) was a Soviet military leader. A peasant's son, Cherepanov served as a junior officer in the Russian Army in World War I and took part in the Russian Civil War and Polish-Soviet War with the Red Army. A 1923 graduate of the Red Army Military Academy, Cherepanov first came to China as a military adviser to Sun Yat-sen's National Revolutionary Army in 1923–1927. He returned as chief military adviser to Chiang Kai-shek's Kuomintang China during the Second Sino-Japanese War in 1938–1939. Appointed a senior instructor at the General Staff Academy after returning from China, he was named commander of the 23rd Army in 1941 and promoted to lieutenant-general in 1943. A member of the Allied Control Commission in Bulgaria in 1944–1947 and the commission's chairman in 1947, he returned to the Soviet Union to become deputy chief in the Department of Military Colleges of the USSR Ministry of Defense in 1948–1955.

See Irkutsk and Aleksandr Cherepanov (general)

Aleksandrs Dibrivnijs

Aleksandrs Dibrivnijs (born 28 August 1969 in Jēkabpils) is a former Latvia international footballer, a four-time champion of Latvia.

See Irkutsk and Aleksandrs Dibrivnijs

Aleksei Yushchuk

Aleksei Anatolyevich Yushchuk (Алексей Анатольевич Ющук; born 10 February 1987) is a Russian professional football player.

See Irkutsk and Aleksei Yushchuk

Alexander Amfiteatrov

Alexander Valentinovich Amfiteatrov (Amphiteatrof) (Алекса́ндр Валенти́нович Амфитеа́тров); (December 26, 1862 in Kaluga – February 26, 1938 in Levanto) was a Russian writer, novelist, and historian.

See Irkutsk and Alexander Amfiteatrov

Alexander Andreyevich Baranov

Alexander Andreyevich Baranov (Алекса́ндр Андре́евич Бара́нов) (1747–16 April 1819), sometimes spelled Aleksandr or Alexandr and Baranof, was a Russian trader and merchant, who worked for some time in Siberia.

See Irkutsk and Alexander Andreyevich Baranov

Alexander Bocharov

Alexander Bocharov (Александр Бочаров; born 26 February 1975 in Irkutsk; name also spelled Alexandre Botcharov), is a Russian professional road bicycle racer most recently riding for UCI ProTeam.

See Irkutsk and Alexander Bocharov

Alexander Chernin

Alexander Mikhailovich Chernin (Александр Михайлович Чернин; born 6 March 1960) is a Soviet-born Hungarian chess grandmaster and trainer.

See Irkutsk and Alexander Chernin

Alexander III of Russia

Alexander III (r; 1845 1894) was the Emperor of Russia, King of Poland, and Grand Duke of Finland from until his death on.

See Irkutsk and Alexander III of Russia

Alexander Kolchak

Alexander Vasilyevich Kolchak CB (Алекса́ндр Васи́льевич Колча́к, – 7 February 1920) was an Imperial Russian admiral, military leader and polar explorer who served in the Imperial Russian Navy, who fought in the Russo-Japanese War and the First World War.

See Irkutsk and Alexander Kolchak

Alexander Mayer (ice hockey)

Alexander Borisovich Mayer (Александр Владимирович Майер), born 18 February 1986) is a professional Russian ice hockey player, who is currently playing for Buran Voronezh.

See Irkutsk and Alexander Mayer (ice hockey)

Alexander Men

Alexander Vladimirovich Men (Александр Владимирович Мень; 22 January 1935 – 9 September 1990) was a Russian Orthodox priest, an outstanding theologian, Biblical scholar and writer on theology, Christian history, and other religions.

See Irkutsk and Alexander Men

Alexander Odoevsky

Alexander Ivanovich Odoevsky (Алекса́ндр Ива́нович Одо́евский, November 26 (December 8), 1802, Saint Petersburg, Russian Empire &ndash; October 10 (22) or August 15 (27), 1839, Psezuape, now Lazarevskoe, Sochi, Russia) was a Russian poet and playwright, one of the leading figures of the 1825 Decembrist revolt.

See Irkutsk and Alexander Odoevsky

Alexander Osminin

Alexander Petrovich Osminin (Александр Осминин, born November 19, 1981) is a Russian classical pianist who gives concerts throughout the world.

See Irkutsk and Alexander Osminin

Alexander Radishchev

Alexander Nikolayevich Radishchev (Алекса́ндр Никола́евич Ради́щев; –) was a Russian author and social critic who was arrested and exiled under Catherine the Great.

See Irkutsk and Alexander Radishchev

Alexander Shulgin (musician)

Alexander Valeryevich Shulgin (Aлeксандр Валepьeвич Шульгин; born August 25, 1964) is a Russian author and composer.

See Irkutsk and Alexander Shulgin (musician)

Alexander Sibiryakov

Alexander Mikhaylovich Sibiryakov (Алекса́ндр Миха́йлович Сибиряко́в) (Irkutsk – 1933) was a Russian gold mine and factories owner and explorer of Siberia.

See Irkutsk and Alexander Sibiryakov

Alexander Zaïd

Alexander Zaïd (1886 − 10 July 1938) was one of the founders of the Jewish defense organizations Bar Giora and Hashomer, and a prominent figure of the Second Aliyah.

See Irkutsk and Alexander Zaïd

Alexei Fedchenko

Alexei Pavlovich Fedchenko (Алексей Павлович Федченко; 7 February 184415 September 1873) was a Russian naturalist and explorer well known for his travels in central Asia.

See Irkutsk and Alexei Fedchenko

Alexei Fridman

Alexey Maksimovich Fridman was a Soviet physicist specializing in astrophysics, physics of gravitating systems and plasma physics.

See Irkutsk and Alexei Fridman

Alexei Khvostov

Aleksey Nikolayevich Khvostov (1 July 1872 – 23 August 1918) was a Russian politician.

See Irkutsk and Alexei Khvostov

Alexey Negodaylo

Alexey Aleksandrovich Negodaylo (Алексей Александрович Негодайло; born 28 May 1989) is a Russian bobsledder who has competed since 2010.

See Irkutsk and Alexey Negodaylo

All Shall Perish

All Shall Perish is an American deathcore band from Oakland, California, United States, formed in 2002.

See Irkutsk and All Shall Perish

Allium altaicum

Allium altaicum is a species of onion native to Asiatic Russia (Altay, Buryatiya, Zabaykalsky Krai, Irkutsk, Tuva, Amur Oblast), Mongolia, Kazakhstan and northern China (Inner Mongolia, Heilongjiang and Xinjiang).

See Irkutsk and Allium altaicum

ALROSA (airline)

CJSC "Air Company ALROSA" (ЗАО «Авиакомпания АЛРОСА», ZAO «Aviakompanija ALROSA»; Алроса авиахампанньа, Alrosa aviaxampannya), formerly Alrosa Mirny Air Enterprise (Alrosa Air Company Limited) is an airline from Mirny, Russia.

See Irkutsk and ALROSA (airline)

Altai-Sayan region

The Altai-Sayan region is an area of central Asia proximate to the Altai Mountains and the Sayan Mountains, near to where Russia, China, Mongolia and Kazakhstan come together.

See Irkutsk and Altai-Sayan region

Alzamay

Alzamay (p) is a town in Nizhneudinsky District of Irkutsk Oblast, Russia, located on the Toporok River (Angara River's basin) northwest of Irkutsk, the administrative center of the oblast, and from Nizhneudinsk, the administrative center of the district.

See Irkutsk and Alzamay

Amur River Tunnel

The Amur River Tunnel (Russian:, during its construction — стройка No.4) is a 7200 meter-long railroad tunnel on the Trans-Siberian Railroad, in Khabarovsk, Russia.

See Irkutsk and Amur River Tunnel

Anatoli Ivanishin

Anatoli Alekseyevich Ivanishin (Анатолий Алексеевич Иванишин; born 15 January 1969 in Irkutsk) is a Russian cosmonaut.

See Irkutsk and Anatoli Ivanishin

Anatoliy Samotsvetov

Anatoliy Vasilyevich Samotsvetov (Анатолий Васильевич Самоцветов) (born 27 November 1932) was a Soviet athlete who competed mainly in the hammer throw.

See Irkutsk and Anatoliy Samotsvetov

Anatoly Gladyshev

Anatoly Vasilievich Gladyshev (Анатолий Васильевич Гладышев, 1947 – 19 February 1984) was a Russian ice speedway rider who won two world titles in 1978–1981.

See Irkutsk and Anatoly Gladyshev

Anatoly Kuznetsov

Anatoly Vasilievich Kuznetsov (Анато́лий Васи́льевич Кузнецо́в; August 18, 1929, Kiev – June 13, 1979, London) was a Russian-language Soviet writer who described his experiences in German-occupied Kiev during World War II in his internationally acclaimed novel Babi Yar: A Document in the Form of a Novel.

See Irkutsk and Anatoly Kuznetsov

Anatoly Marchenko

Anatoly Tikhonovich Marchenko (Анато́лий Ти́хонович Ма́рченко, 23 January 1938 – 8 December 1986) was a Soviet dissident, author, and human rights campaigner, who became one of the first two recipients (along with Nelson Mandela) of the Sakharov Prize for Freedom of Thought of the European Parliament when it was awarded to him posthumously in 1988.

See Irkutsk and Anatoly Marchenko

Anatoly Novoseltsev

Anatoly Petrovich Novoseltsev (Анатолий Петрович Новосельцев; 1933, Irkutsk – 1995) was a Russian orientalist who brought to light and translated into Russian a slew of obscure Persian and Arab documents relating to the early history of Kievan Rus'.

See Irkutsk and Anatoly Novoseltsev

Andrei Katkov

Andrei Katkov, born Apollo Katkov, (1916–1995) was a Russian Catholic bishop.

See Irkutsk and Andrei Katkov

Andrey Mishin

Andrey Mikhaylovich Mishin (Андрей Михайлович Мишин; born May 28, 1979 in Irkutsk) is a boxer from Russia, who competed for his native country at the 2000 Summer Olympics in Sydney, Australia.

See Irkutsk and Andrey Mishin

Andrey Selivanov

Andrey Nikolayevich Selivanov (5 August 1847 – 15 July 1917) was a Russian politician and general notable for capturing Przemyśl during World War I.

See Irkutsk and Andrey Selivanov

Andrey Yeshchenko

Andrey Olegovich Yeshchenko (Андрей Олегович Ещенко; born 9 February 1984) is a professional Russian football player who plays as a right-back for FC Spartak Moscow.

See Irkutsk and Andrey Yeshchenko

Andrzej Grzegorczyk

Andrzej Grzegorczyk (22 August 1922 – 20 March 2014) was a Polish logician, mathematician, philosopher, and ethicist noted for his work in computability, mathematical logic, and the foundations of mathematics.

See Irkutsk and Andrzej Grzegorczyk

Angara Airlines

JSC Angara Airlines (ЗАО «Авиакомпания «Ангара») is an airline based in Irkutsk, Russia.

See Irkutsk and Angara Airlines

Angara River

The Angara River (Ангар, Angar, "Cleft"; Ангара́, Angará) is a river in Siberia, which traces a course through Russia's Irkutsk Oblast and Krasnoyarsk Krai.

See Irkutsk and Angara River

Angarsk

Angarsk (p) is a city and the administrative center of Angarsky District of Irkutsk Oblast, Russia, located on the Kitoy River, from Irkutsk, the administrative center of the oblast.

See Irkutsk and Angarsk

Angarsk State Technical Academy

The Angarsk State Technical Academy (AGTA, rus. Ангарская Государственная Техническая Академия - АГТА) is the center of education, science, and culture for the city of Angarsk and Angarsk regional area.

See Irkutsk and Angarsk State Technical Academy

Anna Timiryova

Anna Vasilyevna Timiryova (Анна Васильевна Тимирёва; 18 July 1893 Kislovodsk - 31 January 1975 Moscow) was a Russian poet.

See Irkutsk and Anna Timiryova

Antipodes

In geography, the antipode of any spot on Earth is the point on Earth's surface diametrically opposite to it; the antipodes of a region similarly represent the area opposite it.

See Irkutsk and Antipodes

Anton Lyuboslavskiy

Anton Andreyevich Lyuboslavskiy (Антон Андреевич Любославский; born 26 June 1984 in Irkutsk) is a Russian shot putter.

See Irkutsk and Anton Lyuboslavskiy

Antonov An-124 Ruslan

The Antonov An-124 Ruslan (Антонов Ан-124 "Руслан") (NATO reporting name: Condor) is a strategic airlift jet aircraft.

See Irkutsk and Antonov An-124 Ruslan

Antonov An-24

The Antonov An-24 (Russian/Ukrainian: Антонов Ан-24) (NATO reporting name: Coke) is a 44-seat twin turboprop transport/passenger aircraft designed in 1957 in the Soviet Union by the Antonov Design BureauGordon, Yefim.

See Irkutsk and Antonov An-24

Antonov An-26

The Antonov An-26 (NATO reporting name: Curl) is a twin-engined turboprop civilian and military transport aircraft, designed and produced in the Soviet Union from 1969 to 1986.

See Irkutsk and Antonov An-26

Apo Hsu

Apo Hsu (Apo Ching-Hsin Hsu) is a conductor born in Taiwan and resident of both Taiwan and the United States.

See Irkutsk and Apo Hsu

Arena Vänersborg

Arena Vänersborg is an indoor arena in Vänersborg, Sweden.

See Irkutsk and Arena Vänersborg

Argynnis sagana

Argynnis sagana is a butterfly of the family Nymphalidae.

See Irkutsk and Argynnis sagana

Arkhangelsk

Arkhangelsk (p), also known in English as Archangel and Archangelsk, is a city and the administrative center of Arkhangelsk Oblast, in the north of European Russia.

See Irkutsk and Arkhangelsk

Arman Pashikian

Arman Pashikian (Արման Փաշիկյան; born July 28, 1987, Irkutsk, Russia) is an Armenian chess Grandmaster.

See Irkutsk and Arman Pashikian

Arnica

Arnica is a genus of perennial, herbaceous plants in the sunflower family (Asteraceae).

See Irkutsk and Arnica

Arshan, Republic of Buryatia

Arshan is a small resort village in the Tunkinsky District, Republic of Buryatia, Russian Federation.

See Irkutsk and Arshan, Republic of Buryatia

Aslan Ahmadov

Aslan Ahmadov (Aslan Əhmədov, Аслан Ахмадов) (born 12 February 1973 in Baku) is a Russian professional photographer of Azerbaijani origin.

See Irkutsk and Aslan Ahmadov

August Heinrich Petermann

Augustus Heinrich Petermann (18 April 182225 September 1878) was a German cartographer.

See Irkutsk and August Heinrich Petermann

Avia Traffic Company

Avia Traffic Company is an airline with its head office in Bishkek, Kyrgyzstan.

See Irkutsk and Avia Traffic Company

Aviaarktika

Aviaarktika was a Soviet airline which started operations on 1 September 1930 and was absorbed by Aeroflot on 3 January 1960.

See Irkutsk and Aviaarktika

Aviaprad

CJSC, Aviaprad (ЗАО «Авиапрад») was an airline based in Yekaterinburg, Russia.

See Irkutsk and Aviaprad

Azur Air

Azur Air (Азур Эйр), formerly Katekavia, is a charter airline and former regional airline in Russia.

See Irkutsk and Azur Air

Baikal Airlines

--> | revenue.

See Irkutsk and Baikal Airlines

Baikal Airlines Flight 130

Baikal Airlines Flight 130 was a scheduled domestic passenger flight from Irkutsk to Moscow that crashed on 3 January 1994.

See Irkutsk and Baikal Airlines Flight 130

Baikal Highway

The Baikal Highway is a federal highway in Russia.

See Irkutsk and Baikal Highway

Baikal Nature Reserve

The Baikal Nature Reserve (Байка́льский запове́дник, Baikalski Zapovednik) is a nature reserve on the southeast shore of Lake Baikal, in southern Buryatia, Russia.

See Irkutsk and Baikal Nature Reserve

Baikal Rift Zone

The Baikal Rift Zone is a series of continental rifts centered beneath Lake Baikal in southeastern Russia.

See Irkutsk and Baikal Rift Zone

Baikalian Research Centre

The Baikal Research Centre is independent research organization focused on scientific and educational environmental studies in Lake Baikal and its area.

See Irkutsk and Baikalian Research Centre

Baikalov

Baikalov is a Russian private tour operator which specializes in travels on the Lake Baikal.

See Irkutsk and Baikalov

Balagansk

Balagansk (Балага́нск) is an urban locality (a work settlement) and the administrative center of Balagansky District of Irkutsk Oblast, Russia.

See Irkutsk and Balagansk

Balkhash Radar Station

Balkhash Radar Station (also described as Sary Shagan radar node and Balkhash-9) is the site of two generations of Soviet and Russian early warning radars.

See Irkutsk and Balkhash Radar Station

Bandy World Championship

The Bandy World Championship is a competition between bandy-playing nations' men's teams.

See Irkutsk and Bandy World Championship

Barthélemy de Lesseps

Jean-Baptiste Barthélemy de Lesseps (27 January 1766 in Sète – 6 April/26 April 1834 in Lisbon) was a French diplomat and writer, member of the scientific expedition of Jean-François de Galaup, comte de La Pérouse (1 August 1785 – January 1788) and uncle of Ferdinand de Lesseps.

See Irkutsk and Barthélemy de Lesseps

Battle of Komsomolskoye

The Battle of Komsomolskoye took place in March 2000 between Russian federal forces and Chechen separatists in the Chechen village of Komsomolskoye (Saadi-Kotar), Chechnya.

See Irkutsk and Battle of Komsomolskoye

Baykal (port)

Baykal (port) (Байка́л (порт)) is a rural locality (a settlement) in Slyudyansky District of Irkutsk Oblast, Russia, located near Lake Baikal on the left bank of the Angara River, south of Irkutsk, the administrative center of the oblast.

See Irkutsk and Baykal (port)

Baykal-Energiya

Baykal-Energiya (Байкал-Энергия) is a bandy club from Irkutsk, Russia.

See Irkutsk and Baykal-Energiya

Baykalsky State University of Economics and Law

Baikal State University is a Russian state educational institution of higher professional learning which provides under-graduate, graduate, post-graduate and advanced education in Economics, Management, Law, Applied Computer Science in Economics, Journalism, Psychology and Sociology.

See Irkutsk and Baykalsky State University of Economics and Law

Belarus national bandy team

The Belarusian national bandy team have been competing in the annual Bandy World Championship since 2001.

See Irkutsk and Belarus national bandy team

Belarusians in Russia

Belarusians are a major ethnic group in Russia.

See Irkutsk and Belarusians in Russia

Beriev Be-200

The Beriev Be-200 Altair (Бериев Бе-200) is a multipurpose amphibious aircraft designed by the Beriev Aircraft Company and manufactured by Irkut.

See Irkutsk and Beriev Be-200

Bering Strait crossing

A Bering Strait crossing is a hypothetical bridge and/or tunnel spanning the relatively narrow and shallow Bering Strait between the Chukotka Peninsula in Russia and the Seward Peninsula in the U.S. state of Alaska.

See Irkutsk and Bering Strait crossing

Biryulka

Biryulka (Бирю́лька) is a rural locality (a selo) in Kachugsky District of Irkutsk Oblast, Russia, located on the Lena River near its headwaters northwest of Lake Baikal.

See Irkutsk and Biryulka

Biryusinsk

Biryusinsk (p) is a town in Tayshetsky District of Irkutsk Oblast, Russia, located on the right bank of the Biryusa River (Angara's basin), northwest of Irkutsk, the administrative center of the oblast.

See Irkutsk and Biryusinsk

Bodaybo

Bodaybo (p) is a town and the administrative center of Bodaybinsky District in Irkutsk Oblast, Russia, located on the Vitim River at its confluence with the Bodaybo River, located from Irkutsk, the administrative center of the oblast.

See Irkutsk and Bodaybo

Boguchany Dam

The Boguchany Dam (Богучанская ГЭС) is a large hydroelectric dam on the Angara River in Kodinsk, Krasnoyarsk Krai, Russia.

See Irkutsk and Boguchany Dam

Bolshiye Koty

Bolshiye Koty (Больши́е Ко́ты) is a rural locality (a settlement) in Irkutsk Oblast, Russia situated on the western shore of Lake Baikal, to the northeast of Listvyanka.

See Irkutsk and Bolshiye Koty

Boltonia

Boltonia is a genus of plants in the sunflower family native primarily to North America with one species in eastern Asia.

See Irkutsk and Boltonia

Boris Stürmer

Baron Boris Vladimirovich Stürmer (Бори́с Влади́мирович Штю́рмер, Boris Vladimirovich Shtyurmer) (27 July 1848 – 9 September 1917) was a Russian lawyer, a Master of Ceremonies at the Russian Court, and a district governor.

See Irkutsk and Boris Stürmer

Boris Volynov

Boris Valentinovich Volynov (Бори́с Валенти́нович Волы́нов; born 18 December 1934) is a Soviet cosmonaut who flew two space missions of the Soyuz programme: Soyuz 5, and Soyuz 21.

See Irkutsk and Boris Volynov

Boris Yukhananov

Boris Yukhananov–(Russian: Борис Юрьевич Юхананов) is a Russian director of theatre, video, cinema and TV, a theatre educator and theorist.

See Irkutsk and Boris Yukhananov

Botanic Garden of the Irkutsk State University

The Botanic Garden of the Irkutsk State University is a botanic garden in Irkutsk, Siberia, Russia.

See Irkutsk and Botanic Garden of the Irkutsk State University

Brachionycha sajana

Brachionycha sajana is a moth of the Noctuidae family.

See Irkutsk and Brachionycha sajana

Bratsk

Bratsk (p) is a city in Irkutsk Oblast, Russia, located on the Angara River near the vast Bratsk Reservoir.

See Irkutsk and Bratsk

Bratsk Hydroelectric Power Station

The Bratsk Hydroelectric Power Station (also referred to as 50 years of Great October) is a concrete gravity dam on the Angara River and adjacent hydroelectric power station.

See Irkutsk and Bratsk Hydroelectric Power Station

Bural

Bural was an airline based in Ulan-Ude, Russia.

See Irkutsk and Bural

Buryat State University

Buryat State University (Бурятский государственный университет) is institution of higher education, one of the leading educational and scientific centers of Siberia and the Russian Far East, located in the city of Ulan-Ude, Buryat Republic, Russia.

See Irkutsk and Buryat State University

C.V. Starr-Middlebury Schools Abroad

The Middlebury C.V. Starr Schools Abroad, operated by Middlebury College in 17 countries across 5 continents, offer overseas academic programs for undergraduates from various U.S. institutions, as well as graduate-level programs for students from the Middlebury Language Schools and the Middlebury Institute of International Studies at Monterey.

See Irkutsk and C.V. Starr-Middlebury Schools Abroad

Canada national bandy team

The Canadian national bandy team is the bandy team representing Canada.

See Irkutsk and Canada national bandy team

Carl Steenstrup

Carl Steenstrup (born 1934 in Vaasa, Finland; died November 11, 2014, in Berlin, Germany) was a Danish japanologist.

See Irkutsk and Carl Steenstrup

Centrosibir

Centrosibir (Центросибирь), short for the Central Executive Committee of Siberian Soviets, was elected by the First Congress of Siberian Soviets, held in Irkutsk from to.

See Irkutsk and Centrosibir

Children's railway

A children's railway or pioneer railway is an extracurricular educational institution, where teenagers learn railway professions.

See Irkutsk and Children's railway

Chinggis Khaan International Airport

Chinggis Khaan International Airport (Чингис хаан олон улсын нисэх буудал, Çingis hán olon ulsîn niseh búdal) is the international airport serving Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia, situated southwest of the capital.

See Irkutsk and Chinggis Khaan International Airport

Chita, Zabaykalsky Krai

Chita (p) is a city and the administrative center of Zabaykalsky Krai, Russia, located at the confluence of the Chita and Ingoda Rivers and on the Trans-Siberian Railway, east of Irkutsk.

See Irkutsk and Chita, Zabaykalsky Krai

Christianity in Russia

Christianity in Russia is by some estimates the largest religion in the country, with nearly 50% of the population identifying as Christian.

See Irkutsk and Christianity in Russia

Christopher Szwernicki

Christopher Szwernicki (September 8, 1814 – November 26, 1894) was a priest of the Congregation of Marian Fathers.

See Irkutsk and Christopher Szwernicki

Circum-Baikal Railway

The Circum-Baikal Railway (Кругобайка́льская желе́зная доро́га or Кругобайка́лка, abbreviated "КБЖД") is a historical railway in the Irkutsk region of Russia.

See Irkutsk and Circum-Baikal Railway

Circumbaikal Highway

The Circumbaikal Highway (Around Baikal Highway, Round Baikal Highway, Кругобайкальский тракт, Krugabaikalsky Trakt) was part of the Main Siberian Postal Highway (главный сибирский почтовый тракт).

See Irkutsk and Circumbaikal Highway

Climate of Russia

The climate of Russia is formed under the influence of several determining factors.

See Irkutsk and Climate of Russia

Coleophora strigiferella

Coleophora pauperculella is a moth of the Coleophoridae family that can be found in Irkutsk, eastern Siberia, Russia.

See Irkutsk and Coleophora strigiferella

Common toad

The common toad, European toad, or in Anglophone parts of Europe, simply the toad (Bufo bufo, from Latin bufo "toad"), is an amphibian found throughout most of Europe (with the exception of Ireland, Iceland, and some Mediterranean islands), in the western part of North Asia, and in a small portion of Northwest Africa.

See Irkutsk and Common toad

Communist University of the Toilers of the East

The Communist University of the Toilers of the East (KUTV) (Коммунистический университет трудящихся Востока; also known as the Far East University) was a revolutionary training school for important Communist political leaders.

See Irkutsk and Communist University of the Toilers of the East

Congregation of Marian Fathers of the Immaculate Conception

The Congregation of Marian Fathers of the Immaculate Conception of the Most Blessed Virgin Mary (Latin: Congregatio Clericorum Marianorum ab Immaculata Conceptionis Beatissimae Virginis Mariae; abbreviation: M.I.C.) is a Roman Catholic male clerical religious congregation founded, 1670, in Poland.

See Irkutsk and Congregation of Marian Fathers of the Immaculate Conception

Cossack host

A Cossack host (Козаче військо, kozache viysko; каза́чье во́йско, kazachye voysko), sometimes translated as Cossack army, was an administrative subdivision of Cossacks in the Russian Empire.

See Irkutsk and Cossack host

Coverage of Google Street View

Google Street View was first introduced in the United States on May 25, 2007, and until November 26, 2008, featured camera icon markers, each representing at least one major city or area (such as a park), and usually the other nearby cities, towns, suburbs, and parks.

See Irkutsk and Coverage of Google Street View

Czechoslovak Legion

The Czechoslovak Legion (Československé legie in Czech and Slovak) were volunteer armed forces composed predominantly of Czechs with a small number of Slovaks (approximately 8 percent) fighting together with the Entente powers during World War I. Their goal was to win the Allied Powers' support for the independence of Bohemia and Moravia from the Austrian Empire and of Slovak territories from the Kingdom of Hungary, which were then part of the Austro-Hungarian Empire.

See Irkutsk and Czechoslovak Legion

Dactylorhiza fuchsii

Dactylorhiza fuchsii, the common spotted orchid, is a species of flowering plant in the orchid family Orchidaceae.

See Irkutsk and Dactylorhiza fuchsii

Dalavia

JSC Dalavia (ОАО «Дальавиа»), also known as Dalavia — Far Eastern Airways (Дальавиа «Дальневосточные Авиалинии») was an airline based in Khabarovsk, Russia.

See Irkutsk and Dalavia

Dalcombank

Dalcombank was one of the largest banks in the Russian Far East.

See Irkutsk and Dalcombank

Damdin Sükhbaatar

Damdinii Sükhbaatar (Дамдины Сүхбаатар; February 2, 1893 – February 20, 1923) was a founding member of the Mongolian People's Party and leader of the Mongolian partisan army that liberated Khüree during the Outer Mongolian Revolution of 1921.

See Irkutsk and Damdin Sükhbaatar

Darya Dmitriyeva

Darya Andreyevna Dmitriyeva (Дарья Андреевна Дмитриева; born 22 June 1993) is a Russian rhythmic gymnast.

See Irkutsk and Darya Dmitriyeva

Daryal radar

The Daryal-type radar (NATO: Pechora) is a Soviet bistatic early-warning radar.

See Irkutsk and Daryal radar

Datsan

Datsan (Дацан, Дацан) is the term used for Buddhist university monasteries in the Tibetan tradition of Gelukpa located throughout Mongolia, Tibet and Siberia.

See Irkutsk and Datsan

Dauria (airline)

Dauria was a Russian regional airline based in Chita which also carried out aerial work and aircraft maintenance.

See Irkutsk and Dauria (airline)

David A. Frank-Kamenetskii

David Albertovich Frank-Kamenetskii (Давид Альбертович Франк-Каменецкий, August 3, 1910, Vilna, Russia – June 2, 1970, Moscow, Soviet Union) was a Soviet theoretical physicist and chemist, professor and doctor of physical, chemical and mathemetical sciences.

See Irkutsk and David A. Frank-Kamenetskii

December 6

No description.

See Irkutsk and December 6

Decembrist revolt

The Decembrist revolt or the Decembrist uprising (r) took place in Imperial Russia on.

See Irkutsk and Decembrist revolt

Demid Ilyich Kulikalov

Demid Ilyich Kulikalov was an administrator of Russian America during the first decade of the 19th century.

See Irkutsk and Demid Ilyich Kulikalov

Demographics of Siberia

Geographically, Siberia includes the Russian Urals, Siberian, and Far Eastern Federal Districts.

See Irkutsk and Demographics of Siberia

Denis Koval

Denis Anatolyevich Koval (Денис Анатольевич Коваль; born 6 November 1991 in Irkutsk) is a Russian speed skater.

See Irkutsk and Denis Koval

Denis Matsuev

Denis Leonidovich Matsuev (Дени́с Леони́дович Мацу́ев, born June 11, 1975) is a Russian classical pianist.

See Irkutsk and Denis Matsuev

Denis Petushinskiy

Denis Petushinskiy (Денис Петушинский; born 28 June 1967 in Irkutsk) is a retired pole vaulter who represented New Zealand after switching from Russia in 1998.

See Irkutsk and Denis Petushinskiy

Denis Sokolov (sport shooter)

Denis Sokolov (born 19 March 1983 in Irkutsk) is a Russian rifle shooter.

See Irkutsk and Denis Sokolov (sport shooter)

Deschampsia

Deschampsia is a genus of plants in the grass family, commonly known as hair grass or tussock grass.

See Irkutsk and Deschampsia

Design 414N tankers

414N is a river tank ship class, developed in Russia in 1962.

See Irkutsk and Design 414N tankers

Dmitri Kondratyev

Dmitri Yur'yevich Kondrat'yev Дмитрий Юрьевич Кондратьев (born 25 May 1969 in Irkutsk, Russia) is a retired Russian cosmonaut.

See Irkutsk and Dmitri Kondratyev

Dmitri Pytlev

Dmitri Vladimirovich Pytlev (Дмитрий Владимирович Пытлев; born 15 July 1987) is a Russian professional football player.

See Irkutsk and Dmitri Pytlev

Dmitri Shostakovich

Dmitri Dmitriyevich Shostakovich (Дми́трий Дми́триевич Шостако́вич|Dmitriy Dmitrievich Shostakovich,; 9 August 1975) was a Russian composer and pianist.

See Irkutsk and Dmitri Shostakovich

Dmitry V. Bisikalo

Dmitry V. Bisikalo is a Russian astrophysicist, Doctor of Sciences, Professor, Corresponding Member of the Russian Academy of Sciences and Director of the Institute of Astronomy (RAS)(1).

See Irkutsk and Dmitry V. Bisikalo

Dnepropetrovsk maniacs

The Dnepropetrovsk maniacs (Дніпропетровські маніяки, Днепропетровские маньяки) are Ukrainian serial killers responsible for a string of murders in Dnipropetrovsk in June and July 2007.

See Irkutsk and Dnepropetrovsk maniacs

Dnestr radar

Dnestr radar (Днестр) and Dnepr radar (Днепр), both known by the NATO reporting name Hen House are the first generation of Soviet space surveillance and early warning radars.

See Irkutsk and Dnestr radar

Doellingeria

Doellingeria is a genus of flowering plants in the aster family.

See Irkutsk and Doellingeria

Drago Siliqi

Drago Siliqi (1930–1963) was an Albanian poet, literary critic, and publisher.

See Irkutsk and Drago Siliqi

Dumaagiin Sodnom

Dumaagiin Sodnom (Думаагийн Содном; born 14 July 1933) is a Mongolian political figure who served as Mongolia's 14th Prime Minister from 1984 to 1990.

See Irkutsk and Dumaagiin Sodnom

Dutch exonyms

Below is list of Dutch language exonyms for places in non-Dutch-speaking areas of Europe.

See Irkutsk and Dutch exonyms

Dux Factory

Dux (Zavod "Duks") was a bicycle/automobile/aircraft factory in Moscow, Russia before and during World War I. The factory was founded in 1893.

See Irkutsk and Dux Factory

Early life of Joseph Stalin

The early life of Joseph Stalin covers the life of Stalin from his birth on 6 December (18 December, New Style) 1878 until the October Revolution on 25 October 1917 (7 November).

See Irkutsk and Early life of Joseph Stalin

East Siberian economic region

East Siberian economic region (Восто́чно-Сиби́рский экономи́ческий райо́н, Vostochno-Sibirsky ekonomichesky rayon) is one of twelve economic regions of Russia.

See Irkutsk and East Siberian economic region

East Siberian Laika

The East Siberian Laika (Vostotchno-Sibirskaia Laika) is a Russian breed of dog of spitz type, a hunting dog originating in parts of Siberia east of the Yenisei River.

See Irkutsk and East Siberian Laika

East Siberian Oblast

The East Siberian Oblast was an early oblast of the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic, which existed from December 5, 1936 to September 26, 1937.

See Irkutsk and East Siberian Oblast

East Siberian Railway

The East Siberian Railway (Восточно-Сибирская железная дорога) is a railway in Russia (a branch of the Russian Railways and a part of the Trans-Siberian Railway), which runs across Irkutsk Oblast, Chita Oblast, Buryatia, and Yakutia.

See Irkutsk and East Siberian Railway

Eastern journey of Nicholas II

The Eastern journey of Nicholas II in 1890–91 was a journey made by Nicholas Alexandrovich&ndash;then Tsesarevich of Russia&ndash;around the greater part of the Eurasian continent.

See Irkutsk and Eastern journey of Nicholas II

Echo of Moscow

Echo of Moscow (Э́хо Москвы́, Ekho Moskvy) is a Russian radio station based in Moscow, broadcasting in many Russian cities, some of the former-Soviet republics (through partnerships with local radio stations), and via the Internet.

See Irkutsk and Echo of Moscow

Eduard Sergeyevich Bogdanov (Эдуард Серге́евич Богданов; born 8 May 1994) is a Russian football player.

See Irkutsk and Eduard Bogdanov (footballer, born 1994)

Edward Stallybrass

Edward Stallybrass (8 June 1794 in Royston, Hertfordshire &ndash; 25 July 1884) was a British Congregational missionary to the Buryat people of Siberia.

See Irkutsk and Edward Stallybrass

Electric locomotive

An electric locomotive is a locomotive powered by electricity from overhead lines, a third rail or on-board energy storage such as a battery or a supercapacitor.

See Irkutsk and Electric locomotive

Eparchies and Metropolitanates of the Russian Orthodox Church

This is the list of the metropolitanates and eparchies (dioceses) of the Russian Orthodox Church.

See Irkutsk and Eparchies and Metropolitanates of the Russian Orthodox Church

Erast Fandorin

Erast Petrovich Fandorin (Эраст Петрович Фандорин) is a fictional 19th-century Russian detective and the hero of a series of Russian historical detective novels by Boris Akunin.

See Irkutsk and Erast Fandorin

Erik Laxmann

Erik Gustavovich Laxmann (Эрик (Кирилл) Густавович Лаксман) (July 27, 1737 – January 6, 1796) was a Finnish-Swedish clergyman, explorer and natural scientist born in Nyslott in Finland, then part of Sweden.

See Irkutsk and Erik Laxmann

Ernest B. Price

Ernest Batson Price (October 13, 1890 – October 20, 1973) was an American diplomat, university professor, military officer, and businessman.

See Irkutsk and Ernest B. Price

Estonia national bandy team

Estonian national bandy team competed for the first time during the first period of Estonian independence, in the interwar years 1918–1940.

See Irkutsk and Estonia national bandy team

Eugene, Oregon

Eugene is a city of the Pacific Northwest in the U.S. state of Oregon.

See Irkutsk and Eugene, Oregon

Evangelical Lutheran Church of Saint Mary

The Evangelical Lutheran Church of Saint Mary (Евангелическо-лютеранская церковь Святой Марии) is an Evangelical Lutheran church located in Saint Petersburg, Russia.

See Irkutsk and Evangelical Lutheran Church of Saint Mary

Evgeny Donskoy

Evgeny Evgenyevich Donskoy (Евге́ний Евге́ньевич Донско́й; born 9 May 1990) is a Russian tennis player playing on the regular ATP tour.

See Irkutsk and Evgeny Donskoy

Evstratii Delarov

Evstratii Ivanovich Delarov (also spelled Evstrat Delarov and Eustrate Delarof, c. 1740 &ndash; 1806, Ευστράτιος Ντελάρωφ) was a Greek-born mariner who served with several Russian maritime fur trade companies in Russian America.

See Irkutsk and Evstratii Delarov

Expedition Trophy

The Murmansk–Vladivostok Expedition Trophy is the world's longest winter motor rally.

See Irkutsk and Expedition Trophy

Fairness of the Russian presidential election, 2008

The fairness of the 2008 Russian presidential election is disputed, with election monitoring groups giving conflicting reports.

See Irkutsk and Fairness of the Russian presidential election, 2008

FC Baikal Irkutsk

FC Baikal Irkutsk (ФК Байкал Иркутск) was a Russian football team from Irkutsk, founded in 2009.

See Irkutsk and FC Baikal Irkutsk

FC Zvezda Irkutsk

FC Zvezda Irkutsk (ФК Звезда Иркутск) was a Russian football club based in Irkutsk.

See Irkutsk and FC Zvezda Irkutsk

Federal Financial Markets Service

The Federal Financial Markets Service (FFMS, FSFR) (Федеральная служба по финансовым рынкам, ФСФР.) was a Russian federal executive body which regulated Russian financial markets and operated from 2004 until it was disbanded in 2013.

See Irkutsk and Federal Financial Markets Service

Federal subjects of Russia

The federal subjects of Russia, also referred to as the subjects of the Russian Federation (субъекты Российской Федерации subyekty Rossiyskoy Federatsii) or simply as the subjects of the federation (субъекты федерации subyekty federatsii), are the constituent entities of Russia, its top-level political divisions according to the Constitution of Russia.

See Irkutsk and Federal subjects of Russia

Federation of Jewish Communities of the CIS

Federation of Jewish Communities of the CIS (FJC) is a Jewish organisation dedicated to restoring Jewish life, culture and religion in the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), the former Soviet Union.

See Irkutsk and Federation of Jewish Communities of the CIS

Fedir Zharko

Fedir Avramovych Zharko (4(17)/VI/1914-17/VII/1986), Merited Artist of Ukraine (1965).

See Irkutsk and Fedir Zharko

Feliks Kon

Feliks Yakovlevich Kon (May 18, 1864 &ndash; July 30, 1941) was a Polish communist activist.

See Irkutsk and Feliks Kon

Felix Dzerzhinsky

Felix Edmundovich Dzerzhinsky (Russian: Фе́ликс Эдму́ндович Дзержи́нский; Polish: Feliks Dzierżyński; 20 July 1926), nicknamed Iron Felix, was a Polish and Soviet Bolshevik revolutionary, leader and statesman.

See Irkutsk and Felix Dzerzhinsky

Finland national bandy team

The Finnish national bandy team (Suomen jääpallomaajoukkue, Finlands herrlandslag i bandy) has taken part in all the Bandy World Championships for men since the competition was launched for the first time in 1957.

See Irkutsk and Finland national bandy team

First Kamchatka expedition

The First Kamchatka expedition was commissioned in December 1724 by Peter I of Russia to explore the northern part of the Pacific Ocean and confirm the presence of the strait between Asia and America.

See Irkutsk and First Kamchatka expedition

Food industry of Russia

The food industry of Russia is a branch of industry in Russia.

See Irkutsk and Food industry of Russia

Foreign relations of Mongolia

Mongolia has diplomatic relations with 188 states—187 UN states, the Holy See and the European Union.

See Irkutsk and Foreign relations of Mongolia

Foreign relations of Poland

The Republic of Poland is a Central European country and member of the European Union and NATO, among others.

See Irkutsk and Foreign relations of Poland

Foreign relations of Russia

The foreign relations of the Russian Federation is the policy of the government of Russia by which it guides the interactions with other nations, their citizens and foreign organizations.

See Irkutsk and Foreign relations of Russia

Franciszek Żwirko

Franciszek Żwirko (16 September 1895 – 11 September 1932) was a prominent Polish sport and military aviator.

See Irkutsk and Franciszek Żwirko

French exonyms

Below is a list of French language exonyms for places in non-French-speaking areas.

See Irkutsk and French exonyms

Fyodor Matisen

Fyodor Andreyevich Matisen (Фёдор Андреевич Матисен) (June 1 (O.S. May 20), 1872, Saint Petersburg – December 19, 1921, Irkutsk) was an officer of the Russian Imperial Navy, hydrographer, and explorer.

See Irkutsk and Fyodor Matisen

Fyodorov Eye Microsurgery Complex

The S.N. Fyodorov Eye Microsurgery Complex is a clinical and research ophthalmological center in Moscow, Russia, founded in 1988 by Russian eye surgeon Svyatoslav Fyodorov.

See Irkutsk and Fyodorov Eye Microsurgery Complex

Gabala Radar Station

Gabala Radar Station in some sources Gabala is spelled Qabala, other names are Lyaki, Mingacevir and Mingechaur was a Daryal-type (NATO Pechora) bistatic Passive electronically scanned array early warning radar, built by the Soviet Union in the Qabala district of the Azerbaijan SSR in 1985.

See Irkutsk and Gabala Radar Station

Galina Belyayeva

Galina Viktorovna Belyaeva (Гали′на Ви′кторовна Беля′ева, born April 26, 1961) is a Soviet and Russian film and theatre actress, best known for her leading roles in A Hunting Accident (1977) and Anna Pavlova (1983).

See Irkutsk and Galina Belyayeva

Gangneung

Gangneung is a city in the province of Gangwon-do, on the east coast of South Korea.

See Irkutsk and Gangneung

General rating of city appeal

The general rating of city appeal — is a method for calculating and comparing the city appeal and urban environment, based on determining their number values and the threshold of appeal.

See Irkutsk and General rating of city appeal

Georgiy Zatsepin

Georgiy Timofeyevich Zatsepin (Гео́ргий Тимофе́евич Заце́пин) (&ndash; 8 March 2010) was a Soviet/Russian astrophysicist known for his works in cosmic rays physics and neutrino astrophysics.

See Irkutsk and Georgiy Zatsepin

Georgy Millyar

Georgy Frantsevich Millyar, sometimes spelled Milliar (Георгий Францевич Милляр) (7 November 1903 in Moscow – 4 June 1993 in Moscow), was a Soviet/Russian actor, best known for playing evil spirits in Soviet fairy tale films, including the witch Baba Yaga in films such as Vasilisa the Beautiful, Jack Frost, Fire, Water, and Brass Pipes and The Golden Horns.

See Irkutsk and Georgy Millyar

Gerasim Izmailov

Gerasim Grigoryevich Izmaylov (Герасим Григорьевич Измайлов; circa 1745 - after 1795) was a Russian navigator involved in the Russian colonization of the Americas and in the establishment of the colonies of Russian America in Alaska.

See Irkutsk and Gerasim Izmailov

Germain Henri Hess

Germain Henri Hess (Герман Иванович Гесс German Ivanovich Gess; 7 August 1802 &ndash; 30 November 1850) was a Swiss-Russian chemist and doctor who formulated Hess's law, an early principle of thermochemistry.

See Irkutsk and Germain Henri Hess

German Okunev

German Grigoryevich Okunev (b. Leningrad 12 June 1931, d. Leningrad 12 June 1973) was a Soviet Russian composer, pianist and teacher.

See Irkutsk and German Okunev

Germany national bandy team

Germany national bandy team (Deutsche Bandynationalmannschaft der Herren) is a bandy team competing for Germany in the international bandy and rink bandy tournaments.

See Irkutsk and Germany national bandy team

Glazkov culture

Glazkov culture is archaeological culture of ancient Tungus racially Mongoloid tribes in the Bronze Age (18th-13th centuries BCE), spread in the Baikal area.

See Irkutsk and Glazkov culture

Gleb Yakunin

Gleb Pavlovich Yakunin (Глеб Па́влович Яку́нин; 4 March 1936 – 25 December 2014) was a Russian priest and dissident, who fought for the principle of freedom of conscience in the Soviet Union.

See Irkutsk and Gleb Yakunin

Gloydius intermedius

Gloydius intermedius is a venomous pitviper species endemic to northern Asia.

See Irkutsk and Gloydius intermedius

Google Street View in Asia

In Asia, Google Street View is available in Bangladesh, Bhutan, Cambodia, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Israel, Japan, Macau, Malaysia, Mongolia, Philippines, Russia, Singapore, South Korea, Sri Lanka, Taiwan, Thailand and Turkey.

See Irkutsk and Google Street View in Asia

Google Street View in Europe

In Europe, Google Street View began on 2 July 2008 with the route of Tour de France being covered in parts of France and Italy.

See Irkutsk and Google Street View in Europe

Grand Duke Sergei Mikhailovich of Russia

Grand Duke Sergei Mikhailovich of Russia (Серге́й Миха́йлович; 7 October 1869 &ndash; 18 July 1918) was the fifth son and sixth child of Grand Duke Michael Nikolaievich of Russia and a first cousin of Alexander III of Russia.

See Irkutsk and Grand Duke Sergei Mikhailovich of Russia

Great Baikal Trail

The Great Baikal Trail or GBT (Russian: Большая Байкальская Тропа or ББТ (Bolshaya Baikalskaya Tropa or BBT)) is a Russian non-profit environmental organization promoting the development of ecotourism, voluntary work, and ecological education.

See Irkutsk and Great Baikal Trail

Great Northern Expedition

The Great Northern Expedition (Великая Северная экспедиция) or Second Kamchatka expedition (Вторая Камчатская экспедиция) was one of the largest exploration enterprises in history, mapping most of the Arctic coast of Siberia and some parts of the North America coastline, greatly reducing "white areas" on maps.

See Irkutsk and Great Northern Expedition

Great Siberian Ice March

The Great Siberian Ice march (Russian: Великий Сибирский Ледяной поход, Velikiy Sibirskiy Ledyanoy pokhod) was the winter retreat of Vladimir Kappel's White Russian Army in the course of the Russian Civil War in January–February 1920.

See Irkutsk and Great Siberian Ice March

Greater East Asia Railroad

was an idea for a railroad linking Japan with the Asian mainland and Europe, formulated in 1938 during the Second Sino-Japanese War leading to World War II.

See Irkutsk and Greater East Asia Railroad

Grigori Voitinsky

Grigori Naumovich Voitinsky, born Zarkhin (1893-1953) A Bolshevik Comintern Official.

See Irkutsk and Grigori Voitinsky

Harbin

Harbin is the capital of Heilongjiang province, and largest city in the northeastern region of the People's Republic of China.

See Irkutsk and Harbin

Harpalus salinus klementzae

Harpalus salinus klementzae is a subspecies of ground beetle native to Central Asia, where it could be found in such countries as Mongolia, Chinese province of Xinjiang, and Russian autonomous regions such as Buryat Republic, Chita, Irkutsk, and Maritime Province.

See Irkutsk and Harpalus salinus klementzae

Heinrich von Wild

Heinrich von Wild or Heinrich Wild I (1833–1902) was a Swiss meteorologist and physicist who established a modern meteorological system throughout the Empire and developed meteorological instruments.

See Irkutsk and Heinrich von Wild

Henry Russell (explorer)

Henry Patrick Marie, Count Russell-Killough (1834–1909) was one of the pioneers of Pyrenean exploration, known for his obsession with the Vignemale.

See Irkutsk and Henry Russell (explorer)

History of Scandinavian Airlines System (1933–52)

The history of Scandinavian Airlines System (SAS) from 1933 to 1951 covers the first attempts at transatlantic travel, the establishment of a consortium and finally the establishment of the consolidated SAS.

See Irkutsk and History of Scandinavian Airlines System (1933–52)

History of Siberia

The early history of Siberia is greatly influenced by the sophisticated nomadic civilizations of the Scythians (Pazyryk) on the west of the Ural Mountains and Xiongnu (Noin-Ula) on the east of the Urals, both flourishing before the Christian era.

See Irkutsk and History of Siberia

History of the Cossacks

The history of the Cossacks spans several centuries.

See Irkutsk and History of the Cossacks

History of the Jews in Mongolia

The history of the Jews in Mongolia starts with the 19th century trade routes between Siberian-Jewish merchants and the Mongolians.

See Irkutsk and History of the Jews in Mongolia

History of Tuva

The territory currently known as Tuva has been occupied by various groups throughout its history.

See Irkutsk and History of Tuva

History of Waldorf schools

This article on the History of Waldorf schools includes descriptions of the schools' historical foundations, geographical distribution and internal governance structures.

See Irkutsk and History of Waldorf schools

Hour record

The hour record is the record for the longest distance cycled in one hour on a bicycle from a stationary start.

See Irkutsk and Hour record

Howard Zinn

Howard Zinn (August 24, 1922January 27, 2010) was an American historian, playwright, and social activist.

See Irkutsk and Howard Zinn

Hydrofoil

A hydrofoil is a lifting surface, or foil, that operates in water.

See Irkutsk and Hydrofoil

Ice (Dukaj novel)

Ice (Lód) is a Janusz A. Zajdel, European Union Prize for Literature and Kościelski awards-winning novel written in 2007 by the Polish science fiction writer Jacek Dukaj, published in Poland by Wydawnictwo Literackie.

See Irkutsk and Ice (Dukaj novel)

Igor Akulov

Igor Akulov (Epiphany, Epiphanius; 13 April 1897, Novo-Nikitskaya, Korchevsky County, province of Tver — 27 August 1937, Leningrad) was a Russian Orthodox monk, a priest of the Russian Catholic Church, and a victim of Joseph Stalin's Great Purge.

See Irkutsk and Igor Akulov

Ilimsk

Ilimsk (Илимск) was a small town in Siberia, within today's Irkutsk Oblast of Russia.

See Irkutsk and Ilimsk

Ilya Rashkovsky

Ilya Rashkovsky (born 17 November 1984 in Irkutsk) is a Russian pianist.

See Irkutsk and Ilya Rashkovsky

Ilya Tsivtsivadze

Ilya Benediktovich Tsivtsivadze (March 20, 1881 &ndash; March 15, 1938) was a Georgian Communist politician.

See Irkutsk and Ilya Tsivtsivadze

Ilyushin Il-6

The Ilyushin Il-6 was a Soviet long-range bomber developed from the Ilyushin Il-4 during 1942.

See Irkutsk and Ilyushin Il-6

Innocent of Alaska

Saint Innocent of Alaska (August 26, 1797 &ndash; March 31, 1879, O.S.), also known as Saint Innocent Metropolitan of Moscow (Russian Святитель Иннокентий Митрополит Московский) was a Russian Orthodox missionary priest, then the first Orthodox bishop and archbishop in the Americas, and finally the Metropolitan of Moscow and all Russia.

See Irkutsk and Innocent of Alaska

Innocent of Irkutsk

St.

See Irkutsk and Innocent of Irkutsk

Institute for Noble Maidens

An Institute for Noble Maidens was a type of educational institution and finishing school in late Imperial Russia.

See Irkutsk and Institute for Noble Maidens

Interavia Airlines

Interavia Airlines (Russian: Авиакомпания Интеравиа) was an airline based in Moscow, Russia.

See Irkutsk and Interavia Airlines

International Airport Irkutsk

International Airport Irkutsk (Russian: Международный Аэропорт Иркутск) is an airport on the outskirts of Irkutsk, Russia, at a distance of 60 kilometers (37 miles) from Lake Baikal.

See Irkutsk and International Airport Irkutsk

International Astronomy Olympiad

The International Astronomy Olympiad (IAO) is an internationally recognized annual astronomy scientific-educating event for high school students (14–18 years old), which includes an intellectual competition between these students.

See Irkutsk and International Astronomy Olympiad

International Festival of Children's Theatres

The Subotica International Festival of Children's Theatres is an international festival dedicated to children's theatre.

See Irkutsk and International Festival of Children's Theatres

Iosif Utkin

Iosif Pavlovich Utkin (Ио́сиф Па́влович У́ткин) (&ndash; 13 November 1944) was a Russian poet of the World War II generation.

See Irkutsk and Iosif Utkin

IrAero

IrAero is an airline based in Irkutsk, Russia.

See Irkutsk and IrAero

Irakli Tsereteli

Irakli "Kaki" Tsereteli (ირაკლი გიორგის ძე წერეთელი; Ира́клий Гео́ргиевич Церете́ли, Irakliy Georgievich Tsereteli; 20 November 1881 &ndash; 20 May 1959) was a Georgian politician and a leading Social-Democratic spokesman during the era of the Russian Revolutions.

See Irkutsk and Irakli Tsereteli

Irina Tkatchuk

Irina Anatolyevna Tkatchuk (Ирина Анатольевна Ткачук, born 9 July 1983) is a Russian former competitive figure skater.

See Irkutsk and Irina Tkatchuk

Irkut MC-21

The Irkut MC-21 (Иркут МС-21) is a Russian single-aisle twinjet airliner, developed by the Yakovlev Design Bureau and produced by its parent Irkut, a branch of the United Aircraft Corporation (UAC).

See Irkutsk and Irkut MC-21

Irkut River

Irkut (Ирку&#769;т, Эрхүү гол, Эрхүү гол) is a river in the Buryat Republic and Irkutsk Oblast of Russia.

See Irkutsk and Irkut River

Irkutsk (disambiguation)

Irkutsk may refer to one of the following.

See Irkutsk and Irkutsk (disambiguation)

Irkutsk Hydroelectric Power Station

The Irkutsk Hydroelectric Power Station (Irkutsk HPS) is a rock-fill dam on the Angara River with an adjacent hydroelectric power station.

See Irkutsk and Irkutsk Hydroelectric Power Station

Irkutsk New Airport

Irkutsk New Airport was a planned I class new international airport 24 km (15 mi) to northeast from Irkutsk, near Pozdnyakova village.

See Irkutsk and Irkutsk New Airport

Irkutsk Northwest Airport

Irkutsk Northwest Airport is an airport in Russia located 11 km northwest of Irkutsk.

See Irkutsk and Irkutsk Northwest Airport

Irkutsk Oblast

Irkutsk Oblast (Ирку́тская о́бласть, Irkutskaya oblast) is a federal subject of Russia (an oblast), located in southeastern Siberia in the basins of the Angara, Lena, and Nizhnyaya Tunguska Rivers.

See Irkutsk and Irkutsk Oblast

Irkutsk State Linguistic University

Irkutsk State Linguistic University (Иркутский государственный лингвистический университет (ИГЛУ)) is a university in Irkutsk, Siberia in eastern Russia founded in 1948.

See Irkutsk and Irkutsk State Linguistic University

Irkutsk State Pedagogical College

Irkutsk State Pedagogical College, also called Irkutsk State Teacher Training University was founded in 1909 in Irkutsk, Siberia as the University for training intending teachers for schools and colleges.

See Irkutsk and Irkutsk State Pedagogical College

Irkutsk State University

Irkutsk State University (Russian: Иркутский государственный университет) was founded in October 1918 in Irkutsk, Siberia.

See Irkutsk and Irkutsk State University

Irkutskenergo

Irkutskenergo is a power company in Russia.

See Irkutsk and Irkutskenergo

Irkutskoye Slovo

Irkutskoye Slovo (Irkutsk Word) was a Menshevik-oriented weekly newspaper in Russia, published in Irkutsk from 1911 to 1912.

See Irkutsk and Irkutskoye Slovo

Irkutsky District

Irkutsky District (Ирку́тский райо́н) is an administrative district, one of the thirty-three in Irkutsk Oblast, Russia.

See Irkutsk and Irkutsky District

Italy Davis Cup team

The Italy Davis Cup team represents Italy in Davis Cup tennis competition and are governed by the Federazione Italiana Tennis.

See Irkutsk and Italy Davis Cup team

Ivan Babushkin

Ivan Babushkin (pseudonym Nikolay Nikolaevich) (January 3, 1873 – January 18, 1906) was a Russian professional Bolshevik revolutionary.

See Irkutsk and Ivan Babushkin

Ivan Ivanovich Petrov

Ivan Ivanovich Petrov (Иван Иванович Петров; b. February 29, 1920 in Irkutsk ― d. December 26, 2003 in Moscow) was a Soviet and Russian bass opera singer.

See Irkutsk and Ivan Ivanovich Petrov

Ivan Khleborodov

Ivan Vyacheslavovich Khleborodov (Иван Вячеславович Хлебородов; born 13 October 1995) is a Russian football forward.

See Irkutsk and Ivan Khleborodov

Ivan Tovstukha

Ivan Pavlovich Tovstukha was a candidate member of a Central Committee of the All-Union Communist Party of Bolsheviks (TsK KPSS), member of the Central Executive Committee of the Soviet Union, deputy deputy director of Marx-Engels-Lenin Institute.

See Irkutsk and Ivan Tovstukha

Ivan Vyrypaev

Ivan Aleksandrovich Vyrypaev (Ива́н Алекса́ндрович Вырыпа́ев; born August 3, 1974) is a Russian playwright, screenwriter, film director, actor and art director of the Praktika Theatre in Moscow.

See Irkutsk and Ivan Vyrypaev

Ivan Ziatyk

Blessed Ivan Ziatyk (Zyatyk) (1899–1952) was a member of the Redemptorists (Congregation of the Holy Redeemer) a religious congregation in the Latin Rite branch of the Catholic Church and is considered a martyr by the Church.

See Irkutsk and Ivan Ziatyk

Ja Lama

Ja Lama (Жа Лама, also known as Dambiijantsan, Дамбийжанцан or Dambiijaa, Дамбийжаа, (1862–1922)) was an adventurer and warlord of unknown birth and background who fought successive campaigns against the rule of the Qing dynasty in western Mongolia between 1890 and 1922.

See Irkutsk and Ja Lama

Jacob Netsvetov

Saint Jacob Netsvetov, Enlightener of Alaska, was a native of the Aleutian Islands who became a priest of the Orthodox Church and continued the missionary work of St.

See Irkutsk and Jacob Netsvetov

Jacques Gershkovitch

Jacques Gershkovitch (1884–1953) was a Russian conductor and musician who became the first music director of the Portland Junior Symphony (now known as the Portland Youth Philharmonic), the first youth orchestra in the United States, based in Portland, Oregon.

See Irkutsk and Jacques Gershkovitch

James Holman

James Holman FRS (15 October 1786 &ndash; 29 July 1857), known as the "Blind Traveller," was a British adventurer, author and social observer, best known for his writings on his extensive travels.

See Irkutsk and James Holman

Jamsrangiin Tseveen

Jamsrangiin Tseveen (Жамсрангийн Цэвээн; Tsyben Zhamtsaranovich Zhamtsarano; often romanized to Jamtsarano), (1880 - May 14, 1942) was a Buryat scholar and one of the leading figures in Mongolian politics and especially academia in the 1920s.

See Irkutsk and Jamsrangiin Tseveen

Jan Czerski

Jan Stanisław Franciszek Czerski (b. 3 May 1845 in Swolna d. 25 June 1892 nr. Kolyma) was a Polish paleontologist, osteologist, geologist, geographer and explorer of Siberia.

See Irkutsk and Jan Czerski

Jan Weiss

Jan Weiss (10 May 1892 &ndash; 7 March 1972) was a Czech author, best known for his surrealist novel House of a Thousand Floors (Dům o Tisíci Patrech).

See Irkutsk and Jan Weiss

January 20 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)

January 19 - Eastern Orthodox liturgical calendar - January 21.

See Irkutsk and January 20 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)

Japan national bandy team

Japan national bandy team is competing for Japan in the international bandy tournaments.

See Irkutsk and Japan national bandy team

Japanese garden

are traditional gardens whose designs are accompanied by Japanese aesthetic and philosophical ideas, avoid artificial ornamentation, and highlight the natural landscape.

See Irkutsk and Japanese garden

Japanese-Language Proficiency Test

The, or JLPT, is a standardized criterion-referenced test to evaluate and certify Japanese language proficiency for non-native speakers, covering language knowledge, reading ability, and listening ability.

See Irkutsk and Japanese-Language Proficiency Test

Józef Piłsudski

Józef Klemens Piłsudski (5 December 1867 – 12 May 1935) was a Polish statesman; he was Chief of State (1918–22), "First Marshal of Poland" (from 1920), and de facto leader (1926–35) of the Second Polish Republic as the Minister of Military Affairs.

See Irkutsk and Józef Piłsudski

Joasaph Bolotov

Bishop Joasaph (secular name Ivan Ilyich Bolotov, Иоанн Ильич Болотов; 22 January 1761 – May 1799) was a Russian Orthodox missionary, bishop of Kodiak, vicar of Irkutsk diocese.

See Irkutsk and Joasaph Bolotov

Johann Gottlieb Georgi

Johann Gottlieb Georgi (31 December 1729 – 27 October 1802) was a German botanist, naturalist and geographer.

See Irkutsk and Johann Gottlieb Georgi

John Ledyard

John Ledyard (November 1751 &ndash; 10 January 1789) was an English explorer and adventurer.

See Irkutsk and John Ledyard

John of Kronstadt

John of Kronstadt (Иоанн Кронштадтский) (Sura, Arkhangelsk&ndash;, Kronstadt) was a Russian Orthodox archpriest and a member of the Synod of the Russian Orthodox Church.

See Irkutsk and John of Kronstadt

John Randolph Pepper

John R. Pepper (a.k.a. John Pepper and John Randolph Pepper, born 1958) is a photographer and theatre director.

See Irkutsk and John Randolph Pepper

Josef Kořenský

Josef Kořenský (26 July 1847 – 8 October 1938), was a Czech traveller, educator and writer.

See Irkutsk and Josef Kořenský

Julia Danzas

Julia Danzas (May 9, 1879, Athens – April 13, 1942, Rome) was a Russian historian of religion, a Catholic theologian, writer and a Catholic female religious leader.

See Irkutsk and Julia Danzas

Julian Lublinski

Julian Lublinski (authentical surname Motoszonowicz) (1798, Novohrad-Volynskyi - 1873), Decembrist, landowner of the Volynsk labiums.

See Irkutsk and Julian Lublinski

June 30 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)

June 29 - Eastern Orthodox Church calendar - July 1 All fixed commemorations below celebrated on July 13 by Orthodox Churches on the Old Calendar.

See Irkutsk and June 30 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)

Junker (Russia)

Junker (юнкер in Russian, or yunker) has several meanings in Imperial Russia.

See Irkutsk and Junker (Russia)

Kadala Airport

Chita-Kadala International Airport is a single runway airport, located in Chita (p), the administrative center of Zabaykalsky Krai, Russia.

See Irkutsk and Kadala Airport

Kalinin K-4

The Kalinin K-4 was an airliner built in the Soviet Union in the late 1920s which was also adapted for use as a photographic survey aircraft and as an air ambulance.

See Irkutsk and Kalinin K-4

Kamov Ka-8

The Kamov Ka-8 "Иркутянин", (Irkutyanin - from Irkutsk), was a diminutive Soviet helicopter that first flew in 1947.

See Irkutsk and Kamov Ka-8

Kanazawa

is a city located in Ishikawa Prefecture, Japan.

See Irkutsk and Kanazawa

Karel Janoušek

Karel Janoušek, KCB (30 October 1893 – 27 October 1971) was a senior Czechoslovak Air Force officer.

See Irkutsk and Karel Janoušek

Karl Harald Felix Furuhjelm

Karl Harald Felix Furuhjelm, (Фуругельм, Гаральд Васильевич) was a Governor of the Siberian specific department, in Nakhodka.

See Irkutsk and Karl Harald Felix Furuhjelm

Karlo Štajner

Karlo Štajner (15 January 1902 – 1 March 1992) was an Austrian-Yugoslav communist activist and a prominent Gulag survivor.

See Irkutsk and Karlo Štajner

Kate Marsden

Kate Marsden (13 May 1859 – 26 May 1931) was a British missionary, explorer, writer and nursing heroine.

See Irkutsk and Kate Marsden

Kavminvodyavia

Kavminvodyavia (KMV Avia) was an airline based in Mineralnye Vody in the Caucasus, Russia.

See Irkutsk and Kavminvodyavia

Kazakhstan national bandy team

The Kazakh national bandy team has been representing Kazakhstan in the Bandy World Championships since 1995.

See Irkutsk and Kazakhstan national bandy team

Kazan (Volga region) Federal University

Kazan (Volga region) Federal University (Казанский (Приволжский) федеральный университет, Kazanskiy (Privolzhskiy) federalnyy universitet; Казан (Идел Буе) федераль университеты) is located in Kazan, Russia.

See Irkutsk and Kazan (Volga region) Federal University

Kazimierz Rumsza

Kazimierz Rumsza (1886&ndash;1970) was a Polish general.

See Irkutsk and Kazimierz Rumsza

Kazys Ladiga

Kazys Ladiga (25 December 1893 in Iškonys near Biržai – 19 December 1941 in Irkutsk) was a Lithuanian general and one of the first volunteer officers of the Lithuanian army.

See Irkutsk and Kazys Ladiga

Köppen climate classification

The Köppen climate classification is one of the most widely used climate classification systems.

See Irkutsk and Köppen climate classification

Khorloogiin Choibalsan

Khorloogiin Choibalsan (Хорлоогийн Чойбалсан, (February 8, 1895 &ndash; January 26, 1952) was the Communist leader of the Mongolian People's Republic and Marshal (general chief commander) of the Mongolian armed forces from the 1930s until his death in 1952. His rule marked the first and last time in modern Mongolian history that an individual had complete political power. Sometimes referred to as "the Stalin of Mongolia", Choibalsan oversaw Soviet-ordered purges in the late 1930s that resulted in the deaths of an estimated 30,000 to 35,000 Mongolians. Most of the victims were Buddhist clergy, intelligentsia, political dissidents, ethnic Buryats and Kazakhs and other "enemies of the revolution." His intense persecution of Mongolia's Buddhists brought about their near complete extinction in the country. Although Choibalsan's devotion to Joseph Stalin helped preserve his country's fledgling independence during the early years of the Mongolian People's Republic (MPR), it also bound Mongolia closely to the Soviet Union. Throughout his rule, Mongolia's economic, political and military ties to the USSR deepened, infrastructure and literacy rates improved and international recognition of Mongolia's independence expanded, especially after World War II.

See Irkutsk and Khorloogiin Choibalsan

King in the mountain

The King asleep in mountain (D 1960.2 in Stith Thompson's motif index system) is a prominent folklore motif found in many folktales and legends.

See Irkutsk and King in the mountain

Kirensk

Kirensk (p) is a town and the administrative center of Kirensky District in Irkutsk Oblast, Russia, located at the confluence of the Kirenga and Lena Rivers, north of Irkutsk, the administrative center of the oblast.

See Irkutsk and Kirensk

Kirovsky District, Russia

Kirovsky District is the name of several administrative and municipal divisions in Russia.

See Irkutsk and Kirovsky District, Russia

Kodiak Island

Kodiak Island (Alutiiq: Qikertaq, Кадьякъ) is a large island on the south coast of the U.S. state of Alaska, separated from the Alaska mainland by the Shelikof Strait.

See Irkutsk and Kodiak Island

Koeleria

Koeleria is a common and widespread genus of plants in the grass family, found on all continents except Antarctica and on various oceanic islands.

See Irkutsk and Koeleria

Komsomolsk-on-Amur Airport

Khurba (also given as Komsomolsk South, Khurba, Hurba, Uchastok, and Kalinovka) is an air base (also used as an airport (Аэропорт Хурба)) in Khabarovsk Krai, Russia south of Komsomolsk-on-Amur.

See Irkutsk and Komsomolsk-on-Amur Airport

Konkordiya Samoilova

Konkordiia Nikolavna Samoilova (née Gromova) (1876-June 3, 1921), a bolshevik, was a founding editor of the Russian newspaper, Pravda, in 1912.

See Irkutsk and Konkordiya Samoilova

Konstantin Genich

Konstantin Mikhailovich Genich (Константин Михайлович Генич; born January 3, 1978 in Irkutsk) is a retired Russian professional football player.

See Irkutsk and Konstantin Genich

Konstantin Kravchuk

Konstantin Vladimirovich Kravchuk (Константи́н Влади́мирович Кравчу́к; born 23 February 1985) is a Russian professional tennis player.

See Irkutsk and Konstantin Kravchuk

Konstantin Rokossovsky

Konstantin Konstantinovich (Xaverevich) Rokossovsky (December 21, 1896 – August 3, 1968) was a Soviet officer of Polish origin who became Marshal of the Soviet Union, Marshal of Poland and served as Poland's Defence Minister from 1949 until his removal in 1956 during the Polish October.

See Irkutsk and Konstantin Rokossovsky

Konstantin Volkov (athlete)

Konstantin Yuryevich Volkov (Константин Юрьевич Волков; born February 28, 1960 in Irkutsk) is a retired pole vaulter.

See Irkutsk and Konstantin Volkov (athlete)

KrasAir

KrasAir or Krasnoyarsk Airlines (Красноярские авиалинии) was a Russian airline with its head office on the grounds of Krasnoyarsk Yemelyanovo Airport in Krasnoyarsk.

See Irkutsk and KrasAir

Krasnoyarsk Krai

Krasnoyarsk Krai (p) is a federal subject of Russia (a krai), with its administrative center in the city of Krasnoyarsk—the third-largest city in Siberia (after Novosibirsk and Omsk).

See Irkutsk and Krasnoyarsk Krai

Krasnoyarsk Railway

Krasnoyarsk Railway (Красноярская железная дорога) is a subsidiary of the Russian Railways headquartered in Krasnoyarsk and serving the south of Siberia.

See Irkutsk and Krasnoyarsk Railway

Kuybyshevsky District, Russia

Kuybyshevsky District is the name of several administrative and municipal districts in Russia.

See Irkutsk and Kuybyshevsky District, Russia

KYPCK

KYPCK (Volapuk rendition from rus. Курск, Kursk in the Western Alphabet) is a Finnish metal band.

See Irkutsk and KYPCK

Lake Baikal

Lake Baikal (p; Байгал нуур, Baigal nuur; Байгал нуур, Baigal nuur, etymologically meaning, in Mongolian, "the Nature Lake") is a rift lake in Russia, located in southern Siberia, between Irkutsk Oblast to the northwest and the Buryat Republic to the southeast.

See Irkutsk and Lake Baikal

Latvia national bandy team

The Latvian national bandy team took part in its first Bandy World Championship in 2007 as a replacement for Canada who had to withdraw from the competition.

See Irkutsk and Latvia national bandy team

Law enforcement in Azerbaijan

Law enforcement in Azerbaijan comes under the control of the Ministry of Internal Affairs of Azerbaijan, which administers the National Police of the Republic of Azerbaijan.

See Irkutsk and Law enforcement in Azerbaijan

Lebia cruxminor

Lebia cruxminor is a species of ground beetle in the Harpalinae subfamily.

See Irkutsk and Lebia cruxminor

Legione Redenta

The Legione Redenta was an Italian military formation that participated in the Siberian Intervention during the Russian Civil War.

See Irkutsk and Legione Redenta

Lena massacre

The Lena Massacre or Lena Execution (Ленский расстрел, Lenskiy rasstrel) refers to the shooting of goldfield workers on strike in northeast Siberia near the Lena River on.

See Irkutsk and Lena massacre

Leninsky District, Russia

Leninsky District is the name of several administrative and municipal divisions in Russia.

See Irkutsk and Leninsky District, Russia

Lensk

Lensk (p; Лиэнскэй, Lienskey) is a town and the administrative center of Lensky District of the Sakha Republic, Russia, located on the left bank of the Lena River, approximately west of Yakutsk, the capital of the republic.

See Irkutsk and Lensk

Leonard Jaczewski

Leonard Jaczewski, Леонард Антонович Ячевский, Leonard Yachevsky (1858-1916) was a Polish geologist, geographer, engineer and explorer of Siberia.

See Irkutsk and Leonard Jaczewski

Leonid Borodin

Leonid Ivanovich Borodin (Леони́д Ива́нович Бороди́н; 14 April 1938 in Irkutsk – 24 November 2011 in Moscow) was a Russian novelist and journalist.

See Irkutsk and Leonid Borodin

Leonid Bronevoy

Leonid Sergeyevich Bronevoy (Леони́д Серге́евич Бронево́й; December 17, 1928 – December 9, 2017) was a Russian actor.

See Irkutsk and Leonid Bronevoy

Leonid Kharitonov (singer)

Leonid Mikhailovich Kharitonov (Леонид Михайлович Харитонов; 18 September 1933 – 19 September 2017) was a Russian bass-baritone (баритональный бас) singer.

See Irkutsk and Leonid Kharitonov (singer)

Lin Biao

Lin Biao (December 5, 1907 – September 13, 1971) was a Marshal of the People's Republic of China who was pivotal in the Communist victory in the Chinese Civil War, especially in Northeast China.

See Irkutsk and Lin Biao

Linda Brava

Linda Cullberg Lampenius, better known by her maiden name Linda Lampenius and international stage name Linda Brava, (born 26 February 1970) is a Finnish classical concert violinist.

See Irkutsk and Linda Brava

Linton Wells

Linton Wells (1893–1976) was an American foreign correspondent, world traveler and pioneer broadcaster.

See Irkutsk and Linton Wells

List of accidents and incidents involving airliners by airline (P–Z)

This list of accidents and incidents involving airliners by airline summarizes airline accidents and all kinds of incidents, major or minor, by airline company with flight number, location, date, aircraft type, and cause.

See Irkutsk and List of accidents and incidents involving airliners by airline (P–Z)

List of accidents and incidents involving airliners by location

This list of accidents and incidents on airliners by location summarizes airline accidents by state location, airline company with flight number, date, and cause.

See Irkutsk and List of accidents and incidents involving airliners by location

List of accidents and incidents involving military aircraft (1990–99)

This is a list of notable accidents and incidents involving military aircraft grouped by the year in which the accident or incident occurred.

See Irkutsk and List of accidents and incidents involving military aircraft (1990–99)

List of Aeroflot destinations

The history of Aeroflot can be traced back to, when the Council of Labour and Defence passed a resolution to create the Civil Air Fleet of the USSR, amalgamating all pioneer airlines to form Dobrolet on.

See Irkutsk and List of Aeroflot destinations

List of Air China destinations

This is a list of destinations served currently by Air China.

See Irkutsk and List of Air China destinations

List of Air Koryo destinations

This list shows airports that are served by Air Koryo.

See Irkutsk and List of Air Koryo destinations

List of aircraft accidents and incidents resulting in at least 50 fatalities

This article lists aircraft accidents and incidents which resulted in at least 50 fatalities in a single occurrence involving commercial passenger and cargo flights, military passenger and cargo flights, or general aviation flights that have been involved in a ground or mid-air collision with either a commercial or military passenger or cargo flight.

See Irkutsk and List of aircraft accidents and incidents resulting in at least 50 fatalities

List of aircraft hijackings

The following is a list of notable aircraft hijackings.

See Irkutsk and List of aircraft hijackings

List of airports by IATA code: I

The DST column shows the months in which Daylight Saving Time, a.k.a. Summer Time, begins and ends.

See Irkutsk and List of airports by IATA code: I

List of airports by ICAO code: U

The prefix 'U' is used for Russia and all the former Soviet republics except Moldova (LU), Estonia (EE), Latvia (EV), and Lithuania (EY).

See Irkutsk and List of airports by ICAO code: U

List of airports in Irkutsk Oblast

List of airports in Irkutsk Oblast (Russian Federation).

See Irkutsk and List of airports in Irkutsk Oblast

List of airports in Russia

List of airports in Russia (Russian Federation), sorted by location.

See Irkutsk and List of airports in Russia

List of Area Control Centers

Area Control Centers (ACCs) controls IFR air traffic in their flight information region (FIR).

See Irkutsk and List of Area Control Centers

List of astronomical observatories

This is a list of astronomical observatories ordered by name, along with initial dates of operation (where an accurate date is available) and location.

See Irkutsk and List of astronomical observatories

List of Aurora Airlines destinations

Aurora Airlines serves the following destinations (as of January 2017).

See Irkutsk and List of Aurora Airlines destinations

List of botanical gardens

A botanical garden is a place where plants, especially ferns, conifers and flowering plants, are grown and displayed for the purposes of research, conservation, and education.

See Irkutsk and List of botanical gardens

List of cathedrals in Russia

This is the list of cathedrals in Russia sorted by denomination.

See Irkutsk and List of cathedrals in Russia

List of Catholic dioceses (structured view)

As for May 31, 2018, the Catholic Church in its entirety comprises 3,160 ecclesiastical jurisdictions, including over 645 archdioceses and 2,236 dioceses, as well as apostolic vicariates, apostolic exarchates, apostolic administrations, apostolic prefectures, military ordinariates, personal ordinariates, personal prelatures, territorial prelatures, territorial abbacies and missions ''sui juris'' around the world.

See Irkutsk and List of Catholic dioceses (structured view)

List of China Southern Airlines destinations

The list shows airports that are served by China Southern Airlines as part of its scheduled passenger and cargo services.

See Irkutsk and List of China Southern Airlines destinations

List of cities and towns in Russia

This is a list of cities and towns in Russia.

See Irkutsk and List of cities and towns in Russia

List of cities and towns in Russia by population

This is a list of cities and towns in Russia with a population of over 50,000 as of the 2010 Census. These numbers are the population within the limits of the city/town proper, not the urban area or metropolitan area figures. The list excludes the city of Sevastopol and the cities/towns of the Republic of Crimea, as those were not a part of the 2010 Census, are a subject of an unresolved dispute between Russia and Ukraine, and are considered to be a part of Ukraine by the majority of the international community. The city of Zelenograd (a part of the federal city of Moscow) and the municipal cities/towns of the federal city of St. Petersburg are also excluded, as they are not enumerated in the 2010 Census as stand-alone localities.

See Irkutsk and List of cities and towns in Russia by population

List of cities in Russia by average winter temperature

The following table lists the average winter temperature in the 25 largest cities in Russia.

See Irkutsk and List of cities in Russia by average winter temperature

List of companies of Russia

Russia has an upper-middle income, World Bank mixed economy with state ownership in strategic areas of the economy.

See Irkutsk and List of companies of Russia

List of corps and divisions of the Russian Air Force

This is an incomplete list of corps and Aviation Divisions of the Russian Air Force and Russian Air Defence Force (PVO) active from 1992 to the present.

See Irkutsk and List of corps and divisions of the Russian Air Force

List of country subdivisions by area

This is a list of the 50 largest country subdivisions and dependent territories by area (including surface water) in square kilometres.

See Irkutsk and List of country subdivisions by area

List of diplomatic missions in Russia

This is a list of diplomatic missions in Russia.

See Irkutsk and List of diplomatic missions in Russia

List of diplomatic missions of China

This is a list of diplomatic missions of the People's Republic of China.

See Irkutsk and List of diplomatic missions of China

List of diplomatic missions of Mongolia

This is a list of diplomatic missions of Mongolia.

See Irkutsk and List of diplomatic missions of Mongolia

List of diplomatic missions of Poland

This is a list of diplomatic missions of Poland, excluding honorary consulates.

See Irkutsk and List of diplomatic missions of Poland

List of diplomatic missions of South Korea

The following is a list of diplomatic missions of South Korea.

See Irkutsk and List of diplomatic missions of South Korea

List of earthquakes in 2008

Earthquakes in 2008 resulted in about 88,011 fatalities.

See Irkutsk and List of earthquakes in 2008

List of European junior records in athletics

European junior records in the sport of athletics are ratified by the European Athletics Association (EAA).

See Irkutsk and List of European junior records in athletics

List of folk festivals

A folk festival celebrates traditional folk crafts and folk music.

See Irkutsk and List of folk festivals

List of Hainan Airlines destinations

Hainan Airlines serves the following destinations (as of May 2018).

See Irkutsk and List of Hainan Airlines destinations

List of herbaria

This is a list of herbaria, organized first by continent where the herbarium is located, then within each continent by size of the collection.

See Irkutsk and List of herbaria

List of international airports by country

This is a list of international airports by country.

See Irkutsk and List of international airports by country

List of Internet exchange points by size

This is a list of Internet Exchange Points by size, measured by peak data rate (throughput), with additional data on location, establishment and average throughput.

See Irkutsk and List of Internet exchange points by size

List of islands of Russia

This is a list of islands of Russia.

See Irkutsk and List of islands of Russia

List of journalists killed in Russia

The dangers to journalists in Russia have been well known since the early 1990s but concern over the number of unsolved killings soared after Anna Politkovskaya's murder in Moscow on 7 October 2006.

See Irkutsk and List of journalists killed in Russia

List of MIAT Mongolian Airlines destinations

MIAT Mongolian Airlines serves the following scheduled international destinations as of August 2017.

See Irkutsk and List of MIAT Mongolian Airlines destinations

List of military headstamps

A headstamp is the markings on the bottom of a cartridge case designed for a firearm.

See Irkutsk and List of military headstamps

List of military special forces units

This is a list of active special forces (SF) or special operations forces (SOF) from militaries around the world.

See Irkutsk and List of military special forces units

List of Mongolian records in athletics

The following are the national records in athletics in Mongolia maintained by the Mongolian Athletic Federation (MAF).

See Irkutsk and List of Mongolian records in athletics

List of museum ships

This list of museum ships is a comprehensive, sortable, annotated list of notable museum ships around the world.

See Irkutsk and List of museum ships

List of named passenger trains of Russia

This article contains a list of named passenger trains in Russia.

See Irkutsk and List of named passenger trains of Russia

List of names of Asian cities in different languages

This is a list of cities in Asia that have several different names in different languages, including former names.

See Irkutsk and List of names of Asian cities in different languages

List of Olympic torch relays

The Olympic torch relay is the ceremonial relaying of the Olympic flame from Olympia, Greece, to the site of an Olympic Games.

See Irkutsk and List of Olympic torch relays

List of Peabody Award winners (1960–69)

Peabody Award winners and honorable mentions.

See Irkutsk and List of Peabody Award winners (1960–69)

List of places named after Vladimir Lenin

This is a list of places which are located all around the world named or renamed in honor of famous Russian revolution leader Vladimir Ilyich Ulyanov, better known by the pen name Lenin.

See Irkutsk and List of places named after Vladimir Lenin

List of planetariums

This entry is a list of permanent planetariums, including software and manufacturers.

See Irkutsk and List of planetariums

List of population centers by latitude

The following is a list of population centers by latitude.

See Irkutsk and List of population centers by latitude

List of population centers by longitude

The following is a list of cities by longitude.

See Irkutsk and List of population centers by longitude

List of power stations in Russia

The following page lists the power stations in Russia.

See Irkutsk and List of power stations in Russia

List of primates of the Orthodox Church in America

This article is a list of primates of the Orthodox Church in America (OCA).

See Irkutsk and List of primates of the Orthodox Church in America

List of Pulkovo destinations

Rossiya Russian Airlines (Pulkovo) operates the following services (as of December 2006).

See Irkutsk and List of Pulkovo destinations

List of rail accidents (1930–49)

This is a list of rail accidents from 1930 to 1949.

See Irkutsk and List of rail accidents (1930–49)

List of rail yards

This article is a list of important rail yards in geographical order.

See Irkutsk and List of rail yards

List of rampage killers (Europe)

This section of the list of rampage killers contains those cases that occurred in Europe.

See Irkutsk and List of rampage killers (Europe)

List of rivers of Russia

Russia can be divided into a European and an Asian part.

See Irkutsk and List of rivers of Russia

List of Rossiya destinations

Rossiya Airlines, a Russian airline, flies to the following destinations (as of June 2018).

See Irkutsk and List of Rossiya destinations

List of Russian explorers

The history of exploration by citizens or subjects of the Russian Federation, the Soviet Union, the Russian Empire, the Tsardom of Russia and other Russian predecessor states forms a significant part of the history of Russia as well as the history of the world.

See Irkutsk and List of Russian explorers

List of Russian flags

This is a list of flags used in Russia.

See Irkutsk and List of Russian flags

List of Russian saints

This list of Russian saints includes the saints canonized by the Russian Orthodox Church and the Russian saints canonized by other Orthodox Churches.

See Irkutsk and List of Russian saints

List of S7 Airlines destinations

S7 Airlines operates the following regular services.

See Irkutsk and List of S7 Airlines destinations

List of Serebro Tours

This is the list of concert tours and appearances by Serebro, a Russian girl group.

See Irkutsk and List of Serebro Tours

List of serial killers by country

This is a list of notable serial killers, by the country where most of the murders were committed.

See Irkutsk and List of serial killers by country

List of serial killers by number of victims

A serial killer is a person who murders three or more people, in two or more separate events over a period of time, for primarily psychological reasons.

See Irkutsk and List of serial killers by number of victims

List of Soviet armies

An army, besides the generalized meanings of ‘a country's armed forces’ or its ‘land forces’, is a type of formation in militaries of various countries, including the Soviet Union.

See Irkutsk and List of Soviet armies

List of squadrons and detachments of the Russian Air Force 2007

This is a list of reported active squadrons and detachments of the Russian Air Force in 2007.

See Irkutsk and List of squadrons and detachments of the Russian Air Force 2007

List of the busiest airports in Russia

This is a list of the busiest airports in Russia, using data from the Federal Air Transport Agency.

See Irkutsk and List of the busiest airports in Russia

List of the busiest airports in the former USSR

This is a list of the busiest airports in the Post-Soviet states (handling more than 1,000,000 passengers per year), ranked by total passengers per year, including both terminal and transit passengers.

See Irkutsk and List of the busiest airports in the former USSR

List of town tramway systems in Russia

This is a list of town tramway systems in Russia by federal district.

See Irkutsk and List of town tramway systems in Russia

List of towns and cities with 100,000 or more inhabitants/cityname: I

This is a list of towns and cities in the world believed to have 100,000 or more inhabitants, as of 2006.

See Irkutsk and List of towns and cities with 100,000 or more inhabitants/cityname: I

List of towns and cities with 100,000 or more inhabitants/country: P-Q-R-S

This is a list of towns and cities in the world in alphabetical order, beginning with the letters P, Q, R and S, by country believed to have 100,000 or more inhabitants.

See Irkutsk and List of towns and cities with 100,000 or more inhabitants/country: P-Q-R-S

List of tram and light rail transit systems

The following is a list of cities that have current tram/streetcar (including heritage trams/heritage streetcars), or light rail systems as part of their regular public transit systems.

See Irkutsk and List of tram and light rail transit systems

List of Transaero destinations

This article lists the destinations that Transaero Airlines served near the end of its operations in 2015.

See Irkutsk and List of Transaero destinations

List of trolleybus systems in Russia

This is a list of trolleybus systems in Russia.

See Irkutsk and List of trolleybus systems in Russia

List of Turkish exonyms

An exonym is a place name, used by non-natives of that place, that differs from the official or native name for that place.

See Irkutsk and List of Turkish exonyms

List of universities in Europe founded after 1945

This list of modern universities in Europe since 1945 comprises all universities which have been founded in Europe since the end of World War II.

See Irkutsk and List of universities in Europe founded after 1945

List of Ural Airlines destinations

Ural Airlines serves the following destinations.

See Irkutsk and List of Ural Airlines destinations

List of UTC time offsets

This is a list of the UTC time offsets, showing the difference in hours and minutes from Coordinated Universal Time (UTC), from the westernmost (−12:00) to the easternmost (+14:00).

See Irkutsk and List of UTC time offsets

List of Vladivostok Air destinations

Vladivostok Air operates the following scheduled and charter services (as of December 2012).

See Irkutsk and List of Vladivostok Air destinations

List of volcanoes in Russia

This is a list of active and extinct volcanoes in Russia.

See Irkutsk and List of volcanoes in Russia

List of wheel-well stowaway flights

This page lists known flights with stowaways, who for various reasons traveled inside the wheel well (landing gear compartment, also known as wheel bay) of an aircraft.

See Irkutsk and List of wheel-well stowaway flights

List of World Heritage Sites in Russia

This a list of UNESCO World Heritage Sites in Russia.

See Irkutsk and List of World Heritage Sites in Russia

Listvyanka, Irkutsky District, Irkutsk Oblast

Listvyanka (Листвя́нка) is an urban locality (a work settlement) in Irkutsky District of Irkutsk Oblast, Russia, located from Irkutsk, near the point where the Angara River leaves Lake Baikal.

See Irkutsk and Listvyanka, Irkutsky District, Irkutsk Oblast

Long Range Aviation

Long Range Aviation (r, abbr. to AДД, or ADD) is the branch of the Soviet Air Forces and Russian Air Force tasked with long-range bombardment of strategic targets with nuclear weapons.

See Irkutsk and Long Range Aviation

Longwave

In radio, longwave, long wave or long-wave, and commonly abbreviated LW, refers to parts of the radio spectrum with wavelengths longer than what was originally called the medium-wave broadcasting band.

See Irkutsk and Longwave

Ludwig von Hagemeister

Ludwig August von Hagemeister (Лео́нтий Андриа́нович Гагеме́йстер; Leontij Andrianovic Gagemejster;Baltic, Alix. The Baltic Connection in Russian America. Jahrbücher für Geschichte Osteuropas, Neue Folge 42, No. 3 (1994), pp. 321-339. 1780 Drostenhof, Governorate of Livonia, Russian Empire – December 24, 1833) was a Baltic German who held the rank of Captain of the 1st rank in the Imperial Russian Navy.

See Irkutsk and Ludwig von Hagemeister

Ludwik Trynkowski

Ludwik Trynkowski (born 1805, d. 1849 in Irkutsk) was a Polish Roman Catholic priest and religious writer.

See Irkutsk and Ludwik Trynkowski

Ludzie bezdomni

Ludzie bezdomni (Homeless people) is a book written by Stefan Żeromski in 1899 in Zakopane, Poland, published for the first time in 1900.

See Irkutsk and Ludzie bezdomni

Lyudmila Chernykh

Lyudmila Ivanovna Chernykh (Людмила Іванівна Черних, Людми́ла Ива́новна Черны́х, June 13, 1935 in Shuya, Ivanovo Oblast – July 28, 2017) was a Russian-born Soviet astronomer, wife and colleague of Nikolai Stepanovich Chernykh, and a prolific discoverer of minor planets.

See Irkutsk and Lyudmila Chernykh

M5 highway (Russia)

The Russian route M5 (also known as the Ural Highway) is a major trunk road running across a distance of 1879 km from Moscow to the Ural Mountains.

See Irkutsk and M5 highway (Russia)

M55 highway (Russia)

The Russian route M55 is a federal highway in Russia, part of the Baikal Highway (which is part of the Trans-Siberian Highway): The highway runs from Irkutsk through Ulan-Ude to Chita with a total length of 1113 km.

See Irkutsk and M55 highway (Russia)

Maksim Mashnev

Maksim Vitalyevich Mashnyov (Максим Витальевич Машнёв; born 12 January 1993) is a Russian football midfielder.

See Irkutsk and Maksim Mashnev

Maksim Zyuzin

Maksim Anatolyevich Zyuzin (Максим Анатольевич Зюзин; born 9 August 1986) is a Russian professional football player.

See Irkutsk and Maksim Zyuzin

Mama Airport

Mama Airport (Аэропорт Мама) is an airport in Irkutsk Oblast, Russia located northwest of Mama on the Vitim River.

See Irkutsk and Mama Airport

Mamert Stankiewicz

Mamert Stankiewicz (January 22, 1889 &ndash; November 26, 1939) was a Polish naval officer of the merchant marine, the commander of Lwów, SS Polonia and finally the captain of the Polish ocean liner MS ''Piłsudski''.

See Irkutsk and Mamert Stankiewicz

Manchu language

Manchu (Manchu: manju gisun) is a critically endangered Tungusic language spoken in Manchuria; it was the native language of the Manchus and one of the official languages of the Qing dynasty (1636–1911) of China.

See Irkutsk and Manchu language

Manjaagiin Ichinnorov

Manjaagiin Ichinnorov (Манжаагийн Ичинноров; born 12 December 1972) is a Mongolian civil rights activist, born in the Khovd Province of Western Mongolia.

See Irkutsk and Manjaagiin Ichinnorov

Manzhouli

Manzhouli (Маньчжу́рия; Манжуур хот) is a sub-prefecture-level city located in Hulunbuir prefecture-level city, Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region of China (PRC).

See Irkutsk and Manzhouli

Marburg virus

Marburg virus is a hemorrhagic fever virus of the Filoviridae family of viruses and a member of the species Marburg marburgvirus, genus Marburgvirus.

See Irkutsk and Marburg virus

March 30 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)

March 29 - Eastern Orthodox liturgical calendar - March 31 All fixed commemorations below are observed on April 12 by Orthodox Churches on the Old Calendar.

See Irkutsk and March 30 (Eastern Orthodox liturgics)

Maria Klenova

Maria Vasilyevna Klenova (Мари́я Васи́льевна Клёнова) (12 August 1898 – 6 August 1976) was a Russian and Soviet marine geologist and one of the founders of Russian marine science and contributor to the first Soviet Antarctic atlas.

See Irkutsk and Maria Klenova

Maritime fur trade

The maritime fur trade was a ship-based fur trade system that focused on acquiring furs of sea otters and other animals from the indigenous peoples of the Pacific Northwest Coast and natives of Alaska.

See Irkutsk and Maritime fur trade

Mariya Ovechkina

Mariya Ovechkina (born 1991) is a beauty contest contestant who won the title of Miss Irkutsk in 2009 and participated in the Miss Russia 2010 contest.

See Irkutsk and Mar