CREDIT Marty Feldman with this: a sense of restraint. Mr. Feldman is the star, director and co-author of ''In God We Trust'' (the dollar sign is dopey, but it does give you an idea of what Mr. Feldman is up to) and the temptations must have been enormous. The movie, which opens at the Rivoli and other theaters today, is about an innocent - a monk who leaves his cloister - who falls among religious hucksters. Then he meets God. Moreover, everything takes place in Los Angeles, so already you can see the temptations. Mr. Feldman could easily have choked on his own satirical sense.

Nonetheless, he has not, but the problem is that he hasn't made a particularly funny movie, either. ''In God We Tru

'' doesn't really have much comic energy, and it goes in fits and starts. Most of its jokes spring from Mr. Feldman's own persona of radiant innocence, and while Mr. Feldman can be endearing, he can't support a whole picture that way. Mr. Feldman also has a predilection for pratfalls. When you've seen one pratfall, however, you've seen almost all of them.

Mr. Feldman's monk leaves his monastery - which is run by the Trappist Order of St. Ambrose the Unlikely - in search of Armageddon T. Thunderbird, a big-time television evangelist. He wants Thunderbird, who founded the Church of Divine Profit, to pay the mortgage on the monastery.

On his way to Thunderbird, Mr. Feldman meets Dr. Sebastian Melmoth, a seedy evangelist, who is given a nicely understated performance by Peter Boyle. He also meets Mary, a prostitute, played by Louise Lasser, who is very much as you remember her from ''Mary Hartman, Mary Hartman.'' Eventually, virtue triumphs. Melmoth and Mary are redeemed. Thunderbird, who is played by Andy Kaufman (white robes, smarmy smile, an intricate coiffure) gets done in, and the monastery is saved.

Mr. Feldman's monk also converts God. God, you see, is really a computer, who more or less materializes into Richard Pryor. And if you think the movie has been restrained so far, wait until you see Mr. Pryor: His God is really rather sweet. Even downtown Los Angeles looks rather sweet. Theologically speaking, ''In God We Tru

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.