Most people are vaguely familiar with the expression “Kilroy was here” but how did it arise and what was it real significance? This story must rate as no more than a footnote to history. Nonetheless it is tales like this that comprise the rich mosaic of life and provide its human interest.

Most people have sometime in their life seen the drawing of a bald head with an overlarge nose peering over a fence as it is now an iconic picture. Like us today, the Allies during WW2 – but mainly the Americans – had seen this quirky image adorning everything from tanks, vehicles to planes sometime during their service in the American military.

Finally in 1946, somebody – or in this case Organisation – decided to discover the originator of this drawing. So In 1946 the American Transit Association, through its radio program, “Speak to America,” sponsored a nationwide contest to find the real Kilroy, offering a prize of a real tram – trolley car in American parlance – to the person who could prove himself to be the genuine creator.

Almost 40 men stepped forward to make that claim, but only James Kilroy from Halifax, Massachusetts, had evidence of his identity.

According to Wikipedia/Google:

‘Kilroy’ was a 46-year old shipyard worker during the war who worked as a checker at the Fore River Shipyard in Quincy. His job was to go around and check on the number of rivets completed. Riveters were on piecework and got paid by the rivet. He would count a block of rivets and put a check mark in semi-waxed lumber chalk, so the rivets wouldn’t be counted twice. When Kilroy went off duty, the riveters would erase the mark.

Later on, an off-shift inspector would come through and count the rivets a second time, resulting in double pay for the riveters.

One day Kilroy’s boss called him into his office. The foreman was upset about all the wages being paid to riveters, and asked him to investigate. It was then he realized what had been going on. The tight spaces he had to crawl in to check the rivets didn’t lend themselves to lugging around a paint can and brush, so Kilroy decided to stick with the waxy chalk. He continued to put his check mark on each job he inspected, but added ‘KILROY WAS HERE’ in king-sized letters next to the check, and eventually added the sketch of the chap with the long nose peering over the fence and that became part of the Kilroy message.

Once he did that, the riveters stopped trying to wipe away his marks. Ordinarily the rivets and chalk marks would have been covered up with paint. With the war on, however, ships were leaving the Quincy Yard so fast that there wasn’t time to paint them. As a result, Kilroy’s inspection “trademark” was seen by thousands of servicemen who boarded the troopships the yard produced.

But that was not the end of the story as his message apparently rang a bell with the servicemen, because they picked it up and spread it all over Europe and the South Pacific. Apparently before war’s end, “Kilroy” had been here, there, and everywhere on the long hauls to Berlin and Tokyo .

To the troops outbound in those ships, however, he was a complete mystery; all they knew for sure was that someone named Kilroy had “been there first.” As a joke, U.S. servicemen began placing the graffiti wherever they landed, claiming it was already there when they arrived.

Kilroy became the U.S. super-GI who had always “already been” wherever GIs went. It became a challenge to place the logo in the most unlikely places imaginable (it is said to be atop Mt. Everest, the Statue of Liberty , the underside of the Arc de Triomphe, and even scrawled in the dust on the moon. As the war went on, the legend grew.

Underwater demolition teams routinely sneaked ashore on Japanese-held islands in the Pacific to map the terrain for coming invasions by U.S. troops (and thus, presumably, were the first GI’s there). On one occasion, however, they reported seeing enemy troops painting over the Kilroy logo! Whether these reports were apocryphal or not has never been established.

In 1945, an outhouse was built for the exclusive use of Roosevelt, Stalin, and Churchill at the Potsdam conference. Its’ first occupant was Stalin, who emerged and asked his aide (in Russian), “Who is Kilroy?”

To help prove his authenticity in 1946, James Kilroy brought along officials from the shipyard and some of the riveters. He won the trolley car, which he gave to his nine children as a Christmas gift and set it up as a playhouse in the Kilroy yard in Halifax, Massachusetts. The tradition and with it the legend lives on.

It is reported that a Kilroy icon was even painted on Osama bin Laden’s house in Pakistan by the American SEAL’s team that annihilated him.

Naturally cartoons have used this iconic symbol in their jokes too.

James Kilroy must have died in 1962, but his name lives on albeit as a foornote to history.