Godzilla is a 1998 American film remake of the Japanese film of the same name. It was co-written and directed by Roland Emmerich, director of Independence Day and Stargate, and starred Matthew Broderick, Jean Reno, Maria Pitillo, Hank Azaria and Kevin Dunn. The film spawned an animated sequel called Godzilla: The Series. The film was released on May 20, 1998, by Tri-Star Pictures.

The film follows the attacks of the titular creature on Manhattan, following his apparent creation via radioactive fallout from atomic bomb testing decades before. The film follows the attacks, beginning with the off-shore attack of a Japanese fishing vessel and culminating in a confrontation of Godzilla and the American military in the Big Apple.

For the original Japanese fillm, see Gojira. For the 1984 direct sequel, see The Return of Godzilla. For the 2014 film, see Godzilla (2014 film)

Tropes used in Godzilla (1998 film) include:

Acrophobic Bird: The helicopter pilots seem to always stay at mouth-level of the monster they're attacking.

Animated Adaptation: The resulting animated series, considered by many the best thing to come of the movie.

Badass: Phillipe Roache.

Bad Vibrations

Captain Obvious: "That's a lot of fish!"

Car Fu: When Jean Reno gets behind the wheel of a taxi, shit gets mad real.

Cheese-Eating Surrender Monkeys: Averted hard. The French Foreign Legionaires that work with the protagonists are very competent, knot-cutting, pragmatic and professional soldiers.

Who are all killed horribly by baby godzillas!

Color Wash: The flashbacks that open the film are yellow.

Driving Stick: American Nick telling French Philippe that the Army Hummer isn't in gear when trying to sneak into the subway system.

Elevator Escape

Epic Fail: The USAF blowing up the Chrysler building with two missiles meant for 'Zilla is an excellent example. Justified[1] and Lampshaded.

Expy: Harry Shearer's news reporter character, Charlie Caiman, has shades of a live-action Kent Brockman.

Follow the Leader: Let's face it, the infant Godzillas were really only there because of the popularity of Jurassic Park's Velociraptors.

One suspects that instead of scene descriptions here, there were twenty blank pages in the screenplay prefaced by one sentence: "Just like the Velociraptor attack in Jurassic Park." I think they actually owe DGA residuals to Steven Spielberg for this scene.