Jonah Attalla

Design Academy Eindhoven Graduation Show 2023, took place between 21st - 29th October during Dutch Design Week. During these nine days more than 220 graduate projects were showcased.

This year the show was staged in the heart of Eindhoven city, transforming Heuvel shopping centre into a space where the graduate’s experimental, curious, and provocative design projects met the hustle and bustle of everyday city life.

"Presenting the Graduation Show 2023 in this central, active location will prompt visitors to reflect on how design shapes the way they dwell, work, travel, and play in cities today, and how this will inevitably change as we face the social, technological, and environmental challenges of tomorrow." - from the DAE statement

The transition from the educational environment to the very public space of this year’s graduation show is made possible by the curatorial vision of Martina Muzi and Nadine Botha, the display concept and production of Mark van der Gronden, and the campaign and graphic design of the whywhynot Collective.

The show also presented the Award Ceremony for the annual Gijs Bakker, René Smeets and Melkweg Awards. The nominees have been selected during the assessment of the Master’s and Bachelor’s graduation projects by a jury of experts who convened at Design Academy Eindhoven in June. The winners will receive a sum of € 2,000 and a trophy designed by DAE alumnus Olga Flor in collaboration with EE Labels.

Read more about the awards and the nominees here.

Take a look at the picture report and some impressions of the show and projects.

Sien Entius

Jonah Attalla

Michelle Akiki Jonker

Jonah Attalla

Willem Zwiers

Yufei Gao

Dani van Gerwen

Lucas Hendrix

Eros Risiglione

Henry K.Wien

Ilaria Cavaglia

Nolan Le Goff

Carys Higgins

Sylvain Bauguen

Bela Bezold

Emma Meewis

@natasha's_design_stuff

Dārta Maija Zēģele

Matilde Cappelletti

Chaewon Kong

Fynn Herlinghaus

Fynn Herlinghaus

Pablo Rego Rivera & Camila d'Estutt d'Assay

Pablo Rego Rivera & Camila d'Estutt d'Assay

Pablo Rego Rivera & Camila d'Estutt d'Assay

Elizabeth Balado

Kristiyan Hristov

Dace Suna

Yawen Cong

Charles Weinberg and Shai Ben-Ami

Charles Weinberg and Shai Ben-Ami

Lison Gueguen

Niels Nijman

Niels Nijman

Suzanne Corcessin

Agatha Prieto Jeanty

Fedora Boonaert

Bhavneet Kaur

Szymon Klejborowski

Eric Treillard

Eric Treillard

Hsiang-Lin Kuo

YP Yuanpu Wang

Marco Loi

Pablo Bolumar Plata

Nico Neves

Claudia Rao Hackett

Clemens Tomlow

Luka Mahmuljin Udovičić

Luka Mahmuljin Udovičić

Janneke de Lange

Sonia Gorecka

Thaïs Busnel

Thaïs Busnel

Walter Mingledorff

Rosa Raaphorst

Blanche Vivet