They are full of heart this year: with projects that appeal to the emotions and do not only stimulate heightened awareness but actual change. The winners were announced and celebrated on 27 October at the DDA Award Night during Dutch Design Week 2022 in Eindhoven.

It is not an easy time to be a designer; there are so many things to consider. But this does not stand in the way of designers taking responsibility for design as a discipline and probably even increases the need for collaboration. Designers and their clients are clearly focusing on social impact and designing layered experiences to achieve their goals. This year, the younger designers in particular present strikingly clear perspectives on a variety of urgent social themes.

On the one hand, design is becoming more accessible again, and on the other, designers are stretching the boundaries of what we have come to see as normal. With this year’s winners, the Dutch Design Awards 2022 has a rich, distinctive harvest that represents these developments at all levels.

Read the full jury report on dutchdesignawards.nl.

These are all the winners of Dutch Design Awards 2022:

PARTNER AWARDS

Dutch Design Awards is able to present four additional awards this year thanks to collaboration with our partners:

DDA x Keep an Eye Foundation

Keep an Eye Foundation keeps its eyes open for young, promising talents. The collaboration with DDA makes it possible to financially support Young Designer again this year. Winner Cream on Chrome (Martina Huynh & Jonas Althaus) received a Keep an Eye Young Designer Grant of 12,000 euros from Keep an Eye Foundation, nominees Irene Ha and Leo Maher received 9,000 euros each.

DDA x MINI

For the DDA x MINI Award, MINI chose Buro Belén as the winner from all 24 nominees: they get to drive a special edition electric MINI for a year. Danielle Dieben presented the award to Buro Belén on behalf of MINI: ‘Design and sustainability go hand in hand. Buro Belén uses very innovative materials and just like MINI their aim is protecting both the people and the planet.’

DDA x EY

The DDA x EY Award consists of a coaching program based on EY's services, from creating a business plan together to financial advice. After the presentation, EY will map out a customized trajectory together with winner Cream on Chrome, chosen from all nominees. Maton Sonnemans presented the award to Martina Huynh and Jonas Althaus on behalf of EY: ‘EY is very inspired by the way Cream on Chrome works. We are looking forward to helping them grow their business. Let’s work together on our mission to build a better world.’

DDA x Catawiki

This year, for the first time, the DDA x Catawiki Award will be presented to one of the 24 nominees. In addition to a cash prize and professional photo shoot, winner Buro Belén will be extensively featured on Catawiki.nl. Eléonore Floret presented the award to Buro Belén on behalf of Catawiki: “This new award is a great experience; at Catawiki we want to support designers that are creating a brighter future through innovation.’