2024

Many congratulations to Prof. Meijer for receiving the prestigious Medema Award 2024, awarded annually for groundbreaking research in the field of polymers

On March 22nd, 2024 Marco Preuss successfully defended his Ph.D. thesis titled “Chiral Supramolecular Materials: From Fundamentals to Application”. Many congratulations to Dr. Preuss!

Prof. Bert Meijer becomes the first professor in the Eindhoven Institute of Technology and very few in the Netherlands to supervise over 100 PhD graduates, here is a recent video featuring Prof. Jan van Hest (4th PhD from the group) & Laura Rijns (101th PhD) published by TU e to reflect on Bert’s journey & his goal to empower young scientists

2023

On December 7th, 2023 Joost van der Tol successfully defended his Ph.D. thesis titled “Supramolecular Polymeric Materials: The interplay between macromolecules & supramolecular polymers”. Many congratulations to Dr. Van der Tol!

Beginning of this month, members of Meijer-Vantomme Lab celebrated the Dutch Sinterklaas tradition and enjoyed various traditional snacks. We wish you all a Merry Christmas and a Happy New Year!

Beginning of November, we visited Limburg as part of our annual group retreat, which included a company visit to Brightlands Chemelot Campus, a nice talk by “hamburger professor” Dr. Mark Post (Mosa Meat), a mini-symposium and some fun activities

Many Congratulations to our group member Dr. Giulia Lavarda on receiving one of the prestigious 2023 Margarita Salas Research Awards in Fundamental Sciences

On September 14th 2023 Marle Vleugels succesfully defended her PhD thesis titled “Bioactive supramolecular assemblies”. Many congratulations to Dr. Vleugels! This defense was a special one because it was Bert Meijer’s 100th PhD student, so also congratulations to Bert!

Our congratulations go to Professor Craig Hawker of the University of California Santa Barbara, who has been awarded an honorary doctorate by Eindhoven University of Technology for his outstanding work in polymer chemistry.

To give students an insight into the research done in the Meijer group, Bart van den Bersselaar wrote an article in the T-licht, the association magazine of T.S.V. ‘Jan Pieter Minckelers’.

Several of our (former) group members attented the Gordon Research Conference in Switzerland on “Structure and Motion Across Length Scales“, which was very inspiring.

After being awarded the Herman Staudinger Preis 2022, Bert Meijer was interviewed by ChemistryViews and shared his insights regarding training of Ph.D. students and communicating science to the public.

On February 24th 2023, Martin van Son has successfully defended his PhD thesis titled “Functional Block Molecules with Nanoscale Order”. Congratulations Dr. van Son!

2022

“The molecular rebellion” – an article in Coopernicus written by Marcin Ślęczkowski, former PhD student of the group, about his PhD work .

Giulia Lavarda received three awards for her outstanding PhD thesis: best PhD Thesis defended in 2021 in the Community of Madrid from the Madrid Territorial Section of the Spanish Royal Society of Chemistry, 2021 PhD Thesis Award of the Nanoscience and Molecular Materials Group of the Spanish Royal Society of Chemistry and extraordinary PhD Award from the Universidad Autónoma de Madrid. Congratulations on these great achievements Giulia!

Brigitte Lamers, a previous PhD student in our group, received the Marina van Damme award. This award is granted to give successful women an extra push to make a groundbreaking career move. Brigitte will use it to develop herself further as leader and rolemodel for women in industry. Congratulations Brigitte!

On September 29th, we visited the groups of Filip du Prez and Richard Hoogenboom at Ghent university as part of our annual group retreat, together with the Palmans group. We had a very inspiring mini-symposium, and congratulations to Marle Vleugels and Filip Van Lysebetten for winning the presentation award!

Congratulations to Bert Meijer for being awarded with the “Hermann-Staudinger-Preis“!

On July 21st, three of our group members visited the University of Tokyo, where they had a seminar with the groups of prof. Aida and prof. Itoh. Great to see these international visits happening again!

Stef Jansen received a poster prize at the 25th IUPAC International Conference on Physical Organic Chemistry. Congratulations Stef!

Perhaps a bit counterintuitive, but by dilution of a supramolecular system a hydrogel can be obtained! Read more about these intriguing in our latest publication in Science Magazine, or some background at the TU/e website.

The Chiral Materials Team, consisting, amongst others, of Bert Meijer and our previous group members Chidambar Kulkarni and Mathijs Mabesoone, received the Stephanie L Kwolek Award. Congratulations to all!

Congratulations to Bert Meijer for being awarded with the “Hermann-Staudinger-Preis“!

On May 21st, Bert Meijer received the Van ‘t Hoff Medal for his outstanding and groundbreaking work in chemistry. Congratulations to Bert for this wonderful achievement!

On May 12th, Ghislaine Vantomme was nominated for the Groundbreaking Research Award during the TU/e Research Day. Photography by Bart van Overbeeke.

Bert Meijer has been elected as international member of the US National Academy of Sciences. Congratulations to Bert for this great news!

Congratulations to Shikha Dhiman for being selected for the Freiburg Rising Stars Academy.

A special issue of Materials Horizons in honour of Seth Marder, including our publication “Tuning the donor–acceptor interactions in phase-segregated block molecules“.

Our recent publication in Biomacromolecules “Choline-Functionalized Supramolecular Copolymers: Toward Antimicrobial Activity against Streptococcus pneumoniae“ is among the recently most accessed articles!

Behind the paper: a blog post by Elisabeth Weyandt about our recent publication on dilution-induced supramolecular polymerization of porphyrins.

The UNSW RNA Institute is welcoming Bert Meijer as a Visiting Professor for the next 3 years! He will work together with Director Palli Thordarson and others in the institute.

2021

Congratulations to Fabian Eisenreich for attaining a VENI award! He will continue his career as assistant professor in the group of Zeljko Tomovic, we wish him all the best luck.

On December 2nd we celebrated Dutch Sinterklaas with presents and pepernoten, Sinterklaas even visited our group!

Ghislaine Vantomme made it to the finals of the Dream Chemistry Award with “Supramolecular Wires for Brain-Inspired Computing”. Congratulations to Ghislaine!

On November 30th 2021, Sandra Schoenmakers has successfully defended her PhD thesis titled “Supramolecular Polymers under the Magnifying Glass”. Congratulations Dr. Schoenmakers!

Shikha Diman presented her work on multivalency induced clustering at the Women Interactive Materials Award, the jury awarded her with a 3rd place. Congratulations Shikha!

Stef Jansen has been nominated for the KNCV Golden Master Award. Congratulations to Stef with the nomination and good luck at the award ceremony in October during the KNCV Evening of Chemistry.

On September 17th 2021, Elisabeth Weyandt has successfully defended her PhD thesis titled “Controlling the length of supramolecular polymers”. Congratulations Dr. Weyandt!

Beginning of September we visited Friesland for our group retreat, which included a very interesting ‘bird talk’ from professor Theunis Piersma.

The first ‘live’ meeting again with the whole group at the Academisch Genootschap – a mini symposium to share the status and challenges of our work.

On June 23rd 2021, Brigitte Lamers has successfully defended her PhD thesis titled “Nanostructured Siloxane-Based Materials”. Congratulations Dr. Lamers!

A special issue of Journal of Polymer Science on polymer science and technology at ICMS. This issue includes work from our group on discrete oligodimethylsiloxanes in bulk and supramolecular polymers in solution.

On June 21st 2021, Andreas Rösch has successfully defended his PhD thesis titled “Supramolecular charge transfer systems”. Congratulations Dr. Rösch!

On the occasion of 65 years TU/e with the theme “Heroes like you”, Marle Vleugels was interviewed as part of “the Heroes of the Month: the doctoral candidates”. Photography by Bart van Overbeeke.

A combination of theory and experiments: Elisabeth Weyandt and Ivo Filot did some fine ‘spot the differences’ on a molecular level. Read more about this work in Chemistry or at the C2W.

“In situ with Bert Meijer”, an interview with Bert in Chemistry World about the rewards of working with young people and the role of chemistry in fighting Covid-19.

A tribute to van ‘t Hoff: a prediction dating from 1894 about chiral molecules confirmed by Eindhoven scientists Marcin Ślęczkowski and Mathijs Mabesoone published in Nature Chemistry. Read more about it at Nemo Kennislink and C2W!

Eindhoven researchers found that thin plastics can also synchronize their swing, similar to what Christiaan Huygens observed in the 17th century. Read more about this interesting phenomenon in Nature Materials, or at the Cursor or NEMO kennislink for a shorter read.

The Journal of American Chemical Society announced that Bert Meijer will join the editorial team as an associate editor. Congratulations to Bert, the first Dutch associate editor of this prestigious journal!

On the 14th of January we had the first Meijer/Aida joint group seminar with the group of professor Aida from The University of Tokyo. Topics ranged from Molecular Assembly to Supramolecular Polymerization and Materials Science.

2020

Plastic, fantastic? Bert Meijer gives a lecture about our future world with(out) plastics at Universiteit van Nederland

Congratulations to Dr. Tobias Schnitzer for being awarded both ETH medal for outstanding doctoral thesis and Nachwuchspreis 2020 of the Max-Bergmann Kreis for his PhD thesis “Proline-rich Peptides – From Catalysts to Metal Organic Frameworks”.

On the occasion of his royal distinction, an interview with Bert Meijer in the Cursor about his love for molecules and his career at TU/e.

Een interview met Bert Meijer in de Cursor over zijn liefde voor moleculen en zijn carrière bij de TU/e, ter ere van zijn koninklijke onderscheiding.

How are the homeworkers doing now, 8 months after the first appeal to work from home? Brigitte Lamers looks back on her experiences in the Cursor.

Research from the Meijer group made it to the front cover of JACS! The manuscript “Supramolecular Double Helices from Small C3 Symmetrical Molecules Aggregated in Water” is also the 125th publication of Bert Meijer in this journal.

The Meijer group compliments Jesús Mosquera, a former group member, on being awarded with with the Ramon y Cajal fellowship. We wish him all the best for his career in Spain!

Olga Goor, a former PhD student in our group, now works at Chemelot where she has been working on a “pilot plant for everyone”. You can read more about it in C2W.(photography by Patrick Marx)

On June 26th, 2020 Mathijs Mabesoone has successfully defended his PhD thesis titled “Competitive Solvent Interactions in Supramolecular Polymerizations”. Congratulations Dr. Mabesoone!

Lioba Heidendael, a former MSc student in our group, crossed the border for her industrial internship in Belgium. Read all about her experiences at our friendly neighbours in the T-licht!

To give students an insight into the research done in the Meijer group, Marle Vleugels wrote an article in the T-licht, the association magazine of T.S.V. ‘Jan Pieter Minckelers’.

How is it to work from home as a PhD student during these quarantine times? Brigitte Lamers shares her experiences in the Cursor. And as it turns out, “it is very nice to write at home, without any distractions”.

Bert Meijer was honored with the title Commander of the Order of the Netherlands Lion, an exceptional royal distinction, for his remarkable work in organic chemistry and his pioneering research on supramolecular polymers. Congratulations Bert! (photography by M54 Beeldcreaties)

2019

On October 31st, 2019 Marcin Ślęczkowski has successfully defended his PhD thesis titled “Supramolecular Polymer Chemistry and the Active Role of Solvents in Molecular Assembly”. Congratulations Dr. Ślęczkowski!

Bert Meijer spoke as a keynote speaker at Axalta’s Distinguished Lecture Series about the balance between covalent and non-covalent synthesis to obtain functional nanomaterials.

Bert Meijer presented the 2019 Saul Winstein Lecture at UCLA about non-covalent synthesis of supramolecular systems and materials.

Bert Meijer has been awarded with an honorary doctorate for his work in the field of supramolecular polymer science by The Freie Universität Berlin.

Congratulations to Elisabeth Weyandt, who received the poster prize at the 14th International Symposium on Macrocyclic and Supramolecular Chemistry

How great would it be if a phone screen could repair itself? Ghislaine Vantomme explains her research at eye-openers, an online stage for scientists where they tell about their research and what inspires them.

How does a news reporter perceive a basic course in chemistry given by Bert Meijer? Read more about the topic in the recent article from the Cursor newspaper! (photography by Bart van Overbeeke)

The Meijer group compliments Ghislaine Vantomme on her appointment as assistant professor. We wish her the best for fostering her headway and are excited to see the future of responsive materials, soft robotics and non-covalent chemistry!

The Meijer group and the chemistry and chemical engineering faculty congratulate Anja Palmans on becoming a full professor in Supramolecular Chemistry and Catalysis.

2018

Bert Meijer appointed as honorary member of the Royal Netherlands Chemical Society .(KNCV)

Meijerlab members publish in Nature.

Bert Meijer received the Humboldt Research Award from Professor Pape – President of the Alexander van Humboldt Foundation.

2017

Bert Meijer receives the 2017 Nagoya Gold Medal in Organic Chemistry from Professor Ryoji Noyori. [1] [2]

Meijerlab present at the Molecular Machines Nobel Prize Conference 2017.

Repeated Miller-Urey experiment in Nemo revealed building blocks of life [1] [2]

Marle Vleugels and Martin van Son revealed amino acids present in the repeated Urey-Miller experiment during the FMS annual meeting.