EINDHOVEN, THE NETHERLANDS, May 21, 2024 — DLL, a global asset finance company for equipment and technology, is the recipient of the “Best ESG/Sustainability Initiative of the Year: Environmental Aspects” and the “Best E-Mobility Financing Programme” Awards from the Arena International Events Group. The awards ceremony, which was in its second edition, was held in Paris, France, on May 16, 2024, at the Arena International Group’s Sustainable Finance Summit and Awards 2024.

DLL was a finalist in four of Arena International Events Group’s Sustainable Finance award categories: “Best ESG/Sustainability Initiative of the Year: Environmental Aspects,” “Best Circular Economy Model: Equipment,” “Best E-Mobility Financing Program,” and “Best Sustainable Finance Company of the Year.” Last year, the company was awarded the “Best ESG Initiative of the Year: Social Aspects” and the “Best Give me a New Life Funding Programme” for its dedication in advancing its sustainability ambition.

“More than ever, DLL understands its role in supporting a more sustainable future and is taking concrete actions to accelerate its sustainability ambition as well as support the sustainability goals of its partners and end-users,” says Adrian Leach, Global Head of Energy Transition at DLL. “By focusing on key transition areas such as energy transition as well as circularity and food and agriculture transition, our ambition is to be the ‘transition partner for a better world’ by providing more sustainable asset finance solutions in the industries we serve.”

Mission of Partnering for a Better World

Neal Garnett, Chief Commercial Officer and member of the Executive Board at DLL shares, “At DLL, we have taken significant steps to integrate sustainability into the core of our business strategy. With innovative solutions such as our new partner approach that is pioneering a future where leasing provides additional ways for customers to accelerate on their sustainability goals, tailored financial solutions to encourage electric vehicle use and leveraging our global and parent company (Rabobank) network, we are committed to building a more sustainable future for the environment and the communities in which we operate. We are grateful and honoured to be recognized for these impactful efforts.”

About DLL

DLL is a global asset finance company for equipment and technology with a managed portfolio of more than EUR 44 billion. Founded in 1969 and headquartered in Eindhoven, the Netherlands, DLL provides financial solutions to the Agriculture, Food, Healthcare, Clean Technology, Construction, Transportation, Industrial, Office Equipment and Technology industries in more than 25 countries. DLL partners with equipment manufacturers, dealers and distributors, as well as end-customers on a direct basis, to enable businesses to more easily access equipment, technology and software. The company also delivers insights and advice to partners and customers that drive smarter and more economical methods of use. DLL combines customer focus with deep industry knowledge to deliver sustainable solutions for the complete asset life cycle, including commercial finance, retail finance and used equipment finance. DLL is a wholly owned subsidiary of Rabobank Group. To learn more about DLL, visit www.dllgroup.com.

About Arena International Events Group

Arena International Events Group provides a broad range of event platforms for multiple industry sectors. Their market research teams produce of-the-moment meetings that stimulate business through cutting-edge information exchange, powerful lead generation and carefully facilitated networking.