Alexander Gordon is a principled journalist, a categorical TV presenter and a talented actor. This is how viewers characterize him. In addition, he proved himself as a professional director, radio announcer, and founder of a television company. It would seem that no matter what you do, any project is crowned with success. Despite his advanced age, today he continues to appear regularly on TV screens, makes films, and is active.

Early years

Alexander Garrievich Gordon was born on February 20, 1964 in the village of Obninsk (Kaluga region). His mother, Antonina Striga, was a medic in a military unit. My father, a writer and artist, was in the army at the time. That's where they met. When Alexander was born, the young family moved to Belousovo, and then to Moscow. Antonina and Harry's marriage did not last long. Soon after arriving in the capital, they divorced. The mother had to work hard to feed herself and her son. The grandmother took over the upbringing of the child. When Alexander turned 4, his stepfather appeared in his life. Nikolai Chinin replaced his father. He got along well with the child, became the mainstay of the family.

Alexander Gordon's childhood was bright and eventful. He became interested in the theater from an early age and from the age of five he arranged real performances for his yard friends. In addition to the dream of becoming a director, Sasha had another one in his school years. He wanted to be a policeman, to help people.

Creativity took over. After school, he entered the Shchukin College, where he studied acting. In order to earn a living on his own, he got a job as a teacher of a theater group at school and a stage installer at the theater on Malaya Bronnaya.

A young, healthy and strong guy was perfect for military service. When the time came for the draft, he went to a psychiatric hospital. Such a bold decision was deliberate and deliberate. Alexander really did not want to spend years of his life building Baikonur. Faking a mental disorder, he stayed in a hospital for a couple of weeks, and then continued his studies, receiving his diploma in 1987.

Career achievements

With a diploma in his hands and an acting experience behind him, he immediately got a job at the Ruben Simonov Theater Studio. Two years later, he and his family went to conquer America.

He spent 9 years in the USA. It was a very difficult and at the same time productive period of life. At first he was an electrician, set up air conditioners, learned how to cook pizza, but fate sent him in the right direction – on television.

He began his career as a TV presenter on one of the Russian-language channels. He was noticed, popularity quickly came. In 1990, he was already a director and announcer on RTN. He worked on several channels at once: he directed programs on one, and was a correspondent on the other. After gaining experience and making many acquaintances, he founded his own "brainchild" – Wostok Entertainment. The TV company where he would work for the next few years.

Since 1994, he began collaborating with Russian TV-6. "New York, New York" – this was the name of the rating program, the author of which was Alexander Garrievich. He revealed all the secrets of American life in a fascinating and truthful way.

Regular flights between Russia and the United States were very exhausting. And in 1997, it was decided to finally return to their homeland. From that time on, Gordon built his career only in Moscow.

Here he created a number of programs. The sensational project "Collection of misconceptions" has become one of their most rated. It was a series of documentary feature films in the context of a historical investigation. The political talk show "The Process" remained one of the most discussed until 2001. At the same time, Gordon worked as a correspondent, and then became the author and presenter of the program "A special case", hosted "Gloomy Morning" on radio and television. In 1997, he released the film "The Americans were not on the Moon", based on his own investigation.

Alexander Garrievich's collaboration with the NTV channel gave us the programs "Stress" and "Gordon". On the "First" he launched the program "Gordon2030".

In 2002, the film "The Shepherd of his cows" was shot. The script is based on a story by Harry Gordon's father. The phenomenal film won the jury prize in the nomination "Best Directorial Debut" at the IX Russian Film Festival. 9 years later, another film based on his father's stories was released – "The Lights of the Brothel".

In 2004, Alexander became the main director of the play "Possessed" based on Fyodor Dostoevsky's novel "Demons". Gordon's love for the theater never left him.

Shooting in famous films brought him massive fame as an actor. So, participation in the TV series "Physical education teacher" made Alexander popular and recognizable by the younger generation.

Since the late 90s, he has tried himself in the political sphere, even expressed his intention to run for president. He was the ideologist and founder of the Interregional public movement "Image of the Future". But he did not achieve any special results in politics.

In recent years, he has been actively manifesting himself as a TV presenter. He has dozens of programs on his account. And each of them has high ratings.

Family and children

Gordon's personal life has been condemned many times by the tabloid press. Maria Berdnikova, Nana Kiknadze, Ekaterina Gordon, Nina Shchiplova, Elena Pashkova were together with Alexander at different periods. Today, his life partner is Nozanin Abdulvasieva, who has already given birth to two sons in marriage. Alexander does not advertise his relationship and speaks about them extremely rarely, but his young wife periodically posts joint photos with declarations of love on Instagram.

You can follow the further achievements of Alexander Gordon, as well as learn facts from the biographies of other famous personalities in the catalog of artists on the website kontramarka.de .

Popular programs:

"Gloomy morning. Ten years later"

"Private Screening"

"Gordon Juan"

"Gordon Quixote"

"Gordon in Ambush"

"Soul Science"

"Citizen Gordon"

"Politics"

"Pros and Cons"

"Them and Us"

"Male/Female".

Filmography of Alexander Gordon:

2007 – "Night Visitors"

2010 – "An Eye for an Eye"

2011 – "Generation P"

2011 – "Casting for a villain"

2011 – "Fate to choose from"

2012 – "After School"

2013 – "The Cuckoo"

2013 – "Smart Guy"

2014 – "Physical education teacher"

2015 – "The Heirs"

2017 – "The Bottom" (documentary-game)

2018 – "Uncle Sasha".

Director's work:

2002 – "The Shepherd of his cows" (based on the book by Harry Gordon)

2009 – "LDPR. 20 years of facing Russia";

2010 – "Blizzard"

2011 – "Lights of the brothel"

2018 – "Uncle Sasha".

Awards and prizes:

2007 — TEFI in the "Talk Show" nomination

2008 — TEFI in the nominations "Best Talk show host" and "Talk Show"

2010 — TEFI in the nomination "Talk show Host"

2011 — TEFI in the nomination "Talk show Host"

2011 — Pacific Meridians Film Festival in Vladivostok — Audience Award.