AUBURN HILLS, Mich. (AP) — Rasheed Wallace has proclaimed himself the megaphone of the Detroit Pistons because he's willing to say what his teammates feel.

Trailing 3-2 in the Eastern Conference finals, the defending champions need him to do as much playing — and producing — as talking.

If he doesn't, Detroit's season might end here after Game 6 against Miami on Saturday night.

Wallace has scored 20 points in each of Detroit's two wins against the Heat and averaged just 10 in the three losses, including a foul-plagued, two-point performance in Game 5.

"He has a huge impact on every game," teammate Chauncey Billups said Friday. "When he's been aggressive in this series, we win."

After Thursday's game in Miami, Wallace made an expletive-laced prediction that the Pistons would force a Game 7, using conspiratorial language to suggest the outcome was already predetermined. The NBA fined him $20,000 for the allegation.

Pistons coach Larry Brown said he doesn't buy the conspiracy theory.

"I don't think that people other than the players decide the game," Brown said. "We had chances to win Game 2 and Game 3, but Miami made shots and made plays. That's why they are up."

The Heat have pushed Detroit to the brink of elimination because Dwyane Wade has emerged as a superstar, but he might not play Saturday after straining his right rib muscle in Game 5.

Wade, who did not practice or speak to the media Friday, has been Miami's leading scorer in the playoffs and is averaging 27 points in five games against Detroit.

Would the Heat rest him, hoping he would be more healthy if a Game 7 is necessary in Miami?

"That would not be my preference," Miami coach Stan Van Gundy said.

Shaquille O'Neal said the Heat can win without Wade.

"We've got a lot of guys who people don't know about," he said. "We've got a lot of weapons on this team. If he doesn't play, somebody's going to step up."

The Pistons have more at stake than their playoff lives because the outcome of the series will go a long way toward determining whether history will view them as a fluke champion.

Detroit's ultimate legacy won't be determined for another few years, but long-term perceptions will be based in large part on how it performs in Game 6 — and possibly in Game 7 on Monday on the road.

"Saying it was a fluke because they only won it once, that's not what we want to leave associated with this team," Detroit guard Lindsey Hunter acknowledged.

If, however, Detroit doesn't win, it'll validate some of the arguments that the Pistons, the first team without a big-time star to win a title since Seattle in 1979, were a one-year wonder fortunate enough to run into a team in the midst of imploding from internal friction.

Despite the bleak outlook against Miami, the Pistons are not discouraged because they've been down and doubted before.

They went to New Jersey trailing 3-2 in the second round last year and responded with two victories. In the same round this year, they trailed Indiana 2-1 before winning three in a row.

"Those guys are going to scratch and claw until the last tenth of a second," Miami's Rasual Butler said.

The Pistons figure if they get a fair shake from the officials and do a few more things the right way — especially making the extra pass and playing with more energy — they'll extend the series and advance to the NBA Finals against San Antonio.

"We've got the forces against us," Wallace said after Game 5. "But we still can do it. We've done it before. This is nothing new to us."

While Detroit complains about officiating, overlooking what Miami has done effectively, the Heat are miffed about not getting much credit from their opponent.

"According to a lot of the Pistons players, we haven't won a game yet in this series," Van Gundy said sarcastically.