Richard Jefferson didn’t get much playing time during his two-year stint with the Golden State Warriors from 2012-13.

But after each practice, then-assistant coach Michael Malone watched Jefferson play 1-on-1 with youngsters like Draymond Green, Klay Thompson and Harrison Barnes.

Malone, now the head coach of the Denver Nuggets, believes Jefferson had a “profound” impact on helping develop those players into NBA champions. Now the Nuggets are calling on Jefferson to provide a similar presence to their young core, as Jefferson officially joined the organization Thursday after signing a one-year contract.

“My job is to kind of get here and be the old grumpy man,” Jefferson said, “and make sure everyone’s working and make sure guys are putting in that extra time.”

Jefferson rattled off Jason Kidd, Kenyon Martin and Lucious Harris as some of his key veteran influences throughout his 17-year career. Later on, he played with future Hall of Famers LeBron James, Tim Duncan and Dirk Nowitzki. He’s been to the NBA Finals four times, helping the Cleveland Cavaliers win a title in 2016.

Jefferson became an unrestricted free agent earlier this week, after he was traded from Cleveland to the Atlanta Hawks and then subsequently waived. Jefferson won’t initially be part of the Nuggets’ rotation, Malone said. But the coach added he “would have no hesitancy” to put Jefferson in a game if needed because of his ability to space the floor, guard multiple positions and make intelligent decisions.

Last season, Jefferson averaged 5.7 points and 2.6 rebounds per game for the Cavaliers while shooting 44.6 from the floor and 33.3 percent from 3-point range

“His No. 1 goal right now is to get acclimated, be a veteran and then to stay ready,” Malone said. “Because I have no doubt that, at some point, he’s gonna be called upon. And when he is called upon, I know he’ll go out there and help us.”

Jefferson does not mind the limited on-court action, joking “I’m so old, I don’t care about what my playing role is. I’m glad to have a job.” He believes in the Nuggets’ potential, and in Malone as a head coach. And Jefferson insists his longtime friendship with Nuggets president and governor Josh Kroenke was not a primary factor in his choice to come to Denver.

“(Kroenke) tries to kind of stay out of those things,” Jefferson said. “This was not a personal decision. This was a professional decision.”

Last night, Jefferson watched the Nuggets blow a 15-point lead in their season-opening loss at Utah, noting this young group still needs to learn how to close out games. Jefferson was on the Nuggets’ practice floor within hours of signing his contract. Malone expects Jefferson to quickly earn the respect of the Nuggets’ locker room.

Perhaps soon, Jefferson will be staying after practice with guys like Nikola Jokic, Gary Harris and Jamal Murray.

“My job as a professional is not only to perform, but also put my team in the best position,” Jefferson said. “That could be helping with what I see. That could be working out with the young guys.

“The only thing I’m doing is what older players did for me when I was a young player. All I’m doing is paying it forward.”