Classic Rock Hits, Deep-Cuts, Live Tracks and Local Programming

Phone: 518-280-5684

Email: This email address is being protected from spambots. You need JavaScript enabled to view it.

The Capital Region’s headquarters for classic rock, not just the same old top 40 repeats you hear on big box radio but all the fun stuff too. B-sides, live tracks, rare tracks, deep cuts, WPTR does it all!

WPTR also features a specialized showcase for music lovers of all kinds.

Weekday mornings, ‘Sunshine Superman’ kicks off your day with an eclectic mix of music from all eras, all genres. You never know what you’re gonna get. Roots of rock ‘n roll, soul, disco, progressive, full albums, live albums, everything!

Evening drivetime, radio veteran Jeff Clark lays down the soundtrack to your drive home with ‘JC’s Afternoon Adventure’. No stress hits to relax you during your commute, along with the latest news from around the world, weather at the top of every hour, ‘This Day in History’ and celebrity birthdays. Jeff is your co-pilot for the drive home, no button pushers, only the best songs!

When the sun goes down, the headbangers come out with ‘Hard Rockin’ Nights’. Local band mainstay and rock enthusiast Rockin’ Randy brings you hard rock and heavy metal hits from the 70s thru today. The loudest three hours on Capital Region radio, featuring hits, b-sides, rarities, your favorite bands and your soon-to-be favorite bands.

Weekends, WPTR bring’s you an even bigger mix of music and culture to match Albany, Schenectady and Troy’s diverse tastes.

Saturday mornings, Capital Region crooner and showman Joe Sinatra brings you ‘The Magic of Swing’ featuring Frank Sinatra and his influence on and beyond the Big Band Era. Other members of the infamous Rat Pack, along with other famous voices of jazz and big band music from yesterday to today.

Saturdays at noon it’s time to put on your dancing shoes and hit the floor with iconic voice of the Capital Region Carla Page with ‘Motown Memories’. Motown, disco, funk, pop, jazz, everything to get your toes tapping and your hips moving. Stories about all the biggest names in dance music and the best music to get you up out of your seat.

Sunday mornings it’s island time with DJ Sammy and ‘West Indian Vibrations’. Sammy gets you going with the warm breeze of the West Indies, featuring all the sounds of the islands from Caribbean, Reggae, Soca, Calypso, Bollywood and more.