Synopsis

Melinda Gates was previously married to Microsoft co-founder Bill Gates. Their high-profile divorce was finalized in 2021.

In recent years, Melinda Gates has stayed out of the spotlight but is now making headlines for her new relationship. Melinda Gates is now dating Jon Du Pre. Jon is a Strategic Communications Specialist with over 35 years of experience in broadcasting, writing, and video production, according to reports.

Microsoft founder Bill Gates divorced his long-time friend and wife, whom he married in 1994, in 2021.

Melinda Gates had said that she gave everything to the relationship with Bill as his lawfully wedded partner, and she holds her head high for never committing any wrongdoing. In such cases, people generally associate the woman as having done wrong but not so for Melinda.

Melinda Gates is happy with the new man in her life, and the two were first spotted at an NBA match together in April 2022. Jon is a broadcaster, video producer, and writer with 35 years of experience, according to reports.

Melinda is from Dallas, Texas, and is a computer scientist by profession. She is the recipient of the US Presidential Medal of Freedom and the French Legion of Honour.

FAQs

When did Bill and Melinda first meet?

In 1987.

What was Melinda's rank among Forbes' powerful women?

3rd

(You can now subscribe to our Economic Times WhatsApp channel)

Disclaimer Statement: This content is authored by an external agency. The views expressed here are that of the respective authors/ entities and do not represent the views of Economic Times (ET). ET does not guarantee, vouch for or endorse any of its contents nor is responsible for them in any manner whatsoever. Please take all steps necessary to ascertain that any information and content provided is correct, updated, and verified. ET hereby disclaims any and all warranties, express or implied, relating to the report and any content therein.

(Catch all the US News, UK News, Canada News, International Breaking News Events, and Latest News Updates on The Economic Times.)

Download The Economic Times News App to get Daily International News Updates.

...moreless

(You can now subscribe to our Economic Times WhatsApp channel)

(Catch all the US News, UK News, Canada News, International Breaking News Events, and Latest News Updates on The Economic Times.)

Download The Economic Times News App to get Daily International News Updates.

...moreless

The Ola Electric story: What makes Bhavish Aggarwal India's most impatient man?

HNIs invested in Piramal PMS. Then this happened.

Three reasons why Tata Motors has taken a contrarian view on hybrids

These cars aren’t really Toyota’s own, but account for 50% of its India sales

Your EV is 40% Chinese, and will remain so if this jigsaw is not solved

Red flag? IT’s slump-driven offshoring work in reverse gear

1

2

3