Bill and Melinda Gates have been married since 1994, raised three kids, are worth US$130.5 billion, and run a namesake philanthropic enterprise boasting a US$49.8 billion endowment.

Here’s a look back at Bill and Melinda Gates’ marriage.

Bill and Melinda first met in 1987, when she joined Microsoft as a product manager

Melinda described on NPR how he asked her if she could go out “two weeks from tonight” – to which she replied, “Two weeks from tonight? I have no idea what I’m doing two weeks from tonight. And I said, ‘You’re not spontaneous enough for me’.”

Melinda gave Bill her number and told him to call her closer to the day he had in mind

Instead, he called her up later that same night with a wry question: “Is this spontaneous enough for you?” Turns out, it was.

Melinda and Bill dated for seven years before they wed – Melinda told Fortune her mum didn’t think that seeing the CEO was a good idea

But the couple didn’t listen. Business Insider reported they “kept a low profile at work and asked colleagues and family members to respect their privacy”.

“When I look back, Bill was the same kind of guy I was hanging out with in college,” Melinda told Fortune. “I had a lot of respect for them, and they had respect for me.”

“I was definitely attracted to his brilliant mind, but beyond that, his curiosity,” she told Fortune. “And he has a huge sense of fun. I love that wry side of him.”

After they were engaged, they travelled to Africa in late 1993 where they encountered extreme poverty

On a walk on a beach in Zanzibar, Melinda told TED in an interview, the couple “started to talk about” how they might use their fortune to help others.

That’s when the idea that would ultimately become the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation began to take root.

“It’s not fair that we have so much wealth when billions of others have so little,” Melinda wrote, in the 10th of the couples’ annual letters about their foundation in 2018.

The couple married in 1994 in what was then Manele Bay Hotel in Hawaii

They tied the knot by the “par-three 12th hole” on the property’s golf course, according to Forbes. The event reportedly cost US$1 million.

To keep the wedding private, Bill booked all the rooms in the hotel, along with all of the helicopters on the island of Maui to “prevent unwanted visitors from flying over”, Forbes reported.

Bill’s parents gifted the newlyweds with a sculpture of two birds, sitting side-by-side and staring at the horizon. “It’s still in front of our house,” Melinda wrote in the couples’ 2018 annual letter. “I think of it all the time, because fundamentally we’re looking in the same direction.”

The next year, the couple’s lavish home – nicknamed “Xanadu 2.0” – was completed in Medina, Washington

The mansion’s worth was estimated at US$127 million in 2016.

The couple has raised two daughters and a son …

Bill and Melinda would read books from a range of genres to their kids as they grew up, from Guess How Much I Love You to Fahrenheit 451.

Gates has said his wife is the driving force when it comes to bringing the family together

“Melinda is very creative about helping me find chances to spend time with the kids,” Gates wrote in a 2017 Reddit AMA (Ask Me Anything). “Even just driving them to school is a great time to talk to them.”

Each of the Gates’ kids will inherit about US$10 million of their parents’ US$98.1 billion fortune, while much of the rest will go to charitable causes.

“We want to strike a balance where they have the freedom to do anything but not a lot of money showered on them so they could go out and do nothing,” Bill told TED in 2014.

The Gates also support their kids in other ways. The couple spent US$37 million purchasing a string of Wellington, Florida properties in 2016. The reason? Their daughter Jennifer is a nationally ranked show jumper, and the Florida town is the equestrian capital of the US.

Melinda has said her relationship with her husband has changed over time

“We’ve had to change to really be coequals,” she said. “It’s not something that immediately happens overnight, but we’re both committed to it.”

Melinda said the couple still did the dishes together every night to keep the partnership equal. According to Melinda, Bill was used to being in charge from his Microsoft days when they first started the foundation.

But these days, Bill and Melinda work as partners at the foundation

They both received Presidential Medals of Freedom in 2016 from President Barack Obama for their efforts. They work to make sure their schedules are synchronised, complementary and balanced. “Melinda and I look over our schedules a lot to make sure we are balancing things well,” Gates wrote in a 2018 Reddit AMA.

In response to a question about how the couple handles arguments, Melinda jokingly wrote “we never disagree” in the Gates’ 2018 annual letter

“Our occasional disagreements these days are over tactics. Because I’ve been a public figure longer, and because I’m a man, some people assume I am making the big decisions. That’s never been the case,” Bill wrote in the Gates Foundation’s annual letter for 2018.

Melinda added that the couple avoids serious disagreements by sharing fundamental values, trust and a sense of open-mindedness.

Warren Buffett, who is close to the couple, told Fortune that Bill was “smart as hell, obviously”, but that “in terms of seeing the whole picture”, Melinda was smarter

When it comes to their working partnership, Bill wrote in their 2018 annual letter that the perception that Melinda is “the heart” of the organisation is a bit of a stereotype

“Just as she knows I’m more emotional than people realise, I know she’s more analytical than people realise. When I get really enthusiastic about something, I count on her to make sure I’m being realistic.”

“Melinda and I believe that everyone deserves the chance for a healthy and productive life – and so with the help of our amazing partners, we are working to find innovative ways to help people in need all over the world,” Bill wrote during one of his Reddit AMAs.

Bill announced on May 3, 2021, that the couple had made the decision to end their marriage.

“After a great deal of thought and a lot of work on our relationship, we have made the decision to end our marriage,” Bill Gates said in a tweet. “Over the last 27 years, we have raised three incredible children and built a foundation that works all over the world to enable all people to lead healthy, productive lives.”

Want more stories like this? Sign up here. Follow STYLE on Facebook, Instagram, YouTube and Twitter.