SABA AUTOMATION is the Official System Integrator of KUKA, a German manufacturer of industrial robots, with 25 subsidiaries worldwide and a turnover of over 2.5 billion Euros. The integration of these robots, combined with specially designed pick-up implements, as well as product and pallet handling systems, allows the product to be palletised (toilet paper, kitchen paper, napkins, paper handkerchiefs, interfolded paper towels, etc.) gently and without damage.

SABA AUTOMATION’s commitment is to never stop innovating, looking for solutions that can effectively help their customers in their production process. Automating the end-of-line process is an essential factor to increase production output. It not only makes operators work better and with less fatigue but also allows the customers to become more competitive and, last but not least, to offer a well-palletised product that is ready to be shipped. It is certain that one of the qualities that sets SABA AUTOMATION apart from other competitors is flexibility; fundamental in order to always find the right solution, the “tailored suit” for the customer.

We develop and produce automatic systems and robot stations for transporting systems

SABA AUTOMATION innovative end-of-line systems

ZEUS ROBOT. This solution guarantees ultimate speed in terms of cycles per minute, which means that it can be used for lines with a very high production output. Particular care has been paid towards design of the pick-up implements both for unpacked and packed tissue products. These special grippers grasp the product without causing any kind of deformation; this drastically improves quality of palletising. Grippers are motorised with the robot’s interpolated axis to ensure adequate handling of such a delicate product as is tissue paper. The size changeover system adopted is much more accurate than the typical pneumatic systems so that the gripper does not damage the product.

BD CARTESIAN ROBOT. Compact and particularly efficient, they are the ideal solution for lines handling paper napkins, paper handkerchiefs and interfolded paper towels. Cartesian robots designed to operate in three shifts for 365 days a year, with low maintenance requirements and high efficiency.

SABA SOFTWARE. Management software and operator-industrial PC interface have been optimised to make line operation easier still and allow for better control over all end-of-line stages. This software can be interfaced with the latest management systems for data exchange, etc. The SABA AUTOMATION programme for handling different product formats is the same for both ZEUS robots and the BD. Thanks to the combination of robot and software, SABA AUTOMATION robotised palletising systems offer more advantages in terms of cycle time reduction, adaptability to different products and elimination of downtime. Operators no longer have to deal with heavy palletising work and no longer have to perform size changeover operations since a production order can be called up and uploaded in an instant.

COMPLETE END-OF-LINE SYSTEMS. To complete our end-of-line range, SABA AUTOMATION offers fully automatic solutions for pallet packaging, such as pallet stretch-film wrapping machines, labelling systems and Agv.

Upcoming events

In June 2020, Open House at SABA AUTOMATION facilities; this will be an opportunity to see the machines at work, right where they are designed and built, and to learn more about the latest innovations in terms of palletising bagged products and displays. The company then will be at MIAC in Lucca, where, in addition to meeting the staff at the stand, it will be possible to visit the company and touch SABA AUTOMATION technology at work.