Toppled by the men in suits, an angry Margaret Thatcher struggles to adjust to the new realities of life as a civilian, adoping a position as the nation's 'back-street driver' - much to the fury of her successor.

On November 29 1990, having led her country for 4,227 consecutive days, Margaret Thatcher began her first full day as a former prime minister. The sudden loss of office and routine was almost impossible to process.

As she struggled to come to terms with her situation, she repeatedly told those around her that it was like “having a mosaic smashed into little pieces on the floor”.

Her lack of a suitable place to live and of a proper office added greatly to her disorientation. She had spent her first weekend after leaving office unpacking in Dulwich, a house she owned that was no longer suitable for her needs.

For her second, she and Denis went to stay at Easton Neston, the great Northamptonshire house built by Nicholas Hawksmoor, which was the seat of Lord (Alexander) Hesketh.

Hesketh had been one of her whips and a junior minister in the House of Lords. She liked him very much, not least because he was one of the handful of men who could make her laugh.

Charles and Carla Powell were fellow guests, as was Sabrina Guinness. She had stayed there once before as a fellow guest with Mrs Thatcher when she was prime minister, and had not taken to her. “She gave me that handshake which almost threw me away.”

Ignoring the women, Mrs Thatcher had “flirted” with the men and stayed at the dinner table when the other women left, just as she had done 40 years earlier in the farmhouse of the man who wanted to marry her.

Now Mrs Thatcher was in “a very wobbly state”. Denis joined the party from a lunch at the Saints and Sinners charity, of which he was a leading light. James Baker, the US Secretary of State, had been his guest there. “Why hasn’t he rung me about the Gulf crisis?” complained Mrs Thatcher.

The truth, in those days before universal mobile phones, and with no Downing Street switchboard to find ways of connecting callers to her, was that no one was ringing her that weekend.

After dinner, Denis sat at her feet in the drawing room, patting her knee as her eyes filled with tears. At breakfast the next morning, Sabrina Guinness discussed with her where she would live: “I was staggered when she said she had no idea.”

Snow fell so heavily that the planned guests could not come to lunch. The place was virtually cut off. So the small party, including the Thatchers, walked out as the snowflakes fell about them. “Being English, no one said: ‘How do you feel?’ But everyone was kind, embarrassed, sympathetic. It was like being with someone who had just lost a relation.

“My God,” Sabrina thought, “she has nothing to do.” She could see that, for Mrs Thatcher, it was an experience as unwelcome as it was new.

Mrs Thatcher’s plight was the result not only of the suddenness of her overthrow but of the fierceness of the British system.

Because the prime minister is head of government in an adversarial parliamentary system, not head of state, little formal dignity attaches to the role and little provision is made to look after the departing occupant.

Once she had resigned, Mrs Thatcher received from the state only the salary (£21,000 a year) and allowances of a Member of Parliament, as well as close protection officers and a bullet-proof car (plus driver) to ward off terrorist attack, and a prime ministerial pension of £25,000 a year.

There was something admirably democratic about this penny‑pinching, but for Mrs Thatcher it created real difficulties.

She was a figure of global renown, receiving endless demands for speeches, media appearances and interviews, as well as many thousands of supportive letters from the public which began to pile up, in unopened sacks, in the hall of 17 Great College Street.

For this, she required an experienced staff and decent premises. Great College Street, though charming and central, was much too small.

Paul Allen, her hairdresser, could find no room big enough to accommodate Mrs Thatcher, the necessary basins, his equipment and himself.

“I had to do the work with my back pressed right up against the wall,” he recalled. “She would sit tensed up in the chair and wouldn’t speak.”

She did not even have a room in the House of Commons, so Archie Hamilton voluntarily surrendered his own. On leaving office, she had, according to Julian Seymour, who was quite soon to take charge of her affairs, “no money – and I mean no money – in her bank account”.

Although Denis was comfortably off, he had never paid for any aspect of her life in Downing Street and “never voluntarily put his hand in his pocket from 1979 till the day he died”.

Now she had to incur major new expenses in a hurry. Her decisions about what she would do with her life would naturally dictate how this was dealt with.

John Major and the coup by the men in suits - read our first exclusive extract here

Yet she was too overcome by grief to make them. Even the small things of life were a puzzle for her, since her immensely long sojourn in No 10 had cut her off. She was unfamiliar with a modern television and struggled valiantly with the remote control.

When she rang Romilly McAlpine, she left a message saying she had never before used an answering machine.

She had probably not dialled anyone direct on the telephone since 1979 and consequently had no idea what anyone’s number was.

For Christmas, her daughter Carol sought to remedy this by giving her a book containing the telephone numbers and addresses of her closest friends.

Family pleasures

Lady Thatcher delighted in her grandchildren, but saw them only on special visits and occasions like Christmas because they lived in America.

Michael Thatcher had taken his first steps on Christmas Day 1989, at Chequers – the last Christmas Margaret and Denis spent there.

The best family Christmases were at her son Mark’s house in Cape Town, which he acquired in the mid-1990s.

The children were amazed by their grandmother’s enthusiasm for feeding the cats there, giving them saucers of milk which, to the two young Americans, well trained that cats are lactose-intolerant, seemed comically behind the times.

According to Mark’s then wife, Diane, only the presence of the grandchildren could make Lady Thatcher kick off her formal shoes: she would sit on the floor to get on their level.

They knew her always as “Grammy” rather than “Granny”. She deluged them with presents. On one occasion, in London, Grammy arranged a private, after-hours visit to Hamleys, the famous toy shop.

As Michael recalled, “we got, as kids, to run through Hamleys and grab whatever we wanted”. On another, Grammy threatened to give Amanda, who loved riding, a horse, but was gently dissuaded. Amanda remembered a typical example of Lady Thatcher’s grandmotherly conversation.

When she was five or six, Lady Thatcher came into her bedroom to say goodnight and read her an improving children’s book called The Little Rose of Sharon, in which the rose sacrifices her petals to keep a dove’s egg warm so that it can hatch.

Perhaps prompted by the talk of sacrifice, Grammy told Amanda about the Falklands war. She expounded the whole thing: “Did I understand why it was important for the UK to reclaim its territory? Did I understand why troops had to stay behind even after the war was finished? I was extremely perplexed at the time but it’s one of my most delightful memories of her now.”

Illness begins

In December 2001, the Thatchers celebrated their golden wedding. Although neither was in the best of health, they went for Christmas to Madeira, scene of their honeymoon in 1951. At high altitude, sitting in a café, Lady Thatcher temporarily lost the power of speech.

Denis, who hated everything to do with illness, could not cope, and simply sat still pretending nothing had happened. His wife, inclined always to equate illness with weakness, also brushed aside concern.

A brain scan in Madeira did not show up trouble, but when she returned to England, she had neurological tests for the first time.

A neurologist found ischaemic changes on her MRI scan, but Lady Thatcher continued to downplay what had occurred.

In early March, however, she had a further episode in which she could not string sentences together. The risk of a major stroke was considered high.

Her doctors recommended that she withdraw from public life. This was announced on March 19 2002, the day after the publication of Statecraft, a further volume of her memoirs.

It added that she could not be expected to speak in public again. The reason stated was not dementia, which had not been diagnosed, but the “small strokes” (known as transient ischaemic attacks, or TIAs) which “can neither be predicted nor prevented”.

This was a hard decision, because all understood that Lady Thatcher’s greatest fear was of “a life without work”, and so they expected that her health would suffer if she had nothing to do. As Mark Worthington put it: “The medical advice was: ‘Keep her busy.’ ”

Now, however, there was little choice: it was no longer safe for her to continue. Lady Thatcher objected to this ruling.

“There’s nothing wrong with me,” she said. Although she liked having the plain facts of her neurological condition explained scientifically to her, she could not – or would not – connect this with admitting a deterioration in her mind.

Occasionally, she showed consciousness of her own condition – once she was seen to knock her head with her fist and say: “It’s like mud.” But on the whole she ignored it. Her withdrawal from public life was overdue.

Even before the end of the 20th century, there had been incidents when she had got in a muddle while delivering a speech.

In 2000, for example, speaking for John Whittingdale at a constituency dinner, she repeated the same joke about him three times.

This caused Denis, who normally interjected words of support, to shout out: “You’ve already said that.” He noticed her general decline, remarking: “It’s not how many miles there are on the clock. It’s how hard you drive the car.”

There would be further occasions when she could not be prevented from delivering a few remarks among friends. Worthington recalled that: “She was constant trouble about making speeches and it was all but impossible to contain her, so we let her a bit.”

From now on, however, all formal speaking invitations were declined, except for one existing engagement – the eulogy after the death, whenever it should come, of Ronald Reagan.

By the 21st century, it was clear to all who knew Lady Thatcher that her mental powers were in decline, but when the decline had really set in was disputed. Opinion tended to reflect the attitude to Lady Thatcher of the person speaking.

In 2018, for example, John Major went public with the view that she had shown some symptoms very early on: “The comments that came out from Margaret after she left office didn’t sound to me like the Margaret I had come to know… So although it was a very difficult period when she was sniping, when she was bored, not very well and out of government, I don’t really think that was the Margaret Thatcher that I knew and so I could bear that, though it was uncomfortable.”

He even recalled some changes when she was in office, noticing, for example, during discussions of the hard European Currency Unit in 1990, that “she didn’t understand” certain details and sometimes showed “irrationality”.

He formed the view that she was “a little unwell”. She “would find it difficult to focus, didn’t always register. It could have been simply exhaustion.”

He also felt that some of her anger with him after leaving office had been related to her mental health: “It became more and more clear that she was simply unwell.”

Those who worked with Mrs Thatcher daily when she was prime minister, however – such as Charles Powell, Amanda Ponsonby, Andrew Turnbull, Bernard Ingham and John Whittingdale – were quite clear that this was not the case. According to them, and to her doctors, there was no sign whatever of any loss of mental powers while she was in office.

Charles Moore: A nation in crisis needs vision and leadership. That's exactly what Mrs Thatcher provided

To an extent, remarks by male colleagues about Mrs Thatcher’s mental condition had been a trope from the start of her leadership.

“She’s mad, you know,” they would say, when upset by the flashing-eyed intensity she brought to public controversy or when she failed to laugh at their jokes.

Men of that generation often talked about the “irrationality” of women – a recognised way of releasing tension among chums.

In later years, such talk about Lady Thatcher sometimes amounted to a retrospective “gaslighting”. Obviously, male attempts to get her out of office would seem more forgivable if it were thought that she had been, in Chris Patten’s phrase, “off her trolley”.

After Major made his remarks, Julian Seymour and Mark Worthington, her last, longest-serving private secretary, immediately wrote to The Telegraph to disagree.

At the time of leaving office, they said, Lady Thatcher had not been “ill”, but distraught, suffering from disorientation, not dementia.

Only later did she suffer memory loss. Worthington thought she lost “some of her edge” after her dental operations in 1995.

One day in 2000, when sitting on the arm of his chair in his office, talking, she suddenly could not get words out. She was shaking. This was probably an early transient ischaemic attack.

She was also quite deaf and refused to wear a hearing aid. Her strange responses because she had not quite heard what was said led some to diagnose mental decline before it had happened.

Lady Thatcher’s park life

The secret of the success of the ensuing few years was that Lady Thatcher had such good care, well-coordinated with Julian Seymour and Mark Worthington.

Her chief carers, Kate Sawyer and Janice McCallum, understood what she needed. Kate, who came for six weeks in 2003 and stayed until the end 10 years later, described Lady Thatcher as “one of the most compassionate and easy people I ever looked after… she would come down to the level of anyone.”

She loved visiting Battersea Park, the Hurlingham Club for tea or, best of all, picnics, shared with “her boys” – her personal protection officers and drivers – in Richmond Park.

There would be private expeditions, too, as the guest of Lord and Lady Salisbury at Hatfield House, for example, where she loved the gardens.