What’s the climate like in Yekaterinburg?

The current climate in Yekaterinburg features temperatures ranging from a high of 25°C to a low of -9°C throughout the year. The average yearly temperature is around 9°C. At night, temperatures in the colder months average around -18°C and in the warmer months around 13°C.

The highest temperature recorded in Yekaterinburg in recent years was 39°C in July 2023. The lowest daytime temperature recorded was -30°C in December 2016.

On average, Yekaterinburg gets 392 mm of precipitation each year, including rain, snow, and hail. Of this, about 179 cm is snowfall. For comparison, London gets 833 mm of precipitation each year.

Click on the month name to see more weather details, like daily averages, temperatures, and precipitation for the past years in that month.

The best time to visit Yekaterinburg for sunny weather is May through August. During this period, you'll have good temperatures and not too much rain, making it a great time to visit Yekaterinburg. In the other months of the year, there's too much rain or the temperature isn't ideal for a visit if you want sunny and pleasant weather.

Check out the weather for Yekaterinburg

Climate Table of Yekaterinburg

The climate table of Yekaterinburg shows the average temperatures, rainfall, snow, and UV index per month. The table gives an overview of the average day and night temperatures in degrees Celsius, the total amount of rainfall in millimetres, the total snowfall in centimetres, and the UV index for each month. Rainfall is always measured as water, even if it's snow or hail.

Click on the month name to see more weather details, like daily averages, temperatures, and precipitation for the past years in that month.

Average yearly temperature: 9°C

Highest temperature: 25°C in July

Lowest temperature: -9°C in January

Precipitation*: 392 mm per year, averaging 33 mm per month

Snowfall: 179 cm per year

Driest months: 16 mm in September, 22 mm in February and 25 mm in January

Wettest months: 45 mm in August, 41 mm in June and 39 mm in March

*Precipitation is measured as a combination of rain, snow, and hail

Average Temperature per Month in Yekaterinburg

This graph shows the average maximum temperatures per month in Yekaterinburg, Russia. The temperatures are shown in degrees Celsius and the average is calculated based on the recorded temperatures per month from past years.

Average Rainfall per Month in Yekaterinburg

This graph shows how much rainfall Yekaterinburg, Russia gets on average per month. Rainfall is always measured as water, even if it's snow or hail. This makes it easy to compare how much has fallen, regardless of the form of precipitation. The amount of rainfall is measured in millimetres and the average is calculated based on the recorded rainfall per month from past years.

Average Snowfall per Month in Yekaterinburg

This graph shows how much snow Yekaterinburg, Russia gets on average per month. The amount of snowfall is measured in centimetres and the average is calculated based on the recorded snowfall per month from past years.

Average UV Index per Month in Yekaterinburg

This graph shows the average UV index per month in Yekaterinburg, Russia. The UV index indicates the intensity of ultraviolet radiation and ranges from 0 to a maximum of 11.

Yearly Temperature in Yekaterinburg

This graph shows the average yearly temperature in Yekaterinburg, Russia. The yearly temperature, expressed in degrees Celsius, is the average of all twelve monthly temperatures summed up for that year.

Total Yearly Rainfall in Yekaterinburg

This chart shows the total yearly rainfall in Yekaterinburg, Russia over the past few years. The total yearly rainfall, measured in centimetres, is the sum of all the rain that fell in the twelve months of that year.

Total Yearly Snowfall in Yekaterinburg

This chart shows the total yearly snowfall in Yekaterinburg, Russia over the past few years. The total yearly snowfall, measured in centimetres, is the sum of all the snow that fell in the twelve months of that year.