>>Weather by month // weather averages Yekaterinburg

>>Climate graph // Weather by Month Yekaterinburg

>>average temperature by month Yekaterinburg

>>Weather Yekaterinburg

The climate is cold and temperate. The precipitation levels in Yekaterinburg are noteworthy, as there is rainfall even during the most arid month. As per the Köppen-Geiger classification, the prevailing weather conditions in this region are categorized under Dfb. The average annual temperature in Yekaterinburg is 2.1 °C | 35.8 °F. About 601 mm | 23.7 inch of precipitation falls annually.

The specified area is located in the northern hemisphere of our planet. The onset of summer commences towards the conclusion of June and culminates by September. The season is characterized by a sequence of months, namely: June, July, August, September.

Climate graph // Weather by Month Yekaterinburg

The driest month is February, with 20 mm | 0.8 inch of rain. The month of July experiences the highest amount of precipitation, with an average value of 93 mm | 3.7 inch.

average temperature by month Yekaterinburg

July is the warmest month of the year. The temperature in July averages 18.1 °C | 64.6 °F. The month of January is characterized by the lowest temperatures, which have an average reading of -14.7 °C | 5.5 °F.

Weather by month // weather averages Yekaterinburg

<>

Avg. Temperature °C (°F) Min. Temperature °C (°F) Max. Temperature °C (°F) Precipitation / Rainfall mm (in) Humidity (%) Rainy days (d) avg. Sun hours (hours)

January February March April May June July August September October November December

Data: 1991 - 2021 Min. Temperature °C (°F), Max. Temperature °C (°F), Precipitation / Rainfall mm (in), Humidity, Rainy days. Data: 1999 - 2019: avg. Sun hours

There is a difference of 73 mm | 3 inch of precipitation between the driest and wettest months. The fluctuation of temperatures over the course of a year is referred to as temperature variation.

It has been observed that November exhibits the highest relative humidity, with a percentage of 80.89. On the other hand, May experiences the lowest relative humidity at an approximate rate of 63.52. According to the data, June is observed as the month with maximum rainy days (13.87) while February has recorded minimum rainfall during its tenure (6.43).

Yekaterinburg weather and climate for every month

Hours of sunshine in Yekaterinburg

avg. hours of sun

Total hours of sun

Within the region of Yekaterinburg, the month that experiences a maximum number of daily hours with bright sunshine is June exhibiting an average duration of approximately 11.94. In totality, there are about 358.09 hours worth of sunlight throughout this particular period.

On average, the location of Yekaterinburg experiences the least number of daily hours with sunshine during January. The total duration of sunlight in this period is recorded as 59.62, while an average of about 1.92 hours are received per day.

Throughout the year, Yekaterinburg experiences approximately 2345.39 hours of sunshine. The average monthly duration of sunlight is estimated to be around 76.95.

Airport close to Yekaterinburg

The closest Airports of Yekaterinburg are: Koltsovo Airport (SVX) 15.49km,Chelyabinsk Airport (CEK) 180.36km,Roshchino International Airport (TJM) 289.54km

You can reach Yekaterinburg from this Cities by Plane: Paris (CDG), Beijing (PEK), Kyiv (KBP), Minsk (MSQ), Hurghada (HRG), Novosibirsk (OVB), Samara (KUF), Kazan (KZN), Ufa (UFA), Saratov (RTW), Krasnodar (KRR), Nizhny Novgorod (GOJ), Bishkek (FRU), Tashkent (TAS), Dushanbe (DYU), Astana (TSE), Dubai (DXB), Sochi (AER), Rome (FCO), Yerevan (EVN)