Yekaterinburg is a city in Russia, east of the Ural Mountains. It’s known for the golden-domed Church on the Blood, built in the early 21st century on the site of the 1918 Romanov executions. The Monument to the Founders stands by the banks of the Iset River. Exhibits at the nearby Sverdlovsk Regional Local Lore Museum include the Hall of the Romanovs, with personal items that belonged to the last royal family. Geography and climate Yekaterinburg is situated on the border of Europe and Asia, 1,667 km (1,036 mi) east of Moscow and 3,375 km (2,097 mi) west of Irkutsk. The city has a total area of 495 km2 (191 sq. mi).

Historical, Cultural facts & Religion

Yekaterinburg was founded as a factory-fort in 1723 as part of Peter the Great’s push to exploit the Ural region’s mineral riches. The city was named after two Yekaterinas: Peter’s wife (later Empress Catherine I), and the Russian patron saint of mining. Yekaterinburg is a home for the followers of many confessions. There are Orthodox churches and cathedrals, two mosques, a synagogue, and other religious establishments and centres.

Brief City History

Yekaterinburg was founded as a factory-fort in 1723 as part of Peter the Great’s push to exploit the Ural region’s mineral riches. The city was named after two Yekaterinas: Peter’s wife (later Empress Catherine I), and the Russian patron saint of mining. Yekaterinburg is most famous as the place where the Bolsheviks murdered Tsar Nicholas II and his family in July 1918. Six years later, the town was renamed Sverdlovsk, after Yakov Sverdlov, a leading Bolshevik who was Vladimir Lenin’s right-hand man until his death in the flu epidemic of 1919.WWII turned Sverdlovsk into a major industrial centre, as hundreds of factories were transferred here from vulnerable areas west of the Urals. The city was closed to foreigners until 1990 because of its many defence plants. Remnants of this era still litter the city, with fighter planes proudly displayed in schoolyards and missiles arranged outside the city’s Military History Museum. It was one such missile that in 1960 brought down US pilot Gary Powers and his U2 spy plane in this area. Powers, who bailed out successfully, was exchanged for a Soviet spy in 1962. During the late 1970s a civil engineering graduate of the local university, Boris Yeltsin, began to make his political mark, rising to become regional Communist Party boss before being promoted to Moscow in 1985. In 1991 Yekaterinburg took back its original name. After suffering economic depression and Mafia lawlessness in the early 1990s, the business has been on the upswing for the past decade.

Language (s) Written & Spoken

Russian is the common language, though dozens of other languages are spoken by ethnic minorities. It’s relatively easy to find English speakers in the big cities, but not so easy in smaller towns and the countryside.

Important Types of Commerce in Yekaterinburg

Its major industries include ferrous and non-ferrous metallurgy, chemicals, timber, and pulp and paper. Yekaterinburg has long been an important trading centre for goods coming from Siberia, Central Asia and Europe. The city also has a reputation as a centre of higher education and research.

Language Services US and others will provide working with Yekaterinburg

Doing business with Yekaterinburg requires an understanding of their local language which is Russian. An individual or business is required to have a Russian interpreter accompanying them in Yekaterinburg for an exhibition, business negotiations, training, conference, medical support or for an excursion to bridge the language gap. Moreover, they also require Russian Translation services for translation of important business documents such as sales and marketing literature, copyright, trademark and patent applications, partnership and employment agreements, mergers, acquisitions and incorporations, trusts and wills flawlessly.