SPOKANE, Wash. – The Whitworth University Department of Athletics has recognized five outstanding and inspirational student-athletes with the school's year-end special awards. Golfer Sam Pauly is the 2023 Dennis Spurlock Award winner, while track & field standout Samson Irish-Lodge claims the Aaron Leetch Inspiration award. Swimming's Carly Hoff and volleyball's Maddie Lee are the 2023 Co-Senior Female Athletes of the Year, while football defensive back Colten Chelin is the Senior Male Athlete of the Year.

The Whitworth athletics department voted on the 2022-23 awards this week.

The Dennis Spurlock Award is named in memory of the former Pirate All-America quarterback (1958-61). The award was established to honor Whitworth student-athletes who model the characteristics of the award's namesake, specifically modesty, poise, and leadership in addition to excellence in athletics performance, drawing respect for the school, the team, and the individual.

Sam Pauly earned his second straight first team All-Northwest Conference selection in 2023 after he had three top-ten finishes at conference events throughout the season. He finished third individually at the 2022 NWC Fall Classic, seventh at the NWC Spring Classic and tied for seventh at the NWC Tournament. Pauly's average score was 72.2 this season over 18 rounds, which ranks among the top 10 in NCAA Division III on Golfstat. His best round was a 65 at Sun Willows golf course in April during a dual with Whitman in Pasco. He led the Pirates with seven top-ten finishes over the course of the season.

The Aaron Leetch Inspiration Award was created in 2015 to honor the memory of the former Whitworth Director of Athletics who perished in a plane crash in April of that year. It recognizes a Pirate student-athlete who embodies inspiration, passion, perseverance and dedication to his or her sport.

Samson Irish-Lodge completed his career as a horizontal jumper for the Pirate track and field team this spring. He scored in either the triple jump or the long jump, or both, at the Northwest Conference Championships each season. He has career-best marks of 45'-3" in the triple jump and 21'-2.75" in the long jump. Irish-Lodge provided leadership on the Whitworth Athletics DEI committee each of the last two years, wrote an original concerto that has been performed at major university events, and gave the invocation at Pirate Night 2022. Irish-Lodge has inspired teammates and the department by overcoming personal challenges from his childhood.

The Whitworth Senior Athlete of the Year award recognizes outstanding athletic achievement during a student's final year of eligibility and culminates an accomplished career as a Pirate.

Carly Hoff earned recognition as the 2023 Northwest Conference Women's Swimmer of the Meet after she claimed first place in the 50-yard, 100-yard and 200-yard freestyle at the NWC Championships in February. She defeated two other NWC individual champions to win the 200 distance. Hoff concluded her Pirate career as a five-time NWC individual champion.

Maddie Lee, an outside hitter who was the 2021 NWC Player of the Year, earned first team recognition again in 2022. Lee led the Pirates, and ranked among NWC leaders, in points per set (3.81), kills per set (3.33) and total kills (290). She was the NWC volleyball offensive student-athlete of the week twice this season, on Sept. 26th and on October 31st. She helped lead the Pirates to a share of the 2022 conference title and back-to-back NWC championships.

Colten Chelin ended his career as Pirate football's all-time Ironman. Chelin did not miss a start, much less a game, during his tenure. The fifth-year senior cornerback started every game since stepping on campus for the 2018 season, running his streak to 44 in a row in the 2022 season finale on November 12th, which is the most ever in school history. He ended with eight interceptions and 43 passes defended in his career. He was the 2018 NWC Freshman of the Year and a first team All-NWC honoree in 2022.