Whitworth University is a nationally ranked, private Christian liberal arts university in Spokane, Wash. Founded in 1890, Whitworth enrolls over 2,300 undergraduate students and offers more than 100 majors and programs between its College of Arts & Sciences, School of Education and School of Business. From participating in NCAA Division III athletics or intramurals, getting involved in one of 50-plus student clubs, or attending campus chapel, Whitworth students stay busy and deeply integrate themselves into the tight-knit campus community.

Admissions

Key Admissions Stats

Institution Type

Private

Not for Profit

Presbyterian

Coed

Need Aware

This school may consider an applicant’s financial situation when deciding admission

Level of Institution

4 Year

Campus Setting

Suburb or town

0

100

91%

Acceptance Rate

Admissions Requirements

SAT

No

ACT

No

Transcript

Yes

Important Deadlines

Application TypeApplication DeadlineReply DeadlineEarly Action Acceptance is not binding, but student will receive admissions decision earlier.November 15May 1Fall Regular DecisionMarch 1May 1Spring Regular DecisionDecember 1 January 1

Admitted Student Stats

In-State Students

69%

Out-Of-State Students

26%

9%

Submitting ACT

26%

Submitting SAT

Average ACT Composite: 25

0

36

Average SAT Composite: 1183

0

1600

Academics

Key Academic Stats

Highest Degree Offered

Doctorate

Total Number of Students

2,681

Total Number of Undergrads

2,309

Academic Calendar

Four-one-four plan

See your fit

Classroom Sizes

2-19 Students

59%

20-39 Students

36%

40-99 Students

3%

0

100

63%

Graduate in 4 Years US National: 28%

0

100

75%

Graduate in 6 Years US National: 52%

Student:Faculty Ratio

11:1

US National: 21:1

Tuition, Cost & Aid

Key Financial Stats

Average Net Price

$25,785

Calculate your net cost

Tuition

In-State Tuition In-state tuition is the tuition charged by institutions to those students who meet the state's or institution's residency requirements. In-district tuition is the tuition charged by the institution to those students residing in the locality in which they attend school and may be a lower rate than in-state tuition if offered by the institution.

$48,990

Out-of-State Tuition Out-of-state tuition is the tuition charged by institutions to those students who do not meet the state’s or institution’s residency requirements. Out-of-district tuition is the tuition charged by the institution to those students not residing in the locality in which they attend school.

$48,990

Additional Costs

Room and Board The weighted average for room and board and other expenses is generated as follows:

(amount for on-campus room, board and other expenses * # of students living on-campus.

+ amount for off-campus (with family) room, board and other expenses * # of students living off-campus with family

+ amount for off-campus (not with family) room, board and other expenses * # of students living off-campus not with family)

divided by the total # of students. Students whose living arrangements are unknown are excluded from the calculation. For some institutions the # of students by living arrangement will be known, but dollar amounts will not be known. In this case the # of students with no corresponding dollar amount will be excluded from the denominator.

$13,100

Books and Supplies

$696

Aid & Grants

0

100

83%

Need Met

Students Receiving Gift Aid Percent of undergraduate students awarded federal gift aid. Federal gift aid includes any grant or scholarship aid awarded, from the federal government, a state or local government, the institution, and other sources known by the institution.

31%

Average Aid Per Year

$34,668

Students Receiving Grants Percent of undergraduate students awarded grant aid. Grant aid includes any grant or scholarship aid awarded, from the federal government, a state or local government, the institution, and other sources known by the institution.

31%

Average Federal Grant Aid Per Year

$5,592

Average Institution Grant Aid Per Year

$29,393

Student Loans

Students Borrowing Loans Loans to students - Any monies that must be repaid to the lending institution for which the student is the designated borrower. Includes all Title IV subsidized and unsubsidized loans and all institutionally- and privately-sponsored loans. Does not include PLUS and other loans made directly to parents.

58%

Average Loan Amount Per Year

$7,089

Average Debt at Graduation The median federal debt of undergraduate borrowers who graduated. This figure includes only federal loans; it excludes private student loans and Parent PLUS loans.

$20,500

Median Monthly Loan Payment The median monthly loan payment for student borrowers who completed, if it were repaid over 10 years at a 5.05% interest rate.

$248

Campus Life

Key Campus Stats

Student Gender

Male

Female

41%

59%

Student Organizations

58

Size of Town

Suburb or town

LGBTQIA Student Resource Groups

Yes

On Campus Women's Center

No

Housing

0

100

45%

Undergrads Living on Campus

On-campus living required of freshman

No

Athletics

Divisional Sports Nickname

Pirates

School Colors

red and black

Varsity Athletics Association

NCAA

Varsity Athletics Conference Primary

Northwest Conference

Campus Safety

24-HR security patrol

Yes

Campus emergency phones

Yes

After Graduation

Post Grad Stats

Top 5 Cities

Spokane

Seattle

Portland

San Francisco

Los Angeles

Employed

6 mos. after graduation

52%

Average Salary

6 years after graduation

$48,000

What Students Are Saying

Whitworth is AMAZING. It lives up to its mission statement, it offers an incredible learning environment, and it contains the nicest people possible. I honestly cannot express how wonderful this institution is!

Rylee from Spokane, WA

This university contains some of the most intellectually sound, yet compassionate professors anywhere in the world. Not only do almost all of them hold doctoral degrees from outstanding universities (University of Washington, University of Oregon, University of Alabama, Princeton, Princeton Theological Seminary, Oxford, etc.), they ALL want and do relate to you in incredible ways. Each professor I had desired to get to know me and would call me to check-in (especially if I missed a class), but challenged me to help me become a competitive professional and diligent employee.

Joshua from Mission, TX

whitworth is a great christian university that doesn't compromise its christ mission, while still having a vibrant, diverse community and high academics. the many opportunities for community, service, faith, and learning provide anyone with the options for success. christian and non-christians alike will feel welcome here and be challenged to ask tough questions and learn about other perspectives.

Katelyn from Union, OR

whitworth university promotes a sense of community that is incomparable to any other i've seen or heard of. the student body is driven and diverse. and the faculty genuinely cares for the personal and academic growth of their students.

Hailey from Greenacres, WA

Whitworth University is wholeheartedly committed to its motto of providing an education of the mind and heart. The professors are devoted to encouraging their students to reach their fullest potential and to explore topics outside of their usual comfort zone. Whitworth's student body is welcoming, energetic, and on fire for Christ.

Anya from Medford, OR

Similar Colleges

Salem, OR

Ellensburg, WA

Cheney, WA

Spokane, WA

Tacoma, WA

Seattle, WA

Seattle, WA

Pullman, WA

Seattle, WA

Bellingham, WA

Stanford, CA

Portland, OR

See All