Mal Peet, the award-winning writer best known for the books Keeper, Tamar and Exposure, has died aged 67, shortly after being diagnosed with cancer. Although known as a children’s author and especially an author for teenagers, Mal never thought of himself as defined by his audience. In particular, he was suspicious of books that targeted teenagers, on the grounds that “such books usually give off a strong whiff of condescension, although there are, of course, very honourable exceptions”.

He similarly disliked being defined by genre. “I see genres as generating sets of rules or conventions that are only interesting when they are subverted or used to disguise the author’s intent. My own way of doing this is to attempt a sort of whimsical alchemy, whereby seemingly incompatible genres are brought into unlikely partnerships.”

His output was small. When he was asked what kind of writer he was, Mal said: “If I were to try to describe the way in which I write, the only word I would use without qualification is slowly.” However, despite publishing only a handful of books, he won both the Carnegie medal and the Guardian children’s fiction prize, and was regarded as one of the finest current writers.

Mal came to writing children’s fiction when he was 52. He was so successful so quickly that he was described as a “veteran” only 11 years later. But when he published his first novel he was not quite the newcomer he seemed: with his wife, Elspeth Graham, he had already written more than 100 easy readers, as well as Cloud Tea Monkeys (1999), a reworking of a Chinese folk tale, illustrated first by Alan Marks and then, in a new edition in 2010, by Juan Wijngaard.

When Mal declared himself to be “bored stiff” with the easy readers, Elspeth encouraged him to write a novel. Keeper (2003), a ghost story with a touch of magical realism, was inspired by an editor telling him that if he ever wanted to write a book, they were looking for stories about death and stories about football. Mal took the advice to heart and wrote about both in a novel set in the South American rainforest, in which a young footballer is haunted by an older, world-famous goalkeeper. Keeper brought Mal immediate recognition, including winning the Branford Boase award for an outstanding debut novel for children; its citation highlighted his “singular originality” with “superb storytelling in its soul”.

In his second novel, Tamar (2006), a powerful love story about Special Operations Executive agents in the second world war, Mal showed that he was just as comfortable writing for older teens. Against considerable opposition from a slew of previously award-winning authors and very much as the outsider, Tamar won the Carnegie medal.

Mal followed this with The Penalty (2006), which again starred Paul Fustino, the footballing journalist in Keeper. Reviewing The Penalty in the Guardian, Frank Cottrell Boyce wrote: “I can’t begin to describe how terrific this book is. We’re in the middle of a spate of novels about football. I’ve read them all. This is the best.” It was the kind of praise that Mal’s writing inspired not only from critics but also from his many readers. Fustino appears also in Exposure (2008), an up-to-date version of Othello set in South America, with contemporary celebrities succumbing to the tricks of Shakespeare’s original. Full of the intensity of adolescence, Exposure won the Guardian children’s fiction prize and, like Tamar, showed Mal’s warmth and understanding of young people.

Where that skill was honed is revealed in Life: An Exploded Diagram (2011), Mal’s semi-autobiographical and totally fresh novel about the complications of growing up, which was described by the novelist Meg Rosoff as “a real book, a rare treat for thoughtful readers of any age. Read it yourself. Then, if you can think of a young person with the wit to appreciate it, pass it along.” In this novel, Mal was not following any rules or targeting any audience, but he was still being published as an author for children and young adults. It was only with The Murdstone Trilogy (2014), his wickedly clever dig at fantasy novels and at the world of celebrity writers he both loved and was terrified by, that Mal was first published as an author for adults.

Mal’s infectious humour propels The Murdstone Trilogy, which also reflects many of his views about writers and writing. He was totally without arrogance or side but he knew his worth, and very much enjoyed his success, and other people’s, too. But he did not like unjustified adulation, was a keen critic for the Guardian Review and had a sharp eye for flannel and unnecessary over-promotion.

Kind, funny and incredibly generous, Mal was excellent company. He was sharp without ever being cruel. When he was curmudgeonly about things he disliked – bad books, technology and non-stop rain in the West Country, for example – it was never irritating or dull but witty and pertinent.

Mal was a natural believer in social justice and a campaigner at heart. He was a tireless contributor to the cause of children’s books and reading in general, and used his success to rail against government cuts to resources for culture and for children. In his Carnegie medal acceptance speech, he said “libraries offer the arsenal in the war of understanding”, and cited his childhood experience in which the public library filled the void of a home life that left him “emotionally challenged”.

Mal was brought up in North Walsham, Norfolk, where his father worked in a confectionery factory and his mother was a part-time bookkeeper. He described his childhood with his parents, younger brother and sister and grandmother in a small house on a council estate in a small town as “rather crowded and quarrelsome”. After passing the 11-plus he went to the Paston school, an old-fashioned grammar, which he described in Life: An Unexploded Diagram.

Despite his parents’ resistance to the idea, Mal was encouraged by an English teacher – who inspired him to write – to abandon plans to go to art school in favour of studying literature. Mal “escaped Norfolk” and went in 1965 to the University of Warwick, where he eventually gained an MA in English and American literature, and enjoyed the freedom university brought him.

After moving though several unrelated jobs, having what he described as “a very low tolerance for routine”, Mal moved to Devon, married Elspeth in 1987 and began to write.

An earlier marriage ended in divorce. He is survived by Elspeth, his sons, Tom and Charlie, his daughter, Lauren, and his grandchildren, Grace and Ezra.