Local writer Mal Peet, an illustrator turned author has been nominated for the Carnegie Medal - one of the world's leading children's book prizes - for his novel, Tamar.

After a primary school in Australia contacted us to say how much their pupils loved Norfolk's Mal Peet's novels, we asked them to send us a review of his first book, Keeper.

Twelve-year-old Dean wrote the review and this is what he had to say.

This story is about a boy who went from living with his family in a small village in South America, hardly able to play football at all, to being coached secretly by a harsh but legendary Keeper.

"El Gato" (The Cat), as he becomes known, ends up as a World Cup-winning goal keeper.

Mysterious person

Dean

The story jumps backwards and forwards between a newspaper interview with El Gato after his World Cup win, and the story of his childhood in the village.

Everyone was very poor so he was forced to work in the forest as a woodcutter with his father.

At the same time he was secretly learning his keeping skills from the mysterious Keeper in a hidden part of the forest. In all he did, though, he had the support of a loving family.

Fabulous story

Just who the mysterious coach is and how El Gato becomes so successful is a truly fabulous story.

This is the best book I have ever read. It puts history, biography, magic and adventure together for a great read.

I give it 12 out of 10 because it is an amazing book. Mal Peet has written a book that everyone can enjoy.

Keeper is published by Walker Books and is suitable for children aged 12 and above.

Once you've read the book, add your comments about Keeper here.

Your name & where you're from: Your comments:

umm jakcy mate...mal peet is a relative of mine..sort of and if u cnt say nothin nice dont say nothing at all!!! xx

Jordan Trick

we studied this book in english and i really liked it even though im not crazy about footie

frankie

it was pretty good at parts but it was often way to mystical to believe. I go back and forth about it.

Nick California

i loved this book. mal peet is inspirational

Katty kent

this book is weird very weird.....by the way I DONT LIKE IT

jacky

good book

sam ohio

Not being a soccer fan but doing what librarians do (read alot), I picked up Mal Peet's book during the World Cup Series. I have no background information about soccer so when I finished the book, I was very curious--was this a real player? Was there a soccer team that had died in a plane crash? I turned to the internet to try to find information but alas, it must all be fiction. It is a wonderfully written story that I will recommend to my students for many reasons beyond just the soccer game aspect.

PSwanson, School Librarian, USA