Liverpool Home Shirt 1995/96 - Kit Vault

We've got our hands on another classic football shirt for the next edition of the SoccerBible Kit Vault. This time it's the 1995-96 Liverpool home shirt, as famously worn by the Liverpool Spice Boys!

Liverpool are one of the true greats of English football, but it was hard to envisage a team steeped in history and tradition when the squad of 95-96 stepped onto the pitch wearing this interesting number from adidas. As you would have expected, the unconventional design caused some controversy when it was first released, but this shirt has since gone on to become a cult classic.

This unique adidas football shirt was the last design to be worn before Liverpool began a ten year stint with Reebok, and adidas certainly signed off with a memorable shirt. Characterised by it's large V neck collar, it's fair to say we hadn't seen anything like it before, and haven't seen anything like it since.

Liverpool won countless admirers for their freeflowing brand of football during the course of 95-96 season, the highlight of which was the 4-3 thriller at home to Newcastle. Unfortunately though, there was no trophy to show for their attacking football, just a trip to the FA Cup final and cream Armani suits all round!

Our 1995-96 Liverpool home shirt features classic adidas numbering, but more importantly the legendary name 'BARNES'. In a period of ten years at Liverpool, John Barnes established himself as an icon by scoring 84 goals from 314 appearances. Admittedly by the 95-96 season Barnes was entering the twilight years of his career, but his role within the team was crucially important as he helped to nurture the likes of Jamie Redknapp, Robbie Fowler and Steve McManaman.

Liverpool returned to wearing adidas kits in the 2006-07 season, although none of the designs since have been quite as bold as this Liverpool football shirt. And with all the technology in modern football shirts, and the need to be performance apparel, we wonder whether you'll ever see the likes of this classic shirt again?

Stay tuned to the SoccerBible as we reveal even more retro soccer shirts from the Kit Vault, showcasing the best retro amd classic kits and bringing them back to life!