Contraction's second LP, entitled 'La Bourse ou La Vie' (Your money or Your Life), was released in 1974 and dedicated to Dervieux. Their sophomore effort continues in a similar vein, again featuring themes taken from Dimension M", such as Dervieux's...

A real surprise to find a 35 year old, excellent sound quality live concert recording from this short-lived but excellent band.

"What a long-forgotten treasure!!! Contraction entered Montreal's Studio Tempo during the winter of 1974, in order...

Great Canadian intricate, guitar-based music that is heavily influenced by folk music, as well as the Quebecois progressive scene at the time (this was released in 1977). Unavailable for years, then reissued on lp, then deleted, then reissued on CD, th...

Vincent Dionne is a Quebecois percussionist who, along with Michel-Georges Bregent, released two very excellent drum/electronics albums in the 1970s. This is a compilation of his two solo albums (Destinations and Parade) from 1988 and 1992...

ExCubus were a Quebecois progressive rock band of the early 1970s - one of Quebec's earliest I am told - who recorded only half an album's worth of material and then re-formed to complete their first album, releasing it as "Memoires Incubussiennes"...

"LIMITED EDITION! It is far from often that we at ProgQuebec are stunned to find an excellent progressive group from 1970's-era Quebec who was simply forgotten! Such is the case with Incubus (rebaptised ExCubus for this CD release, in order to avoid...

"Yves Laferrière’s eponymous solo album, originally released on Le Tamanoir in 1978) is quite unknown and underrated. Laferrière was bassist for most of the stuff reviewed in the article to this point. On guitar is René Lussier (Conventum, Quatre Guita...

Jerome Langlois is best known as the co-founder of Maneige. This is new music from him and is 25' of solo piano (nice, but...solo piano, y'know?) and 40' of a small suite for a 10 piece chamber-rock ensemble, which is quietly great...

"This 2-CD set features Maneige co-founder and composer Jerome Langlois performing live in a number of settings. The first disc is the Molignak ensemble's performance at FMPM 2006. This group featured three ex-members of Maneige, the bassist of Octobre...

Jerome was a founding member of the very fine Quebecois band Maneige, writing and performing on their 1st two albums, which were some of the band's highlights. For the last 30 years, he's been doing soundtrack-type work, and it reflects that, but it al...

This is a nicely done, charming, period-piece release that has quite good sound considering the unreleased nature and age of the materials. Most people were not even aware of this band's existence! "Maneige fans are in for quite a treat with these long...

This really could be considered a Maneige album, expanded into a larger format! "Another page in the history of Lasting Weep, formed in 1968 by Alain Bergeron and Jérôme Langlois (prior to them founding Maneige), Mathieu Leger and Claude Chapleau...

After a very, very long time quiet, ProgQuebec have returned for one last hurrah with this excellent archival release, which was issued in a limited quantity.

Like many of the other bands during Quebec’s golden age of progressive rock, there is a lot of influence from the major UK names and also a lot of influence from Gentle Giant (who, admittedly, were more popular in Quebec than they were in the USA).

This is a fine, totally professionally recorded progressive rock release from 1976, that...

"People have been bugging us for these for four years. Finally available on CD, remastered from the original tapes with the blessing of EMI Music Canada, this was the second Maneige album released in 1975. Featuring one of the great compositions of...

Maneige were one of the very best known (and also the very best) Quebecois progresive bands of the 1970s. Founded in 1972 by classically trained musicians, they were a sextet of musicians who played a huge array of instruments, including piano, electri...

Great sounding live, archival release from the period when Miriodor were a trio ("Miriodor" and "3rd Warning"). Both of these albums are unfortunately out of print at this time, so it's also the only way to currently hear this period of the band's...

"One of the foremost Quebec prog bands of their day, Morse Code's discography has sold over 100,000 copies and earned them fans around the world. These highly anticipated reissues were green-lighted by EMI Music Canada, remastered from the original...

"One of the foremost Quebec prog bands of their day, Morse Code's discography has sold over 100,000 copies and earned them fans around the world. These highly anticipated reissues were green-lighted by EMI Music Canada, remastered from the original...

"Who in 1973 would have thought that the recordings on the just-released soundtrack was the genesis of one of Quebec's favorite bands as we know it? In fact, this album (one of the least promoted of Offenbach's discography, with none of its tracks...

Offenbach were a long lived Quebeçois progressive / progressive hard band whose history reaches back into the early 60s. This is their fourth album and was originally a double and is included here with tons of bonus live material...

First-ever reissue by this Quebecois progressive jazz/rock outfit. Using a line up of vibes/percussion, flute/piano, bass and drums. The vibes in the front line along with the flute sometimes gives this a bit of a Pierre Moerlin's Gong sound. Comparisons can also be drawn to the sound of ealy Maneige. This was their first album, and it was recorded live in 1979. A nice, jazzy-leaning fusion effort.

"Former keyboardist for both Ville Emard Blues Band and Toubabou, Yvan Ouellet surprised everyone in 1979 with a peaceful and jazzy album which struck a chord within its seven songs. Ouellet is accompanied by former bandmates Yves Laferrière...

"Polygone was formed around three former members of ‘70s Québec progressive rock group Incubus (since reunited as ExCubus with two albums also available through ProgQuébec): Marc Delage (guitars, vocals, bass, piano and mellotron), Michel Phaneuf (synthesizers, clavinet, mellotron and vocals), and Pierre Poulet (guitar and bass), who were joined by Claude Phaneuf (guitars and bass) and Luc Proulx (drums) in 1979; the group remains active until 1983 (also the year André Barrière replaced Claude Phaneuf...

Rare album by the leader of Pollen, in a much more 'folky'vein. "After the dissolution of Pollen, Rivest produced this cycle of pretty, sometimes folky, song-based material. Helping him on the release is most of Pollen; Lemay, Lemoyne, even original...

Excellent progressive/jazz-rock band from Montreal who recorded two extremely well regarded and hugely sought-after albums in the mid 1970s and who then basically dissapeared without a trace. To me, they combine elements of Canterbury jazz-rock with...

This is a reissue of the complete works of this Montreal-based ensemble.

"This remastered 2-CD collection contains both complete albums released by this group led by percussionist Michel Sguin. It also contains a bonus multimedia section...

"August 2004 saw the return of the mega-group Ville Emard Blues Band on the Plains of Abraham... now including a second generation of musicians, and led by Chris "Mad Frog" Gagnon (son of Bill Gagnon, original VEBB leader). The 1970's met the new...