Brown University is a private research university and part of the Ivy League. It is situated in Providence, Rhode Island, and is the seventh-oldest higher education institution in the United States, and third-oldest in New England. Brown was the first college in the country to admit all students, regardless of religious association. It has a total undergraduate enrollment of 6380 students, and the campus is 146 acres.

History

Brown University’s history is closely related to that of greater New England and Rhode Island, spanning almost 250 years. It was founded on March 3rd, 1764, when a charter (executed under the authority of King George III) was filed to create the College. James Manning was the College’s first president. He was there from 1765 to 1791, during which time the location of the College moved to its current location at College Hill. The College was renamed Brown University in 1804 in honor of Nicholas Brown Jr., John Brown’s nephew. Brown University played a significant role during the American Revolution, serving as an encampment area for French troops, and also acting as a military hospital. Brown established a Women’s College in 1891 and began admitting women. In 1969, Brown adopted the “New Curriculum”, which was a major change in the University’s institutional history. The “New Curriculum” brought a policy that sought to teach students how to think while putting them at the center of education.

Programs

Brown has an excellent English program. The Department of English promotes original work on new questions of criticism, analysis, history and theory, while also fostering the open understanding of cultures and literatures in English. All undergraduate concentrators take courses corresponding to broad historical periods. Brown’s doctoral program in English offers professional training in literary theory, research, and criticism. The program also trains graduate students to become researchers and teachers.

Brown’s History program is one of the best in the country. The History undergraduate concentration aims to encourage students to develop an understanding of the ways in which cultures and societies change over time, and provides them with different approaches to appreciate and study the past. Brown’s master’s and doctoral programs in History are both small and selective (the doctoral program enrolls only 10-12 students annually). It takes the average students approximately 5-7 years to complete the doctoral degree. Brown is also known for Alpert Medical School. Alpert Medical School is a national leader in biomedical research and medical education. It is the 4th most selective medical school in the country with an acceptance rate of only 3.2%. Alpert Medical School awards around 100 MD degrees annually. The mission statement of the college is: “the pursuit of health to benefit society”. It was adopted by the faculty and students of Alpert Medical School in 2011 and sums up the college perfectly.

Pros & Cons

Brown University is located in Providence, Rhode Island, and is the central attraction in the town, making it a “college-town”. Thayer Street is a center of activity with many dining and shopping options, and is a popular destination for students. At 9:1, the student-faculty ratio is superb, and over 2/3 of the classes have less than 20 students. All students attending Brown must live on campus for their first 3 years (6 semesters). There are over 200 student organizations on campus, and living on campus gives easy access to these clubs. Living on campus also gives you the opportunity to meet new people and gives you quick access to all the facilities Brown has to offer. Brown is extremely selective, however, and had just an 8.9% acceptance rate in Fall 2011. It is also extremely expensive. In 2012-2013, the tuition and fees came to a total of $43 758, while residence cost $11 258.