If you plan on visiting The Trusts Arena, please make sure to check in first.

Simply fill in the printed form in the foyer, or scan the printed QR code using the new NZ COVID Tracer app.

Please make use of the supplied hand sanitizer.

Thank you for your cooperation.

For more information on this app, and how to download it, please use the link below.

Privacy Statement for the collection of personal information under the Epidemics Preparedness Act 2006 and associated legislation to respond to Covid-19

We are collecting personal information from you during Level 2, including information about your:

· name

· contact information: address and telephone number

We collect your personal information in order to:

· assist the Ministry of Health to contact trace under the Epidemics Preparedness Act 2006 and associated legislation

Besides our staff, we share this information with:

· the Ministry of Health via the regional Medical Officers of Health appointed under the Health Act 1956 in order to assist the Ministry of Health trace contacts of those diagnosed with Covid-19.

Providing this information when you visit The Arena is necessary to protect the health of all users of the Arena. If you chose not to enter your name, address and phone number, we reserve the right to advise the Ministry of Health and may be required to by law.

We keep your information safe by storing it in encrypted file where it is provided electronically or if provided in writing in a closed filed only accessible by The Arena’s Privacy Officer.

We keep your information for four weeks from the date of collection at which point we securely destroy it by secure erasing.

You have the right to ask for a copy of any personal information we hold about you, and to ask for it to be corrected if you think it is wrong. If you would like to ask for a copy of your information, or to have it corrected, please contact us at michael.ocego@thetrustsarena.co.nz, or 09 970 5200 or The Trusts Arena PO Box 21241, Waitakere 0610, Attention The Privacy Officer.