Charlie Villanueva

American Basketball Player

39 years old

Single

Full Name

Charlie Alexander Villanueva

Age

39

Birth date

August 24, 1984

Horoscope

Virgo

Birth Place

Queens

Profession

Basketball Player

Net Worth

$100,000 – $1M

Martial Status

Single

Height

6′ 11″

Ethnicity

Multiracial

Nationality

American

Weight

N/A lbs (N/A kg)

Hair Color

Dark Brown

Eye Color

Dark Brown

Ahead, we take a look at who is Charlie Villanueva dating now, who has he dated, Charlie Villanueva’s girlfriend, past relationships and dating history. We will also look at Charlie’s biography, facts, net worth, and much more.

Who is Charlie Villanueva dating?

Charlie Villanueva is currently single, according to our records.

The American Basketball Player was born in Queens on August 24, 1984. NBA power forward known for his three-point shooting; drafted 7th overall by the Toronto Raptors in 2005, spent three years with the Milwaukee Bucks and signed a 5-year deal with the Detroit Pistons in 2009.

Relationship status

As of 2023, Charlie Villanueva’s is not dating anyone. Charlie is 39 years old. According to CelebsCouples, Charlie Villanueva had at least 1 relationship previously. He has not been previously engaged.

Fact: Charlie Villanueva is turning 40 years old in

'}if(count > 0 && !show_zero) {//show_zero = true;}abs_diff -= count * seconds[display[i]];}}}}jQuery('#countdown_6586ec4075d444_27180821').html(text);}setInterval(updateCountdown, 1000);updateCountdown(); }); }); . Be sure to check out top 10 facts about Charlie Villanueva at FamousDetails.

About Charlie Villanueva’s girlfriend

Charlie Villanueva doesn’t have a girlfriend right now.

All dating histories are fact-checked and confirmed by our users. We use publicly available data and resources to ensure that our dating stats and biographies are accurate.

Who has Charlie Villanueva dated?

Like most celebrities, Charlie Villanueva tries to keep his personal and love life private, so check back often as we will continue to update this page with new dating news and rumors.

Charlie Villanueva girlfriends: He had at least 1 relationship previously. Charlie Villanueva has not been previously engaged. Charlie Villanueva has been in a relationship with Julissa Bermudez (2008 – 2009). We are currently in process of looking up information on the previous dates and hookups.

Online rumors of Charlie Villanuevas’s dating past may vary. While it’s relatively simple to find out who’s dating Charlie Villanueva, it’s harder to keep track of all his flings, hookups and breakups. It’s even harder to keep every celebrity dating page and relationship timeline up to date. If you see any information about Charlie Villanueva is dated, please let us know.

Relationship Statistics of Charlie Villanueva

What is Charlie Villanueva marital status?

Charlie Villanueva is single.

How many relationships did Charlie Villanueva have?

Charlie Villanueva had at least 1 relationship in the past.

How many children does Charlie Villanueva have?

He has no children.

Is Charlie Villanueva having any relationship affair?

This information is not available.

Charlie Villanueva Biography

Charlie Villanueva was born on a Friday, August 24, 1984 in Queens. His birth name is Charlie Alexander Villanueva and he is currently 39 years old. People born on August 24 fall under the zodiac sign of Virgo. His zodiac animal is Rat.

Charlie Alexander Villanueva is a Dominican-American retired professional basketball player who last played for the Dallas Mavericks of the National Basketball Association (NBA).

He played two years of college basketball at UConn, winning an NCAA Championship in 2004.

Continue to the next page to see Charlie Villanueva net worth, popularity trend, new videos and more.

Last update: December 2023

ncG1vNJzZmivp6x7pa3ToqWgm5WhsqO%2FjZympmennbxutdJmmqGZoqG2pnnVoqOlmZ6qsretjJ2YraGenHw%3D