William III. (of Orange), King of England, Ireland, and Scotland, and Stadtholder of Holland, was born at the Hague, 4th November 1650. He was the posthumous son of William II., Stadtholder of Holland; his mother, Mary, was daughter of Charles I. of England.

Excluded from the succession during his youth, partly through the influence of Cromwell, he was chosen Stadtholder in 1672.

On 4th November 1677, he married Mary, daughter of the Duke of York, afterwards James II.

On 30th June 1688 he received an invitation from English politicians, to intervene for the restoration of national rights and liberties, and on the 5th of November landed at Torbay with an English and Dutch force. He was received with enthusiasm, and James, after entering into negotiations with him, fled to France in December.

A convention was immediately summoned, and, on the 13th of February 1688–’9, William and Mary were proclaimed joint sovereigns of England. They were crowned on the 11th April, and on the same day were proclaimed King and Queen by the estates of Scotland.

While the revolution in Great Britain was thus accomplished almost without bloodshed, the greater part of Ireland remained loyal to James. The Catholic Irish were in the ascendant everywhere except at Londonderry, Enniskillen, and a few unimportant places, chiefly in Ulster.

James landed at Kinsale in the month of March 1688–’9, and held a Parliament in Dublin in May.

Where the Protestants resisted at all, they were everywhere on the defensive.

Londonderry, one of the few remaining strongholds in English hands, was besieged from 18th April to 30th July, when the place was relieved by a naval force from England.

About two weeks later Duke Schomberg, with some 16,000 men, chiefly foreign mercenaries, arrived in Belfast Lough; but, though he gained some successes, he was quite unable to cope with James’s army, and was obliged to entrench himself near Dundalk.

Reinforcements were sent in March 1690, and, on the 11th June, William himself sailed from Highlake, near Chester, with more troops, and landed at Carrickfergus on the 14th, where he was met by Schomberg, who resigned the chief command into his hands.

The King’s united forces numbered about 36,000 men—English, Irish, French, Dutch, and Brandenburgers. He had a military chest of £200,000, and was amply provided with artillery and munitions of war.

His principal generals were: Duke Schomberg, Count de Zolmes, Count Schomberg, the Earl of Oxford, General de Ginkell, Lieutenant-General Douglass, Sgravenmoer, Lanier, Kirk, La Forest, Tettau, Sidney, and Nassau.

On the 19th June, at Belfast, then a small town of some three hundred houses, he issued a proclamation forbidding plunder or violence by those under his command, and declaring the chief intention and design of his expedition to be “to reduce our kingdom of Ireland to such a state that all who behave themselves as becomes dutiful and loyal subjects may enjoy their liberties and possessions under a just and equal government.”

At Hillsborough, on 19th June, he issued a warrant granting a pension of £1,200 a year to the Presbyterian ministers of the north of Ireland, “wherein,” said Harris, “he takes notice of their loyalty and good affections, the losses they had sustained, and their constant labour to unite the hearts of others to zeal and loyalty toward him.” (This was the nucleus of the Regium Donum, gradually increased to £40,000 per annum, and extinguished in our time by the payment of a capital sum under the Church Act.)

The Enniskillen and Londonderry regiments were received into the regular army, upon the same footing as the other troops.

It was known that James had marched north at the head of a large force, and the country south of Dundalk was believed to be friendly to him.

Some of William’s generals recommended great caution in the advance; but, declaring that the country was worth fighting for, and that he had not come to let the grass grow under his feet, but was determined to prosecute the war with the utmost vigour, he reviewed his army at Loughbrickland, marched to Dundalk, and hearing that the enemy had abandoned Ardee, pushed on thither.

There was considerable difference of opinion in James’s cabinet as to the proper policy to be pursued in the emergency.

His council on the whole advised that he should strengthen Dublin, Drogheda, and the Leinster garrisons, hold the line of the Shannon, and wait the chance of reinforcements from France, of William’s retreat being cut off by a French squadron, or of a diversion in James’s favour in England.

James himself was, however, determined to defend the Boyne at Oldbridge. He had all the advantages he could desire; the river was tolerably deep, there was a morass to be passed, and behind it rising ground.

On 30th June (o.s.), William, being informed that James had repassed the Boyne, moved his whole army, in three columns, at break of day, to the river, and sent a detachment towards Drogheda. From a hill he had a view of a portion of the Irish army encamped in two lines on the south bank.

William was somewhat disconcerted by the apparently honest report of a deserter, who placed the numbers of the enemy at a much higher figure than he had anticipated; but Richard Cox, the King’s under-secretary, set his mind at rest, by leading the deserter through their own camp, and showing how grossly he exaggerated their own forces.

King William rested on a knoll within musket-shot of the ford, as his troops marched into their positions. There he narrowly escaped death—the enemy brought a small fieldpiece secretly into position; the first ball killed a man and two horses beside the King, and the second, grazing the bank, slanted on to the King’s right shoulder, carried away a piece of his coat, and ruffled the skin.

After this slight wound was dressed, the King remounted and rode through the lines, to dissipate the apprehensions of his troops. He continued on horseback until four o’clock in the afternoon, when he dined on the field, and in the evening mounted again, though he had been up since one o’clock in the morning.

At nine he called a council of war, and declared his resolution to force the passage of the river next morning.

Duke Schomberg at first opposed the proposition; and then advised that at least a large force should be sent that night towards Slane bridge to flank the enemy. His opinion not being regarded, he “retired to his tent, and not long after received the order of battle with discontent and indifference.”

As the night closed, the cannon ceased on both sides. Orders were given that the troops should be ready to march at break of day, with green sprigs in their hats, to distinguish them from James’s men, who it was understood would wear pieces of white paper.

William “rode about twelve at night with torches quite through the camp, and then retired to his tent, impatient for the approaching day.”

The 1st July rose bright and clear. As well as can be ascertained, William had 36,000 troops to oppose James’s 30,000. William’s were superior in discipline, materiel, and artillery; but James occupied a strong position.

The Irish army retreated in confusion to Dublin, and soon afterwards retired upon Athlone and Limerick, while James himself fled south, and took shipping for France.

Captain FitzGerald, son of the Earl of Kildare, headed the Protestants of Dublin in seizing the keys of the Castle and the city, and sending messengers to King William, beseeching his speedy occupation of the capital.

On the 4th William encamped at Finglas; and on the 6th made his triumphal entry into Dublin, and heard service at St. Patrick’s, where a sermon was preached by Dr. King, afterwards Archbishop of Dublin, “On the power and wisdom of the providence of God in protecting his people, and defeating their enemies.”

The afternoon of the same day the King returned to the camp, and published a declaration, promising pardon and protection to all common soldiers, countrymen, tradesmen, and citizens who before the 1st of August should return to their homes and deliver up their arms; directing rents to be paid to Protestant landlords; whilst such as held under persons concerned in the war on James’s side were to hold them in hand until they had notice from the Commissioners of Revenue.

Harris says that he desired to make his grace more comprehensive, “but this was opposed by the English in Ireland, who thought the opportunity was not to be lost of breaking the great Irish families, and destroying the dependence of the inferior sort upon them.”

On the 7th and 8th, King William reviewed his army, and found it to consist of 22,579 foot, 7,75l horse and dragoons, besides “483 reformed officers, and all the standing officers and sergeants, and also four regiments in garrison.”

He divided his forces into two corps—one of which he directed towards Athlone, while he proceeded at the head of the other to Limerick.

Encamping at Crumlin on the 8th, he advanced on the 9th to Inchiquire, in the County of Kildare. We are told that on the way he “espied a soldier robbing a poor woman, which so enraged him that he first corrected him with his cane, and then commanded that he, with some others guilty of the like crimes, should be hanged. … The severity was seasonable, and struck such a terror into the soldiers as preserved the country from all violence during the whole march.”

King William sailed from Duncannon on 5th September, and landed at Bristol next day. The campaigns in Ireland were concluded by his generals the following year, at the capitulation of Limerick.

It was not willingly that William assented to the infraction of that treaty, to the degradation of the whole Catholic population of Ireland, to the penal laws, and to the destruction of Irish manufactures and commerce for the supposed interest of England.

Under King James’s Irish Act of Attainder the property of 2,500 of his enemies had been confiscated. The forfeitures made by the English Parliament in Ireland at the conclusion of the war numbered some 3,921, comprising 1,060,792 acres, the value of which at that time was £3,319,943.

Lord Clare, in his celebrated speech on the Union, said this was the third extensive seizure of Irish estates within the century—2,836,837 acres under James I.’s Ulster Plantation; 7,800,000 set out by the Court of Claims after the Restoration; 1,060,792 after the treaty of Limerick.

William died at Kensington, 8th March 1702, aged 51. The equestrian statue standing in College-green, Dublin, was completed the year before his death.

The gratitude of Irish Protestants “does not stop here,” says Harris, writing in 1745, “for every year they observe four festival days to his memory with great solemnity and undissembled joy; one on the 4th of November (his Majesty’s birth-day); the second the day following, being that of his landing to the rescue of the religion and liberty of these nations; the other two on the 1st and 12th of July, being the anniversaries of his victories at the Boyne and Aghrim. Nor were these memorials and solemnities thought enough. For further to perpetuate the memory of the great deliverance wrought by his Majesty, to the hazard of his life, at the battle of the Boyne, they erected a monumental pillar, anno 1736, near the place where he made his passage over that river.”

Walter Harris’s History of the Life and Reign of William Henry, Prince of Nassau and Orange (Dublin, 1749) contains copies of original documents and much information relating to the War of 1689–’91.

Sources

166. Huguenots in England and Ireland: Samuel Smiles. London, 1867.

175. Ireland, History of: Samuel Smiles, M.D. (the Invasion to 1829). London, 1844.

223. Macaulay, Lord: History of England, from the Accession of James II. [to 1702]. 5 vols. London, 1849–’61.

318. Story, George, Wars of Ireland, 1689–’92. 2 parts. London, 1693.

347a. William Henry, Prince of Orange, Life and Reign: Walter Harris. Dublin, 1749.