A native of Örebro, Sweden, Daniel Nätterdal has one of the best hardcore record collections you'll find anywhere. The singer of hardcore outfit Prison Riot, Nätterdal is a married family man who loves NYHC with a burning passion. I like Daniel.

So, let's welcome the Record Collector series' first member representing Örebro (home of Nasum!).

How long have you been collecting records?

I started collecting records when I was really young. I got my first LP (Twisted Sister's Stay Hungry) on my 5th birthday in 1985. I pretty much have spent all of my money on music since then. I started collecting hardcore/punk vinyl more ”seriously" about 20 years ago, but things were really slow for me before the interwebs, and I had a hard time finding the records I wanted.

Where/how do you usually find your records?

Nowadays, I mostly get my records on Discogs from European sellers. I did, however, get most of the 1-20 Revelation Records singles from mowing the lawn at the Burning Heart Records boss's [Peter Ahlqvist] house. He had a great collection but wouldn’t sell, so we came up with the arrangement: 1 record per cut, which was a pretty sweet deal for me.

What is the most you paid for a single album, where/how did you obtain it, and what was it?

I don’t have any super-expensive records because I can never save enough money [laughs]. The records that I have that cost me the most are probably the Minor Threat singles, the Negative Approach 7” first press, or the SSD's The Kids Will Have Their Say LP.

In your collection, which record is the most important to you for personal reasons?

Pretty much anything Warzone cause they’ve been the most important band for me the last 21 years. I still don’t have any Lower East Side Crew copies on colour, but I have 5 Warzone test presses and a few of those are made in 6-8 copies. And I would say infamous Age of Quarrel mis-press with the Run-D.M.C. label, and a Johnny Winter LP that plays the Agnostic Front One Voice record. I like oddities like that.

Is there anything that frustrates you about the current record collecting scene?

I really do collect records with a passion. With hardcore, it's more than the music, for me, records are pieces of the culture. Having a 7” made in a few hundred copies where the band members actually self-folded the sleeves and sold it to their friends 30-plus years ago in a another part of the world is like holding a piece of history in your hands. There's a few downsides to collecting, I guess. I think it’s sad that people are buying punk records to sell for profit and that prices on records, especially older records, are sky rocketing. Another thing that sucks big time is that the Swedish Central Bank is working really hard to weaken our currency (the Swedish ”Krona”) to stimulate export. One US dollar now costs almost twice as much as it did 10 years ago.

Which albums are still on your want list that you've had a tough time tracking down through the years?

Most records do surface once in a while, albeit, over-prized. However, there a few records that are affordable but I just can’t seem to find. One of those are Insight's What Will It Take 7” on purple vinyl, and if I ever find that one, there's a rarer blue vinyl one and a misprint with a "snow tiger" on it. But, yeah, the list goes on.

***

Follow Daniel on Instagram, and don't sleep on Prison Riot.