Cheap Shots-Volume II

Burning Heart Records bands compilation (Burning Heart Records)

By: Alex Steininger

Burning Heart Records has provided us with a compilation of some of the bands on there label. With their big selection of bands to chose from, it can often be difficult to find the next Burning Heart CD you want to purchase. But with thirteen bands on this compilation, and each contributing two songs, you may have find it easier to select the next Burning Heart CD you want.

The CD starts off with No Fun At All's "Master Celebrator." A fast paced pop-punk song with everything. Good vocals, hooky guitars, crushing bass lines, and drums that keep the beat nice. And it's fast paced to slow and back again pace keeps the song interesting. They also contribute "Out of Bounds." The next two tracks go to Home Grown. The two best tracks on this CD, in my opinion. Their first track is "Get a Job." A nicely done pop-punk song with snarling vocals that get the message across. Pure teen angst is portrayed in the lyrics and vocals. From the hooks and catchiness, this song got me addicted the first time I heard it. And with a chorus like "I'm going off to get a job/gonna rise to the top/gonna make a million dollars," this is one song that will be stuck in your head for a long time after you hear it. And their next song, "Hanging Out," continues with their pop-punk tales of teen life. And this song is another one you'll be running around singing out loud. These two tracks have done their purpose, I'm going to go out and find their record and purchase it. The next three bands are: 59 Times The Pain, Millencolin, and Liberator. Then comes Puffball, with their two tracks "Whininglad," and "So Wheres Your Vision?" They are pure hardcore. Both tracks are fast and intense. Satanic Surfers are next. Then comes MindJive with "Mobile," and their pop-funk-punk-hardcore sound. Their next song, "Jamfuel," is just that, a funky jam. Up until this point the CD has been very nice, but for some reason these two tracks didn't flow well with me. We'll see what the rest of the CD has to offer. Next up is Chickenpox. After all this punk, here's some nice ska to calm you down. It's time to take a dance break with this. Breach, Bodyjar, and Raised Fist are the next three bands. The Hives finish off the CD with "Cellblock," and "Ramanda." Some very nice fast paced, energetic, punk to end off the CD.