Privilege Ibiza’s 2019 Party Calendar is indicative of how diverse the nightlife in Ibiza really is, seven days a week offering a different musical proposal every night.

Privilege Ibiza is one of the few places in the world where you can lose yourself in a labyrinth of rooms and gardens, each with its distinct character and musical style, all of them with the same electric excitement that ignites the entire club. A must-see stop for anyone visiting the island in search of unforgettable and different experiences with their friends.

Mondays at Privilege Ibiza

Kicking off on 1st July and running weekly until the 2nd of September, One Third promises to bring good vibes only on Mondays at Privilege Ibiza, a combination of great production, cheerful atmosphere, and quality music brought to you by the likes of ATK1 (Abel the Kid), Plastik Funk, Dj Kaka and many more to be announced.

Tuesdays at Privilege Ibiza

Following a wildly successful 2018 season, RESISTANCE will be touching back down on the White Isle in 2019. Returning to its home at the world’s largest nightclub, from 23 July – 17 September.

ULTRA WORLDWIDE’s esteemed underground brand is ready to takeover Tuesdays on the island for another 9 weeks, with a huge roster of heavyweight headliners.

Carl Cox and Adam Beyer have been confirmed, as well as one of the most talked about additions to their line-up, Hot Since 82.

Eats Everything, Charlotte De Witte, Maceo Plex, Richie Hawtin and Sasha and John Digweed are performing this season. Also this year you can see Jamie Jones, Joris Voorn, Joseph Capriati, Kölsch, Loco Dice, Nic Fanciulli, Nicole Moudaber, Paco Osuna, Pan-Pot and Testpilot all confirmed to send us to techno heaven.

Wednesdays at Privilege Ibiza

Privilege Ibiza welcomes Manycome on Wednesdays at Vista Club running weekly from 3rd July until September 18th. The establishment of a techno sanctuary where everyone is welcome and giving female DJs more protagonism are the core beliefs of Manycome. International artists such as Marika Rossa, Lilly palmer, Elena Pavla, Amber and Nusha will be in charge of the beats on Wednesday nights at Vista Club.

Thursdays at Privilege Ibiza

Do You Remember is the new Thursday night residency at Privilege’s Vista Club kicking off on Thursday 27th June, a musical journey through the 80s, 90s and 2000s Pop, Rock, Soul, Disco and Ibiza House Classics.

Fridays at Privilege Ibiza

Starting on June 28th, veteran Ibiza party SuperMartXé takes back its rightful spot on Fridays at Privilege Ibiza for their 11th season on the White Island.

SuperMartXé is set to make history once more every week as the curtain rises, after having completely renewed their shows and returning to their house roots.

Among the first confirmed acts for this season, they have 2manydjs DJ Set, Benny Benassi, Mark Knight, Fedde Le Grand, WEISS, Illyus & Barrientos, David Tort, Robbie Rivera, David Penn, Superlover, Kryder, David Morales, The Cube Guys, Cedric Gervais, Though Love and ATFC.

Saturdays at Privilege Ibiza

Brutal Ibiza brings 17 sessions of Latin Urban Music to Privilege Ibiza between June 8th and September 28th, with the live performances of the hottest artists in the scene, including the current star of the genre Maluma, whose concert will take place on Thursday July 4th at the biggest club in the world, as a special extra date.

Sundays at Privilege Ibiza

Returning to their weekly Sunday spot at Privilege’s Vista Club between 23rd June and 22nd September, Solid Grooves introduce the white isle to their brand new, tongue in cheek FCUK THE FAKES concept. This exciting campaign is designed to represent the more authentic, unpretentious side of the island’s club culture rebelling against the crowd who have become accustomed to the VIP experience.

The bill includes a host of up-and-coming and globally loved heavyweight DJ talent such as Cassy, Skream, Michael Bibi, Route 94, Darius Syrossian, Richy Ahmed and many more. The ‘Solid Sundays’ event also sees a slew of hotly tipped acts confirmed in Rebūke, Mason Collective and Mason Maynard, while FUSE resident Seb Zito also joins ranks plus tINI, wAFF, Latmun and Detlef.