Shaun Livingston was supposed to be here all along. It just wasn't supposed to look like this.

Livingston should have been point guard for a playoff team, tasked with guiding his squad through the first round -- then on toward the ultimate goal, an NBA title.

It should've been an easy road. Livingston was a skinny teenager from Peoria, Illinois. He was the kid who had the giant afro. He was the kid who had the NBA scouts drooling, the one who didn't even need college to make the pros.

Livingston did everything right. He was never an ego case, or a reckless knucklehead. He was cool and reserved, hard-working and earnest about becoming the transcendental point guard everyone saw within him.

But injuries don't discriminate. A blown-out knee in 2007, among the most gruesome in NBA history, nearly ended Livingston's career before it really began. His leg was in danger of amputation. But -- slowly, game by game, season by season -- Livingston built himself a new NBA career.

Now, because of an injury afflicting Steph Curry, -- one of Livingston's teammates and the league's most popular player -- Livingston is right where everyone thought he'd be all along.

The basketball gods work in mysterious ways.

The high school prodigy

Out of Peoria, Shaun Livingston was the second-ranked high school basketball prospect in the class of 2004. Only one young hoop dreamer ranked ahead of Livingston: Dwight Howard. Among those ranked behind Livingston: Al Jefferson, Rudy Gay and Rajon Rondo.

Livingston was a smooth, 6-foot-7 point guard, the kind of precocious young talent who gives scouts fever dreams. Perhaps he could redefine the position -- or at least put an extremely rare spin on it with his combination of height, lankiness and skill.

The young prodigy was supposed to go to Duke, but he skipped college altogether. Livingston's confidence was vindicated when the Los Angeles Clippers selected him fourth overall out of Peoria Central High in the 2004 NBA Draft.

Livingston showed promise in his first two seasons. Sure, he needed to get much stronger and add a jumpshot, but he had the tools to make good on all that potential.

Then, on Feb. 26, 2007, Livingston lived every athlete's nightmare.

Mashable Top Stories

Stay connected with the hottest stories of the day and the latest entertainment news.

Sign up for Mashable's Top Stories newsletter

By signing up you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.

Thanks for signing up!

Seven minutes into a regular season game in L.A. against the Charlotte Bobcats, Livingston snatched a loose ball while defending at the top of the key. He raced down the left side of the court then jumped for a layup. He leapt awkwardly and landed even more awkwardly. His left knee crumpled beneath him in a way human limbs simply aren't supposed to bend.

Livingston tore his left anterior cruciate ligament, posterior cruciate ligament and medial collateral ligament -- three of the four main bonds that hold the human knee together. His left kneecap pointed inward at an unnatural angle as he lay heaped on the court.

So heinous was the injury that some networks wouldn't show it. Dr. Steven Shimoyama, the Clippers team physician, reached Livingston on the court seconds later. Here's how NBA writer Jonathan Abrams recounted the scene in his 2013 profile of Livingston.

Livingston’s knee looked like a pretzel, Shimoyama thought to himself. He could tell that Livingston had sustained a severe knee dislocation and wanted to lessen the agonizing suffering immediately. He prepared to pop the knee back into place, knowing the potential problems if it did not lock back in on the first attempt. Each subsequent attempt would have a lower rate of success than the last. The dislocation impaired the circulation to Livingston’s foot; gangrene could set in if Shimoyama failed. Worse, failure could necessitate amputation.

Shimoya popped Livingston's knee back in.

But the former fourth-overall pick was hardly out of the woods.

Livingston didn't play another NBA game until October 2008, and he bounced between eight teams over the next six years. Finally, over the 2013-14 season, Livingston found himself on the court.

Playing for the Brooklyn Nets, Livingston averaged 8.3 points in 26 minutes per game while holding up for 76 games of the 82-game season. That summer, the Golden State Warriors signed Livingston to a three-year deal.

The Warriors signed Livingston for his all-around game and his ability to relieve superstar point guard Steph Curry from ball-handling duties, thereby allowing the league MVP to snipe from long range with more ease. The plan worked wonderfully. It's hardly the only reason the Warriors won the NBA title last season, Livingston's first with the team -- but the new arrangement was a major factor.

Through it all, the former high school superstar has maintained a relatively low profile with Bay Area fans.

"Being with a winning team, that's the main thing," Livingston told USA Today in February. "Some guys go for individual accolades, but I realized early that when you win, everybody gets the credit."

This is true. But with the Warriors, Curry gets more credit than most -- and deservedly so.

Good thing the Warriors have a backup plan

Curry, the NBA's defending MVP, was simply unreal this season as the Warriors posted a 73-9 record -- better than any team ever before.

But late in the first half of the fourth game of the Warriors' opening-round playoff game against the Houston Rockets, Curry slipped on a wet spot on the court. He fell, and his right knee splayed out awkwardly. The team announced Monday that Curry had suffered a sprained medial collateral ligament. He's expected to be out for somewhere around two weeks.

That timetable would hypothetically slate Curry's return for the middle of the next round of the playoffs, assuming the Warriors finish off Houston posthaste. Without Curry, Golden State is still a tough, experienced team loaded with talent. But Curry is the league MVP -- meaning the Warriors are no longer title favorites with him out.

Which puts a whole lot of focus on Livingston for the next two weeks -- or more, if Curry's injury lingers.

Curry missed two games of the Houston series already with a separate injury, and Livingston put up strong numbers while starting in his place. Inserted into the starting lineup, Livingston averaged 16 points, 4.5 assists, 3.5 rebounds and 2.5 steals per game.

That production might surprise casual NBA viewers, who are accustomed to tuning into Warriors games to watch Curry's heroics with Livingston in a minor role.

But for those who have followed Livingston's career since he was a high school prodigy, it's not a surprise at all. It's right where the former Peoria Central star was supposed to end up all along.