The Miami Heat are hoping Shaun Livingston can breathe life into a stalled career after signing the talented but injury-prone point guard to a contract on Friday.

The Heat cut point guard Tre Kelley to make room on the 20-man training camp roster.

"I'm excited to play, excited to be here in Miami and really show what I bring to the table when healthy," Livingston said.

Livingston, a free agent, hasn't played since suffering a gruesome injury to his left knee 19 months ago.

Several other teams showed interest in the 23-year-old former high school star, including Portland, Minnesota and the Los Angeles Clippers.

L.A. drafted the six-foot-seven Livingston fourth overall in 2004, and he averaged 7.4 points and 4.8 assists in parts of three seasons with the Clippers.

Livingston last appeared on an NBA court on Feb. 26, 2007. During the first quarter of a home game against Charlotte, Livingston went up for a layup and landed awkwardly, his left leg buckling in a grotesque fashion.

The slender point guard howled in pain while being attended to by trainers, and had to be carted off the court on a stretcher. He was later diagnosed with three torn knee ligaments and a dislocated kneecap.

Livingston was cleared for basketball activity last spring, and has been playing 5-on-5 in scrimmages for several months, including some stints this summer in Chicago with Heat guard Dwyane Wade.

"He has great size and feel for the game at his position," new Heat head coach Erik Spoelstra said. "I've followed him for a few years. It's unfortunate, really, what happened, but we'd normally never be able to get a player of his talent at this time. He's very committed to getting healthy and we have a great staff to help him get there."

Livingston's signing continues the remodelling project orchestrated by Heat president Pat Riley on a team that went 15-67 last season, worst in the NBA.

Riley traded centre Shaquille O'Neal to Phoenix in February for versatile forward Shawn Marion, and later drafted Kansas State's Michael Beasley with the second overall pick.