Bruce Willis was born on March 19, 1955, in Idar-Oberstein, Rhineland-Palatinate, Germany. His full name is Walter Bruce Willis. Bruce Willis is an actor, singer and producer. Bruce start career with Off-Broadway stage in the 70s. Bruce Willis got fame in a lead role on the hit tv series Moonlighting 85 to 89. From the 80s onwards he has appeared in over 70 movies as an action hero. due to his hit role of John McClane in the Die Hard franchise 88 to 13. Bruce Willis credits in most hit movies include Death Becomes Her, The Sixth Sense, Sin City, Red, Moonrise Kingdom, The Expendables 2, Looper, Unbreakable film series and Glass. Bruce Willis released his album, The Return of Bruno, in 87 also released 2 more solo albums then, in 89 & 2001. Bruce Willis achieve many awards in which 2 Primetime Emmy Awards, Golden Globe Award, 2 People’s Choice Awards. In 2006, Bruce also received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame. we at Lessons Learned In Life love to share the Bruce Willis Quotes on Motivation and Inspiration.

We compile the Top Inspiring Bruce Willis Quotes for you to be inspired and find them comforting and helpful in your life.

Bruce Willis Quotes On Motivation:

1.“If I had a choice, I would do comedy all the time. It’s just the most challenging thing. To make someone laugh is the most challenging thing, and the most rewarding thing, in entertainment.”– Bruce Willis

2.“You can’t undo the past… but you can certainly not repeat it.”– Bruce Willis

3.“Art imitates life and, sometimes, life imitates art. It’s a weird combination of elements.”– Bruce Willis

4.“I’m much more proud of being a father than being an actor.”– Bruce Willis

5.“Too many children in foster care are falling through cracks. Be a hero, take the time to learn about adoption today.”– Bruce Willis

6.“Every day, I work at not taking this fame thing seriously. Fortunately, I have a great group of friends who help me do this.”– Bruce Willis

7.“I’m much more proud of being a father than being an actor.” — Bruce Willis

8.“It doesn’t matter how many people I’ve killed. What matters is how I get along with the people who are still alive.”– Bruce Wills

9.“I’m really just a regular guy who has had an incredibly blessed life.”– Bruce Willis

10.“Nine million terrorists in the world and I gotta kill one with feet smaller than my sister.”– Bruce Willis

11.“My wife heard me say I love you a thousand times, but she never once heard me say sorry.”– Bruce Willis

12.“There is nothing better than strolling down the beach the way God made you.”– Bruce Willis

13.“Organized religions in general, in my opinion, are dying forms. They were all very important when we didn’t know why the sun moved, why weather changed, why hurricanes occurred, or volcanoes happened. Modern religion is the end trail of modern mythology. But there are people who interpret the Bible literally. Literally! I choose not to believe that’s the way. And that’s what makes America cool, you know?”– Bruce Willis

14.“I had no idea Canada could be so much fun.”– Bruce Willis

15.“Everybody, no matter how old you are, is around 24, 25 in their heart.”– Bruce Willis

16.“Organized religions in general, in my opinion, are dying forms,”– Bruce Willis

17.“I’m staggered by the question of what it’s like to be a multimillionaire. I always have to remind myself that I am.”– Bruce Willis

18.“After I did the first Die Hard I said I’d never do another, same after I did the second one and the third. The whole genre was running itself into the ground.”– Bruce Willis

19.“I hate government. I’m apolitical. Write that down. I’m not a Republican.”– Bruce Willis

20.“Our marriage is like anybody’s marriage, It goes through ups and downs. It’s a little garden that you have to tend all the time. When we’re home, it’s not like we walk around all dolled up going, We are celebrities! We are famous! I change diapers. I clean up dog doo.”– Bruce Willis

21.“Violence – look, we live in a violent world, man. This country was founded on violence. Who’s kidding who?”– Bruce Willis

22.“Hair loss is God’s way of telling me I’m human.”– Bruce Willis

23.“Our marriage is like anybody’s marriage, It goes through ups and downs. It’s a little garden that you have to tend all the time. When we’re home, it’s not like we walk around all dolled up going, We are celebrities! We are famous! I change diapers. I clean up dog doo.”– Bruce Wills

24.“Violence – look, we live in a violent world, man. This country was founded on violence. Who’s kidding who?”– Bruce Willis

25.“If you catch him, just give me four seconds with Saddam Hussein.”– Bruce Willis

26.“I’m always being accused of being a Hollywood Republican, but I’m not! I have just as many Democratic ideas as Republican ones. If they could build three fewer bombs every month and give the money to foster care, that would be great.”– Bruce Willis

27.“I would say, ‘I’m alone, but I’m not lonely.’ But I was just kidding myself.”– Bruce Willis

28.“I mean, look, I wear makeup in films. I don’t wear makeup in real life. It’s just part of the gig, that’s all.”– Bruce Willis

29.“But the action film genre is gonna have to come up with some new bad guys.”– Bruce Willis

30.“Justin Timberlake is terrific in this film. I told him it’s time to stop singing.”– Bruce Willis

31.“I think I’m even more open and more giving as a father now. I pay more attention now because I value it more and I’m less caught up with my career.”– Bruce Willis