Stephen Low, Awards & Honours

Stephen has been recognized with important career honours and his films have earned a host of awards around the world.

HONOURS, MEMBERSHIPS & SPECIAL ACHIEVEMENT

Honorary Member, Director’s Guild of Canada (Inducted 2012)

Member of The Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences —“Accepted for demonstrating exceptional accomplishments in the field of theatrical motion pictures.” (2004 – present).

Kodak Vision Award, Lifetime Achievement; Large Format Cinema Association (LFCA), Los Angeles, California (2004)

Alumni Honour Award, Lakehead University, Thunder Bay, Ontario (2005)

Giant Screen Consortium Award – In honour of Stephen Low for his contribution to the Canadian Large Format Industry, Giant Screen Consortium, Canada (2002)

FILM AWARDS (SELECTED)

2021 Best Science Film—Secrets of the Universe; GeekFest Toronto 2021

2021 Best Visual Effects—Secrets of the Universe; Canadian Diversity Film Festival, Toronto

2020 Best Immersive Media—Secrets of the Universe; 6th Annual Raw Science Film Festival, L.A.

2020 Best Physics Movie—Secrets of the Universe; Vienna Science Film Festival, Vienna, Austria

2018 The Remi Special Jury Award—The Trolley; The 52nd Annual WorldFest, Houston, Texas

2018 Winner, Documentary Feature—The Trolley; 2018 Mexico International Film Festival, Mexico

2018 Special Presentation and World Premiere—The Trolley; Hot Docs Canadian International Documentary Festival 2018, IMAX Cinesphere at Ontario Place, Toronto

2012 Best Film—Rocky Mountain Express; Giant Screen Cinema Association (GSCA), Sacramento California

2012 Best Cinematography—Rocky Mountain Express; Giant Screen Cinema Association (GSCA), Sacramento California

2012 Best Sound Editing, Special Venue—Rocky Mountain Express; MPSE Golden Reel Awards

2012 First Prize, Current Affairs—Rescue; 22nd International Military Film Festival, Bracciano, Italy

2011 Maximum Image Award—Titanica; IMAX Hall of Fame

2011 Best Aviation Photography—Fighter Pilot; Fly Film Festival, Poland

2011 Best Short Documentary—Legends of Flight; Skyfest, Asheville, North Carolina

2011 Golden Sheaf Award: Documentary Arts and Culture—Ultimate Wave Tahiti; Yorkton Film Festival, Yorkton, Saskatchewan

2011 Silver Palm Award—Legends of Flight; Mexico International Film Festival

2011 Bronze Palm Award—Ultimate Wave Tahiti; Mexico International Film Festival

2011 Jury Lycéen Award—Ultimate Wave Tahiti; Festival Les Toiles de Mer

2010 Golden Palm Award—Fighter Pilot; Mexico International Film Festival

2010 Best in Show—Fighter Pilot; Skyfest, Asheville, North Carolina

2010 Best Sports Category—Ultimate Wave Tahiti; Blue Ocean Film Festival, Savannah, Georgia

2010 Outstanding Achievement in Action Sports Filmmaking—Ultimate Wave Tahiti; Newport Beach Film Festival, Newport Beach, California

2009 Honorable Mention, Educational Value—Volcanoes of the Deep Sea; 6th Annual Montana CINE International Festival, Missoula, Montana

2009 International Finalist, Marine and Earth Sciences—Volcanoes of the Deep Sea; Blue Ocean Film Festival, Savannah, Georgia

2009 Honorable Mention, Ocean Exploration and Adventure—Volcanoes of the Deep Sea; Blue Ocean Film Festival, Savannah, Georgia

2009 Honorable Mention, Marine Animal Behavior—Volcanoes of the Deep Sea; Blue Ocean Film Festival, Savannah, Georgia

2009 Golden Wheel Award—Super Speedway; International Reel Wheel Film Festival, Knoxville, Iowa

2007 Best Scientific Exploration Film—Volcanoes of the Deep Sea; The Explorers Club Documentary Film Festival, New York, NY

2006 Golden Reel Award for Outstanding Achievement in the Motion Picture and Television Industries—Fighter Pilot: Operation Red Flag; Motion Picture Sound Editors

2005 Scientific Literacy Achievement Award—Volcanoes of the Deep Sea; Association for Biomedical Reasearch

2004 Grand Prize, Best Film of the Year—Volcanoes of the Deep Sea; La Géode Film Festival, Paris

2004 Kodak Vision Award—Volcanoes of the Deep Sea; Giant Screen Theater Association (GSTA)

2004 Special Achievement in Film—Volcanoes of the Deep Sea; Giant Screen Theater Association (GSTA)

2004 Maximum Image Award (Hall of Fame Award)—Beavers; IMAX Corporation (voted by IMAX theaters world-wide).

1999 Best Entertainment DVD—Super Speedway; European DVD Awards, Dublin Castle

1997 Northern Nevada Motion Picture Award—Mark Twain’s America; Low Films International, 1997 Distinguished Business of Nevada

1993 Board of Directors Award for Best IMAX Film—Beavers; Hawaii International Film Festival

1993 Genie Award for Best Feature Length Documentary—Titanica; Academy of Canadian Cinema and Television

1990 Gemini Award for Best Writing in an Information / Documentary Program or Series—The Defender; Academy of Canadian Cinema and Television

1990 Gemini Award for Best Director in an Information / Documentary Program or Series—The Defender; Academy of Canadian Cinema and Television

1989 Best Picture—The Defender; Golden Sheaf Awards, Yorkton Film Festival (Saskatchewan)

1989 Best Director—The Defender; Golden Sheaf Awards, Yorkton Film Festival (Saskatchewan)

1989 Best Script—The Defender; Golden Sheaf Awards, Yorkton Film Festival (Saskatchewan)

1989 Jury Prize for Best IMAX/OMNIMAX Film—Beavers; 2nd International Film Festival de la Géode, Paris

1989 Public Prize for Best IMAX/OMNIMAX Film—Beavers; 2nd International Film Festival de la Géode, Paris

1989 Super Channel Award —The Defender; Yorkton Short Film and Video Festival

1981 Best of Show—Challenger: An Industrial Romance; Cindy Competition / Audio Graphics Films and Information Film Producers of America (Cindys)

1981 Gold Cindy Award—Challenger: An Industrial Romance; Information Film Producers of America (Cindys)

1981 Gold Camera Award (for outstanding creativity in the production of audio/visual communications in international competition)—Challenger: An Industrial Romance – US Industrial Film Festival

1981 The Chris Award—Challenger: An Industrial Romance; 29th Annual Columbus Film Festival

1980 Silver Award—Challenger: An Industrial Romance; San Francisco International Film Festival

William Walker Reeve, 1952-2018

It is with great sadness that we acknowledge the passing of our long time friend and production collaborator, Bill Reeve. A cinematographer, stereographer Bill passed away on Tuesday May 22nd after a battle with cancer.

Bill brought together a fascination with things engineered and the photographic arts to become a master of the IMAX camera. Bill’s contributions to the industry were many and included work on several Stephen Low films: Titanica, Mark Twain’s America (3D), Super Speedway, Volcanoes of the Deep Sea, Fighter Pilot, and Legends of Flight (3D). We will miss you Bill.

“The Trolley” at Hot Docs

Streetcars Get the IMAX Treatment at Hot Docs 2018

The Trolley, a creation of award-winning IMAX filmmaker Stephen Low,

showcases the beauty, history, and impact of one of the greatest innovations in transportation.

Tuesday, March 20, 2018 (Toronto, ON) – Filmmaker Stephen Low, who has spent three decades producing and perfecting large-format cinema experiences, will have his newest project, The Trolley, debut as a Special Presentation at Hot Docs 2018. The Trolley propels audiences on a journey around the world to explore the power and potential of the trolley, tram or streetcar—a once nearly forgotten masterpiece of 19th century innovation. The film’s stunning aesthetic and ‘how-things-work’ approach turn a streetcar ride into something extraordinary. Following the trolley’s rollercoaster existence from 19th century invention to near extinction in the 1960s, the film focuses on Toronto as one of the only cities in North America to have retained an extensive streetcar network. The Trolley will have its World Premiere at the Hot Docs Canadian International Documentary Festival on Saturday, May 5 at the Cinesphere, Ontario Place at 3PM EST.

“The Trolley stares down the automobile. In climate change, humanity faces a global crisis that is in scale and complexity unlike anything we have encountered before, yet we already have the solutions. And one of them is staring us in the face,” explains filmmaker Stephen Low. “I had to make this film to give streetcars their due. The film may prove especially poignant and nostalgic for Torontonians, given that streetcars (trolleys) have been these charming fixtures in the city since before we can remember. I hope we are able to give people a look at how and why they evolved – and I hope that the film helps humanize the transit system that is so vital to our lives and future.”

Can the trolley triumph? This film is sure to stimulate passions in its viewers. Showcasing surging urban machines from across of the eras, The Trolley evokes nostalgia, romance and adventure, but also underlines the dramatic transportation dilemma faced by humankind in an era of enduring auto-mania and impending climate catastrophe. In its visuals, its storytelling, its soundtrack, and its overall enchantment, the film is accessible and informative, elucidating the true and enduring magic of streetcars, including the red rockets that have been seen as both a point of pride and contention for so many Torontonians.

The Trolley has one Special Presentations screening at Hot Docs Canadian International Festival, in IMAX: Saturday, May 5 at 3PM EST, Cinesphere, Ontario Place

Links

Find out more about The Trolley here: The Trolley

Find out more about Hot Docs here: hotdocs.ca

Clippings

New documentary a ‘love letter’ to streetcars and trolleys – [FEATURE]

CityNews

By: News Staff

Published on: March 20, 2018

Toronto’s Hot Docs Festival reaches gender parity with 2018 lineup – [MENTION/SOUNDBITE]

The Globe and Mail

By: Barry Hertz

Published on: March 20, 2018

Hot Docs Finally Achieves Gender Parity with 2018 Lineup – [MENTION]

Exclaim!

By: Josiah Hughes

Published on: March 20, 2018

Media

An IMAX press screening will be held in advance of the Hot Docs festival.

Please contact AlphaPR to RSVP and for details.

Media inquires:

Sophie van Bastelaer, AlphaPR

+ 1 647-901-6416

sophie@wearealphapr.com

Amy Saunders, AlphaPR

+1 647-282-0269

amy@wearealphapr.com

Rocky Mountain Express at Great Lakes Science Center

Rocky Mountain Express will run at the Great Lakes Science Center in Cleveland, OH from November 3, 2017 through November 4, 2018.

Check the Great Lakes Science Center listing for showtimes:

www.greatscience.com

Links

Check other theater listings for Rocky Mountain Express here:

www.rockymountainexpressfilm.com

Rocky Mountain Express at the Science Museum of Minnesota

The Science Museum of Minnesota. Photo: Diane Carlson.

Rocky Mountain Express will run at the William L. McKnight – 3M Omnitheater at the Science Museum of Minnesota in St-Paul, MN from October 13th, 2017 through March 18th, 2018.

Check the Science Museum of Minnesota listing for showtimes: Science Museum of Minnesota

Links

Check other theater listings for Rocky Mountain Express here:

http://www.rockymountainexpressfilm.com/up…/where-to-see-it/

Where to See Aircraft Carrier

Aircraft Carrier 3D was released in 2017.

Where to see it: visit the theater listings on the official film site

Aircraft Carrier World Premiere

The world premiere of Aircraft Carrier 3D (43-min) was held at the Smithsonian National Air and Space Museum in Washington DC, May 24th, 2017. Aircraft Carrier focuses on the world of naval power and the astounding activity and air operations aboard a giant Nimitz-class aircraft carrier, the USS Ronald Reagan. The film presents authentically, the true scale and drama of carrier and fleet naval operations to giant screen audiences for the first time.

Gen. Jack Dailey, Director of the National Air and Space Museum and Acting Secretary of the Navy, The Honorable Sean J. Stackley welcomed attendees to the Premiere. The project was presented by Bob Kresser, CEO, K2 Communications, with an introduction by the film’s director, Stephen Low.

The film launches in theaters immediately. Filmed in 15/70 motion picture film and Ultra-high-definition digital 3D, Aircraft Carrier is available in both 43-min and 24-min versions, in IMAX® Laser / 12.0 and in all digital 2D and 3D formats.

____________________________

See also: Aircraft Carrier project page

Articles

Air & Space, Smithsonian

The Aviationist

Rocky Mountain Express Celebrates 150 Years of Canada

In celebration of Canada’s 150th Birthday, The Stephen Low Company is pleased to announce the availability of Canada 150 graphics for the promotion of the award-winning IMAX® Experience Rocky Mountain Express.

The Film Connection

Rocky Mountain Express tells the remarkable story of one of the nation’s founding projects: the shaping of a transcontinental railway. Give your audiences the journey of a lifetime aboard CPR locomotive 2816 and help celebrate Canada’s birthday.

An essential promise to partners of Confederation in 1867, the building of a transcontinental railway would tie together the provinces of the Dominion of Canada and its far-flung communities.

A risky, rough and dangerous undertaking, the building of the Canadian Pacific Railway ultimately helped bring connection, industry and prosperity and shaped a place for the new nation in the world.

The new transcontinental linkage also helped citizens and visitors discover how truly spectacular this land called Canada really was.

Join the Party

150 years only comes around once. Make the most of an extraordinary birthday party. Celebrate with Canadians and honorary Canadians everywhere!

Exhibition Formats

Available for exhibition in:

IMAX with Laser

15/70

giant screen digital

Film Licensing

For information on licensing Rocky Mountain Express for your theater, contact: Pietro L. Serapiglia

Links

More about the film:

Rocky Mountain Express (film page)

“The Road to Rocky Mountain Express” (production feature)

Graphics

Vertical and horizontal graphics are available in flat pdf or layered Photoshop (.psd) file formats. Previews below.

Musician Sam Roberts & Rocky Mountain Express

Sam Roberts expresses appreciation of Rocky Mountain Express. Check out: “Sam Roberts, Part 1: Love Affair With Trains” on the VIA Rail blog. Thanks Sam! Did we mention that the most recent Sam Roberts Band album is called Terraform?

[image: Matt Williams]

Rocky Mountain Express on Blu-ray 4K Ultra HD and Blu-ray Disc

[Updated: Oct 2, 2016 | Originally published: Jan 7, 2016.]

Blu-ray Release Update

As of July 12, 2016, Rocky Mountain Express is available in Blu-ray and 4K Ultra HD Blu-ray editions from local and online retailers. Check out the reviews and where to buy below.

Reviews

“It’s terrific.” “It’s one of my favorite IMAX films to date.”—Bill Hunt, The Digital Bits

The review at: www.thedigitalbits.com

“This is one of the most gorgeous renderings of early man-made achievements and nature. This is an unforgettable visual experience and an absolute reference-quality presentation that every home theatre enthusiast should own.” 5/5 —Gary Reber. widescreenreview.com

The review at: www.widescreenreview.com

“Wow.” “This 4K UHD / Blu-ray presentation crushes it in terms of visuals and audio presentation. You’ll want to see and just take this whole thing in.”—Brandon Peters, whysoblu.com

The review at: whysoblu.com

“Filled with marvelous images of steam locomotives riding a treacherous track in the Canadian Rockies, this IMAX presentation ranks among the large format elite. Rocky Mountain Express is a vista-drenched tourist ride much as it is historical saga.” 4.3 stars.—Matt Paprocki, DoBlu

The review at: doblu.com

“Breathtaking.” “Rocky Mountain Express is wonderful trip down memory lane with some of the most incredible landscape photography you’ll ever see.”—Bill Kelley III, High-def Watch producer

The review at: hamptonroads.com

“It has only been four days since I watched Rocky Mountain Express, and I am already itching to revisit this lovely documentary.” “Shot in 15 perforation/70 mm film, its aerial footage captured from helicopters and gyro-stabilized camera mounts, Rocky Mountain Express works as both a compelling educational document and a dazzling picturesque journey across the Great White North’s countryside. Far from a dry history lesson, the film brings a visual lyricism to its images, complemented by an eclectic music score—blues, spare piano melodies—and stirring soundtrack cues.”—Dustin Putman, theblufile.com

The review at: www.theblufile.com

“A beautiful and interesting documentary on the building of a railroad, this IMAX feature looks great in 4K UHD”—John Sinnott, DVD Talk

The review at: www.dvdtalk.com

“Gorgeous cinematography is beautifully recreated in 4k”—Robert Harris, www.hometheaterforum.com

The review at: www.hometheaterforum.com

4 stars.

The review at: www.avsforum.com

“…deserves a rating of five stars.”

Teacher and Traveller

Where to Buy

Check online for stock and pricing. Some sources include:

www.blu-ray.com [Blu-ray edition and 4K UHD & Blu-Ray editions]

amazon.com [Blu-ray edition and 4K UHD & Blu-Ray edition]

amazon.ca [Blu-ray edition]

amazon.ca [4K UHD & Blu-Ray]

Original Post

The Stephen Low Company is pleased to announce an agreement with media company Shout Factory that will see the Stephen Low film “Rocky Mountain Express” released on Blu-ray 4K Ultra HD and Blu-ray HD disc later this year.

Shout Factory, a multi-platform media company, has just unveiled its first slate of new family-friendly movie releases in the 4K Ultra HD™ format with high dynamic range (HDR), that will deliver visually stunning picture clarity and immersive audio for the optimal home entertainment experience. The discs are expected to be released beginning in late spring/early summer 2016 with pricing to be announced.

The IMAX® Experience Rocky Mountain Express is filmed in full 15/70 negative—world’s largest film format-guaranteeing spectacular image fidelity in the 4K Ultra HD medium. Together with its authentic story and award-winning cinematography, the film promises to be a highlight of the new medium.

“As the Ultra HD devices and entertainment content begin to populate the consumer marketplace this year, we are announcing our commitment to the UHD format joining industry leaders and major consumer electronics companies,” stated Melissa Boag, Shout’s Senior Vice President of Kids & Family Entertainment. “We look forward to presenting these awe-inspiring movies to a broad audience in the UHD format around the same timeframe that the traditional Blu-ray™ edition hits national retail.” Shout Factory plans a strategic staggered launch of these movies in 4K Ultra HD with HDR through physical home entertainment releases and select digital entertainment distribution platforms in North America, beginning in late spring/early summer 2016. A specific date for the release of Rocky Mountain Express will be announced.

About Shout! Factory

For more on Shout! Factory, visit shoutfactory.com

More Links

http://www.highdefdigest.com/news/show/Shout_Factory/Disc_Announcements/rocky-mountain-express-bound-for-bluray-ultra-hd-bluray/31588

http://www.cnet.com/news/imax-movies-headed-for-4k-blu-ray-in-2016/

http://www.thehdroom.com/bluray/shout-factory-joins-4k-ultra-hd-blu-ray-studios-with-multiple-imax-film-releases-97290/

http://www.thedigitalbits.com/columns/my-two-cents/010516_0800

http://www.trustedreviews.com/opinions/what-is-ultra-hd-blu-ray