(Thunder Bay - May 10, 2005) The Alumni Association of Lakehead University is pleased to announce the recipients of its 2005 awards. This year the AALU will be recognizing the Alumni Honour Award recipient, Stephen Low (BA'74 - Political Studies), President, The Stephen Low Company, as well as the Young Alumni Award recipient, Christopher Fernyc (HBComm '97), Vice President, Portfolio Manager, Bissett Investment.

For an unparalleled career in bringing big ideas to the biggest screens in the world, this year's recipient of the Lakehead University Alumni Honour Award is pioneering IMAX film director Stephen Low. An award-winning large-format filmmaker, Low has produced a sequence of documentary film projects--all in the IMAX format--featuring a wide range of subject material such as the Titanic, Mark Twain, F1 Racing, Deep Sea Volcanoes, and even that most prominent of Canadian symbols: the beaver. Low's most recent project is the 2004 release "Fighter Pilot: The Battle of Red Flag" -- an in-depth look at United States' Air Force jet pilot training, featuring spectacular air-to-air photography of the most advanced flying machines the world has ever known. He looks back fondly on his time at Lakehead, saying "the day I arrived in Thunder Bay, it really did huge things for my sense of well-being and confidence. It changed my life."

The 2005 Young Alumni Award recipient is Christopher Fernyc. Fernyc has been working in Calgary, Alberta, since graduating from Lakehead. He earned Lakehead U's President's Award for contributions to the advancement of the University, and the Dean Braun's Gold Medal for being the highest ranking student in the Commerce program. He keeps in touch with his Alma Mater by sponsoring an annual competition for third-year finance students that involves analysing companies and making investment recommendations--not unlike his own work with Bissett Investment Management as Vice President, Portfolio Manager.

The recipients will be honoured at the 2005 Alumni Awards Dinner on Thursday, May 26 at 6 p.m. in the Faculty Lounge at Lakehead U.

MEMBERS OF THE MEDIA are invited to speak with either award winner or Rob Zuback, Manager, Alumni Relations, Lakehead University, prior to the event by calling 343-8155.

The Alumni Honour Award is presented to alumni who have demonstrated outstanding achievement in public service, business, humanities, research, science and technology, scholarship, and/or the arts. The recipient is a graduate whose reputation or potential will bring honour and prestige to Lakehead University and its Alumni Association. One award is granted each year, along with a gift of $1,000 to be designated to a Lakehead University department or area of choice.

If you know graduates from the last 10 years who are 35 years of age or younger, and have made significant achievements, why not nominate them for the Young Alumni Award? One award is granted each year, along with a gift of $500 to be designated, again, to a Lakehead U department or area of choice. Nomination forms for both awards are available on the website or by contacting the Office of Alumni Relations.

Lakehead University is a comprehensive university with a worldwide reputation for innovative programs and research. With over 7,400 students and 1,600 faculty and staff, Lakehead University is home to the west campus of the Northern Ontario School of Medicine, and is developing a satellite campus in Orillia, Ontario, planned to open in September 2006. Lakehead's total economic impact on the City of Thunder Bay alone is approximately $197.7 million yearly. For more information on Lakehead University, visit www.lakeheadu.ca.

-30-

Contact: Marla Tomlinson, Office of Communication, Lakehead University, 343-8177 or 472-9113