Lakehead University

Lakehead University is a research based public university located in Thunder Bay, Orillia, Ontario, Canada. It is a non-denominational and provincially supported. The motto of the university is “Achievement through effort”. The official website of the www.lakeheadu.ca

Lakehead University, History

The Lakehead University was established in 1946 as Lakehead Technical Institute and later renamed as Lakehead University in 1965.

Lakehead University Programs, Courses and Schools

Some of the famous courses of the Lakehead University are –

Anthropology

Applied Life Science

Biology

Economics

Engineering

Environmental Sustainability

Gender and Women’s Studies

Geoarchaeology

Indigenous Learning

Kinesiology

Law

Natural Resources Management

Political Science

Sociology

Water Resource Science

Student can further find the course of their choice on the official website of the university that is https://www.lakeheadu.ca/programs/undergraduate-programs

Lakehead University, Achievements

The rankings of the Lakehead University are –

GLOBAL

The university ranked 901-1000 by ARWU World

It ranked 801-1000 by Times

It ranked 1279 by U.S. News & World Report

NATIONAL

The university ranked 28 by ARWU

It ranked 28-31 by Times

It ranked 32 by U.S. News and World Report

It ranked 2 by Maclean’s Undergrad

Lakehead University, USP

Lakehead University is among the top universities of Canada which is known for its research-based teaching, inclusive culture, student centred teaching and their expert faculties. The most popular majors are Finance, Psychology and Logistics. It is one of the nation’s leading urban public universities for graduate, undergraduate and professional research and studies.

Lakehead University, Notable Alumni

Some of the notable alumni of Lakehead University are –

Shandor Alphonso – NHL Official

Jan Cameron – Australian swimmer

Melissa Coates – Professional Wrestler

Jim Foulds – former Ontario MPP

Stephen Low – IMAX Film maker

Diane Schoemperlen – novelist

Dave Sicilano – ice hockey

Don Talbot – Australian swimming coach

Dr. Asmia Vezina – President, Algome University

Denis Turcotte – President & CEO, Algoma Steel

Lakehead University infrastructure & services

Campuses

THUNDER BAY CAMPUS

The original college site is about 32 hectares of land in Ontario. In 2005 the Northern Ontario School of Medicine was formed as joint initiative between Lakehead University and Laurentian University in Sudbury organized within the Faculty of Medicine of both Laurentian universities.

ORILLIA CAMPUS

Lakehead University opened another campus at Heritage Place in Downtown Orillia in 2006. In September 2010 the university expanded to its new 500 University Avenue location. A new academic building at this site represents the first phase in the development of Canada’s first Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design Platinum university campus.

Libraries

The library of Lakehead University has huge collections of books, volumes, magazines and journals. It also has variety of rare books and historical manuscripts.

Housing services

Accommodation at Lakehead is divided into three living styles: residence halls, apartments and townhouses. The Thunder Bay residence has a total of three cafeteria/dining halls. Students can choose from many options that range from kitchenette, full-kitchen and complete meal plan depending on the residence styles.

Lakehead University location

Where exactly

Lakehead University is located at 955 Oliver Rd, Thunder Bay, ON P7B 5E1

Different campuses locations

Lakehead University campuses are located in Thunder bay and Orilla.

Top landmarks nearby, top companies, airports nearby

Some of the famous places to visit around the Lakehead University are –

Moksha Yoga Thunder Bay

The Outpost Campus Pub

The Blue Point Amethyst Mine

Thunder Bay Country Club

Hillcrest Park

Little Trout Bay Conservation Area

Dawson Trail Craft Brawery

Sleeping Giant Brewing Company

Terry Fox Monument

Gear Up For Outdoor Ltd

Fort William Historical Park

Lakehead University International students’ info

Courses offered

Anthropology

Applied Life Science

Biology

Economics

Engineering

Environmental Sustainability

Gender and Women’s Studies

Geoarchaeology

Indigenous Learning

Kinesiology

Law

Natural Resources Management

Political Science

Sociology

Water Resource Science

Student support

Lakehead University provides various range of student support in fields of mental wellbeing, physical wellbeing, sports, academics, financial support, family and physiological support to their students.

International student contact

Students can visit the official website of the Lakehead University or can mail to the university.

Student life

Sports and fitness

Lakehead’s Thunder Bay campus has two main athletics facilities known as the Fieldhouse and the Hangar. The Fieldhouse contains a main gymnasium, weight room, yoga room, and 50-meter swimming pool and change-room facilities. The Hangar has 200-meter indoor track, soccer field, Cardio area, aerobic studio and a climbing wall. Lakehead University is represented in the Canadian interuniversity Sport league by the Lakehead Thunderwolves. Varsity teams include: Basketball, Cross-Country, Hockey, and Wrestling. It also has club teams including, Men’s Volleyball, Men’s and Women’s curling, and rowing.

Residential Life

Accommodation at Lakehead is divided into three living styles: residence halls, apartments and townhouses. The Thunder Bay residence currently has three cafeteria/dining halls. Students can choose from many options that range from kitchenette, full-kitchen and complete meal plan depending on the residence styles.

Food & drink

The Study Coffeehouse

The Outpost

Caribou Restaurant = Wine Bar

5 Forks Restaurant

Lot 66 Restaurant and Wine Bar

Bistro One

The Growing Season Juice Collective

The Persian Man

The Keg Steakhouse + Bar – Thunder Bay

Tomlin Restaurant

Short term getaways

Moksha Yoga Thunder Bay

The Outpost Campus Pub

The Blue Point Amethyst Mine

Thunder Bay Country Club

Hillcrest Park

Little Trout Bay Conservation Area

Dawson Trail Craft Brawery

Sleeping Giant Brewing Company

Terry Fox Monument

Gear Up For Outdoor Ltd

Fort William Historical Park

Part time jobs

Lakehead University students do many part time jobs in their area to meet their expenses. There are options for work as an intern, in restaurants, to give tuitions and many more.

Student Safety

Crime Around the area

Crime in Thunder Bay is very low. It is considered as safe place for students to study.

Campus recruitment

Process

Lakehead University helps students to get placements by marketing them to potential employers through workplace tours, international summer internships and employer-sponsored skills awards, degree plus. The University provides a dedicated career support services.

Application form

Students can visit the official website of the Lakehead University that is www.lakeheadu.ca

Application Requirements

The entry requirements for the Lakehead University are different for different courses. It is not feasible to write every requirement here, so students can visit the official website of the university

Where to apply

Students can visit the official website of the Lakehead University that is www.lakeheadu.ca

Scholarships

Lakehead university scholarship for Aboriginal, First Nations and Metis students include: Hamlin Family Fund Nursing Bursaries; Hamlin Family Fund Bursary; Hamlin Family Fund Native Bursary; Lakehead University Native Award; TbayTel Bursay

Future Career Options

Lakehead University helps students to get placements by marketing them to potential employers through workplace tours, international summer internships and employer-sponsored skills awards, degree plus. The University provides a dedicated career support services.