Over the course of evolution, Chung Hwa Middle School, BSB has been standing tall and attaining remarkable achievements for almost a century, aided by the capitalisation of the leading-edge technology. It was 87 years ago when our dedicated pioneers first sow the seeds of Chinese education on the land of Brunei and Chung Hwa Middle School, indebted to the wise leadership of His Majesty the Sultan of Brunei in providing a supportive milieu, has sprouted, grown and emerged as a iconic institution that promotes the rich heritage of Tiong Hwa community and preaches the much-treasured Tiong Hwa virtues from generations to generations.

Chung Hwa Middle School was bestowed with beaming pride during the gracious visit of His Majesty Sultan Haji Hassanal Bolkiah who consented to officiate the 80th Anniversary. Now, with the surging needs to keep pace with the latest educational reforms, the school vows to implement the avant-garde SPN 21 curriculum through the optimum utilisation of state-of-the-art facilities and up-to-date software. One noted example is the completion of Pehin Temenggong DatoLim Teck Hoo building in year 2008, considered to embody the school’s determination in moulding the future pillars of the society with the best resources available.

Although Chung Hwa Middle School, BSB has the undeterred aim to ensure a perpetual enthusiasm in Mandarin and Tiong Hwa values amongst Tiong Hwa community and other races in Brunei, it never forgets its duty to place equal emphasis on cultivating moral value, knowledge, physical strength, appreciation of arts and team spirit into the students. For decades, Chung Hwa Middle School has been serving as the backbone of the society in producing well-rounded citizens who are trilingual and possess both academic & athletic competence.

In this era of vigorous technological advancement, Chung Hwa Middles School, BSB has always been gearing up to create innovative ways of integrating information and communication technology (ICT) into the curriculum and management. In retrospect, the management had been computerised and computer class for secondary students was pioneered at the school as early as the eighties. It was soon followed by the establishment of the school computer room in the nineties and the introduction of computer lessons from primary one in 1998.

Over the years, in response to the directives from the Ministry of Education, the school’s ICT facilities have been substantially upgraded. Having begun the setting up of Chung Hwa Network in the library in 2002 and proudly emerging as the first school in Brunei to be linked by intranet, Chung Hwa presently has one of the most extensive educational websites in the country which incorporate all three languages, catering for parents and other educationists of different races.