Protecting Visual Storytelling

Strategies for Mural Documentation and Preservation

July 18, 2024

Building on History: A Summit for Housing Solutions

Building on History: A Summit for Housing Solutions

Now Available as a Recording

Watch the Recording FREE

California Preservation Awards

Awards Nomination Opens Soon

Learn More About the 2024 Awards

Annual Conference

Planned for Spring 2025 in Sacramento

Submit a Conference Session Proposal Today

Watch All Our FREE Webinars! More than fifty presentations available from Tiki to CEQA to Modernism. Find the videos on our Facebook page or here for the same videos on our YouTube channel. View a list of current and ongoing events below.

Get CPF updates Sign up for our email list

Upcoming Events

What we do

The California Preservation Foundation provides statewide leadership, advocacy and education to ensure the protection of California’s diverse cultural heritage and historic places.

ADVOCATE

From the loss of our historic post offices, to documenting the storied sites of Route 66, to state rehabilitation tax credits, to mapping LGBTQ heritage, and providing programs to designate sites associated with underrepresented communities, we are the leading statewide advocacy organization fighting to protect our diverse heritage at the state legislature and Washington.

Learn More

EDUCATE

More than 30,000 preservation professionals and local advocates each year rely on CPF for education leadership, something we have provided for nearly five decades. Our annual conference is the West Coast’s largest and most respected, drawing upwards of 750 people to discuss innovative preservation strategies and approaches. We are an international provider of preservation education with participants in 49 states and 13 countries.

Learn More

CELEBRATE

We recognize and share stories of the state’s irreplaceable places. Over 600 exemplary projects have received a prestigious Preservation Design Award from CPF. We celebrate California’s unique built heritage through tours, site-specific gatherings, and networking events.

Learn More

90+

EVENTS Each YEAR

Over 35,000 people benefit from our educational events every year.

What we’re doing now >>

300+

VOLUNTEERS Annually

Over our 40-year history, thousands of dedicated volunteers have helped us protect historic places in the state.

How can you help?

200+

PARTNERS

In the last five years, we have partnered hundreds of local nonprofit, government, and professional organizations. We recognize that collaboration ensures a stronger preservation coalition.

See our past partners >>

500+

Awards

Since 1983, we have bestowed more than 500 prestigous Preservation Design Awards for exemplary work in historic preservation.

Learn about our design awards >>

Our Community

Facebook Updates

California Preservation Foundation

Join a Committee