WE SPREAD SMILES ACROSS THE COMMUNITY

The California Giant Foundation was established in 2015 by the founders of California Giant Berry Farms as a 501(c)3 non-profit (Tax ID: 47-3539939) as way to formalize their ongoing dedication to supporting local charitable organizations and causes. Doing so also provides the employees of California Giant an opportunity to give back to the community through organizations that are making a positive change in the health and wellness of current and future generations.

The support of the California Giant Foundation is defined by four pillars that serve as the inspiration for charitable gifts, event sponsorship and partnerships. These four pillars include:

Childhood Obesity and Nutrition – encourage healthy food stability and increase food education through programs such as Farm Discovery at Live Earth, Rancho Cielo and various school programs.

Hunger and Food Insecurity – support to local homeless and hunger-based organizations such as Meals on Wheels and local Food Bank programs that seek to significantly decrease the number of hungry families in the community.

Prevention and Awareness – national and local support is given to organizations that affect change by educating and increasing awareness about prevalent diseases that affect so many. Organizations that benefit include American Cancer Society and Jacob's Heart Children's Cancer Support Services, among others.

Community – support of local health and fitness initiatives that benefit employees of California Giant Berry Farms and their families including Pajaro Valley Shelter Services, Court Appointed Special Advocates (CASA), community sports programs and more.

To provide even more support to these causes and local organizations, the California Giant Foundation plans and executes a variety of fundraising events throughout the year. Run by a volunteer committee made up of California Giant employees, events such as Bunko Night, Gift Basket Raffles and Meal Occasions take place at California Giant headquarters for staff to take part in and raise money. An annual Skirt Steak BBQ has also become a community-wide tradition, and one of the largest fundraising events put on by the Foundation.