About UsOur Story

Our Story Our Story

Since 1998, FoundationCCC has worked to support innovation and excellence in higher education. We were founded on the idea that the California Community Colleges change lives by providing access to affordable, quality education and training.

By making education more affordable and accessible, the California Community Colleges help improve the quality of life for those who face barriers to higher education—including first-generation college students, students in low-income families, rural residents, inner city residents, foster youth, military veterans, and immigrants.

Additionally, the California Community Colleges are the largest system of higher education in the nation, with 116 colleges and 73 self-governing districts. With such an expansive system, coordinating among stakeholders and implementing change can be challenging. FoundationCCC, in collaboration with the California Community Colleges Chancellor’s Office, facilitates collaboration, accelerates innovation, and increases systemwide resources.

As we reflect on our history, we acknowledge our partners and supporters who have helped us make progress along the way. We continue to uphold the value of the California Community Colleges and our state by expanding our wide-reaching portfolio of programs and services that increase systemwide resources and directly provide support to students, colleges, and our communities.

Our History Our History

2022

Supporting Communities in Climate Mitigation and Resilience

FoundationCCC is selected as a recipient of $21.5 million in funding from President Biden’s Good Jobs Challenge, administered by the Commerce Department’s Economic Development Administration, and establishes the “Resilient Careers in Forestry” project to help place qualified workers into high-quality jobs in forestry and fire safety. Shortly after, the Center for Climate Futures is launched as a hub to support local colleges and communities as they work towards climate mitigation, adaptation, and resilience.

2022

Bridging Education and Workforce Pathways for Equity and Opportunity

As part of a statewide strategy for strengthening education-to-workforce pathways, FoundationCCC partners with the California Department of General Services and the Office of Public School Construction, to launch the California Regional K-16 Education Collaboratives Grant Program. In phase one of the project, $108.6 million is distributed to six grantees across education, vocational, and workforce programs who are addressing the income, racial, and gender inequalities in education and employment.

2021

Delivering Relief and Support to Californians in Need

FoundationCCC expands partnerships with public agencies to build out the Community Impact Call Center, which helps more quickly distribute critical relief dollars into the hands of vulnerable individuals and families, core participants of the California communities our colleges serve. In 2021 alone, $807 million in relief dollars is distributed to Californians.

2020

Bridging Regional Gaps for Student Completion

Jay Pritzker Foundation pledges $100 million, the largest philanthropic gift to community colleges in the nation. The gift is intended to help keep students on track to completion of a degree, certificate, or transfer to a four year college or university. The gift establishes the Finish Line Scholars Program, which distributes emergency financial aid and scholarships in three regions with low rates of college completion. In year one, $4.55 million is distributed to over 8,200 students.

2019

Combating Food Insecurity for Better Student Outcomes.

The “Fighting Student Hunger” campaign raises approximately $600,000 to help combat student food insecurity by raising greater awareness for the California Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program, and supporting other innovative solutions that efforts to improve student outcomes in health and education.

2018

Revolutionizing Education with Online Learning for Working Adults

FoundationCCC helps launch the first fully public online community college through raising $5 million in start-up investments from philanthropy and supporting the initial design and implementation. Now known as Calbright, the college offers online, flexible, affordable, skills-based programs that provide tangible economic value for working adults.

2017

Confidential Mental Health Support for Students

A new collaboration between the Crisis Text Line, the Chancellor’s Office, and FoundationCCC begins providing free, text-based, confidential mental health assistance to students. This helps bolster statewide prevention and early intervention efforts to address the mental health and basic needs of California Community Colleges students.

2017

Creating Clear Paths to Success

The California Guided Pathways Project is announced as an effort to help community colleges design and implement structured academic and career pathways substantially to increase the number of students who earn a certificate or degree at a California community college. FoundationCCC works with College Futures Foundation and Teagle Foundation to increase philanthropic support for implementation of the innovative approach to student success.

2016

Empowering Student Voices through Voter Registration

A new grant from NextGen Climate America helps create the Civic Impact Project, a multi-year, non-partisan outreach effort to register voters and promote civic participation at community college campuses across the state. The project trains student volunteers to educate their peers and register voters, and serves as a blueprint for what’s known today as FoundationCCC’s “Student Ambassador Program.

2015

Enhancing Efficiency and Collaboration

The California Higher Education Shared Services Initiative is established to encourage collaborative and coordinated purchasing among the California Community Colleges, University of California, and California State University systems, and helps optimize savings and efficiencies for colleges to support financial sustainability and redirect resources to core academic and research missions.

2014

Driving College Completion and Student Success

The Student Success Center is launched as a hub of support for policy, research, and data projects that improve college completion rates and promote student success, made possible by an initial grant from the Kresge Foundation.

2013

Connecting Students and Employers for Workforce Readiness

FoundationCCC pilots LaunchPath, a workforce readiness program and technology matching platform which simplifies the process of connecting employers and high school and community college students paid internships. Funded by a $1.5 million grant from JPMorgan Chase and operated in partnership with the Linked Learning Alliance, LaunchPath gets its start in the Sacramento region.

2012

Empowering Students for Educational and Career Achievement

“Student Success” is named as FoundationCCC’s flagship priority in support of the “California Community Colleges Student Success Initiative,” to help improve the educational outcomes of students and the workforce preparedness of the state. With almost $1 million in support from the Kresge Foundation, FoundationCCC launches a campaign to increase college participation and student awareness of key steps to ensure priority enrollment and stay on track to reach their educational and career goals.

2011

Bridging the Digital Divide for Central Valley Communities

FoundationCCC launches the California Connects program to increase digital literacy and broadband access in the Central Valley. In its first year, the program distributes 5,800 laptops and provides training to over 18,000 Californians, made possible through partnership with local community colleges and federal funding.

2010

Improving Air Quality by Encouraging Vehicle Upgrades

The VRRRM (Vehicle Repair, Retirement and Replacement for Motorists) program is established by FoundationCCC in partnership with the State, part of the Reformulated Gasoline Settlement Fund and $20 million in cy pres funds, to help improve California’s air quality by providing financial incentives for motorists to repair, retire, or replace their high-polluting vehicles. Through the project, 883 tons of pollutants are removed from California’s airways.

2008

Transforming Lives through Perpetual Scholarships

The Bernard Osher Foundation donates $25 million to create the California Community Colleges Scholarship Endowment and FoundationCCC launches a three-year matching campaign in partnership with local colleges and their foundations. The campaign results in a permanent scholarship fund totaling more than $76 million, which funds student scholarships at 115 colleges in perpetuity. At the time, it was the largest single donation ever given to support community college students.

2005

Investing in Nursing Education

The Nursing Education Investment Fund is established through an agreement between FoundationCCC, WellPoint, Inc., and the Insurance Commissioner for the State of California, and is designed to benefit nursing education within the California Community Colleges.

2004

Advancing Healthcare Education in California

The Nursing Resource Center and the Centralized Clinical Placement System is launched to help improve the education of healthcare professionals in California, thanks to philanthropic funding from The Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation.

2004

Streamlining Smog Check and Training Future Professionals

FoundationCCC joins forces with the California Bureau of Automotive Repairs (BAR) to help operate the statewide Smog Check Referee Program, which improves the smog check process and reduces air pollution for all Californians. 31 California community college campuses launch Referee Centers and not only provide consumer services, but offer hundreds of students annually an opportunity to gain on-the-job training in the automotive industry.

2002

Forging Pathways to College and Career

The multi-year Early College High School (ECHS) program, which provided thousands of young people with stronger pathways to college and career, is kick-started through an inaugural $9 million grant from the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation.

2000

Scaling Mission-Aligned Initiatives

The organization begins to help scale mission-aligned initiatives through fiscal sponsorship and management services, later named the Collaborative Impact Program, starting with a partnership with the Association of Chief Human Resources Officers.

1999

Empowering Community Colleges through Systemwide Procurement.

CollegeBuys is launched as the first and only systemwide procurement program focused exclusively on the needs of community colleges. Microsoft software is the first offering, resulting in significant cost savings for colleges and students.

1998

Connecting Students with Valuable Work Experience

Career Catalyst is created to help connect more students with paid work experience. FoundationCCC begins by working with state agency partners to connect students with public service opportunities.

1998

Pioneering Support for the California Community Colleges

Dr. Larry Toy establishes FoundationCCC and the organization becomes the official foundation to the California Community Colleges. As its first action, FoundationCCC starts by providing funding for the Hayward Outstanding Faculty Award.

Stories of Impact

FoundationCCC’s impact reaches nearly 2 million students across all 116 colleges, with several programs scaling nationally. Our Media Center showcases stories and press releases which highlight current priorities and bring life to the importance of this work.

These inspiring narratives also acknowledge the invaluable contributions of our partners and the individuals who have played a pivotal role in the success of our initiatives.

Stories of Impact

Enrique S., California Community College Finish Line Scholar

Inspired by compassionate Respiratory Therapists during his father-in-law’s illness, Enrique leveraged the Finish Line Scholarship to pursue his dream. Now a proud graduate, he embodies care and respect in serving patients, forever grateful for FoundationCCC’s support.