The Town of Avon present free community concerts

Avon, CO – We invite the community to join us at the Avon Performance Pavilion at Harry A. Nottingham Park on Wednesday, June 21 as we continue the AvonLIVE! summer concert series starting at 5:30 p.m. Headlining is Bonerama, a band that in many ways defies categorization. A funky rock band with brass…a funky brass band that rocks. Gates open at 5:30 p.m. and Bonerama takes the stage at 7:30 p.m.

Bonerama is a New Orleans-based band that fuses everything that has made that city’s music famous into a genre defying gumbo. The band has taken the best elements of rock, soul, fusion, pop, jazz, funk, brass, gospel, and blues to forge its unique sound.

Formed in 1998, Bonerama is the brainchild of trombone players Mark Mullins and Craig Klein (who from 1990-2006, were also members of Harry Connick Jr.’s big band). Currently comprised of Mullins (trombone, electric trombone, and lead vocals), Klein (trombone and lead vocals), Greg Hicks (trombone and vocals), Bert Cotton (lead guitar), Matt Perrine (sousaphone and electric bass) and Walt Lundy (drums), Bonerama is one of the funkiest and most unique bands to ever come out of New Orleans.

Equally adept at delivering extraordinary originals or blistering covers of artists as diverse as Led Zeppelin; The Beatles; The Allman Brothers; Jimi Hendrix–even Black Sabbath, Bonerama’s distinctive, inimitable, genuine, one-of-a-kind sound is unmatched, high-energy, fun, dynamic and bold.

Opening the show at 6:00 p.m. is Funkiphino, known for their sharp, edgy mashups with more than a hint of funk. The band’s roots are unexpectedly classy with plenty of dirty grit to charm the most discerning listeners. Funkiphino pays homage to an array of musical genres guaranteed to satisfy the most discerning musical palate. By showcasing heavy horn laden music motifs from the past and today, they take inspiration from old school funk playgrounds, adolescent rock rebellion, and R&B daydreams.

What: AvonLIVE! Concerts in the Park

Where: Avon Performance Pavilion at Nottingham Park

When: Wednesday, June 21, 2023 - 5:30 to 9:00 p.m.

Live Music: Begins at 6:00 p.m.

Sponsors: The Town of Avon is proud to present AvonLIVE! Free Concert Series with support from Peak Performances, Vail Daily, Mountain Beverage, Always Mountain Time, KZYR, Lifted Libation, Sonoma-Cutrer, Jack Daniels & Coke and thirst murdered by Liquid Death.

Transportation & Parking: The use of public transportation is encouraged, as well as walking or riding a bike to the park. Free parking is available.

Plastic Free Events | Free water fill station, bring your reusable water bottle | Blankets and low-back lawn chairs are allowed | Pets allowed in pet friendly area only | No outside alcoholic beverages | No smoking | No Drones | Reduce, Reuse, Recycle.

More information: For more information, please visit Avon.org/events or contact Avon Culture Arts and Special Events Manager Danita Dempsey at ddempsey@avon.org or (970) 748-4065.

# # #