Bonerama has always been hailed as &quot;unlike anything you&#39;ve ever heard before”.

It’s the best way to describe this 20-year-old powerhouse touring band from New Orleans, LA. In

addition to changing the way people think about the trombone, the sound of Bonerama has

become an influence and contribution to the sound of New Orleans music today. With newer acts

such as Trombone Shorty and Big Sam’s Funky Nation on the national music scene, it’s New Orleans

that has benefited with a newfound reputation as being a bonafide &quot;Trombone Town&quot;. These

bands all carry the trombone like the trophy it truly is in New Orleans. Bonerama helped cement

this in present day New Orleans music culture.

The band has performed and recorded with countless national artists such as R.E.M., OK Go, Tom

Morello, Wayne Kramer (MC5), Jill Sobule and so many more, all while bringing their distinctive

sounds from New Orleans to a national spotlight. Festivals and events such as Monterey Jazz Fest

to High Sierra Music Festival, Jam Cruise, Bear Creek Festival and of course the New Orleans Jazz &amp;

Heritage Festival outline some of the extensive festival work this band is involved with. National

television appearances on CBS (Late Show with David Letterman), HBO (Comic Relief, Treme) and

CNN has further exposed Bonerama to a wide range of unsuspecting new viewers.

“I never knew the trombone could do that.” -Audience members everywhere.

While enduring lineup changes, member displacement, tragedy and loss over the years, the song

for Bonerama has remained the same; being centered around their beloved trombone, city, and

culture while striving for greatness with a fun spirit.

Whether it’s their inventive covers or funky, rocking originals, rest assured, Bonerama will take you

on your most memorable RIDE ON THE SLIDE!

The new studio album “Bonerama Plays Zeppelin” in 2019 on Basin Street Records and was a top

seller at the New Orleans Jazz and Heritage Festival and Louisiana Music Factory during the festival.

This is Bonerama’s seventh major release after Live at the Old Point (2001), LIVE From New York

(2004), Bringing It Home (2007), You Are Not Alone (2008, OKGo and Bonerama), Hard Times

(2009), Shake It Baby (2013), Hot Like Fire (2017).

In addition to being their debut release on Basin Street Records, the album features some fantastic

robust and colorful packaging created by New Orleans artist and beloved musician Molly Reeves.

Bonerama -- now in their 20th year of changing the way you think about the trombone and New

Orleans Music.

Bonerama is:

Mark Mullins – Trombone / Lead Vocals and band co-founder

Craig Klein – Trombone / Lead Vocals and band co-founder

Greg Hicks – Trombone / Vocals

Bert Cotton – Guitar

Matt Perrine – Sousaphone / Electric Bass

Walter Lundy – Drums