Media Statement by Alan Khan, Senior Director: Corporate Affairs at the Durban University of Technology

Durban University of Technology Convocation and Alumni Relations cordially invites you to the Billy Nair Inaugural Memorial Lecture, which is taking place at the Docklands Hotel, Point Waterfront, this Saturday (17 November 2012) at 19H00.

Health Minister Dr Aaron Motsoaledi will deliver the keynote address at the inaugural memorial lecture.

An activist, trade unionist and Member of Parliament (MP), Billy Nair was born on 27 November 1929 in Sydenham, Durban. He acquired a Diploma in Accountancy at the former M L Sultan Technical College in 1948.

Since the 1950s, Billy Nair served in a number of trade unions. He was also an active anti-apartheid activist, having being a member of Umkhonto we Sizwe and the United Democratic Front until he was elected as a parliamentary member in the first democratic administration. Nair’s actions resulted in many arrests and disputes with the law, yet he was unfazed. He was called to rest on 17 October 2008.

Nair’s resilient characteristic earned him a Silver Tusk Award from DUT in 2005. “This award is only bestowed to university graduates who, through their work, bring honour and recognition to the University in line with the institution’s tradition of excellence,” explained Convocation and Alumni Relations Manager David Sedumedi.

“DUT is extremely proud to have been associated with an alumnus of the stature and calibre of the late Billy Nair. It is our view that Mr Nair is one of the unsung heroes in the struggle for the emancipation of our country. The purpose of the lecture, in part, is to also assist the Billy Nair Trust with its noble efforts to have the legacy of this giant member of our community celebrated in a sustainable manner,” added Sedumedi.

Date: Saturday 17 November 2012

Time: 18:30 for 19:00

Venue: The Docklands Hotel, Point Waterfront, Durban

Dress code: Formal or Traditional

For interviews, journalists are urged to contact DUT Convocation and Alumni Relations Manager David Sedumedi on 082 900 1900.

Issued by