After being put into bat first, Hadleigh scored 188/8 in their innings.

Adam Soilleux top scored with 55 while skipper Sam Handley added 34.

However, Wanstead reached the required total for the loss of three wickets with Essex batsman Robin Das scoring 40 not out.

In Division One, third placed Billericay beat Ilford by eight wickets.

Billericay put their hosts into bat after winning the toss and bowled them out for 114.

Ross Poulton did most damage with the ball as he took six wickets for just 20 runs while Ellis Pickering took 3/14 to put Billericay in command.

Opener Grant Roelofsen then got them off to a strong start with the bat, scoring 43 runs from 22 balls before skipper Matthew Bell saw his side home with 37 not out.

In Division Three, Benfleet beat Wickford by seven wickets at Woodside Park.

Wickford decided to bat first after winning the toss and were bowled out for 125.

Ryan Dickens, who was batting at number nine, top scored with 29 for Wickford while Paul Frensham (3/18) and Rob Zammit (3/20) caught the eye with the ball.

Benfleet then also did well with the bat.

Opener Laurence Shearcroft led the way with 40 while Gavin Blowes added 30 to ensure victory for the hosts.

The win saw Benfleet move seventh in the standings with Wickford sitting ninth.

Elsewhere, Leigh on Sea went fourth after beating Hornchurch Athletic by five wickets.

Hornchurch batted first and scored 208/7, thanks to a brilliant 104 not out from skipper Sam Samarasekera.

Tim Knox (3/19) was the pick of Leigh's bowlers before the visitors started their innings in superb fashion.

James Spencer and Jon Edwards put on 113 for the first wicket before Edwards was run out for 36.

Skipper Spencer went on to score 119 before Leigh made it home for the loss of five wickets.

In Division Four, Southend & EMT lost by seven wickets at Harlow Town.

Southend were bowled out for just 66 with Matt Mohan top scoring with 31 before Harlow reached the low winning total for the loss of three wickets.

Southend are now eighth in the 11 team table.