Crystal Palace vs Man City LIVE!

Kevin De Bruyne struck twice to inspire Manchester City to a dominant 4-2 win at Crystal Palace on Saturday and move the champions level on points with Liverpool at the top of the Premier League table.

Stunned by conceding an early goal scored by Palace striker Jean-Philippe Mateta, De Bruyne equalised with a superb shot before second-half goals by Rico Lewis, Erling Haaland and the Belgian midfielder adding his second.

Odsonne Edouard grabbed a late consolation for the hosts but with seven games remaining City are level on 70 points with Liverpool and two ahead of Arsenal, although both their title rivals have a game in hand.

Crystal Palace vs Man City highlights

GOAL! Mateta shocks City in third minute

GOAL! De Bruyne screamer levels up

GOAL! Lewis completes comeback after break

GOAL! De Bruyne to Haaland for 3-1

GOAL! 100th City goal for De Bruyne

GOAL! Edouard hits late consolation

Watch Kevin De Bruyne score his 100th City goal

14:35 , Marc Mayo

Two absolute pearls from the Belgian today!

Full time!

14:29 , Marc Mayo

Man City go level on points with Liverpool atop the Premier League table!

Crystal Palace 2-4 Man City | 90+7 mins

14:28 , Marc Mayo

Jefferson Lerma and Erling Haaland with a bit of afters as we approach the final whistle.

Paul Tierney calls them in for a chat.

Then Joachim Andersen is the next to wind up the Norwegian...

Crystal Palace 2-4 Man City | 90+2 mins

14:23 , Marc Mayo

Tricky play from Palace, they are going down with a bit of fight and Naouirou Ahamada shoots low at the keeper.

Up the other end, only a last-ditch Joachim Andersen tackle prevents Kevin De Bruyne from shooting for a hat-trick.

In fact, off comes the Belgian with Bernardo Silva on for a short cameo.

Crystal Palace 2-4 Man City | 90 mins

14:20 , Marc Mayo

A bit of life in the home crowd now, particularly when Michael Olise gets on the ball.

And it’s his delightful cross from the right which just evades Jeffrey Schlupp!

Seven added minutes coming up.

Football reporter Dom Smith at Selhurst Park:

That’s more like it from Palace. Edouard flicks home nicely. Nothing City could do about that.

GGGGOOOOAAALLLL!!! Crystal Palace 2-4 Man City | Edouard, 86'

14:17 , Marc Mayo

THE EAGLES HIT BACK!

Jeffrey Schlupp crosses from the left and a neat flick from Odsonne Edouard reduces the deficit.

Crystal Palace 1-4 Man City | 83 mins

14:14 , Marc Mayo

Will Hughes off for Naouirou Ahamada as Oliver Glasner makes his final change.

Crystal Palace 1-4 Man City | 80 mins

14:12 , Marc Mayo

CHANCE!

Poor giveaway by Manuel Akanji allows Odsonne Edouard to shoot but a superb recovery block allows the defence to clear.

Watch Erling Haaland add his name to the scoresheet

14:08 , Marc Mayo

FPL players worldwide rejoice...

Crystal Palace 1-4 Man City | 74 mins

14:05 , Marc Mayo

Mateo Kovacic and Matheus Nunes on for Julian Alvarez and Rodri.

Palace also make some changes, Michael Olise back from injury to replace Jordan Ayew with Odsonne Edouard and Nathaniel Clyne on for Jean-Philippe Mateta and Tyrick Mitchell.

Crystal Palace 1-4 Man City | 71 mins

14:03 , Marc Mayo

“Champions again, ole ole” chant the away fans as Pep Guardiola begins to turn to his bench to rest some legs.

Football reporter Dom Smith at Selhurst Park:

Stunning pass from Grealish through Munoz’s legs into De Bruyne. The Belgian puts it on a plate for Haaland, who has looked lacking in confidence in recent weeks and needed that goal. Palace’s race increasingly looking run.

And that’s that. Wondrous strike from De Bruyne. A Manchester City fourth that kills the chance of a Palace comeback now. They’ve been far from their best here, but Pep Guardiola’s side now have a commanding lead.

GGGGGGOOOOAAAALLLL!!! Crystal Palace 1-4 Man City | De Bruyne, 70'

14:01 , Marc Mayo

HAVE SOME OF THAT!

A beautiful volley from Kevin De Bruyne makes it four!

Crystal Palace 1-3 Man City | 68 mins

13:59 , Marc Mayo

VAR wants to have a look at Kevin De Bruyne’s run to ensure he’s on side. Indeed he is, and City look good value for another three points today.

GGGOOOOAALLL!!! Crystal Palace 1-3 Man City | Haaland, 66'

13:57 , Marc Mayo

KEVIN DE BRUYNE TO ERLING HAALAND...

You know the rest!

Crystal Palace 1-2 Man City | 65 mins

13:56 , Marc Mayo

Eberechi Eze departs for Jeffrey Schlupp. Not been his game, in fairness. Schlupp goes left wing.

Football reporter Dom Smith at Selhurst Park:

Eberechi Eze has delivered a bit of a stinker today. Constantly being dispossessed and not playing in well-placed teammates quickly enough. Plays much better when Michael Olise is fit and on the field of play alongside him. Olise is back from a hamstring injury and could feature for a 15–20-minute cameo today.

Watch Rico Lewis put Man City ahead

13:55 , Marc Mayo

His second league goal, with the other also coming against the Eagles.

Crystal Palace 1-2 Man City | 63 mins

13:54 , Marc Mayo

Booking for Jean-Philippe Mateta after he landed his studs on the top of Rodri’s foot.

A painful one for the Spaniard, looks like he’ll play on though.

Crystal Palace 1-2 Man City | 60 mins

13:51 , Marc Mayo

Wide from Kevin De Bruyne as he takes aim far out.

Palace have half an hour to regather some momentum.

Perhaps we’ll see Michael Olise from the bench?

Crystal Palace 1-2 Man City | 56 mins

13:47 , Marc Mayo

The corner is spun back to Jack Grealish, who has to control it in a bit of a difficult spot and lashes over.

Crystal Palace 1-2 Man City | 54 mins

13:46 , Marc Mayo

CHANCE!

Rico Lewis again strolls forward and Kevin De Bruyne’s cute header nearly sends Erling Haaland in.

He rounds the keeper and has to cut it back, before Julian Alvarez’s shot is blocked by a defender on the floor.

Crystal Palace 1-2 Man City | 52 mins

13:44 , Marc Mayo

Daniel Munoz races down the right into space and yet his cross is of the aimless variety, and Palace have to settle for possession in their own half.

Crystal Palace 1-2 Man City | 49 mins

13:41 , Marc Mayo

That goal has City level on points with Liverpool, who play Manchester United tomorrow. Another three goals and they’ll go top on goals scored.

Football reporter Dom Smith at Selhurst Park:

A horrible start to the second half for Crystal Palace, who concede just 104 seconds after the restart. Joachim Andersen’s defensive header should be better. Lewis picks up the pieces for City and scores.

GGGOOOAAAALLL!!!! Crystal Palace 1-2 Man City | Lewis, 47'

13:39 , Marc Mayo

RICO LEWIS STRIKES FOR CITY!

Not for the first time today, the young right-back wanders into the box and collects a cross from the left - which he buries in the corner of the goal!

Crystal Palace 1-1 Man City | 46 mins

13:37 , Marc Mayo

Manuel Akanji in at left-back, up against Jordan Ayew.

Jean-Philippe Mateta looks offside as he runs in behind and eventually shoots wide, before the flag goes up.

Kick-off!

13:36 , Marc Mayo

It is indeed Josko Gvardiol taken off by Pep Guardiola, who still has Bernardo Silva and Phil Foden among his bench options. The Croatian looks to be injury free as he heads to the dugout, hood up.

And we’re back underway!

Manuel Akanji coming on

13:35 , Marc Mayo

Looks like Josko Gvardiol may be departing, we’ll find out in just a moment.

Crystal Palace vs Man City | Half-time

13:30 , Marc Mayo

Football reporter Dom Smith at Selhurst Park:

With a right-back and a defensive midfielder among their three centre-backs today, Palace can be proud of that first-half performance as they are applauded loudly back into the dressing room.

Drawing 1-1, went ahead, and looking dangerous on the break. City must find something more to avoid a halting of their title-race momentum here.

Watch Stefan Ortega's cheeky turn

13:25 , Marc Mayo

Ederson, watching on from the bench, may well struggle to get his place back on this form!

Half-time!

13:20 , Marc Mayo

Work to do for Man City with plenty of applause for Crystal Palace as the players depart at the break.

It’s 1-1.

Crystal Palace 1-1 Man City | 45+2 mins

13:19 , Marc Mayo

Cheers from the home fans asJosko Gvardiol is booked for a late one on Jordan Ayew.

Crystal Palace 1-1 Man City | 45 mins

13:17 , Marc Mayo

Big appeals from a penalty by the home fans as Eberechi Eze goes down under pressure from Josko Gvardiol in battling for a cross.

Replays show the Palace man just stood still, waiting for the contact. No foul, VAR agrees.

Three added minutes as the Eagles’ corner comes to nothing.

Crystal Palace 1-1 Man City | 43 mins

13:15 , Marc Mayo

The mother of all Cruyff turns from Stefan Ortega beats Jean-Philippe Mateta after a shocker of a backpass from Rodri put the City goalkeeper in all kinds of trouble by his own goal.

It caps a scrappy move by Palace that neither team really got a grip of, Jordan Ayew and Will Hughes unable to produce enough of a touch to open a shooting chance.

Crystal Palace 1-1 Man City | 40 mins

13:11 , Marc Mayo

Rico Lewis pops up on the 18-yard line and shoots early, hitting a shot straight at Dean Henderson.

Nice little move by the right-back, he travelled forward well under the radar.

Football reporter Dom Smith at Selhurst Park:

A glorious, glorious chance for Palace to take the lead for the second time in this game. Ayew, Mateta and Eze had a three-on-one against Dias. Ayew opted to go alone and stung the crossbar. Might Palace rue that by the end of this game? Win, lose or draw, Ayew certainly will.

Crystal Palace 1-1 Man City | 38 mins

13:09 , Marc Mayo

OFF THE BAR!

Jordan Ayew takes advantage off a mistake by Rodri and decides to shoot, with options to his left, and his effort clips the top of the woodwork.

Crystal Palace 1-1 Man City | 37 mins

13:08 , Marc Mayo

Into the final ten minutes of the half, can City make a breakthrough to grab the lead?

Football reporter Dom Smith at Selhurst Park:

First moment of quality for a good few minutes as Alvarez does a give-and-go with Stones and then fires just wide of the post. City, naturally, dominating proceedings here, but the Eagles have defended resolutely. So nearly undone there though.

Crystal Palace 1-1 Man City | 33 mins

13:05 , Marc Mayo

Jefferson Lerma has thrown in some important tackles in the past few minutes yet looks hurt after sliding in in the box. Erling Haaland then wins a corner as Joachim Andersen’s plea for a foul goes ignored.

City work it short and Julian Alvarez lashes a shot wide from range.

Crystal Palace 1-1 Man City | 30 mins

13:01 , Marc Mayo

City’s sixth corner of the first half hour is slapped clear by Joel Ward at the near post.

The visitors have had over three-quarters of possession but Palace’s setup makes it an intriguing contest, particularly the longer the score stays level.

Crystal Palace 1-1 Man City | 28 mins

12:59 , Marc Mayo

Good target man work by Jean-Philippe Mateta, who finds Eberechi Eze and gallops into space. The England international doesn’t trust his striker with a ball into space though, and quickly gets crowded out.

You sense Oliver Glasner would have much preferred that ball to go in behind quickly.

Crystal Palace 1-1 Man City | 25 mins

12:56 , Marc Mayo

Handball by Oscar Bobb in the Palace box shuts down a City attack after a neat crossfield ball. It’s another big game for the Norwegian to try and impress in, down the same flank as fellow youngster Rico Lewis too.

Crystal Palace 1-1 Man City | 22 mins

12:54 , Marc Mayo

A short pause as Jordan Ayew is down, along with Jack Grealish who was caught in a challenge by Daniel Munoz.

Football reporter Dom Smith at Selhurst Park:

De Bruyne has been fairly influential in the first 22 minutes of this match and has seen a lot of the ball. There’s a good structure about Palace’s defensive shape, though, and they deserve to be level.

Crystal Palace 1-1 Man City | 19 mins

12:50 , Marc Mayo

Palace are undoubtedly a threat on the break today, they’re getting forward with numbers and confidence.

The latest counter ends with Jordan Ayew swinging a shot over the bar from 20 yards.

And Dean Henderson denies Erling Haaland up the other end after a fine ball by Kevin De Bruyne!

Breathless start...

Watch De Bruyne goal to level the score

12:49 , Marc Mayo

Dean Henderson made two good saves moments before and had no chance with this.

Crystal Palace 1-1 Man City | 16 mins

12:48 , Marc Mayo

Big test now for Palace, who nearly threaten instantly only for a cross to escape Eberechi Eze at the far post.

Football reporter Dom Smith at Selhurst Park:

De Bruyne was rested in midweek when Foden did the business against Villa. He’s back in now, and that’s a show of his world-class quality. Drops his shoulder and curls into the top corner. Hint of a deflection. If so, it only helped the City man.

GGGGGOOOOAAALLLL!!!! Crystal Palace 1-1 Man City | De Bruyne, 13'

12:47 , Marc Mayo

THAT IS CLASS FROM KEVIN DE BRUYNE!

A serious finish from the Belgian, who cuts onto his right foot at a narrow angle just inside the box and curls an unstoppable effort into the top corner.

Man City are level and Pep Guardiola’s blowing him kisses from the dugout!

Crystal Palace 1-0 Man City | 11 mins

12:42 , Marc Mayo

SAVE!

Dean Henderson again! Rodri’s volley is a little awkward but goalbound and the keeper tips it wide.

Crystal Palace 1-0 Man City | 10 mins

12:42 , Marc Mayo

CHANCE!

Julian Alvarez is slipped in and shoots from a tight angle, but Dean Henderson makes the save with hsi foot and it pops clear off Joel Ward.

Watch Mateta score the opening goal

12:40 , Marc Mayo

Cool, calm and collected.

Crystal Palace 1-0 Man City | 7 mins

12:39 , Marc Mayo

So, we’re back into a pattern of City possession but they lose it again and Adam Wharton’s pass isn’t good enough to send Eberechi Eze in the box.

A give-and-go with Jordan Ayew then fails to come off.

Football reporter Dom Smith at Selhurst Park:

Jean-Philippe Mateta said this week, in an interview with The Athletic, that he believes he can become one of the Premier League’s best strikers. Decent way to show so — scoring against the Treble winners after just three minutes. Palace into a surprising early lead.

GGGOOOOAAALLLL!!!! Crystal Palace 1-0 Man City | Mateta, 3'

12:37 , Marc Mayo

JEAN-PHILIPPE MATETA BREAKS THROUGH TO SCORE!

Well, well, well. Man City are caught in possession in the Palace half and the hosts break with devastating effect.

Mateta shrugs off a challenge, bears down on goal and scores via the inside of the far-post.

Pandemonium in south London (and north London... and Merseyside)!

Crystal Palace 0-0 Man City | 2 mins

12:34 , Marc Mayo

Rico Lewis is marauding forward with John Stones staying back in the usual City switch to a three-man backline when on the ball.

Palace are in a five-man backline in defence and have a corner to deal with early on.

In front of the away fans, Kevin De Bruyne sends it in and Joachim Andersen clears as Erling Haaland lingers.

Crystal Palace vs Man City | Kick-off!

12:32 , Marc Mayo

We’re underway!

Here come the players!

12:31 , Marc Mayo

Our referee, Paul Tierney, leads out the two teams into a packed Selhurst Park.

Crystal Palace in their traditional home kit, City in their away strip of white and crimson.

Pep Guardiola is settled in

12:23 , Marc Mayo

The Man City boss has been sat in his seat in the dugout - looking around, scrolling on his phone - for the best part of 40 minutes waiting for kick-off.

Luckily for him, and us, the wait is nearly over!

Crystal Palace vs Man City: Countdown to kick-off

12:19 , Marc Mayo

Football reporter Dom Smith at Selhurst Park

Marc Guehi has just been signed autographs for Palace fans near the tunnel. He remains a big miss for the Eagles. Oliver Glasner, and indeed Gareth Southgate, will be hoping to see him back to full fitness soon.

Kick-off in ten minutes!

Marc Guehi provides injury update

12:15 , Marc Mayo

Crystal Palace captain Marc Guehi has just popped up on TNT Sports to discuss his injury absence

He said: "It's going well, I'm lucky I've got good people around me. Hopefully I can come back and help in the last few games.

"[The new manager has brought] a lot of running! We've needed that intensity, that drive to our game. A lot of work on details and that'll help especially in a big game like this.

"[England] is in the back of my mind but I'm really focused on the injury, making sure my knee is good. It's important to have perspective and think long-term as well as short-term.

"It's been unfortunate at times, we have ourselves to blame in the last few games we haven't won. But we've played well, we're just missing that cutting edge."

Pep Guardiola explains Phil Foden decision

12:11 , Marc Mayo

In midweek, Erling Haaland and Kevin De Bruyne were given a chance to rest their legs as Man City beat Aston Villa.

Today, it’s Phil Foden, Bernardo Silva and Manuel Akanji.

“It was difficult, but not just [Foden],” Pep Guardiola has just told TNT Sports.

“All the guys, when you don't allow a player to play it's tough but we have a lot of games. Phil played against Arsenal, then friendly games with England... it's a lot of games.

“I thought a lot about letting [De Bruyne and Foden both] play but after we arrived I felt [today] then Madrid, we need sometimes fresh [legs].

“I'd love to have Phil on the pitch - I'm not stupid - but that's why I decided.”

Oliver Glasner on his toughest challenge

12:06 , Marc Mayo

The Crystal Palace boss has given his take on his early weeks in the Eagles job ahead of kick-off.

Speaking to TNT Sports, Oliver Glasner has insisted he will need a full pre-season to implement his hard-running, high-pressing style.

So far, he’s only managed to win one of his five games in charge.

"How we want to play means a lot of intensity - and we're 19th in runs, 19th in sprints,” he said.

“You can't make it work [so quickly].

“We arrived mid-season and three days before the Burnley game. It's important the players are fresh and avoid injuries, increasing our intensity is the biggest challenge we have.”

Crystal Palace vs Man City: Countdown to kick-off

12:00 , Marc Mayo

It’s high noon in south London so that means we’re only half an hour away from kick-off!

The warm-ups are underway and here’s our reporter Dom Smith to preview the action from the press box.

Head-to-head record

11:55 , Marc Mayo

Palace have only beaten City once in their past 10 meetings, but they recorded an impressive draw earlier in the season, courtesy of the returning Olise’s 95th-minute penalty.

Man City wins: 37

Crystal Palace wins: 17

Draws: 16

Crystal Palace unchanged

11:48 , Marc Mayo

Oliver Glasner sticks by the team which lost to Bournemouth in midweek.

However, Michael Olise is back in the squad after injury and should feature later on as a substitute.

Erling Haaland starts for Man City

11:41 , Marc Mayo

Four changes for the visitors as Kevin De Bruyne and Erling Haaland retake their spots in the XI.

Phil Foden and Bernardo Silva drop out along with Mateo Kovacic and Manuel Akanji.

In their place come Oscar Bobb and John Stones, while Ederson is fit for the bench.

Spanish midfielder Mahamadou Susoho, 19, is once again among the substitutes.

Crystal Palace team news

11:33 , Marc Mayo

Crystal Palace XI: Henderson; Ward, Andersen, Lerma; Munoz, Wharton, Hughes, Mitchell; Eze, Mateta, Ayew

Subs: Matthews, Tomkins, Clyne, Schlupp, Ahamada, Ozoh, Umeh, Olise, Edouard

Man City team news is in!

11:30 , Marc Mayo

Man City XI: Ortega; Lewis, Stones, Dias, Gvardiol; Rodri, De Bruyne; Bobb, Alvarez, Grealish; Haaland

Subs: Ederson, Kovacic, Doku, Bernardo, Gomez, Akanji, Nunes, Foden, Susoho

Man City touch down

11:22 , Marc Mayo

Ederson, Erling Haaland and Kevin De Bruyne all off the team bus.

Team news coming up next!

Match odds

11:13 , Marc Mayo

Crystal Palace to win: 17/2

Man City to win: 2/9

Draw: 7/2

Hosts are in the house

11:07 , Marc Mayo

Crystal Palace’s squad have touched down at Selhurst Park.

Crystal Palace vs Man City: Countdown to kick-off

10:59 , Marc Mayo

We are just 90 minutes away from the 90 minutes beginning in south London!

Team news expected in the coming half-hour.

Weekend build-up: Liverpool manager search intensifies

10:53 , Marc Mayo

Against the backdrop of Jurgen Klopp leading Liverpool’s charge to the title in his final season with the club, they are also looking for his replacement.

Xabi Alonso isn’t a go-er and there appear to be doubts over Roberto De Zerbi, who’s been linked with Bayern Munich.

Ruben Amorim of Sporting CP appears to be the top candidate and he’s once again opened the door to a summer switch - although Barcelona also like the look of him.

Read the full story!

Weekend build-up: Michail Antonio milestone for West Ham

10:47 , Marc Mayo

Michail Antonio will make his 300th West Ham appearance in today’s trip to Wolves.

"He's shown loyalty to West Ham over a long time,” David Moyes said. “He's aging like we all are but he's doing the job well.

“Every time I've sat in this seat, most people have asked, 'When are you buying a striker?' But the problem is over the last three, four years there's been a lack of strikers, availability and trying to get players at the right value.

“So, we decided to give Mich a chance to play up front and he's done brilliantly well for us.”

Read the full story!

Weekend build-up: Chelsea eye another big win

10:40 , Marc Mayo

Sheffield United are on the horizon for Chelsea after their late heroics against Manchester United in midweek.

It’s another unusual late Sunday kick-off, due to the Sheffield Half Marathon.

Only three points off seventh place, Blues midfielder Carney Chukwuemeka has tipped Cole Palmer to be their guiding light to a successful finish to the season.

Read the full story!

Weekend build-up: Arsenal gamechanger can impact title race

10:33 , Marc Mayo

This evening’s 5.30pm kick-off sees Arsenal travel to Brighton.

The Premier League title contenders may start the match in third place if Man City beat Crystal Palace in our lunchtime game.

Former City man Oleksandr Zinchenko has been a bit-part player of late but Simon Collings has analysed how he can still play a big role for the Gunners.

Read the full story!

Weekend build-up: Fulham out to bounce back

10:25 , Marc Mayo

Newcastle head to Craven Cottage this afternoon as Fulham look to recover from a poor midweek defeat away to Nottingham Forest.

Marco Silva made three substitutions during the first half of that loss and has backed one of his hooked flops, Sasa Lukic, to bounce back.

Read the full story!

Weekend build-up: How icon Puskas shaped Postecoglou's philosophy

10:18 , Marc Mayo

Tottenham are in the unusual position of kicking off at 6pm tomorrow night, after train strikes brought their game with Nottingham Forest forward a day.

Dan Kilpatrick has written about a fascinating new documentary that provides an insight into Ange Postecoglou’s footballing education - including the influence of Hungarian icon Ferenc Puskas during his time in Australia.

Read the full story!

Score prediction

10:11 , Marc Mayo

Man City have a history of remarkable end-of-season runs and Guardiola’s side should prove too strong for Palace this weekend.

Man City to win, 3-1.

Our prediction for the Man City team

10:03 , Marc Mayo

Predicted Man City XI: Ortega; Lewis, Stones, Dias, Gvardiol; Rodri, De Bruyne; Silva, Foden, Grealish; Haaland

Injuries: Walker, Ake

Doubt: Ederson

Early Man City team news

09:56 , Marc Mayo

Nathan Ake and Kyle Walker will miss the game for City, although Ederson may return.

Pep Guardiola has refused to confirm if Kevin De Bruyne and Erling Haaland will start.

"It will depend if they play on the way we're going to play," he told reporters.

"If we play good they'll be fresh, if we don't play good they won't be fresh. It's not legs. They are physically good, they are fit - it's not a problem. It's how the team play, makes the players individually play good."

How we reckon Palace could line up today

09:50 , Marc Mayo

Predicted Crystal Palace XI: Henderson; Ward, Andersen, Lerma; Munoz, Wharton, Hughes, Mitchell; Eze, Mateta, Ayew

Injuries: Johnstone, Guehi, Richards, Holding, Rak-Sakyi, Doucoure, Franca

Doubts: Olise

Early Crystal Palace team news

09:44 , Marc Mayo

Sam Johnstone, Marc Guehi, Chris Richards, Rob Holding, Jesurun Rak-Sakyi, Cheick Doucoure and Matheus Franca are all missing for the hosts.

The good news for Palace is that Michael Olise looks set to return for the first time in eight matches, although he is not yet ready to start after more hamstring trouble.

Where to watch Crystal Palace vs Man City

09:36 , Marc Mayo

TV channel: In the UK, the game will be televised live on TNT Sports 1 and TNT Sports Ultimate, with coverage beginning at 11am.

Live stream: TNT Sports subscribers can also catch the contest live online via the Discovery+ app and website.

Crystal Palace vs Man City LIVE!

09:28 , Marc Mayo

The Premier League weekend starts here as Manchester City face Crystal Palace at Selhurst Park.

A midweek romp past Aston Villa has kept City within touching distance of top spot but they can ill-afford any slip-ups in the title race having failed to beat either of Liverpool or Arsenal earlier in the campaign.

Palace, meanwhile, have failed to win in four despite a debut victory for recently-installed coach Oliver Glasner.