Manchester City have been charged by the Premier League with more than 100 alleged breaches of its financial rules after a four-year investigation and the spotlight has swiftly turned to the potential ramifications.

The reigning champions of England have been referred to an independent commission over alleged rule-breaking between the 2009-10 and 2017-18 seasons.

City, who say they “welcome” the review, have won six Premier League titles since they were purchased by the Abu Dhabi United Group in 2008, but the commission could impose punishments ranging from a fine and points deduction to expulsion from the Premier League.

How likely is it that the club be stripped of their Premier League trophies and who could stand to benefit should the most severe sanctions be served? Here, The Athletic re-examines City’s most recent top-flight successes.

Manchester City’s Premier League titles

2011-12 (runners-up: Manchester United)

Manchester City had finished the 2009-10 season — the start of their alleged rule-breaking, according to the Premier League — in fifth place under new boss Roberto Mancini, before climbing to third by the end of the 2010-11 campaign.

But they finally captured the Premier League crown — their first league title since 1968 — in 2011-12, and glory came in the most dramatic of circumstances.

Mancini’s side, now buoyed by Sergio Aguero and Samir Nasri, as well as Carlos Tevez, Emmanuel Adebayor and Kolo Toure, had tussled with their Manchester rivals from the off as United edged a five-goal Community Shield thriller, but revenge was emphatic.

A 6-1 derby thrashing at Old Trafford rubber-stamped the arrival of the side Sir Alex Ferguson dubbed the “noisy neighbours” and though the gap between the foes stood at eight points at one stage in April, only goal difference separated them heading into the final day.

United looked destined for glory as they led 1-0 at Sunderland while City trailed 10-man QPR 2-1 in the embers of a topsy-turvy season, but Edin Dzeko struck and then Aguero rifled a 94th-minute winner that felt immortal and embodied City’s startling ascent.

2013-14 (runners-up: Liverpool)

Manchester United reclaimed Premier League supremacy in the 2012-13 season as Ferguson signed off with silverware, but City were back on top the following term after replacing Mancini with Manuel Pellegrini.

The Chilean boss nicknamed ‘The Engineer’ added new cogs in the form of Fernandinho, Jesus Navas, Stevan Jovetic and Alvaro Negredo, and though they topped the table for only 15 days, it was Liverpool who malfunctioned when it mattered.

Brendan Rodgers’ side won a crunch game between the sides at Anfield in April to move seven clear at the top, but they subsequently stumbled — Steven Gerrard did, quite literally — and City roared to the finish line to triumph by two points.

2017-18 (runners-up: Manchester United)

Pep Guardiola guided City to a third-placed finish in his first season of 2016-17, but he delivered the club’s third title in seven years after a dominant campaign the following season.

Ederson, Bernardo Silva, Kyle Walker and Aymeric Laporte were fresh arrivals as City secured top spot by mid-April after closest rivals Manchester United suffered a shock home defeat by West Brom that left them 16 points behind with five games to go.

Guardiola’s side lost just two matches all season and became the first Premier League team to reach 100 points thanks to a last-gasp winner from Gabriel Jesus against Southampton on the final afternoon.

2018-19 (runners-up: Liverpool)

Guardiola’s now formidable team couldn’t quite achieve centurion status again, but they did become the first side to win back-to-back Premier League titles since Manchester United in 2009.

This triumph came at the end of a relentless battle with Liverpool. Jurgen Klopp’s side lost just once — to City in a game that saw John Stones stage a remarkable clearance to deny Sadio Mane, with goal-line technology subsequently showing the ball was just 11.7mm from crossing the line in its entirety.

Liverpool amassed a remarkable 97 points but Guardiola’s City went one better in a season of the smallest margins.

2020-21 (runners-up: Manchester United)

Liverpool were finally able to overcome Manchester City to win their first Premier League title in the COVID-19-affected 2019-20 season, but Guardiola’s serial winners were soon back on top.

Their start to the 2020-21 campaign was by no means electric, though. After eight games, Manchester City were in the bottom half of the table having won just three times.

A staggering unbeaten run — that has become a trademark of Guardiola’s time at the club — followed as only two Premier League teams took points off them in a span of 19 games.

Manchester United and West Brom held Manchester City to a pair of draws but a subsequent 15-game winning run meant there was only one ever going to be one winner of the Premier League.

2021-22 (runners-up: Liverpool)

The 2021-22 season brought another titanic title race between Manchester City and Liverpool, the outcome — like in 2019 — was the same.

Fans returned to stadiums in the Premier League to watch Guardiola and his players dominate English football for another year.

As it had done previously, constant pressure from Liverpool spurred Manchester City into playing their best football and they reached 93 points, a tally just a point greater than that of Klopp’s side.

Needing a win to confirm the title, fans at the Etihad feared the worst when Aston Villa doubled their lead in the second half. Goals from Ilkay Gundogan either side of Rodri’s perfect finish — all in the last quarter of an hour — led to another dramatic final day title triumph.

What about City’s other titles in this timeframe?

City have not just racked up the Premier League titles in the investigation’s timeframe.

Stoke and Watford were beaten finalists in City’s respective FA Cup wins of 2011 and 2019.

City also won six League Cups between 2014 and 2021, beating Sunderland (2014), Liverpool (2016), Arsenal (2018), Chelsea (2019), Aston Villa (2020) and Tottenham (2021).

How could City be punished?

All the potential sanctions are set out in rule W.51 of the Premier League’s handbook and there are several, ranging from a simple telling-off to expulsion.

Of all the possible sporting sanctions, several experts believe a points deduction seems most likely.

The biggest question would be whether a deduction would apply retrospectively to the seasons in which the breaches occurred or the season in which the case is decided.

“I would expect that if there is a points deduction it would be applied to the season in which the decision is made rather than retrospectively,” says James Hill, a legal director specialising in sports regulatory matters at Onside Law.

“That way the club faces a tangible sporting sanction going forward.

“Should the commission want to punish the club retrospectively, it may elect to use its power to impose such other penalty as it sees fit under Rule W 51.7; to strip the club of previous titles, for example.”

What about expulsion?

Hill notes: “The Premier League will want to see justice done but the primary interest of the Premier League is ensuring it has the most attractive product involving the best teams and players.”

City have vowed to defend the charges, though given FIFA Statues would not allow any appeal to the Court of Arbitration for Sport so Premier League rules would be final and binding.

A verdict is not expected in the case for months if not years, but the threat of sanctions will hang over Pep Guardiola’s side until a resolution is found.

(Photo: Andrew Powell/Liverpool FC via Getty Images)