The Premier League must feel like a lonely competition just now for the Crystal Palace players but there is a precedent that makes even their nightmare start to the season feel almost tranquil.

“We were in a hotel the night before one game and a report came through saying, ‘it’s done – the club is closed, finished’,” recalls Michael Brown, a midfielder for Portsmouth in 2009-10.

“You name it, everything happened that season. It wasn’t just about not getting paid - it was that the club was going to be extinct. You were looking at people working there, the fans and thinking ‘what are they going to do?’ We had relegation, liquidation and an FA Cup final. It was such a unique and strange situation.”

Portsmouth’s seven straight league defeats at the start of that season is likely to be equalled this weekend by Crystal Palace at Old Trafford but, for Brown, it is not just Palace’s current plight that might have stirred old memories.

After beginning his first full season in management at Port Vale with a win, six straight league defeats followed without a goal and he lost his job earlier this month.

Just as at Palace this season and Portsmouth eight years ago, it was a reminder of how negative momentum can be so hard to reverse, especially when you are overseeing major on-field change.

“I have been used to tough things in my life and football,” says Brown. “But when you have 20 new signings, it was always going to take time to get it going.” Brown sadly did not get that time at Port Vale but the Portsmouth example does actually offer some small hope to Palace in how they improved and partially salvaged the season in the FA Cup.

“We had a lot of players come into the squad very late in the summer and to immediately get going was tough,” says Hayden Mullins, a former Portsmouth and Palace defender who is now a coach at Watford. “We had that bad start and, once you lose a series of games in the Premier League, to get that back along the season is very tough.

“Every day you go in, you’re together as a group, you try to put the previous week aside, concentrate on training and doing better but the build-up now in the Premier League is so big – it’s everywhere. There’s big pressure and you get to a stage where draws are good but you are bottom and need a win.”

“We were playing league games and a bit naïve, saying, ‘We have played well today and we lost 1-0’ but it kept happening,” says Brown.

“We just didn’t kick on and got into relegation difficulties. We pretty much knew we were going to get relegated and that the club could close, so you wanted to create something special and the fans were so positive when it came to the Cup. It was a totally fresh thing that everyone could look forward to. The pressure was off and we could enjoy it.

“No one gave us a chance against Tottenham; that was the big day out that the fans wanted. To win it was off the scale."

So what of Palace now? Brown says that he saw enough against Manchester City to suggest that Roy Hodgson can have a rapid impact.

“They were excellent in that first half and have no-one better to try and organise the team,” he says. “I think he will make them hard to beat. It’s just about having that belief that you are going to be OK, plus maybe a bit of brilliance from someone or a stroke of luck to get going.”

Mullins believes that the return of Wilfried Zaha can be pivotal. “Palace gave me my start,” he says. “It’s the club I look out for and hold close. Hopefully they can get on a run but, at the moment, it looks very tough. The Premier League is unforgiving.”