Thursday May 29 2008 09:42 IST

Sharadha Narayanan

MARRIAGE is happiness to others, it's been a disaster to me," Prashanth candidly explained as he broke his silence and discussed the trauma surrounding his 3-year marriage with Grihalakshmi.Two days after the police has submitted its investigation to the Metropolitan Magistrate, Saidapet, that reports of harassment by Prashanth to his wife Grihalakshmi was a `mistake of fact', Prashanth seems a relieved man.

When a scribe asked him how he was doing, I'm fine, only now," he jubilantly said.Accusing Grihalakshmi of staging the wedding to cheat him, Prashanth calls himself the biggest victim of Section 498A, which deals with harassment by husband and his relatives and can lead to upto 3 years' imprisonment and fine."What hurts is that my son will be forced to grow in a broken house, which is why I filed a petition asking for his custody," Prashanth added.

Meanwhile, reading from the petition filed by Grihalakshmi against him, the actor said there were accusations that he forced her father to get him an LCD TV while in Malaysia. "Other things that I've supposed to have made them spend includes hair pruning equipment and hair dressing," he said, almost with a smile.

With this police report coming in his favour, things certainly seem to be looking up for the actor. When he was asked if he would accept her if she came back to him, the actor, in a non-committal way, stated that he had waited for too long for a positive response from her. The actor now has two cases that he has filed, pending: one in the matrimonial court seeking to declare the marriage null and void, and one in the criminal court accusing Grihalakshmi of cheating.

Meanwhile, things are also going in his favour in terms of his Kollywood commitments. The actor has six projects waiting to begin and he is awaiting the release of his Pulan Visaranai II this month. Three of his future projects will be under his home banner; one including the remake of his father's yesteryear hit Malaiyoor Mambattiyaan. One other project in the discussion stage is by new director Saroj. The Tamil actor who first got to act with Aishwarya Rai, Rinkie Khanna and many such heroines is eyeing Shriya for that project. "It's almost confirmed," he says.