Finally Actor Prashanth has proved his wife Grihlakshmi as bigamy. The Chennai police interrogated her first husband Venu Prasad Narayanan yesterday and confirmed his first marriage with Grihlakshmi.

Venu Prasad, a Malayalee middle aged man came to Mambalam police station last evening and confessed all the facts involved in his marriage with Grihlakshmi.

Venu Prasad said, "When I was working in HCL, Grihlakshmi was studying in Stella Maris College. My sister is a very close friend of Grihlakshmi and her friends. Soon, I also became a close friend of her, and later the friendship turned into love. We dated several times from 1996 to 1998. Grihlakshmi was afraid that her family would never accept our love. Finally we decided to marry legally and the same was registered with the Sub Registrar office at Ambattur on 30th December 1998. My friend Sudhir and three others attended the marriage and signed in the witness column. Though we were married, we did not live together. We lived separately and had no sex. After this marriage, I went to Grihalakshmi's house and requested her parents for a formal marriage. But after seeing her status and her parent's behavior I realized that the marriage would never be possible. So, I decided to give up my love. We parted with mutual consent and continued our friendship till her marriage. Just two years before I got married with Lela, I briefed everything about my past relationship with Grihlakshmi to my wife before marriage. But she didn't bother about that and made my life more meaningful. But the recent developments in Grihalakshmi's married life has shocked me."

Since Grihlakshmi's marriage with Venu Prasad is registered one with government records, it is considered as a lawful relationship and it is valid even today. Now, both Grihlakshmi and Venu Prasad have committed crime of bigamy against the Hindu Marriage act.

Now, everything has been cleared before the court and the case is totally under Prashanth's control. He has already applied for divorce and is seeking to penalize her. He is also planning to move a petition against Grihlakshmi's lawyer for furnishing wrong information to the court against him.

Meanwhile, Grihlakshmi has moved a petition for anticipatory bail to avoid police arrest for her criminal activities involved in the marriage with Prashanth.