Top Star Prashanth is back where he belongs hitting headlines as he is gearing up to release his new movie 'Andhagan' the Tamil remake of the super hit Bollywood flick 'Andhadhun'. Prashanth's dad and veteran actor-producer-director Thiagarajan has opened up for the first time exclusively to us in a video interview about what exactly happened in his son's failed marriage.

It is well known that Prashanth got married to Grihalakshmi the daughter of a businessman on September 1st 2005 and their son was born on 31st July 2006. It is said that marital dischord was there right from the beginning and three years later the couple divorced.

Thiagarajan has opened up for the first time ever regarding the black days of his family and has cleared the air controversies surrounding it. He said that it was he and his wife Shanti who fixed the alliance since Grihalakshmi's parents were from a prominent business family. He states that he still regrets his decision as his son may have done better if he had fallen in love with a girl and married her.

The veteran businessman turned film industry senior added that within one month after the wedding Grihalakshmi went off to her parent's house and never returned. It was later learned from a fan of Prashanth that the girl already had married a person and had hidden it and got remarried.

He also revealed that the girl's family had many lawyers and judges and they filed a dowry harassment case. However, Prashanth proved in the court that he was cheated and it was the judge who ordered that the marriage was null and void. Thiagarajan said that people without knowing the facts even now talk as if Prashanth divorced his wife but the truth according to him is that he was forced to do so by his ex-wife's actions.

The good news for Prashanth fans is that the all-rounder hero will be tying the knot soon after the release of 'Andhagan'. He has also signed a couple of more movies and early next year will team up with Amitabh Bachchan for a pan-Indian film.

Meanwhile 'Andhagan' is all set to be released worldwide by Kalaipuli S Thanu. The film has Prashanth, Navarasa Nayagan Karthik, Simran, Priya Anand, Vanitha Vijayakumar, Oorvashi, and Yogi Babu.