Prashanth, born in Chennai, India, to Thiyagarajan, an actor and director, and his wife Shanti. He has a sister, Preeti, and got married to Grihalakshmi on September 1, 2005. Prashant studied Computer Graphics and Multimedia and went to Trinity College of Music in London before embarking on an acting career. Prashanth was studying 11th standard at Madras Christian College Higher Secondary School when he joined filmdom.

Boyish Prashant has got a special tag attached to his screen persona. The title cards of his movies proclaim him as ‘Kathal Ilavarasan’ (the prince of love), largely due to his image as a romantic hero. He made his debut a decade back, in 1990, when he starred in 'Vaigasi Poranthachu', a rehash of ‘Alaigal Oivathillai’ and the film fared well at the box office. 'Chembaruthi', directed by Selvamani, followed and that film gave a strong footing to Prashant in Tamil filmdom. 'Vanna Vanna Pookal' by Balu Mahendra won the best regional film award at the national level and Prasanth came into reckoning thereafter.

Suddenly the young actor was booked in a series of films. But the films he had worked in during this phase did not help him much to stabilize himself. Sathya Movies 'Enga Thambi', Thirupur Mani's 'Unakkaha Piranthen', Manivannan's 'Raasa Maghan', Manoj Kumar's 'Senthamizh Selvan' and Selvamani's 'Kanmani'. All of these films proved to be duds at the box office. The bombing of these movies put Prashant in a fix. Mighty man Manirathinam pulled out the sinking Prashant from the quagmire and cast him as his hero in 'Thiruda Thiruda'. Alas, the well made romantical, with starling visuals, flopped to the dismay of the director.

Prashant saved his career by acting in an offbeat Malayalam film 'Perunthachan', which won the best film award in Kerala and he started to appear in Telugu films like 'Tholi Muddu' (Divya Bharathi), 'Prema Vijayam', 'Prema Sikaram', 'Premapattam', 'Allariprema' as well as in Hindi films like 'I Love You' and 'Anto Ka Prem Yudh'.

Sensational Shankar picked him up for his multi-lingual 'Jeans' and for three years Prashant had not signed any other film. Though he had put all his eggs in one basket nothing untoward happened to him. The shrewd career decision paid off and the film 'Jeans' celebrated 100 days run in Singapore and Malaysia and silver jubilee runs in ten theatres in Chennai. Prashant was catapulted to the big league. Today, he has turned down directors like Rajiv Menon and Manirathnam because he does not like their stories. His 'Kathal Kavithai' has also become a hit.

Prashanth has filed a divorce petition in court. Prasanth had given 29 complaints about his wife Grihalakshmi. Including her sister in law’s relationship with Ajith’s brother. He has also made allegations about his wife’s drinking habits. Recently, Prashanth has filed a petition in court to allow him to see his new born baby.