Correct me if I'm wrong, but it seems to me that the uniqueness of Gracie Fields may be that she didn't lip-synch to pre-recorded tracks in her films. Due the improvisational nature of her performances, all of her vocals in this film (and I assume all the others) are recorded live on set. Even George Formby (I think) mimed to a vocal track. It adds a bracing freshness to her performance and pulls the public in with her little audience-baiting ad libs. She is an irrepressible force.

The script material is of course bog standard - this one is about a commoner who falls in love with the prince of a foreign state. Nobody else on screen is remotely as talented as the star, her romantic opposite number John Loder being as two-dimensional as ever. But the public came to a Gracie Fields film for two things - her singing and her personality - and they're not short-changed in either.

Love, Life and Laughter was released during a time when Gracie Fields was Britain's biggest film star and only served to confirm this status. However, it is probably the weakest of her films that I have seen so far. It ha a fun enough concept but just doesn't do anything interesting with it. As I have enjoyed what I have so far from Gracie Fields, I found Love, Life and Laughter to be a disappointment.

The film follows Nellie Gwynn, the daughter of an English pub owner. Much like her namesake, she falls in love with a member of royalty. She falls for Charles, prince of the fictional country of Granau. They are both in love with each other and…

Harmless piece of fluff with Gracie Fields front and center throughout, even getting the full-on glamour treatment towards the end.

She's as lively and pert as ever but the film still drags not helped by the very attractive but dull John Loder as the romantic lead. He and Gracie share little chemistry.

This was the great George Sanders screen debut in nothing more than a bit as part of a group of bar patrons around a piano. I couldn't help thinking once I saw him how much better the film would have been with him in Loder's place.