Pop Art is an art movement defined by bright colours, bold patterns, and familiar images from everyday life. Pop Art emerged in the mid-1950s and gained popularity throughout the 1960s. Its artists were inspired by popular culture and mass media, and they used everyday objects and images as the basis for their artwork.

But why did Pop Art become such a popular movement? One reason is that it challenged traditional notions of fine art. For centuries, art had been associated with high culture and the elite. It was often seen as inaccessible to the average person. But Pop Art turned this idea on its head. By using images from popular culture, Pop Art made art more relatable and accessible to everyone.

In this blog post, I take a closer look at Pop Art and its key characteristics and introduce you to 11 of the most famous Pop Art artists from across the world, each with their own unique style and approach. These top 11 Pop Art artists include:

Andy Warhol (1928-1987)

Roy Lichtenstein (1923-1997)

Claes Oldenburg (1929-2022)

Jasper Johns (1930-present day)

Robert Rauschenberg (1925-2008)

Tom Wesselmann (1931-2004)

Richard Hamilton (1922-2011)

James Rosenquist (1933-2017)

David Hockney (1937-present day)

Peter Blake (1932-present day)

Bridget Riley (1931-present day)

Pop Art Characteristics

Pop Art is characterised by several key features. One of these is the use of popular imagery. Pop Art artists drew inspiration from advertising, comic books, and other aspects of popular culture. They often used recognisable images in their artwork, such as celebrities, household products, and everyday objects.

Another defining feature of Pop Art is its use of bright colours. Pop Art works often feature bold, eye-catching colours that draw the viewer's attention. These colors are sometimes used to enhance the impact of the image or to create a sense of vibrancy and energy.

Pop Art also made use of mass production techniques, such as silkscreen printing, to create multiple copies of the same image. This allowed Pop Art to be reproduced quickly and easily, making it more accessible to a wider audience.

By using these techniques, Pop Art challenged traditional notions of fine art. It brought art out of the galleries and museums and into the mainstream, making it more relatable and accessible to everyday people.

Andy Warhol was an American artist, filmmaker, and producer who played a major role in the development of the Pop Art movement in both the United States and globally. Warhol's artistic career spanned from the 1950s to the 1980s, during which time he produced some of the most iconic works of art in contemporary history.

Warhol was active as an artist from the 1950s until his death in 1987. During this time, he created a vast body of work that challenged traditional notions of art and redefined the boundaries of what could be considered fine art. His bold use of colour and his incorporation of popular imagery into his art revolutionised the art world and helped define the Pop Art movement.

Warhol's artwork is highly sought after and some of his most famous works have fetched incredible prices at auction. One of his most expensive works, ‘Silver Car Crash (Double Disaster)’, sold for a staggering US$105.4 million at an auction in 2013. Another of his works, ‘Eight Elvises’, sold for US$100 million in a private sale in 2008.

Here are some of Andy Warhol's most famous artworks:

Campbell's Soup Cans (1962) - This artwork was inspired by consumerism and the mass-produced market place. This artwork can viewed in the Museum of Modern Art, New York.

Marilyn Diptych (1962) - This artwork was created after Marilyn Monroe’s death in 1962. It sought to contrast the public life of the star, with her private self. This artwork is held in the Tate Modern, London, but is not currently on display.

Double Elvis (1963) - For this artwork, Warhol created a strobe effect by overlapping two images of Elvis Presley. This artwork is held in the Museum of Modern Art, New York, but is not currently on display.

Mao (1972) - This series sought to capture the historic meeting between U.S. President Richard Nixon and China’s Chairman Mao Zedong. The series comprises 199 silkscreen paintings of Mao in five scales. This artwork is held by the Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, but is not on display.

Flowers (1964) - The flowers series is based on a photograph of hibiscus flowers. These artworks are not currently on display.

The Andy Warhol Museum at 117 Sandusky Street, Pittsburgh, PA 15212, is one of the best places to view his artworks. The Museum of Modern Art in New York and Tate Modern in London, also hold extensive collections and regularly hold exhibitions to display his work.

Roy Lichtenstein was another American artist who played a major part in the Pop Art movement. Roy Lichtenstein's career as an artist spanned from the 1950s until his death in 1997. During this time, he produced some of the most recognisable and influential artworks of the Pop Art era. In particular, he is known for his use of bold colours. His incorporation of comic book imagery into his work challenged traditional notions of fine art and helped define the Pop Art movement.

Some of Lichtenstein's most famous works have fetched impressive prices at auction. His artwork ‘Woman with Flowered Hat’ sold for US$56.1 million at auction in 2013, making it one of his most expensive pieces to date. Another notable work, ‘I Can See the Whole Room...and There's Nobody in It!’, sold for US$43.2 million in 2011.

Some of Lichtenstein's most famous artworks include:

Drowning Girl (1963) - This artwork is one of Lichtenstein's most famous paintings. It is based on samples of a page from issue #83 of Secret Hearts, a romance comic book illustrated by Tony Abruzzo and published by DC Comics in 1962. This image shows a woman set within a wave.

Whaam! (1963) - This artwork comprises a two-canvas painting that is based on a comic book strip. It features a fighter plane firing at an enemy plane. This artwork can be viewed at the Tate Modern, London.

Brushstroke (1966) - This image depicts an enlarged brushstroke.

Oh, Jeff...I Love You, Too...But... (1964) - This artwork is one of the early romance comic derivative works, depicting a women speaking on a phone.

In the Car (1963) - This is another romance work, comprising a couple in a car.

Claes Oldenburg was an American sculptor born in Sweden in 1929. He was active from the 1950s to the early 21st century, and is known for his unique sculptures and installations that challenge the traditional notions of art.

Oldenburg started his artistic career as a painter, but soon transitioned to sculpture. He created larger-than-life sculptures of everyday objects, such as hamburgers, typewriters, and scissors. His sculptures were made of soft materials such as vinyl, felt, and canvas, and often incorporated elements of humour and satire. Oldenburg's works were highly influential in the development of Pop Art.

Oldenburg's works are known for their playfulness, humour, and boldness, and continue to inspire artists and art lovers around the world.

Oldenburg's most expensive work sold at auction is the ‘Giant Soft Drum Set’, which sold for US$2.2 million in 2011. His works can be found in collections of major museums around the world, such as the Museum of Modern Art in New York, the Tate Modern in London, and the Centre Pompidou in Paris.

Five of his most famous works include:

Floor Burger (1962)

Giant Soft Toilet (1966)

Typewriter Eraser, Scale X (1999)

Clothespin (1976)

Spoonbridge and Cherry (1985-1988)

David Hockney is a prominent British artist known for his vibrant and colourful works. He was educated at the Bradford School of Art and the Royal College of Art in London. He rose to prominence during the Pop Art movement in the 1960s and continued to create art in a variety of styles and mediums throughout his career. He has experimented with painting, drawing, printmaking and photography. More recently, David Hockney has created iPad drawings and immersive art.

Hockney's most expensive artwork sold to date is ‘Portrait of an Artist (Pool with Two Figures)’, which sold for US$90.3 million in 2018. It depicts a man standing on the edge of a swimming pool, looking down at a swimmer underwater. Hockney created the painting in 1972 and it is considered one of his most iconic works.

Some of David Hockney's most famous artworks include:

A Bigger Splash (1967) - The painting depicts a swimming pool and diving board with a splash in mid-air, capturing a moment frozen in time. This artwork is currently on display in the Tate Britain, London.

Portrait of an Artist (Pool with Two Figures) (1972) - This painting features a man looking down at a swimmer underwater in a pool. It is considered one of Hockney's most iconic works.

Pearblossom Highway (1986) - This photo collage depicts a desert landscape with a highway and a stop sign. It was created using over 700 individual photographs.

Mr and Mrs Clark and Percy (1970-71) - This portrait depicts the fashion designer couple, with their cat Percy. It is a quintessential example of Hockney's Pop Art style.

We Two Boys Together Clinging (1961) - This painting was created early in Hockney's career and depicts two naked men lying together. It was inspired by a poem by Walt Whitman.

There is an exciting David Hockney immersive exhibition in London during 2023. ‘David Hockney: Bigger & Closer (not smaller & further away)’ is being housed in Lightroom near Kings Cross station. This exhibition offers visitors a personal journey through 60 years of David Hockney's art.

Visit my blog post to find out where in London you can see David Hockney’s artwork in 2023.