Huntington Beach is a beach community in Southern California, U.S.A. with the nickname Surf City USA®. Huntington Beach's 8 miles is the longest stretch of uninterrupted beachfront on the West Coast. The city has four distinct beaches - Huntington City Beach, Bolsa Chica State Beach, Dog Beach and Huntington State Beach. The city is committed to keep its sandy shoreline free from development.

Huntington Beach’s beaches are perfect for barefoot strolls, open water swims, sitting by the glow of a late night bonfire, surfing on some of the world’s best-breaking waves; building sandcastles, and walking with dogs.

Ocean Swimming

Huntington Beach is the site for:

training with the Open Water Swim Club

three of the legs of the OC Coast To Coast Boast, an 11-day stage swim along the Orange County coastline

annual Huntington Beach Pier Swim

annual The Mega

several USA Swimming National Open Water Swimming Championships

Huntington Beach Junior Lifeguards summer program

Turkey Brine Pier Swim that is part of the Southern Pacific Masters Open Water Series held along the Southern California coast in November

Ohio

Huntington Beach is a area in Bay Village in the state of Ohio, U.S.A.

Surf City USA

The city of Huntington Beach (Surf City USA® or Surf City USA) is located along the Southern California coast in Orange County, about 40 miles south of Los Angeles and about 90 miles north of San Diego. With a population near 200,000, it is among the nation's safest cities and often ranked among the Top Ten Safest Cities by City Crime Rankings. It is site of the annual Huntington Beach Pier Swim.

Huntington Beach covers 28 square miles of land, 26 square miles of water where there are numerous open water swimming courses, and is one of the 20 largest cities in California. With 8.5 miles of uninterrupted, soft white sand beach along the Pacific Ocean, the city also plays host to an annual visitor population of more than 16.3 million people, with the greatest attendance during summer, special events and weekends.

Founded in the late 1880s, Huntington Beach was incorporated as a Charter City in 1909.

Surf City USA