LORNA DOONE

US, 1951, 89 minutes, Colour.

Barbara Hale, Richard Greene, Anne Howard, William Bishop, Carl Benton Reed, Ron Randall, Sean Mc Clory, Onslow Stevens, Lester Matthews, John Dehner.

Directed by Phil Karlson.

Lorna Doone is a colourful, matinee style version of R.D. Blackmore's famous novel about the 17th. century. The English setting is colourful - but the treatment and the stars are American style. Barbara Hale does her best as Lorna. Richard Greene is more at home in swashbuckling films as John Ridd. Ron Randall has a supporting role as Tom. Direction is by Phil Karlson, more at home with action features and gangster movies. Entertaining in its way but minor.

1. Entertaining costume drama? Action melodrama?

2. The 17th century? England, the countryside, the castle? Special effects, stunt work? Musical score?

3. The adaptation of a classic? The status of Blackmore's novel? Popularity? Other film versions?

4. The focus on Lorna? As a little girl, her growing up in the family, her place there? Her guardian? His love for her? The brothers and their arrogance, treatment of her? Her falling in love with John Ridd? The encounter when they were children and he climbed the waterfall? The later encounters? Love, the oppressive situation, her loyalties to him? Against the family? The dangers, the escape, the fights? The reconciliation? The heroine of romantic fiction?

5. John Ridd and his family, his father's death, the family's oppression? As a boy, climbing the waterfall? The encounter with Lorna? His growing up, poverty, oppression, his leading his family and the villagers against the powerful family? Clashes? The swashbuckling adventure tone to the social drama? The escape, pursuits, fight, help of Lorna, reunion with her?

6. Tom and his cavalier style, friendship with John, involvement in the battles, the escape?

7. The family and its power, oppression, the patriarch of the family and justice, inheritance? His sons and their cruelty? The build-up to the confrontation, the battles? Their hiding in the cellar? The build-up to the wedding and the shooting? Their defeat?

8. The portrait of the villagers, their life, oppression? The social revolution?

9. Popular material of romantic novels, for the widest audience, the battle of good and evil, romance, danger, the triumph of good?