Jona, Hummelwaldstrasse: Tickets, Map, Live Departure, How-to, Routes

Jona, Hummelwaldstrasse Building

Address

Hummelbergstrasse, St. Dionys, Wurmsbach, Rapperswil-Jona, Wahlkreis See-Gaster, Sankt Gallen, 8645, Switzerland

Main stations in

Jona, Hummelwaldstrasse Live Departures

Departure Time

Train number

Status

Platform

From

To

Scan QR code, download Xmove App to see Jona, Hummelwaldstrasse's more live update, station guide, plan and photos

Train and bus from Jona, Hummelwaldstrasse

Popular train routes departing from Jona, Hummelwaldstrasse

Jona, Hummelwaldstrasse Live Arrivals

Arrival Time

Train number

Status

Platform

From

To

Scan QR code, download Xmove App to see Jona, Hummelwaldstrasse's more live update, station guide, plan and photos

Train and bus to Jona, Hummelwaldstrasse

Popular train routes arriving in Jona, Hummelwaldstrasse

Scan QR code, download Xmove App to see Jona, Hummelwaldstrasse's more live update, station guide, plan and photos

Main Railway Operators

Ultimate Guide to German Railway

Ultimate Guide to German Railways

For those who love to travel, the quality and service of German Railways (Deutsche Bahn AG or German Railway abbreviated as DB) are world-class, with free entry and exit without ticket gates, ICE high-speed trains with a speed of nearly 300 kilometers per hour, and dense With the railway network and precise and punctual schedules, if you want to enjoy the way of traveling through the state and provinces on the train, Germany can be said to be the best choice.

There are approximately 37,000 trains operating in Germany every day. Most of the trains are operated by 24 railway companies under Deutsche Bahn. Deutsche Bahn also has the world's third densest railwa...

Ultimate Guide to Italian National Railway

Ultimate Guide to Italian Railway

Italian railways are of high quality and low price in Europe, especially between cities and towns. The Italian railway system began to develop in 1800 and had an explosive development during the Nazi Mussolini era, and Mussolini was famous for propagating "to keep trains on time" during World War II. Since the 1970s, Italy has developed high-speed railways. And continue to modernize the railway system.

Trains are usually the best choice for direct travel in large and medium-sized Italian cities, because there are many problems with road traffic and parking fees are often expensive. If you want to travel to the Italian countryside or remote mountain towns, trains are u...

Ultimate Guide to Flixbus

Ultimate Guide To FlixBus/FlixTrain

Friends who live in Europe know that buses are currently one of the cheapest ways to travel in Europe. Flixbus is currently the largest long-distance bus company in Europe.

At present, Flixbus not only does business in popular tourist cities, but most of the large residential towns in Europe have bus stations, including Germany, France, Italy, Netherlands, Poland, Czech Republic, Denmark, Sweden, Norway, Switzerland, Spain , Portugal, Hungary, Austria, Croatia, Belarus and other countries. Among them, the German route is the cheapest. Flixbus began to expand to the United States in 2018, and currently has thousands of sites in the United States. ...

Ultimate Guide to French Railway

Ultimate Guide to French Railway

The French railway system is planned and constructed by the French National Railway Agency (Socicte Nationalc des Chemins de Fer Francais, abbreviated as SNCF). The route is centered on Paris and woven in all directions, including high-speed trains (Train a Grande Vitesse, abbreviated as TGV). Routes, and general train routes that go to cities and towns. Among these general train routes, the nationwide inter-regional route is called the "Grande Ligne" (GL for short), and the routes that only travel within a single area are collectively called "Regional Rapid Transport System" (Transports Express Regionaux, referred to as TER).

(https://sematicweb.detie.cn/railways/...

Ultimate Guide to Austrian National Railway

Ultimate Guide to Austrian Railways

Traveling through Austria by train is now getting faster and easier. The best way to explore Austria is to travel through magnificent mountain views, lush alpine meadows, historic towns and picturesque villages. Austria is located in the central part of the European continent adjacent to Germany and Italy. It also borders the Czech Republic, Slovakia, Hungary, Slovenia, Liechtenstein and Switzerland. Its train network is well connected to surrounding countries. With a punctuality rate of 96%, ÖBB was one of the most reliable railway operators in Europe in 2018.

Austria’s main train service operator is the state-owned company ÖBB, which serves almost the entire country. There are some private railway companies that are not part of ÖBB. In the corridor...

Ultimate Guide to Swiss Railway

Ultimate Guide to Swiss Railways

Trains are the most important means of transportation within Switzerland and with neighboring countries. The road network is quite dense. The national railway company of the Swiss Confederation is called Swiss Federal Railways, abbreviated as SBB/CFF/FFS (German/French/Italian respectively). The railway covers the main trunk lines, while the private railways supplement the branch lines between the villages and mountain railways. Routes of the same width can be directly connected. Except for special sightseeing trains or mountain climbing roads, most of the ticketing mechanisms and ticket purchase methods are jointly operated. There will be no problem multiplying. The de...

Hot Journeys