Flash of Genius (PG-13) Universal (120 min.) Directed by Marc Abraham. With Greg Kinnear, Lauren Graham. Opens Friday at theaters in New Jersey. TWO STARS

You see him sometimes, sitting at the dark end of a cheap bar, or clinging to the loneliest corner of a party. Just don't make the mistake of making eye contact. "I had a million-dollar idea once," he'll blurt out. And unless you move away, right away, his long story of crooked corporations and incompetent lawyers begins.

A story sort of like "Flash of Genius."

It's a movie based on the life of Bob Kearns, an engineering professor and part-time inventor who got an idea one day for what he called the "blinking-eye" windshield wiper. He worked up a model, brought it to Ford and explained its adjustably intermittent, stop/start concept. They said no thanks.

And then, two years later, Ford put it on the market anyway -- without paying him a cent.

What followed were years -- and years -- of lawsuits and endless frustration. Kearns' marriage dissolved. His money disappeared. His mental health suffered. And still he fought on, even when Ford occasionally, petulantly, offered him settlements. This wasn't about profit, he maintained. This was about principle.

Fights for a principle, however, can sometimes be as wearying on the audience as they are on the poor, righteous hero's family, who just want a little peace and quiet. And pretty soon "Flash of Genius" begins to pall. Yes, stubborn, solitary men can have thrilling stories -- as in "A Man for All Seasons," or even "The Insider."

But this film isn't talking about church and state, or cancer. It's talking about, well, windshield wipers. And two hours is a very long time to expect us to listen.

The movie is capably, if not colorfully acted, the performers hitting the requisite, TV-movie moments. Greg Kinnear, who's been better before, is merely bland as the obsessed Kearns; Lauren Graham is pleasant, but no more, as his long-suffering wife. Of course, it's not their fault the script doesn't give them much to do; only Alan Alda, as one of their exasperated lawyers, gets a moderately juicy scene.

But that's not enough to draw us into a movie which plods along like one of Kearns' Engineering 101 lectures. And presented with Philip Railsback's schematic of a script, debuting director Marc Abraham finds nothing to add visually; the story just stumbles along, with title cards -- "Three months later," "Eighteen months later" -- drearily interrupting the flow.

It's no spoiler to say Kearns eventually wins some sort of vindication; there wouldn't be a movie if he didn't. But even when he does, it's hard to stand up and cheer. Although it's competently made -- the set direction, indicating the Kearns family's fall in fortunes, is especially well done -- "Flash of Genius" contains no spark of life at all.

Instead, it's just like that drunk in the bar or bore at the party -- fixing you with its gaze, grabbing your arm with its soft damp hand and slowly, ceaselessly, spinning its tale of how it once had a million-dollar idea.

Rating note: The film contains some strong language.