AFTER re-mortgaging his beachside home in Western Australia, Chris Heyring set about developing his idea for a new four-wheel drive suspension system.

With his wife, Anny, he bought a four-wheel drive Toyota pick-up and set to work in their back garden near Dunsborough to equip it with the first, crude version of the Heyring Kinetic patented suspension system.

Within a year they had a fully working vehicle that made its debut at the Perth four-wheel drive show - where the backyard Toyota made light work of terrain that stopped established manufacturers' products in their tracks.

Now Chris has sold his Kinetic system to US automotive giant Tenneco for £20 million.

Kinetic should also soon be supplied as original equipment on various DaimlerChrysler four-wheel drive models, as a result of talks that are close to conclusion. It's not a bad result for an idea dreamt up by a man who admits to being more artist than engineer.

Once a company as large as Tenneco gets in on the act, the marketing drive begins with a vengeance - and so it was that a clutch of European motoring journalists were flown across the world to meet the Kinetic system's inventor and to judge just how much of a breakthrough it really was.

Before being let loose in the forests and sand dunes of Western Australia, we were given a tour of the tiny Kinetic R&D centre in Dunsborough (pop 2,800), where Chris employs 18 staff.

To date there are four types of Kinetic suspension, the first three being "X" and "H" - so named after the system layout - and "RFS" (for Reverse Function Stabiliser). The last is "Generation Three", the workings of which we were forbidden to see because it will be the first system to go into full-scale production.

In each case, however, the heart of Kinetic lies in the way it links the movement of all four wheels through a set-up of hydraulic pipes, damper cylinders and Citroen-type accumulators to create a passive/reactive suspension system that gives extreme wheel articulation off road while improving on-road handling.

Development tests have reportedly shown as much as a 40 per cent reduction in body roll and a 60 per cent improvement in traction. In some cases, a Kinetic-equipped vehicle in two-wheel drive mode outperformed a standard model with all four wheels engaged.

Kinetic's official test track is a slice of farmland provided by a friendly local. Here, three-foot moguls that left a standard Wrangler Jeep pawing the air in a vain attempt to find traction could be negotiated with ease in a similar vehicle equipped with the Kinetic system. All wheels maintained contact with the ground from start to finish and the ascent was completed with the engine barely ticking over.

A test in a Kinetic Jeep Grand Cherokee to evaluate the extra comfort the system is said to provide on a continuously rutted surface proved less conclusive. A base model Toyota Landcruiser - admittedly wider and longer than the Jeep - felt better.

Later at the nearby Collie test track, a much-repaired circuit that resembled a patchwork quilt of every type of asphalt known to man, the Kinetic vehicles were put through slalom tests that proved the system really does all but dispense with the galleon-like body roll that comes as standard with most four-wheel drive vehicles. A Kinetic-equipped Land Rover Discovery cornered fast enough to make all four tyres break away - by which time a standard vehicle would probably be on its roof.

During the next five days, we drove through unforgiving terrain that incorporated shifting sand dunes, boulder-strewn tracks and a smattering of suicidal kangaroos. There were a few reliability problems, mainly due to burst hydraulic seals - but the system is still in the development stage and is made mainly from components scratch-built in Dunsborough.