Suffer from sea sickness? Then this super boat might help you find your sea legs again.

The Nauti-Craft's high-tech suspension means it can cut through rough waters and keep its passengers in blissful comfort on board.

Initially the boat was designed for commercial use on wind farms, but the technology will soon also be available for recreational use.

Scroll down for video

Stunning pictures and video footage have revealed the impressive new suspension system created by a research and development company called Nauti-Craft based in Dunsborough, Western Australia.

The Nauti-Craft, which has been dubbed the 4x4 for the ocean, can handle rough sea at high speed with the help of a hydraulic suspension system for multi-hulled vessels.

These hydraulic shock absorbers minimise the impacts for those onboard.

'Our marine suspension technology is on the path to widespread adoption with three companies with programs in place to build boats using the technology during 2017,' said Nauti-Craft's Managing Director Ken Johnsen.

'Initial development has been focused of the commercial application of providing safer and more comfortable operations in the servicing of offshore wind farms.

'More recently two boat builders are focusing on high end recreational applications of the technology', he said.

Stability is enhanced with active control of the suspension system.

This technology could also be used by the military - due to the hydraulic shock absorbers the boat is incredibly stable in even the roughest waters.

A 'passive reactive' separates the hull from the superstructure.

This is interlinked with a hydraulic system which allows the hulls to react rapidly to wave inputs without transmitting these forces to the hull and deck of the boat.

This provides increased levels of ride comfort, control and stability.

Similar suspension systems have been used by Mitsubishi motors in the Dakar rally and by Citroen's WRC team in the world rally championships.

'Nauti-Craft has under development concepts that are being targeted at the higher volume recreational sector where we aim to offer never been seen before levels of comfort in a consumer version of the technology', said Mr Johnsen.