I dropped my 2014 LC200 off at the local Toyota dealership to have my AIRBAG/Seatbelt recall service completed. While there I was asked by the female service writer if I wanted any other work completed while they had it for the day. I asked if they could adjusting my "KDSS" system and make sure my truck was level. I explained that there are two bolts that need to be loosened to regulate the system. I expressed my concern with not wanting to damage them and that having a certified Toyota technician address the issue was probably the way to go.

The Service woman then went on to tell me that the "air bag" suspension is a highly complex system and that she would have a mechanic look at it. I explained to her that my truck had "KDSS", not an air bag suspension. I read the definition from my phone to her...

The Kinetic Dynamic Suspension System (KDSS) technology was employed initially in the Lexus GX 470, and subsequently the 200 Series Toyota Land Cruiser. The system was invented and developed by Kinetic Pty Ltd, a small R&D company based in Dunsborough, Western Australia.[1] It optimally adjusts front and rear stabilizers based on a set of interconnected hydraulic cylinders. The interconnection is made up of hydraulic piping and a control cylinder which is located at the frame rail.[2] KDSS, which is fully mechanical, can disengage the stabilizer bars (the bars are jointed, allowing movement independent of one another).[2] This system will not engage during normal driving conditions, when hydraulic pressure is equal. In off-road conditions, KDSS activates when it senses that a wheel has dropped.

Her reply was "I am pretty sure it has air bags because the Lexus has them"!

When I picked up truck that afternoon she told me that the bolts were "frozen" and that there was nothing they could do. When I asked her if she knew of another shop that I could take my truck to since Toyota couldn't handle the task, she replied; "I wouldn't mess with it, the airbag suspension cost about $8K to replace, I would wait till it fails before you go messing with it"!

As I was attempting to leave she complemented my truck and asked if I had bought it that way? I assume referring to my wheels and TRD badging. I told her that I had added a few to things and deleted the chrome etc. since Toyota does not offer us a TRD version. She replied; "They do now"! Of course I was intrigued and took the bait... She pulled out her phone to show me a photo of a 2020 ARMY green Sequoia TRD Pro that was on their lot. I immediately replied, that is not a Land Cruiser, it is a Sequoia". She was like... "oh, I guess your right".

So my question, should I bother with attempted to break these bolts loose and adjust my KDSS or should I just keep it moving and not worry about it?

Thanks for the advice gents. I don’t even know why I went to this stealership any way. It’s always something with them.

Years ago I special ordered a 2017 TRD Pro Taco and gave them a deposit. Several months later I received a call from my Salesman who told me he had bad news. He told me that they were only getting one that year and that the one ordered had actually been promised to their top sales person. I was like WTF? He was like yeah sorry about that. I just told myself it wasn’t meant to be and got my deposit back. I found a new arrival at Another dealer in NE Philly 2 weeks later. Sold it 6 months after my purchase. Hated the new 6 cylinder. No torque. Main reason why I love the LC’s V8.