"You Could Be Mine"Single by Guns N' Rosesfrom the album Use Your Illusion IIA-side"You Could Be Mine" (LP Version)B-side"Civil War" (LP Version)ReleasedJune 21, 1991 ( )RecordedA&M Studios, Record Plant Studios,

Studio 56,

Image Recording, Conway Studios & Metalworks Recording Studios, January 1991GenreHeavy metalLength5:44LabelGeffen, UZI SuicideSongwriter(s)Axl Rose, Izzy StradlinProducer(s)Mike Clink, Guns N' Roses

"You Could Be Mine" is a song by American rock band Guns N' Roses, featured on their 1991 fourth studio album Use Your Illusion II. It was released as the band's seventh single, and the first from the Use Your Illusion albums, in June 1991. Backed with "Civil War" from Use Your Illusion II, the single reached number 29 on the US Billboard Hot 100, number three on the UK Singles Chart, and number one in Finland and Spain. It became a top-five hit in more than ten additional countries.

The song was originally released as the theme song for director James Cameron's 1991 film, Terminator 2: Judgment Day.

History[]

"You Could Be Mine" was selected to be included in the James Cameron film Terminator 2: Judgment Day. Arnold Schwarzenegger had the band members over for dinner at his own home to negotiate the deal.[1]

The lyric "With your bitch slap rappin' and your cocaine tongue you get nothin' done" from the chorus appeared on the inner sleeve of Guns N' Roses' debut album Appetite for Destruction, released in 1987 (the song had already been written by then). This "tradition" was followed by the line "Ain't It Fun" on the Use Your Illusion albums released in 1991 - two years later GN'R cover of the song "Ain't It Fun" appeared on "The Spaghetti Incident?" album. The end of first verse, "we've seen that movie too", is a reference to Elton John' song "I've Seen That Movie Too", from the album Goodbye Yellow Brick Road. Slash states that the song's writing began at the first preproduction session for Appetite for Destruction.[2]

The song has one minute drum and guitar intro. The song was played during the ending credits of Terminator 2 and was heard in the film itself in early scenes with John Connor. It also appeared in another part of the Terminator series, Terminator Salvation.

Song meaning and lyrics[]

The song talks about band member Izzy Stradlin's failed relationship with his girlfriend.[citation needed]

"You Could Be Mine" has a little profanity, using the word bitch three times in the chorus:

With your bitch slap rapping and your cocaine tongue

You get nothin' done

I said you could be mine

Music video[]

The music video for the song was directed by Andy Morahan, Stan Winston and Jeffrey Abelson.[3] A T-800 Terminator is assembled, given the appearance of Arnold Schwarzenegger, and dispatched to assassinate the band at one of their concerts. The video consists of clips from the movie, including its teaser trailer, intercut with footage of the band performing the song as the T-800 makes his way to the front of the crowd. After the song ends, he confronts the band as they leave the venue through a back door and analyzes each member individually; Izzy Stradlin is absent at this point, replaced by keyboardist Dizzy Reed. The T-800 scans W. Axl Rose last and concludes that killing the band would be a "Waste of Ammo". Lowering his shotgun, he gives Rose a brief smirk and walks away.

As the video features clips from the movie, it could not be put on the DVD Welcome to the Videos due to licensing issues. The video was also not included on any of the DVD releases of Terminator 2: Judgment Day, although it was included with a special double tape edition of the film, released on VHS in 1993.

Live performances[]

Early live versions of "You Could Be Mine" featured Slash using a B.C. Rich Mockingbird (as in the video) instead of his usual Gibson Les Paul, due to his use of a tremolo during the solo. It was first played live at Rock in Rio II on January 20, 1991, and has been a staple ever since. The live version features amended lyrics to the line "an I leave you lyin' on the bed' with your ass in the air".

Track listing[]

CD single Geffen 19039

"You Could Be Mine" - 5:44

"Civil War" – 7:41

7" single Geffen GES 19039

"You Could Be Mine" (LP version) - 5:44

"Civil War (LP Version)" – 7:38

Personnel[]

W. Axl Rose – lead vocals

Slash – lead guitar, rhythm guitar

Izzy Stradlin – rhythm guitar, backing vocals

Duff McKagan – bass, backing vocals

Matt Sorum – drums

Charts and certifications[]

Similarities[]

The Guns N' Roses' 1991 song "You Could Be Mine" contains melodic samples of the Grace Jones' 1980 song "Love Is The Drug" (for instrumental melody), of the Kenny Loggins' 1986 song "Danger Zone" (for verse melody) and of the Sisters Of Mercy's 1987 song "This Corrosion" (for chorus melody).

References[]

[]

Full lyrics of this song at MetroLyrics

Page Template:Hlist/styles.css must have content model "Sanitized CSS" for TemplateStyles (current model is "wikitext").