Single infobox |

Name = You Could Be Mine

Artist = Guns N' Roses

from Album = Use Your Illusion II

Released = 1991

Format = vinyl record (7")

Cassette

Compact Disc

Recorded = 1991

Genre = Hard rock

Length = 5:48

Label = Geffen

Writer = Izzy Stradlin, Axl Rose

Producer = Mike Clink, Guns N' Roses

Last single = "Civil War" (1990)

This single = "You Could Be Mine" (1991)

Next single = "Don't Cry" (1991)"You Could Be Mine" is American rock band Guns N' Roses's second-highest selling single and one of their most popular songs. It is the twelfth track on the 1991 album "Use Your Illusion II". The song was written by Izzy Stradlin and Axl Rose; Stradlin and Rose wrote the lyrics together and Stradlin wrote the music. Originally, this song was written about Izzy's failed relationship with ex-fiance Angela Nicoletti.

History

Contrary to popular belief, "You Could Be Mine" was not originally going to be the official theme of "". However, the references to Guns N' Roses that were made in the film (from John Connor's friend's Guns N' Roses t-shirt to the T-800 taking out his shotgun from a box of roses (thus playing a pun on the band) were so clear and obvious that it was a wise business decision to make when Cameron decided to recruit the band to perform a song. As it would turn out, "You Could Be Mine" was selected to included in the film. Arnold Schwarzenegger had Axl and the band members over for dinner at his own home to negotiate the deal.Fact|date=December 2007

The lyric "With your bitch slap rappin' and your cocaine tongue you get nuthin' done" from the chorus appeared on the inner sleeve of Guns N' Roses' debut album "Appetite for Destruction", released in 1987 (the song had already been written by then). This "tradition" was followed by the line "Ain't It Fun" on the "Use Your Illusion" albums released in 1991 - two years later GN'R cover of the song "Ain't It Fun" appeared on ""The Spaghetti Incident?"" album. Slash states that the song first started being written at the first preproduction session for "Appetite for Destruction". [Bozza, Anthony, & Slash (2007). Slash. Harper Entertainment: New York. pp. 166]

Music video

Schwarzenegger appears in the music-video as the T-800 Terminator from the film who arrives at a Guns N' Roses concert, having mission orders to assassinate the band. [Music video with footages from "Terminator 2: Judgment Day" [http://youtube.com/watch?v=VlzptZ9wieQ&feature=related] ] However, when the song is finished, the Terminator confronts the band and individually assesses each member. He gets to Axl and assesses that killing him would be a "A waste of ammo." He then stares at Axl Rose for a while and then walks off. The video, edited by Jeffrey Abelson, was one of the most requested music-videos during that period, and it most definitely built up a lot of hype around the release of "Terminator 2". Izzy Stradlin was conspicuously absent from the end section of the video.

As the video features clips from the movie, it could not be put on the DVD "Welcome to the Videos" due to licensing issues.

The song is remembered for its minute-long drum and guitar intro. It was played during the ending credits of "Terminator 2" and was heard in the film itself in early scenes with John Connor. The original script called for The Ramones song "I Wanna Be Sedated" to be played instead. [Cameron and Wisher, Terminator 2: Judgement Day: The Book of the Film: An Illustrated Screenplay, Applause Books, 1991, p. 24, ISBN 1-55783-097-5]

Live performances

Live versions included some twin-guitar parts by Izzy and Slash, where Slash would use a B.C. Rich Mockingbird (as in the video) instead of his usual Gibson Les Paul, due to his use of a tremolo during the solo. It was first played live at Rock in Rio II festival on January 20th, 1991.