Skip to content

👋 Welcome on our website dedicated to the stories of iconic songs. In the section below you’ll find the explanations related to the song You Could Be Mine. You can also find other tracks via the search bar. Enjoy your reading!

Search

🎙Listen to CMF AI Radio 👇

Discover the story of the song > You Could Be Mine – Guns N’ Roses

Who sang You Could Be Mine?

Guns N' Roses released the song You Could Be Mine. Date of release: 1991.

Release date: 1991

Duration: 05:44

The story of the song ' You Could Be Mine '

Share with your friends

The meaning of the song 'You Could Be Mine ', based on the lyrics

What is You Could Be Mine about?

🎶 You Could Be Mine song analysis

The protagonist sings about his relationship with his partner. He tries to explain to her that their relationship is not healthy because she is always arguing and not getting anything done. He tells her that if she would just try to be better, they could be together. However, he also knows that five years is a long time and that his partner hasn't grown up yet. So he knows that it is unlikely that they will be able to make their relationship work.

Share with your friends

This explanation is based on the lyrics of ‘You Could Be Mine’. The meaning is of course subject to interpretation.

👉 Listen to ' You Could Be Mine ' on Spotify

Don't Miss The Mix

Receive our exclusive music mix, every Monday.

A selection of the very best tracks from around the globe, played for you by our resident DJs. There’s no better way to start the week!

Email

Guns N' Roses - Short Biography

Guns N' Roses is an American hard rock band from Los Angeles, formed in 1985 and signed to Geffen Records in 1986. The original lineup, consisting of vocalist Axl Rose, guitarist Slash, rhythm guitarist Izzy Stradlin, bassist Duff McKagan and drummer Steven Adler, has expanded to include current members Richard Fortus, Frank Ferrer, Dizzy Reed and Melissa Reese. The band has released six studio albums and numerous chart-topping singles, establishing the band as one of the most popular hard rock bands of all time.

Image credit: Raph_PH – Wikimedia

Join The Mix

"You Could Be Mine" is a song by American rock band Guns N' Roses from their fourth studio album, Use Your Illusion II. The song was released on June 21, 1991 as the first single from the album Use Your Illusion. It was also used in the 1991 film Terminator 2: Judgment Day by director James Cameron. The single reached number 29 on the US Billboard Hot 100, number 3 on the UK Singles Chart, number 1 in Finland and Spain, and was a top 5 hit in over 10 other countries.

Receive our exclusive music mix, every Monday.

A selection of the very best tracks from around the globe, played for you by our resident DJs. There’s no better way to start the week!

Email

Do you like this song?

Click on a star to rate it!

Average rating 0 / 5. Vote count: 0

No votes so far! Be the first to rate this song.

As you liked this song...

Follow us on social media!