THE title character in ''Educating Rita'' is a housewife who yearns so mightily for knowledge that she embarks on a tutorial program, soon becoming the favored protege of a boozy English professor.

This self-styled student is such a bundle of spunk and intellectual curiosity that you can probably picture her: intense, serious, mousy and, of course, beautiful when she takes off her glasses. Why is it, then, that Rita when we first see her is a tarty-looking creature dressed in a short tight skirt and long black stockings, teetering adorably on her high heels and sporting pink streaks in her dyed blond hair?

The reason is that ''Educating Rita,'' opening today at Cinema 2 and directed by Lewis Gilbert, based on the long-running London stage hit by Willy Russell, is an awkward blend of intellectual pretension and cute obvious humor. It's the perfect play about literature for anyone who wouldn't dream of actually reading books. Rita - who is actually named Susan, but who has rechristened herself in honor of Rita Mae Brown, one of the few authors with whom she is familiar at the beginning of the story - is eventually heard quoting William Blake from memory, airing a few opinions about Chekhov, and raving about the excitement she has experienced while watching ''Macbeth'' for the first time. This, in the play's terms, is more than enough to establish her quick eager mind and her extraordinary openness to new ideas.

Dr. Frank Bryant, the sodden and disheveled professor played by Michael Caine, is shown to be so dazzled by Rita's promise that he's reluctant to interfere with her innocence. ''I don't know that I want to teach you,'' he says. ''What you have is already too valuable.'' Nonetheless, ''Educating Rita'' chronicles the process by which Rita, under Frank's tutelage, resumes her real name, lets her hair go brown and begins dressing in denims, like the other students. Meanwhile, Frank learns to drink less, and is told by Rita/Susan that his own poetry has ''a direct link through to the 19th-century tradition of, like, wit and classical allusion.''

The audience will be ahead of this and possibly too far ahead in presuming that it will lead to a student-teacher romance. Even though Rita's marriage (to a lout who burns her books and complains loudly when she won't accompany him to his pub) and Frank's longtime love affair (with a fellow academic) both seem shaky, and even though there's a lot of after-hours activity in the tutorial relationship, Frank and Rita part as chastely as they have met.

When, early in the film, Frank extracts a liquor bottle from behind a copy of ''The Lost Weekend'' on a shelf otherwise devoted to Milton and Gibbon, it becomes apparent that ''Educating Rita'' will underscore everything as heavily as it possibly can. Sure enough, Mr. Gilbert (who directed three James Bond films and who also directed Mr. Caine in ''Alfie'') proves to have an approach as ponderous as Mr. Russell's. The essentially two-character play has been opened up to the point that it includes a variety of settings and subordinate figures, but it never approaches anything lifelike. The long arm of coincidence touches all of the minor characters, whose actions exist only to comment on those of Rita and Frank.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.