EDUCATING RITA. (1983) DIRECTED BY LEWIS GILBERT. SCREENPLAY BY WILLY RUSSELL.

BASED ON THE PLAY BY WILLY RUSSELL.

MUSIC BY DAVID HENTSCHEL.

STARRING JULIE WALTERS, MICHAEL CAINE, MICHAEL WILLIAMS, JEANANNE CROWLEY, MALCOLM DOUGLAS AND MAUREEN LIPMAN.

REVIEW BY SANDRA HARRIS. ©

This is still such a quaint and endearing movie. I saw it recently on the big screen as part of this year’s ONE DUBLIN, ONE BOOK festival (it was introduced by Louise Nealon, who wrote SNOWFLAKE, the book part of ONE DUBLIN, ONE BOOK) and I must say, though the disc was a bit scratchy and the sound was gone in places, it still looked pretty good.

Julie Walters, in her first feature film, plays the eponymous Rita, a twenty-six-year-old English hairdresser who’s not happy with her lot and wants to try to improve it by doing an Open University Course in Literature. Michael Caine (JAWS 4: THE REVENGE) is Frank, the scruffy, shambling alcoholic of a college professor assigned to be her tutor.

She sees him once a week in his college rooms, and he teaches her how to pass exams on the likes of Ibsen’s Peer Gynt. What she teaches him is almost more valuable; how there are more ways to look at a poem, play or novel than just the usual, narrow-minded academic one. She’s a breath of fresh air in his stuffy old rooms.

It’s a real case of opposites attracting, though not necessarily in a sexual way. Rita lives in a shabby side-street with her husband Denny, who, in an infamous scene accompanied by David Hentschel’s fabulous score, burns her books on a bonfire in the yard when he finds out she hasn’t come off her contraceptive pill like she’d promised him.

Her family in general don’t see the point of her trying to better herself intellectually when her lot is clearly to marry, have kids and grow old on the street where she lives. Is she wrong to want something more, to want to ‘sing a different song?’

Frank the tutor is a deeply unhappy man. With a failed marriage behind him, he doesn’t even care any more if his students see him literally falling down drunk on the job. He’s on thin ice with the college governors and probably only avoids the sack because the college don’t seem to really sack anyone; they just give their recalcitrant staff loads of warnings, lol.

Frank’s live-in girlfriend Julia is openly cuckolding him with his pal Brian, played by Michael Williams from situation comedy A FINE ROMANCE, in which he co-starred with his wife, Dame Judy Dench. Brian pretending to be on the phone to his publisher, Morgan, in order not to be caught in flagrante delicto with Julia is very funny, especially when Frank tells him they’ve had their phone cut off due to non-payment of the bill.

If Rita can instil some much-needed self-respect into Frank, she’ll be doing him a huge favour. He gets more and more miffed as Rita’s journey towards self-betterment takes her on an upward trajectory, away from him.

At the same time, he’s falling to pieces and sinking ever lower in the eyes of his students and his colleagues. He’s also jealous of the easy way Rita fits in with the other students, even the posh ones. What’s it going to take to get him to pull himself together and stop wasting what’s left of his one wild and precious life…?

The film was shot mostly in Dublin while purporting to take place in an unnamed British university town. The whole thing looks gorgeous, and, as I mentioned earlier, is set to the most fantastic music by David Hentschel, an English music producer who has engineered for such artists as Queen, George Harrison, Mike Oldfield and Elton John.