CLINT EASTWOOD is a Hollywood icon whose trademark scowl and raspy voice are synonymous with the Western genre.

Fans of the American actor and director want to know more about his eight kids.

Who are Clint Eastwood's children?

Clint Eastwood was born in San Francisco, California, on May 31, 1930.

His acting career started on TV, starring in the Western series Rawhide alongside Eric Fleming.

The legendary actor rose to fame through his work with legendary director Sergio Leone and starred in his Dollars Trilogy of Westerns in the 1960s.

While the Oscar-winner has gone on to have a hugely successful career as an actor and a director, he also found time to have eight children.

Laurie Murray

Laurie Murray was born before Clint became famous and was given up for adoption, as per the Daily Mail.

Her mother gave Laurie up for adoption after her birth on February 11, 1954, with Clint unaware she was pregnant.

The outlet says she was adopted by a couple in Seattle but didn't meet her biological father until they finally reconnected years later.

Laurie was pictured and acknowledged as Clint's daughter for the first time in 2018.

Laurie is a mother of two who lives in Lakewood, Washington.

Kimber Eastwood

Kimber Eastwood was born on June 17, 1964. She is a film producer and make-up artist.

Kimber has been married to her third husband, producer and actor Shawn Midkiff, since 2014.

She is Clint's only child with Roxanne Tunis, but her existence was kept secret from the public until July 1989.

The late actress and dancer reportedly had a 14-year affair with Clint.

She passed away at the age of 93 on June 23, 2023, after battling a brief illness, Kimber told RadarOnline.com.

Kyle Eastwood

Clint married Maggie Johnson in 1953, but the pair divorced in 1984.

They had two children together, with the eldest, Kyle Eastwood, born on May 19, 1968.

Kyle is a musician and composer who shares his father's love of jazz.

His debut release, From There To Here, reached No. 21 on the Billboard Traditional Jazz Albums chart.

His music was also featured in his dad's films, and he wrote the scores for Letters from Iwo Jima, Gran Torino, and Invictus with collaborator Michael Stevens.

Kyle has been married to Cynthia Ramirez since 2014.

Alison Eastwood

Kyle's younger sister, Alison Eastwood, was born on May 22, 1972.

She made her acting debut at just seven years old with an uncredited role in Bronco Billy, which her dad directed.

She went on to star in several films, appearing in The Mule in 2018, a crime drama in which Clint produced, directed, and starred.

Alison runs an animal rescue center, the Eastwood Ranch Foundation. She has been married to sculptor Stacy Poitras since 2013.

Scott Eastwood

Clint has two children with former flight attendant Jacelyn Reeves.

Scott Eastwood was born on March 21, 1986.

He's also an actor, and initially started the business using his mother's last name, but later changed his stage name to Eastwood.

His credits include Flags Of Our Fathers and An American Crime. He also appeared as Trey in Gran Torino.

Kathryn Eastwood

Scott's sister Kathryn Eastwood was born on March 2, 1988, and is Clint's second child with Jacelyn.

She has also followed her father into the profession and appeared in Jersey Boys, which Clint directed.

She appeared in Virus Of The Dead and the horror short American Virus.

Francesca Eastwood

Francesca was born on August 7, 1993, and has also followed her father onto the big screen, becoming a TV personality and actor.

She also appeared in Jersey Boys and was in the M. Night Shyamalan-directed thriller Old as Madrid in 2021.

Her mother is Titanic actress Frances Fisher.

Morgan Eastwood

Morgan was born on December 12, 1996, and is Clint Eastwood's youngest child.

She has appeared in several of her father's films, including Million Dollar Baby, for which he received his second Best Director Oscar.

She's perhaps best known for Mrs. Eastwood & Company, a 2012 reality documentary series in which she appeared as herself alongside her half-sister Francesca and mother, Dina.

Her parents divorced in 2014 when she was only 16.

On May 23, 2024, Morgan took to Instagram to reveal that she is expecting her first child with her fiancé, Tanner Koopmans.

"Our baby 🤍," she wrote alongside two photos that showed off her baby bump.

Morgan and Tanner made it official on June 15, 2024. Their wedding ceremony was attended by all seven of her siblings.