Julie Gholson Carmichael's children were reminded of their mother's brief fling with Hollywood when they were assigned to read the classic book "Where the Lilies Bloom" in school. "There was a picture of me on the cover," Carmichael says with a laugh.

Julie celebrated her 14th birthday in 1972 during filming of the movie version of the book, in which she portrayed Mary Call. Carmichael, now 57 and living in Birmingham, grew up in an acting household - her father Ashby Gholson acted in the Birmingham theater group Town and Gown.

"He was supposed to be the next Clint Eastwood but he decided not to go to Hollywood," she said. Instead, her father opted to keep the family in Alabama and continue acting locally.

A friend with Town and Gown suggested Julie audition for "Where the Lilies Bloom," and, on a lark, she did. "It was a real fluke," she says.

The movie did not debut until 1974 and when it did, Julie was nominated for a Golden Globe award for Most Promising Newcomer. Susan Flannery won in that category for her role in "The Towering Inferno."

Carmichael, who was a sophomore at Mountain Brook High School when she was nominated, said she wasn't affected by the glitz and glamor of Hollywood. Her family did not attend the awards ceremony.

"My agent wanted me to move to New York and go to a performing arts school," Carmichael said. "I wanted to just do high school. My family was very grounded. We didn't take any of it too seriously. " Her older sister, Lisa Gholson, was a ballerina in New York at the time. "She was the real talent of the family," she says.

Carmichael opted to stay in Alabama. She attended the University of Alabama and worked at an ad agency before eventually marrying her college sweetheart Doug Carmichael, a retired Air Force pilot who flew F16s. They had two children - Hunter, now 26 and an attorney, and Kathryn, 29, who is pregnant with her second child - and moved "all over the world" for his career.

About nine years ago, Carmichael was invited to attend a reunion of the "Lilies" cast at a North Carolina film festival. Rance Howard, real-life dad to Ron and Clint Howard and Julie's on-screen dad, was being honored.

The Carmichaels dined with the Howards, Hollywood royalty, and other cast members.

"It was fun for my family to meet all my costars," she said. "My family got to watch it with me on the big screen and then the cast went on stage and answered questions about the movie."

These days, Carmichael is reveling in her role as grandmother to 2-year-old Ann Ashby and eagerly anticipating the arrival of her first grandson.

Her only regret in not choosing life as an actor? "I think I would have loved to have done something with my father," she said. But she said people treated her differently when they learned she was an actress and she didn't enjoy that.

"My real life was so awesome," she says. "(Acting) wasn't nearly as interesting to me as my incredible family and great friends."

Where are some of Alabama's other former child actors?

Houston Tumlin

Houston Tumlin was born Dec. 27, 1992, in Pell City. His only film was the 2006 comedy "Talladega Nights: The Ballad of Ricky Bobby," in which he played Walker, the son of Will Ferrell's title character.

He graduated in 2011 from Victory Christian High School. These days, Houston is at Fort Campbell serving in the Army's 101st Airborne Division.

Grayson Russell

Grayson Russell was born Dec. 27, 1998, in Clanton, Ala. He portrayed Texas Ranger, the younger brother of Houston Tumlin's character in "Talladega Nights: The Ballad of Ricky Bobby." He graduated from Chilton High School and continues to act, going on to star in the "Diary of a Wimpy Kid" film series and "Space Warriors," among others.

Lucas Black

Lucas Black was born Nov. 29, 1982, in Speake, Ala. He was "discovered" in 1993 by Kevin Costner at a casting call in Hollywood, Ala., where he won a role in the film "The War." Since then, Black has starred in dozens of films and TV shows, including "Sling Blade," "Ghosts of Mississippi," "Crazy in Alabama," "The X-Files," "Friday Night Lights," "Fast and Furious: Tokyo Drift," and "Fast 7." He currently stars in the TV series "NCIS: New Orleans."

Black, who played football at Speake High School, is now married and has two children.

Debby Ryan

Debby Ryan was born May 13, 1993, in Huntsville and began her career at age 12 starring in "Barney & Friends." She went on to have parts in Disney shows, "The Suite Life on Deck," "Hannah Montana," and "Wizards of Waverly Place." Currently, she stars in the Disney show "Jessie," playing a young nanny. She is also a singer.

Kathleen Arthur

Kathleen Arthur was born Aug. 30, 1994, in Mableton, Ga., but grew up in Huntsville. She played "Young Rosa" in the movie "Constellation," which was filmed in 2003 in Huntsville. The movie debuted in 2005.

Arthur graduated from Lee High School and is a dance major at the University of Alabama. "I currently teach at D'ancin Starz in Tuscaloosa but I often return home to Dance Theatre of Huntsville, my home dance studio directed by my mother, Monique Ryan," she said. She has won numerous awards for choreography.

"I just recently got asked to dance on an episode of 'The Prancing Elite Project' soon to air on Oxygen Network," she said. "I also model here and there, from runways to photo shoots." She also writes music.

Mary Badham

Mary Badham was born Oct. 7, 1952, in Birmingham. As a child, she starred in several movies, most famously as Scout in 1962's "To Kill a Mockingbird." She also had roles in the 1966 films "This Property is Condemned," and "Let's Kill Uncle."

She is also known for playing Sport in the popular 1959 episode of "The Twilight Zone" called "The Bewitchin' Pool."

She was nominated for a Best Supporting Actress Oscar at age 10 for her role in "Mockingbird," becoming the youngest nominee until 9-year-old Tatum O'Neal won for 1973's "Paper Moon."

Badham now works as an art restorer and college testing coordinator. She is also a sought-after speaker, recalling her experiences on the set of "Mockingbird."

Phillip Alford

Phillip Alford was born Sept. 11, 1948, in Gadsden. He is best known for his portrayal of Jem Finch in "To Kill a Mockingbird," but also starred in the 1970 TV movie "The Intruders" and several TV shows, including "The Virginian."

He graduated from Ramsay High School in Birmingham and is now a successful businessman and consultant in Birmingham.

Cary Guffey

Cary Guffey was born May 10, 1972, in Douglasville, Ga., but at age 4 played the memorable role of Barry Guiler in 1977's "Close Encounters of the Third Kind," which was filmed in Alabama. He would later earn his MBA from Alabama's Jacksonville State University.

He is married, has two children and is a certified financial planner.

Mitch Holleman

Mitch Holleman was born in Auburn, Ala., on Sept. 13, 1994. He would star as Jake Hart on the CMT show "Reba," from 2001-2007. He continues to act, taking roles in "Bubble Boy," "The Animal" and "The Hangover." His current film, "The Bus Driver," is due out this year.

Holleman's Twitter feed describes him as an "actor, musician and stand-up comedian."

Renee Olstead

Renee Olstead was born in Houston, Texas, in 1989, but lived in Huntsville for about a year when her father worked at the U.S. Space and Rocket Center. She played Lauren Miller on the sitcom "Still Standing" from 2002-2006 and had small roles in films such as "The Insider," "End of Days" and "Space Cowboys." She then played Madison Cooperstein on "The Secret life of the American Teenager" from 2008-2013. She has a role in the horror film called "Unfriended" that will be in theaters April 17.