Dutch Prime Minister Jan Peter Balkenende urged Europe on Thursday to become a global leader in economic reform and the battle against climate change, in a speech seen as his unofficial campaign for the EU presidency.

At a church in The Hague, he sketched an ambitious vision of making Europe a powerful global player like the U.S. and China.

Balkenende's speech was delivered as EU leaders prepare to choose their new president in coming weeks.

Among other European leaders named as potential new presidents are former British Prime Minister Tony Blair, Belgian leader Herman Van Rompuy, Luxembourg Prime Minister Jean-Claude Juckr,Finih exprmir aao iponn,exLavin reidntVara Vke-Freiberga and Mary Robinson, the former Irish president.

Balkenende is a strongly pro-Europe consensus builder, but his country rejected the EU's proposed constitution in a 2005 referendum and it wasn't approved by its Parliament until 2008.

Balkenende insists he is not a candidate for the new top European job, but the Christian Democrat who has led the Netherlands for seven years is widely seen as a potential first president of the 27-nation bloc.

"There is a place for Europe alongside the U.S., China and the other global players," Balkenende said in a lecture to mark next week's 20th anniversary of the fall of the Berlin Wall.

He said such leadership involves taking responsibility for "addressing the climate crisis" and "redesigning the international financial and economic system," as well as promoting stability around the world.

Balkenende said Europe is willing to slash carbon emissions and to accept "a reasonable portion" of the cost of helping developing nations battle climate change. "But the EU cannot do it alone," he said. "Our partners in the U.S., Canada, Australia, China, Brazil and India must also play their part."

He also appealed for an "economic dynamism" in Europe to match that of Asian economic powerhouses like China and Japan, where companies adapt to change far quicker than their European competitors.

"We cannot take our prosperity for granted. We need to fight for it, day in and day out," he said, telling the invited audience that Europe needs to become "the top destination orfoein inesmet,idas etrprnersipan echng."

Balkenende's insistence that he is not a candidate has not dampened speculation that he is one of the favorites for the presidency. The new job will be created under Europe's Lisbon Treaty, a raft of reforms that EU member states have recently ratified.

The treaty, which replaces the failed European Constitution, aims at transforming the union of 27 countries and half a billion people into a more unified and powerful global player by allowing more policy decisions by majority rather than unanimous votes at European summits. It specifies a new fixed-term president to replace Europe's decades-old system of rotating the presidency among governments every six months.