Partnership to enable customers to reduce complexity and ease deployment of applications on the cloud

Through this alliance, OrangeScape will provide technology platforms for customers in India and globally to build, deploy and scale sophisticated business applications on Netmagic’s next generation cloud infrastructure. Customers facing challenges in hosting critical applications outside India both from a data security and regulatory perspective can now avail of the OrangeScape and Netmagic solution stack to host their applications within the Indian jurisdiction limits.

Sharad Sanghi, CEO and Founder, Netmagic Solutions said, “At Netmagic, it is our constant endeavor to build a strong cloud ecosystem that enables customers to drive efficiency and respond faster to market dynamics. We are witnessing increased demand from our customers for a state-of-the-art technology platform to migrate existing applications and build newer ones on cloud with ease and reduce complexity drastically. The partnership with OrangeScape enables us to provide a simple, robust and scalable cloud application development platform to our customers.”

Suresh Sambandan, CEO and Founder, OrangeScape said, “OrangeScape has been focused on driving business innovation through simplification of the enterprise application development through its Visual PaaS platform. This partnership with Netmagic reaffirms our commitment to the “Cross Cloud” support, leading to greater flexibility and choice for our customers. We are delighted to have OrangeScape PaaS on top of Netmagic’s next generation cloud infrastructure.

About Netmagic Solutions

Netmagic Solutions is India's leading Managed IT Hosting Services Provider, specializing in Internet Data Center & Managed Hosting, Infrastructure Management, Managed Security, Cloud Computing, Application Hosting, Messaging & Collaboration and Disaster Recovery & Availability Services.

Netmagic Solutions is ISO 27001 and ISO 9001:2008 certified and its processes are designed as per the ITIL framework. Combining world class Internet Data Centers with advanced technology and professional service capabilities, Netmagic Solutions supports mission critical hosted applications for over 1000 enterprises across the globe.

Netmagic's Chennai Datacenter is the only Gold LEED certified datacenter in India by the USGBC in India. Netmagic has 7 carrier neutral Tier III + datacenters located in Mumbai, Bengaluru, Noida (Delhi) and Chennai as well as a virtual data center in the United States with over 2,00,000 sq. ft. floor space. These are equipped with best-in-class infrastructure, services, tools and skilled personnel, giving its customers the option to host their applications in any of these centers. Netmagic is recipient of Frost & Sullivan’s Data Center Service Provider of the Year award for 2010. For more information visit www.netmagicsolutions.com

About OrangeScape