To mark the 120th anniversary of the World's Columbian Exposition in Chicago, The Queen Savang Vadhana Foundation has mounted the "Siam: The Queen And The White City" exhibition at the Chicago History Museum.

Queen Savang Vadhana, the Queen Grandmother.

The event was significant because King Chulalongkorn, Rama V, graciously granted permission to Queen Savang Vadhana, the Queen Consort, to organise an exhibition on Siamese arts and culture in the Woman's Building at the Columbian Exposition.

The exhibition comprised delicate embroidery using silk threads, gold and silver filaments, as well as other items of Siamese arts and culture including preserved food. The expo helped to create an awareness about Siam as being civilised and sophisticated as attested by the level of craftsmanship.

For the queen to direct the organisation of the expo which took place on the other side of the world was an achievement in itself, and involved careful planning, packing, shipping and creative display.

To show her appreciation for the success of the expo, Queen Savang Vadhana presented an album of Siamese photographs to Mrs Potter Palmer (Mrs Bertha Palmer), president of the Board of Lady Managers. The album, with an embroidered cover in the image of lotus flowers and leaves by the queen's own hand and a silver elephant in the corner, was enclosed in a Siamese-designed silver filigree binder and catch crafted by Tiffany & Co. The album was later presented to the Chicago History Museum by descendants of Mrs Palmer, and is currently the highlight of the ongoing exhibition 120 years later.

The Siamese Album, now on display at the Chicago History Museum, with an elaborate cover embroidered by Queen Savang Vadhana and presented to Mrs Potter Palmer.

Concurrent with the Chicago History Museum exhibition is another, albeit on a smaller scale, at the Queen Savang Vadhana Museum, Srapathum Palace.

Titled "Siam _ American: Savang Vadhana", this exhibition attempts to recreate the ongoing Chicago History Museum exhibition for Thai audiences, and also celebrate Queen Savang Vadhana's 150th birthday anniversary and her being named by Unesco as one of the world's great personalities for her contributions to education, applied science (public health), culture, social science and the humanities.

The exhibition board is divided into three segments. The first details the relations between Siam and America since the days of King Rama III and President Andrew Jackson, when the first trade agreement was signed. The board details international relations during the subsequent reigns.

The second board concentrates on the actual World's Columbian Exposition 1893, or Chicago World's Fair 1893, in the Windy City hosted by the US to mark the 400th anniversary of Christopher Columbus "discovering" the New World.

Part three details Siam's participation in the fair under the direction of Queen Savang Vadhana. Among the various handicraft items selected by the queen for display at the fair, 101 items received prizes. Among these, 22 were either crafted by the queen herself, or were items that displayed her insignia.

Although it was not possible to bring the actual embroidered Siamese album given by Queen Savang Vadhana to Mrs Potter Palmer back for display, there is a life-size model of the album, with digital images of the inside pages for the interest of visitors.

Other exhibits include one of the former queen's outfits and shoes, a yan lipao vine betel nut set with beetle wing decorative details displayed alongside modern handicrafts that also highlight the same decorative technique such as HRH Princess Sirindhorn's yan lipao evening bag, to indicate how Queen Savang Vadhana helped to keep the country's artistic heritage alive, a role that has been carried on by Her Majesty the Queen during the present reign.

Most notable are samples of beautiful embroidery, from Queen Savang Vadhana's shoulder sashes to cushion covers with her insignia, well-preserved over the past century. A box of ivory needlepoint tools belonging to the queen is also on display.

Also of interest are pieces of embroidery by various members of the royal family, from Queen Savang Vadhana and The Princess Mother to HRH the late Princess Galyani Vadhana and HRH Princess Maha Chakri Sirindhorn.

In the last instance, there is an actual painting by the princess which became the prototype for the embroidered piece which is still unfinished. Yet it shows how delicate embroidery is very much a favoured craft among the ladies of the royal court then and now.

The exhibition gives an insight into the life and achievements of Queen Savang Vadhana, and will be on display until the end of March.