The United States District Court for the District of Oregon is a federal trial court within the Judicial Branch of the federal government. The District's geographic jurisdiction covers an area in excess of 96,000 square miles and encompasses the state of Oregon.

The District Court consists of six district judgeships, three senior district judges, six U.S. magistrate judges, four recalled U.S. magistrate judges, one part-time U.S. magistrate judge, the Office of the Clerk of Court, the U.S. Probation Office, the U.S. Pretrial Services Office, and the Federal Public Defender's Office. The headquarters for the Court are located in Portland with additional staffed offices in Eugene and Medford.

The Clerk's Office, under the direction of the Clerk of Court, serves as the primary administrative office for the District and employs a staff of approximately 66 deputy clerks. The Clerk's Office is responsible for a wide variety of administrative functions including case administration, courtroom and juror services, record management, appeals processing, human resources and development, budgetary and financial operations, space and facilities management, information and audio-visual technology, property management, and procurement.

The Probation Office has a total staff of 65 employees, including probation officers, administrative staff, and clerical support positions. The mission of the U.S. Probation Office for the District of Oregon is to promote justice, reduce risk to the community, and provide opportunities for positive change. This mission provides a roadmap for work with clients, the Court, and partners in the community. The Probation Office has employees in the following cities: Portland, Medford, Salem, and Eugene.

The Pretrial Services Office has a total staff of 22 employees, including pretrial services officers, administrative staff, and clerical support positions. The U.S. Pretrial Services system carries out probation and pretrial services functions in the district court. Through its officers and other employees, the system works to make the criminal justice process effective and the public safe. The Pretrial Services Office has employees in Portland, Eugene, and Medford.

If you are relying on your education to meet qualification requirements:

Education must be accredited by an accrediting institution recognized by the U.S. Department of Education in order for it to be credited towards qualifications. Therefore, provide only the attendance and/or degrees from schools accredited by accrediting institutions recognized by the U.S. Department of Education.

Failure to provide all of the required information as stated in this vacancy announcement may result in an ineligible rating or may affect the overall rating.