We were extremely disappointed with our takeout order of three large pizzas tonight. It’s hard to believe that a pizza could be tasteless, but somehow they accomplished this goal. We understand that it’s fast food so we weren’t expecting a gourmet meal, but we should’ve…have received something that resembled food. Instead, it was 95% dough with so few toppings and cheese that we ended up eating the top layer and throwing out the bottom. Maybe they forgot to put sauce on the dough? We do not recommend this pizza 73 location – it was absolutely horrible.

Absolutely atrocious customer service. I ordered 3 pizzas for take-out at 5:50pm. When I got them home I realized that the 2-pizza box had only 1 pizza in it. Called customer services, asked them to deliver the 3rd. It finally arrived at 7:40. When I…asked the driver to speak to the manager, I was told there was no manager that day (?!?!?!? not possible). So I called customer service again. They offered me $5 off my next order, and promised a phone call from the manager. I have not yet received a phone call. I would have needed at least the price of the missing pizza to ever order from them again. The pizza was passable – standard pizza as you’d expect from any large chain – but the 4 kids who were waiting for pizza were hungry, and the apology was abysmal.

Last time I order from there ever. I had the pleasure of one of the staff there load my wings with their bare hands – pretty average effort for cleanliness and general hygiene standards. If you want to take a chance and see how they…do with what seems to be a total disregard for just basic hygiene needs …. you should eat here… To their credit they did replace my wing order when I confronted them…. but it shouldn’t be like that. Space should be replaced by a joint the neighbourhood can be proud of… not one where you have to watch how they serve food.

I ordered takeout from them on Tuesday of last week, I got so brutally ill from food poisoning I would be puking every 10 minutes for 9 hours straight nearly having to go to the hospital to be put on iv, I was that dehydrated….People that handle food like this shouldn’t be allowed to own a restaurant I do not recommend going at all!More