Except more expensive

Lindsay Douglas

Web Editor

Pizza 73 is meant to be a cheaper option when you’re looking to eat a meal of cheese and grease — less pricey than Pizza Hut but with slightly more substance than Little Caesars. I’ve had a lot of Pizza 73 in my time and for the most part it’s been totally satisfying.

Unfortunately, my visit to the new Pizza 73 in Herb ‘n Market at Mount Royal University lacked everything that makes Pizza 73 great.

For my meal I got a slice of Hawaiian, some curly fries, three boneless wings and a Dr. Pepper. This cost over $13! To put that into perspective, you can get a roast beef lunch with gravy and veggies for $8.99.

On the Pizza 73 website, you can order a large Hawaiian (or other two-topping) pizza and a 1L bottle of coke for $14.99. You can also get 2-for-1 pizza. That’s buy one pizza, get the second free.

None of these deals are available via the Herb ‘n Market location. Why this pizza is so expensive is beyond me, but it makes it just another unaffordable option for most of the on-a-budget students here at MRU.

With the benefit of a low price being gone, the success of this pizza rests in the taste. Pizza 73 was never the greatest pizza, but it was especially disappointing this time around.

The pizza tasted as though it had been sitting out, which it probably had been, but I bought it right at noon so you would think if there was a time to get fresh pizza, that would be it. It was worse quality than other Pizza 73 I have had, so I was basically paying more money for crappier pizza.

The wings and curly fries begged for dip, which I had unfortunately decided not splurge on seeing as I had already gone way over my pizza budget. Therefore they were passable, better than the pizza, but still nothing special.

In the end the meal left me feeling regret, dissatisfaction and a little bit sick. Not to mention 13 bucks poorer. I got that feeling when you know you have put nothing but bad things into your body, and you didn’t even enjoy it, which just makes it worse. If I’m going to eat unhealthy, I should at least feel a sick sense of pleasure as I cram the greasy mess down my throat hole.

If you are a fan of Pizza 73, save yourself from utter disappointment and get it delivered to the school, or, hey, there’s always Vanelli’s.