TORONTO, ONTARIO--(Marketwired - Feb. 3, 2015) -

Editors Note: A photo for this release will be available on the Canadian Press picture wire via Marketwired.

Pizza Pizza Limited, parent company to Pizza Pizza and Pizza 73, has wrapped up its annual Slices for Smiles campaign for 2014 and has announced a milestone donation of $375,000 to Children's Miracle Network and its 14 member hospitals across Canada.

Throughout the year, the two brands contributed a portion of proceeds from popular menu items towards Slices for Smiles, which included pepperoni smile pizzas and walk-in specials. Funds were also raised through in-store events, organized with Children's Miracle Network member hospitals, patient ambassadors and local celebrity personalities, with donations collected in store, online, by phone and through the company's mobile ordering apps.

"We couldn't be happier with results of this campaign," said Pat Finelli, Chief Marketing Officer for Pizza Pizza and Pizza 73. "We continue to set the bar higher by exceeding our goals and raising more money year after year. It's amazing to see our partners, customers and team members come together to help put smiles on the faces of so many children. We're thankful for their continued support of this fundraiser."

Since the campaign's inception in 2008, Pizza Pizza Limited has raised over $1.65 million to help save and improve the lives of children in communities across Canada. All funds raised locally stay within the community and are directed to the local Children's Miracle Network member hospital for that region.

"We're thrilled by the generous support of Pizza Pizza and Pizza 73 team, their loyal customers and the enthusiasm behind the Slices for Smiles campaign," said John Hartman, Chief Operating Officer of Children's Miracle Network. "This program gives customers the opportunity to make a big impact on local children in need through its network locations across Canada."

Each day, there are over 4,900 children who receive medical care from Children's Miracle Network member hospitals across Canada. This donation will help fund critical services, leading-edge research, purchase new equipment and pay for uncompensated care.

Pizza Pizza and Pizza 73 plan to build on the success of their 2014 initiatives and will continue with Slices for Smiles campaigns in April and October this year.

About Children's Miracle Network

Children's Miracle Network® raises funds for 170 children's hospitals, 14 of which are in Canada. These hospitals, in turn, use the money where it's needed the most. When a donation is given, it stays in the community, ensuring that every dollar is helping local kids. These donations have support critical research, purchase life-saving equipment, and ensure excellence in care, all in support of our mission to save and improve the lives of as many children as possible. Learn more at ChildrensMiracleNetwork.ca.

About Pizza Pizza Limited