Learn how energy is transfered from one object to another in this newton’s cradle activity. For this physics experiments for kids, you will make a newton’s pendulum to explore how what happens when two objects colide. This newton cradle project is fun for all ages from preschool, pre-k, kindergarten, first grade, 2nd grade, 3rd grade, and 4th grade students. With a few simple materials I will show you how to make a newton’s cradle; this is a SUPER cool and easy science experiment.

Newton’s Cradle

A Newton’s Cradle is a classic physics demonstration that is frequently seen in science museums or as a desk decoration. This Newton’s cradle project demonstrates the conservation of energy and momentum when the balls collide. While the idea of doing a physics science project with your kids probably sounds super complicated, don’t worry – it’s not! This simple newton’s pendulum uses common objects to replicate this cradle of energy and observe how energy is transfered from one object to another. Try this how to make a Newton’s Cradle with preschoolers, kindergartners, grade 1, grade 2, grade 3, and grade 4 students.

How to Make a Newton’s Cradle

All you need to try this physics experiment are a few simple materials including:

5 bouncy balls

5 pushpins

thread

4 identical bottles at least 8″ tall

4 bamboo skewers

ruler

tape

Newtons Cradle Project

Carefully stick a pushpin into each of the bouncy balls. Now cut FIVE 17-inch long pieces of thread. Tie the center of one thread around the pushpin in the bouncy ball. Repeat with all 5 bouncy balls.

Newton cradle pendulum

Make sure all bottles are filled with liquid and have their cap securely in place. Place bottles at four corners of a rectangle that is 6 inches wide and 10 inches long. Set bamboo skewers across the bottles to form a rectangle. The shorter side wil have some of the stick hanging off on both ends. Now tape the skewers to the lids of the bottles to hod them in place.

Swinging balls pendulum

Tie the ends of the bouncy ball’s thread on opposite long side skewers makign sure that each ball hangs at the exact same heigh all in a row.

Easy Science Experiments

They should all hang so they are almost touching and as low as possible. Add tape to the stick to ensure that each string doens’t slide around.

Newton’s Pendulum

Now it’s time to try your Newtons Cradle! Carefully pull back one ball from one end and let it go.

Fun Physics Experiments

Watch the ball on the other end fly out!

Physics Experiments for Kids

Now try pulling back two balls and see how many balls fly out the other side.

Newton’s Third Law

His third law states that for every action (force) in nature there is an equal and opposite reaction. If object A exerts a force on object B, object B also exerts an equal and opposite force on object A.

Newton’s cradle explanation

Whenever two objects collide the total amount of kinetic energy stays the same. How much energy depends on the objects mass and the speed at which the items collide. So if the fast- moving object hits another object of the same mass that is sititng still, the momentum (movement) is transferred from the fast object to the still object. If the collision is statice, energy is not lost to friction, the still object will move at the same speed as the fast object and will not stop. In Newton’s cradle all the balls have the same mass and the hard rubber makes for a mostly elastic collision.

Want to take it a step farther? What if you tried using ping pong balls which are lighter than the bouncy balls. Would it still work the same?

Fun Science Experiments for Kids

Looking for more outdoor activities for kids and things to do in the summer? Your toddler, preschool, pre k, kindergarten, and elementary age kids will love these fun ideas to keep them busy all summer long:

Marshmallow Shooters – go over 30 feet!

Amazing Lemon Volcano Experiment for Kids

2 ingredient Easy Slime Recipe

How to Make a Simple Newton’s Cradle Science Experiment

Watermelon Volcano Experiment – Summer Activity for Preschoolers

Super Simple Sand Slime

EPIC Mentos and Soda Experiment

How to Make a Lava Lamp – it’s super EASY!

Kids will no nuts over this simple Pop Rock Experiment

Easy Button Crafts for Kids

Handprint Strawberry Craft for Summer

Grow Your Own Crystals

Water Balloon Experiment – exploring densit with an EPIC summer activity for kids

Amazing Bubble Painting

Mind Blowing Color Changing Playdough

Summer Activities for Kids

Egg Shell DIY Chia Pet Craft – Silly Spring / Summer Activities for Kids

Grass Head Craft for Kids

Human Heart for Kids: 2 Fun Heart Models plus Worksheets

EASY Stained Glass Pasta Art for Kids

Simple Flower Mason Jar Lid Crafts

Free Beach Worksheets for Kids

Chromatography Butterflies – EASY Butterfly Craft for Kids

Silly Bandaid Art Craft for kids

Blow GIANT bubbles with this Homemade Bubble Solution

Outrageously FUN Bubble Painting

Bleeding Tissue Paper Fireworks Craft

Fun to play with Ocean Slime

Beautiful Flower Suncatcher Craft

30 Fun June Crafts for Kids

Kids will be amazed at the l-o-n-g colorful bubble snakes they can make with this easy activity

Must try Lego Zipline

Exploding Watermelon Science Experiment

Homemade Chalk Recipe

75+ FUN Scavenger Hunts for Kids

Find activities by month with our June Crafts for kids or our June Activities for Kids!

20+ Printable Roadtrip Games

Fun Summer Activities for Kids