Nick Name: DJ Timmy

Born: March 10, 1972 in Norfolk, VA

Genre: Rap

Styles: Pop-Rap, Contemporary R&B, Pop

Also Known As: DJ Timmy Tim, Timar, Timbo, Timothy Mosley, Timothy Zachary Mosley

Timbaland Age: 50 Years

Height: 5’7″ (170 cm)

Active: 1990s – 2020s

Member Of: Timbaland & Magoo

Founder/Co-Founder: Mosley Music Group

Timbaland Net Worth: $85 million

Timbaland Ex Wife: Monique Idlett (M. 2008 – 2013)

Father: Garland Mosley

Mother: Latrice Mosley

Siblings: Sebastian

Children: Demetrius Mosley, Frankie Mosley, Reign Mosley

Timbaland was born on 1972, 10th of march in Norfolk in the state of Virginia, United States. He is an American hip-hop Producer, Singer, Songwriter, Rapper, DJ, and Musician. His real name is Timothy Mosley. He is known for his song composition and vocal abilities. He has been liable for countless hit songs and collections for a scope of artists, principally in the metropolitan pop genre.

American producer Timbaland climbed to the highest point of the pop business in the late ’90s, amazingly adjusting his sought-after hitmaking capacities with his shocking creation style. At that point, few rap producers were able to do such a balance between business and craft.

Timbaland Complete Bio & Career

Timothy Zachery Mosley a.k.a. Timbaland took interest in music during his -teenage. While still in secondary school, he used to play in a band called ‘surrounded By Idiots’ with rapper Magoo and Pharrell Williams, who later helped to establish ‘The Neptunes’. As a fourteen-year old kid, Timothy took in the specialty of DJing, while being partially paralyzed after an accident. He graduated from Salem High School in Virginia Beach, Virginia. Timothy, in his adolescence, was encircled by numerous talented people who later became well known. One of them was Missy Elliot, who was in the group named Sista in the mid-90s.

Missy Elliot and her R&B bunch Sista assumed a significant part in Timothy’s career. Elliot brought both Timothy and Magoo with her to New York, where they chipped away at Swing Mob’s record name with Sista. Timothy took different jobs as author, entertainer, and producer. While he was working on the collection, “The Show, the After Party, the Hotel” he was named Timbaland.

In 1996, not long after Timbaland began spreading out, he stumbled upon the opportunity of a lifetime as a producer with Ginuwine’s debut collection “Ginuwine..the Bachelor” and Aaliyah’s second album “One out of many”. He got a ton of acknowledgment for his way of applying hip hop music to R&B, by bringing both hip hop and R&B production closer. As the time of the 1990s was grinding away’s fag end, he turned out to be very renowned with his creations like Elliot’s “Supa Dupa Fly” and “Da Real World”, and his introduction album “Welcome to Our World” and began working with high profile hip-hop artists including Jay-Z, UGK, and Usher.

In the year 2006, he established his own record band called Mosley Music Group (MMG). The name quickly struck instant gold with Nelly Furtado’s popular album “Loose”, and Timbaland got to produce Justin Timberlake’s second independent collection “Future Sex/Love Sounds”. The two of them worked together again for two “20/20 Experience albums”, both delivered in 2013. Up to this point, he has won 4 Grammy Awards in R&B and dance categories.

Timbaland Popular Video

Timbaland Family, Relatives and Other Relations

Timbaland’s parents’ names were Garland Mosley and Latrice Mosley. He has a sibling named Sebastian. He wedded Monique Idlett in 2008, and they had a little girl together named Reign Mosley. In 2013, they finished their marriage in the wake of being together for a long time.

Conclusion