Timothy Zachary Mosley, better known as Timbaland, is an award winning producer, writer, DJ, and songwriter, born on March 10, 1970 in Norfolk, Virginia. Timothy is the son of Latrice and Garkland Mosley, with 2 other siblings: Sebastian and Courtney. At 14 years old, Mosley was “accidentally” shot at his job at Red Lobster by a coworker, leaving him partially paralyzed for 9 months. During the 9 months, Mosley started to learn about Dj-ing and also learned to write with his left hand. Attending and graduating from Salem High School in Virginia Beach, Mosley began his Dj career under the name of “Dj Tim” or “Dj Timmy Tim”. At 19 he began to learn more about studio equipment and producing music under DeVante Swing, who then mispronounced the shoe ‘Timberlands’ which inspired Mosley’s stage name.

It cannot be stressed enough just how TALENTED Timbaland is. Having worked with names such as Jay-Z, Justin Timberlake, Madonna, Drake, Kanye West, Elton John and so many other stars, Timbaland is a sought out producer. In 2006, Timbaland founded Mosley Music Group, signing artists such as Nelly Furtado, OneRepublic, and Keri Hilson along with himself being uner the label. The first album to be released under the label was Nelly Furtado’s Loose, that went on to be certified Platinum. Following Furtado’s release, Timbaland dropped his own Shock Wave, after was OneRepublic debut of Dreaming out Loud, which had “Apologize” on Billboard at #2. Former artsist include Tink, Lyrica Anderson, Omarion, Chris Cornell, and Soul Diggaz. Having a net worth $85 million, Timbaland still remains a relevant rapper to this day. As of recent times, Timbaland has made way in other endeavors other than producing. In 2016 Timbaland along with Andy Rubin, an engineer, got along with SubPac, a startup that has developed wearable device that dives into physical-sound technology. Timbo had also worked on a variety of other projects, not just straight forward albums. Timbaland had wored with Rockstar Games to produce Beaterator, a music mixing game that on Playstaion, and iOS.

I deserve to not take the final for a number of reasons. First, I have absolute perfect attendance. I, Lauren Smith, have been in class every Monday, Wednesday, and Friday, including online with the occasional livestreams. This attendance is important because it shows just how seriously I take my education, and I how I value your time as well. Secondly, I feel that I have thoroughly posted quality, and aesthetically pleasing content to the Black Music Scholar website. Lastly, I deserve to not take the final because I am more often than not an active participant in class discussions, proving that I have actually absorbed the information provided. With all of this being said, I hope you thoroughly consider me to not take the final. Thank you.