AKA Timothy Mosley

Born: 10-Mar-1971

Birthplace: Norfolk, VA

Gender: Male

Race or Ethnicity: Black

Sexual orientation: Straight

Occupation: Music Producer, Rapper

Nationality: United States

Executive summary: Innovative rap producer and performer

Now one of the top producers in the rap department, Timbaland (born Tim Mosley) first began articulating his science in his native Virginia during the 1980s. Much of this early work was done with fellow Virginian Magoo, with whom he continues to work despite becoming such a big shot. His first significant break into the music business came with his contribution to a pair of albums by swingbeat band Jodeci: Diary of a Mad Band and The Show, The After-Party, The Hotel. Seeking to consolidate his position, in the mid-1990s both he and Magoo had founded the rap production collective Da Bassment with other artists such as Ginuwine and Missy Elliott; the group first saw gold in 1996 when they produced the track Love You Down for the soundtrack to the film The Nutty Professor. However, it was his work that same year on the second album by singer Aaliyah that fully established his credibility and brought the rap world a-begging at his door on bended knee.

Following his success with Aaliyah, Timbaland quickly moved on to work his voodoo on some of his Bassment buddies, writing and producing the popular single Pony for Ginuwine before undertaking duties for Missy Elliott's debut record Supa Dupa Fly. This would be the start of a particularly fruitful musical relationship, and Ms. Elliott and Timbaland have continued work magic together on both their own and other artists' projects ever since. In 1997 the first duo record with Magoo, Welcome To Our World, was released, moving the producer further out of the studio and into the limelight. His reputation as a performer in his on right would be clinched the following year with his solo release Tim's Bio: From the Motion Picture: Life From the Bassment.

Demand for his production skills through the remainder of the 90s and the start of the 00s has remained steadfast; in addition to his contribution to all of the subsequent albums by Missy Elliott, he has continued to build up a catalogue of work with R&B and rap artists including Jay-Z, Tweet, Ms. Jade, and Ludacris, amongst numerous others. Several popular soundtrack albums also carry his fingerprints, such as Moulin Rouge and Dr. Doolittle. He has established his own record label, Beat Club, which provides yet another outlet for his studio wizardry.

Wife: Monique Idlett (publicist, m. 10-Jun-2008, one daughter)

Daughter: Reign

Timbaland and Magoo Vocalist/Producer (1997-present)

Surrounded By Idiots

Missy Elliott

Timbaland

FILMOGRAPHY AS ACTOR

Fade to Black (5-Nov-2004) · Himself

Official Website:

http://www.timbalandmusic.com/

New!

NNDB MAPPER Create a map starting with Timbaland

Requires Flash 7+ and Javascript.

Do you know something we don't?

Submit a correction or make a comment about this profile