The Indian bungalow where George Orwell was born more than a century ago has come under threat in an unlikely showdown between literary enthusiasts, government developers and die-hard Gandhians.

Orwell – real name Eric Arthur Blair – spent the first year of his life in a small compound in Motihari, modern day Bihar, while his father Richard worked as an opium agent for the British colonial government, overseeing poppy growers and preparing the drug for export to China.

The very same town 14 years later became the crucible for Mahatma Gandhi’s resistance to British rule, as the freedom fighter launched his first "satyagraha" movement here to support local farmers forced to grow opium for the factory that employed Orwell’s father.

Competing bids to honour each of the town’s remarkable heritages have clashed occasionally over the years, but were thought to have been settled in 2010 when the state government earmarked half of Orwell’s former colonial compound for an “Orwell Park” and the neighbouring plot to commemorate the independence movement.

However, a local society for protecting Orwell’s legacy now claim that developers backed by local municipal officials are attempting to secretly and illegally expand the “rival” Gandhian plot – known as Satyagraha Park – ironically, straight onto the birthplace of one of the last century’s greatest anti-imperialist writers.

“Most people in Motihari now know he was a great writer. Maybe few have actually gone through his writing, but most people know who he was and about his famous books.

“But these developers have no knowledge of him. It is a few people with vested interests. They just want to gain monetary profit.”

The alleged encroachment came to light last Saturday, as Mr Mookherjee’s George Orwell Commemorative Committee gathered at the site to mark the writer’s 113th birthday.

They noticed that construction for a parking lot and a new boundary wall had begun on the 12,000 square feet area set aside to conserve Orwell’s legacy, and notified the authorities.

On Wednesday, the district magistrate stepped in to halt the expansion of the Gandhi park, and ordered an inquiry be called into the matter.

The latest row follows protests here in 2014 when construction of Satyagraha Park was temporarily halted to prioritise the Orwell renovation.

"Gandhian sites like Satyagraha Park should be developed first. Discrimination with Gandhi would not be tolerated," protester Braj Kishore Singh told reporters at the time .

Another demonstrator, Mamta Rani Verma, claimed that Orwell had "made no contribution to India".

Orwell’s family in fact returned to England just a year after his birth in Motihari, and he never returned to live in India.

But the Motihari house lay neglected for decades until a visit in 1983 by Scottish journalist Ian Jack, who was tracing Orwell’s roots for an article to be published in the following, symbolically significant year.

In the subsequent article, Jack claimed not a single person in the town had been aware of the great writer’s local roots.

Today, the house has been finally renovated into a museum which state officials hope will become a pilgrimage site similar to Shakespeare’s Stratford-upon-Avon or Tolstoy’s Yasnaya Polyana.

Mr Mookherjee says the town is already becoming a hub of Orwell-related activity, including a national seminar on the author to be held in September.

“People from all across the literary world are all supportive of Orwell’s legacy and are coming together here to ensure his birthplace is protected as a heritage site,” he said.

They may do well to skip Orwell's 1949 "Reflections on Gandhi", in which the writer admits he has an "aesthetic distaste" for the Gandhi, for whom he has "never been able to feel much liking".

Orwell added: " No doubt alcohol, tobacco, and so forth, are things that a saint must avoid; but sainthood is also a thing that human beings must avoid."