Harmoni Everett is a Canadian producer and actress best known for her role in Breaking News, The Outer Limits, and Welcome to Paradox. But who’s Harmoni Everett behind the fame? Let’s see about her particular life, education, family, career, connections, net worth and much further.

Personal information

Born in Lauren Invermere, Canada Harmoni Everett is a producer, actress and is in the entertainment industry for over 15 year. She is born in Christian family and is Canadian by nationality. Her Zodiac sign is Gemini. Harmoni has no Wikipedia but if you are interested in her information you can visit her IMDB profile. Her IMDB is filled with her movie and achievements. We will update this blog as soon as we get more information.

Physical appearance

5 feet 5 inches tall American entertainer has very beautiful black eyes and brown hairs. Her body measurements are currently unavailable. Her shoes size and dress size is not known. She weight about 54 kg. Her bra size is not known.

Education

Harmoni Everett has completed her high school from her home town. Furthermore she completed her graduation from a local private university and started her career as an actress in Hollywood movie industry. There is no information about her educational qualification available online. We will update as soon as we get more information.

Family

Harmoni Everett is very secretive about her family members and there is no information available about her family members. She is born in Christian family and is Canadian by nationality. We will update this blog as soon as we get more information about her personal life.

Relationship status

She met Kerr Smith in a movie in Vancouver in 2000 and the duo fell in love. Furthermore they married in Palm Springs in 2003. Unfortunately due to personal reasons they divorced in 2009. Currently Harmoni Everett is single and have no kids. We will update this blog as soon as we get more information.

Career

She startled out in visitor gaping roles on TV shows like Breaking News, The outward Limits and Welcome to Paradox. Harmoni similarly held a part in Universal’s blockbuster movie Josie and the Pussycats (2001). Abiding in Los Angeles since 2003, Harmoni has continued playing and most lately executive produced and starred in her first point film The Truth About You (2014). That same time she was Associate Producer on Battle Scars (2015), a moving and transformative independent movie authored and directed by Danny Buday. Harmoni is correspondingly committed to contributing her time to charities that encourage her. She can be found feeding the homeless and vets at the Veterans clinic on special breaks, advancing her photography experience to Children Mending Hearts Charity. She met Kerr Smith in a movie in Vancouver in 2000 and the duo fell in love. Furthermore they married in Palm Springs in 2003. Unfortunately due to personal reasons they divorced in 2009. She continues to observe creativity by shooting her own short flicks and sketches.

Net worth

Her estimated net worth is approximately $112 Million. Her monthly salary is not known.

Favorite

Social media accounts

She’s veritably active on her social media particularly on her Instagram account. .

Frequently asked questions

1. Who is Harmoni Everett?

Born in Lauren Invermere, Canada Harmoni Everett is a producer, actress and is in the entertainment industry for over 15 year. She is born in Christian family and is Canadian by nationality.

2. How old is Harmoni Everett?

There is no information about her age and birthday available online. We will update as soon as we get more information.

3. Is Harmoni Everett married?

She met Kerr Smith in a movie in Vancouver in 2000 and the duo fell in love. Furthermore they married in Palm Springs in 2003. Unfortunately due to personal reasons they divorced in 2009.

4. How tall is Harmoni Everett?

5 feet 5 inches tall American entertainer has very beautiful black eyes and brown hairs.

5. How much is Harmoni Everett net worth?

Her estimated net worth is approximately $112 Million. Her monthly salary is not known.

6. Do Harmoni Everett smoke?

Not known. We will update as soon as we get more information.

7. Who is Harmoni Everett husband?

Kerr Smith is her ex husband. Currently she is single.