Assembly Speaker Perry B. Duryea and the Assembly Republican Majority leader, John E. Kingston, were indicted yesterday by a Manhattan grand jury investigating an alleged Republican vote‐siphoning scheme.

Governor Rockefeller and Lieut. Gov. Malcolm Wilson immediately rallied to Mr. Duryea's support.

Republican politicians, lawyers and sources close to the investigation said that six persons had been indicted on charges of having violated at least two sections of the election law dealing with conspiracy and improper identification of campaign literature.

Other targets of the grand jury investigation, said to be focused on a group of Mr. Duryea's staff members, were Assemblyman Alfred A. Delli Bovi of Queens; James Threatte, the Speaker's director of communications; Henry A. Mund Jr., his executive assistant, and I. Lynn Mueller, special assistant to the Speaker.

How Scheme Worked

The investigation has centered on an alleged scheme for Republicans to support Liberal Party candidates secretly in order to drain off votes that might otherwise go to Democrats in marginal Assembly, districts throughout the state.

A spokesman for Mr. Duryea acknowledged the indictment and said that the Speaker had “never individually or in concert with others participated in an effort to commit any violation of the election law.”

It was learned that Harold L. Fisher, a Brooklyn Democrat and a member of the Metropolitan Tranportation Authority, would be one of Mr. Duryea's lawyers.

Mr. Fisher, who is also an election law expert, said that the Speaker would seek “immediate disposition” of the case and was “confident of full and total exoneration.”

Edwin M. Schwenk, Suffolk County Republican leader, issued a statement in Mr. Duryea's defense as did Geyernor Rockefeller and Lieutenant Governor Wilson.

Mr. Duryea, who Is the state's most powerful legislative leader, has been considered a strong contender for the Republican gubernatorial nomination next year, with Mr. Wilson as his chief opponent.

Mr. Schwenk, who is from Mr. Duryea's home county, said in his statement:

“I urge these charges against him be processed immediately so that Mr. Duryea's absolute innocence can be established and his service to all the people of New York State can continue unhindered.

“I have known Perry Duryea all of my life and can testify to his high standards of integrity and conduct.”

Kenneth Conboy, the assistant, district attorney who has directed the investigation before the grand jury, refused to comment on the report that Mr. Duryea had been indicted.

But sources close to the investigation said that sealed indictments had been filed with State Supreme Court Justice Jawn A. Sandifer in connection with the case early yesterday afternoon.

The grand‐jury foreman, Richard Brockway, submitted what was referred to in court as “certain papers” to Justice Sandifer earlier yesterday, and Mr. Conboy then asked that the papers be sealed until 9:30 this morning. Sources close to the investigation said that the pawere the indictments.

Marginal Districts

The indictment would jeopardize Mr. Duryea's political career—not only as a governorship prospect but also as the Speaker, the third most powerful Republican in the state, behind Mr. Rockefeller and Mr. Wilson.

One high‐ranking Republican said a Duryea indictment could “clear the decks” for Mr. Wilson's unchallenged nomination for a full term es Governor next year. At the least, even if Mr. Duryea were exonerated, he would have to spend the crucial next few months preparing to defend himself rather than attempting to corral support for a challenge of Mr. Wilson.

His removal as Speaker would give Mr. Wilson, as the new Governor, a chance to put in that vital post a Republican who is friendly to him and his programs.

Extent of Power

The Speaker, who is elected by the Assembly, and the majority leader, who is in effect designated by the Speaker, together control a $5‐million payroll of close to 1,200 people.

Governor Rockefeller and Lieutenant Governor Wilson said in a joint statement that they had “complete confidence” in Mr. Duryea. They emphasized that “a man is innocent until proven guilty.”

The statement, which the Governor's office said was a response to news inquiries, was issued at 6:30 P.M., several hours after Speaker Duryea had visited the two men at Mr. Rockefeller's office at 22 West 55th Street. The Governor's spokesman said that as far as he knew, the hour‐long meeting was concerned solely with the transition by Mr. Wilson as new Governor.

The Rockefeller‐Wilson statement fellows:

“We have known Speaker Perry B. Duryea and Majority Leader John E. Kingston for nany years as dedicated and nitstanding public servants and nen of the utmost integrity and toner.

“Because of our complete confidence in our justice system, based on the principle hat a man is innocent until proven guilty, and because of our complete confidence in the Speaker and the majority leader, our faith in both remains unshaken.”

One of the key figures involved in the alleged votesiphoning scheme was Harold J. Relkin, a part‐time employe of the Speaker's office, who formed the Action Committee for the Liberal Party.

The alleged scheme first came to light after leaflets in the name of the committee and Mr. Relkin began to circulate in several State Assembly districts last fall.

In one of these, the 13th in Nassau County, Assemblyman Stanley Harwood, a Democrat, said he had found his voting record misrepresented. He lost in the election to the Republican, Milton M. Jonas, by 251 votes out of 57,000 ballots cast. The Liberal candidate, Frank S. DiPaola, received 918 votes.

Complaints by Mr. Harwood and other Democrats brought an investigation by State Attorney General Louis J. Lefkowitz.

He and newspapers that pursued the investigation learned that the Action Committee's listed address, 123 Liberty Street, was a vacant lot and that Mr. Relkin, a one‐time Liberal party member actually worked as a $3,882‐a‐year aide in Speaker Duryea's office.

Subsequent investigation, by The New York Times showed that the leaflets had been prepared by a Queens printer, Allen M. Spiro of Park Printing Company, allegedly at the behest of Assemblyman Delli Bovi and Mr. Threatte of the Speaker's office. The mailing labels were also allegedly provided by the Republicans through the office of Assemblyman Kingston.

Last June, the Attorney General's investigation was turned over to the office of the Manhattan District Attorney, Frank S. Hogan.

The grand jury was asked to determine whether Mr. Relkin had obtained his job in the Speaker's office as a result of a political payoff, a reward that would constitute a felony.

In addition it was asked to determine whether several Other sections of the election and penal laws—dealing with misdemeanors involving proper identification of literature, misrepresentation of political affiliation and conspiracy—were violated.

It could not be learned last night what specific charges were contained in the indictments reported yesterday.

It could hot be learned last night what specific charges were contained in the indictments reported yesterday, but sources close to the Investigation and lawyers familiar with the case said that the sections of the election law statutes involved were 457 and 446, which deal wih conspiracy to promote or prevent election and the improper, labeling of campaign literature.

Violations of these statutes constitute misdemeanors.

Mr. Duryea, Mr. Kingston, Mr. Delli Bovi and the Speaker's key aides were unavailable for comment yesterday afternoon as was the Assembly press aide, Robert E. Spearman.

Alfred J. Scotti, the chief assistant Manhattan District Attorney, scheduled a news conference for 10:30 A.M. today. He refused to comment on the case, yesterday afternoon.

Reared in Suffolk

The 52‐year‐old Mr. Duryea was reared in a political family in Montauk, L.I., and he is still known to some of the residents there as Junie. His late father, Perry B. Duryea Sr., served in the State Senate and, founded the thriving lobster ‐ fishing business that the Speaker now heads.

A slender, tall man with a crown of silver hair, Mr. Duryea has served in the State Assembly since 1960 and has been Speaker since 1969.

Like all legislators, he receives a basic salary of $15,000, and as the head of the Assembly, he receives expense allowances, which do not have to be accounted for, totaling $26,000.

The Speaker's power is derived both from his control over a vast amount of patronage and from his power to name all Assembly committee chairmen, who hold virtual control over the bills that emerge from committees.

Mr. Kingston, 48, lives in Westbury, L. I. He has served in the Legislature since 1959. He was designated minority whip in 1967 and 1968 by Mr. Duryea, who was then Minority Leader. Mr. Duryea named him Majority Leader in 1969.

Mr. Mund, a 47‐year‐old businessman and Town Councilman of East Hampton, L. I., served as treasurer of the Republican Assembly Campaign Committee in the 1972 elections. He was defeated in the recent election, and his term on the Town Cowcil expires at the end of the year.

In Mr. Duryea's office, he has been in charge of administrative affairs.

Mr. Mueller, who lives in Old Chatham, N. Y., has served as a coordinator for special program legislation under Mr. Dur yea.

Mr. Delli Bovi, one of the youngest Assemblymen in the state at 27, served as an administrative assistant to former Assemblyman Alfred D. Lerner from 1966 to 1969. He became an assistant to Mr. Duryea in 1969 and won an easy victory in 1971 in the 31st Assembly District in Queens.

Mr. Treatte has headed the 16‐man office of communications under Mr. Duryea. He has been one of the less visible aides in the Speaker's office.

The grand jury investigation, which began In early October, was considered so politically sensitive by prosecutors that they employed unusual caution in shielding grand jury witnesses from the press.

After reporters discovered that some grand jury witnesses had been signing their names on a register at the entrance to the District Attorney's office at 155 Leonard Streets bat practice, was stopped.

Some of the key witnesses were brought up to the grand jury by a side entrance to the Manhattan Men's House of Detention, which is part of the building complex that houses the offices of the District Attorney and the Criminal and State Supreme Courts.

Governor Rockefeller was asked Tuesday, after his announcement that he was resigning whether he thought the inquiry into the vote‐siphoning scheme might hurt the party next year. He replied:

“I don't really think so.”

Did he think anything would come of it?

“That I don't know. It's in Hogan's office, and I just honestly don't know.”

REMEMBER THE NEEDIEST!