In 1960, Perry B. Duryea was a little‐known lobster wholewholesaler at the eastern tip of Long Island.

By the end of the decade, he had become one of the most powerful Republicans in the state and had assembled a political apparatus in Albany and on Long Island that commanded the loyalty, respect and, ink some cases, the fear of powerful men from Buffalo to Montauk.

It was this Long Island political machine, particularly the Duryea organization in Suffolk, that spawned the personalities involved in Wednesday's indictments by a Manhattan grand jury. In the past, Mr. Duryea's organization drew political nourishment and encouragement from its mirror image in neighboring Nassau, an organization initially led by the late State Senator Edward J. Speno, and presided over for the last four years by Assemblyman Joseph M. Margiotta.

The roots go deep into the political past of both Nassau and Suffolk, and explain, in part, the powerful hold that Long Island retains, out of all proportion to its population, in the deliberations in Albany.

Montauk and Brooklyn

Perry Duryea, 52 years old, and Joseph Margiotta, 46, grew up at the opposite ends of Long Island—Mr. Duryea in Montauk, where Perry B. Duryea Sr., his father, a State Senator and for 10 years State Conservation Commissioner under Gov. Thomas E. Dewey, was a Republican power and a wealthy lobsterman; Mr. Margiotta in Brooklyn, where his father was active in Republican politics.

But it was 14 years after he returned from duty in the Navy in World War II before Mr. Duryea was able to assume his father's mantle, running for his first Assembly seat in 1960. And it was not until 1969, when Mr. Speno died suddenly of a heart attack, that Mr. Margiotta was able to take over the apparatus in Nassau County.

However, both men were busy in the years between consolidating their hold and drawing around them the men that were to make them powerful.

Mr. Duryea began first. Putting heavy mileage on his twinengine Piper Comanche, which he frequently pilots himself, he began barnstorming the state shortly after his election to the Assembly, helping out fellow Assemblymen in trouble in close districts and otherwise from Buffalo to New York City.

Ground Is Prepared

In Suffolk itself, he prepared the ground carefully, assuming the leadership first of his home township of East Hampton, where Montauk is situated, then quietly cultivating contacts throughout the county, moving through district caucuses, local Republican club meetings, cocktail parties and receptions.

By 1965, he had acquired enough friends statewide to take on the powerful George L. Ingalls of Binghamton in a fight for the post of minority leader of the 1966 Assembly. And he won. It was the first time since 1937 that an incumbent Republican legislative leader had been deposed.

Two years later, he moved to consolidate his hold in his native Suffolk County, traditionally a Republican bastion, but having recently been torn by scandals, particularly involving land deals among senior county Republican figures. He engineered the ouster of Robert A. Curcio, the long‐time county Republican leader, replacing him with the election of Edwin M. Schwenk, a 44‐year‐old Southampton dairyman and a personal friend since sandlot days in Long Island's East End.

Shortly thereafter, Mr. Duryea's continued statewide campaigning paid off. In 1968, Republicans, assisted by the election of Richard M. Nixon as President, took control of the 150‐member State Assembly, and Mr. Duryea became Speaker.

With the new job went tremendous power — $5‐million worth of patronage jobs, an extensive staff and the wherewithal to engage in heavy campaigning throughout the state that, until then, Mr. Duryea had footed almost entirely on his own.

Mr. Duryea quickly began to gather around him men he could trust—men whose loyalty he could also command. Three of them were among those indicted this week —James Threatte, the Speaker's director of communications; I. Lynn Mueller, special assistant to the Speaker, and Henry A. Mund Jr., his executive assistant, an old friend from East Hampton.

“Perry's a tough guy — he plays the game to win,” Mr. Schwenk observed yesterday in an interview from Republican headquarters at Blue Point, L.I. “He's had to get involved [in campaigning] more than any other Speaker with some of the narrow margins he's had in the Assembly. And he doesn't want to be minority leader. He wants to be Speaker.”

The Nassau Organization

But while Mr. Duryea was consolidating his hold over the state and the Assembly, the late Mr. Speno was consolidating his hold over the Republican organization in neighboring Nassau County.

The Nassau organization was wealthy and had personnel unlike anything assembled by Mr. Duryea and Mr. Schwenk. It had 1,800 loyal county committeemen at the beck and call of Mr. Speno, and it raised and spent at least $1 ‐ million each year — a marked contrast to the Tammany Hall budget in Manhattan of about $45,000.

“The Long Island machine is like Willie Wonka's chocolate factory,” said one close associate of both Mr. Duryea and Mr. Margiotta, the Nassau County chairman. “It's a nice machine; it works perfectly and it's sweet for those who partake.”

In Albany, the Long Island apparatus functioned flawlessly too, as Mr, Margiotta dictated and Mr. Duryea suggested. The delegation from Nassau and Suffolk became in recent years the single most powerful voting Republican bloc in Albany, because its members always voted the same way.

Choice of Kingston

When Mr. Margiotta wanted one of his men to be majority leader of the Assembly, Mr. Duryea appointed John E. Kingston, who many felt would be sufficiently amenable to the many suggestions from the leaders of both Long Island organizations. Mr. Kingston, too, was indicted in connection with the alleged vote siphoning.

However, there is no indication that Mr. Margiotta was even aware of Mr. Kingston's role in the alleged election‐rigging scheme.

“Sure we try to help each other out,” a spokesman for Mr. Margiotta said yesterday, explaining that the “chairman,” as he is known to all his workers, would have little to say about the indictment of Mr. Duryea and Mr. Kingston.

“Perry was a dear and close friend to the organization,” the aide continued. “And we always found that if we can work hand in hand, it's better than fighting with each other. They [Mr. Duryea and Mr. Margiotta] sit down and talk out the problems. There's a lot of communication, and that's what helps.”