do elaborate

Simply a fight over the fact that avex released the name of the K album... apparently to SM the release of the name was "too soon"... too soon translating into a mere two weeks before release. the Japanese market is different in Korean, as in springing news of an album last minute isn't a good idea. The info was taken down off of their official avex website, but the third-party internet stores already had the info.

colloquy you impress me with your knowledge, care to expand on that also? I am sorry if I am being bothersome.

Well I don't know where to begin...

the first thing to understanding it is that Johnny & Associates is a talent agency. Avex is a record label/talent agency with various subsidies. Now, Johnny's owns some record labels - J Storm and Johnny's Entertainment. Tackey & Tsubasa, as somebody points out, is signed onto Avex Trax but Johnny's is in control.

It's tough to say who is more powerful. Avex has more album sales, while JE dominates single sales. I have a feeling that Avex has more profit (I haven't seen JE's reports though )

Highest ranking avex CD's this year so far -

*1 1,459,575 ***,591 EXILE LOVE / EXILE 07/12/12

*3 1,298,132 *55,318 BEST FICTION / Namie Amuro 08/07/30

*4 1,191,385 **1,779 EXILE CATCHY BEST / EXILE 08/03/26

10 *,610,733 ***,*** Kingdom / Koda Kumi 08/01/30

11 *,570,828 **6,045 EXILE ENTERTAINMENT BEST / EXILE 08/07/23

12 *,568,288 ***,*** GUILTY / Ayumi Hamasaki 08/01/01

Highest ranking JE Album CD's so far -

24 *,298,343 **1,234 Dream"A"live / 嵐

28 *,282,402 ***,*** KAT-TUN Ⅲ QUEEN OF PIRATES / KAT-TUN

Highest ranking JE Single sales -

*1 *,559,966 *29,143 truth/風の向こうへ / 嵐 08/08/20

*2 *,505,605 **5,565 One Love / 嵐 08/06/25

*7 *,447,229 ***,*** DON'T U EVER STOP / KAT-TUN 08/05/14

*8 *,421,902 ***,*** LIPS / KAT-TUN 08/02/06

*9 *,374,449 ***,*** Step and Go / 嵐 08/02/20

14 *,291,447 ***,*** 太陽のナミダ / NEWS 08/02/27

16 *,258,465 ***,*** SUMMER TIME / NEWS 08/05/08

19 *,246,228 ***,581 Dreams Come True / Hey! Say! JUMP 08/05/21

21 *,229,094 ***,*** ワッハッハー / 関ジャニ∞ 08/03/12

22 *,206,200 *18,902 Secret Code / KinKi Kids 08/08/27

23 *,201,661 **1,269 Your Seed/冒険ライダー / Hey! Say! JUMP 08/07/23

27 *,173,586 ***,*** 弾丸ファイター / SMAP 07/12/19

29 *,158,837 ***,*** そのまま/White Message / SMAP 08/03/05

31 *,143,599 ***,*** way of life / V6 07/12/12

There's a few avex single CD's at the top between all the JE. But the thing about JE and boybands in general is that they survive declining music markets because the fangirls will forever buy their CD's. The girls in Japan love Johnny's, all ages, just like in korea where all ages seem to like DBSK - believe me. Johnny's and SM might have some emotional ties since they were the two first to debut boybands in Asia in their respective countries.

IMHO, Tohoshinki has the chance of becoming a top boyband. I like the fact that avex is promoting them more than they did at the start, when they realized they had potential. In Japan, they not seen as an idol group - which may be seen as a good or bad thing, I don't know. I think it'd be a crime if they don't get on Kouhaku, they certainly have the name recognition at this point + the sales.

If anyone has anymore questions, shoot them at me. Now I have to go to a 3 hour long Chem lab. =__=; Cya.

Looks like I was a little too late. Some of you have kinda already answered the question. Well, here's my 2 cents.

S.M. Entertainment is a talent agency, producer, and publisher of Korean pop music, founded by Lee Soo-man. Initially, "SM" was an abbreviation of the agency founder's name, but now stands for "Star Museum". Once the home of groups like H.O.T., S.E.S., and Shinhwa, some of its current roster includes BoA and TVXQ. SM Entertainment also co-publishes Avex Trax releases for Japanese artists such as Ayumi Hamasaki, Namie Amuro, and Kumi Koda. SM Entertainment celebrated its ten-year anniversary with a party on February 15, 2006. The company's current CEO is Kim Young-min.

SM Entertainment Japan was established in 2001. SM Entertainment, accompanied by SM Entertainment Japan, is preparing to establish a new headquarters in Beijing, China to compete with the Asian market.[3] SM Entertainment will set up its Asian headquarters in Hong Kong to expand its business in the China market.[4]

Avex Group Holdings Inc. (エイベックス・グループ・ホールディングス株式会社 Eibekkusu Gurūpu Hōrudingusu Kabushiki-gaisha?) is the holding company for a group of entertainment-related subsidiaries based in Japan. The origin of the word Avex comes from the English words Audio Visual Expert.

The company was established in 1988 as "Avex D.D., Inc", a CD wholesaler. They opened a recording studio and created Avex Trax as a music label in 1990. In the same year, they created "Musique Folio Inc.", a music publishing company, which later became "Prime Direction Inc." In 1993, they created a U.S. branch, called "AV Experience America Inc." The year also marked the first of Avex's yearly events. It was held in Tokyo Dome under the name "avex rave '93" and attracted 50,000 attendees. In 1994, they formed two UK subsidiaries, "Rhythm Republic Limited" and "Avex U.K. Limited". Later that year, they opened a disco, claimed on their website to be "the world's largest scale disco" [2].

In 1997, they opened a series of concert halls called "Zepp" along with Sony Music Entertainment Japan. In early 1999, they signed an agreement with Walt Disney Records and Hollywood Records to handle both companies' Japanese CD releases. Later that year "Avex Mode", an animation company, was established.

In 2001, Avex opened "avex artists academy", a music school. In 2002, they released the "CCCD", a type of copy-protected CD. In 2003, they opened a classical music business. In 2004, they began selling Japanese music CDs in South Korea.

Sub-labels

• Avex Entertainment (BeForU, Riyu Kosaka's label)

• Avex Trance

• Avex Mode

• Avex Tune (Da Pump, move's label)

• Avex Globe (Globe's label)

• Cutting Edge (Fantastic Plastic Machine, Back-On, Oblivion Dust and Olivia Lufkin's label)

• Rhythm Republic (Eriko Imai)

• Rhythm Zone (TVXQ, m-flo, Exile, Kumi Koda, Maki Goto's label)

• Riddim Zone (Ryo the Skywalker, Akane's label,)

• Espionage Records (Heartsdales's label)

• Disc Du Soleil

• Mad Pray Records (Anna Tsuchiya's label)

• Motorod Records (Nanase Aikawa, Janne Da Arc's label)

• Love Life Records (hitomi's label)

• Sonic Groove (Hiroko Shimabukuro, Takako Uehara, Hitoe Arakaki)

• Tearbridge Records (Camino, Triplane's label)

• True Song Music (Dai Nagao's label)

• J-More

• Avex International (For International acts like Craig David

Johnny & Associates, Inc. (株式会社ジャニーズ事務所 Kabushikigaisha Janīzu Jimusho?), formed by Johnny Kitagawa in 1963, is a talent agency that trains and promotes groups of male idols in Japan.

After debuting the talents, Johnny's & Associates would then arrange for them to be signed to record labels such as J Storm, Johnny's Entertainment or labels owned by other companies such as Avex Trax. Regardless of the labels the groups are assigned to, the members and their respective groups would still be bound to their talent agency, Johnny's & Associates.

• 1991: SMAP

o Label: Victor Entertainment

o Members: Masahiro Nakai, Takuya Kimura, Tsuyoshi Kusanagi, Goro Inagaki, Shingo Katori

o Former members: Katsuyuki Mori

• 1994: TOKIO

o Label: Universal Music

o Members: Tomoya Nagase, Masahiro Matsuoka, Taichi Kokubun, Tatsuya Yamaguchi, Shigeru Joshima

• 1995: V6

o Label: Avex Trax

o Members of 20th Century: Masayuki Sakamoto, Hiroshi Nagano, Yoshihiko Inohara

o Members of Coming Century: Go Morita, Ken Miyake, Junichi Okada

• 1997: KinKi Kids

o Label: Johnny's Entertainment

o Members: Koichi Domoto, Tsuyoshi Domoto

• 1999: Arashi

o Label: J Storm

o Members: Masaki Aiba, Jun Matsumoto, Kazunari Ninomiya, Satoshi Ohno, Sho Sakurai

• 2002: Tackey & Tsubasa

o Label: Avex Trax

o Members: Hideaki Takizawa, Tsubasa Imai

• 2003: NEWS

o Label: Johnny's Entertainment

o Members: Tomohisa Yamamini coopera, Ryo Nishikido, Keiichiro Koyama, Takahisa Masuda, Shigeaki Kato, Yuya Tegoshi

o Former Members: Hiroki Uchi, Hironori Kusano, Takahiro Moriuchi

• 2006: KAT-TUN

o Label: J-One Records

o Members: Kazuya Kamenashi, Jin Akanishi, Junnosuke Taguchi, Koki Tanaka, Tatsuya Ueda, Yuichi Nakamaru

I did a little investigating on Wikipedia and hopefully this helps answer your question. I quoted some parts of the articles that I thought would put this situation in a better perspective.

It SM and Johnny Entertainment both started out as talent agencies. As the agencies grew they started to form alliances with subsidiaries and of course start their own record and entertainment company.

To simplify things SM, Johnny & Associates Inc, and Avex Group Holdings Inc are separate companies. They do their own business in their respective countries.

Now if you look at the Johnny E artists they have some in Johnny Entertainment, but others in J-One Records, Universal Music, Victor Entertainment, and Avex Trax. As to why aren’t all the artists with Johnny Entertainment I do not know. That is up to the decision of the producers and other head administrators to decide who should be signed to what company.

As for business dealings and relationships-most local music companies probably do not have enough man power or money to be able to go overseas and promote their artists. And even if they did they probably want to research the overseas market and map out opportunities for their artists to succeed. And if that means possibly making a business deal with a big overseas music company to help support your endeavor you do it. In the case of SM they went with Avex. Of course SM’s ultimate goal was to establish a SM Japan.

As to why a Arashi promotion was seen on SM’s own website…the simple answer is "it's just all business"-SM probably as others have stated do some promoting for Johnny E artists in Korea. It doesn't really matter if SM has a deal with Avex in Japan. From what I see is that it seems Johnny E has yet to established their own international firm to handle their artists’ overseas promotions…so they choose SM to help them out. And as another Soompier noticed on Yesasia that Arashi’s overseas Asian albums were being published under Avex Trax. Avex original started out as a CD warehouse. Avex is a very large company and has established several overseas branches that can handle making the CDs overseas so many artists choose them to help with overseas production and promotions of their music.

I pulled out two of my Arashi cds that I bought in Taiwan:

their 2002-2004 Best Ablum 5X5 had this copyright = 2004 J Storm Inc. Manufactured by EMI Taiwan LTD. (so it seems this CD was promoted by EMI Taiwan)

their Arashic Album had this copyright = 2006 J Storm Inc. Manufactured by AVEX Taiwan Inc. (so this CD was promoted by Avex Taiwan)

credit: Wikipedia

I thank you all wholeheartedly for your wonderful insights!

Unfortunately I may have mislead some to think I know less than I do. I understand business, it is just a few points of the relationship of Johnny Entertainment and Avex in terms of SM.

A kind kind member had PMed me with some interesting information regarding Avex. That in fact Avex regardless of their efforts in music, are as a whole losing a lot of money.

http://in.reuters.com/article/asiaCompanyA...6GOG22Q20080516

They lost a lot of money from their movie endeavours I gather. And of course it is from a subsidiary, but the subsidiary company reflects financially on the mother company. (I have not run this by my father, but I think I read the figures correctly and Avex have made a loss. I am not very good with Accounts, please correct me if I am wrong.)

An interesting piece of information I have come across also (from the links of the kind member). The press release for the partnership of SM and Avex...

http://www.avex.co.jp/e_site/press/2004/press040206.html

Here it makes it clear what their relationship used to be and what it became after 2004. SM already established SM Japan in 2001 and had been working with Avex well before they started their headquarters there.

Furthermore, in anticipation of the lifting of the ban on Japanese language CDs in Korea, Avex signed a mutual licensing agreement in November 2000 whereby SM Entertainment would market Avex’s Japanese music CDs in Korea, and Avex would market SM Entertainment’s K-Pop in Japan.

Before that SM and Avex dealt with strictly asia and no japan and korea.

The proposed equity investment is designed to bolster the strategic relationship between our two companies in order to better compete in the Southeast Asian (particularly Chinese) music market. We hope that an even closer working relationship between our two companies will enable us to jointly push forward a more aggressive Southeast Asian strategy.

This is a business partnersip, where SM have given a lot of shares to Avex (5.81% quite a lot if you think about SMs market share in Korea) while in return they used that money to make a Chinese base.

SM Entertainment plans to use the funds procured from the third-party allocation to establish a new artist management company to enter the Chinese market, and to scout and develop new artistic talent.

Since we all know that SM China has a few artists active and seems to be doing relatively well (Suju M, ZLY), this only adds to the wonderment in this move.

That was 2004, and this is 2008. A lot could have happened in the four years that have passed. Avex may no longer have the share-amount mentioned, the money loss with their failed Movie investment (an $80 million historical drama "red cliff" - oh my!). The increasing popularity also of TVXQ in Japan could have made SM think otherwise with their relationship with Avex.

Afterall, now Johnny are making more profit and have their own label. Perhaps the better investment? Also SM has had 7 years to establish more connections now, maybe they do not need Avex so much anymore...

I also looked at what SM did at 2004:

Businesses:

1) Music CD planning and production

2) Manufacturing, sales, and publishing

3) Licensing foreign music

4) Studio recording

5) Artist management

6) Marketing

7) Actor/actress, model, and musician development

Ricegirl1212 made some interesting points that made me scratch my head...

Her Arashi Cds from 2006 state Avex. Arashi use Avex, and now Avex can produce Korean CDs many people have made that point clear. But it clearly states in the press release that SM and Avex have a mutual agreement where their business is in SouthEast Asia and not just Japan and Korea exclusively.

Arashi were promoted by SM before in 2006. SM do marketing so it makes sense. Marketing is advertising something, simply. SM advertising Arashis concerts doesnt mean they put a banner on their Smtown page. What I mean is the portal page that has always been only SM artists. Sm have a seperate section for the "J-Pop Zone", where they put all the Japanese CDs they license. That is where it should be. Not the main page. The main page is for Sm artists, that is what is bothering me. I hope I made that clear. Sorry for my repetitiveness. So since SM have millions of customers (the fans), making them aware through the main page of smtown is an extremely large favour.

Simply a fight over the fact that avex released the name of the K album... apparently to SM the release of the name was "too soon"... too soon translating into a mere two weeks before release. the Japanese market is different in Korean, as in springing news of an album last minute isn't a good idea. The info was taken down off of their official avex website, but the third-party internet stores already had the info.

This hints at not bad communication, but at something intentionally done. Avex knows Korea since they have been working with SM for 4 years, they would know the industry better than all of us, releasing the information early, is plainly...suspicious.

What I mean is, that perhaps the assumptions made in this article, could be hinting at something substantial. If SM and Avex were so close, why are they not playing "fair" like they have always done (whatever fair is in the business world)? If anyone can tell me that SM have advertised on their main portal an artist not under SM, that would be helpful, but as someone that has been following SM for three years, I have never seen it. Do you understand where my problems lie?

I am not saying that it is fact, just that some things make this very interesting. Only time will tell. So "Avex pushed aside for Johnny E?" is quite relevant and credible assumptions in my opinion, regardless of the source.

Thank you so much to those that have contributed, I am very much enjoying this discussion. I sincerely express my gratitude to the utmost degree.

You are extremely kind to answer my questions! I am very interested in this topic and want to look in to it further.

Perhaps, please if you may, provide links to back up your information. I am actually someone who invests money in the Korean Market so I want to know all about this. (Mostly my parents, but nevertheless I handle my accounts).

You are very knowledgable, you have impressed me. I was a little worried with your former post, but you seem like a very good person nonetheless.

-----

This article is very logical. I do not care whether or not the source is unreliable, but the comments themselves hold no ill-favour.

I have read this over and over again to try and understand why people are attacking this article. State your opinion, yes, but just to comment to bash, that is upsetting. A community feel is best, and please innocent until proven guilty. This is my first thread and I am afraid that I have become attached to it. I help run a relatively popular private internet community and no matter the information we take it as it comes, only when there is a need to wag our fingers, do we do that. There is enough ill in the world, let us not have that on our computer screensalso.

Links and such: There are no particular sites that will give this information straight. It is simply taken from research and observation of the market, in terms of who has the biggest market share and what promotions are happening. Again its a collection of observations from charts and such.

Oh. And first hand experience.

---

In regards to my former post and other various posts that seem to have upset you, well...

The reliability of the source is important, important in terms of accuracy and bias.

This source is an ANTI_SNSD site, in other words its committed to bashing and downgrading an SM group.

It obvious from

a) the massive signiture

b ) The username

c) The obvious credit

d) the fact that the account was only made just then

that this user is only trying to blatantly advertise their anti-snsd site

Like you said there is already enough stupidity in this world. We dont want anti sites being spread and advertised in soompi. Im attached to soompi too, ive been here for a while and so have others and you'll know that this forum is for every k-pop artist, there are fans of this group that do not care about the forum itself but find that advertising on soompi is pathetic.

And its obvious that it is biased, its hate for an SM artist is enough to generate hate for the company itself.

So you are saying that SM have control over Avex if they co-publish it? But how does that work? SM don't seem to have that much control over their artists in Japan, in fact up until "purple line", SM had never really shown any input. Unless of course you mean the translated music they produced. You confused me though. If SM co-publish Avex, and Rhythm Zone is a sub label of Avex. Doesnt that mean that Avex is owned by SM?

But then you say that Avex have a large market share in SM... If that is the case what happened to Lee Soo Man? He is the largest shareholder, if Avex had such a high amount in stock, they would have to bid for majority share, correct? You study Business, so remind me please the exact share they must have to bid for majority.

Nope,

This is what i meant:

1. Co-publish, does not mean to own, it means to have a partnership, each company cannot control what the other is doing, they simply work together. They co-operate.

2. SM like i said provides funds. The reason Avex controlled THSK's concepts is because SM's aim was to make DBSK a Japanese artist, with a Japanese style in clothing and music NOT a Korean artist singing in Japanese. Thats why the 'SM' style was not apparant.

3. Purple line was an experiment, to see how the Korean style would be received. TVXQ said so themselves in an interview [gosh, can anyone remember which one??]

Purple line was composed and produced in Korea, it has heavy k-pop features and it was a success, therefore SM have decided to put more imput in the management not just providing the money.

4. Like i said partnership.

Avex is owned by no other company, they work with other companies.

If say SM provides 50% or more of the funds to rhythm zone then it means that the artists under that label (not just THSK but Koda etc aswell) depend mostly on SM for the money to run projects and singles/albums/promotions.

If SM take away that funding and end the partnership and some key artists in that label then where is Rhythm zone meant to get its revenue and funding from?

Avex cannot be powerless, they have a large share in the Jpop industry. You have me very confused here, I am sorry. The Japanese market is much larger than the Korean. Then logically Avex would have more "funds" do they not? If anything, SM loses out to Avex in Japan. Since of course, it is their territory.

I meant that Avex is powerless to SM.

why?

like i said above, Avex is not owned by any other company. They work together with other companies, they even work with JE.

Their other labels are co-publised by other producers/companies aswell.

Yes Avex has their own funds BUT: most of the sublabels are supported by another company, probably more than 60% of any sublabel will get its money from the supporting company. If they (other companies) put in more than 60% then its obvious they get more than 60% of the profit, in comparison Avex doesn't alot, if companies cut off their support then they cannot support their sublabels.

Avex thrive on the support of other companies. SM isnt the only company that has a partnership with them, you'll find if you research various artists (even JE artists) that they were once under an Avex sublabel too.

SM Japan is not up to its full potential yet. They are depending on the new trainees under SM Japan to one day help SMJ so that it may run independently.

gar. hang on. I need to sort my head out so i can explain this clearly.

---

okay. ;

Arashi.

lately they have been promoting in Korea.

SM has always been in charge of promoting Arashi in Korea.

Why? er. JE paid them too?

Why does everyone seem to think that SM are just promoting them out of their own free will????

OFCOURSE there is money involved.

And no, its no big deal or threat.

Why?

Because SM are the biggest in Korea. Promotion of a Japanese band from a rival company will in no way affect their market share or the hold they have in the Korean industry.

Ofcourse JE will pay and ask SM to promote. SM is the biggest and the most popular company=the most exposure.

-

JE does not ignore SM.

The Japanese market is way bigger.

For JE to ignore SM is what any company in the Japanese market would want.

Why?

JE is massive. They, according to some have the power to ask say a tv station or radio broadcast to put one of their bands on instead of one from another company.

JE hasn't done that (well they may, if so i havent researched enough) to SM. They remain on good terms.

SO the deal?

eg:

JE: 'you promote one of my bands and you shall have an equal playing field.. rahrahrah...'

They are still rivals, but rivals can be friendly.

Its better to have powerful allies then powerful enemies.

[small note]

im sorry if i sound rude or exasperated.

ahahaha, i asked my senior to read the article, after reading it she shook her head, laughed and asked if a 14 year old had written it XD

in her words:

"these facts.. theyre just assumptions, theyve gone into one aspect and havent bothered to explore anything else"

from the tone of the article, its just written and accumulated to spread rumours or for fun, its not actually a standard report. They just want to play detective and 'uncover' the dirty side of SM, so that in future they have more to bash SNSD on. Its even implied in the article

And well, if theyre part of and advertise an anti snsd site based on rumours then theyre capable of writing gossip columns such as this.

thats enough motivation for me.

Um in terms of sources, can i just say first hand experience? seriously people, go work under or train under an entertainment company. Its amusing