With a name like Posidonius (c. 135 BCE — c. 51 BCE) you would perhaps expect some maritime dimension to this philosopher’s work. He was a Greek Stoic philosopher, teacher, astronomer, geographer, historian, and scientist.

Originally studying in the Athenian school founded by Panaetius, he then set up his own school in Rhodes which was then a major maritime hub. A crossroads of trade and also of a growing sense of the opportunities which come with the sea.

This position would have likely played a role in shaping one of Posidonius’ most important positions, that of “sympatheia”, a view which assessed the interconnectedness and mutual interdependence between different parts of the universe.

It is the idea that everything in the cosmos is sympathetically linked together in an organic whole. The microcosm (individual things) and macrocosm (universe) influence each other through cosmic sympathy.

For Posidonius, the sea was his thought laboratory and by understading the physical he was able to make the leap to metaphysical. He made studies of tides, calculating the lunar tide cycle. This pioneering work in oceanography helped sailors use tidal patterns to aid maritime navigation.

He observed the star Canopus to determine latitude for navigational purposes, and advocated using astronomy/astrology to guide seafaring. This sense of place was in part a result of having traveled extensively by sea to conduct scientific studies. Records show that Posidonius visited Spain, Gaul, Italy, Sicily, Dalmatia, Greece. He peppered his work with maritime metaphors in his philosophical writings to describe the human condition — expressions such as a voyage of life, fortune’s wind, finding safe harbour.

The sea was a key example of a unified system of all things. Sympatheia literally connected disparate lands and people. The tides exemplified the cosmic sympathy between oceans, earth, and heavens (moon).

Sympatheia was seen as a rational principle that ordered the cosmos. Comprehending it brought one closer to Logos (divine reason). Posidonius felt that by recognising these links between parts of the universe, including himself, humans could attain wisdom.

This kind of wisdom was about a sense of place, of change and recognising the skills and knowledge to navigate them. This was a philosophical view which seemingly reflected the understanding that mariners demonstrated. They had to understand these connections to navigate, and this extended well to understanding human nature.

The sense that sympatheia or cosmic sympathy was central to Stoic perspectives on nature, humanity and wisdom. The key to his thinking was the order and rationality reflected in the cosmos as connected to ethics and virtue. Believed studying nature could reveal wisdom. The sea provided an important tangible example of the unifying principles they philosophised about.

The concept persisted through later Stoics like Seneca and even into Renaissance thought, with the important linkages between the sea, celestial bodies, and human existence all to the fore, and with seafarers and their nautical knowledge being seen as the physical manifestation of philosophical thought and skill.