This is a drum lesson breaking down the rim shot. This is an essential technique that can be used in a number of ways to create interesting effects on the kit.

This is not just for metal drummers trying to be heard over heavy distorted guitars!

But yes that is one role that this technique plays. Using a rim shot does create a loud accent so many drummers use it for their backbeat in order to really cut through. I’m not saying that is a bad use for this technique but if you rely on the rim shot for your backbeat then you might become to dependent on it.

And like anything, if it is used too often then it can become annoying. Therefore I prefer to use this for special effects rather than my default method for playing backbeats.

In fact the most common way I use a rim shot is to play nearer the edge of the drum. This creates a high pitched and lighter sound that mimics a timbale type of sound. So this instantly works well for any Cuban music or Reggae, or really most music from South America or the Caribbean, often umbrellered as ‘Latin music’.

So let’s learn the rim shot technique in the video lesson below.

You might also like to check out the buzz roll technique or the cross stick lesson.

If you want to be the best drummer you can be you should also learn the essential drum rudiments.

By clicking below you can gain access to a FREE ‘Drummer Timing 101’ drum course that will give you the knowledge, tools and exercises that you need to quickly get your timing up to the level it needs to be.

It will provide:

The two main types of timing to master

MP3 backing tracks to practice with and develop great timing

Full sheet music for all exercises

Video demonstrations of every exercise

And more than that you will also get a ton of other great free drum resources to make you a better drummer such as playalong tracks, articles, exclusive video lessons and more. And it’s all free!

Watch the video to get a feel for what the drummer timing 101 course entails and then scroll down to get the course immediately.