El Texanito (Chiapas)

The most complete information about the small village of El Texanito (pictures, maps, statistics, population) on a single page.

Did you know that this town in Chiapas has 26 inhabitants?

The town of El Texanito (Chiapas) belongs to the municipality of Escuintla. There are 26 inhabitants and it is 242 meters altitude. It is the most populated town in the position #97 of the whole municipality.

Last Update: 29.05.2024

Data: In El Texanito, 40% of individuals have completed secondary education and 0% of households have a personal computer, laptop or tablet. More interesting data at the bottom of this page.

To locate this beautiful town inside the municipality, you must know that El Texanito is located at 11.3 kilometers (in direction East) from the locality of Escuintla, which is the one that has more inhabitants inside the municipality. With our webpage and with our satelital map that you can find below, you can know where is and visit the surroundings of El Texanito.

#1 Where is El Texanito? How to go? Map

Map to know how to get to El Texanito (Chiapas) by road and with geographical references of the surrounding towns. With the controls you can zoom in and out to the position of El Texanito, which has the following symbol

MORE MAPS OF EL TEXANITO - PICTURES OF EL TEXANITO

Find out the most popular and common surnames in the Chiapas State

#2 The population of El Texanito (Chiapas) is 26 inhabitants

Population data in El Texanito (Chiapas)YearFemale InhabitantsMale inhabitantsTotal population20201214262010201232200591019

Evolution of the population in El Texanito: Total Men Women Comparison of percentages of indigenous population in the town of El Texanito, compared with its municipality, with the percentage in the State of Chiapas, and in the country as a whole.

Find out more interesting facts about all the towns in the Municipality of Escuintla (statistics, pictures, maps, restaurants...) at this link.

Comparison of percentages of single persons in El Texanito (over 12 years), comparing the same percentage with the municipality, with the State of Chiapas, and with the total for the country.

#3 Satellite photo of El Texanito

With the satellite map of El Texanito will I be able to look for my location? Yes, access the map, zoom in and see the surroundings of this town and the municipality of Escuintla. Get free live access to satellite views of 2024 of El Texanito.

#4 Hotels and Accommodation near El Texanito

Do you want to stay in El Texanito? We don't have any hotel registered in this town, but you can check in this list of the closest accommodations to El Texanito:

HOTEL SAN JORGE PLAZA: 17 km away, direction West (13 minutes by car)

MOTEL RIO SECO: 14 km away, direction West (11 minutes by car)

HOTEL SAN JORGE PLAZA: 17 km away, direction West (11 minutes by car)

HOTEL COLONIAL SAN CARLOS: 18 km away, direction West (13 minutes by car)

#5 What to do in El Texanito

Want to know what to see in El Texanito if you are visiting this town?Here are some ideas of activities to enjoy El Texanito.

Las mejores montes de El Texanito para excursiones y actividades al aire libre:

El Encinal (870 meters): 3.2 km walk (50 minutes), heading South.

Buenavista (1104 meters): 5.1 km walk (95 minutes), heading North.

El Curruche (885 meters): 5.0 km walk (63 minutes), heading South.

Cerro Verde (1034 meters): 5.4 km walk (68 minutes), heading Northeast.

Are you looking for charming villages in the surroundings of El Texanito?:

Santa Rita (11 inhabitants): Located 2 km to the North (2 minutes by car)

Cinco de Marzo (Santa Rosa) (106 inhabitants): Located 3 km to the Southwest (4 minutes by car)

El Triunfo (2418 inhabitants): Located 2 km to the Northeast (2 minutes by car)

4 de Octubre (368 inhabitants): Located 3 km to the East (3 minutes by car)

This information is based on geographical data. Distances may vary depending on terrain, driving style or walking conditions.

#6 Population pyramid of El Texanito (Chiapas)

In El Texanito there is a very characteristic age structure of the population, which you can see in the following population pyramid, with data from 2005. After analyzing the demographic data of El Texanito, separated by men and women, and also by age groups, we can analyze what the future of the population in this town will be like.

Data of the age pyramid of the town El Texanito (inhabitants year 2020)Age rangeNumber of womenNumber of menTotal populationInfants (0-5 years)224Youth (6-14 years)257Adults (15-59 years)7714Elderly (60+ years)101

#7 Pictures of El Texanito

Would you like to see what this town looks like and enjoy landscape pictures of El Texanito? We have located on the Internet several beautiful images of places and locations nearby, so you can see the beauty of this Mexican town. Some are artistic pictures and others are simply panoramic pictures taken by amateurs and friends who simply like El Texanito.

Enjoy pictures of El Texanito at this link

#8 Vote for El Texanito as the most beautiful town in Mexico

Do you like El Texanito or don't you like it very much? Now you can vote for El Texanito to let everyone know about it. Use these stars ("0" you don't like it much, "5" you like it a lot) to rate it with your opinion.

In the following links you can check the list of the best (and most beautiful) towns in Mexico and the State of Chiapas, by popular vote:

- The best towns in Mexico

- The most beautiful towns in Chiapas

#9 Comments and opinions about El Texanito

#10 Schools in El Texanito

Schools in El Texanito

>>> Map with all the towns inside the municipality of Escuintla

>>> Click here to see more towns in the State of Chiapas (statistics, pictures, maps, restaurants, hotels,...) <<<

#11 Other towns in the Municipality of Escuintla