Paso del Norte (Chiapas)

Maps, pictures and statistics of Paso del Norte, a beautiful small village of 58 inhabitants of the State of Chiapas

The town of Paso del Norte (Chiapas) belongs to the municipality of Escuintla. There are 58 inhabitants and it is 1,383 meters altitude. It is the most populated town in the position #64 of the whole municipality.

Last Update: 29.05.2024

Data: In Paso del Norte, there is a percentage of 0% of indigenous population and 17% of the households have a cell phone. Need more statistics on Paso del Norte? They are at the bottom of this page.

To locate this beautiful town inside the municipality, you must know that Paso del Norte is located at 22.6 kilometers (in direction East) from the locality of Escuintla, which is the one that has more inhabitants inside the municipality. With our webpage and with our satelital map that you can find below, you can know where is and visit the surroundings of Paso del Norte.

#1 Where is Paso del Norte? How to go? Map

Location map of Paso del Norte in Chiapas: Use the controls in the upper left area to zoom in (+) or out (-). This is a satellite photo centered in Paso del Norte, which is marked with the following symbol

MORE MAPS OF PASO DEL NORTE - PICTURES OF PASO DEL NORTE

Meet all the magical towns of the Chiapas State and discover their cultural essence

#2 The population of Paso del Norte (Chiapas) is 58 inhabitants

Population data in Paso del Norte (Chiapas)YearFemale InhabitantsMale inhabitantsTotal population2020273158201049499820054856104

Evolution of the population in Paso del Norte: Total Men Women Comparison of percentages of indigenous population in the town of Paso del Norte, compared with its municipality, with the percentage in the State of Chiapas, and in the country as a whole.

Find out more interesting facts about all the towns in the Municipality of Escuintla (statistics, pictures, maps, restaurants...) at this link.

Comparison of percentages of single persons in Paso del Norte (over 12 years), comparing the same percentage with the municipality, with the State of Chiapas, and with the total for the country.

#3 Satellite photo of Paso del Norte

With the satellite map of Paso del Norte will I be able to look for my location? Yes, access the map, zoom in and see the surroundings of this town and the municipality of Escuintla. You can search free satellite map (2024) of Paso del Norte.

#4 Hotels and Accommodation near Paso del Norte

Many people want to stay in the town of Paso del Norte itself, but unfortunately there are no hotels in the village yet. Don't worry, we have created this list of the closest accommodations, so you can ask if they have rooms available:

MOTEL EL PARAISO: 35 km away, direction Southwest (25 minutes by car)

MOTEL RIO SECO: 35 km away, direction West (25 minutes by car)

HOTEL SAN JORGE PLAZA: 36 km away, direction West (30 minutes by car)

HOTEL SAN JORGE PLAZA: 30 km away, direction West (25 minutes by car)

#5 What to do in Paso del Norte

A weekend in Paso del Norte and looking for tourist attractions? Tourism in Paso del Norte and surroundings to find the best destinations.

Mountains in Paso del Norte for hiking and trails:

Cerro San Pablo (1238 meters): 3.3 km walk (59 minutes), heading West.

Cimiento (1800 meters): 5.7 km walk (71 minutes), heading West.

Los Andes (1523 meters): 5.3 km walk (78 minutes), heading Southeast.

Cerro Verde (1034 meters): 7.1 km walk (93 minutes), heading Southwest.

Are you looking for charming villages in the surroundings of Paso del Norte?:

El Zapote (45 inhabitants): Located 2 km to the West (2 minutes by car)

El Horizonte (175 inhabitants): Located 2 km to the Southeast (2 minutes by car)

El Arenal (92 inhabitants): Located 2 km to the West (3 minutes by car)

Bolivia (82 inhabitants): Located 3 km to the Southwest (3 minutes by car)

This information is based on geographical data. Distances may vary depending on terrain, driving style or walking conditions.

#6 Population pyramid of Paso del Norte (Chiapas)

In Paso del Norte there is a very characteristic age structure of the population, which you can see in the following population pyramid, with data from 2005. After analyzing the demographic data of Paso del Norte, separated by men and women, and also by age groups, we can analyze what the future of the population in this town will be like.

Data of the age pyramid of the town Paso del Norte (inhabitants year 2020)Age rangeNumber of womenNumber of menTotal populationInfants (0-5 years)3710Youth (6-14 years)6410Adults (15-59 years)171633Elderly (60+ years)145

#7 Pictures of Paso del Norte

In order for you to enjoy nature around Paso del Norte, we have compiled a collection of sightseeing and monument pictures of the town and its surroundings. Access a completely free online image gallery of Paso del Norte, so you can even use it as a wallpaper to always remember this beautiful town.

Enjoy pictures of Paso del Norte at this link

#8 The Postal Code of Paso del Norte (Chiapas) is 30606

Do you want to know the Postal Code of Paso del Norte so that you can send postal packages and letters with complete confidence that they will arrive at their destination? Write down the following 5 digits: 30606. The first two digits of the ZIP code of Paso del Norte ("30") correspond to the State of Chiapas, and the last three identify the town itself. As a curiosity, there may be several locations in the same State with the same Post Code.

#9 Vote for Paso del Norte as the most beautiful town in Mexico

Do you like Paso del Norte or don't you like it very much? Now you can vote for Paso del Norte to let everyone know about it. Use these stars ("0" you don't like it much, "5" you like it a lot) to rate it with your opinion.

In the following links you can check the list of the best (and most beautiful) towns in Mexico and the State of Chiapas, by popular vote:

- The best towns in Mexico

- The most beautiful towns in Chiapas

#10 Comments and opinions about Paso del Norte

#11 Schools in Paso del Norte

Schools in Paso del Norte

>>> Map with all the towns inside the municipality of Escuintla

>>> Click here to see more towns in the State of Chiapas (statistics, pictures, maps, restaurants, hotels,...) <<<

#12 Other towns in the Municipality of Escuintla