H. Rider Haggard’s She is a classic of ‘lost worlds’ literature, and its influence (both direct and indirect) can be felt in the stories we read or see on the screen nowadays. The story follows the journey of the British academic H. Horace Holly and his strapping ward Leo Vincey to a lost kingdom in the depths of Africa. There, they encounter the white saviour (or isn’t she?) Ayesha, the immortal queen of a lost tribe, who finds in Leo the reincarnation of her lost lover. Though its racial sensibilities are outdated, it’s still a stirring read, and it’s easy to see how it has inspired authors as diverse as Edgar Rice Burroughs, J.R.R. Tolkien, Ricardo Pinto and Margaret Atwood. There are echoes of Ayesha too in the protagonist of Tanith Lee’s Birthgrave, and in Game of Thrones’ Daenerys Targaryen and the witch Melisandre.

She has been part of film history since 1899, when Georges Méliès made The Pillar of Fire. Haggard himself participated in the 1925 adaptation by writing the intertitles. Though it would be eclipsed by the sound film that arrived a decade later, it was the first notable adaptation, and one that made it to theatres worldwide. We’ve put on our putties and donned our pith helmets, and mounted an expedition to the depths of the Dutch newspaper archives, to find out how it was received. What first becomes obvious is that the film only made its way through The Netherlands, and colonies, in fits and starts between the autumn of 1925 and early 1928.

The Amsterdam socialist newspaper Het Volk starts its film column of 12 December 1925:

The cinema audience, in only ten years, has progressed so much that instead of melodramatic monsters it demands more refined art than was offered by cinemas in the war years. There is still a certain audience with a simpler taste that needs to be catered for, but the average film of nowadays is undeniably made to a higher standard than ten years ago.

After a review of The Lost World, after Arthur Conan Doyle’s book, a review of She follows, playing in the Corso Cinema; situated in the main shopping area of de Kalverstraat and then recently restyled in Art Deco fashion.

The adaptation of Sir Rider Haggard’s “She”, presently in the Corso, has now been prolonged twice. “She, who must be obeyed” is a mysterious white queen who rules a country of savages, has everlasting youth, and has been waiting for thousands of years for the arrival of the man in whom Kallikrates, who she killed in jealousy, is reborn.

Betty Blythe, an American film star of respectable beauty saw to the difficult task of playing the part of “She”. Alas, unfortunately her acting fell well short, when it is compared to that of Napierkowska in the similar film “Atlantis”. Ah. Atlantis. Compared with that “She” disappoints, in acting, directing and scenery. With the Americans (Reciprocity Films) everything stayed film-routine, what in the French “Atlantide” was made into, well… art.

The Algemeen Handelsblad reports trouble in paradise, in their edition of 16 May 1926. On a national level the Cinema Law was adopted, which saw the censor’s scissors in the state’s hands instead of depending on local tolerance. In 1933 it’d see King Kong’s undressing of Fay Wray removed, and Dutch film goers of 1955 never saw Marilyn Monroe’s skirt blow up in The Seven Year Itch. In 1926, She’s Betty Blythe had her own costume troubles and went to court, as reported by the paper’s column De Rolprent (Moving Pictures, “not in any way connected to the weekly magazine Moving Pictures”). There was drama!

“She” before the judge – How miss Blythe behaved in Berlin – A film that became a flop – The result of a scandalous case.

Today you get as “moving pictures” hors d’oeuvre the resumé of a scandalous court case, to which The Times devoted about fifteen columns, because “the Venus of film” played the part of complainant.

(…)Betty Blythe, actually named Mrs. Scarden, demanded from the producer, Mr. G.B. Samuelson, 25.000 in unpaid salary, and Mr. Samuelson answered with a demand for the similar sum, as Miss Blythe had caused him damage, libelled him, blackened his name and cheated him, all things honed to an art by a good American film diva.

(…)The core of the arguments was the not very business-like agreement Mr. Samuelson had with the fickle Betty. He engaged her from 1 January to 26 February 1925 for 25.000 guilders, with a free transfer from Hollywood to Berlin, with the stipulation that on 14 January she’d be in the German studios with a motley crew, to brew a masterpiece from Rider Haggard’s novel. Mr. Samuelson would have done better to hire her per day, as now the American beauty had a sense to stretch the work as it pleased her. What can a producer do when his main player with masterful sadness says that she’s too sick and nervous to perform… after which she’s seen the same evening palling with a not unhandsome member of the opposite sex?

“Mister Judge,” said Mr. Samuelson, “one can only beg, flatter and work around her, and believe everything when she’s happy in the evening and unwell in daytime, because, Mr. Judge, when such a lady gets it in her head to tell you to go to hell with your film, and puts the word to the deed, then it leaves you empty handed.”

Miss Betty Blythe has, objectively, not shown herself from her best side with the whole “She” saga. She already started with arriving three days late in Berlin. She admitted this, but she couldn’t help it as she’d gone through Paris and spending three days buying some hats and such is surely warranted? She asked with the mysterious smile she’s got in stock.

“Certainly,” said Judge Horridge to the amazement and annoyance of Mr. Samuelson and his lawyer.

From the first moment Betty was in Berlin the misery started. Mr. Samuelson had one ace in his hands: it hadn’t been agreed when and where the film diva would exactly get paid, and that ace the producer played for all it was worth. Betty didn’t work hard enough, and so he left her without “cash”. She stayed in the Eden Hotel, and was soon badgered for payment: they had the waiter come over from Berlin as witness to show Mr. Samuelson’s inhumanity to the jury.

“Did he ask you personally for money?” the judge asked.

“Well,” the waiter answered, “the gérant gives me all the dirty tasks. It comes with the job!”

Imagine – “She”, the immortal princess, harangued by the prosaic oberkellner who gives her the choice between paying up or sodding off. When Betty asked her employer for her wages, he answered that he’d put half of the money in an Parisian bank, but that she first had to finish the movie.

Wait! Betty thought, knowing that every day of delay would cost Mr. Samuelson 4-5000 guilders, I’ll get you. She burnt a finger when they did a test with the pillar of fire, in which “She” disappears: a blister the size of a pin prick was the result according to Mr. Samuelson; a very painful wound according to Betty Blythe! In any case, she couldn’t work, and when her finger had healed, she refused to wear the costumes that were given to her.

Betty Blythe: “Really, I couldn’t wear them. I’d have looked like one of those girls from the Folies Bergere, and I was supposed to be a goddess!”

Mr. Samuelson’s representative: “Those clothes were not bad. One costume was a belt around your waist with not much above it!”

His Lordship: “What do you mean, not much above it? Not much belt, or not much nothing?” (Laughter)

Betty Blythe: “You may be surprise, your Lordship, but there was a skirt beneath it.” (Laughter)

His Lordship: “Well, well…” (the jury members can not longer control themselves and are also laughing)

Betty Blythe: “Well, what can I say. I am no beauty, and I have just a certain amount of histrionic ability, which I must add to with other abilities. And I know what wearing clothes is, you see -“

His Lordship: “Sure, sure, my child.” (Laughter).

Eventually the situation in Berlin became so unbearable that Betty went over to more drastic measures. She let herself be interviewed by reporters, and on 20 February 1925 the Berlin magazines reported what “unscrupulous cretin” Herr Samuelson was (according to Miss Blythe), and after airing her heart she travelled to London with rancour. The poor Samuelson finished his film with stand-ins, had a flop, and then had to defend himself against the complaint of the American.

And the result of the court case? The same as of many French duel. Dust, words, the clatter of weapons, reconciliation. Judge Horridge played peace angel and appealed to the soul of the goddess “She”.

It had already been such a disappointment for Mr. Samuelson, and the only person who’d earned anything was Sir Rider Haggard, who had preferred an advance of £1000 over £2500 later.

Whether Miss Blythe could not leave it at the half that she’d already received. Mr. Samuelson was, all considered, a man of a good, great character.

Betty started weeping. She admitted: his character was better than she’d thought! She sobbed louder. “Yes, he’s a dear, and I won’t have his money!”

“Well spoken!” mumbled Judge Horridge. And Betty and Mr. Samuelson approached each other and hugged in front of the forum of the audience and the court.

An overview of this sorry affair can be found here. I’ve used some quotes from the article, whereas most of the quotes above, originally in English, have been re-translated from Dutch. Then, in November, She is playing in the W.B. Theater in Rotterdam, as the “long expected, beautiful Eastern film SHE”. Perhaps the movie had already got a bit of a reputation, as it also promises that “with this film is comes a special engagement of the famous oriental dancer Lilian Loring”. In February 1927 “She” has moved to the Scala theatre in Rotterdam. On the stage this time, Louis Contran, “Holland’s best humorist, with wholly new repertoire”, and perhaps a draw for some: “CHILDREN NOT ADMITTED”. Then, in February 1928 we find “She” back in The Hague, in the Passage Bioscoop.

Of the two main attractions playing this week in the Passage Bioscoop the film of Rider Haggard’s famous novel the most important. The lead in this oriental history is played by Betty Blythe, who plays a comely, two thousand year old queen. The male lead is played by Carlyle Blackwell, who follows the command found on an ancient Greek shard of pottery, and travels to mid-Africa to conquer the heart of Ayesha, “She, who must be obeyed”.

The mysterious history of Rider Haggard has proven very suitable to be filmed, and many suspenseful and beautiful scenes can be found in this picture, while there is no lack of suspense.

The court case, and the stories of her behaviour, didn’t do Betty Blythe much good. The Algemeen Handelsblad reports in February 1932, besides a portrait of “Walter Disney, the artist and his famous creation: Mickey, the mouse”:

Betty Blythe, ten years ago one of the most popular film stars, will, after a diet, make her return to the film world: she has been hired by Tiffany-Stahl for the lead in “Lena Rivers”. Her most famous part at the time was “She”, after the novel of Rider Haggard.

Blythe indeed appeared in Lena Rivers, but it’s well down the cast listing, in the role of Mrs. Mathilda Nichols. The story of her career is likely more nuanced that The Deli Courant of 16 September 1933 suggests, under the header “The Legion of the Fallen – Hollywood celebrities in poverty”. Present-day actresses, far more so than their male colleagues, still have difficulty finding work after they reach a certain age, and mostly only retain a career when they reinvent themselves as character actor.

The almost forty year old Betty Slaughter, who as Betty Blythe once was world famous, is happy when she can work as an extra for a few days a weak, with a pay that, through the involvement of the producers, is almost thrice that of the “normal” extras. Originally, Betty Blythe studied as a singer in Paris, but she decided to switch to light opera. In 1915 she took up an offer to film in Hollywood. She played, not without success, in several films, until she appeared in The Queen of Sheba. This film, casting the once stunning woman in the figure of the Biblical queen, made a rare sensation. After that, Betty Blythe appeared in several other films, but without that success already behind her. A moment it seemed that she would regain that once earned fame. In Berlin she had played for an English-German combination in the movie She, after the famous book by Rider Haggard. As there was something not quite right with the contracts she’d signed, she was forced to start a costly court case against her English agent. This was the beginning of the end. She lost a lot of money, and went, after appearing without much success in London with a variety show, back to Hollywood as a complete unknown.