It is with great sorrow and sadness that we announce the peaceful passing of our beloved Mother and Grandmother.

Suman was born and grew up in Ludhiana, India where she excelled in academics and received her Masters in English Literature in 1972.

After being married to her husband, Surinder Kumar in 1973, the couple lived in Dehradun, India where they welcomed their eldest son Saket in 1974. In 1976, Surinder received a scholarship to pursue a Doctorate in Engineering in Canada, and the young family moved to Ottawa where they lived for 3 years. There, their youngest son Sumit was born in 1978 and the family returned to Dehradun after Surinder received his PhD.

The family immigrated to Saskatoon, Saskatchewan in 1982 where Suman was an integral part of the Hindu and larger community for over 20 years. In 2003 Suman moved to Victoria, BC along with her sons where she once-again promptly built another wide circle of lifelong friends.

Suman is survived by Surinder, her sister Ripan (Jeevan), her sons Saket (Kiran) and Sumit (Alana) and the grandchildren that were the most precious beings in the universe to her, Nyah, Dylan, Shay and Ayla.

Suman's passions included her love of travel that saw her explore and experience the globe with her ever adventurous and fun-loving spirit. Her profound friendships have left a lasting impact on so many people who held her as a dearest friend, a source of joy and exuberance, and someone with whom they could share deeply personal feelings and experiences. Her most everlasting gift will be the intense love that she showered upon her family, her nurturing of her children and grandchildren that have taught them the true meaning of love, acceptance, and joy.

A funeral and prayer will be held at 10:00 AM Wednesday Nov 17th at McCall Gardens and a prayer service and lunch will be held at 10:00 AM Thursday Nov 17th at the Victoria Hindu Temple (masks required). A Celebration of Life Memorial Service will also be scheduled at a later date. Condolences may be offered to the family at