Not so, though, in François Dupeyron's The Officers' Ward. It accomplishes the considerable feat of being both harrowing and tender. It spares us the sight, but transmits the pain. It's a small miracle of a film, totally sure of its subject: which is rehabilitation of flesh and spirit. Trust me, you will be moved. Shocked at first, though, when Adrien (Eric Caravaca), a handsome, lusty young officer in the Engineers, incurs his appalling injuries. A beautiful spring morning on the front line, a whoosh of an invisible shell, horse and rider collapsing in a torrent of earth, and for fully the next half-hour we see nothing of Adrien s monstrous war wounds, but hear only a snuffled mewing from below the edge of the camera frame as doctors in the officers ward peer down at what remains and wonder how to repair bone, flesh and life.

It s a perfectly graduated film, for it proceeds from hopelessness, pain and shame to self-confidence and regained identity over a time span of five years, and makes a spiritual passage almost as palpable as a physical recovery. I wear this to spare other people, says Adrien, wearing a half-mask when at last we are allowed to lay eyes on him at an advanced stage of recuperation. When you needn t worry about others is when you will be at ease with yourself, says a wise surgeon.

So it proves in one of the most treasurable little scenes I ve witnessed on the screen: Adrien in the post-war world, riding the Paris Métro, and crowded up against a woman holding a child. The child flinches; and the man shrinks back. Then he bravely takes off his black Homburg hat and plays peek-a-boo, shielding his mutilation, then disclosing it. And gradually the child begins to smile, then laugh and the man, too.

When we saw that scene at Cannes, the entire audience exploded in applause, the way they used to do before cynicism made people mistrust the power of cinema to move us deeply and honestly. The Officers Ward does both. Anti-war, yes: but, more importantly and poignantly, pro-life.