For many years, box springs have been the standard foundation for most mattresses, but with more modern, high-quality mattresses on the market, there are more options available to us. From solid to slatted foundations—understanding which one is right for you can be confusing. To answer all of your foundation-related questions, we have put together this comprehensive guide.

What is a Mattress Foundation?

The foundation is the surface your mattress rests on. This base could be a box spring, a wooden slat platform, or a solid base. The mattress foundation has two jobs—to support you as you sleep and ensure the mattress doesn’t sink, slide, or sag.

Stylish Support &

Easy To Assemble

Shop The Foundation

If your mattress doesn’t have the right base, it will not support you correctly. Indents can start to form, causing you to sleep in uncomfortable and awkward positions to accommodate the lack of support. When this happens, you can wake up with stiff, sore muscles and joints.

Do I Need a Mattress Foundation?

Most mattresses need some type of foundation. The type of foundation you need will largely depend on the kind of mattress you have. Throughout this article, we will breakdown the most common foundation types and the mattresses most suited for each.

Benefits of a Mattress Foundation

In addition to supporting you, a stable base offers some unexpected benefits. Below, we include six ways a mattress foundation can promote better sleep.

Allows the Mattress to Work for You

Memory foam, latex foam, and hybrid mattresses contour to the body, so your muscles can recover as you sleep. These beds provide the perfect combination of cushioning and support so your spine remains in a safe, neutral position.

Without the right foundation, the mattress will begin to sag in certain places. As this happens, your body will also sink—forcing your spine out of alignment. When the spine is not straight, our bodies have to overcompensate for the lack of support by sleeping in uncomfortable positions. However, a stable support base will allow you to get the most out of your advanced mattress.

Improves Lifespan of Your Mattress

Placing your mattress on the right foundation will allow it to support you correctly, but it will also ensure that it does so throughout many years of use.

The average person spends about 33 years of their life in bed—when we are not sleeping, we are either trying to get to sleep or using the mattress for sitting up in bed.

Mattresses need a sturdy support base to accommodate this constant use. The right foundation will save you the inconvenience and expense of having to replace your mattress after only a few years of use.

Adds Height to Your Bed

Allowing your mattress to rest on the ground is never a good idea. When sleeping on the floor, we are more open to cold air, dust, dirt, and humidity. It is also challenging to get out of bed when your bed is resting on the ground.

A mattress foundation can add anywhere from 16 to 23 inches of height—many also come with the ability to adjust the height to your preference. However, it is best not to raise your bed too high, either.

The ADA (Americans with Disabilities Act) recommends beds between 20 to 23 inches high from the floor to the top of the mattress—this will make it easier to climb into bed each night and also allow you to safely get out of bed in the morning.

Keeps Your Mattress Clean

The floor is typically the dirtiness spot in the house—this is where dirt, hair, dead skin cells, bugs, dust mites, pet hair and dander, and other allergens collect. Moisture and humidity also tend to gather near the floor, which can encourage mold and mildew to form in the mattress.

To ensure these things stay on the floor and not in your bed, you will need to keep your mattress lifted off the ground.

Innerspring mattresses tend to have open space between spring coils where bacteria and dirt can collect. So these beds should remain lifted off the floor.

Because latex foam and memory foam mattresses are so dense, they are more resistant to dust mites and bacteria. However, moisture can cause foam to deteriorate, so these beds should also rest on a raised platform.

We have a number of guides on maintaining a clean mattress:

How to Get Stains Off and Clean a Mattress

How to Freshen and Deodorize a Mattress

How to Remove Urine Stains and Smell From a Mattress

Improves Airflow

Staying cool and comfortable is one of the best ways to get adequate sleep. If your mattress rests on the floor, air will not circulate properly throughout the bed—causing you to become overheated during the night.

The right foundation will help release trapped heat and circulate air around the bed. No matter what type of mattress you have, the right foundation can provide much-needed breathability so you can sleep comfortably night after night.

Keeps Your Mattress in Place

If your mattress rests on the ground, it is likely to slide around as you sleep. Additionally, if it’s on the wrong foundation, it may slip—causing it to sink in the areas where it is not supported.

A good foundation will keep your mattress stable and firmly in place—preserving its lifespan and preventing the discomfort from a mattress sliding around.

Types of Foundations

Now that you’re familiar with the benefits of a foundation, we will outline the most common types so you can decide which one is right for you.

Best Amerisleep Bed Frames

What is a Bed Frame?

The terms “bed frame” and “mattress foundation” (or mattress base) are often used interchangeably, but there is a difference.

A bed frame is a decorative portion surrounding the mattress—this includes a headboard, footboard, and side panels (four sides). Typically, the bed frame will be attached to a foundation that the mattress can rest on.

For example, many wooden frames have a slatted foundation that consists of wood planks attached to the two side panels of the frame. A metal frame often has thin metal rods instead of traditional wide slats. Platform bed and panel bed frames are two common types.

However, some bed frames only provide a rim around the perimeter of the mattress—leaving no base for you to place the mattress on.

Do I Need a Bed Frame?

If you have the proper support base for your mattress, you don’t necessarily need a bed frame. Headboards and footboards are mostly decorative–they don’t support the bed.

If your mattress is resting on the correct foundation, that is all you need; however, if you have a slatted foundation attached to your bed frame, you will not be able to separate the base from the frame—the two must stay together.

For the most part, the frame is optional, but the base the mattress rests on, is not. You will need to have the right base for support and to preserve the life of your mattress.

Best Bed Frame for Memory Foam Mattress

With a memory foam mattress, it’s best to use a slatted or solid mattress foundation. If you go with a slatted foundation, the slats should be no further than 2.75 inches apart. Any further apart and you’ll need to buy extra slats or a bunkie board to create a more stable surface for your memory foam mattress.

Modern platform beds are another good bed frame for memory foam mattresses. Platform beds are essentially just a more decorative mattress foundation, as they often contain features like built-in headboards or under-bed storage drawers. When you opt for a platform bed, you can skip the extra foundation and save money.

Just remember, the 2.75-inch rule for slat spacing applies to platform beds, too. So you’ll need a platform bed with closely-spaced slats that still allow for plenty of air circulation.

When it comes to the best bed frame material for memory foam mattresses, whether to choose a wooden or metal frame, wood is preferred over metal. A metal bed frame tends to have thin rods instead of thick slats and simply cannot provide the support that a memory foam mattress needs.

Since memory foam beds are so flexible, they also pair great with adjustable bed bases to promote a luxury night’s sleep.

Box Springs

Traditionally, innerspring mattresses needed a box spring underneath to help support body weight. The two layers contained coils that bounced off each other to distribute weight and absorb pressure evenly.

Today, most box springs do not include coils—they are simply a wood or metal box (open on all four sides) covered with cloth. They do not offer much in terms of stability or support, but they can provide a lift.

Do I Need a Box Spring?

If you have a foam or hybrid mattress, you should not use a box spring. Because box springs don’t have a solid surface, they do not provide a good foundation for the mattress to rest on—some warranties actually prohibit the use of a box spring.

For mattresses containing foam, we recommend a solid foundation or a bunkie board, which we will discuss further down.

If you prefer an innerspring mattress, these are still typically sold with a box spring. But an innerspring mattress is sturdy enough on its own that it doesn’t require a box spring. However, box springs do provide additional height.

Bed Slats

A slatted foundation consists of solid wood planks or metal beams that lay across the bed frame, attaching to the sides of the frame. They can be individual slats, or they may be connected in a series of planks.

A slatted base helps support the mattress above and prevents any sagging or slipping. They are also easy to install, inexpensive, and can be replaced if one breaks. But keep in mind slats do not add height to a bed, only support.

Also, if slats are not secured to the frame correctly, they can slide around and potentially fall—leaving sections of the mattress unsupported.

Metal vs. Wood

Although wooden slats are the most common, they may sag or bend over time. When this happens, your mattress can develop indents. New metal slats are durable and won’t bend like some wooden slats.

However, if you opt for wood slats made from solid pine or oak, warping is very rare. Some metal slats are also adjustable, so you can form them to fit the exact width of your bed frame.

European Flexible Slats

These foundations consist of a series of wooden slats connected and placed inside a wood frame, similar to a box spring. They are unique because they feature an adjustable suspension beneath each wooden slat, allowing you to change the bounce and flexibility of the bed.

What is the Best Wood for Bed Slats?

Pine, Oak, Poplar, Maple, Beech, and Mahogany are all long-lasting, high-quality woods for a bed frame. The slats, however, will usually feature a cheaper, unvarnished wood since they are under the bed and out of sight.

How Far Apart Should Bed Slats Be?

Bed slats too far apart will not support the mattress correctly—this is especially true with memory foam or latex mattresses since these beds can sag between wide gaps.

Typically, it is best to keep slats no more than 2.75 inches apart. This distance will provide adequate support and keep air circulating through the bed.

What Mattress is Best For a Slatted Bed?

Most mattresses can rest on a slatted foundation—including memory or latex foam, hybrid, or innerspring beds. If you have an innerspring mattress and prefer to use a box spring for height, just be sure the foundation can support the weight of the box spring and the mattress.

Because slatted foundations don’t add height, only support, if you have a memory or latex foam mattress, or a hybrid, it is best to pair a slatted bed with a bunkie board. Bunkie boards provide both support and height without the use of a box spring.

Solid Foundations

A solid mattress foundation, also called a platform base, is typically made of a series of wood beams covered in durable material—so there is no space between slats. The beams then fit inside a supportive, solid wood platform with a center support beam.

Solid foundations are designed to replace traditional box springs and provide a supportive base for more advanced memory foam, latex foam, and hybrid mattresses. These bases are typically 8.5 to 10 inches and lift most mattress thicknesses to a safe and comfortable height.

Many foundations also come with adjustable legs to accommodate your preferred height. If you enjoy a low profile look, you can lower it as far down as 4 to 6 inches. For extra storage space, you can raise the foundation further with a set of bed risers.

Solid foundations are easy to put together and require no tools to assemble. You can pair them with most bed frames (headboard, footboard, and two side panels). However, these foundations should not be placed on top of a slatted foundation.

To pair a solid base with a bed frame, you would simply remove the slats and replace them with your new solid foundation (with the solid foundation resting on the floor).

Do I Need a Solid Foundation?

If you have a memory foam, latex foam, or hybrid mattress, a platform bed frame provides a sturdy support system for these beds. Since slats can’t be more than 2.75 inches apart for foam beds, it’s sometimes easier to opt for a solid foundation rather than worrying about the distance between each slat. These foundations ensure weight is evenly distributed, and the entire mattress is protected.

Amerisleep Platform Bed

Amerisleep’s Platform Bed features solid wood side rails, center support beams, and slats. The slats are oversized for minimal support gaps, and the side rails keep the mattress firmly in place. This system will ensure no soft stops, sagging, or indents form on the mattress and that it keeps supporting you throughout years of use.

Our frame sits at a comfortable 13.5-inches high and pairs well with most standard size mattresses. This frame locks together in minutes and requires no tools for assembly.

Prices of our Amerisleep Platform Bed