Laurie Lewis didn’t set out to be a professional musician. She wanted to own a small business and play music as a hobby.

Then, on a lark, she recorded an album — 1986’s “Restless Rambling Heart” — and 25 years later, the Berkeley resident is one of the reigning champs on the Bay Area’s storied bluegrass scene, as well as an internationally acclaimed American-roots music star. Her career highlights include a Grammy and two top awards from the International Bluegrass Music Association, whose director, Dan Hays, proclaimed Lewis “one of the preeminent bluegrass and Americana artists of our time.”

And nobody is more surprised about it all than Lewis herself.

“I’m kind of amazed that I’m still here and still doing what I love and that I can still find an audience,” says the 61-year-old singer and musician. “It feels really good. I just love to play music so much.”

New recording

Lewis is celebrating the 25th anniversary of her first album much like any other year — by releasing a new album, “Skippin’ and Flyin’,” planning future projects and playing plenty of shows. She’s been touring the East Coast but returns to the Bay Area for a batch of gigs beginning this weekend.

First up is a big hometown show, with her band the Right Hands, on Saturday at Berkeley’s Freight & Salvage, followed by concerts Dec. 3 at the 13th annual Monterey Cowboy Poetry and Music Festival and Dec. 10 at the Sunnyvale Theatre. Then it’s back to Berkeley to once again host the Freight’s annual Holiday Revue on Dec. 21.

Yes, that’s two Freight & Salvage bookings in less than a month — a rare achievement that speaks to the special bond between the revered musician and Berkeley’s iconic music venue.

“Laurie Lewis’ career as a top female bluegrass vocalist and bandleader is thoroughly entwined with the emergence of the Freight & Salvage as a prominent Bay Area venue for bluegrass and traditional music,” says John Bidwell, president of the Freight’s board of directors.

“It’s the place where I’ve tried out new material most often,” Lewis says. “If I’m going to have a CD release celebration or something — you bet I’m going to have it at the Freight.”

Lewis first fell in love with bluegrass as a teen, some years after relocating with her family from Southern California to Berkeley. She heard the Greenbriar Boys, Doc Watson and many other legends at the Berkeley Folk Festivals of the ’60s and other local concerts, and was entranced by the high lonesome call of the string instruments.

She learned to play the banjo and guitar, then focused on the fiddle. Her father, a classical flutist, was thrilled with her enthusiasm for music — but not her choice of genres. And that nearly derailed her career.

“I didn’t like the pressure that my dad put on me — he wanted me to be a classical violinist,” Lewis recalls. “And I sort of rebelled against that and quit playing music altogether.”

Rising star

Her passion for music eventually won out, as Lewis got entrenched in the Bay Area bluegrass scene in her 20s, dusted off her fiddle and started playing again. She started entering — and winning — fiddling competitions. Yet, that still wasn’t enough to convince her to be a musician full-time.

Instead she opened a violin shop.

“It wasn’t that I wasn’t good enough to be a professional player,” Lewis says. “It was that I never made the personal commitment to do that. It was the recording of my first album that made me realize, ‘Oh, this is really what I want to do.’ So, I sold my violin shop and decided I would play music, and I never looked back.”

The real epiphany generated by 1986’s “Restless Rambling Heart,” an album that drew much acclaim in roots-music circles, was that fine fiddling was only one of Lewis’ many selling points. It was the whole package — singing, songwriting and playing — that made Lewis a star in the bluegrass world.

She gained even more acclaim for her follow-up releases, each of which seemed to display new sides of her artistry.

“Laurie Lewis is one of the most creative forces on the international music scene,” says Steve Baker, the Freight’s executive director. “She is a sterling violinist, a brilliant songwriter and an expressive singer who has the ability to communicate on the heart-to-heart level with each and every member of her audience.”

Still shining bright

Her career highlights include a Grammy win for her part in 1997’s “True Life Blues: The Songs of Bill Monroe” and numerous albums that have made it into the Top 10 of the bluegrass charts. Some of her proudest moments, however, came when she was twice named Female Vocalist of the Year by the International Bluegrass Music Association.

“Those are awards that are voted on by your peers,” Lewis says. “It’s the equivalent of winning an Academy Award or something, in a very tiny pond.”

Despite a career that’s spanned 25 years and some 20 albums, Lewis prefers to live in the present. She’s excited about her new album, “Skippin’ and Flyin’,” another tribute to the late, great Bill Monroe.

“It’s not your normal Bill Monroe tribute album in that it is not all Bill Monroe songs,” Lewis says. “I just wanted to explore the many ways in which his legacy has impacted my musical sensibilities and my career. I drew sort of from the same well that he drew from — early country music, Jimmy Rodgers, Carter Family — and I did the same sort of thing that he did. He put his own stamp on it. And that’s what I tried to do, too. It’s not imitation. It’s innovation.”

Lewis will showcase the CD during her upcoming shows with her band, the Right Hands, and there is no sign that she’s tiring of performing live.

“Right now” she says, “with the Right Hands, I am having as much fun — and maybe more fun — as I’ve ever had playing.”