Some competitors find it difficult to compete in front of a hometown audience, but that's not been the case for Laurie Lewis of Oklahoma City.

Lewis has put together a formidable win record at State Fair Arena.

In 1996, she rode Mikes Gift to an American Quarter Horse Association Working Hunter World Championship, then repeated that feat in 1997.

This week, as a contestant at the Go Show, which began Wednesday, she's seen continued success, earning both championships and reserve championships in hunter competition.

But it's not so much the individual class wins she's posted here that matter to her.

The important thing to Laurie is the points those wins have added to her year-long American Horse Show Association total.

"My goal for 1998 was to qualify for the Indoors," she said.

The "Indoors" refers to the Hunter-Jumper world's three premiere events - held at Harrisburg, Pa., New York City, and Washington, D.C.

To be eligible to compete at these shows, a rider must have earned enough points throughout the year to be nationally ranked.

With that aim in mind, Lewis has traveled extensively this year, showing in Texas, California and Colorado.

And, as of this weekend, it looks like she's secured the needed standings position on her horse, Lifestyle.

According to Lewis, Lifestyle, a 7-year-old Westphalen/Warmblood mare that she calls "Callie," is the reason for much of her success.

"She's a good mover - fluid and elegant," Lewis says of the bay mare.

"Hunters, which jump from three to 3 1/2-foot jumps, are judged on their smoothness, way of going and how easy they make it look."

Lewis also credits her trainer, 20-time World Champion, Shane George of Magnolia, Texas. "He's great - and always has the answers to my questions."

In late evening action last night, Christie Grisham of Justin, Texas, rode Double Down to the championship of the $10,000 Junior Amateur Owner Jumper Classic.

The Go Show, which concludes today at the State Fairgrounds, will feature a $10,000 Hunter Classic. Classes will begin at 8 a.m.

Archive ID: 731651