Birth Name: Charles Robert Redford

Place of Birth: Santa Monica, Los Angeles, California, United States

Date of Birth: August 18, 1936

Ethnicity: English, Irish, Scottish, Northern Irish/Scots-Irish, Cornish

Robert Redford is an American actor, director, producer, businessperson, environmentalist, and philanthropist. He won the Academy Award for Best Director for Ordinary People (1980). His film roles include War Hunt, The Chase, Barefoot in the Park, Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid, Jeremiah Johnson, The Candidate, The Sting, The Way We Were, The Great Gatsby, Three Days of the Condor, All the President’s Men, A Bridge Too Far, The Electric Horseman, The Natural, Out of Africa, Legal Eagles, Sneakers, Indecent Proposal, Up Close & Personal, The Last Castle, Spy Game, The Clearing, An Unfinished Life, All Is Lost, A Walk in the Woods, Truth, Pete’s Dragon, Our Souls at Night, The Old Man & the Gun, The Horse Whisperer, Lions for Lambs, and The Company You Keep. He also directed the last three, as well as A River Runs Through It, The Legend of Bagger Vance, and The Conspirator, among others.

Robert is the son of Martha W. (Hart) and Charles Robert Redford. His father was from Rhode Island. His mother was from Texas. His ancestry includes English, Irish, Scottish, Scots-Irish/Northern Irish, and Cornish. His father’s family are recent immigrants. His mother’s family has lived in the U.S., and specifically the American South, for many generations.

Robert is married to Sibylle Szaggars. He has had four children with his former wife, historian and environmental activist Lola Van Wagenen, including documentary filmmaker and environmental activist James Redford, and actress, director, and producer Amy Redford.

Robert’s patrilineal ancestry can be traced to Peter Redford, who was born, c. the early 1700s, in Manchester, Lancashire, England.

Robert’s paternal grandfather was Charles Elisha Redford (the son of Charles Redford and Jane Archie). Robert’s grandfather Charles was born in Westerly, Washington, Rhode Island. Robert’s great-grandfather Charles was born in South Kingstown, Washington, Rhode Island, to English-born parents, of English and Irish ancestry, Elisha Redford, who was born in Manchester, Lancashire, and Mary Ann McCreary. Robert’s great-grandmother Jane was born in Old Machar, Aberdeen, Aberdeenshire, Scotland, the daughter of William M. Archie and Jane Little.

Robert’s paternal grandmother was Lena Taylor (the daughter of Henry Taylor and Mary Tucker). Lena was born in England. Henry was born in Cornwall, the son of Jonathan Taylor and Elizabeth Crocker. Mary was also born in Cornwall, the daughter of William Tucker and Grace Tremberth.

Robert’s maternal grandfather was Archibald Woodruff “Tot” Hart (the son of John Gabriel Hart and Ida Woodruff). Archibald was born in Webster Groves, St. Louis, Missouri. John was the son of James Carmichael Hart and Mary Elizabeth Long. Ida was the daughter of William Henry Woodruff and Julia Hannah Jackson.

Robert’s maternal grandmother was Sallie/Sally Pate Green (the daughter of Eugene E. Green and Martha “Mattie” Bugg). Sallie was born in San Marcos, Hays, Texas. Eugene was the son of Edwin/Ed Jeremiah L. Green and Eliza Jane Young. Martha was the daughter of Zachariah P. Bugg and Emily J. “Emma” Davis.

Sources: Family history of Robert Redford – http://www.powells.com

Genealogies of Robert Redford – http://famouskin.com

https://www.geni.com

http://freepages.rootsweb.com

Robert’s father on the 1930 U.S. Census – https://www.familysearch.org

Robert’s paternal great-great-grandparents, Elisha Redford and Mary Ann McCreary, on the 1900 U.S. Census – https://www.familysearch.org

Robert’s paternal grandmother, Lena Taylor, on the 1900 U.S. Census – https://www.familysearch.org

Genealogy of Robert’s mother – http://www.findagrave.com