Redford: What does the surname Redford mean?

Redford is an Anglo-Saxon surname that typically denotes geographical origin. Derived from the Old English words "read," which means "red," and "ford," which indicates a shallow part of a river or stream, it likely served as an identifier for communities or individuals living near a red-colored river crossing. Similar to many other English surnames, place names and other geographical features were commonly used to identify people during that period. Therefore, a person might have been named "Redford" because they lived near or were associated with such a location. The surname dates back to early medieval Britain and has seen variations in spelling throughout history, such as Reddeford, Radford, Routford, and others. Actor and director Robert Redford is a famous bearer of this surname.

Order DNA origin analysis

Redford: Where does the name Redford come from?

The surname Redford is of English origins and is attributed to the county of Lancashire, particularly the City of Lancaster. This family’s coat of arms is also linked with this surname. It is now common throughout the world, most notably in the United Kingdom, where it is one of the fifty most common surnames. It is common in Scotland and northern England, as well as in former colonies of the United Kingdom, like Canada, the United States, Australia and New Zealand.

In the United States, Redford is among the top 1,000 most common surnames. According to the US census in 2016, it was the 658th most common surname in North America. Some states in the US with higher than average densities include New York, Connecticut, California, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Virginia, North Carolina and Texas.

In the United Kingdom, the Redfords are among the top fifty most common surnames. Northern England also has higher than average Redford densities, with some reporting as much as a 1% density. The highest Redford densities are mainly in Lancashire, Yorkshire, Merseyside, Durham and Northumberland, while significant numbers can also be found in Scotland.

As a result of colonial history, Redford is also common in the former territories of the British Empire, such as Canada, Australia and New Zealand. It is particularly prominent in Canada, where it is among the top 300 most common surnames. Recent migration has also seen significant numbers of Redford’s settling in parts of South Africa, India and other countries in Europe.

Variations of the surname Redford

The surname Redford is a surname of English origin which originated from two places in England, Redford in the county of Lincolnshire and Radford in Nottinghamshire. It is derived from the Old English words 'raed' meaning 'council' and 'ford' meaning 'river crossing'.

The variants, spellings and surnames which originate from the same origin as Redford include Redforde, Redfode, Redford, Redeford, Radford, Redferd, Redfurth, Radfurd, Radforth, Radforde, Radfode, Radfurde, Redfurd, Radfurth, Redfirth and Redfert.

The surname Redford has also borne numerous variations in spelling over the centuries, as well as adopted derivatives in other languages. In some cases, these variations developed particular regional associations, such as Reethford in Scotland, Radfford in Wales and Redfau in France. Variations have also arisen due to a lack of standardisation in spelling conventions, such as Redfoord, Redeford and Redfibord, as well as the adoption of other surnames of similar sound, such as Redburn and Radburn.

The surname Redford has also replaced an earlier form in Scotland, Redfauld. Redfauld was derived from the Middle English terms ‘red’ meaning ‘river crossing’ and ‘feld’ meaning ‘field’. It is believed to have arisen originally in the Scottish Borders.

In certain instances, the spelling of Redford has been corrupted into Redforde or Redfourn, due to dialectical influences or inaccurate recording by the illiterate. In some cases, the spelling of Redford has become eroded to Redfar or Redwood, resulting in further derivatives and variations such as Redeferd and Redforde.

Variations in spelling, regional dialects and the adoption of other surnames of a similar sound account for the variants, spellings and surnames made from the origin of Redford.

Famous people with the name Redford

Robert Redford: American actor, director, producer, businessman, environmentalist, philanthropist, and political activist.

Jim Redford: American musician, songwriter and producer.

Alan Redford: British actor.

Charlie Redford: Professional Racing Driver.

Frances Redford: Drawing and Prints Artist.

Joe Redford: American Film Actor.

Miles Redford: American Singer-songwriter.

Chelsea Redford: Actress from "The Bride of Chucky".

Emma Redford: Actress from the TV series "Holby City".

Martha Redford: American Clothing Designer.

Other surnames