The Scottish have contributed to almost every aspect of our lives. Many have become well known. Some were born in Scotland and others in the U.S. All have given us enjoyment, security, convenience, products, or information.

Actors & Actresses

“Bond, James Bond…” Charleton Heston

Warren Beatty (MacLaine)

Ava Gardner

Judy Garland

Greer Garson

Katherine Hepburn

Alan Ladd

Robert Mitchum

Marilyn Monroe John Wayne Shirley MacLaine

Actors and poster images courtesy wikipedia.com

Robert Redford

Cliff Robertson

Jayne Russell

George C. Scott

Jimmie Stewart

Elizabeth Taylor

Keifer Sutherland ~

image courtesy wikipedia.com

Reese Witherspoon ~ image

courtesy wikipedia.com

Vin claims the Sinclair clan as his ancestors

At the 2003 MTV awards in Edinburgh,

Vin made international headlines

when wore a black leather kilt

~

Image courtesy wikipedia.com

Great Scots in Africa

In 1770 James Bruce, a wine merchant from Stirlingshire, found the source of the Blue Nile River

In 1796 Mungo Park first European to see upper reaches of the Niger River in Gambia.

In 1823, Hugh Clapperton and the Englishman Dixon Denham first Europeans to cross the Sahara Desert

In 1826, Alexander Gordon Laing, of Edinburgh, was the first European to achieve Timbuktu. He was slain 2 days later

In 1862 James Grant & John Speke an Englishman, discovered and named Lake Victoria, the principal source of the Nile River

In the 1850’s, David Livingstone, discovered Victoria Falls, Zambesi River & Lake Nyasa

Athletes with Scottish Roots

American Baseball ~ Ty Cobb, Don Drysdale, Catfish Hunter, Harmon Killebrew, and Cy Young

Hockey ~ Bobbie Orr

Auto Racing ~ Jackie Stewart and David Coulthard

David Coulthard races for Team

McLaren Mercedes of the UK

~

Image courtesy wikipedia.com

Lance Armstrong

Bicyclist

Tour de France

7 time winner

1999-2005

Image courtesy

wikipedia.com

Scottish Authors

Robert Burns ~ one of history’s greatest poets

Michael Crichton ~ Jurassic Park, The Andromeda Strain

Sir Arthur Conan Doyle ~ Sherlock Holmes

Ian Fleming ~ James Bond series, Chitty Chitty Bang Bang

Kenneth Graham ~ The Wind In the Willows

Rudyard Kipling ~ Kim, Jungle Book

Sir James Barrie

Author

Peter Pan

with

Tinker Bell

Windy

Captain Hook

The Lost Boys

Never Neverland

~

Image courtesy

wikipedia.com

J.K. Rawlings ~ the Harry Potter series

Sir Walter Scott ~ the Waverley novels

Robert Lewis Stevenson ~ Treasure Island, Kidnapped, The Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde

Brand Names

Well known companies founded by men of Scottish ancestry ~

Armour and Company ~ the largest meat packer in the world

Black and Decker Tools

Cannon towels

IBM

Lenox china

Keiller’s Marmalade ~ begun when a grocer bought a distressed cargo of Seville oranges in Dundee harbor in 1797. If you like ginger and haven’t tried their ginger marmalade, it’s wonderful.

Liggett-Rexall Drugs

Lipton Tea ~ the founder was born in Glasgow

Rose’s Lime Juice

Simmons Mattresses

McKesson and Robbins Pharmaceuticals

Thom McAn Shoes

all logo images courtesy wikipedia.com

David Jack, a Scotsman who joined the California gold rush, has become a household word. He didn’t do so well in the gold fields, so he settled in Monterey and developed a cheese called Monterey Jack.

Businessmen

The Scottish are well known for their astute business sense.

In 1694, William Paterson founded the Bank of England.

Andrew Carnegie ~ steel magnate, the greatest philanthropist of all times, died the richest man in the world.

Dale Carnegie ~ author of How To Win Friends and Influence People.

Malcolm Forbes ~ founder of Forbes magazine.

John Kenneth Galbraith ~ economist and author.

J. Paul Getty ~ oilman. His mother’s ancestors fled Scotland after Culloden. The family founded Gettysburg, Pennsylvania.

Malcolm McLean ~ inventor of containerized shipping and McLean Trucking.

Andrew Mellon ~ Gulf Oil and Alcoa.

Donald Trump

~

Scottish mother

The Apprentice

Trump Towers

Taj Mahal at

Atlantic City

~

Image courtesy

wikipedia.com

Educators whose Parents were Scottish

The Scottish contributed greatly to our education system.

William Holmes McGuffey (1800-1873) author of the McGuffey Readers, which improved the American education system.

In use for over 120 years, only The Bible has outsold them. In their first 75 years they sold over 122,000,000 copies.

While less than one-half of 1% of the world’s population, 11% of all Nobel prizes have been awarded to Scotsmen.

The world’s first university faculty of engineering and technical science was in Glasgow.

Scottish Explorers

In 1812, the Oregon Trail, from Missouri to the Pacific Ocean, was first traversed by Robert Fulton.

In 1823, David Douglas traveled to the West Coast, where he discovered over 100 plants and 50 trees, one of which bears his name ~ the Douglas fir.

In 1831, Sir James Clark Ross discovered the Magnetic North Pole.

In 1848, James Wilson Marshall discovered gold at Sutter’s Mill, creating the California Gold Rush.

1933 Douglas Douglas-Hamilton and David McIntyre were the first to fly over Mt Everest. David McIntyre later founded the national airlines of Iceland, Belgium, Greece, and Luxembourg.

William Forsyth

(1737 - 1804)

Scottish botanist

Royal head gardener

Founding member

Royal Horticultural Society

~

Forsythia named

in his honor

~

Image courtesy

wikipedia.com

Inventions by the Scottish

The men of Scotland and their Scottish American descendants were great inventors.

In 1497, the Scots invented the game of Golf, by adding the hole to stick-ball games.

John Napier (1550-1617) invented logarithms and the decimal notation.

Branch banking was attempted by The Bank of Scotland in the 1690’s and the 1730’s. The British Linen Company succeeded in 1746. The Bank of Scotland succeeded in the 1770’s.

A Scot invented suspenders.

Inventions of the American Revolution

James Watt started the Industrial Revolutions with the first efficient steam engine in 1769, which Robert Fulton needed to improve the Steamboat.

In 1776, Captain Patrick Ferguson invented the breech loading rifle.

Steamboats and The London Bridge Built by the Scottish

Robert Fulton

“Quick Silver Bob”

Inventor ~

In 1800 developed

first modern

submarine, “Nautilus”

exhibited on the

Seine River in Paris

for Napoleon

~

Image courtesy

wikipedia.com

In 1824, Scottish engineer John Rennie, designed the London Bridge.

Postage Stamps, Bicycles, and Morse Code

In 1837,

John Chalmers

Invented the

adhesive postage

stamp

~

Image courtesy

wikipedia.com

Around 1839, Kirkpatrick MacMillan invented the bicycle.

On May 24, 1844, Samuel Morse inventor of the Morse code, sent his first message, "What hath God wrought?"

Stirling Engines, Cable Cars, Seeds, and Fingerprints

In 1850, Robert Stirling invented the Stirling engine.

In 1873, Andrew Halladie introduced his San Francisco cable cars, which are a landmark of San Francisco.

In 1876

W. Altee Burpee

founded the Burpee

Seed Company

which is still in

business today

~

Image courtesy

wikipedia.com

In 1880, Henry Faulds pioneered the use of fingerprints for criminal identification.

Tires, Buicks, Television, and Penicillin

In 1887, John Dunlop, a veterinarian by training, invented the car tire.

In 1902

David Buick began

manufacturing the

Buick automobile

with an innovative

valve-in-head engine

~

His father, Alexander,

invented the process used

to bind white porcelain

to cast iron bathtubs

~

Image courtesy

wikipedia.com

In 1926, John Logie Baird invented the Television.

In 1945, Sir Alexander Fleming discovered Penicillin.

Chewing Gum

In 1869, Santa Anna was living in exile in New Jersey. He told Thomas Adams about chicle from the sapodilla tree. Adams, an inventor, tried to make an imitation rubber and failed.

Having seen Santa Anna chewing on chicle, Adams added mint flavoring and tried chewing it. This became Adams Chewing Gum, with Black Jack and Clove becoming their most popular flavors. Today their fruit flavor is most popular.

Image courtesy wikipedia.com

Ministers

Eric Liddell ~

‘The Flying Scotsman’

A 1924 Olympic runner,

immortalized in the movie

Chariots of Fire.

Known for his refusal to

run on Sunday, in later life

he chose to referee Sunday

soccer matches for children

who were getting into trouble

on Sunday afternoons.

Born of missionary parents

in China, Eric returned to

China as a missionary.

He died in 1945, while

Interred in a Japanese

Prison camp.

~

The movie poster and

this scene from the

movie, were shot on the

beach at St. Andrew's

Golf Course in Scotland.

~

Images courtesy

wikipedia.com

Dr. Peter Marshall ~ introduced the ‘Kirking of the Tartans’ ceremony in 1941. He was Chaplain of the U.S. Senate from 1947 until his death in 1949.

His wife, Catherine Marshall, is a well-known author. Though her maiden name was Wood, the fact that her father was a Presbyterian minister, implies she was also of Scottish extraction.

Widowed at 35, Catherine began her writing career and authored 22 works. The best known are A Man Called Peter, a biography of her famous husband, and Christy, a novel about a schoolteacher in The Appalachia Mountains.

Their son, Professor Peter Marshall, is a Presbyterian minister and college professor. He co-authored of The Light and The Glory and From Sea To Shining Sea.

These non-fiction books chronicle the history of the United States from Columbus. Using historical letters and reports, the books tell of our country, it’s founding, and growth from a Christian perspective.

Reverend Billy Graham was born in 1918. He has preached to more people worldwide than an other evangelist, ever. Billy Graham is called America’s Pastor and has sworn in seven U.S. Presidents.

Painters

Grandma Moses, Anna Mary Robertson Moses ~ a painter of folkart rural scenes. Wife of a farmer, began her painting career at 76, when she had to give up embroidery.

Jackson Pollack (1912-1956), America’s most influential expressionist.

James Abbott

MacNeill Whistler

(1834-1903)

his famous portrait

of his mother

hangs in the

Louvre Art Museum

~

Image courtesy

wikipedia.com

American Scottish Philanthropists

In 1993, thirteen of the twenty-one largest charitable foundations in the U.S. had been started by Scottish Americans.

Andrew Carnegie ~ steel magnate

Doris Duke ~ daughter of James B. Duke

James Buchanan Duke ~ tobacco, hydroelectricity, textiles, Duke University

J. Paul Getty ~ oilman

W. K. Kellogg ~ of cereal fame.

John D. MacArthur ~ Bankers Life & Casualty

William L. McKnight ~ 3M Scotch Tape

Richard King Mellon ~ Pittsburgh banking

Charles Stewart Mott ~ General Motors

John Davison Rockefeller ~ oilman, mother a Davison

De Witt Wallace ~ Readers Digest

Lila Acheson Wallace ~ Readers Digest

Singers with Scottish Blood

Joan Baez ~ Mexican-Scots

The BeeGees & Andy Gibb

Glen Campbell

Johnnie Cash claimed that his

line came down from Ada of

Huntingdon, the sister of

Malcom IV and wife of Floris III,

Count of Holland, who was

descended from Dub of Scotland,

the first King of Scotland.

~

Image courtesty wikipedia.com

Donovan

Sheena Easton

Judy Garland

Woodie Gutherie

Arlo Gutherie

Sir Harry Lauder ~ Vaudevillian

Don McLean

Bill Monroe

Anne Murray

Elvis Presley

(1935-1977)

~

the King

Image

courtesy

wikipedia.com

Rod Stewart

Dame Joan Sutherland ~ of Australian Scots ancestry. She sang in concerts, oratorios and broadcasts throughout Australia.

James Taylor

Song Writers

Hoagie Carmichael ~ Stardust, Georgia On My Mind

Johnnie Mercer ~ Moon River, Blues in the Night, That Old Black Magic, Autumn Leaves

Scottish Statesmen

Thomas Blake Glover ~ one of the founding fathers of modern Japan.

Major General Lachlan MacQuarie ~ known as the Father of Australia.

Winston Churchhill, Charles deGaulle, and Franklin D. Roosevelt, the leaders of the Allied Forces in World War II, all had Scottish ancestors.

Women

Scottish American Women

Elizabeth Arden ~ a Canadian Scot who built an empire in women’s cosmetics from her first salon, opened in New York City in 1907.

Julia Child ~ famous television chef whose programs brought French cuisine to the American masses.

Martha Graham ~ dancer and choreographer, Modern American Dance.

Princess Victoria Kaiulani

~

heir-apparent to

the throne of Hawaii,

her life was spent

being groomed to be

the future Queen of

Hawaii.

Her father was a Scot.

~

Image courtesy

wikipedia.com

Juliette Gordon Low ~ founder of the Girl Scouts in the United States.

Mary Lyon ~ began teaching school in 1814, became the first woman principal in America.

Martha Bulloch Roosevelt ~ wife of President Teddy Roosevelt.

Elizabeth Wallace Truman ~ wife of President Harry Truman.

The Mary’s of Scotland

Mary of Guise ~ the Queen Consort of James V of Scotland and regent for her daughter, Mary Queen of Scots.

Mary Queen of Scots ~ whose life was one of the great tragedies of history.

Image courtesy

wikipedia.com

The Four Marys ~ young ladies, closely connected with the Royal House of Stewart, who were chosen by Mary of Guise to be companions to her daughter, Mary, the future Queen of Scotland.

Mary Seton ~ the only one of the Maries not to marry, she remained in service to the queen and shared her captivity in England for 15 years.

Mary Beaton ~ called Beaton because it rhymed with Seton.

Mary Fleming ~ along with Mary Queen of Scots, the granddaughter of James IV.

Mary Livingstone ~ a very robust and athletic girl, whome the others called Lust. Her father was one of Mary Stuart's guardians and sailed with her to France.

Scottish Women

Rhona Martin ~

team leader of

Scotland's gold

medal Curling team

at the Salt Lake City

2002

Winter Olympics

~

Image courtesy

wikipedia.com

Lady MacBeth

Winifred Maxwell, Countess of Nithsdale, who followed her husband, James II into exile, then delivered him from the Tower of London in 1716.

Elizabeth Mure, the first wife, but not the queen, of Robert II.

Euphemia Ross, the second wife and only queen of Robert II.

Mary Fairfax Greig Sommerville ~ one of the leading minds in mathematics and physical science.

Margaret Tudor ~ first daughter of Henry VII and Elizabeth of York. She married James IV of Scotland on 8 August, 1503, at Holyrood House.

To Return to Clan Tartans, just close this page

Leave Famous Scotsmen and Return to

Scottish Wedding Dreams Home Page