HOLLYWOOD legend Robert Redford’s son has revealed his hero isn’t his famous dad - but his Scots milkman grandfather.

James Redford, 54, told how Edinburgh-born grandpa Charles fought his way through The Great Depression to become a wealthy accountant.

The filmmaker, whose new documentary Resilience is being screened across Scotland, admits being inspired by his relative’s determination to succeed.

He said: “My grandfather was a lovely man. During the depression when things were really rough, he worked as a truck driver for a dairy.

“If it wasn’t for my dad’s story, the big success story in our family would be my grandfather.

“He went on and did his accounting degree and retired as a top account executives. He had quite an amazing journey throughout his whole life.”

But James, whose first visit to Scotland was when Robert was filming for 1974 hit The Great Gatsby in London, admits his career choice was also inspired by his dad.

The American icon, who is now also a director, was best known for his roles in acclaimed films like The Sting and The Way We Were.

James, who is the double of his dad, said: “The idea of using images to tell a story rubbed off on me, I started out as a screenwriter as a young man and had a great career doing that.

“I remember back in the mid-70s my dad was making the Great Gatsby at Pinewood Studios in London.

“We got the car and drove north because my mum and dad have Scottish ancestory. We were driving around the countryside and visiting places.

“There was a summertime and we went and there was a massive fair going on in Edinburgh.

“There was marches and bands, a fairground on a plateau, it was huge and it made an impression on me.

“We stayed at inns, we went to a pub where my dad had stayed for a few days. It’s a beautiful country - it’s hard not to love Scotland if you’re a nature lover.

“The Scottish people are very welcoming and very friendly.”

His hardhitting new documentary tells how medical studies show that conditions such as heart disease can be linked to childhood trauma.

And James, who was diagnosed with lifelong illness ulcerative colitis as a child and later received two liver transplants, explained how a close bond with his father helped him become a survivor.

He said: “I’m very fortunate to have a loving and close family, but when I was being considered as a candidate for a liver transplant, I was really struck by how much time the surgical chain investigated and explored whether or not I had healthy relationships with people.

“When the chips were down my dad was as supportive as a father could be, he went out of his way to support me, he’d go to hospital on weekends, even when he was stuck in the middle of trying to make a movie.

“Patients who go through a very harrowing experience, if they don’t have close family they don’t do as well and they don’t survive. I knew then that there was something going on.”

During the making of Resilience, director James found how “toxic stress” in childhood can lead to adult disorders, such as heart disease, cancer and obesity, as well as eating disorders and depression.

He hopes his film will help offer a solution to worldwide illnesses.

And he says dad Robert was in awe of the documentary after viewing it at the Sundance premiere.

James continued: “We’re like sharks, we don’t stop moving, but we always make a point of figuring out when to spend time together and watch each others’ work.

“Every time he does something I feel a connection to it, I think he feels the same way too.”