Western music is the nearly forgotten half of “country and western” and this song is one of the best examples of it. Western was (and is) the cowboy side of things; songs about gunfights, the desert, cattle calls and the like, something that is a persistent part of American self-identity.

Marty Robbins may have been western’s most well-known artist, but there were others, fellows like Eddy Arnold, Bob Nolan, Foy Willing and bands like Sons of the Pioneers and Otto Gray and his Oklahoma Cowboys were all popular and well-regarded in their time.

Sometimes, traditional country stars like Johnny Cash and Hank Williams dabbled in western as well. And I am sure you all remember Slim Whitman, who actually was more than a novelty in his day.

In the early 1970’s, western waned and “country and western” just became “country.” It was modern times, we’d been to the moon and there were other concerns to consider. Cowboy songs were gone.

Time passes and what was once old becomes new again: western music is making a bit of a return. Maybe that’s because a lot of artists that are revisiting the old styles, and updating them into something new. Western music is no exception and musicians are again tapping into its rich vein.

You’ll find no better example of “modern” western and a paean to its past than Marty Stuart’s last album “Way Out West.” The title track is something that could have been recorded in 1965, but it a 21st-century sensibility that could only be made in modern times. Also on that record is “Old Mexico” – a pure western song that will make you think Stuart is channeling the late Marty Robbins.

Another artist to check out for modern western is Gil Landry’s solo work, especially with songs like “Fennario” or “Denver Girls.” Landry will take you out under the infinite Colorado skies and tell you a story or two in the blowing winds.

It’s a great form of American music, and one that really sets a technicolor vision of a mythical place.

My father Armand worked at Cape Kennedy (now Kennedy Space Center) during the Apollo program. He was the Pad Fire Chief whose fire and safety responsibility was launch pad operations — and that included astronaut safety except for when they were in the rocket itself. Once they were strapped in, the Launch Escape System (a rocket on top of the rocket) was the primary safety system, but anywhere else, that was Dad’s team.

When it came time to launch Apollo 7, everyone at Kennedy Space Center was tense — it was the first human-crewed flight of Apollo, and it was the first time men humans would be going to space after the AS-204 (Apollo 1) tragedy that had claimed three astronauts in the first design of the Apollo capsule. America had started falling behind schedule in its schedule to get to the moon before 1970, and on this flight, everything had to go right…or perhaps the program would be canceled.

If there’s one thing about NASA, is that’s they pay attention to the smallest details. That’s because major incidents always start small…and mushroom from there. On this particular mission, due to the previous tragedy in the capsule, extra attention was given to FOD — foreign object debris — that might be loose in the capsule. The fear was another fire, and no one was taking any chances. None.

With that, word came down from on high in the NASA hierarchy: once they were in their flight suits, no one was to touch the astronauts, under penalty of instant dismissal from their position. The mission managers made it clear that they meant business and that meant anyone.

Part of Dad’s job was to ride up in the elevator on the rocket gantry to the White Room — the place where crew would help each astronaut into the capsule. This elevator was essentially a hardened industrial elevator, big enough to move a lot of people and gear, but not so big one could stand on the other side of a room. There wasn’t room enough for that.

The mission command was Walter “Wally” Schirra, a crack former Navy test pilot and an inveterate smart-ass. He and my father knew each other well from launches and rehearsals for the Apollo 7 launch. They’d spent a lot of time testing emergency evacuation systems, refining them afterwards in meetings, and probably hoisting a couple of drinks after work back in Cocoa Beach. That meant Wally had also experienced by Dad’s wicked sense of humor, and anyone that ever knew him said the same thing: he was a masterful raconteur who loved to laugh and loved to tell a joke even more. He and Schirra were two peas in a pod.

So the astronauts get out of their van, walk up to the elevator on the launch pad and they start riding up towards their seats, and Dad was with them in their procession.

Dad told me that they ended up in the back, side by side, riding up to the top when Schirra starts laughing, gives my Dad “a shit-eating grin” and then “started rubbing shoulder all over me, laughing.”

What did you think about that?

“I was scared shitless that one of the Germans would turn around and I’d have to come home and explain to your mother why I’d gotten fired.”

But you didn’t, right?

“Nope, the Germans turned around, looked at Schirra and said in their perfect* English ‘stop it Schirra. Armand has kids at home.'”

Did you worry about getting any FOD on Wally?

“No, we were in jumpers and they were the cleanest clothes I ever wore. Wally knew it too.”

Dad told me that the rest of the way was silent, and when they got to the top, and then he looked at my Schirra and said, “give me a hug goodbye, Wally!”

Yup, the world watching and two smart-asses are cutting up behind the scenes. That was my Dad.

most of zee Germans had accents.

My father Armand worked at Cape Kennedy (now Kennedy Space Center) during the Apollo program. He was the Pad Chief — his responsibilities included fire and safety during any launch pad operations — and that included astronaut safety except for when they were in the rocket itself. Once they were strapped in to the Apollo capsule, the Launch Escape System (a rocket on top of the rocket) was the primary safety system, but there were also others: the infamous Rubber Room, zip-lining drops away from pad, others.

One thing that may not immediately be apparent where a Pad Chief’s job was concerned: the Saturn V was launched off of a mobile launch pad. It was built over 3.5 miles from where it launched, and it had to be moved from the Vehicle Assembly Building to the pad complex on the edge of the coast. To get there, a huge system called the Transporter-Crawler moved the 362-foot rocket on a road of river rock at a whopping one MPH. It took a while. And every inch of the way, Dad and his fire and rescue team were right beside it just in case something happened.

When Apollo 6(1) was being moved out to the pad, it of course went down that rocky road, and Florida being Florida, there’s wildlife everywhere. It could be anything: from a battalion of mosquitoes to a Bald Eagle, a gator, a wild boar, lizards of all shapes and sizes, bobcats, or something else. Florida is alive, and Kennedy Space Center adjoins a National Wildlife Refuge, giving the local fauna plenty of space to roam. When you visit the place, probably the second thing you notice is how wild it all is.

On the day the rocket was lumbering out to its launch complex, a small snapping turtle was paying no attention to the 6,000,000 pound vehicle carrying the most powerful non-explosive machine humanity had ever built bearing down on it. It slowly crawled out of the marshes and was headed to the next one on the other side of the road. And once a turtle makes up its mind, there’s no stopping it. Sure enough it had bad timing: it walked squarely underneath the middle of one of the treadmills which then proceeded to drive right over him.

You might think that was the end of that, and that the turtle was ground into soup beneath the Saturn V as it rolled slowly over.

You would be wrong.

After 20 minutes or so, the crawler rolled of the spot where it had run over the turtle. “And there it was,” my Dad used to relate. “Squished into the rocks.”

“In one piece. And looking pretty pissed off.”

“So then we walked over to where the turtle was, embedded in the rocks, and the he stood up and walked off, like nothing had ever happened.”

I asked him if ever saw the turtle again. “Maybe. They didn’t like it when the rocket launched because it shook them all to hell. If I was him I’d have moved along to where the tourists were so I could get a free handout.”

The quip about gators is a quick story for another time: why you never went near the water for a day or so after a Saturn V launch. It made them rather salty.

(1) I am 90% certain Dad said it was Apollo 6.

Today would have been Hedy Lamarr’s birthday. Not only was she an incredibly successful film actress from Hollywood’s Golden Age, Hedy was also a crack mathematician and engineer responsible for inventing one of the base technologies that made cellular phones, Bluetooth and WiFi possible.

Lamarr co-invented the first realization of spread-spectrum technology that initially provided for more secure electromagnetic communication but something that was later refined for use in cell phones, 802.11 WiFi and Bluetooth. In those later technologies, the ability to change channels without missing a beat is a requirement, one because it allows mobility as a signal weakens and another becomes available, but also so that interference can be minimizes. For example, if you and your friend are both using Channel 11 on a WiFi connection, one of you will automatically switch to another channel so that your communications are not canceled out.

In 1962, the U.S. army recognized Lamarr’s genius, using her invention in military ships against a Cuban blockade. Variations on the technology are now standard. Heard of CDMA cell phone networks like those that Sprint and Verizon run? They work a lot like the “secret communications system” Lamarr and Anthiel envisioned.

The Atlantic: Hedy Lamarr’s Secret Communications System

Lamarr is proof that one can have talents in many realms and that the old cliché of “brains or beauty” is absolute BS.