Matti Vanhanen, President-in-office of the Council. (FI) Mr President, Mr President and Madam Vice-President of the Commission, ladies and gentlemen, honourable guests, I warmly thank you for this opportunity to come and discuss the priorities and main objectives of the Finnish Presidency with the European Parliament. It is an exacting task to discharge the responsibilities of the Presidency in the European Union, but at the same time it is a great honour and privilege, and Finland welcomes the challenge.

As the country to hold the Presidency, our collaboration with the European Parliament has got off to a good start. I would like to thank the President and all the other Members of the European Parliament who attended the meeting between the Finnish Government and Parliament in Helsinki. Furthermore, several parliamentary committees and political groups have visited Finland and engaged in productive discussions regarding the aims of our Presidency.

Ever since Finland joined the EU it has supported efforts to make the work of the Union’s institutions more effective and improve the close cooperation that exists between them. As the country to hold the Presidency, we will work in close and effective cooperation with the European Parliament. By that I do not just refer to Parliament’s role in the codecision procedure as a legislator on an equal footing with the Council, but in a wider context, promoting the key aims of the Union.

Finland’s own national parliament, the Eduskunta, is celebrating a special anniversary. This year it is 100 years since the unicameral parliament was founded and universal suffrage established. Everyone, men and women alike, at the same time had the right to vote and the right to stand for election. We are proud of this landmark in the history of our democracy.

In Finland, the parliament is closely involved in the handling of EU affairs, and it has a lot of influence. Perhaps this experience that we have of fruitful cooperation with our parliament has in turn made it so natural for us Finns to engage in close cooperation with the European Parliament too. There is no overlap in the work of the European Parliament and that of the national parliaments: each has its own role to play in Union affairs. Basically, however, they have the same fundamental mission: to strengthen democracy in the Union.

During its Presidency, Finland will endeavour to persuade the Union to look outwards and ahead. We must reflect on what sort of a Union we want to see 10 to 20 years from now, and how that is to be achieved. As Europeans, we need to identify the historical forces of change in our time, and respond to and embrace them. It is a major challenge for the EU to face up to the reality of globalisation.

The world that surrounds the Union is changing and if we are not careful we will lag further and further behind. That would be disastrous, above all for the future of our children and future generations. For their sake, Europe must stop looking inwards and consider its position in the global context in the longer term. The world around us will not wait. Our future requires us to take concrete action now, even though its effects will only be visible later on.

In recent years participation in decision-making in the Union has left something to be desired and the public are more critical about that than before. I nevertheless dismiss the pessimistic talk of a crisis in the Union; instead, I believe that the problems we have at present can be overcome. The agreement reached on the Financial Framework and progress with the Services Directive are examples of the Union being able to take important decisions when the political will is there. I believe that it is there in all the Union’s institutions.

The European Union is a community of values, which exists for the people. That is why its reduced legitimacy and its diminished justification and credibility in the eyes of the people must be taken seriously.

This perception that the Union’s legitimacy is suffering is partly due to the fact that the public does not know what the Union does for them. Many issues that have a real impact on people’s lives, such as the right to reside, work and study anywhere in the EU, are taken as a matter of course. People forget that they are possible precisely on account of the Union.

Lack of information, however, does not explain everything: the Union has also to be able to improve the way it does things. It needs to deliver results, the effects of which the people can see in their own lives.

The Union’s basic premise, peace and stability in Europe, is still relevant. I was personally reminded of that on my trip to Croatia a few weeks ago: they want to join the Union so that they and their children will never again need to witness another war.

Many other people, who have lived their whole lives in peace, tend, however, to take peace and stability for granted. As a result, that no longer seems enough on its own to give the Union legitimacy. As many of you have often said, the Union must be able to demonstrate the benefits it offers to its citizens in other ways too, and more tangibly.

The best way to demonstrate the necessity of the Union is to deal with its basic tasks effectively, especially its legislative work. That we can and must do right away on the basis of the existing Treaties. Europe cannot wait around for new rules on decision-making: it needs to start improving the way it functions straight away. The Union needs to show that it can achieve results that impact on human lives and not just quarrel about institutional matters.

Improved effectiveness will mean that bold decisions will need to be taken by Europe’s leaders and decision-makers. We cannot just think about the here and now, or future elections; we have to think about the interests of future generations. That is why decisions also need to be taken which will perhaps be painful now, but which will help shape the future. There must also be a willingness to compromise on national points of view and consider Europe as a whole.

The Union must focus on the essential, and work effectively for it. That means the sort of action that results in added value compared to what the Member States could do alone. This added value can be achieved in the areas of welfare, security and freedom.

If we are to realise these aims we need to start with the right approach. Transparency is essential: our citizens need to know how the decisions that affect them are made. The growing political debate in Europe is in the interests of everyone. You also have a crucial role to play in this.

I am pleased that we in the European Council decided to increase the transparency of Council sittings. Finland, as the country to hold the Presidency, will implement comprehensively the principles adopted by the European Council to increase the transparency of the Council’s work.

Finland will aim to contribute to the issue of transparency in other ways too, in all its practical work and activities. We shall aim to ensure that all essential information is available at our EU Presidency website as quickly as possible. Sometimes practical solutions like this do more to provide genuine access to information than mere political statements.

During its Presidency, Finland will steer its resources towards better regulation, that is to say, quality of legislation, and attention to the principles of subsidiarity and proportionality. This will not merely be a case of pruning legislation. In the European Union we need new legislation, but we must keep existing legislation up-to-date. This way the Union can influence and react dynamically to the changes in the world around it. In this we support the work of the Commission.

The Presidency will invest time and effort in ensuring that decision-making takes careful account of the economic, social and environmental effects of legislative proposals. Our goal will also be to expedite the implementation of Commission proposals that aim to simplify and update legislation.

The work of the Council will be based on the Annual Work Programme for 2006, which we drafted together with Austria. Cooperation between successive Presidencies is very important for continuity. With Austria it has gone well, and we intend to continue the cooperation in just the same positive spirit with Germany, which succeeds us.

The Finnish Presidency is committed to working through the Union agenda and all the issues on it effectively, efficiently and impartially. I shall briefly mention here the issues that the Finnish Presidency intends to highlight in particular, but that does not mean that we would not attend to other matters just as diligently. There is need for progress in all sectors.

Finland wants to promote the debate on the Union’s future. Connected with this debate are the very real issues of the future of the Union’s Constitutional Treaty and EU enlargement.

I am pleased that the European Council decided in June that, with regard to the Constitutional Treaty, it was time to move on from mere reflection to a more proactive stage. This twin-track approach is the right one: we will improve the way the Union functions in line with the current Treaties, whilst at the same time we start to ponder the future of the Constitutional Treaty. During its Presidency, Finland will start consultations relating to the future of the Constitutional Treaty. These consultations with the Member States and EU institutions will form the basis of a report to be produced during the first half of 2007, when Germany has the Presidency.

I am convinced that the Treaty negotiated with the Member States is essential for an expanding Union. In Finland the Government presented a proposal on the ratification of the Treaty to the Finnish Parliament at the start of June, and Parliament will deliberate on the matter in its autumn session. In this way, Finland is adopting a position on the negotiated Treaty.

Union enlargement is one of the key issues for the Finnish Presidency. I am personally convinced that the enlargement of the Union has been a success story. Not only is enlargement a crucial tool for strengthening stability and democracy, it is also one of Europe’s strategic responses to the challenges of globalisation. Recent analyses show that the latest round of enlargement was of clear benefit to both the new and the old Member States.

In June the European Council held an important debate on the Union’s absorption capacity. I am very pleased that this was not set as a new accession criterion. No new accession criteria should be set for applicant countries, but at the same time the existing criteria must be adhered to unconditionally. The bottom line is that the Union should remain an open Community. European states that meet the membership criteria should be able to join.

During our Presidency a decision will be taken on the accession date for Romania and Bulgaria. Membership negotiations with Turkey and Croatia will also be taken forward on the basis of the progress they have made and the Commission reports.

The Finnish Presidency will also support the European Perspective of the Western Balkans. The current year will in many ways be crucial for the future of the Western Balkans. The process concerning the status of Kosovo is likely to reach a conclusive phase in the autumn. The Presidency hopes that the parties will achieve results in the exacting negotiations entered into under Martti Ahtisaari by the end of the year.

A vital area during the Finnish Presidency will be the competitiveness of the Union and its Member States and their success in global competition. These we will make efforts to address over a broad spectrum during our Presidency in the various formations of the Council.

A fundamental question is where Europe will find the foundations for economic growth. Finland’s answer is that it will be found in such areas as innovation, energy solutions, the quality of work and productivity, openness in global trade, immigration and a competent social security system.

It is the Member States which have the principal responsibility for competitiveness. The onus is on them. The Union must have its own part to play too. Finland will strive to achieve results with regard to the Seventh Framework Programme for research. The same goes for the regulation on chemicals, REACH, the Services Directive, the Working Time Directive and the regulation on international roaming.

We want to make headway in developing a wide-ranging innovation policy. In Council legislation work and at the meeting of the Heads of State and Government in Lahti we will focus on initiatives designed to create a favourable environment for generating innovation and adopting it effectively. We are talking about a demand-driven innovation policy. The Heads of State and Government at Lahti can expedite the necessary decision-making process.

If there is to be a wide-ranging innovation policy there will have to be more effective cooperation and decision-making in the Union, for example, in standardisation, in the protection of intellectual property, and in the development of the financial markets. It will be just as important to add momentum to student and researcher mobility, enhance cooperation between universities and expedite the creation of European centres of excellence. I would also like to stress how important the positive effect of competition resulting from an open global economy is on innovation.

Europe needs to boost the mobility of its intellectual and material resources. The cornerstone of innovation policy is the Union’s internal market and its further development.

The obstacles to an internal market that functions effectively must be removed, so that the benefits of economic integration can be fully felt. The internal market is the very foundation of the EU. This should not be forgotten. The market in services is of major importance in this, and it is excellent that we are nearing a settlement on the Services Directive. The role of the European Parliament has been crucial. I hope that the directive can be finally adopted immediately at second reading in the European Parliament.

External relations regarding energy are also on the agenda at the meeting of the Heads of State and Government in Lahti. The Russian President, Vladimir Putin, has been invited to the dinner that takes place after the meeting, where he and EU leaders will have an opportunity for some informal discussions.

Europe’s economic success depends very much on securing a reliable supply of energy at a reasonable price. All Member States are affected by the challenges of rising energy prices, reliability of supply and climate change. Energy policy choices are largely national affairs. The European Union, however, needs common energy policy guidelines, and, in particular, a coherent policy on external relations with regard to energy. During the Finnish Presidency we want to promote the strategic debate on how we need to make our objectives on energy policy visible in the Union’s external relations.

Energy consumption and the choice of energy sources are closely related to the most serious threat to the environment of our time, climate change. With regard to climate policy, it is especially important to promote the discussions on the development of the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change after 2012. The Finnish Presidency will try internationally to promote discussion that could result in the EU’s objective of establishing an ambitious regime for climate change that covers all major countries. A comprehensive approach would not only work to promote a response to the climate challenge which is as effective as possible but would protect EU competitiveness.

Both these issues, energy and climate change, will be high on the agenda at summits with third countries during the Finnish Presidency, including the 10th ASEM Summit between the EU and Asian countries, to take place in Helsinki.

I am well aware that millions of Europeans fear global competition and that, as a result, they also oppose many changes. This fear was in evidence in the debate on the Services Directive, for example. It needs to be taken seriously. I would stress that we should not try and boost competitiveness in Europe no matter what the cost and regardless of the consequences. There needs to be a balance between reform, social security and environmental sustainability. Frequently, however, new working methods and modern technology benefit both economic growth and social welfare, and reduce emissions into the environment.

To preserve Europe’s welfare societies we will need to boost competitiveness, reduce unemployment, and improve labour productivity. The results are to be achieved through close cooperation with the social partners. A new balance between flexibility and security is the goal here. Finland will therefore host an extraordinary social summit just prior to the Lahti meeting of Heads of State and Government, where these issues will be discussed.

The Union’s external relations are linked to the economy, as its external action is based on its economic strength. We are an attractive trading partner, and that means that we have influence. The EU has become a global actor, which cannot afford to pause to reflect when dealing with external affairs.

During the Finnish Presidency, the EU’s international role will be consolidated and the coherence in the way it acts and functions will be reinforced. The Union has a far more comprehensive range of tools at its disposal than many other global players. They must be used with consistency, whether it is regarding policy on external relations, trade, development cooperation or human rights. The voice of the Union will only be heard around the world as one of unity if the Union is united.

We intend to develop the Union’s crisis management further. Rapid deployment troops must be fully ready to respond by the start of 2007. Coordination of civil and military crisis management will continue.

EU relations with Russia and the Northern Dimension will be priority areas during the Finnish Presidency. The Western Balkans, transatlantic relations and Asia will also be high on the agenda.

EU-Russian relations will not just be limited to the issues of trade and energy: the aim is for a broad-based partnership, in which European values and global interests unite us. The goal will be Russia’s ever closer involvement in democratic European cooperation in the various sectors of society. For that we need more dialogue between the EU countries and Russia, as well as student exchanges, cultural collaborations, and the active involvement of civil society.

During the Finnish Presidency there will be discussions regarding the new framework for the EU-Russia Partnership and Cooperation Agreement, which expires at the end of next year. Regarding the Northern Dimension, we have now come a long way: the political framework agreement is to be signed in the autumn. The development of the Northern Dimension is also of value in respect of other forms of cooperation in the Baltic region.

In addition to all this, we will obviously devote our efforts to the crises in the Middle East and other regions. We are very concerned about the situation in the Palestinian territories, on which important separate talks are being held today. In external relations the unexpected is the rule rather than the exception. Finland is also ready to take its presidential responsibilities seriously should the unexpected occur.

During the Finnish Presidency, a thorough political evaluation will be carried out on the progress achieved in the area of freedom, security and justice. We need concrete action, effective decision-making and the rigid implementation nationally of the decisions that have already been taken. In 1999 the Tampere Summit showed the way for the ambitious and democratic development of justice and home affairs. Now, in 2006, the assessment of the Hague Programme will provide an opportunity actively to push ahead with European cooperation in this area.

The public expect effective action on the part of the European Union in the fight against international criminality, people trafficking and terrorism. During the Finnish Presidency the political will of the Member States to commit to more effective decision-making, especially in the area of policing and crime, will be put to the test. The work can be improved if the Member States are ready to switch to a system of qualified majority decisions and communitisation in this area. The most recent European Council called on us to consider this in conjunction with the Commission.

I would like to emphasise that cooperation on policing and crime is not just a way of scoring points. We do not intend to get the Constitutional Treaty through by the backdoor, because the changes can be implemented on the basis of the Treaty of Nice.

Finland would also like to endorse the implementation of the principle of mutual recognition in judicial cooperation. If judgments and decisions by the legal authorities in another Member State are implemented as they stand, this can be a very real way of boosting the efficiency of large-scale, cross-border criminal investigations and speeding up legal proceedings. A good example of this is the European arrest warrant, which has resulted in shortening the time it has taken to extradite suspects from more than six months to as little as just one day.

Recent events, such as those in the Canary Islands and Malta, have once again made illegal immigration headline news. We need to take a thorough look at the range of options that the Union has, including agreement on common policies on legal immigration. More effective border control is just one part of the solution, albeit an important one. The importance of cooperation with the countries of origin and transit involved in illegal immigration cannot be overstated. We need to ensure that the Union’s common asylum system is in place by 2010. The Union must be able to guarantee protection to those who need it, with reference to comparable procedures and legislation. Attention also needs to be paid to the external dimension of questions relating to migration and partnership with our neighbours.

As I said at the beginning, cooperation between the institutions at both European and national level must be developed further. Today I would like to thank you in particular for this opportunity to present the priorities of the Finnish Presidency and discuss with you how they may be promoted. I await your comments with interest both today and at any time in the future, in this plenary and in other contexts.

The debate on Europe’s development is an important one, regardless of the political differences. The leaders of the political groups in the European Parliament, for example at the public meeting in Helsinki at the start of June, have demonstrated the will and ability to move forward with the European agenda. We in Finland too are used to engaging in productive cross-party political cooperation. It is also a natural thing to do at European level.

I hope that working together, as we will be during the next six months, will produce the best possible results. I look forward to being here again in the European Parliament in connection with the summits that are to be held during the Finnish Presidency.

We live in a time of enormous challenges. The Union needs to look to the future, boldly embrace reform, and demonstrate the political will needed to develop Europe. I believe that in many cases the right answer is more Europe, not less.

As it is about to begin, this Presidency has already been described as a sort of transitional phase. It would deal with the day-to-day business and prepare for a time when the preconditions for tackling the Union’s major issues are close at hand. It needs to be said very clearly, however, that, although the European Union might be in something of a wait-and-see mood, the rest of the world around us is not going to come to a halt. It would be the wrong way to treat Europe’s future generations if we were to close our eyes to the historic challenges we face and just wait around for a better time to come. That time is here and now.

(Applause)

José Manuel Barroso, President of the Commission. Mr President, I am delighted that, after the excellent Austrian Presidency, we can now work in tandem with the Finns. In Helsinki a few days ago, Prime Minister Vanhanen and I agreed that our two teams should work as one. Let us join efforts between the Presidency, the Commission and Parliament. Europe needs the clear, dynamic harmony which Finland brings.

I welcome the presentation by the Prime Minister, Mr Vanhanen. He has shown that the next six months present an opportunity to demonstrate what we mean when we talk about a Europe of results, to deliver on important dossiers of concern to our citizens, to move towards the next stage in the constitutional question, to steer the discussion on enlargement. In short, to follow the twin-track approach which I outlined to this House last month – an approach that was endorsed by the European Council – to move from a period of reflection to a period of engagement.

Let me pick up just some of the themes raised by Prime Minister Vanhanen.

I shall start with a simple, important point concerning enlargement. It is one of the most successful policies of the European Union, an extraordinary achievement in exporting freedom and opportunity across our continent. Many of us here today have benefited from this policy. We should be proud of our enlargement policy. I was very pleased that the last European Council reaffirmed that we will honour existing commitments.

However, on enlargement, as on so much of European policy-making, there is a popular debate with which we must engage. I welcome that debate. I want that debate. It is important to show that Europe does not enlarge by default, that enlargement is a conscious choice that is of benefit to all, that far from being a negative factor, an enlarged Europe is a precondition for a powerful Europe, for a Europe that really counts in the world.

That is why this autumn the Commission will report on the enlargement process as a whole, to set up the debate at the December European Council. This will include the analysis of the capacity of an enlarged Europe to function properly. This will be a serious, rigorous exercise. Nothing else will satisfy the public demand for more certainty and confidence.

We must take the same serious and correct approach to Turkey. I welcome the fact that negotiations are under way. It will be a long road, sometimes a very bumpy one. What matters is that we are open, honest and fair. Turkey must fulfil its commitments, just as the European Union must fulfil its commitments. Turkey’s commitments include respect for the Ankara Protocol.

Each Presidency brings its own particular expertise to the European Union. In Finland’s case it also brings a deep knowledge of and cooperation with its neighbours, including Russia.

I strongly support the emphasis placed by the Presidency on the relationship with Russia. Earlier this week the Commission adopted a recommendation for a comprehensive agreement that we hope will bring – because we believe it is in our interests as well as Russia’s – a new quality to the European Union’s relations with Russia, building on the existing partnership and cooperation agreement. We are proposing to move towards a free trade area to be completed once Russia accedes to the WTO. At the same time, we propose a partnership approach for energy, based on mutual interests and agreed principles.

Next week Prime Minister Vanhanen and I will travel to St Petersburg for the G8 Summit to determine, I hope, a new framework for the global energy challenges which require a global response. For energy, as for climate change, we need this global response. We will follow this up in turn at the October and December European summits. It is clear that on Russia – as on so many external issues – Europe has greater power when it works in a united and coherent way, and I hope the Member States will approach this issue precisely in that way.

The Commission looks forward to the Finnish Presidency taking forward the negotiations on the next generation of Northern Dimension partnerships. The ultimate result should be a shared policy with common ownership by all players, including Russia. The Northern Dimension will become a permanent forum on northern issues and concerns. In this context, the Commission has taken good note of this Parliament’s aspiration to establish a parliamentary forum.

The European economy is picking up pace. This is good news and we should build on it. I welcome the Finnish Presidency’s intention to drive forward the new Lisbon Strategy and to focus on research, innovation and education – the knowledge triangle. In this area, as well as in others, we must move from reflection to engagement, to real delivery. Political support must now be translated into concrete actions which create a more innovative climate in Europe.

My Commission will prepare a short paper on innovation to prepare for the Lahti informal summit. We must promote the European Research Area, including the European Institute of Technology, which should be a flagship project and symbol of the knowledge-based European economy. We must accelerate the drive to ensure open and interoperable standards and promote those standards worldwide. We must promote effective mechanisms – like venture capital – to finance innovation by European companies, having in mind also small and medium-sized companies.

Last week the Commission adopted proposals for an ambitious programme for increased security and more efficient justice for Europe’s citizens in a way that respects and protects their rights. This is a key feature of our Europe of Results agenda. I share the Finnish Presidency’s determination to move this dossier forward. The European Union will return to Tampere for the informal Justice and Home Affairs Council in September, to deepen European integration in this crucial area.

The case for deeper and more dynamic European action is clear: against those who plot against our values, freedom and democracy; against those who traffic in human beings, especially women and children; against illegal migration and those who exploit people in the workplace. We should not wait for the next tragedy in order to advance European integration in these areas: we must act now to prevent it.

We must implement better what already exists. For example, everybody agrees that sexual exploitation of children is a repugnant crime, yet only five countries have transposed the framework directive. Everybody agrees on the need to act against terrorism and organised crime, yet several Member States have not transposed effectively key legislation, such as the framework decision on terrorism.

To achieve our goals, we must improve our procedures. It is not coherent to proclaim the ends – on the fight against crime, terrorism, illegal immigration – but not provide the means.

The Commission believes the Community method, including proper European democratic scrutiny by this Parliament, should be spread to police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters and legal migration. That is what we said in our Citizens’ Agenda paper of 10 May. We are therefore now proposing to use the existing Treaty articles to make this change. The Commission is opening the interinstitutional debate and based on the results of that debate we will present formal proposals. I very much welcome the clear remarks made just now by Prime Minister Vanhanen.

We know there are political sensitivities, and we are ready to address those political sensitivities, but our procedures must catch up with reality.

Any step we take to improve our cooperation in security and justice matters must be matched with an extended protection of the individual citizen’s human and civic rights. This is for us a question of principle.

Law is the source of strength of the European Union, not intergovernmental backroom deals outside Parliamentary scrutiny and judicial review. That is why I also welcome the commitment of the Finnish Presidency to everything associated with the transparency agenda. Transparency, subsidiarity, better regulation should not be seen, as sometimes they are seen, as just technical matters; they are political matters. It is the democratic accountability agenda of our Union and we, the European Commission, stand ready to move forward on all those issues – transparency, better regulation and real subsidiarity – because this is a question of democratic accountability.

I have picked out only a few of the priorities of the Finnish Presidency. There are other priorities we fully share, including matters of immediate concern such as the deadlock in the Doha trade round.

The last few presidencies have helped the European Union resolve internal problems or lay the path towards their resolution. Now we need a change of gear from reflection to engagement, to a Europe which is looking forwards and outwards.

I welcome this. An open Europe, a more self confident Europe, a forward-looking Europe is what we need. Let us renew our energies to engage more deeply, more coherently and more effectively with the world around us. By exporting our values, by promoting our interests in the world, we can strengthen our identity and confidence. I look forward to doing just that in the next six months with the Finnish Presidency and with Prime Minister Vanhanen.

(Applause)

Matti Vanhanen, President-in-Office of the Council. (FI) Mr President, I kept diplomatically quiet on the subject of football. Our task, however, that of the Council, Parliament and the Commission, is to ensure that the world’s four – or preferably 25 – best are European: that is our common responsibility.

I tend to agree with many of your assessments and opinions regarding my speech and my style of presentation. I am perhaps slightly civil servant-like and it may well be that I tend to make lists, but I do not intend to change my style. I know that I will not get away with rhetoric with hardly any of you and I am not even going to try. Nevertheless, this debate has showed that there are such passionate views on many of these European issues that perhaps it is going to take a cool head to reconcile them all. This might be a better solution than strident rhetoric.

(Applause)

In this I have received very much good advice and guidance. I cannot now comment on all your speeches. I would like to start, however, with Mr Titley’s speech, as he is a sort of godfather to us. Some time ago, he drafted a report on the Finnish Presidency and was the first Member of the European Parliament whose acquaintance I briefly made when we were on the same committee jointly set up by the Finnish Eduskunta and the European Parliament. He gave me some good advice: action, action, and action. That will also hopefully describe the Finnish Presidency.

Mr Poettering made the apt comment that the presidencies form a six-month chain. It is therefore also natural that the same issues that you have heard many times will appear on the Finnish Presidency’s agenda. If I remember, one of you grumbled about this. This chain is necessary. You sit in the European Parliament for five years. The Commission sits for five years. There is a natural long-term aspect to all this among you. For the Council, the long-term aspect has to be established through mutual cooperation between the presidencies, because we need continuity. We have to devote our energies to that.

We need the involvement of everyone in next spring’s 50-year anniversary festivities and declaration, and I have welcomed those ideas that have been put forward here in this part-session. I agree with Mr Schulz’s powerfully expressed view that the Union needs those tools which we can use to respond to all the challenges that are important to us. To his comments on the need for enlargement and a new treaty I reply that there is not the slightest conflict of opinion between Commission President Barroso and myself. As it is, we have the mechanisms for enlargement, but everyone knows that common sense says that we also need a new treaty, at least in the longer term. Thank you to Mr Schulz and Mr Watson for your support and for the firm but healthy pressure you exerted in order that we should achieve progress in decision-making under the third pillar.

Mr Cohn-Bendit made the criticism that I did not raise the issue of legal immigration. It occupies a position of importance in our programme and I mentioned it. I mentioned it in connection with factors relating to Europe’s success. We also need legal immigration for Europe to succeed. It is one path towards European success in global competition in the future.

Mr Seppänen criticised Finland’s aim to ratify the Constitution, saying that we do not respect the results of the French and Dutch referendums. We certainly do, but we also respect Finland’s right to adopt a position itself on the negotiated Treaty, that broad-based compromise which was at one time reached.

(Applause)

We also have the right to express our views on it and we do so with reference to our own constitution and the consideration of matters and ratification procedures which it establishes.

Mr Crowley made special mention of new sources of energy, and I fully agree with what he said in his speech.

Mr Farage said that a common asylum policy in Europe is laughable. It is not. On the contrary, we need a common asylum policy. That is exactly what Europe needs, as with a lot of other things which are vitally necessary in internal and legal affairs.

(Applause)

It is with regard to these very issues that we need an area of freedom and justice. We need common standards and common regulations, and we need common action very much along the same lines. We need both cooperation between our countries and a clear mandate for the European Union.

Mr Paasilinna raised the sensitive question as to whether energy policy is for some in the world a weapon. That question is raised very frequently. Our reply is that energy policy should not be used as a weapon in global policy. On the contrary, the EU line should be that energy policy is a normal part of business. It must be business-based, and should clearly work both ways and give the same rights to all concerned parties. It must be based on long-term, reliable agreements and market prices. This way, when we act we can benefit from one another. The energy policy between the EU and Russia in particular is part of a strategic partnership. Russia needs European technology and the money that we spend as well, and we need Russian energy. This partnership can serve to improve both the EU’s and Russia’s success globally.

Mrs Jäätteenmäki made special mention of transparency and I fully agree with what she said when she remarked that what was most important was public access to documents. We are expecting the Commission to produce a document to debate on the review of a Community Regulation on transparency, and, during our Presidency, we will submit it as a topic of discussion in the Council.

Furthermore, everything that was said on the issue of climate change in the debate, including what Mrs Hassi said, will be taken into consideration.

Mr Kirkhope stressed the importance of assessing the effects of legislation. This is also a fundamental part of this policy of better regulation. This will be the responsibility of the Commission, the Council and Parliament: all those involved in legislative work. We must consider our legislative work a basis for impact assessments. As I said in my speech, they relate to both the effects on our competitiveness and the environment and the effects on social welfare. This needs to be part of the normal legislative process.

Mr Swoboda’s speech on the issue of Turkey was a wise one. I fully support what Commission President Barroso drew attention to regarding Turkish negotiations in his speech.

Mr Pflüger described Finland as neutral. I must correct him on that: Finland is a member of the EU. We were at one time a politically neutral country, during the time of the Iron Curtain. Now we are a member of the Union, part of this community of values, which has a common policy and, moreover, a common foreign policy.

(Applause)

He criticised the fact that we are leading the Union into military ventures and mentioned, by way of example, the operation we have begun in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. That is all about ensuring that there are democratic elections. That is just the sort of task that the Union should be engaged in. It gives firm support to those basic values which our existence relies on.

(Applause)

Mr Rasmussen mentioned the extraordinary social summit which we are holding and the fact that in choosing between flexibility and security the people need to feel that they have security. This will be an exacting task when we are introducing reforms. In responding to the challenge of globalisation we need to be able to make reforms in such a way that we also lead the world in terms of the economy and employment, but that has to happen in such a way that the people too can have confidence in it. In this respect, the social partners have an especially important role to play. At that summit we mean to speak a little about the model of consensus which Finland, for its own part, has used with some success to achieve certain kinds of results.

Finally in this regard, I will address Mrs Estrela’s question on equality. The introduction of a regulation on the founding of a Gender Equality Institute is now being considered. Hopefully we will achieve a result there. Similarly, during our Presidency we will focus attention on such issues as the trafficking of, and violence against, women.

Mr Buzek mentioned what in fact is the most important of the Finnish Presidency’s priorities: innovation policy. The Seventh Framework Programme is an important component of that. The EIT is an important initiative and a suitable structure needs to be found for it. In general, however, during this six-month term you will be hearing the phrase innovation policy over and over again. That is the message we want to drum home in the Union. Moreover, if there is something I hope the Finnish Presidency will be remembered for, it will be that we never stopped talking about innovation policy and how important it is. In fact, Mr Buzek gave a very graphic description of the sort of elements innovation policy should embrace.

Then, regarding Mr Brok’s speech on the importance of the Baltic region, I have to remind you that it is now a common sea. I was happy to note what you had to say, and we intend to keep the issue of the Baltic a current one. The progress we are making on the Northern Dimension is enough to provide us with the tools we need to improve the situation regarding the Baltic too.

(Applause)

To Mr Hökmark of Sweden I can only say that for 700 years we were the same country as Sweden, and in a few years’ time we will be celebrating the fact that we went our separate ways. Now for the last 11 years, on the other hand, we have been part of the same community within the framework of the Union and we enjoy a very close partnership.

I would like to end with a comment on Mr Millán Mon’s speeches on the situation in the Canary Islands. Hopefully there is something symbolic about the fact that Finland, the northernmost country in the Union, has wanted even to send a border patrol and a surveillance aircraft to the Canary islands to help and demonstrate solidarity, and show that the problems that we have in different parts of Europe, even with regard to illegal immigration, are shared by all of us. We need to show solidarity within the Union. These are issues which we all have in common. I would also like the Finnish Presidency to act in such a spirit in the Union over the next six months.

Thank you, Mr President, for the opportunity to speak here in Parliament, and I hope that we will enjoy the most fruitful cooperation with Parliament, its committees and its political groups over the next six months.

(Applause)

Richard Corbett (PSE), rapporteur. – Mr President, I suspect that there was a plot in this House in scheduling this debate right now, because it was expected that this would be the time at which England would have been playing against France. Mr Daul and I, having been involved in these negotiations, felt we were the victims of this plot. But, as we know, England did not qualify, so perhaps it matters somewhat less – at least for me.

We have before us technically two reports for procedural reasons, but they concern a single package: the proposed revision of the 1999 Council decision on comitology and the joint declarations which, because they constitute a sort of interinstitutional agreement, are subject to a separate report. They are globally a package and together they represent a huge step forward for Parliament – a major transformation of the comitology system.

My constituents back home in Yorkshire would be asking me what comitology is. It is not exactly the subject they are talking about day in, day out in the pubs and clubs of Yorkshire. Every legislature has a system of delegating powers to the executive. In national parliaments that is typically legislation that confers on the government powers to adopt further measures: the statutory instrument in the UK, the arrêté royal in Belgium, decrees in various other countries. The systems change slightly, but it is quite normal to confer powers on the executive, not least to deal with technical details and complex matters once the main legislation has laid down the general principles.

What is unusual in our system in the European Union is that, when we confer such powers on the Commission, we oblige it to act in conjunction with a committee of national civil servants. In many cases those committees have the power to block the Commission and refer the matter back to the Council. We have always found that objectionable: firstly because only committees of national civil servants and not Parliament have the right to scrutinise the Commission and refer questions back, and secondly because matters are referred back only to one branch of the legislative authority – the Council – even when the basic act has been adopted under codecision.

We also found the system to be thoroughly untransparent and complex with the numerous committees that give rise to the name of comitology. Only an expert could study it and understand it.

Over the years we have obtained small concessions. We now receive every document that is sent to a comitology committee. Since 1999 we have had some power to object within a certain time limit if we think that a measure goes beyond the powers that have been delegated. However, up to now, our fundamental objections have been unanswered. With this agreement there is a transformation of the situation: henceforth Parliament will be able to say no to any implementing measure of a quasi-legislative nature adopted through the comitology system, and if we say no the measure cannot be enacted. The Commission will either have to put forward a new proposal or table new legislation under the codecision procedure. That is a huge step forward for Parliament – and not just for Parliament – in terms of the accountability and transparency of the whole Union system. That is why this agreement is so important.

Nonetheless, there have been some issues with which we have been ill at ease and where we had to negotiate to ensure that our position was fully safeguarded. For instance, we have in this agreement a reference to the Lamfalussy acquis. Indeed, by mentioning it, as regards the Commission, we are actually upgrading that acquis from a mere statement in Parliament by the Commission President and a letter from the relevant Commissioner to the relevant committee chairman, to a declaration by the whole institution. So we have upgraded the relevant parts of the Lamfalussy acquis. That is also important.

We have gained satisfaction on time limits: it is an important step forward that three months can be extended to four, especially – as Commissioner Wallström pointed out – as the clock starts running once we get the text in all the languages. That will give us adequate time to consider these matters.

There has also been this issue of sunset clauses. I think that with this agreement Parliament will not normally need to use sunset clauses. We used them before, because when we delegated powers to the Commission we lost those powers for ever. With very loose control over how they were exercised, it was quite normal that we wanted to use sunset clauses as a way of reasserting control if need be. However, with this agreement we can say no to any implementing measures we dislike, even every single one of them, if we are dealing with quasi-legislative measures.

We therefore do not need to use sunset clauses. The agreement reflects that – in that we acknowledge that the principles of good legislation mean that powers should be delegated without a sunset clause, without a time limit. But the principle that the legislature should, if necessary, be able to set a sunset clause – that is a power we have under the Treaty – is recognised to the extent that the agreement says very clearly ‘without prejudice to the rights of the legislative authority’. As is said, we do have the right, but I believe that we will not need to use it except perhaps in exceptional circumstances that we cannot foresee at present. We recognised that de bonne foi as part of the negotiations, because the other institutions felt very strongly about it, but also, in my opinion, because as a parliament we realised that we will not need to do so.

With this agreement we should be more relaxed about delegating matters to the Commission because we will have that control afterwards. We have the ludicrous situation in our Union where we sometimes have two or three readings on subjects such as the width of tyres for tractors, which in any national context would have been delegated to the government to deal with – this is because we have been reluctant to delegate. With the assurance that we can control what we delegate, there is no reason for us not to delegate much more and more frequently. That is another reason for welcoming this agreement.

That is why my group and our committee, the Committee on Constitutional Affairs, rejected the amendments to which the Commissioner referred. It is only a recital – Parliament is not reaffirming the resolution to which it refers – but I do not see the need for a reference. My group – and I think other groups too – may be voting against this amendment if it is indeed confirmed by the group that tabled it. I will be listening to other speakers with interest in a minute.

There is a remaining issue: the adaptation of existing legislation. Commissioner Wallström referred to the package of 25 measures that will be adapted urgently, with a proposal by the end of this year. Beyond that the Commission has undertaken to carry out a survey of all existing legislation to see what needs to be adapted and will make a proposal. But we have no undertaking from the Council to act within any given timetable, so we as a Parliament will have to watch that very carefully. We have a ceasefire. I do not want to break the ceasefire, but we will have to watch very carefully that the Council looks at this seriously within the necessary timetable. So this may not be completely the end of the story, but nonetheless I think it is a huge breakthrough, a huge advance for Parliament.

I would like to finish in the way that Commissioner Wallström began, which is to thank all those involved. Certainly my thanks are due to the Commission. Its position is completely different to the Commission’s position of a few years ago and I think Commissioner Wallström can take much of the credit for that. The Commission has moved to a position where it was very supportive of our position. I think our positions were virtually identical for most of these negotiations.

I would like to thank the British and the Austrian Presidencies: the British Presidency that initiated the resumption of the Council’s consideration of this matter, the Austrian Presidency that took it forward so ably. Of course I would like to thank my fellow negotiator, Mr Daul, the Chairman of the Conference of Committee Chairmen. We went through many meetings together over a six-month period. I am very glad that tonight I can report to this packed House – at least those Members who are not watching the football! – that we have a very important result which I think is not just good for this Parliament, but is actually good for our Union.

Franco Frattini, Vice-President of the Commission. (IT) Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the reports produced and the questions asked have given me many ideas and I would like to thank the two rapporteurs and all the authors of the other documents debated today.

In my speech I will try to define the guidelines for the action that the Commission is preparing, also because, as all Members know, only six or seven months ago there were many doubts within the European Councils about the truly European, rather than national, dimension of the great challenge of global management of migratory flows.

The most important item of political information, which has been mentioned many times but is sometimes forgotten, is that, between November and December of last year, the European Council finally expressed itself with one voice; inspired by the spirit of Salonika 2003, it recognised that immigration requires a global approach, which can only be a European one. This is a political step forwards of definite importance and today we have been asked to implement the action plan.

This action plan comprises a series of concrete initiatives of which you are already aware. These are the proposals that the Commission has presented in recent months and that are in part the subject of the reports and the questions that you have brought up. For example, one of the main keys to European action is the principle of solidarity between Member States of the Union. This principle implies many things: first, it means that the Member States undertake to provide each other with mutual support should one of them be subject to particular pressure from migration.

The second aspect of the principle of solidarity is precisely that to which Mr Gaubert’s report, which I very much liked, is devoted. It is a report based on a proposal that I put forward in 2005, when I became aware of the need to provide a firmer basis for exchange of preventative information by each Member State that legitimately wished to adopt immigration initiatives, where these initiatives had an impact on the other Member States. Establishing a consultation mechanism is another way of applying the principle of solidarity. We must not forget that whatever happens within the borders of each State has repercussions in other States, hence the mechanism for mutual consultation and communication.

I accept with great pleasure all the proposals made in Mr Gaubert’s report, including the additional proposals, such as that for permanent political dialogue at ministerial level. There is also a proposal for an annual report, which the Commission would be very happy to present to this Parliament each year, on the operating of this mechanism. Someone who spoke before me said that there must be mutual trust between Member States for this mechanism to function. If there is no mutual trust, we can write the rules, but they will remain on paper alone. We will, therefore, need to put political pressure on Member States, explaining to them that if they do not communicate or exchange information with the other States in a true spirit of European sharing, things may go well one time round, but then go badly, as we say in Italian. It suits everyone, therefore, to be totally transparent at all times and this is the spirit of the report by Mr Gaubert, with whom I concur.

What are the shared guidelines for European immigration policy? First, a challenge that is both global and European. Second, and this is the most innovative aspect, a role for the European Union as a single player on the international scene, for example and in particular in neighbouring geographic areas; I refer specifically to Africa, to the Mediterranean area and to our close neighbours in the East. These are the three main geographic areas where Europe has to conduct political action in practice as a single player with a single voice.

What things have to be done within this political challenge? Above all, we have to confront the fundamental causes of immigration at a European level. Mrs Lambert has just stated perfectly correctly that we must transform immigration that is the fruit of despair into immigration that is the result of the choices made by people who freely decide to go and live and work in the European Union, but who are not forced to flee because of poverty or lack of drinking water in their country or because their environment has been destroyed. So what should we do? Point European development aid policies in the direction of strategies to deal with the lack of local development. For example, we can organise intervention that focuses on migrants’ countries of origin in order to encourage investment and the restructuring of the agricultural system or the environmental fabric, which is very often devastated and blighted.

We are currently considering projects for funding in conjunction with the World Bank, in order to use the remittances sent back by regularised immigrants and invest them in their countries, naturally only if this is what they want. So what is the obstacle? Very often immigrants have no access to bank credit and thus we would like to encourage credit services that are more prepared to invest, for example in a small or medium-sized company in a country of origin. We are developing so-called micro credit projects precisely to encourage the setting-up of such investment outlets in the countries of origin.

This work will be developed at a global political level, represented by contribution of Europe, which, I hope, will really speak with one voice, at the United Nations sitting in September, commonly known as the High Level Dialogue on Migration and Development. This session will take place on the margins of the United Nations General Assembly; here they will pinpoint the relationship between immigration and the development of the countries of origin. Europe will present a strategic document, based on a proposal that I will submit to the Commission in a few days prior to the summer break; this will be the European Commission’s contribution to this debate, which, I think, is the most important theme that we need to address.

The second theme is combating the trafficking of human beings, as mentioned by Mrs Klamt. You will know that the trafficking of human beings is now one of the major sources of income for totally unscrupulous organised crime. We now have very clear information on traffic flows, on the origin of the traffickers and even on the price charged to each desperate individual transported with no guarantee of reaching their destination alive. On average, traffickers ask these desperate people for enormous sums, between USD 1 500 and 2 500 each, without even providing a guarantee of safe arrival on the other side of the Mediterranean.

It is clear that combating the trafficking of human beings must go hand in hand with the protection of the victims of trafficking and, therefore, with the theme of vulnerable victims, immigrant women and children who are victims of the traffic in illegal immigrants.

In this respect I think we will also have to consider, because we need to do so, a policy of repatriation as European action against those who cannot stay on European soil because they do not have the right papers. I think we should organise repatriation moves, setting standards, in conjunction with the United Nations agencies, for the respect of individuals, not only for their rights, but also for the dignity of those to be repatriated; they must be repatriated in total compliance with the standards defined by international conventions.

In this context, we are working on readmission agreements. At the moment we are addressing very ambitious challenges, such as signing as soon as possible, first with Morocco and then with Algeria, readmission agreements that are once again European, and no longer bilateral between one State and another, to increase Europe’s political dimension.

The third theme is legal immigration, which I see as an opportunity and certainly not a danger. It is obvious that, as far as legal immigration is concerned, we have to comply with national regulations. For example, you merely have to remember that even in the constitutional treaty that we signed in Rome, we had specified that the number of immigrants who could enter each country would be determined at national level; that said, however, I think joint rules are needed on the admission of legal immigrants and I fully share the opinion of the person who said that we should not ask for or hire only highly qualified immigrant workers because that would cause a brain drain that would very likely impoverish the countries of origin. Instead, our intention is to encourage people to move around, since it is clear, as someone has said, that many immigrants would like to go back to their country of origin, their motherland, and we have to help them to do so.

In Europe, however, there is a need for seasonal workers and agricultural workers, workers in so many sectors, who are not highly specialised, but who are of use; if, therefore, we confined ourselves just to engineers, doctors or researchers, it would lead to the impoverishment of the countries of origin.

The fourth theme is integration. Mr Lambrinidis knows how much I appreciate his work, and in particular this report because, until now, integration was not considered to be what it effectively is: a factor that cannot be separated from migration policy. Allow me to say that it would be irresponsible to welcome immigrants without integrating them because we would thereby increase their frustration and their sense of isolation.

It is precisely on this subject that our proposals provide for focusing on key sectors, on civil rights, on accommodation, education, and on work, which must obviously be legal rather than illegal. We have proposed, and we are implementing, a permanent European Integration Forum, and local government will have a prominent say. For how long now have we forgotten mayors, regional governments and civil society organisations? And in talking about integration, we cannot confine ourselves to the capitals of Member States. The European Integration Forum will deal precisely with this aspect and I hope that this Parliament will support it by approving the European Integration Fund. This fund does not replace national policies, but helps them to be more efficient.

The fifth theme is illegal immigration. I am about to promote an initiative, which the Commission should approve on 19 July, on certain guidelines for illegal immigration. First, I believe that we should promote a proper education and communication strategy in the countries of origin. When they arrive in Europe, aspiring immigrants do not know the rules, do not speak the language, do not know about work opportunities, and do not know the laws of the European countries, which, however, they must respect; so why not consider one of my proposals on vocational training courses and language courses in the countries of origin, which Europe could encourage and even cofinance to prepare for legal and necessary immigration? It is obvious that, if we wish to beat illegal immigration, we need to stop undeclared work, because undeclared work means exploitation and is also a factor that attracts further illegal immigration.

The sixth theme is urgent measures to protect and provide concrete support for the Member States with the greatest problems. The Canary Island mission has been decided; thirteen Member States have agreed to participate and will provide naval vessels and aircraft to patrol the Atlantic coast opposite the Canary Islands. A second European mission will then go to the aid of Malta and patrol the Mediterranean. I would like to emphasise that these are the first actions to be coordinated by the Frontex Agency, that is by Europe. They are not actions implemented by individual Member States working together, but are coordinated by a European agency.

These constitute urgent patrolling measures, but they are not just that; they are also measures to save human lives at sea, because the humanitarian aspect of this terrible tragedy is that, every week in the Mediterranean, in the sea around my country, we see people drowning; often we do not even manage to recover the bodies. These actions, too, are absolutely vital.

Lastly, the seventh theme is aid to the immigrants’ countries of origin and of transit. We have to provide concrete assistance, work with them and, if I may say so, in a spirit that replaces the usual tone of international relations, in a real partnership. I am about to go to the Rabat conference, which will take place on Monday and Tuesday next week, in Morocco itself. For the first time, at this conference the African countries and Europe will meet to develop a common action plan.

I think that we will then have to create an instrument to provide constant monitoring of the initiatives that we will be adopting in a few days’ time; then we will need a second meeting, this time under the aegis of the African Union. I think that the future will see the African Union and the European Union implementing a strategic programme and I think that this can really make a difference.

Louis Michel, Member of the Commission. (FR) Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I am glad to be addressing you today at this final plenary before the summer break.

This will also be our last meeting before the International AIDS Conference which will take place in August in Toronto. As you know, Toronto will offer the Commission a first rate platform to express its vision for dealing with the scourge of HIV/AIDS.

The European Commission obviously remains very concerned about the problem of HIV/AIDS. Despite our efforts, this scourge continues to spread throughout the world. It now affects tens of millions of people, infecting more and more girls and young women. The countries most affected are still the poorest countries of sub-Saharan Africa, where the rate of infection is not falling and where the disease continues to undermine any prospect of human, social and economic development worthy of the name.

Faced with this tragedy, the European Commission is more determined than ever to vigorously support its partners in Africa and elsewhere. Our goal is to give them the tools to fight this pandemic by combining prevention, treatment and care in an effective manner. However, in addition to these measures we remain convinced that HIV/AIDS cannot be treated in isolation.

First of all, the fight against HIV/AIDS cannot be dissociated from the fight against other diseases that are also linked to poverty, notably malaria and tuberculosis. Furthermore, HIV/AIDS brutally exposes all the biggest challenges for development: limited access to social services, exaggerated inequalities – whether social or between men and women – bad government and corruption, as well as the persistently extremely low level of economic and technological development. In a word, the blatant inadequacy of the state with respect to essential governmental functions.

The only way that HIV/AIDS can be combated successfully is if the leaders of developing countries address all these problems at the same time. This integrated approach to HIV/AIDS is the principal driving force for the Community’s action, and it also forms the basis of our approach in concert with the Member States, and also with our other partners at the heart of the international community.

The main financial instrument to which the Commission has recourse is the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria, which devotes around 57% of its resources to the fight against HIV/AIDS. We favour the use of this Global Fund because at the moment it is the most rapid and effective means to provide aid that can be allocated by the beneficiary countries in an integrated way.

As you are aware, the Commission plays a key role in administering this Fund; it has, effectively, a sort of Vice-Presidency. Since the creation of the Global Fund at the end of 2001, the Commission has contributed up to EUR 522 million, or 11% of the total contributions. If we include the contributions of the Member States of the European Union, then we are obviously, by far, the principal backer of this Fund, providing around 60% of the total Fund. I should also say that a few months ago I participated in the replenishment of this Fund in London, and I will not conceal the fact that we were fairly disappointed that participants were somewhat lukewarm, even reserved, about replenishing the Fund. We are a long way from the objective that we set ourselves, and therefore great efforts must be made to mobilise donors.

Thus we are implementing a series of financial support measures, projects and programmes. Among these measures we are giving precedence to general budgetary support. This approach is in accordance with our priority, which is to let our partners take control of their own policy and thus their own destiny. In line with this stance, the Commission has committed EUR 2.4 billion since 2002 to the general budget for Africa alone, where the impact of HIV/AIDS is by far the most serious.

We are of course involved in an ongoing political dialogue with our partners regarding the use of these funds. This dialogue also aims at encouraging them to implement an integrated approach – I mean, in particular, by including questions regarding human rights and good governance. I also mean gender equality, as well as discrimination and acts of violence against women, and access to education for girls.

In addition to these efforts through the Global Fund and through bilateral action, the Commission is actively participating in international forums for dealing with poverty-related illnesses – I am thinking in particular here of the World Trade Organisation, of the United Nations General Assembly special session on HIV/AIDS, of the G8, and of conferences like the one in Toronto as well.

The Commission has played a decisive role in making sure that on these occasions the European Union speaks with a united voice on this question. Moreover, the Commission has also been engaged for several years in a dialogue with the pharmaceutical industry in order to speak in favour of making medication available to developing countries at lower prices. This dialogue has borne fruit: the introduction of a graded price scale has enabled the price of certain medicines to be reduced by 95%. This system allows developing countries to pay prices in accordance with their means, while at the same time protecting the businesses that produce these medicines from the risk of seeing their products imported back into the very lucrative markets of the developed countries. In 1999, a complete antiviral HIV treatment cost USD 10 000. Today it costs USD 200.

We are engaged in research ourselves, in cooperation with industry and with the research centres of Member States, and our efforts are in particular directed towards finding microbicides and vaccines. We have also launched a partnership to coordinate the research programmes of Member States in order to accelerate clinical testing and thereby to ensure that medications may be put onto the market more rapidly.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, we must go further in our fight against HIV/AIDS, in order to be able to provide preventative measures and treatment to all those who need them by 2010. In this respect, we are following – with great interest – the implementation of innovative funding mechanisms by certain Member States, in particular the tax on aeroplane tickets. We are also glad to see increasing contributions from private foundations, such as the Bill Gates Foundation, to the fight against HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria.

The creativity of these solutions, as well as the increasing involvement of the private sector, give me cause to hope. This reflects a realisation – that is increasingly being transformed into action – of the threat represented by HIV/AIDS and of the need to respond to it in a proactive way in order to preserve our common future. We must not relax our vigilance, and we must continue our work without respite. We can attain our ultimate goal, which is to provide care to all those who need it and to see future generations grow up without the fear of AIDS.

I am delighted to be able to continue to collaborate with the European Parliament in order to turn this objective into reality. Thank you for your attention.

Louis Michel, Member of the Commission. (FR) Mr President, it is always slightly embarrassing to make do with saying that what one has just heard corresponds to one’s own convictions, but it is obvious that, like you, I agree with the majority of the points that have just been made. Even so, and in order to be entirely objective, I will make a number of comments.

It has been pointed out that we could find the means to resolve this crucial problem if only we wanted to. This, for me, is a major concern. Mrs Scheele put it well: it is a question of political will. For my part, I can only fight this fight by using arguments and speeches. I cannot – obviously - force Member States and international donors to be more generous. I was very shocked and surprised by the low level of commitment in London. If I recall correctly, the objective was set at USD 7 billion, and we barely reached the figure of USD 3.7 billion, which is indeed well below the initial objective. It will therefore be necessary to continue our efforts.

My second observation is that I agree, of course, with Mr Bowis who argues in favour of strengthening research in this area. It is clear that research will ultimately enable us to gain a great deal of time in our efforts to eradicate this terrible evil once and for all.

As for the fixing of a percentage, Mrs van Lancker, even if I agree in general what you say, I would like to emphasise that we do not determine such a percentage ourselves: it is determined by the partner countries. The principle of appropriation exists and we often have to plead with our partners in order for them to agree to dedicate part of the development aid that we donate to a sector like the one under discussion this evening. This is something I consider important to remember. In other words, I am personally right behind you when you say 6%, but this does not depend entirely on us.

As regards the developmental aid dedicated to the Millennium Development Goals, I very sincerely have the impression that in the framework of the new programme – which we are working on and for which we will need your contributions, creativity and ideas – more than 50% will be devoted to the Millennium Goals. In fact, my conviction is, and this has become an obsession with me – by the way it is, curiously enough, very difficult to find people who share it – that, in many developing countries, problems are linked to the inadequacy of the state, to the deficit in the state’s capacity to deliver social or democratic services, like access to education for girls, access to health care, access to justice, access to administration. All this is often very incomplete, and sometimes it does not even exist at all. Therefore, when we give the states in question the means to reinforce their service capacities in a general sense, then it is quite understandable that this money will also help to meet the Millennium Goals.

As for your remark about maintaining our contribution to the Global Fund, we do indeed intend to maintain this contribution. I should also say that a number of Member States of the European Union set a good example in London and have made real efforts concerning the sums. It is our non-European partners who have been rather timid on this subject.

I agree with you that we must provide more significant support to benefit those countries which especially make particular efforts, even if AIDS does not, unfortunately, recognise borders. We must therefore make aid payments dependent on the performance of these countries, and that is what we are doing. Moreover, as you know, the 10th European Development Fund provides a special instalment which is, precisely, intended to supply additional means in a significant quantity relative to the initially planned sum, depending on governance, on performance and also depending on, for example, investment dedicated by partner countries to the fight against AIDS.

Now, Mrs Hall, as regards local NGOs who feel that they have not been treated properly by the Commission, if you have specific NGOs with specific projects in mind, then I would like to hear about them. Be that as it may, I recognise that the Commission’s policy has been to avoid spreading credits too thinly between all sorts of projects which, taken individually and on a micro-local level, are doubtless important. In any case, it seemed to us that it was even more important for the international community to have a truly coherent communal strategy, based on a methodology that would be consistent across the board in order to deal with the problem as a whole. The Commission’s policy has been to try to make payments into the Global Fund in order that there might be a 'thinking head' capable of generating a global strategy. In any case, if an individual project is good, why not fund it, indeed. However, I remain convinced that if we dispersed ourselves between all sorts of projects then we would not be so efficient.

That is the choice that the Commission has made, although it does not prevent me from being open to discussion – I am not narrow-minded. However, if certain people think that we should multiply little projects, even if they are good ones, then I remain sceptical as to the long term effectiveness of this strategy. When it comes to dealing with large scale problems like the one we are talking about this evening, I personally am in favour of adopting a much more systematic procedure. Now, if you spread out your resources among a multitude of small projects, then you lose sight of the systematic global approach and you become less effective. That would be my cause for concern. However, if you know the NGOs who have submitted these applications, please do give them and show them to me, because I do not want to give the impression of being arbitrary. Besides, I am not the one who decides – the administration submits its conclusions to me, and it is, unfortunately, not possible for me to study each application individually. Thus, if certain people believe that their applications have been treated unfairly, then I am willing to look into this question.

One final point: you know that, within a broad European consensus, I advocate a common programme in which the contributions of European donors, Member States and the Commission are merged together. If we could truly succeed with this common programming initiative, in other words collectively agree on common objectives and decide on how to share out the work between us, then I think we would be much more effective, particularly in fighting the terrible disease of AIDS. This approach would be more coherent and perhaps then we would have a real European strategy at our disposal, something that is not the case today, as we must admit. Today, we are donors, we are investing money in the Global Fund, we finance this Fund, but we do not have our own strategy for fighting AIDS except, as I said earlier, for our plan to attack it on several fronts: gender inequality, the education of girls, care, access to health care, all those problems that the state is called upon to solve. Apart from that, we do not have a truly specific strategy for fighting AIDS. We have to admit that what we are doing is financing external operations. Therefore, if we had a common programme, we could then perhaps implement a more refined strategy that would engage in a more direct way with the specific aspects - and even local aspects - of this problem.