EDIT UPDATE: This edit has changed into a rescored version of Red Rock West (no added Twin Peaks scenes, only the music of Angelo Badalamenti.

This Edit will be a Mashup of Red Rock West and Twin Peaks Fire walk with Me/The missing pieces.

The Main movie is Red Rock West starring Nicolas Cage, Dennis Hopper & Lara Flynn Boyle and then I have added scenes from the world of Twin Peaks.

The music in Red Rock West will for the most parts be replaced with Angelo Badalamenti & David Lynch's scores.

I'm not an approved editor yet but as soon as I get there I will put this edit into "in the works section"

or move one of my other edits to "inactive"

here's a quick teaser poster (not final)

Sorry for some misspelling of the cast

Love it - after my recent TP binge , i had a similar idea to try and make an edit featuring the various actors but its just too much of a big task at the moment. As David Lynch would probably say - i'll meditate on it for a while.

Last Impressions said:

Love it - after my recent TP binge , i had a similar idea to try and make an edit featuring the various actors but its just too much of a big task at the moment. As David Lynch would probably say - i'll meditate on it for a while.

Thanks Last Impressions!

I have more ideas about Twin Peaks!

I’m planning to make a trilogy of Fake Twin Peaks movies if this edit turns out well.

To expand/explore that universe is very interesting.

This is my idea for the intro!

Each movie will have a different song and for this I have chosen "I'm waiting here" by David Lynch & Lykke Li

from the David Lynch album "The Big Dream".

Not sure about the fonts!

I have tried to make them like in the show but they may better work in white like in Fire Walk With Me.

Any feedback is welcome!

Password:fanedit.org

Really excited to watch this! Red Rock West is one of my favorite movies but I'm not a fan of the score so I love what you're doing audio wise. It definitely has more of a Lynch vibe even in the Dahl parts (ha). I'm more of a Twin Peaks novice although I love Fire Walk With Me so I'm really pumped for this.

Really excited to watch this! Red Rock West is one of my favorite movies but I'm not a fan of the score so I love what you're doing audio wise. It definitely has more of a Lynch vibe even in the Dahl parts (ha). I'm more of a Twin Peaks novice although I love Fire Walk With Me so I'm really pumped for this.

Thanks @FutureCapsule!

Yes Red Rock has already some great vibes of Twin Peaks over it so the change Will for the most part be just the music.

the biggest problem is that Red Rock has only a

Stereo track so I must remove all audio to rescore it.

but it’s nice to know that there’s some interest for this Edit

Running Time is at the moment 1h 56min

It’s approx 75 % Red Rock West and 25% Twin Peaks scenes.

The Red Rock West ending is slightly changed to a more ”open ending”

Have some more audio work to do and maybe find some more Twin Peaks scenes to level up

the % rate.

But I want to keep a good pace in the movie as well so maybe I will just keep it as it is.

Quick update!

Sarah Palmer and The Log Lady joins the cast in this Edit!

And new beginning has been created and it’s now starts with the ”classic” Twin Peaks theme.

The Running Time is now 121 min.

I Will post the first 10min of the Edit very soon!

i am still interested how you plan to make sense of the narrative.

right now at least to me, it just seems like we are going back n forth from 2 different stories.

will it make sense once it's complete?

i am still interested how you plan to make sense of the narrative.

right now at least to me, it just seems like we are going back n forth from 2 different stories.

will it make sense once it's complete?

I’m not sure it Will make perfect sense!

My first goal was just to rescore Red Rock West into a Twin Peaks movie.

But it didn’t feel right for me so I just expanded the Edit with random scenes from Fire Walk with Me/The Missing Pieces to make it feel ”more”

Twin Peaks.

The main story is still Red Rock West