Southwest Airlines Co. operates one of the world's most admired and awarded airlines, offering its one-of-a-kind value and Hospitality at 1211 airports across 11 countries. Southwest took flight in 1971 to democratize the sky through friendly, reliable, and low-cost air travel and now carries more air travelers flying nonstop within the United States than any other airline2. Based in Dallas and famous for an Employee-first corporate Culture, Southwest maintains an unprecedented record of no involuntary furloughs or layoffs in its history. By empowering its more than 74,0003 People to deliver unparalleled Hospitality, the maverick airline cherishes a passionate loyalty among more than 137 million Customers carried in 2023. That formula for success has brought 47 consecutive years4 of profitability for Southwest Shareholders (NYSE: LUV). Southwest leverages a unique legacy and mission to serve communities around the world including harnessing the power of its People and Purpose to put communities at the Heart of its success. Learn more by visiting Southwest.com/citizenship. As the airline with Heart, Southwest has set a goal to work toward achieving net zero carbon emissions by 20505. Southwest has also set near-term targets and a three-pillar strategy to achieve its environmental goals. Learn more by visiting Southwest.com/planet.

Southwest has a long history of returning value to its Shareholders. Since 2010, Southwest has returned more than $13.5 billion to Shareholders through share repurchases and dividends. From early 2020 through third quarter 2022, the Company's dividend was suspended due to the uncertainties of the pandemic and the requirements of the Company's Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (CARES Act) financings. On December 6, 2022, Southwest’s Board of Directors reinstated and declared a quarterly cash dividend of $.18 per share, or $.72 per share annualized, equivalent to its quarterly dividend prior to the pandemic. Through the first half of 2024, Southwest returned $215 million to Shareholders through payment in dividends.