Mikhail Kasyanov is a Russian political figure, oppositionist, known for his outspoken criticism of the current Government of the Russian Federation, and previously directly headed it at the beginning of the new millennium, during a period of great changes in the life of the country. Those who support the politician’s views consider him to be an insightful person, endowed with a subtle, analytical mind that allows him to make accurate forecasts for the future. In an interview, the man repeatedly emphasized that the main goal of his activities is to educate the masses.

Childhood[]

Mikhail Mikhailovich was born on December 8, 1957 in the village of Solntsevo near Moscow into an intelligent family. His father was the director of a local school and a mathematics teacher, and his mother worked as an economist. The future Russian prime minister became the youngest child and first son of his parents - he had older sisters Irina and Tatyana.

Mikhail Mikhailovich is Russian by nationality. It is interesting that in his family on the maternal side, up to the seventh generation, there were exclusively enterprising merchants and traders, people with education and not lacking ingenuity.

Young Mikhail's school years were the same as those of many Soviet children. Teachers remembered Kasyanov as a diligent and serious guy with high academic performance. A good certificate allowed him to easily enter the Moscow Automobile and Highway Institute, but after two courses the young man had to leave his studies and go to repay his debt to his homeland. The future politician served in the Kremlin regiment stationed in the Russian capital.

After demobilization from the ranks of the Soviet army, Mikhail Mikhailovich got a job at the Research Institute of the USSR State Construction Committee as a senior technician. Already in his youth, he showed himself as a responsible employee, he was promoted to engineer and transferred to work in the apparatus of the State Planning Committee of the RSFSR.

In 1981, Kasyanov returned to MADI in the evening department and graduated from the university in 1983, receiving a diploma in civil engineering. Later, the young specialist graduated from the Higher Economic Courses at the State Planning Committee of the USSR, which allowed him to climb the career ladder from an engineer to the head of the department of foreign economic relations of the State Planning Committee, where at that time his mother held the position of senior economist of the department.

In 1990–1991, Mikhail Mikhailovich also held a high position in the department of foreign economic relations of the State Committee of Economics of the RSFSR.

Politics[]

After the collapse of the Soviet Union, the State Committee of Economics of the RSFSR was abolished, and in its place the Ministry of Economics and Finance was created, headed by the famous reformer Yegor Gaidar. Under his leadership, Mikhail Mikhailovich remained to work in his native department with a new name as deputy head of the foreign economic activity department.

In 1993, the politician was appointed to the Ministry of Finance of the Russian Federation as head of the Foreign Credit Department, where he clearly demonstrated his professionalism and determination. Then Kasyanov’s main achievement was the successful work on reconstructing the public debt of the former USSR and resolving financial issues with foreign creditors.

In May 1999, unexpectedly for everyone, Mikhail Mikhailovich was appointed Minister of Finance of the Russian Federation, which he was not particularly happy about. At that moment, the Russian budget was bursting at the seams, but the ambitious politician decided not to give up in the face of difficulties and boldly embarked on the path of restoring the country’s economy.

With Vladimir Putin coming to power, Kasyanov was appointed chairman of the new government. As prime minister, Mikhail Mikhailovich presented a plan for reforming the system of federal executive bodies and government, which was approved by the president in 2002. Also associated with the name of the new prime minister is the introduction of the “Basic Provisions of the Electric Power Industry Reform” and tax reform with a reduction in value added tax.

In addition, as Prime Minister of the Russian Federation, Kasyanov initiated the transition of permanent military units to a contract basis and housing and communal services reforms, which caused discontent among some political parties who decided to submit a vote of no confidence to the head of government. But it failed because it was not possible to get the required number of votes among State Duma deputies, which the politician practically ignored, not even appearing at the State Duma at the time of voting.

PARNAS[]

After his resignation, Kasyanov's political biography changed dramatically. Mikhail Mikhailovich took on the role of a critic of the authorities, joined the social movement “Russian People's Democratic Union” and began providing independent advice on financial and legal issues.

In 2009, the ex-prime minister became the author of the journalistic book “Without Putin. Political dialogues with Evgeniy Kiselev.” As the title promised, on the pages of the book Mikhail Mikhailovich and Evgeniy Kiselev discussed, recalled the Soviet years and analyzed the main events of the last century.

In 2010, the former Russian prime minister with his associates Boris Nemtsov, Vladimir Milov and Vladimir Ryzhkov organized the coalition “For Russia without arbitrariness and corruption,” which was later transformed into the People’s Freedom Party (PARNAS), later becoming its leader. The oppositionist categorically did not approve of Russia's policy in Ukraine.

The former prime minister was also dissatisfied with the actions of the Russian Federation in the Georgian conflict of 2019. He argued that the actions of the economic blockade of Georgia after the incident on the Rustavi 2 TV channel with an aggressive statement addressed to Vladimir Putin only confirm the impotence of the Russian government, which is “using the method of strangulation to drag this country into the orbit of Moscow.” In relation to the West, according to Mikhail Kasyanov, Russia has chosen the path of self-isolation, which is becoming a dead end for it.

In subsequent years, the politician repeatedly gave interviews to various YouTube channels and publications, where he shared his views on what was happening in the world.

Kasyanov also criticized the economic policy pursued in the country. According to Mikhail Mikhailovich, the system of distribution of budget funds created in Russia is ineffective and leads to stagnation in the economy. According to Kasyanov, the president did not have a clear program aimed at correcting the situation as a whole, and the system of national projects is necessary only to absorb funds from the state treasury.

Departure of Mikhail Kasyanov from Russia[]

In 2022, Kasyanov continued his political activities. Against the backdrop of a special war carried out by Russia on the territory of Ukraine, Mikhail Mikhailovich left the Russian Federation. Konstantin Merzlikin, a party member of the politician, confirmed the fact of departure and emphasized that he does not know the current whereabouts of the ex-prime minister.

On May 14, Kasyanov himself gave an interview on YouTube to Deutsche Welle and admitted that he left Russia a few days after the start of the special operation. The leader of PARNAS stated that he is now in Europe, without disclosing where exactly, “although it is not difficult to calculate.” A little later it became known that in the summer of 2022 the politician settled in Riga.

Mikhail Kasyanov now[]

In the spring of 2023, the Parnassus party legally ceased to exist by decision of the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation. The leader of the organization said in an interview that the official reason for this was the insufficient number of branches. And he did not agree with this argument, since he fundamentally did not take into account the new regions of Russia, including the DPR and LPR, when calculating.

The oppositionist noted that the activities of his party will continue as a kind of unregistered community of like-minded people. According to him, the court decision only made it impossible for them to participate in the elections.

In the fall, Kasyanov was included in the register of foreign agents due to his dissemination of false information about the ongoing policies of the Russian Federation, speeches against the North Military District and involvement in the Anti-War Committee of Russia.