Former Russian Prime Minister Mikhail Kasyanov returned to work in Moscow yesterday after a long holiday in Europe, dashing rumours he might stay abroad while prosecutors investigate his purchase of a luxury villa.

But he was immediately quoted as saying his consultancy firm was now being investigated by tax inspectors and he suggested the probe was the latest episode in what he has called a Kremlin campaign to destroy him as a political rival.

Prosecutors are already looking into allegations Mr Kasyanov, a Kremlin critic who has hinted he may run for president in 2008, pulled strings when in office to acquire the riverside villa on prime real estate outside Moscow.

Some analysts had suggested he might not return to Russia from his holiday to avoid arrest, but his spokeswoman said he had been back in Moscow since late last week.

Mr Kasyanov, who denies the charges against him, said the firm he set up earlier this year, MK-Analytica, had been notified by the local tax inspection office it was to be audited.

The tax inspectorate could not immediately be reached for comment and it was not clear if the tax probe was linked to the villa investigation.

"They are going to check the legality of our tax payments," Interfax news agency quoted Mr Kasyanov as saying.

"It is obvious this is being done with one simple aim: to get information on our clients... in order to put pressure on our business partners," Interfax quoted him as saying.

Mr Kasyanov was prime minister for about four years until President Vladimir Putin abruptly sacked him last year.

He returned to Russia for a few days last month, soon after the launch of the real estate investigation, but quickly left the country again.

Last month, he issued a statement saying the villa probe was consistent with a Kremlin policy of using compliant prosecutors and judges to destroy all political opposition.

Though Mr Putin, under the Constitution, must step down in 2008, analysts say he wants to ensure the election of a hand-picked heir rather than a rival like Mr Kasyanov.