Slaughterhouse-Five: Summary

Slaughterhouse-Five opens with Kurt Vonnegut describing his intention to write a book about his time in a German prisoner of war camp and during the devastation of the Bombing of Dresden. Still haunted by the horrors he witnessed, Vonnegut pledges to portray war accurately.

Vonnegut introduces Billy Pilgrim, a young soldier who has become unstuck in time. Billy is an optimistic optometry student drafted into the war from upstate New York. Assigned as a chaplain's assistant, he sees little nobility in the death and destruction of war. As Vonnegut tells Billy's experiences during the war, the narrative is interrupted by flashes from various points in Billy's life. Throughout the book, these moments flash from Billy's early childhood to his death. The book's fractured, non-linear storytelling suggests Billy may be an unreliable narrator.

On the European front, Billy meets Roland Weary, a violent bully who relishes the opportunity to fight and kill. During the German counterattack known as The Battle of the Bulge, Billy's unit is surrounded. Just as the Germans close in, Billy is suddenly hurled through time. He witnesses all the events of his life, from his past through to his eventual death.

Unstuck in time, Billy Pilgrim visits his past and present future in a random, disjointed series. Pixabay.

The captured troops are transported to a prisoner of war camp on a freight train where the German guards force Roland Weary to wear painful wooden clogs. The clogs cut deep wounds into his feet, which become infected. A dying Weary manages to convince another soldier, Paul Lazzaro, that Billy is to blame for his death. Viewing revenge as the highest form of honor, Lazzaro vows to avenge Weary.

At the camp, Billy suffers a breakdown and receives morphine which sends him slipping through time once again. As part of a work detail sent to the German city of Dresden, Billy works in a factory and sleeps in an abandoned slaughterhouse. The soldiers are able to survive the Bombing of Dresden by hiding in an underground bunker.

After several days the men emerge to find the city destroyed. The fierce heat of the bombs has cratered the land to resemble the moon's surface. Days later, the prisoners are liberated when Russian forces arrive in the city.

Back at home, Billy struggles to fit back into everyday life. Traumatized by the time shifts and the war, Billy displays symptoms of PTSD. While recovering in a mental asylum, Billy discovers an obscure sci-fi writer known as Kilgore Trout and uses his novels to escape the trauma.

After leaving the hospital, Billy enrolls in the Ilium School of Optometry. In his final year, he marries Valencia Merble, the daughter of the school's owner. Valencia's father helps Billy to establish a successful and profitable practice. With his growing family, Billy enjoys a happy and privileged life in the American suburbs.

On the night of their eighteenth anniversary, the sight of a barbershop quartet triggers Billy's memories of Dresden. That night, Billy is abducted by a flying saucer and taken to the planet Tralfamadore. The Tralfamadorians are two feet tall and shaped like toilet plungers, who view time from a fourth dimension perspective. While humans see time's passage as linear and progressive, Tralfamdorians see all events as occurring simultaneously and in a loop. To them, death is only a moment, a person continues to exist in all other moments. Instead of being sad or traumatized by death, they simply say, "so it goes." (Ch. 1)

The Tralfamdorians are amused at Billy's human ideas of free will. They believe all events are predetermined and that people have no control over their future. In the entire universe, the people of Earth are the only species to believe in the outmoded idea of free will.

For months, Billy lives in a glass enclosure acting as a zoo exhibit for the Tralfamadorians. His captors force him to breed with a beautiful actress, Montana Wildhack. Just as the couple falls in love and produces a child, Billy is sent back to Earth. Placed only a few moments after his abduction, Billy hasn't been gone long enough for anyone to miss him.

In 1968, Billy survives a plane crash. On her way to visit him at the hospital, his wife crashes her car and dies of carbon monoxide poisoning. Billy's mental state deteriorates until his daughter has him placed under the care of a nurse. He escapes and visits New York City where he finds books by Kilgore Trout. One of the books perfectly describes Billy's abduction experiences.

Knowing his experiences must be shared with humanity, Billy attempts to tell the story on a radio show but is thrown out. That night, he falls asleep in his hotel room and is cast back to Dresden, 1945. He recalls a traumatic incident in the ruins of Dresden when the German guards executed one of his friends for stealing a teapot.

In a final attempt to share his message, Billy makes a tape detailing his death. He forecasts an escalation of the Cold War which splits the U.S and leads to a full-scale war with China. While giving a speech to a crowded baseball stadium about his time-tripping, Billy is shot with a laser gun. Billy's killer is an assassin paid for by Lazzaro.