Hardcover, Slipcased. Condition: New. Dust Jacket Condition: New. Julian De Narvaez (illustrator). 1st Edition. Illustrated and signed by Julian De Narvaez An American classic named by Modern Library as one of the top 20 best novels of all time, Slaughterhouse-Five is Kurt Vonnegut's semi-autobiographical, science fiction infused anti-war masterpiece that defies genre. Slaughterhouse-Five is the story of Billy Pilgrim, a World War II veteran and POW who becomes "unstuck in time," experiencing all known events of his chronology out of order and sometimes simultaneously. Traumatized by the bombing of Dresden, Pilgrim drifts through all events and history?sometimes deeply implicated, sometimes a witness?as he struggles to find purpose, order, or meaning to his own existence and to that of humanity. Published on March 31, 1969, Slaughterhouse-Five, or, The Children's Crusade: A Duty-Dance with Death is the result of what Kurt Vonnegut described as a twenty-three-year struggle to write a book about what he had witnessed as an American prisoner of war. It combines historical fiction, science fiction, autobiography, and satire in an account of the life of Billy Pilgrim, a barber's son turned draftee turned optometrist turned alien abductee. Billy experiences the destruction of Dresden as a POW, much like Vonnegut did. Unlike Vonnegut, he experiences time travel, or coming "unstuck in time." An instant bestseller, Slaughterhouse-Five made Kurt Vonnegut a cult hero in American literature, a reputation that only strengthened over time, despite the book being banned and censored by some libraries and schools for content and language. But it was precisely those elements of Vonnegut's writing?the political edginess, the genre-bending inventiveness, the frank violence, the transgressive wit?that have inspired generations of readers not just to look differently at the world around them but to find the confidence to say something about it. In 2019, The New Yorker wrote, "Vonnegut's novel is about that, about the inevitability of human violence, and about what it does to the not particularly violent human beings who get caught up in it." Slaughterhouse-Five remained on the New York Times bestseller list for a total of sixteen weeks. The novel was a finalist for the National Book Award, and it was nominated for both the Nebula and Hugo. In 1988, Replay won The World Fantasy Award for Best Novel. ARTIST EDITION : 6" x 9" trim size. 238 Pages. Limited to 1000 copies. Full cloth smyth-sewn binding. Woven silk-like cover cloth. Foil blocked cover stamping. New exclusive introduction by Jess Walter. Frontispiece illustration by Edith Vonnegut. Six full color illustrations by Julian De Narvaez, as well as ten pen and ink vignettes which appear at the head of each chapter. Dust jacket featuring wraparound artwork by Julian De Narvaez (the only edition featuring the dust jacket). Signed by Julian De Narvaez. Endsheets are illustrated. Printed offset on Cougar Natural Vellum paper. Printed in two color on the title and chapter pages. Housed in a slipcase covered in dyed through paper. Two promotional bookmarks with all orders. Signed by Illustrator(s).

Hardcover in Slipcase. Condition: Very Fine. Dust Jacket Condition: Very Fine. Julian De Narvaez (illustrator). LIMITED ARTIST EDITION , Irvine California, Suntup Press, 2022. Out of Print . Signed by the Artist, Julian De Narvaez. NEW , still in the publisher's shrinkwrap, and will ship in Suntup's well-padded box. Includes two promotional bookmarks. The first photo is of this book. The others are from the Suntup website. Description from the publisher: "This edition of Slaughterhouse-Five by Kurt Vonnegut is presented in three states: Artist, Numbered and Lettered. The editions measure 6" x 9" and feature six full-color illustrations by Julian De Narvaez as well as ten pen and ink vignettes which appear at the head of each chapter. The editions include a new introduction by Jess Walter and a frontispiece illustration by Edith Vonnegut. The text pages are composed in Gimlet and Sachsenwald. The artist edition is printed offset on Cougar Natural Vellum paper. All editions are printed in two colors on the title and chapter pages. The Artist edition is limited to 1000 copies and is the only edition to feature a wraparound dust jacket illustrated by Julian De Narvaez. It is a full cloth, smyth sewn binding with a foil-blocked cover, and is housed in a slipcase covered in dyed-through paper. Endsheets are illustrated and the edition is printed offset on Cougar Natural Vellum paper. It is signed by the artist.". The text pages are composed in Gimlet and Sachsenwald. The artist edition is printed offset on Cougar Natural Vellum paper. All editions are printed in two colors on the title and chapter pages. The Artist edition is limited to 1000 copies and is the only edition to feature a wraparound dust jacket illustrated by Julian De Narvaez. It is a full cloth, smyth sewn binding with a foil-blocked cover, and is housed in a slipcase covered in dyed-through paper. Endsheets are illustrated and the edition is printed offset on Cougar Natural Vellum paper. It is signed by the artist." This is a beautiful collectible copy of this classic title published with Suntup Press's usual care and attention to detail. Books are Carefully Packed and Shipped Daily with Delivery Confirmation from a Dry, Smoke-Free shop. Signed Slipcased Limited Edition, First Printing.

Hardcover. Condition: New. Limited Edition. VERY FINE. Sealed. Personally signed by Kurt Vonnegut on a special dedication page. Easton Press Norwalk, CT 1998. 205 pages. Signed by Author. Leather-bound. Includes COA, collector's notes and unattached bookplate for your own personalization. Brand new and flawless. Sealed. "Everything was beautiful and nothing hurt". Vonnegut's most powerful book and also as important as any written since 1945. An elegant leather-bound collector's edition from Easton Press. This special collector's edition has been personally hand signed by the late Mr. Vonnegut on a special dedication page. About Slaughterhouse-Five Slaughterhouse-Five is one of the world's great anti-war books. Centering on the infamous fire-bombing of Dresden, Billy Pilgrim's odyssey through time reflects the mythic journey of our own fractured lives as we search for meaning in what we are afraid to know. The contents of this book are studied in universities around the world. Slaughterhouse-Five is taken from the name of the building where the POWs were held. Like Catch-22, it fashions the author's experiences in the Second World War into an eloquent and deeply funny plea against butchery in the service of authority. Slaughterhouse-Five boasts the same imagination, humanity, and gleeful appreciation of the absurd found in Vonnegut's other works, but the book's basis in rock-hard, tragic fact gives it unique poignancyand humor. Don't let the ease of reading fool youVonnegut's isn't a conventional, or simple, novel. He writes, "There are almost no characters in this story, and almost no dramatic confrontations, because most of the people in it are so sick, and so much the listless playthings of enormous forces. One of the main effects of war, after all, is that people are discouraged from being characters." Kurt Vonnegut's absurdist classic Slaughterhouse-Five introduces us to Billy Pilgrim, a man who becomes 'unstuck in time' after he is abducted by aliens from the planet Tralfamadore. In a plot-scrambling display of virtuosity, we follow Pilgrim simultaneously through all phases of his life, concentrating on his (and Vonnegut's) shattering experience as an American prisoner of war who witnesses the firebombing of Dresden. Features Includes all the classic Easton Press qualities: * Premium Leather * Silk Moire Endleaves * Distinctive Cover Design * Hubbed Spine, Accented in Real 22KT Gold * Satin Ribbon Page Marker * Gilded Page Edges * Long-lasting, High Quality Acid-neutral Paper * Smyth-sewn Pages for Strength and Durability * Beautiful Illustrations About The Author Kurt Vonnegut, Jr. (November 11, 1922 to April 11, 2007) was a prolific and genre-bending American author. The novelist is known for works blending satire, black comedy and science fiction, such as Slaughterhouse-Five (1969), Cat's Cradle (1963), and Breakfast of Champions (1973). He is also known for his humanist beliefs and being honorary president of the American Humanist Association. He was a master of contemporary American literature. His black humor, satiric voice, and incomparable imagination first captured America's attention in The Sirens of Titan in 1959 and established him as "a true artist" with Cat's Cradle in 1963. He was, as Graham Greene declared, "one of the best living American writers. Vonnegut's work as a graphic artist began with his illustrations for Slaughterhouse-Five and developed with Breakfast of Champions, which included numerous felt-tip pen illustrations, such as anal sphincters, and other less scatological images. Later in his career, he became more interested in artwork, particularly silk-screen prints, pursued in collaboration with Joe Petro III. In 2004, Vonnegut participated in the project The Greatest Album Covers That Never Were, where he created an album cover for Phish called Hook, Line and Sinker, which has been included in a traveling exhibition for the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. Signed by Author(s).