The artist formally known as Cheryl Fernandez-Versini , formerly known as Cheryl Cole, formally known as Cheryl Tweedy is now officially just “Cheryl”.

Wiping all trace of ex-husband Jean Bernard Fernandez-Versini from her life, Chez will only be known by her first name for the forseeable - and she’s booked her first public appearance under her mononymous moniker.

The singer, 32, will receive an award at the Global Gift Gala in Paris next month from actress Eva Longoria.

Read more:Cheryl desperate to change her name

A source said: “Cheryl wants to wipe the slate clean and start afresh with a new name, now the divorce is going through.

“Things turned pretty nasty over the weekend, with both Cheryl and JB making comments on social media, so from hereon in, she will just be known as Cheryl.

“Her last album in 2014 was released under the name ‘Cheryl’, too, but everyone still called her by her new married name.

“This time around, everyone is under strict instructions that she is just Cheryl, nothing else. Organisers at next month’s event were told that all announcements of Cheryl’s attendance should only refer to her as Cheryl.”

Over the weekend, Cheryl slammed JB’s claims she started her relationship with One Direction star Liam Payne, 22, before her marriage ended as “false” and lashed out on Twitter.

The French restaurateur responded by saying: “Certain people that love to say that they don’t comment on their private life can’t help themselves but to justify themselves.”

Read more:Test your Cheryl knowledge in our quiz

Desperate Housewife star Eva will present the Geordie star with the Philanthropist award, honouring her work with Cheryl’s Trust - which she set up to support disadvantaged children in the North East and across the UK.

Cheryl said: “I am honoured to be this year’s recipient of the Global Gift Gala Philanthropist Award. I’m proud of where I grew up but I’m only too aware of the challenges that young people face. I want to give back and help young people who feel like they’ll never achieve anything reach their dreams and live a happy life.”