Cheryl Fernandez-Versini is officially a free woman following the finalisation of a divorce from Jean-Bernard Fernandez-Versini. The news comes in the midst of mounting rumours that Cheryl, 33, is pregnant with her first child by boyfriend Liam Payne.

A rep for the former Girls Aloud singer has confirmed that Cheryl and Fernandez-Versini, 36, were granted a decree nisi at the Central Family Court in London on 20 October. It also appears that Cheryl will continue to use Fernandez-Versini's last name.

In a statement released to the Mail Online, Cheryl's publicist said: "Cheryl Fernandez-Versini and Jean-Bernard Fernandez-Versini have today obtained Decree Nisi in their divorce proceedings. No further comment will be made and they ask for their privacy to be respected."

Neither Cheryl or the French businessman were in attendance at the court hearing, which reportedly lasted mere seconds. The former couple are believed to have agreed a settlement before the court proceedings, with Cheryl reportedly keeping her estimated £20m fortune.

The Call My Name singer married Fernandez-Versini in a secret ceremony in Mustique on 7 July 2014 after three months of dating. However, the couple are said to have split just 18 months into their marriage towards the end of 2015 with sources confirming their separation in January. It was Cheryl's second marriage after her four-year union with former Chelsea footballer Ashley Cole coming to an end in 2010.

Reports of Cheryl's romance with One Direction star Liam Payne, 23, first emerged in February 2016. Speculation is now rife that the couple are expecting a child together with some claiming to have spotted Cheryl's baby bump in recent weeks. The Crazy Stupid Love songstress has been seen out and about in baggy clothing but the pair are yet to confirm the pregnancy.

Discussing the new chapter of Cheryl's life now that her divorce has been finalised, a source told the Mail Online: "Last year was a terrible year and she's a completely different person now. She's relieved she can finally move on with her life. She's the happiest she's been in a long time."