Bio:

Cheryl Fernandez-Versini (born Cheryl Ann Tweedy on June 30, 1983 in Newcastle upon Tyne, UK) is a UK pop star and X Factor judge. She has released 3 solo albums since 2009, and was a member of highly-successful girl band Girls Aloud. She has become a UK staple in the fashion mags, having appeared on front covers for British Vogue, Elle and Harper’s Bazaar. She rose to fame in 2002 when she appeared on reality TV show Popstars: The Rivals. She wowed at auditions and won a place in Girls Aloud soon after. In 20011, she quit the UK version of the X Factor, in which she had starred as a judge for 3 years, to try her hand at the US version. However, she left the show under a cloud of rumor that she was fired and since returned back to X Factor UK in 2014 where she is said to be on a bumper pay-day of $2.7 million-per year.

Best Known For:

Cheryl is best known for her famed romance with soccer star Ashley Cole. The pair were tabloid darlings and married in 2006. Their marriage lasted just 4 years after he was alleged to have cheated on her multiple times with different women.

Personal Life:

Cheryl is currently dating One Direction star Liam Payne. She married Jean-Bernard Fernandez-Versini, her second marriage, after 3-months of dating in July 2014. However, their romance was short-lived, and they were said to have split in August, 2015.

Oh no! We love Liam Payne and so do his 1D bandmates, which is why one of them is worried that he’s about to get seriously hurt by new love Cheryl Fernandez-Versini! HollywoodLife.com has the EXCLUSIVE details on why Harry Styles thinks she’s totally wrong for him.

Liam Payne, 22, has been spending lots of time with new girlfriend, British X-Factor judge Cheryl Fernadez-Versini, 32, as of late. While he seems totally enamored of their time together – even posting selfies of himself cudding on her lap – his pal Harry Styles, 22, is worried that the soon-to-be-divorced singer is going to break his heart, HollywoodLife.com has EXCLUSIVELY learned. Keep reading for the shocking reasons why Harry thinks they’re a terrible fit!