Harold Eugene Roach Sr. (January 14, 1892 – November 2, 1992) was an American film and television producer, director, and actor who is best known today for producing the Laurel and Hardy and Our Gang film comedy series. Here, we look at his life.

Hal Roach was born in Elmira, New York, the grandson of Irish immigrants. He was apparently inspired by American humorist Mark Twain as a young grade school student.

After working all over the US, including Alaska, Roach arrived in Hollywood, in 1912 and got some work as an extra in silent films. Realising quite quickly that this was what he wanted to do, he began producing short film comedies in 1915 with his friend Harold Lloyd, who portrayed a character known as Lonesome Luke. Roach financed these early efforts initially with an inheritance.

Roach married actress Marguerite Nichols in September 1916 and two children followed, Hal Jr. on June 15, 1918 and Margaret M. Roach on March 15, 1921. Both children would significantly predecease their father; Margaret died on November 22, 1964 and Hal Jr died on March 29, 1972. After almost 25 years of marriage, Marguerite died in March 1941.

He married for a second time to Lucille Prin, a Los Angeles secretary, on September 1, 1942, at Wright-Patterson Airfield in Dayton, Ohio, where Roach was stationed while serving as a Major in the United States Army Air Corps. Roach and Lucille had four children, Elizabeth Carson Roach on December 26, 1945, Maria May Roach on April 14, 1947, Jeanne Alice Roach on October 7, 1949, and Kathleen Bridget Roach on January 29, 1951. Sadly, Elizabeth lived for less than a year.

Originally working from studios in Downtown Los Angeles, the original name for Roach’s company was ‘Rolin’ – named after Hal Roach and financial backer Dan Linthicum. Hal Roach then purchased the land on which the Hal Roach Studios would be built from Harry Culver in 1919 on Washington Blvd, Culver City (above). He continued to employ Harold Lloyd (his top money-maker until his departure in 1923), as well as Will Rogers, Max Davidson, the Our Gang kids, Charley Chase, Harry Langdon, Thelma Todd, ZaSu Pitts, Lupe Vélez, Patsy Kelly and, most famously, Laurel and Hardy.

By April 1920, the studio consisted of an administration building, a large open stage and an enclosed stage, a storage building for sets and costumes, a laboratory and department bungalows. There was also a backlot with various types of sets that would be used over and over again. Later, a water tank was installed along with some other departmental buildings. This tank would be named ‘Lake Laurel and Hardy’ in December 1954. The studio complex would eventually cover over 14.5 acres.

During the 1920s, Roach’s biggest rival was producer Mack Sennett, however, in what would prove a masterstroke, Roach poached Sennett’s supervising director, F. Richard ‘Dick’ Jones in 1925. Jones’ arrival was the catalyst for the start of the period of greatest creativity for the studio, and the time when Laurel and Hardy rose to prominence as the biggest ‘stars’ under contract to Roach. These two unassuming and modest gentlemen never saw things that way though and this was partly to blame for the contractual issues that would exist between them for much of their time with Roach. He perhaps took advantage of Stan and Babe by keeping them on separate, out-of-step contracts rather than as a team. This also meant that the boys had no ownership of any of their work, and even though handsomely paid for the time, they were certainly not appropriately compensated for the massive revenues they were generating.

Some of the notable writers, directors, and photographers who got their start and learned their craft working for Roach were Leo McCarey, George Stevens, Frank Tashlin, Gordon Douglas, William Beaudine, Tay Garnett; Frank Capra, Hal Mohr, George Marshall, Clyde Bruckman, and Frank Butler.

In May of 1923, Hal Roach purchased a 10-acre ranch near the studio at what is now Robertson Blvd, where he shot films ‘on location’ – including Way out West.

Sound Arrives

Releasing his films through Pathé Exchange until 1927, he then moved to Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer. The studio was converted to sound in late 1928 and began releasing talking shorts in early 1929. Laurel and Hardy’s Unaccustomed as We Are being the first. Foreign language versions of the many Roach comedies were created by reshooting each film variously in Spanish, French, and sometimes Italian and German. Laurel & Hardy, Charley Chase, and even the Our Gang kids – some of whom had barely begun school – read the foreign dialogue phonetically, usually from cue cards held out of sight of the cameras.

In 1931, Roach began producing occasional full-length features, the first again being a Laurel & Hardy film, Pardon Us. Short film production continued too, but they became less profitable and were pretty much phased out by 1936, save for the Our Gang series. Laurel and Hardy’s last short for Roach being Thicker than Water.

In 1932, Roach won an Academy Award for Laurel and Hardy short subject, The Music Box. This was the first year that shorts were considered for awards and perhaps a little disappointingly, no actual statue was awarded. The award – a certificate – was collected by Stan and Babe and as can be seen below.

In very controversial circumstances in 1937, Roach started a joint business venture with Vittorio Mussolini, son of fascist Italian dictator Benito Mussolini, forming a production company called “R.A.M” (Roach and Mussolini). Roach claimed the scheme involved Italian bankers providing $6m that would enable him to produce a series of 12 films, eight for Italian screening and the other four for worldwide distribution. The first film for Italy was to be a feature film of the opera Rigoletto.

Understandably, MGM were less than happy with this and demanded Roach pay his way out of the venture. This embarrassment, along with the poor performance of much of his new feature output (Laurel & Hardy films aside), ultimately led to the end of the relationship with MGM. In May 1938, however, Roach sold MGM the production rights and actors’ contracts for Our Gang in the process. He then signed with United Artists to distribute his future productions.

From 1937 to 1940, Roach focussed on producing glossy features, abandoning the simple comedy he had specialised in and been particularly good and successful at. The studio began delivering sophisticated farces (like Topper, 1937, and The Housekeeper’s Daughter, 1939) or rugged action fare (like Captain Fury, 1939, and One Million B.C., 1940). Roach’s one venture into heavy drama was the acclaimed Of Mice and Men (1939), in which actors Burgess Meredith and Lon Chaney Jr. played the leading roles.

Laurel and Hardy comedies, for years the studio’s biggest income stream, were now the studio’s least important production, and the last one – Saps at Sea was released in May 1940.

He then experimented with medium-length featurettes, running 40 to 50 minutes. ‘Streamliners’, as he called them, were used in double-feature situations. Distributors used these to balance top-heavy double bills and United Artists continued to release Roach’s streamliners through to 1943. By this time though, Roach no longer had a resident ‘stock’ company’ and was forced to cast his films with unfamiliar and often unknown featured players.

World War II

Hal Roach joined the US Army Signal Reserve Corps in 1927 and was called back to active military duty June 1942, at age 50. The ‘Lot of Fun’ began producing military training films. The studios were leased to the U.S. Army Air Forces, and made 400 training, morale and propaganda films at “Fort Roach”. Members of the unit included Ronald W. Reagan and Alan Ladd. After the war the government returned the studio to Roach, but, as he noted happily, with millions of dollars worth of of improvements.

In 1943 he began licensing revivals of his sound-era productions having recognised the value of his film library – the bulk of which he owned outright where the original artist had no say or income. This included Laurel and Hardy, as touched on above where both theatrical and home-movie distribution channels were exploited and the Roach back catalogue were also early arrivals on television.

In 1946, Hal Roach resumed motion picture production, where he was the first Hollywood producer to go all-colour. However, this did not lead to increased revenue despite the increased production costs. In 1948, now deeply in debt, Roach turned television production, with Hal Roach Jr., ironically producing series such as The Abbott and Costello Show. By 1951, the studio was producing 1,500 hours of television programs a year.

The Laurel and Hardy sound catalogue was a big success in television syndication, as were the Our Gang comedies originally produced from 1927-1938. Roach had bought back the rights for the latter from MGM in 1949 and renamed them as ‘The Little Rascals’ for television.

In 1955, Roach sold his interests in the production company to his son, Hal Roach Jr., and essentially retired. Unfortunately, the younger Roach lacked much of his father’s business acumen and the studios struggled. In April of 1959, the Hal Roach Studios was closed due to bankruptcy. Hal Sr. came back to try and get the studio rolling again, but by December of 1962, the studio was permanently closed.

In August 1963, the ‘Lot of Fun’ was finally demolished after several auctions and sales of the company’s assets.

The 92-year-old Roach was presented with an honorary Academy Award in 1984, presented by former Our Gang members Jackie Cooper and George “Spanky” McFarland. A plaque financed and unveiled by the Sons of the Desert on the site of the studios in July 1980 with Roach in attendance.

Hal Roach Sr. continued to work as a consultant on projects related to his past work, even contemplating a comedy comeback at 96.

On 21 January 1992, just days after his 100th birthday, Roach was a guest on Johnny Carson’s Tonight Show starring, where he recounted experiences with such stars as Stan Laurel and Jean Harlow; he even did a brief, energetic demonstration of a hula dance. https://youtu.be/ap-eBNB0ieM

At the 64th Academy Awards ceremony on March 30, 1992 hosted by Billy Crystal, Roach was in the audience. When he rose to acknowledge a standing ovation, he decided to give a speech without a microphone. Crystal remarked “I think that’s appropriate because Mr. Roach started in silent films.”

Harold Eugene Roach Sr. died at his home in Bel Air, Los Angeles, from pneumonia on November 2, 1992, at the age of 100 years. He married twice, had six children, eight grandchildren, and a number of great-grandchildren. He survived three of his children: Hal Jr. died in 1972, Margaret in 1964, and Elizabeth in 1946. He also outlived many of the children who starred in his films. Roach is buried in Woodlawn Cemetery in Elmira, New York, where he grew up.