Horizon Christian School (HCS) is a non-denominational, Biblically-based Christian School that strives for academic excellence. Our Christ-centered education helps students build and defend a Christian worldview and develops an attitude of lifetime service to Jesus Christ. It is the work of Horizon Christian School to provide an educational framework which equips our students to acquire the skills necessary to pursue God’s calling in their lives.

Who Should Apply

Admissions criteria have been established for those students considering applying to Horizon Christian School. These criteria are based on the desire of the school to have students who are teachable and desire to use the gifts and skills God has given them for His glory. We want to train and equip our students to go into the world and make a difference for eternity. Please review the Admissions Criteria as you consider Horizon Christian School for your student. Click Here for Admission Criteria. If you believe your son or daughter meets the admissions criteria, we are pleased to extend to you the opportunity to submit an application to Horizon Christian School.

When to Apply

Horizon Christian School encourages families to begin the application process in January for the following school year. Applications will not be considered until all of the required steps are complete and required supplemental information is received. If you are seeking admissions during the school year, please call to inquire if there are openings in that grade.

How to Apply

To be considered for admission, the following steps must be completed:**

Parent(s) and student meet with our Director of Admissions

Submit online application (including a non-refundable fee of $30 at completion of application).

Select Apply for Admission from the menu on the left.

Create an account.

Log into your account and select “Create A New Student Application” for your child. You will then have the flexibility to log in and out of your account to access your open application.

Submit application along with application fee.

Submit all required supplemental forms to HCS (See “Required Supplemental Information” list below).

Student shadow for a day at Horizon (as possible when school is in session).

Middle and high school student meet with our Head of School.

Complete placement exams (as determined necessary based on grade, previous school information, and available standardized testing information).

**International Students seeking to apply to Horizon must refer to the “International Student Admission Criteria” for information about the admission process.

Required Supplemental Information:

Copy of Birth Certificate

Copy of Immunization records

Pastor’s Confidential Recommendation Form (one per family)

Teacher’s Confidential Recommendation Form (Teacher Recommendation (K-2nd), Teacher Recommendation (3rd-6th), Teacher Recommendation (7th – 12th))

Copies of prior 2 years academic records, including: transcript/grades; standardized test scores; attendance record; behavioral record; copy of IEP/ISP/504 plans (if applicable); and psychological testing (if applicable). These records can be obtained by requesting a copy of your child’s cumulative school file. You may request these records directly from the school with the form provided in your packet when you meet with the Director of Admissions.

Copy of Home Language Survey

Request More Information

If you would like information not available in our other online materials, please fill out the Request More Information form. We will contact you as soon as possible.

We Look Forward to Meeting You

If you have not already done so, please make an appointment to visit our school and meet with our Director of Admissions. We appreciate your interest, and hope to assist you any way we can. If you have any questions, please feel free to contact us at 317-823-4538 Monday through Friday from 8 am until 4 pm.

Although we make every effort to discern which students Horizon Christian High School can best minister to, we will not discriminate in our admissions practices against any person because of race, color, national or ethnic origins, or gender. We reserve the right to change the application process or any associated fees at any time.