ROME -- Luigi Barzini Jr., Italy's most widely known journalist who got his start in the old New York World newspaper, died of cancer at his Rome home Friday, his family announced Saturday. He was 75.

Barzini was the son of the late Luigi Barzini, the most famous Italian journalist of his generation. Among his books was 'The Italians,' on modern Italy.

Born in Milan in 1908, the younger Barzini spent his early years in the United States where his father was a foreign correspondent. After graduating from Columbia University in New York, he began working as a reporter for the New York World.

After returning to Italy, Barzini was a foreign correspondent for Milan's prestigious Corriere della Sera from 1931 to 1940, when he was placed under house arrest by the Fascist regime of dictator Benito Mussolini.

Resuming his journalistic career in 1944, Barzini founded and directed the daily newspaper Il Globo and also was managing editor of a daily political paper called Libera Stampa (Free Press) and a weekly magazine.

Later he became a correspondent for La Stampa of Turin and Corriere della Sera of Milan.

At the same time he wrote articles for the New York Times, Encounter, Harper's magazine and the New York Review and collaborated in the Italian circulation of Reader's Digest Selections.

While covering the Sino-Japanese war in the 1930s, Barzini was aboard the U.S. Navy ship Panay when it was sunk in the Far East. He won a U.S. Navy decoration for helping to rescue sailors from the ship.

Barzini was also the author of many books, most of them written in English. They included 'The Americans are alone in the world,' in 1952, 'O America', in 1978 and a much-praised book on modern Italy called 'The Italians,' in 1963.

He also served as a Liberal member of the Chamber of Deputies, the lower house of the Italian parliament, to which he was elected in 1958, 1963 and 1968.

Barzini was twice married and had five children. In recent years he continued to write articles for the Milan newspaper Giornale Nuovo.

In a message of condolence to Barzini's family Saturday, Italian President Sandro Pertini said, 'Italian journalism has lost an eminent figure of great prestige.'