Marshall Brickman (Book) Marshall entered show business first as a member of the folk group The Tarriers and then, along with John and Michelle Phillips, as one of The New Journeymen, a precursor of The Mamas and the Papas. Mr. Brickman’s film work as author (or co-author with Woody Allen) includes Sleeper, Annie Hall (Academy Award), Manhattan, (AA nomination) and Manhattan Murder Mystery. As film writer/director: Simon, Lovesick, The Manhattan Project, Sister Mary Explains it All. In television: “The Tonight Show with Johnny Carson” (head writer, 1967-70), “The Dick Cavett Show” (head writer/co-producer, 1970-72). His first foray into musical theater resulted in Jersey Boys, which won the Tony, Olivier, Helpmann, Grammy and many other awards worldwide, is in its twelfth year on Broadway, has been seen by twenty million people worldwide and is currently the 10th-longest running show in the history of Broadway. Mr. Brickman’s other theatrical efforts include Turn of the Century, which played to capacity houses in Chicago, and The Addams Family, starring Nathan Lane and Bebe Neuwirth, which ran for two years on Broadway and to date has had over four thousand first and second tier productions internationally. In addition to his work in film and theater, Mr. Brickman has published in The New York Times, The New Yorker, Playboy and other periodicals. He is the 2006 recipient of the Writers’ Guild of America Ian McClellan Hunter Award for Lifetime Achievement. His current project is a stage musical celebrating the life of western star Roy Rogers.

Rick Elice (Book) co-wrote Jersey Boys (winner 2006 Tony Award, 2007 Grammy Award and 2009 Olivier Award for Best Musical) with Marshall Brickman. His play, Peter and the Starcatcher, received nine 2012 Tony Award nominations (including two for Rick) and won five, more than any play of the season. It’s currently playing in New York and on tour across North America. Also on Broadway, Elice wrote The Addams Family (with Marshall Brickman, music and lyrics by Andrew Lippa), currently touring North America, with productions in Europe and South America. In 2014, the Old Globe Theatre in San Diego presented the world premiere of his new musical, Dog and Pony (music and lyrics by Michael Patrick Walker). Rick is currently writing a musical for Disney Theatricals with Benj Pasek and Justin Paul, based on the film Make Believe, and Super Fly (co-written with Seth Zvi Rosenfeld), directed and choreographed by modern dance legend, Bill T. Jones. Heartfelt thanks to those whose work in the theatre makes him grateful for the day he was born: Sondheim, Stoppard, Bennett, Prince, Fosse, Robbins, Nichols, Tune, Nunn, Laurents, Stone, Kushner, Taymor, Papp, Schumacher, Schneider, Coyne, Brickman, Timbers and Rees. Rick thinks about them a lot. He never thought about Jersey much. He does now.

Bob Gaudio (Composer) wrote his first hit, “Who Wears Short Shorts,” at 15, for The Royal Teens, and then went on to become a founding member of The Four Seasons and the band’s principal songwriter. He also produced the hit “You Don’t Bring Me Flowers” for Neil Diamond and Barbra Streisand (Grammy nomination, Record of the Year) as well as six albums for Diamond, including The Jazz Singer. Other producing credits include albums for Frank Sinatra, Marvin Gaye, Diana Ross, Michael Jackson and the soundtrack for the film Little Shop of Horrors. Several songs co-written with Bob Crewe have been cover hits for such artists as the Tremeloes (“Silence is Golden”), the Walker Brothers (“The Sun Ain’t Gonna Shine Anymore”) and Lauryn Hill (“Can’t Take My Eyes Off You”). With his wife, Judy Parker, Gaudio produced and co-wrote the Who Loves You album for The Four Seasons and one of Billboard’s longest-charted singles (54 weeks), “Oh, What a Night.” A high point in his career came in 1990 when, as a member of the original Four Seasons, Gaudio was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. In 1995, he was inducted into the Songwriters Hall of Fame, which hailed him as a quintessential music-maker.” To this day, Bob Gaudio and Frankie Valli still maintain their partnership on a handshake.

Bob Crewe (Lyricist) “New York was pregnant in the fifties,” says Bob Crewe, “gestating with possibilities.” Crewe and music partner Frank Slay became independent writer-producers when the category hadn’t yet been invented. In 1957 they wrote and produced “Silhouettes” for The Rays, which skyrocketed to #1. Suddenly, producers in demand, they launched Freddie Cannon’s “Tallahassee Lassie” and Billy & Lillie’s “Lah Dee Da.” Crewe’s 1960’s unprecedented producing success with The Four Seasons birthed a new sound, striking a major chord in American pop. “Sherry, “Big Girls Don’t Cry,” “Walk Like a Man,” “Candy Girl,” “Ronnie” ñ all smashes! When lead Frankie Valli demanded a solo turn, Crewe and Bob Gaudio wrote (and Crewe produced) “Can’t Take My Eyes Off of You,” which eventually became the century’s fifth most-played song. Crewe ran hot with artists from Vicki Carr, Oliver and Lesly Gore to Mitch Ryder, co-writing with Charles Fox the soundtrack for Jane Fonda’s film, Barbarella. Then his own Bob Crewe Generation exploded with Music to Watch Girls By. In 1972 Bob was in L.A., where he revived Frankie Valli with “My Eyes Adored You” by Crewe and Kenny Nolan. They also co-wrote Patti LaBelle’s “Lady Marmalade” (#1, July ‘75), which was a hit again on the soundtrack of Moulin Rouge (#1, June ‘01) … David Ritz.

Kevin P. Hill (Director & Choreographer, Producing Artistic Director) was born and raised in Waltham, MA and began his theatrical career as a dancer and actor. He appeared in National Touring companies of Hello, Dolly! with Carol Channing, Leslie Uggams and Michele Lee, Anything Goes, and the International Touring Company of A Chorus Line. New York audiences have seen him in the Off-Broadway production of Party. Regional performing credits include West Side Story, Good News! A Chorus Line, My Fair Lady, and Marvin in Falsettoland. Kevin has directed and choreographed over 100 productions across America and has had the privilege of working with such stars as Marin Mazzie, Joanne Worley, Kathleen Turner, Josh Groban, Jonathan Groff, and Tony Award-winner, Cady Huffman. In New York, he was the assistant to the director of On the Twentieth Century and assistant to the choreographer on the revival of Guys and Dolls. Kevin recently directed and choreographed Elvis: A Musical Revolution, and has also directed and choreographed The Sound of Music, A Christmas Carol, Kinky Boots, Rodger + Hammerstein’s Cinderella, Mamma Mia!, Sunset Boulevard, Jersey Boys, Young Frankenstein, Mary Poppins, and Sister Act here at North Shore Music Theatre. He has also directed and choreographed Jersey Boys, Kinky Boots, Mamma Mia!, Smokey Joe’s Cafe, Sister Act, Young Frankenstein, Mary Poppins, and Grease at Theatre By The in Wakefield, RI, where he is also Producing Artistic Director. Kevin was nominated as Best Director/Choreographer for his work on Smokey Joe’s Cafe, Rent, The Full Monty, Chicago, and Edwin Drood, and was awarded the NH Theatre Award for Best Choreography for West Side Story at the Papermill Theatre. Kevin has also been awarded six BroadwayWorld awards and two Motif awards for his productions of Mamma Mia!, Mary Poppins, and Young Frankenstein. Future projects include an original dance play called Dance Night. As a Professor of Dance, Kevin has been on the faculty at Pennsylvania State University, Kansas State University, and most recently The Boston Conservatory of Music. He is a proud member of SDC, AEA, and Dance Masters of New England, Chapter 5.

​Milton Granger (Music Direction) returns to North Shore Music Theatre having previously music directed A Christmas Carol (’14 – ’18, ’21 - ‘23), Elvis: A Musical Revolution, The Full Monty, The Sound of Music, Buddy - The Buddy Holly Story, Rodgers + Hammerstein’s Cinderella, Smokey Joe’s Cafe, Sunset Boulevard, Jersey Boys, Hairspray, Jekyll & Hyde, Mame, 42nd Street, Young Frankenstein, The Music Man, West Side Story, Singin’ in the Rain, Mary Poppins, Saturday Night Fever, Anything Goes, Cats and Swing!. As pianist/conductor: Broadway: Mary Poppins, The Woman in White, Chitty Chitty Bang Bang, Cyrano: The Musical, and Camelot (with Robert Goulet). National Tours: The Phantom of the Opera, Big, Sunset Boulevard, Camelot. International: West Side Story. Over 100 regional productions at North Shore Music Theatre, Baltimore CenterStage, Westchester Broadway Theatre and others. Work as composer/lyricist: Two First Prizes in National Opera Association new chamber opera competition; nine chamber operas, performed regularly throughout U.S. and Canada. Several produced musical plays, including Castle Walk (NYMF Next Link Selection), and Peter Rabbit and the Garden of Doom (winner, Actors’ Playhouse competition). www.miltongranger.com

Kyle Dixon (Scenic Design). Kyle’s scenic artwork may be seen across the United States, from NYC to Las Vegas. Recent scenic designs include: Elvis: A Musical Revolution, The Full Monty, The Sound of Music, Kinky Boots, Little Shop of Horrors, Buddy, Cinderella, Smokey Joe’s Cafe, Mamma Mia! (‘18, ‘21), The Bodyguard, Sunset Boulevard, Jersey Boys, Freaky Friday, Oklahoma!, Hairspray! Peter Pan, Mame, 42nd Street, Young Frankenstein, The Music Man, West Side Story (North Shore Music Theatre); Jersey Boys, The Bodyguard, Beautiful, My Way, Kinky Boots, Cinderella, Footloose, Million Dollar Quartet, Saturday Night Fever, Newsies, Singin’ in the Rain, Love and Other Fables, Chicago, Joseph and the Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat, Mamma Mia! (BroadwayWorld Regional Award), Ain’t Misbehavin’, The Producers, Disney’s Beauty and the Beast, The Music Man, Beehive, Buddy, West Side Story, The Wizard of Oz, Sister Act, and Young Frankenstein at Theatre By The Sea, (BroadwayWorld Regional Award); White Christmas, Rock of Ages, and A Bronx Tale (John W. Engeman Theatre); Camelot (Westchester Broadway Theatre), The Broadway Classic Music Dance Review (Tianqiao Performing Arts Center, Beijing, China), Growing up ’70s starring Barry Williams (Off Broadway), Angelina Ballerina, The Musical (NYC, Toronto, National Tour), Fancy Nancy, the Musical(NYC, National Tour), StinkyKids (Off Broadway Alliance Award), It Shoulda Been You (starring Kim Zimmer) and The Wizard of Oz (Gretna Theatre, BroadwayWorld Regional Award), Xanadu, Doubt, The Secret Garden and The Merchant of Venice (Williams Center for the Arts), and many more. Kyle has designed concert events for Faith Prince, Tommy Tune, Pam Tillis, and the NC Gubernatorial Inauguration Gala (Telly Award). In addition to theatre, Kyle accepts fine art commissions and is the designer of North Carolina’s historic Elizabethan Gardens’ Winter Lights. kyledixondesigns.com ; @kyle_dixon_designs

Dana Pinkston (Costume Design) has designed costumes for theatres across the country, including North Shore Music Theatre in Massachusetts, Theatre By The Sea in Rhode Island, and The Virginia Shakespeare Festival in Virginia. In 2018, Dana won a Rhode Island BroadwayWorld Award for Best Costume Design for the smash Mamma Mia!. Dana is also the recipient of the prestigious ACTF/ Kennedy Center National Award for Excellence in Costume Design for her design of Our Country's Good, as well as Penn State University's Arts and Architecture Creative Achievement Award. As an Associate Professor of Design at Kansas State University, Dana has been privileged to work with many emerging playwrights and directors, both on campus and in New York City. Dana is a proud member of United Scenic Artists Local 829.

Jose Santiago (Lighting Design) is happy to return after lighting The Sound of Music ‘23, Kinky Boots, Mamma Mia! (‘21, ‘18), The Bodyguard, Sunset Boulevard, Jersey Boys, Freaky Friday, Hairspray, Peter Pan, 42nd Street, Evita and Spamalot at North Shore Music Theatre. His work has been seen at Pioneer Theatre Company, Maltz Jupiter Theatre, Chicago Opera, The Paramount Theatre (Aurora, IL), Drury Lane (Chicago), Skylight Music Theatre, Center REP, Bristol Riverside Theatre, Theatre by the Sea, Bay Street Theatre, Gretna Playhouse, The Gateway, The Engeman Theater, Guild Hall, Penobscot Theatre, 5 Star Theatricals, Slow Burn Theatre, Gulfshore Playhouse. He received his MFA in Lighting Design from Florida State University. Proud member of USA829 and represented by Michael Moore Agency. www.jsantiagodesign.com

James Cannon (Sound Design) is a sound designer and composer based in Watertown, MA. He is thrilled to be making his North Shore Music Theatre debut this season with Jersey Boys! Recently, his work has been heard at The Umbrella Stage Company, SpeakEasy Stage Company, The Huntington Theatre Company, Moonbox Production, Greater Boston Stage Company, and many more theatres in and around the Greater Boston area. Outside of theater, he produces music for local hip-hop artists Red Shaydez, Brandie Blaze, Joe Grizzly, and J. Jordan. Somewhere in there he gets a little sleep. He gives all the love in the world to his four month old son, Trevante, and his loving partner Rebecca!

Kat Shanahan (Hair & Wig Design) is thrilled to return to design wigs for Jersey Boys having designed the wigs for last season’s production of A Christmas Carol. Kat is the resident Wardrobe Supervisor here at NSMT, now in her 11th season! Other companies she has worked for include Boston Ballet, The Huntington Theatre, Speakeasy Stage Co., The Lyric Stage Co., Greater Boston Stage, Theater By The Sea, Odyssey Opera, The New England Conservatory, Boston University, The Poets Theater, Boston Conservatory, and ArtsEmerson. Kat has designed and/or maintained wigs for such other companies as Boston Ballet, The Huntington Theatre, Odyssey Opera, and Boston University. Kat has a B.S. in Film and Video Production from The New England Institute of Art. For J, O, P, R & C always.

Stephen MacDonald (Production Stage Manager) is excited to be working on another production with North Shore Music Theatre after stage managing A Christmas Carol (’21 - ‘23), Elvis: A Musical Revolution, The Full Monty, Escape To Margaritaville, The Sound of Music, Beautiful: The Carole King Musical, Kinky Boots, Little Shop of Horrors, Buddy, Rodgers + Hammerstein’s Cinderella, Smokey Joe’s Cafe, and Mamma Mia! (‘21). Other recent credits include The Inheritance, People, Places and Things and Admissions with Speakeasy Stage Company of Boston, Mamma Mia! (‘21) at Theatre By The Sea, and TYA productions of Madagascar and A Year with Frog and Toad at North Shore Music Theatre. When not working professionally as a stage manager, Stephen spends his time directing and designing educational productions, teaching future generations of performing and technical theatre artists.

Dakotah Wiley Horan (Assistant Stage Manager) is thrilled to be back having worked as the Assistant Stage Manager on A Christmas Carol (‘16 – ‘19, ‘21 – ‘23), Elvis: A Musical Revolution, The Full Monty, Escape To Margaritaville, The Sound of Music, Beautiful: The Carole King Musical, Kinky Boots, Little Shop of Horrors, Buddy, Rodgers + Hammerstein’s Cinderella, Smokey Joe’s Cafe, Mamma Mia! (‘18, ‘21), The Bodyguard, Sunset Boulevard, Jersey Boys, Freaky Friday, Oklahoma!, Hairspray, Jekyll & Hyde, Peter Pan,Mame, 42nd Street, Evita, Young Frankenstein, Disney’s Beauty and the Beast, The Music Man, West Side Story, Spamalot and Singin’ In The Rain, and as the Production Assistant for Mary Poppins and Funny Girl. Some of her previous Stage Management credits include: Capital Repertory Theatre: Betrayal, Marvelous Wonderettes, Cactus Flower, 33 Variations, Leslie Uggams in Uptown Downtown, Man of La Mancha, and Single Girls Guide. Pendragon Theatre: Clean House, and Twelve Angry Men. She would like to thank her parents for instilling and encouraging her love of theatre, and to her friends and her North Shore family for always supporting her.

Brian Robillard (Assistant Stage Manager) - he/him - makes his North Shore Music Theatre Debut! National Tour: Menopause The Musical! Regional credits include TheCher Show, Young Frankenstein, Jersey Boys, and Smokey Joe’s Café (Ogunquit Playhouse) How High the Moon: The Music of Ella Fitzgerald, The 39 Steps (Merrimack Repertory Theatre) Pippin, West Side Story (Reagle Music Theatre) Macbeth, Cymbeline, Romeo & Juliet (Commonwealth Shakespeare Company) Legally Blonde (Moonbox Productions), Beyond, Words The Half Life of Marie Curie, The Crucible, Bedlam’s Pygmalion, A Christmas Carol (Central Square). Brian received his BFA in Stage Management from Boston University and is a proud member of Actor’s Equity Association. Upcoming Productions: Crazy for You (Ogunquit Playhouse) An American in Paris (Reagle Music Theatre).

Robert L. Rucinski (Assistant Music Director) is thrilled to be returning to NSMT. Past NSMT Music Director credits include Madagascar, Elvis: A Musical Revolution, Escape To Margaritaville, Curious George: The Golden Meatball, A Christmas Carol (‘19), A Year with Frog & Toad, School House Rock Live Jr. Past Assistant Music Director credits include The Full Monty, The Sound of Music, Beautiful: The Carole King Musical, Kinky Boots, Little Shop of Horrors, Rodgers + Hammerstein’s Cinderella, Smokey Joe’s Cafe, A Christmas Carol (‘04 – ‘07, ‘10 – ‘18, ‘21- ‘23), Sunset Boulevard, Jersey Boys, Freaky Friday, Oklahoma!, Hairspray, Jekyll & Hyde, Peter Pan, 42nd Street, West Side Story, Singin’ in the Rain (‘06 & ‘16), Les Misérables, The Little Mermaid, The King and I, Forever Plaid, Seven Brides for Seven Brothers, Crazy for You, Cinderella (‘05-’06), Ain’t Misbehavin’, Damn Yankees, Camelot, Fame. Robert has been music director at many theaters throughout New England and teaches at several high school and university theater programs in the local area. A native of Jersey City, NJ, he now lives in Arlington, MA. More info at rucinskimusic.com

Kelly Baker (Costume Coordinator) is so happy to be back for another season! Previous NSMT Costume Design/Coordinator credits include: A Christmas Carol, Elvis: A Musical Revolution, The Full Monty, Escape To Margaritaville, The Sound of Music, Beautiful: The Carole King Musical, Kinky Boots, Little Shop of Horrors, Buddy, Rodgers + Hammerstein’s Cinderella, Smokey Joe’s Cafe, Mamma Mia! (‘21, ‘18), The Bodyguard, Sunset Boulevard, Jersey Boys, Freaky Friday, Oklahoma!, Hairspray, Jekyll & Hyde, Peter Pan, as well as TYA shows Matilda Jr., The Wizard of Oz - Youth Edition, Curious George: The Golden Meatball, The Little Mermaid, Jr., A Year With Frog and Toad. Other companies she has worked for include: Lyrics Stage Company, The Boston Conservatory at Berklee, New England Conservatory, Greater Boston Stage Company, Odyssey Opera, The Cape Playhouse, Commonwealth Shakespeare Company, Theatre By The Sea, and OIV’s Ouroboros Trilogy. Thank you to Kevin, Karen, Matthew and the amazing NSMT Costume Shop/Wardrobe Crew for all that they do. Hi Mama!

Bill Hanney (Owner/Producer) is honored and proud to have been responsible for the re-opening of the nationally renowned North Shore Music Theatre in 2010. Aside from his work operating North Shore Music Theatre, one of Bill's crowning achievements was the 2007 purchase and re-opening of Theatre By The Sea, a landmark 500 seat professional summer theatre and restaurant, which is entering its seventeenth successful year of operation in Matunuck, RI (theatrebythesea.com). Bill was a co-producer on the recent Broadway production of The Shark is Broken, and recently co-produced a New York City workshop of The SeaView Nursing Home for the Newly Deceased. Bill was an investor in the recent Tony Award-winning Broadway revival of Pippin, as well as the First National Tour. Bill is currently expanding his group of live theatres. He began his career in show business at age 19, leasing and developing movie theaters, including his first multiplex in Quincy, Massachusetts. Before long, he was booking rock shows (Jefferson Starship, Rush) and other types of live entertainment, which eventually led to the presenting and producing of Broadway productions. One such show was an appearance by the legendary mime artist, Marcel Marceau. As president of Broadway Productions, Bill presented national tours such as Annie, Amadeus, Dancin', Peter Pan, Rocky Horror Show and Mark Twain starring Hal Holbrook, throughout New England including Worcester, Springfield, Portland, Maine and Boston. Throughout his career, Bill has stayed focused on his movie theatre chain having bought, built, owned, operated, and sold more than 30 cinemas. His company, Entertainment Cinemas, currently operates six movie complexes in three states. Bill is currently Chairman of the Board of the Theatre Owners of New England. Bill has been named to the North Shore Top 100 by the North Shore Chamber of Commerce. He received the Leslie S. Ray Hall of Fame Award (2015) and Businessperson of the Year Award (2012) from the Greater Beverly Chamber of Commerce, as well as Businessperson of the Year from the Salem Chamber of Commerce (2011).

Matthew Chappell (Associate Producer & Casting Director) is in his 6th season as resident Casting Director and Associate Producer for Bill Hanney’s North Shore Music Theatre and resident Casting Director for Theatre By The Sea. He is a former talent agent, casting associate, and photographer for Heyman Talent Agency, specializing in TV/film, commercials, runway, print and voiceovers and, for many years, worked as Associate Producer for Encore International, casting and producing shows for theme parks, cruise ships, and corporate events. Prior to making the leap to Casting and Producing, Matthew enjoyed a 20+ year career as a professional Actor/Singer/Dancer.

Actors’ Equity Association (AEA), founded in 1913, represents more than 45,000 actors and stage managers in the United States. Equity seeks to advance, promote and foster the art of live theatre as an essential component of our society. Equity negotiates wages and working conditions, providing a wide range of benefits, including health and pension plans. AEA is a member of the AFL-CIO, and is affiliated with FIA, an international organization of performing arts unions. The Equity emblem is our mark of excellence. actorsequity.org

North Shore Music Theatre (NSMT) Since 1955, NSMT has become one of the most attended theatres in New England, with approximately 250,000 patrons annually. With a national and regional reputation for artistic achievement, NSMT has received numerous industry awards including Elliot Norton Awards, IRNE Awards, the Rosetta Le Noire Award from Actors’ Equity, and the Moss Hart Award. NSMT produced the World Premiere of Memphis in 2003, the show went on to win four 2010 Tony Awards including Best Musical. Under the new ownership of Bill Hanney in 2010, NSMT continues to annually produce a musical subscription series and an annual production of A Christmas Carol along with celebrity concerts, children’s programming, and year-round education programs for all ages.