''I NEVER thought I'd say this to anybody,'' says young, clean-cut Paul Stephens (Christopher Collet), a high school science whiz, ''but I've got to go get an atomic bomb out of the car.''

It's a funny line, and there are many other funny lines in Marshall Brickman's ''Manhattan Project,'' but Paul Stevens isn't kidding. He does have an atomic bomb in his car. It's ''the first privately produced nuclear device in the history of the world,'' put together by Paul for a national student science fair and loaded with enough liquid plutonium to erase much of the state of New York.

This is a tricky subject for comedy, even one that aims at being both instructive and cautionary as, I believe, Mr. Brickman means ''The Manhattan Project'' to be. Yet ''The Manhattan Project'' tends to neutralize its own serious intentions by being too jokey much of the time and, at other times, too much the teen-age adventure-comedy whose conventions deny the immensity of the horror with which it's concerned.

''The Manhattan Project'' is not as frivolous as John Badham's ''WarGames,'' in which another brilliant teen-ager similarly plays with nuclear disaster by breaking into a top-secret Government computer system. Like the Badham film, however, ''The Manhattan Project'' is less disturbing than soothing. Whatever happens, it seems to say, everything will come out all right, just as it does in the movies. Perhaps only a comedy as consistently, bleakly sardonic as Stanley Kubrick's ''Dr. Strangelove'' can handle this theme without making it seem as trivial as the misunderstandings that fuel the average sit-com.

''The Manhattan Project,'' which opens at the Sutton and other theaters today, is nicely acted by a first-rate cast that, in addition to Mr. Collet, includes John Lithgow, as the scientist who unwittingly provides the liquid plutonium for the homemade bomb; Jill Eikenberry, as the teen-age genius's average American mom, and Cynthia Nixon, as Mr. Collet's loyal, admiring girlfriend.

As long as the film isn't playing with the bomb, ''The Manhattan Project'' displays the intelligence and wit that distinguished Mr. Brickman's two earlier films, ''Simon'' and ''Lovesick.'' The sequence in which Mr. Collet and Miss Nixon slip into the supposedly impregnable laboratory to carry off the plutonium is both comic and ingenious. There's also a briefly funny sequence at the science fair in New York, where Mr. Collet plans to show his bomb. Among his competitors for first prize are one boy who's made a study of social behavior in elevators and another with six toads sleeping in frozen hydrogen.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.