Actress Carice van Houten: Cruise's co-star kisses

and tells

Not just Tom, but Jude Law, Leonardo DiCaprio… The adventurous Dutch actress has puckered up with them all (on screen, of course). So what’s her verdict?

There’s something engagingly natural about the hot new Hollywood discovery who is quietly waiting for me in the London show business restaurant Le Caprice. It’s the way she fiddles with her tangled auburn hair as she gives me

a little-girl grin that shows off her small white teeth to disconcertingly sexy effect.

No wonder she’s smiling, though, for the Dutch-born Carice van Houten has to be the luckiest leading lady in Los Angeles after acquiring three superstar screen spouses – Tom Cruise, Jude Law, Leonardo DiCaprio – in the space of one year.

‘It was so surreal to be kissing all these men within three months – my friends were going crazy,’ she admits impishly. So who was the best kisser among them, Carice? ‘Oh, that’s impossible to say. They all went to the same school, I think,’ she says, giving another grin.

Carice with her actor boyfriend Sebastian Koch

It must have been a pretty exciting experience for Cruise and co as well, for although Hollywood movie etiquette dictates that you never use tongues (just lips), no one told Carice. The Dutch do things differently, it seems.

‘Well, I’m from Holland, I don’t know that rule!’ says Carice, continuing in her splendidly uninhibited English. ‘For me, the tongue is always there. If the men don’t like it, they should tell me, but I’ve had no complaints.

'If people really love each other in a film but give each other a silent-cinema kiss then I don’t believe it.’

There speaks a true actress, who throws her whole

self into everything she does and is very much her

own woman.

After winning two Golden Calves (the Dutch equivalent of the Oscars) for the Dutch films Suzy Q, the story of a dysfunctional 60s family, and Undercover Kitty, a fantasy adventure, Amsterdam-based Carice, now 32, went on to make an international name for herself in 2006 with her award-winning performance in the gripping, morally ambivalent wartime thriller Black Book. (She played a Jewish woman who joins the Dutch resistance as an undercover agent and then falls for a Gestapo officer.)

A worldwide hit with audiences and critics alike, Black Book was Basic Instinct director Paul Verhoeven’s first film in his native Netherlands after years of Hollywood blockbusters. The unselfconscious sensuality of Carice’s love scenes led to comparisons with Sharon Stone’s breakthrough role in Basic Instinct – although Verhoeven is reported to have said: ‘But Carice can really act!’

And everyone acknowledged it. The show-business bible Variety raved about ‘a face that can spin between fear, defiance, caprice and caring’; New York magazine named Carice Woman of the Year in January 2008, and Vanity

Fair’s Hollywood edition two months later featured a leggy Carice in an upside-down pose as if to show how much

she had shaken up the industry.

Meanwhile, Tom Cruise, who was seeking an actress with the right period look to play his wife in his new wartime thriller Valkyrie, knew he had found his leading lady.

Valkyrie dramatises the true story of an audacious plot by high-ranking German officers to assassinate Hitler, with Cruise starring as the chief plotter, Colonel Claus von Stauffenberg, Carice as his anguished wife Nina and Kenneth Branagh, Bill Nighy, Tom Wilkinson, Terence Stamp and Eddie Izzard offering stellar support.

With Tom Cruise in Valkyrie

For Carice, the gulf between the tiny budgets of her native movie industry and the extravagance of Hollywood was massive. ‘Nobody in Holland knows what Winnebago trailers are – if you ask for a chair, you are considered a diva,’ she says.

Most overwhelming was her first meeting with Cruise. ‘I was so nervous because I come from a little cheese country where we are so sober and grounded and have no idea what stardom is. So for me, it was like meeting the king,’ she explains wryly. ‘I think I blushed for two minutes. I was like a tomato – really, really red.

'But he was very elegant and nice and genuinely interested, asking me, “What are you doing, what is your sister [Jelka, also an actress] doing, where were you born?” He calmed me down.

'He is very charismatic, sexy and good-looking, but very intense and serious as well. But he can have a laugh. I had a funny time with him when we worked together – we would joke around and have a lot of dancing lessons.

'It’s nice to see somebody who’s not afraid to make mistakes,’ adds Carice, suggesting Cruise’s footwork might have a touch of the John Sergeant about it. ‘I like that he tries and tries; you really feel that this man has been in the business for 25 years.’

In Valkyrie, her expressive blue eyes speak volumes in fervent scenes with Cruise that show how much she learned in her childhood from watching old silent films with her father, a musicologist and film critic. ‘Yes, there are tender moments in Valkyrie, but no breasts this time,’ laughs Carice, who has an unfussy European attitude towards nude scenes. ‘In Holland, we joke that if you say Dutch film, you mean nudity – because we are an open-minded country.’

She followed up all that intensity by playing Jude Law’s wife in the futuristic thriller Repossession Mambo (to be released in UK cinemas later this year) – which helped make up for the fact that her performance as Leonardo DiCaprio’s ‘angry ex-wife’, in the movie Body of Lies, ended up on the cutting-room floor (although, as a consolation prize, she will be seen in the longer DVD version).

‘It was disappointing,’ admits Carice, ‘but stuff like that happens – and the experience of making the film with Leonardo and Ridley Scott [the director] was the most important thing. Ridley is known for shooting a lot of footage, so something had to go in the end.’

Spoken like a true pro. Her mother (an educational broadcaster) and father named her Carice (a combination of Caroline and Alice) after composer Edward Elgar’s daughter.

Thanks to her father’s extensive Beatles collection, she became fluent in English from an early age. ‘I was so curious about what the rest of the world was doing, and Black Book was my first chance to express myself outside my country,’ says the multilingual Carice.

And the film was crucial to her life in other ways, for it was on set that she met her boyfriend, German actor Sebastian Koch, who plays the Gestapo officer for whom Carice’s character falls (he also starred in the 2006 German Oscar-winner The Lives of Others).

‘Romances on set happen a lot; how else do actors meet, where else should we pick them up?’ she says playfully. ‘He lives in Germany and I live in Amsterdam, so it’s difficult. We have no plans to live together or marry yet because we are working so much. I don’t find the separation easy but it keeps romance alive when you finally meet up.’

At 46, Sebastian is 14 years her senior. ‘He has a daughter from a relationship he had a long time ago – I did not steal him,’ she says in her direct way, anticipating the question I didn’t ask.

And it seems the charismatic Sebastian had the same initial impact on a nervous Carice as Tom Cruise did. ‘In the train station scene, when you see the first flirtation between our characters, I liked him so much that I found myself blushing through my make-up every time he shook my hand.

'At first I thought, “Oh no, this is not possible – I am supposed to be afraid of this man!”’

She and Sebastian are set to be reunited on screen again with the yet-to-be-made independent movie Smoke and Ochre, which hands her a plum central role as Nelson Mandela’s favourite South African poet, Ingrid Jonker, but which is currently on ice while the makers try to raise the funds.

'Luckily, no one in Hollywood has told me that I’m too fat or

too European'

Sebastian plays the writer Jack Cope, the love of Ingrid’s life. So is Sebastian the love of Carice’s life? ‘Yes – otherwise I should leave, you know,’ she says with a throaty laugh.

Her naturalness extends to everything in her life, it seems. ‘I’ve just done a year of theatre in Holland, which I love, and I wouldn’t like to move to Hollywood permanently. I wouldn’t give up my life and my friends and family in Holland.

'I’m ambitious, but not that ambitious – for me, there’s more to life than work. Luckily, no one in Hollywood has told me that I’m too fat or too European,’ she adds drily. ‘I intend to stay anti-Botox. It scares me, the fashion for it. I have even started wearing bras that don’t lift, because it seemed that everybody had to wear push-up bras. I want to be more natural, I’m sick of all these big boobs.’

So refreshingly different from the usual Hollywood mould is Carice that she even admits to having smoked two packets of cigarettes a day for 15 years, ‘until two years ago when I quit. I don’t drink water or go to the gym, and I eat sweets. But for the first time I’m now thinking about this because I’m over 30 and I feel things are loosening up,’ she adds, pulling a jokey face.

Carice corners the market in wives again with her next film, due to be released in May. From Time to Time is a family fantasy that’s based on the classic novel The Chimneys of Green Knowe. Once again she finds herself among a heavyweight British cast – including Dame Maggie Smith, Timothy Spall and Hugh Bonneville (whose wife she plays). But while she’s grateful for all those spousal opportunities, she’s hoping to escape from screen marital duties in future.

‘I was so spoiled with Black Book because I played such a powerful and heroic figure. It will be difficult to get a female part like that again. Maybe I should play an alien or a dwarf – that would be fine by me,’ she chuckles.

Valkyrie will be released on Friday

Scroll down for more exclusive pictures of Carice. Click to enlarge