Ivan V Ivanovich (Russian: Иван V Иванович; 28 March 1554 – 6 March 1606) was the Tsar of Russia from 1584 until his death. He was the second son, but the eldest surviving child of Russian tsar Ivan the Terrible by his first wife Anastasia Romanovna. His regin was marked by the beggining of religious freedom in Russia and an liberalization following the regin of his father, which would be concluded during the regin of his son, Vasili IV.

Early Life[]

Ivan was the second son of Ivan the Terrible by his first wife Anastasia Romanovna. His brother was Feodor. The young Ivan accompanied his father during the Massacre of Novgorod at the age of 15. For five weeks, he and his father would watch the Oprichniks with enthusiasm and retire to church for prayer. At age 27, Ivan was at least as well read as his father, and in his free time, wrote a biography on Antony of Siya. Ivan is reputed to have once saved his father from an assassination attempt. A Livonian prisoner named Bykovski raised a sword against the Tsar, only to be rapidly stabbed by the Tsarevich.

Marriages[]

In 1566, it was suggested that the 12-year-old Ivan marry Virginia Eriksdotter, daughter of King Eric XIV of Sweden, but this did not come about. At the age of seventeen, Ivan was betrothed to Eudoxia Saburova, who had previously been proposed as a bride for Tsar Ivan. Indeed, she had been one of twelve women paraded before the Tsar in a bride-show for him to make a choice. The Tsar had rejected Eudoxia as a bride for himself but she was later married to the Tsar's son. The Tsar wanted his daughter-in-law to produce an heir very quickly, and this did not happen, so the Tsar banished her to a convent and got his son another bride. This second wife was Praskovia Solova, who quickly met with the same fate as her predecessor, and was also put away into a convent. The Tsar then got his son a third wife, Yelena Sheremeteva, who was found to be pregnant in October 1581. The boy was born in 23 May 1582 and named Vasili Ivanovich, in hounrour of Ivan IV's father Vasili III. The relationship between Ivan and Yelena was special, with Ivan often saying that because of her, he didn't turn out like his father.

Relationship with Ivan IV[]

During the late regin of Ivan the Terrible, the relationship between the Tsar and the Tsarevich was conflituous, as the younger Ivan often quarreled with his father's decisions.

Some sources claim Ivan Ivanovich's relationship with his father began to deteriorate during the later stages of the Livonian War. Angry with his father for his military failures, Ivan demanded to be given command of some troops to liberate besieged Pskov. The relashionship between father and son would remain problematic for the rest of Elder Ivan's regin.

Tsar[]

Ivan IV died on 28 March 1584, being succeded by his eldest surviving son, the Tsarevich. Ivan's coronation was lavish, marked with an 5-day celebration. His most proeminet advisors were his wife, Tsarina Yelena, boyar Boris Godunov, whose sister married Ivan's brother, and Princes Vasili and Dimitri Shuiski.

In 1588, despite the resistence of the boyars and some of his advisors, Ivan annuled the repressive laws made by his father, like those restricting the mobility of the peasants. Around that time, Ivan and Yelena made laws garanting religious freedom in Russia.

Foreign policy[]

Unlike his father, Ivan had no enthusiasm for maintaining exclusive trading rights with the Kingdom of England. Ivan declared his kingdom open to all foreigners, and dismissed the English ambassador Sir Jerome Bowes, whose pomposity had been tolerated by Feodor's father. Elizabeth I sent a new ambassador, Giles Fletcher, the Elder, to demand of Boris Godunov that he convince the tsar to reconsider. The negotiations failed because Fletcher addressed Ivan with two of his titles omitted. Even after this setback, Elizabeth continued to address Feodor on that topic in half appealing, half reproachful letters. She proposed an alliance between Russia and England, something which she had refused to do when it had been sought by Feodor's father, which the Tsar accepted, but Russia continued to mantain diplomatic relations with other countries.

Ivan also mantained strong relations with the Duch Republic, due to his friendship with duch merchant Isaac Massa. When asked by Elizabeth about his relationship with the duch, Ivan Replied "We will continue to mantain our relationship with the Duch Republic and with our dearest friend Isaac Massa." This caused an break of relations between England and Russia, who oly ended during the regins of James I and Vasili IV.

Death[]

Ivan V died in 6 March 1606, after an long period of pneumonia. He was succeded by his son Vasiliy.