Princess Helena Adelaide of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Glücksburg was the third eldest daughter of Friedrich Ferdinand, Duke of Schleswig-Holstein and his wife Princess Karoline Mathilde of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Augustenburg. She was a princess of Denmark through her marriage within the House of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Glücksburg to Prince Harald of Denmark. Princess Helena was a Nazi sympathiser during World War II and was after the war exiled from Denmark, but eventually allowed to return, where she died.

Princess Helena Adelaide of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Glücksburg was born on June 1, 1888, in Thumby, Schleswig-Holstein, Germany. Her birth geographical coordinates are 54° 34’ 60” North latitude and 9° 55’ 0” East longitude. Princess Helena Adelaide of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Glücksburg passed away at the age of 74 in 1962.

Astrologically, Princess Helena Adelaide of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Glücksburg falls under the Sun sign of Gemini, with Virgo as her Ascendant, Pisces as her Moon sign, and Taurus as her Black Moon Lilith sign.

Planets

Planets represent different aspects of personality, life themes, and energies within a birth chart, influencing individual characteristics, motivations, and experiences.

Planets in Signs

Planets in a zodiac sign denote how the energies and qualities associated with those planets express themselves within the context of the themes and attributes of that particular zodiac sign.

Sun Gemini Moon Pisces Ascendant Virgo Midheaven Gemini Mercury Cancer Venus Gemini Mars Libra Jupiter Sagittarius Saturn Leo Uranus Libra Neptune Gemini Pluto Gemini Ceres Gemini Chiron Cancer Eros Taurus Hygiea Virgo Juno Cancer Pallas Taurus Vesta Pisces Black Moon Lilith Taurus North Node Leo South Node Aquarius Part of Fortune Gemini Vertex Aquarius

Sunin Gemini11° 19’ 38”

The Gemini Sun in the Natal Chart makes you friendly and lighthearted. You are curious and creative. You enjoy learning new things and need continual […] Read more »

Moonin Pisces9° 41’ 6”

The Moon in Pisces in the Natal Chart makes you expressive and inspiring. You are sensitive and understand other people’s needs. You are gentle and […] Read more »

Ascendantin Virgo14° 23’ 26”

Virgo Ascendant in the Natal Chart makes you thoughtful and discerning. You have an intellectual and analytical personality. You may have a bookish appearance and […] Read more »

Midheavenin Gemini8° 38’ 28”

The Gemini Midheaven in the Natal Chart indicates you are creative and imaginative. You are curious and need change and variety in your career. Your […] Read more »

Mercuryin Cancer2° 36’ 39”

Mercury in Cancer in a Natal Chart makes you sensitive and thoughtful. You are imaginative and can be introverted. You frequently think about your feelings […] Read more »

Venusin Gemini0° 19’ 51”

Gemini Venus in the Natal Chart attracts you to people who are friends first. You need a partner you can spend time with casually without […] Read more »

Marsin Libra12° 35’ 38”

Libra Mars in the Natal Chart makes you long for balance. You are motivated to express your unique fantasies and find the passion and motivation […] Read more »

Jupiterin Sagittarius0° 12’ 10”

Sagittarius Jupiter in the Natal Chart indicates you are part of a generation that values spiritual growth and expansion. You are a truth-seeker and are […] Read more »

Saturnin Leo2° 50’ 41”

Is Saturn in Leo good or bad? Leo Saturn in the Natal Chart makes you uplifting and determined to succeed. You are part of a […] Read more »

Uranusin Libra13° 16’ 23”

Libra Uranus in the Natal Chart indicates a generation that aspires to live up to their higher ideals. You are born at a time when […] Read more »

Neptunein Gemini0° 13’ 5”

Gemini Neptune in the Natal Chart is an ideal placement for a generation with a desire to find unity through communication. You are part of […] Read more »

Plutoin Gemini4° 39’ 15”

Gemini Pluto in the Natal Chart makes you part of a generation born to change how people communicate. Your generation shifts the power and helps […] Read more »

Ceresin Gemini7° 11’ 45”

Ceres in Gemini in the Natal Chart indicates your generation is thoughtful and conscientious. You are eager to explore your higher mission and can be […] Read more »

Chironin Cancer1° 29’ 52”

The Chiron in Cancer generation has a core wound related to feeling rejected by family. You struggle with feeling like you don’t belong and have […] Read more »

Erosin Taurus11° 43’ 54”

Eros in Taurus in the Natal Chart indicates you are passionate about your desire for luxury and physical pleasure. You are compassionate and can be […] Read more »

Hygieain Virgo22° 56’ 2”

Virgo Hygiea in the Natal Chart gives you a grounded and sensible nature. You are down to earth and avoid going to extremes. You are […] Read more »

Junoin Cancer7° 53’ 44”

Juno in Cancer in the Natal Chart indicates you are a homebody committed to marriage and love. You are a provider who nurtures others and […] Read more »

Pallasin Taurus0° 58’ 13”

Wondering, What is my Pallas Sign? The asteroid Pallas brings awareness of your problem-solving skills. Pallas in Taurus makes you a grounded and productive problem […] Read more »

Vestain Pisces29° 36’ 4”

Vesta in Pisces in the Natal Chart makes you endearing and romantic. You are sensitive and obsessed with spiritual growth. You delve into the occult […] Read more »

Black Moon Lilithin Taurus13° 7’ 15”

Taurus Black Moon Lilith in the Natal Chart makes you daring and sincere. You are authentic and can be true to yourself, even when your […] Read more »

North Nodein Leo3° 10’ 32”

Leo North Node in the Natal Chart indicates you are passionate about overcoming obstacles. You pursue your destiny with zeal and energy. You are determined […] Read more »

South Nodein Aquarius3° 10’ 32”

Aquarius South Node in the Natal Chart makes you adept at embracing change. You may panic and disappear when relationships become too serious. Your lesson […] Read more »

Part of Fortunein Gemini12° 44’ 54”

Part of Fortune in Gemini in the Natal Chart makes you intellectual and talkative. You are chatty and can be friendly and outgoing. You thrive […] Read more »

Vertexin Aquarius25° 2’ 31”

Aquarius Vertex in the Natal Chart makes you passionate about helping others. You are a humanitarian with a gift for anticipating breakthroughs in society. You […] Read more »

Planets in Elements

Planets in elements denote how the fundamental energies and qualities associated with those planets interact with the elemental nature of the signs they inhabit, shaping an individual’s overall temperament and approach to life.

Air Element

The air element in astrology corresponds to three signs; Gemini, Libra, and Aquarius. This element is associated with new insights and perspectives. The air element […] Read more »

Water Element

Astrologers and other occultists study the water element to understand emotional healing. This element relates to love and compassion. Numerous planets in water signs in […] Read more »

Earth Element

The earth element in astrology is associated with practicality and grounding. This element is associated with career and wealth. Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorn are signs […] Read more »

Fire Element

The fire element in astrology is associated with passion and motivation. This element brings creativity and intensifies planets and natal houses. Your competitive nature comes […] Read more »

Planets in Qualities

Planets in qualities signify how the inherent attributes and tendencies of those planets align with the modalities of the signs they occupy, influencing an individual’s style of action, decision-making, and engagement with the world.

Mutable Quality

The third Quality astrological signs are grouped into is mutable. Mutable Signs come at the end of a season. Mutable Signs are associated with flexibility […] Read more »

Fixed Quality

The second Quality in astrology is the Fixed modality. Fixed Signs follow the Cardinal Signs, bringing strength and endurance. These signs build upon the foundation […] Read more »

Cardinal Quality

The Cardinal quality in astrology is associated with new seasons and initiative. Cardinal signs mark the equinoxes and solstices. The Cardinal modality represents the extremes […] Read more »

Planets in Houses

Planets in a zodiac house signify where in life’s areas and experiences the energies and influences of those planets are predominantly focused and expressed.

Sun Tenth House Moon Sixth House Mercury Tenth House Venus Ninth House Mars Second House Jupiter Third House Saturn Eleventh House Uranus Second House Neptune Ninth House Pluto Ninth House Ceres Ninth House Chiron Tenth House Eros Ninth House Hygiea First House Juno Tenth House Pallas Eighth House Vesta Seventh House Black Moon Lilith Ninth House North Node Eleventh House South Node Fifth House Part of Fortune Tenth House Vertex Sixth House

Aspects

Aspects reveal the dynamic relationships and interactions between planets within a birth chart, influencing the way their energies combine and manifest in an individual’s life experiences and personality traits.

Within this birth chart, there are 30 major aspects, alongside 20 minor aspects, as well as 2 extra aspects.

Major Aspects

Major aspects highlight significant connections between planets, providing insights into key dynamics, challenges, and potentials shaping an individual’s life journey and psychological makeup.

Venus Opposite Jupiter Venus Conjunct Neptune Jupiter Opposite Neptune Sun Trine Mars Moon Square Midheaven Mars Conjunct Uranus Sun Square Moon Sun Trine Uranus Mercury Quincunx Jupiter Saturn Sextile Pluto Sun Square Ascendant Sun Conjunct Midheaven Moon Quincunx Mars Venus Sextile Saturn Jupiter Trine Saturn Saturn Sextile Neptune Moon Quincunx Uranus Mars Trine Midheaven Pluto Conjunct Midheaven Venus Conjunct Pluto Jupiter Opposite Pluto Neptune Conjunct Pluto Moon Opposite Ascendant Moon Square Pluto Uranus Trine Midheaven Ascendant Square Midheaven Saturn Sextile Midheaven Sun Conjunct Pluto Moon Trine Mercury Mars Trine Pluto

Explore detailed articles on the major aspects in this birth chart, gaining deeper insights into this cosmic identity. Dive into each aspect and uncover how it shapes Princess Helena Adelaide of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Glücksburg’s life journey.

Venus Opposite Jupiterorb: 0°

Venus opposite Jupiter in a chart typically indicates a person is charming and social. They are likely popular and have no issue meeting new people. […] Read more »

Venus Conjunct Neptuneorb: 0°

Venus conjunct Neptune in the Natal Chart makes you sensitive and romantic. You are empathetic and loving, wearing your heart on your sleeve and making […] Read more »

Jupiter Opposite Neptuneorb: 0°

Jupiter opposite Neptune in a chart typically indicates that a person is curious and imaginative. They constantly question the world around them, but they tend […] Read more »

Sun Trine Marsorb: 1°

The Sun trine Mars in the Natal Chart makes you ambitious and strong-willed. You are caring and affectionate. You show warmth and generosity. You can […] Read more »

Mars Conjunct Uranusorb: 1°

Mars conjunct Uranus in a chart typically brings creativity and a vibrant, attractive energy. People with this conjunction in their Natal Chart are passionate, rebellious, […] Read more »

Sun Square Moonorb: 2°

The Sun square Moon in a Natal Chart is more potent than this aspect in a Transiting Chart. You inhibit your growth and block yourself […] Read more »

Sun Trine Uranusorb: 2°

The Sun trine Uranus in the Natal Chart makes you shocking and eccentric. You are individualistic and balk against anything that stifles you. You are […] Read more »

Mercury Quincunx Jupiterorb: 2°

Mercury quincunx Jupiter in a Natal Chart can indicate that a person doubts their intelligence. They might have big dreams and feel optimistic, only to […] Read more »

Sun Square Ascendantorb: 3°

The Sun square Ascendant in the Natal Chart creates friction between your identity and outer appearance. Your first impressions don’t align with your authentic self. […] Read more »

Sun Conjunct Midheavenorb: 3°

The Sun conjunct Midheaven makes you outspoken and authentic. You openly share your talents and align your unique abilities with your public status. You are […] Read more »

Moon Quincunx Marsorb: 3°

When the Moon is quincunx Mars in a Natal Chart, there will be many inconsistencies in how this person expresses their emotions. Emotional outbursts are […] Read more »

Venus Sextile Saturnorb: 3°

Venus sextile Saturn in a chart is not the easiest sextile to deal with because of the way Saturn can restrict Venus’ affectionate and loving […] Read more »

Moon Quincunx Uranusorb: 4°

When the Moon is quincunx Uranus in a Natal Chart, this creates tension between the need to rebel and the need to find emotional security. […] Read more »

Pluto Conjunct Midheavenorb: 4°

Pluto conjunct the Midheaven in a chart can create intense energy surrounding someone’s career, public image, and what they need to feel successful. People with […] Read more »

Venus Conjunct Plutoorb: 4°

Venus conjunct Pluto in the Natal Chart makes you focused on sexuality and romance. You have a gift for sensing what others are trying to […] Read more »

Jupiter Opposite Plutoorb: 4°

Jupiter opposite Pluto in a chart creates the potential for growth, transformation, success, and abundance. It is not always easy to get those things due […] Read more »

Neptune Conjunct Plutoorb: 4°

Neptune conjunct Pluto in a chart typically creates the energy for intense evolution. This transformative aspect can connect someone to the unconscious mind and allow […] Read more »

Moon Opposite Ascendantorb: 5°

The Moon opposite the Ascendant in a chart often results in someone mirroring the emotional expression they learned from caregivers growing up. This could lead […] Read more »

Moon Square Plutoorb: 5°

The Moon square Pluto in a Natal Chart can bring a lot of challenges, but it also comes with huge benefits if a person can […] Read more »

Sun Conjunct Plutoorb: 7°

The Sun conjunct Pluto in your Natal Chart can make you powerful and authoritative. You can be a natural leader who uses your penetrating and […] Read more »

Moon Trine Mercuryorb: 7°

When the Moon trines Mercury, there is a strong connection between the mind and the heart. It is not difficult for a person with this […] Read more »

Minor Aspects

Minor aspects represent subtler connections between planets, offering additional nuances and layers of interpretation to understand more detailed influences on an individual’s personality and experiences.

Mars Trine Part of Fortune Saturn Conjunct North Node Saturn Opposite South Node Uranus Quincunx Black Moon Lilith Sun Conjunct Part of Fortune Ascendant Trine Black Moon Lilith Ceres Conjunct Midheaven Mercury Conjunct Chiron Mercury Quincunx South Node Venus Sextile Vesta Mars Quincunx Eros Mars Quincunx Black Moon Lilith Jupiter Quincunx Pallas Jupiter Trine Vesta Uranus Trine Part of Fortune Neptune Sextile Vesta Pluto Sextile North Node Pluto Trine South Node Moon Trine Juno Ascendant Square Part of Fortune

Discover additional layers of meaning with this collection of articles on the minor aspects found in Princess Helena Adelaide of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Glücksburg’s birth chart. Delve deeper into these cosmic nuances to gain a richer understanding of this astrological profile.

Saturn Conjunct North Nodeorb: 0°

Saturn conjunct North Node in a chart connects Saturn’s responsible, reliable energy with the North Node’s higher purpose and full potential. This conjunction can create […] Read more »

Sun Conjunct Part of Fortuneorb: 1°

The Natal Sun conjunct Part of Fortune blends your sense of identity with your prominent gifts. You shine in the spotlight and have leadership potential. […] Read more »

Ascendant Trine Black Moon Lilithorb: 1°

The Ascendant trine the Black Moon Lilith in the Natal Chart, is an ideal placement for independence and rebelliousness. You are sexually expressive and can […] Read more »

Mars Quincunx Erosorb: 1°

Mars quincunx Eros in a chart can create a disconnect between a person’s desire to connect intimately with others and their need to express themselves […] Read more »

Mars Quincunx Black Moon Lilithorb: 1°

Mars quincunx Black Moon Lilith in a chart indicates that Mars’ passion and assertiveness are not aligned with Black Moon Lilith’s desire for freedom, expression, […] Read more »

Jupiter Quincunx Pallasorb: 1°

Jupiter quincunx Pallas in a chart can make it difficult for someone to balance their desire for self-improvement and their sense of their wisdom. Some […] Read more »

Ascendant Square Part of Fortuneorb: 2°

The Ascendant square of the Part of Fortune in the Natal Chart makes you struggle to assert your identity. You are stubborn and resist opportunities […] Read more »

Extra Aspects

Extra aspects, though less emphasized than major or minor aspects, contribute subtle nuances and intricacies to the overall astrological interpretation, offering additional insights into an individual’s personality traits and life experiences.

Chiron Sextile Pallas Eros Conjunct Black Moon Lilith

Explore how these extra aspects contribute to the intricate tapestry of Princess Helena Adelaide of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Glücksburg’s life path through subtler influences. Dive into each extra aspect and uncover the hidden gems that shape a unique cosmic identity.

Eros Conjunct Black Moon Lilithorb: 1°

Eros conjunct Black Moon Lilith in a chart aligns inner desires with primal instincts. It can give someone a need to break free from societal […] Read more »

Houses

A house starting in a zodiac sign indicates the area of life where the qualities and themes of that sign are particularly emphasized and influential within an individual’s birth chart.