What do the following titles have in common? Cheese in the Trap, Tazza, What’s Wrong With Secretary Kim?, Goong or Secretly, Greatly? Those are the titles of dramas and films that were inspired by webtoons or digital comics.

While Korean TV dramas draw inspiration from varied sources, webtoons are one of the most popular sources of inventive storylines. This in-demand form of instant entertainment began in Korea in the early 2000s and now attracts international attention, alongside other forms of Korean pop culture, a least partly because of the dramas and films it inspires.

Webtoons are an art form based in the more traditional comic or manhwa format but transformed by technology. Reading digital comics became popular in Korea because the nation is number one worldwide in smartphone ownership and Internet usage.

“Unlike in the United States, it’s very common to see South Korean commuters riding the subway or the bus and indulging in webtoons via their cell phones,” said Jinyoung Jin, director of cultural programs at the Charles B. Wang Center at Stony Brook University, which hosted the 2016 exhibit Webtoon: The Evolution of Korean Digital Comics. “This is likely because of the accessibility of high-speed Internet service almost everywhere in South Korea.”

Comic lovers can access dozens of online portals which publish hundreds of digital comics or manhwa, offered in regular installments. Some are partially or completely free, while others require paid subscriptions.

“Half the people in the country have read or are active readers of webtoons, and that’s a pretty big population,” said Ernest Woo, chief product officer of TappyToon Comics, which offers Korean webtoon content in several languages, including Spanish, French and English. “They have entertainment value. They’re quick to read and some of them are very engrossing and well made.”

Webtoons can be any genre: fantasy, action, romance, horror and thriller. One of TappyToons’ recent hits is the fantasy, Daughter of the Emperor, about the challenges faced by a cruel and fretful king while raising a newborn daughter. They also offer Bloody Sweet, a fantasy romance between a shaman and a vampire, as well as the more conventional office romance, What’s Wrong With Secretary Kim?

There’s no way to predict which webtoon genres will become popular or will next be converted into other media. Webtoons-turned-dramas are as diverse as the workplace saga Misaeng, the historical vampire drama, The Scholar Who Walks The Night, and the romantic comedy Flower Boy Next Door.

“The more popular ones for conversion would be historical (saeguk) ones or romantic comedy drama titles, because it’s more realistically possible to convert them into something else,” said Woo. “Sci-fi or fantasy is harder to produce.”

There are a few reasons webtoons have become such a popular source for adaptation. The first is the creativity the format inspires. Webtoons have been a boon for novice writers who have innovative ideas and previously had a limited platform. Because they don’t have any limitations on imagination, webtoons can deliver interesting and unusual stories. A drama or film may benefit from a good story that does not initially consider cost as a deciding factor.

“Film producers often limit themselves in reality of production cost, but webtoons do not, so there are more interesting stories being told and to be made into a film,” said the Naver webtoon team in an official group response to the question of drama content. “When webtoons are made into a video, the storyline or ending may change. However, webtoons’ core parts, which the fan base is created on, such as its charming characters and their lines, remains the same.”

Naver Webtoon, launched in 2004, attracts more than eight million readers daily and two of their most popular webtoons Cheese in the Trap and Along With The Gods, both became films and dramas. Recent drama adaptations include My ID is Gangnam Beauty and Mama Fairy and the Woodcutters, while Naver's production company, Studio N, has several adaptations in the works including the working titles: Your Letter, Strangers from Hell, Golden Spoon and Vigilante.

​The mass popularity of webtoons makes it easier to attract a ready audience for an adaptation. Loyal fans are excited long before the first day of filming.

“When a popular title is serialized, there are a lot of people reading it,” said Woo. “The story already has a built-in audience, which is great if you want to make another property out of it. Anyone who reads the comic will have some small interest in the drama and because the drama industry relies on TV ratings, it’s good to have a popular title with a built-in audience.”

The third reason adaptations are popular is that they save the time and energy a drama or film would otherwise spend developing a story line.

“If you produce an original story, there is a lot of time going into developing a story line,” said the Naver web team. “Webtoons reduce those steps, which is why they are being welcomed.”

The very visual medium of webtoons can be adapted into dramas, films, animation or even a printed novel. Conversely, the daily adventures of a k-pop band may even become a webtoon.

The record-breaking, award-winning, k-pop band BTS recently released an official webtoon titled Save Me, a collaboration between their agency Big Hit Entertainment and the artist Lico. It premiered on Naver’s webtoon platform and features the adventures of the band members, with a little time travel thrown into the plot.

Because manhwas have such a loyal fanbase, adaptations may face criticism as often as they earn praise.

“One of the most universally acclaimed was Misaeng, which was very well made and true to the original story,” said Woo. “I think audiences loved it for that. It’s a very real story that a lot of people were able to invest themselves in. Another very different kind would be Scholar Who Walks The Night. When people announced they were making that drama, people had doubts about it. It was a fantasy saeguk, but it turned out well. The actor did a good job.”

Adaptations don’t always please fans, but you can decide for yourself by sampling some of the original manhwas and then enjoying the media they inspire.