1. Innovating the Mobile Internet May 2, 2009

2. Agenda Overview and our genesis Executive team and customer base Global footprint: Bytemobile offices A bird’s eye view of our technology & products Bytemobile European Development Center (BEDC) History & experience of our presence in Patras, Greece The outlook

3. Bytemobile Facts Founded in 2000 University of Illinois startup – others include Netscape, YouTube, PayPal, AMD, Oracle, etc Innovator in wireless, mobile data services: Turning 3G+ into optimized , intelligent multimedia delivery networks Deployments in 105+ networks in 55 countries 12 of 15 top tier-one wireless operators Over 1 billion subscribers serviced by install base

4. Customers 105+ mobile network operators in 55 countries — serving more than a billion total subscribers

5. Global Operations and our BEDC team Americas EMEA Asia Pacific Mountain View, CA Champaign, IL Boston, MA Bracknell, UK Patras, Greece Dubai, UAE Beijing, China Tokyo, Japan Singapore Chatswood, Australia

6. The Bytemobile Unison Solution Internet Bytemobile Mobile Internet Gateway Access Router (GGSN, PDSN/HA, ASN GW…) Operator Services

7. Product and Application Overview

8. Our European Development Center in Patras, GR Today numbers over 60 full time employees Architecture and design Product development Custom engineering System Integration Customer support Professional Services VP of Product Development based in BEDC for the past 2 ½ years Partnership with inAccess that spans solutions engineering and product partnerships Local business cycle in excess of $2.5M per year and growing

9. Bytemobile European Development Center Established in Patras since 2003 Constant Growth ever since

10. BEDC – How it happened Bytemobile was born at the University of Illinois Bytemobile Greece was born at the University of Patras Visionary, motivator (and brother of our CTO and founder) was Prof. Eleftherios Polychronopoulos Group of his students founded Daedalus Inc. in 2001/02 Bytemobile and Daedalus cooperation started in 2003 Bytemobile acquired Daedalus in December 2003 Bytemobile decided to build a key new product in Patras – Web Fidelity Coincided with (at the time) chief architect move to Patras Eleftherios remains the “chief recruiter” for Bytemobile

11. Outlook Difficulties Plenty of “green” talent but lack of experienced engineers in Patras General lack of engineering managers in Patras Infrastructure (modern IT lab space, office space, broadband connectivity, IT support, supply chain lead times, etc.) Stability (power, roads, strikes, etc.) Outlook Bytemobile has been building the talent necessary to take our company to the next level Project strong growth of our BEDC team in the next 2-3 years Extension into Athens office has already begun