Shopping on Fifth Avenue is a New York dream of many. Starting north of Washington Square Park in Greenwich Village and running all the way to 143rd Street in Harlem Fifth Avenue spans a large area. Because of the many luxury stores, the most well-known stretch is between 49th and 60th Streets, one of the most expensive places to shop in the world!

Shopping on Fifth Avenue

Fifth Avenue is the place to go shopping in New York. Brands like Nike, UGG, Zara, Victoria’s Secret, Adidas, H&M and Abercrombie & Fitch have flagship stores here. Also many prestigious and high-end stores can be found between 49th and 60th Street on Fifth Avenue. Including Louis Vuitton, Gucci, Rolex, Cartier, Dolce & Gabbana, and many more. Or visit one of the toy stores on Fifth Avenue, such as the LEGO Store and FAO Schwarz.

This street has also appeared in films like ‘Breakfast at Tiffany’s’ and TV shows like ‘Gossip Girl’ and ‘Sex and the City’.

Fifth Avenue shops

If you enjoy shopping, you could easily spend hours browsing the shops on Fifth Avenue. From Fifth Avenue flagship stores to designer boutiques, there are numerous places to visit during a shopping spree on the Fifth. Here are some of the most famous stores on Fifth Avenue:

Saks Fifth Avenue – The flagship store

The iconic department store, is known for its superior assortment of American and international designer collections. The flagship store opened on Fifth Avenue in 1924 and takes up an entire block. In fact, the store is so big, that the Saks Holiday Light Show, an annual Christmas tradition, is projected onto the side of the building.

Address: 611 Fifth Avenue

Tiffany’s – The flagship store

The famous luxury brand is known for its jewellery in blue boxes with white ribbon. But the Tiffany’s store on Fifth Avenue is more than a jewellery store; over 40 works of art and never-before-seen pieces are displayed over ten floors.

Address: 57th Street & Fifth Avenue

Bergdorf Goodman

A large department store featuring a whopping nine floors full of exclusive designer fashion. There are a wide range of brands available, such as Chanel, Prada, Chloé and Marc Jacobs. The department store also has a restaurant and a café.

Address: 754 Fifth Avenue

Swarovski on Fifth – The flagship store

Step into the colourful world of Swarovski at their luxury shop on Fifth Avenue. The 2-floor shop is worth seeing even if you don’t buy anything. Discover unique jewellery, decorations, tableware and more. Here you can buy jewellery for less than $100 as well as jewellery in a higher price range.

Address: 680 Fifth Avenue

Harry Winston

Celebrities such as Gwyneth Paltrow, Anne Hathaway and Natalie Portman are often spotted on the red carpet dripping in jewels from Harry Winston. It is no surprise therefore that this store is also known as the Jeweller of the Stars!

Address: 718 Fifth Avenue

Where to drink and eat on Fifth Avenue

All this shopping makes you thirsty and hungry. Although Fifth Avenue is mostly a shopping district, there are a few eateries scattered throughout. For an upscale lunch, head to the Blue Box Café by Daniel Boulud at Tiffany’s, The Palm Court at The Plaza or BG at Bergdorf Goodman. You can also stop at a Starbucks or go in the direction of Rockefeller Center, which has a variety of food options. Grab a salad from sweetgreen, a pizza slice from Ace’s Pizza or a bagel from Black Seed Bagels. You can also find several restaurants here.

Fifth Avenue in New York

Fifth Avenue is about more than just shopping, there are also a number of famous buildings dotted along the avenue.

Famous Buildings on Fifth Avenue

Visit places such as the Flatiron Building at Madison Square Park, Empire State Building, New York Public Library, Rockefeller Center, St. Patrick’s Cathedral, Trump Tower and The Plaza Hotel.

Museums on Fifth Avenue

The section on the east side of Central Park between 82nd Street and 105th Street is also known as the Museum Mile. A number of museums located next to each other can be found here. Most noteworthy, the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum (88th Street). Every June the Museum Mile Festival takes place to promote the museums and increase visitor numbers. During the Museum Mile Festival entrance to the ten museums, including the Metropolitan Museum of Art, is free.

Parades on Fifth Avenue