5th Avenue stretches from Washington Square Park in Greenwich Village to West 143rd Street in Harlem, however, more importantly, it is thought of as one of the world’s most exclusive thoroughfares. Choosing to stay at one of the best hotels for 5th Avenue means you are close not only to one of the world’s great shopping streets but also just a stone's throw from Central Park, The Metropolitan Museum of Art, the Guggenheim, the MoMA, Times Square and Broadway. You’re also right up the road from the Empire State Building. So, essentially, you are surrounded by Manhattan landmarks. With such a glitzy postcode it is no wonder that the best hotels near 5th Avenue are also some of the best hotels in New York. Here you can book a room at one of the city's grand classic stays but there are also a good range of sleek modern hotels and some with noteworthy restaurants too. Our hotel experts have compiled a collection of their favourite hotels in the area to suit most tastes and budgets. So why not browse through our list to start planning your next stay?

For traditional elegance

The Sherry Netherland is a grand historic hotel set on 5th Avenue opposite Central Park. Elegant traditional rooms and suites feature decorative mouldings, fireplaces, sweeping vistas and spacious marble bathrooms. Playing host to the iconic lobby restaurant Harry Cipriani, this is a standout stay.

The Pierre is a luxury stay overlooking Central Park in the Upper East Side. Neoclassical elegance defines the hotel, from the grand facade to the beautifully appointed rooms decorated in subtle pastel hues. With the acclaimed restaurant Perrine, this is a decadent choice.

For foodies

The Mark is right in the heart of the Upper East Side and offers some old fashioned elegance despite a recent refurbishment by French designer Jacques Grange. The award-winning restaurant, which has become extremely popular with celebrities and New York royalty, is worthy of a visit alone.

Evelyn Hotel is a surprisingly affordable art-deco hotel set in trendy NoMad. Stylish and sophisticated rooms have vintage touches and antique furnishings. Benno, the hotel's Michelin star restaurant, offers a memorable fine-dining experience featuring coastal Mediterranean cuisine. Complete with a renowned cocktail bar — this is an alluring choice.

NoMad is a chic boutique hotel with a lively bar and a grand two-storied library. Notably large, moody rooms house local artist works and the best have in-room tubs. Refined Michelin starred dining, crafted by notable chef Daniel Humm and restauranteur Will Guidara, is complemented by a renowned wine list. A hip choice.

For contemporary style

Andaz 5th Avenue is a chic concept hotel located right on 5th Avenue. Interiors are minimalist and sleek with sharp lines, whitewashed walls, and plenty of glass overlooking the iconic skyline. Complete with a cocktail bar and tapas restaurant, this is an undeniably stylish stay.

Baccarat Hotel is a swanky New York establishment in the heart of Midtown. Enormous rooms are all white on white style with indulgent marble bathrooms. Complete with a fine-dining restaurant and hip cocktail bar as well as the obligatory spa and indoor pool, it may not be cheap but it's certainly worth the price.

Stylish and recently renovated, The Roger is contemporary, elegant and in a great spot on Madison Avenue offering views of the Empire State Building from the best of its luxe rooms and suites — some even have a private balcony or terrace. The lobby doubles as a bar and bistro offering a relaxed vibe and excellent cocktails.

For luxury

The Lowell is a charming Upper East Side Hotel, just a block to the east of Central Park. The decor is very classical; think marble bathrooms, elegant furnishings, artworks, and even real wood-burning fireplaces. The location is residential, a quiet tree-lined street off Madison Avenue, and the overall feel is of staying in a gorgeous townhouse.

The Whitby is one of the newest additions in husband and wife duo Tim and Kit Kemp's portfolio and it doesn't disappoint. Their beautifully designed rooms make traditional style contemporary — and the best rooms have large terraces. There’s also a chic bar, an excellent restaurant and a cinema!

The Langham New York is an opulent 5* hotel situated right on 5th Avenue. Luxurious contemporary rooms have indulgent amenities, original artworks, and large marble-clad bathrooms with rainfall showers and sweeping views of the Manhattan skyline. With Riviera-inspired cuisine and artisan cocktails, this is a refined and classic stay.

The Peninsula New York is a grand five-star again set right on 5th Avenue. Old school elegance is found in the vast lobby and elegant New York restaurant, while the trendy rooftop terrace and subdued rooms have more of a contemporary flair. Complete with a spa, indoor pool, and (of course) standout service.

For a unique stay

Library Hotel is a book-lover's paradise set between Grand Central and Bryant Park featuring literary-themed rooms and a writer's den. The rooftop bar and poetry garden offer excellent cocktails and city views. A truly unique place to absorb art and culture.

Still not sure where to book?

You could expand your search to include our list of the best places to stay in New York.

Or you could try our Guru's recommendations for the Best Midtown Manhattan Hotels, the Best Uptown Manhattan Hotels, or the Best Hotels for Wall Street and the Financial District.

Or you could contact one of our friendly Gurus for personalised advice.

The Whitby New York (Central MIdtown) 86 rooms from $795

One of the newest additions in husband and wife duo Tim and Kit Kemp's portfolio and it doesn't disappoint. Beautifully designed rooms makes traditional style contemporary. The best rooms boast large terraces. Complete with chic bar, excellent restaurant and a cinema this is hotel perfection. See More

Check Availability

Lowell Hotel New York (Upper East Side) 74 rooms from $675

A finely crafted and charmingly intimate Upper East Side hotel, one block from Central Park. Classically decorated - marble bathrooms, neutral tones, paintings, and elegant furnishings. Some rooms have real wood burning fireplaces. A luxurious destination, reminiscent of a private townhouse. See More

Check Availability

The Mark, New York New York (Upper East Side) 152 rooms from $895

An old favourite with spectacular neo-deco Jacques Granges interiors. Right in the heart of Upper East Side, old style elegance meets modern chic. The award-winning restaurant is reason enough to visit. A super stylish way to experience New York. Popular with celebs and New York royalty! See More

Check Availability

Evelyn Hotel New York (NoMad) 160 rooms from $134

An affordable art-deco hotel set just north of Madison Square Garden in trendy NoMad. Stylish and sophisticated rooms have vintage touches, antique furnishings and marble bathrooms with heated floors. Michelin starred Benno restaurant is unmissable and there's Leonelli's for a cocktail or two. See More

Check Availability

The Langham New York New York (Midtown South) 234 rooms from $518

An opulent 5* hotel situated on the iconic 5th Avenue. Luxurious contemporary rooms have indulgent amenities, original artworks, large marble-clad bathrooms with rainfall showers and sweeping views of the Manhattan skyline. Taste Riviera-inspired cuisine and sip artisan cocktails at the lounge. See More

Check Availability

Library Hotel, New York New York (Grand Central) 60 rooms from $232

A book-lovers' paradise between Grand Central and Bryant Park. Literary themed rooms and writer's den. The rooftop bar and poetry garden offer excellent cocktails and city views. Complimentary continental breakfast is served in the Reading Room. A truly unique place to absorb art and culture. See More

Check Availability

The Roger New York (NoMad) 194 rooms from $204

Stylish, recently renovated hotel with contemporary and elegant designer furnishings & a fantastic location on Madison Ave. Many rooms have stunning views of the Empire State Building and private furnished terraces. Colourful, bright, and buzzy this hotel is perfect for a cool city break. See More

Check Availability

The Sherry Netherland New York (Central Park) 50 rooms from $459

A grand historic hotel set on 5th Avenue opposite Central Park. Elegant traditional rooms and suites feature decorative mouldings, fireplaces, sweeping vistas and spacious marble bathrooms. Playing host to the iconic lobby restaurant Harry Cipriani, this is a standout stay. See More

Check Availability

The Pierre New York (Upper East Side) 714 rooms from $616

This luxury New York bolt-hole overlooks Central Park in the Upper East Side. Neoclassical elegance defines the hotel, from the grand facade to the beautifully appointed rooms decorated in subtle pastel hues. Dine at the hotel's acclaimed restaurant Perrine. A chic city base. See More

Check Availability

The Peninsula New York New York (Central Midtown) 235 rooms from $743

A grand five-star set in midtown New York right on Fifth Avenue. Old school elegance is found in the vast lobby and elegant New York restaurant. While the trendy rooftop terrace and subdued rooms have more of a contemporary flair. Complete with a spa, indoor pool, and (of course) standout service. See More

Check Availability

Baccarat Hotel New York (Central Midtown) 114 rooms from $870

A swanky New York establishment in the heart of Midtown. Enormous rooms are all white on white style with indulgent marble bathrooms. Complete with a fine-dining restaurant and hip cocktail bar as well as the obligatory spa and indoor pool, it may not be cheap but it's certainly worth the price. See More

Check Availability

Andaz 5th Avenue New York (Grand Central) 184 rooms from $525

A chic concept hotel located in the heart of Midtown. Interiors are minimalist & sleek with sharp lines, whitewashed walls, and plenty of glass overlooking the iconic skyline. The suites with large terraces are particularly impressive. A cocktail bar and tapas restaurant complete the picture. See More

Check Availability