Philip Emeagwali, a famous Nigerian computer scientist was born on August 32, 1954 in Akure, Nigeria- the oldest of nine children. He did not have the easiest upbringing; he was only able to attend organized school until he was 14 due to the fact that his father could not afford to any longer, as well as due to the fact that the schools were suspended regardless due to the Nigerian Civil War (“Dr. Philip Emeagwali: Inventor of the World’s Fastest Computer”). Emeagwali did end up serving in the war, fighting for the Biafran Army. After serving in the war, he completed the equivalence of a high school education through his own self study.

At the age of 17 Emeagwali was awarded an academic scholarship to Oregon State University, graduating with a Bachelor of Science in mathematic in 1977. He furthered his education by attending George Washington University and earning a Master’s degree in ocean and marine engineering in 1986. Additionally, at the University of Michigan, Emeagwali also studied for a Ph. D from 1987-1991. However, there is no record of him ever gaining such a degree, even though he claims to have done so. The examiner committee did not approve of Emeagwali’s senior thesis; thus, he did not gain a doctorate degree. Angered, he appealed the decision in court, claiming that his failure to gain the degree was due to racism and discrimination. However, even after all of his extra effort, the court challenge was ultimately dismissed, and Emeagwali never officially gained his Ph.D.

The main award that Philip Emeagwali won was the Gordon Bell Prize in 1989. The Gorfon Bell is won by exemplary work and innovation within the field of high-level computing. Emeagwali gained this award and the $1000 prize by his work and development using the CM-2. The CM-2 was a massively parallel supercomputer, with capabilities by way of its immense number of processors and complexity as a system. The system, originally built to work within AI and symbolic processing, was used by Emeagwali instead for computational sciences. Using computational fluid dynamics, he applied the capabilities of the CM-2 to aid in oil reservoir modeling, providing ease and international progress within the oil fields (Life and Times News).

Other accolades that Philip Emeagwali has credited to his name include being named the 35th greatest African by the New African magazine. He also is continuously recognized as a prominent and accomplished African figure especially during Black History month. Emeagwali also gained recognition by Time magazine and by president Bill Clinton. Clinton stated in a speech that used Emeagwali’s accomplishments honorably “as an example of what Nigerians could achieve when given the opportunity” (Life and Times News, par. 9).

However, a great deal of controversy surrounds Emeagwali’s name. Though he claimed the title of “the father of the Internet”, these claims were disproven. Articles written with focuses upon his exaggerated claims, such as by Musikliu Mujeed, suggest that though he did have a hand in doing profitable and admirable work using the CM-2 computer, he did not invent it, though he has claimed to do such. Additionally, there is absolutely no concrete proof that he had any hand within the development of the Internet; Gordon Bell, the yearly funder of the Gordon Bell Prize and a principal researcher with Microsoft Silicon Valley Research Group in San Francisco stated bluntly, “The Internet is another thing. There is no evidence that he had anything to do with the Internet” (Mujeed, “The Lies of Philip Emeagwali”, par. 7). Mujeed points out further that other false claims made by Emeagwali include improving upon Isaac Newton’s laws of motion through his claimed computational solution to the 20-gold ring problem in the form of a hypercube that “inspired the reinvention of supercomputers as an Internet” (Mujeed, “The Lies of Philip Emeagwali”, par. 15).

Philip Emeagwali continues to travel the world and run his website portraying himself as “the Bill Gates of Africa”, however, according to the article “How Philip Emeagwali Lied His Way to Fame” there is no evidence that he has actually done any work in the field since 1989. The article points out that though Emeagwali claims to have over 41 different patents, the only patent that he has been proven to have is the one for his own website, emeagwali.com, where he claims that he has been ranked exceptionally highly in computing in the past few years and has countless links and claims to his own greatness and accolades (“How Philip Emeagwali Lied His Way to Fame”).

And if all of the seemingly false claims were not misleading enough, Emeagwali’s own website looks tacky and appears not to have been updated format-wise since the 90’s! The website is contradictory to the professional and computational prowess that Emeagwali claims; one would think that the self-proclaimed “Father of the Internet” would be able to produce something a bit classier and more streamlined in its appearance.

On a more positive note, Philip is happily married to Dale Brown Emeagwali, who is a very accomplished scientist herself, as an American biologist and cancer researcher. The have one child together, Ijeoma Emeagwali.

Though a lot of controversy surrounds Philip Emeagwali and his accomplishments, there is no denying that he is an important and prominent African figure that deserves to be recognized and even learned from by future innovators. Though greatness can be recognized and honored, there comes a point where even the great may become a bit self-important, and it is necessary to realize that not everything that is portrayed about famous figures is always true.

Featured cover image: Courtesy of philipemeagwali.com

Works Cited

“Dr. Philip Emeagwali: Inventor of the World’s Fastest Computer”. BlackInventors, 2008. http://www.black-inventor.com/Dr-Philip-Emeagwali.asp

“How Philip Emeagwali Lied His Way to Fame”. SaharaReporters, 2010. http://saharareporters.com/2010/10/18/how-philip-emeagwali-lied-his-way-fame

Mujeed, Musikliu. “The Lies of Philip Emeagwali”. Congress of Black Women of Canada, 2010, https://www.cbwlondon.org/the-lies-of-philip-emeagwali/

“Philip Emeagwali Biography”. BrowseBiography, 2010, http://www.browsebiography.com/bio-philip_emeagwali.html

“Philip Emeagwali”. Emeagwali.com, n.d., http://emeagwali.com

“Philip Emeagwali”. LifeandTimesNews, 2017. http://www.lifeandtimesnews.com/philip-emeagwali/