KL Sentral Indoor parking lots are available in the KL Sentral building itself. It is the nearest carpark you can find to access KL Sentral station and the best option for dropping off/picking up passengers within 15 minutes because it’s free of charge. However, if you are going to park for more than 1 hour after 6 pm on weekdays or weekend, you should consider the cheaper NU Sentral indoor parking bays which is just next door.

KL Sentral Parking Lot is a 24/7 operated indoor parking bay which costs RM4 for the first hour and RM4 for the subsequent hour thereof. The first 15 minutes drive through is free, thus it is the best option for dropping off or picking up passengers at KL Sentral.

There is NO flat rate or maximum rate, thus be aware that the parking fee could be very expensive if you are going to park for a long time. For example, one-day parking inside KL Sentral building will cost you: 24 hours x RM4/hour = RM96

See other available parking options around KL Sentral and Brickfields area.

Parking rate

Be aware that the parking rates could change form time to time. Here are the updated (latest) KL Sentral parking rates:

Monday – Sunday

TimingParking Rate1st Hour or Part ThereofRM4Subsequent 1 Hour or Part ThereofRM4First 15 Minutes Drive ThroughFREE

Penalty For Lost Ticket

RM90 Per Lost Ticket

Operation Hours

Since it is an auto-pay carpark, it operates 24 hours a day.

Where and How to Pay

Touch n Go payment method is available at KL Sentral parking lot. You don’t have to visit the parking ticket machine, just scan your Touch n Go card at the parking entrance and exit.

You can also pay your parking fees by collecting a parking ticket from the entrance and pay before you leave via the autopay parking ticket machine (self-service). The parking ticket machine is located near the lift at Level One (beside Dr. Locker luggage storage).

Photo Gallery

The entrance of KL Sentral indoor parking lot is located at Jalan Stesen Sentral, opposite NU Sentral Mall.

The environment inside KL Sentral indoor parking bays is dark and doesn’t look like safe (you won’t really want to stay there for long).

There are not many parking lots in KL Sentral building, however, due to the high parking rates, you will often find empty parking space.

Location