Jimmy M. Allen, age 74, of Canton, Ohio went to be with the Lord, Thursday afternoon, May 2, 2024, while in the care of Cleveland Clinic Hospital at Cleveland following a brief illness.

Jimmy was born in Canton, Ohio on May 11, 1949. He was a son of the late Elmer L. “Doc” and Vivian Zettler Allen.

After his graduation from the former Lincoln High School at Canton, Jim, as he was known by many, furthered his education at Kent State Stark Campus and spent 40 years with the Timken Company prior to his retirement in 2009. While at Timken he worked in various capacities for the company but ultimately retired as part of the I.T. team.

On June 22, 1979, Jim married the former Martha Rueschman. The couple were looking forward to celebrating their 45th wedding anniversary next month. Through the years they enjoyed raising their three sons, traveling to visit family, and centered their lives on family and faith.

Jim was a talented vocalist who enjoyed singing with various church choirs throughout Stark County and made music a huge part of his life. He was also a model train enthusiast and a longtime leader for the Boy Scouts of America. He was a volunteer of the Buckeye Council, BSA and a proud Eagle Scout, member of the Order of the Arrow and a holder of a fifth year Pipestone.

When not traveling with Martha, the couple enjoyed sharing part of the retirement life as supporters and volunteers with Save-A- Mom Pet rescue. Jim was often called upon to help rescue the larger dogs. As a pet lover, Jim will be missed by his canine companions, Gabrielle, Nemo, and Boomer, who are truly beloved members of the Allen family.

In addition to his wife, Jim is survived by three sons, Jason (Julie) Allen, Joshua (Vicki) Allen all of Florida, and Jeremy (James Bernstein) Allen of California; his grandchildren, whom he deeply loved, Jessica (Nick), Jordan, Taylor, Brittany, P.J., Garrett, and Zoey; three great-grandchildren, Rhett, Addison James, and Kody. Completing the family are a sister, Vicki (James) Whitacre of Canton; a brother, Joddy Allen of Michigan; his nieces and nephews, and a special nephew, Jamie (Melanie) Whitacre of Canton.

In addition to his parents, Jim was preceded in death by a brother, Jerry Allen and a sister-in-law, Robin Allen.

In keeping with Jim’s wishes, he will be cremated. The family is planning a celebration of life to be held at a later date. The Geib Funeral Center at Dover is handling arrangements.

Memorial contributions in Jim’s name may be directed to Save a Mom Pregnant Dog Rescue 1271 Downing St. SW, East Sparta, OH 44626 (https://saveamomrescue.com/) or to the American Cancer Society, PO Box 1981, Cleveland, OH 44106 (http://donate.cancer.org).