The sequel to Ghostbusters: Afterlife (watch it HERE), which is scheduled to reach theatres on Wednesday, December 20, 2023, has been filming for a while now – and while cameras are rolling on that project, Ghostbusters and Ghostbusters II star Sigourney Weaver, who had a quick cameo in Ghostbusters: Afterlife, is doing the press rounds for the film Master Gardener. (You can see our own Weaver / Master Gardener interview at THIS LINK.) While talking to the folks at Collider about the film, Weaver revealed that she hasn’t been asked to come back for the Ghostbusters: Afterlife sequel.

When asked if she’s returning to the world of Ghostbusters, Weaver said, “No, I mean, I wasn’t asked to be in this Ghostbusters, and I think, you know, a little of us goes a long way.”

Ghostbusters: Afterlife stars Finn Wolfhard and Mckenna Grace are back for the sequel, reprising the roles of Trevor and Phoebe. They’re joined in the cast by Carrie Coon, playing Trevor and Phoebe’s mom Callie; Paul Rudd as his Afterlife character Gary Grooberson; Ernie Hudson as Winston Zeddemore, one of the original Ghostbusters; William Atherton as Walter Peck, the antagonistic EPA inspector from the first Ghostbusters film; and new additions Kumail Nanjiani (The Big Sick), Patton Oswalt (The King of Queens), James Acaster (Hypothetical), and Emily Alyn Lind (Doctor Sleep).

At first, Afterlife director Jason Reitman was expected to take the helm, once again directing from a screenplay he was writing with Gil Kenan – but then it was revealed that Kenan will actually be directing the new film. He previously directed the animated movie Monster House, the live-action films City of Ember, A Boy Called Christmas, and the remake of Poltergeist, and an episode of the Scream TV series.

When he took the directing job, Kenan said, “It’s an absolute honor to pick up the proton pack and step behind the camera for the next chapter of the Spengler family saga. I just wish I could go back to 1984 and tell the kid in the sixth row of the Mann Valley West that one day he was going to get to direct a Ghostbusters film.“

Reitman added, “A few years ago, my father (Ghostbusters and Ghostbusters II director Ivan Reitman) handed me the keys to Ecto-1 and together we made Ghostbusters: Afterlife. Words will never express how grateful I am to have made a film with my father by my side. It’s now time to hand those keys to my creative partner and fellow Ghostbuster Gil Kenan, a brilliant director who will keep the Spengler spirit alive. I can only hope to provide him the same producorial care and support that my father showed me.“

Were you hoping to see Sigourney Weaver in the Ghostbusters: Afterlife sequel, or are you fine with Dana Barrett sitting this one out? Let us know by leaving a comment below.