Description

Sigourney Weaver (born Susan Alexandra Weaver; October 8, 1949) is an American actress. She is known especially for her role of Ellen Ripley in the four Alien films: Alien, Aliens, Alien 3, and Alien Resurrection. Other notable roles include Dana Barrett in Ghostbusters and its sequel Ghostbusters II, Gorillas in the Mist: The Story of Dian Fossey, Working Girl, and Grace Augustine in Avatar. Her 1986 Academy Award nomination for Aliens is considered as a landmark in the recognition of science fiction, action, and horror genres, as well as a major step in challenging the gender role in cinema. Ghostbusters is a 1984 American comedy film directed by Ivan Reitman and written by Dan Aykroyd and Harold Ramis. The film stars Bill Murray, Aykroyd, and Ramis as three eccentric parapsychologists in New York City, who start a ghost catching business. Sigourney Weaver and Rick Moranis co-star as a potential client and her neighbor. It was released in the United States on June 8, 1984 and made US$238,632,124 in the United States. After being kicked out of their university, parapsychology professors Spengler, Stantz and Venkman decide to go into business for themselves by trapping and removing ghosts from haunted houses. After some initial skepticism, business is soon booming as The Ghostbusters rid New York of its undead. When a downtown skyscraper becomes the focal point of spirit activity linked to the ancient god Gozer, the problem threatens to be more than the team can handle. Ghostbusters became a critical and financial success, grossing more than $291 million worldwide and received a positive response from both critics and audiences alike. The film was nominated for two Oscars at the 57th Academy Awards ceremony for Best Visual Effects and Best Original Song for the main theme song, but lost both to Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom and Purple Rain. The American Film Institute ranked Ghostbusters 28th in its AFI’s 100 Years…100 Laughs list of film comedies. The film launched the Ghostbusters media franchise, which includes: a sequel, Ghostbusters II in 1989; two animated television series, The Real Ghostbusters and Extreme Ghostbusters; and several video games. The Ghostbusters are retained by Dana Barrett (Sigourney Weaver), whose apartment is haunted by a demonic spirit, Zuul, a demigod worshipped as a servant to Gozer the Gozerian, a Sumerian shape-shifting god of destruction. As the Ghostbusters investigate, Dana is possessed by Zuul, which declares itself the “Gatekeeper”, and Louis by a similar demon called Vinz Clortho, the “Keymaster”. Both demons speak of the coming of the destructive Gozer, and the Ghostbusters plan to keep the two apart.

Frame is shrinkwrapped until time of purchase. Ships boxed with packing peanuts.

THE PERFECT GIFT!