United States Army Lt. Col. John T. Turner Jr. assumed command of Defense Logistics Agency Distribution Tobyhanna, Pa., in a ceremony May 21. The ceremony was officiated by DLA Distribution commander Army Brig. Gen. Richard Dix.

“DLA Distribution is here to support our Nation’s military around the world and at any given moment these soldiers, sailors, airmen and marines are serving in harm’s way in some of the most austere, difficult environments in the world,” said Dix. “I have no doubt Lieutenant Colonel Turner will continue to build this great organization and lead DLA Distribution Tobyhanna into the future.”

A native of Okarche, Okla., Turner is a 1996 graduate of the United States Military Academy at West Point, N.Y., where he received a Bachelor of Science degree in International Relations and received an active Army Commission in the Infantry. He later branch transferred into the Quartermaster Corps. Turner continued his education by completing a Master of Arts in Transportation and Logistics Management from American Military University.

Turner first entered the Army as a split option National Guardsmen in the Oklahoma National Guard, serving as a 13E fire direction specialist. He was assigned to HHB 1/189 Field Artillery in Kingfisher, Okla. After being accepted into West Point, he was discharged from the National Guard.

His active officer assignments have included: supply platoon leader and company executive officer, 725 Main Support Battalion, 2d Infantry Division; battalion assistant S4 and battalion S4, 11th Transportation Battalion; assistant brigade S4, 2d Brigade, 25th Infantry Division; company commander, HHC, 2d Brigade, 25th Infantry Division, assistant brigade S4 and Brigade S4, 2d Stryker Brigade Combat Team, 25th Infantry Division; support operations officer, 225th Brigade Support Battalion, 2d Stryker Brigade Combat team, 25th Infantry Division; assistant G4, Supply and Services Division, Fifth United States Army; aide-de-camp to the Commanding General, Fifth United States Army; deputy director of logistics, Office of Security Cooperation Iraq; and chief of plans, 593d Expeditionary Support Command.

Prior to his selection as commander, DLA Distribution Tobyhanna, Turner served as army watch officer, Army Operations Center, National Military Command Center at the Pentagon.

Turner has participated in exercises and deployments worldwide with joint and coalition partners in Japan, Korea, Thailand, Australia, Egypt, and operational deployments to Iraq in support of Operation Iraqi Freedom. Most recently, he was responsible for coordinating the transfer of all Foreign Excess Personal Property in Iraq to the Iraqi government allowing the closure of the five remaining U.S. bases during the drawdown.

Turner’s military education includes: Quartermaster Officer Basic Course, Airborne School, Aerial Delivery Material Officer’s Course, Ram Air Course, Petroleum Officer’s Course, Combined Logistics Captains Career Course, Combined Arms Staff and Service School, and Intermediate Level Education/Command & General Staff College.

His decorations and awards include the Bronze Star Medal, Defense Meritorious Service Medal, Meritorious Service Medal with three Oak Leaf Clusters, Joint Service Commendation Medal, Army Commendation Medal with two Oak Leaf Clusters, Army Achievement Medal, U.S. Army Basic Parachutist Badge, and Parachute Rigger Badge.