Mystic, Conn. (May 14, 2015)—Plimoth Plantation and Mystic Seaport announced today that Mayflower II is now scheduled to depart Mystic Seaport on the morning of Monday, May 18 for her return trip to Plymouth.

The delay is due to difficulties with the availability of a tugboat to tow the ship back to Massachusetts.

The ship is scheduled to cast off at 8 a.m., although the exact time is dependent on tide levels and weather conditions that morning. The journey to Plymouth is expected to take two days. Once back at her berth, the ship will be inspected by the U.S. Coast Guard and other preparations will be carried out to make her ready to reopen to visitors prior to the Memorial Day weekend.

The full-scale reproduction ship owned by Plimoth Plantation has been at Mystic Seaport to undergo an extensive survey and the first phase of multi-year restoration at the Museum’s Henry B. duPont Preservation Shipyard.

For more information about Mayflower II and her restoration, visit www.plimoth.org/sos.

Images are available for download at the Mystic Seaport website.

About Plimoth Plantation

Plimoth Plantation is a 501(c)3 charitable organization and a living museum dedicated to telling the history of Plymouth Colony from the perspective of both the Pilgrims and the Native Wampanoag people. Located less than an hour’s drive south of Boston in Plymouth, Massachusetts, (Exit 4, Route 3 south) and 15 minutes north of Cape Cod, the Museum is open daily from 9 am to 5 pm, 7 days a week, from the third Saturday in March through the end of November 2015. Plimoth Plantation is a private, not-for-profit educational institution supported by admission fees, contributions, memberships, function sales and revenue from a variety of dining programs/services/special events and Museum Shops. Plimoth Plantation is a Smithsonian Institution Affiliate and receives support from the Massachusetts Cultural Council, private foundations, corporations, and local businesses. For more information, visit www.plimoth.org.