Things to Do

FEATURED

Mystic Boat Adventures

145 Pearl Street, Noank, CT

Mystic Boat Adventures offers guided tours where you can drive your own boat! The only tour of its kind in all of New England!

Tidal River Clothing Co.

28 W. Main St., Mystic, CT

Locally owned and run since 2004, Tidal River Clothing carries the best selection of Mystic t-shirts in town and brand names like Patagonia, Helly Hansen, Prana, OluKai and Nixon.

Adventure Mystic

15 Holmes Street, Mystic, CT

Adventure Mystic offers paddle board, kayak, bike, and snowboard rentals. Their shop sells paddle boards, kayaks, bikes, snowboards, skateboards, accessories, apparel and more.

Mystic Knotwork

25 Cottrell St. / 2 Holmes St., Mystic, CT

Mystic Knotwork hand-ties nautical knot bracelets, coasters, ornaments, door mats, wreaths, wedding table number holders and much more in their downtown shops and for their online store.

Mystic Seaport Museum

75 Greenmanville Ave., Mystic, CT

Take a day and treat the family to a visit to the nation’s leading maritime museum. Immerse yourself in America’s maritime story.

Trove

15 W Main St., Mystic, CT

Trove is “Mystic’s shopping destination for him”. Shop for gifts, clothing, footwear, accessories, bar items and grooming sundries.

Hang the Moon

31 W Main St., Mystic, CT

Hang the Moon is Mystic’s go to shop for women’s gifts, accessories and jewelry. We are proud to offer a wide array of exceptional gifts for women that are made by exceptional women.

Mystic Coastal Cruises

145 Pearl Street Noank CT, 06340

Join Captain Carl and his friendly crew aboard the classic, 42 foot, antique Chris Craft Motor Yacht “White Caps.”

More Things to Do

search by category

Discover More in Mystic

Welcome to thisismystic.com

This is Mystic is here to keep you updated with all things Mystic, Connecticut! Like us on Facebook, follow us on Instagram, and if you have any questions/comments please contact us.

Discover THINGS TO DO

Mystic for the Holidays in 2023

CT Kids Free Admission at Seaport and Aquarium for Summer 2023

Mystic Garden Club Greens Sale 2022

This is Mystic in October