August 1, 2024

Two things I will first say about this biography: It is very well researched, and gives us an excellent insight into both the man and the actor who is Warner Baxter.

To start off, I will tell you that I was born after Mr. Baxter died, so there should be a possibility that I would never have heard of him. But I am a tremendous lover of classic films. So much so, I don't even watch the movies made today. I would rather live in the glory that was once Hollywood than what has unfortunately become. I also have thousands of classic films, so I never get bored!

Warner Baxter has always struck me as a wonderful actor, most deserving of his Oscar, for the film In Old Arizona. It began a long career of movies, one in which he excelled in whatever character he chose to play. He always struck me as not only handsome, but strong and steady, someone you could talk to about anything -- this was his screen persona. In fact, I recently watched once again The Prisoner of Shark Island, just to bring me back into seeing him once more on screen. I won't go into the movie, as the author does that quite nicely. But watching it, you can see the emotions flit over his face as he encounters life -- happiness, despondency, confusion, determination, and eventually, triumph and once again happiness, although this time sadly. It is a wonderful picture, and you should watch it.

He made many wonderful pictures; unfortunately, also quite a few that are "lost" because of the way films were made long ago, and there are no prints available to watch. (I long to see them, but alas, it will never be). There is no doubt that he was spectacular in whatever role he chose; until, at least, he allowed his own health issues to intervene.

Mr. Baxter was also happily married for thirty-three years to his wife until his death in 1951. Their marriage was more than solid. The Baxters traveled, and had several homes, including an impressive (even by today's standards) home in California, which, eventually, they sold, along with other 'impulse' purchases by Baxter. But while they were there, they enjoyed them, and also spending time with friends, which included other great actors such as Ronald Colman and William Powell.

Warner Baxter, unfortunately, had demons he was never able to rid himself of. His mother was widowed when he was only five months old, and never remarried. He spent his life devoted to her and taking care of her. He always knew he wanted to be an actor even when he had other jobs. It was by sheer luck that someone knew and took notice of this tall, imposing man with the baritone voice and expressive face.

There were several accidents and incidents throughout his acting career -- and we will never know if he blamed himself for any of them -- but he kept this to himself, as well as his other insecurities. No matter how much money he had -- and the Baxters were, by all accounts, very wealthy -- he believed that tragedy was around the corner. But Baxter loved to act, and he kept on even late into his career, which spawned a ten-movie series named The Crime Doctor. Occasionally, you can catch this series on Turner Classic Movies (or better yet, buy it!). It is one of the last films (but not the last) that Mr. Baxter made.

I could list all the movies I've watched, and those I love best, but the author does a superb job of doing this for me. As I stated above, the book is well researched, and there is an extensive bibliography and filmography in the back of the book for you to reference. Above all, there are many wonderful pictures of this star throughout the book, and tons of those I have never seen before.

While Warner Baxter remains, I imagine, not as well-known as stars such as James Cagney, his roles were nevertheless diverse and worth watching, and I implore you to read this book and then delve into a few. You will not regret it. Highly recommended.