a a a a a a a a a a OBITUARIES THE CHATTANOOGA TIMES: CHATTANOOGA, TUESDAY, MAY 8, 1951. 17 BAXTER, FILM ACTOR, DEAD Was Original 'Cisco Kid' of Movies Won 'Oscar' for 'In Old Arizona' Role BEVERLY HILLS, May 7 (P)-Warner Baxter, 62, veteran motion picture actor, died his home tonight after a long illness. suffered from arthritis for years and a lobotomy was performed three weeks ago to alleviate his pain. Bronchial pneumonia set in recently and hastened his death. the original "Cisco Kid" movies, enjoyed ruggedness in life in keeping with virile charhe portrayed the screen .

peters, sea fishing, hunting and tennis were his favorite hobbies. But in recent years he was chronically de ill, suffering pain made eating difficult and induced malnutrition. In April, 1951, he underwent cranial sur8 gery. He and his second wife, the former stage actress Winifred Bryson, celebrated their 33rd wedding anniversary in January, 1951. He was married in 1911 to Viola Caldwell of Philadelphia .

They separated soon after and were divorced. Native of Ohio Born in Columbus, Ohio, March 29, 1889, his trend to show business showed up when he was a small boy. He became the barker and ticket seller for a back-yard gunnysack tent act in which another little boy would eat a worm, swallow a fly, for a penny. Parental intervention stopped that show suddenly. In 1910 in Columbus, Baxter landed job when a dancer as ankle .

He vaudevillen stayed in show business from then except for brief excursions in salesman jobs. He joined a stock company in Tulsa, in 1913. In 1914 he went on the stage in Los Angeles. His first movie role was with Ethel Clayton in "Her Own Money" in 1916. Baxter's biggest break resulted from an accident and catapulted him to an Academy Award .

Rauol Walsh, famed director, was playthe part of Cisco Kid in the first outdoor all-talking picture, "In Old Arizona." After finishing location work in Zion Canyon in Walsh was driving at night near Cedar City, Utah. A frightened jackrabbit jumped and crashed thorugh the windshield. Walsh was blinded in his right eye. Long a Favorite Baxter was tested and won the part to replace Walsh. Both the picture and Baxter won "Oscars" in 1929 .

He remained a favorite for years. Earnings of $284,000 in 1936 ranked Him first in the an industry. Among his better-known pictures were "The Arizona Kid," "Daddy Long "The Cisco Kid." "42nd Street," "Broadway Bill" and "Under the Pampas Moon." In recent years Baxter was identified Ordway" in the "Crime Doctor" series. But films became sideline to real estate business and other interests. W .

H. Jasspon MEMPHIS, May 7 (P) -W. H. Jasspon, 63, president of Perkins Oil Company here and a cotton expert, died last night at his home. During World War II he served as director of the Department of Agriculture's fats and oil branch and as chairman of the International Food Council's fats, oil and feeds commission .

Mrs. Uriah Seaborn Fuller CULLODEN, May 7 (P)- Mrs. Uriah Seaborn Fuller, 76- year-old mother of Frank H. Fuller, Associated Press bureau chief at Richmond, died today at Upson County Hospital in Thomaston, Ga. Mrs .

Fuller, the former Clyde Louise Winfield, had been ill for several years. She was the daughter of Winfield and Joanna Woodward Winfield. Funeral arrangements are incomplete, but services probably will be held in Culloden tomorrow. Mrs. Lizzie Jane Flynn SEVIERVILLE, May 7 (P)-Mrs .

Lizzie' Jane Finchum Flynn died today, leaving 133 direct descendants. She was 86. survived by two sons, three daughters, great-grandchildren 40 grandchildren, great- great-great-grandchildren. Walter Jones By Times Correspondent. ATHENS .

May 7-Walter Jones, 69, farmer of Calhoun and formerly of Chattanooga, died in a hospital here today following a stroke suffered at his home Sunday. A native of McMinn County, he was a son of the late William Jones and Mrs. Sarah Benn Jones. was a member of the Methodist Church. Surviving are his wife, Mrs .

Sarah Ann Brown Jones; two daughters, Mrs. Calvin Stephens, Athens; Mrs. Tommy Green, Calhoun; five sons, Dewitt Jones of Chattanooga, Dewey of Copperhill, Luther. Muncy and W. F .

Jones, all of Calhoun; eight grandchildren; two brothers, Will of Chattanooga and Luther Jones of Riceville; three sisters, Mrs. Maud Hamilton of Chattanooga, Mrs. Martha Beard of Louisville and Mrs. Nannie Burris of Calhoun. Funeral will be held Wednesday at 11 a.m .

at Charleston Methodist Church. Burial will be in Charleston City Cemetery. The body will remain at the residence until the hour of service. Riley Wilson Riley Wilson, former Chattanoogan, died Sunday night at his home in Miami, of a heart attack. He was 62 .

Mr. Wilson was associated here with D. B. Loveman Company for many years. He served in the medical corps during World War I and had, been a desk sergeant with the Miami police department for the past 10 years .

Surviving are four brothers, J. CHARGES M'ARTHUR STYMIED PEACE BID Marshall Stresses 'Limited War' Policy to Gain Time for Building Forces From Page One the had urged against any consideration of U.N. membership for Red China and Foroma's future in peace discussions- and that he understood the recommendation had been vetoed by Marshall. Marshall replied vigorously to MacArthur as the first Administration witness to be heard by the Senate committees. These groups are studying U.S .

Asia policy and the reasons for MacArthur's ouster. Deploring this "very distressing occasion," Marshall pictured MacArthur as a commander who grown so far out of sympathy with U.S. policy that his superiors doubted his ability to make the proper command decisions in the field. "He would have us accept the risk of involvment not only in an extension of the with Red China," Marshall said, "but in an all-out war with the Soviet Union. "He would have us do this even though the effect of such action might expose western Europe to attack by the millions of Soviet troops poised in middle and eastern Europe." And then, point by point, Marshall disputed many of MacArthur's statements and warned against the general's a proposal to step up the Korean war by bombing Red China and forcing a Communist surrender .

It was MacArthur's outspoken calls for this action-and the use of Chinese Nationalist troops--which led to his dismissal. Marshall told the committees: (1). Government is nod 'discussing with U.N. Allies a possible naval blockade of Red China's coast, but the issue has not been put to a formal vote. (2) The Truman Administration stoutly opposes Red China's entry into munists the U.N .

control or of giving the the island, Com- of Formosa. Threatened Evacuation (3) MacArthur once informed the joint chiefs that the U.N. forces might have to evacuate unless he could step up the Korea, against the Reds with air bombing of Red bases, a naval blockade and use of Chinese Nationalist troops. (4) JCS recommendations of Jan. 12-which MacArthur said supported his proposed war plans -were partially carried out .

But most of them were discarded when U.N. forces halted the big Red drive last January. Marshall said there were 16 points in these rec-b MacArthur quoted only four. (5) President Truman approved JCS recommendation to permit U.S. pilots to chase Red raiders across the Manchurian border for a limited distance but this plan of "hot pursuit" was voted down by other U.N .

members involved in the Korean war. (6) MacArthur was fired behis 'basic differences of judgment" with the President, himself and the joint chiefs had caused them to doubt his command decisions. Probe May Aid Reds Marshall declared he feared he was being forced by his testimony into "sort of acting as an intelagent" for Russians and ligence the Chinese Red government. "I get nothing of their conclusions, their recommendations, their proposed actions," he said, "but the world gets good bit the other side from U.S.A., and it is not an easy way to handle things when you are at war." But despite this uneasiness, Marshall plowed ahead in his case against MacArthur by showing senators top-secret documents and then urging them' not to be disclosed. At one point he read MacArthur's message to the JCS warning of the possibility of an evacuation from Korea .

Then he said: "Now, gentlemen, I. read that actually the way it is, and I wouldn't have it become public in any way, beit would be ruinous to us in cause our security arrangements." This message was read as it had been sent in code and Marshall meant that if the text were known to the Russians, it would give them the key to the Government's code which guards the highest secrets. Allies Cool Marshall disclosed the U.S. Government has had trouble in getting other U.N. members to go along with the American ideas for pursuing the Korean war .

down pointedata of "hot pursuit," He the U.N. turnand then said this Government has tried to get agreement for a full economic blockade of Red China proposed by MacArthur. tions Marshall have not said come the other around U.N. this to a limited extent." plan In broad outline, the secretary described policy as being at "thwarting the aggressor" in Korea, avoiding a third world war, blocking Red expansion in southeast Asia and winning "sorely needed time" to rebuild defenses against threatened Soviet imperialism. MacArthur has testified that it to try to buy time at was wrong "the tremendous expense of American blood." The ousted general said this policy would permit the Korean war to drag on and on without reaching an honorable end .

16 JCS Recommendations Discussing the now famous JCS recommendation of Jan. 12, which MacArthur said was "identical" with his views, Marshall said it was when it looked as though forces might be prepared, driven out of Korea. Earlier, MacArthur had proposed a naval blockade and bombing of Red bases outside Korea, Marshall said, but these proposals were rejected on Jan. 9 by the joint chiefs with approval of himself "He and (MacArthur) President Trumaherefore directed to defend in successive positions, inflicting maximum damage to hostile forces in Ko- FIRST U.S. TROOPS ARRIVE IN ICELAND Force Is Under Command of McGaw-Believed it Will Be Built Up Gradually REYKJAVIK, Iceland, May Edward J .

McGaw landed by air today with the first contingent of American army, navy and air forces to help defend this North Atlantic republic. (The Defense, Department in Washington said the force consisted of 200 men.) Icelandic newspapers got out extras announcing the second coming of the Yanks. The govenment issued a statement saying the troops had arrived at the invitation of this country, an independent member of the North Atlantic alliance. It was believed the force will be built up gradually in the next few weeks. Its activities will center around the two main airports, Keflavik, 30 miles from the capital, and' Reykjavik, but listening posts and other strategic installations about the island will also be manned .

Second Time American troops were stationed here in World War II, and were the only defense force for this island. close to the Arctic Circle. Iceland's airfields and bases were important factor in the protection of convoy routes across the North Atlantic. Iceland, a nation of 140,000 people, has no army, navy or air force of its own. The government statement said: "WHen Iceland joined the Atlantic .

Pact, it agreed that if war broke out the Allies would have a similar position in Iceland to that they had during the last it was entirely up to Icelanders to say when such a position would be granted." government consulted with 43 of the 52 members of the Al(the world's oldest parliament), who agreed now was time to ask for defense forces, the statement, said. were The not nine consulted. Commumist, negotiations carried on directly with the U.S., the statement said, it was agreed Iceland will retain control over the number of troops to be here. U.S. Good Will Cited The government statement added that the U.S .

had shown good will and understanding of Iceland's views in the negotiations and had furthered country's independence and prosperity in the pact. dent Alben W. Barkley, Speaker of the House Sam Rayburn of Texas, House Majority Leader John W. McCormack of Massachusetts, Secretary of Labor Maurice Tobin, and Millard Caldwell, civil defense administrator. Deaths LAWRENCE-MRS .

Samuel MAUDE W. HARMON, Lawrence, 57, wife of died at at Subligna, Monday afternoon, at 3 o'clock. She is survived only by her parents, Mr. and Mrs. George T .

Harmon of Subligna, Funeral arrangements will be announced later through Wallis Son, LaFayette. -FIRMAN 34, died Saturday in the Veterans Hospital in Memphis, Tenn. He is survived by his wife, Mrs. Neda Mitchell; two children, Sharon and Firman Mitchell mother, Mrs. F .

M. Mitchell of Chattanooga; one sister, Mrs. E. W. Dent, Chattanooga; brother, Royal Mitchell, Detroit, Mich .

Funeral services will be held at 3 o'clock this afternoon in the chapel of the National Funeral Home with Rev. Wayne Tarpley conducting. Burial will be in Lomenick Cemetery. Active pallbearers will be Clifford Long, Walter Duke. Charles Perkins, Gordon Kellett, Gene Power and W .

T. Stivers. Honorary pallbearers will be B. Halsell. Red Mavberry, Donald Ellis, Dr .

A. S. Easley. C. W .

Parsons, T. N. Alsobrook. Stanley Chad, Howard Chad, Richard Dugger, Dr. L .

McDonough, Paul Parham, Carl Long, Earl Levi, R. T. Morton and members of the radio class of the Kirkman School. The body is at the funeral home where it will remain until the hour of service. Arrangements are by the National Funeral Home .

STAFFORD-MRS. FANNIE ANDERSON, 84, died early Monday morning at the residence. 2002 East 34th Street. She is survived by seven children, Mrs. Alma Riley, Mrs .

W. W. Bendure. Mrs. Dona Oliver, Mrs .

Alfred Elrod, Edward F. and Eugene Stafford. all of Chattanooga; Vance Stafford. Rossville: 14 grandchildren. eight great-grandchildren: two brothers .

H. C. Anderson, Chattanooga; Tom Anderson. McMinnville. RISO several nieces and nephews .

Funeral services will be held at 1:30 o'clock this afternoon in the chapel of the National Funeral Home. with Rev. E. B. Shivers Jr .

and Rev. Homer Daniels conducting. Burial will be in Tennessee -Georgia Memorial Park. Pallbearers will be W. W .

Bendure, Clarence Christiansen. Clayton Wyatt. R. C. McAbee, Willard Gross and Richard Oliver .

The body is at the funeral home. Arrangements are by the National Funeral Home. TYLER MRS. DOVIE HALL. 72 .

died at her home north of Trion 5:15 a.m. Surviving are her husband, George Tyler of Trion: two daughters, Mrs. Cora Tyler Mitchell of Trion and Mrs. Sarah Bean of Chicago; three sons. Hall Tyler of Summerville; Leonard Tyler of Chattanooga, and Melvin Tyler 01 Trion; one brother, Flavil Hall of Pineapple, two sisters .

Mrs. Cora Westbrooks of Trion, and Mrs. Ocie Wilbanks of Chattanooga; five grandchildren. Funeral services will be conducted from the Pleasant Grove Church of Christ, of which she was a member, Wednesday at 2 p.m., with Brother Paul Buchanan, Brother Gardner Hall and Brother 8. M .

Connally officiating. Interment in Hall Cemetery in Hall's Valley, Pallbearers, Roland Westbrooks, V. E. Wilbanks. Ernest Hollis, Roland Hemphill, Felton Westbrooks and Henry Westbrooks .

The body will be at the home after 2 p.m. Tuesday and will be taken to the church Wednesday at 1:30 p.m. and will lie in state until the hour service. J. D .

Hill Funeral Home, Summerville, in charge of arrangements. ROY ETHRIDGE FLOWERS Phone 6-1876 Nite 2-8772 Kathryn Carden Roy Ethridge 734 McCallie Ave. PACE-EDWIN age 52, of Trenton. Ga, passed away Saturday night in local hospital. Surviving are his wife .

Mrs. Edwin S. Pace; two daughters, Mrs. Ray Fuller. Tucson, Miss Julia Ann Pace, Trenton: two sons .

Edwin S. Pace U.S. Army. Jackson. 6 .

Charles Pace. Greeneville. two grandchildren, Ogreeta Ann Fuller and Martha Jane Fuller. Tucson, two nephews. E .

A. Ellis Trenton. and A. P. Pace Jr .

U.S., Army. Shreveport, La. Mr. Pace's parents are Juliana Street Pace and the late William Peyton Pace, both members of prominent pioneer families of Dade County. He was member of the Trenton Methodist Church and had been employed in the signal department of the A .

G. S. Railroad for the past 25 years. Active pallbearers will be James C. Case .

Hugh Cureton. Fletcher Allison, M. J. Hale. T .

M. Tatum and A. C. Killian. Honorary pallbearers will be members of signal department of A .

G. S. Railroad and Lewis McBryar, Milton Case. Raymond Morrison, Joe Blevins. W .

W. Daniels, J. L. Wilkins. A .

L. Dyer, E. M. Parker, Boss Cole. Charles Hayes, Cha rlie Butfington, Ernest Stewart .

W. Julls Case, A. W. Peck. Grover Tatum, J .

RobertW. son, Cole, J. A. Jenkins. w .

J. Price, ElL John T. H. Brock, O. M .

Foster. C. W. Page. Charles W .

Wheeler, Frank Snyder, R. A. Woolbright, Gray, L. O. Wheeler Fred A .

Morgan and J. M. Carroll. The body is at the residence of his mother in Trenton. where the funeral services will be held Wednesday afternoon at 2 o'clock EST .

with the Rev. A. T. Newby officiating. Burial will be in Baptist Cemetery .

Arrangements are by the National Funeral Home. Deaths WARNER BAXTER FUNERAL TODAY Funeral services for Firman H. Mitchell, who died Saturday in Veterans Hospital in Memphis, will be held this afternoon at 3 o'clock at National Funeral Home. The Rev. Wayne Tarpley will officiate .

Burial will be in Lomenick Cemetery. CAR MAKERS THINK SALES LAG TO LIFT Planning to Build All Autos Possible and Expect to Sell Them This Year BY DAVID J. WILKIE Associated Press Automotive Editor. DETROIT, May 7. makers apparently are convinced the lag in retail sales is only temporary .

They still are putting out orders, months in advance, for materials. They call for all the materials and parts that can be had under Government restrictions. Of course, the auto makers could call back some of the orders. In an emergency, such as a work stoppage in their plants, they could even cancel them. But right now they are planning to build all the vehicles possible within the limitations of materials controls .

And quite generally, the larger car companies expect to sell all the vehicles they can build this year. Some '50 Models on Hand Some retailers may differ with this view. A few dealers still have some 1950 models on hand. They are glad to sell these at something less than list prices. But this condition prevails in only a few instances .

The over-all new car outlook is encouraging. As most experts view it only some concerted sales effort will be needed to make 1951 a highly profitable year for most of the approxmately 48,000 new-car retailers in the United States. Most car makers deny the recent sales lag resulted in any way from earlier scare buying. They say an improvement already has become apparent. A few days of spring-like weather in the larger marketing areas, they say, will bring the normal seasonal buying upsurge .

ALLEGED FRAUD IS BASE OF SUIT FILED IN COURT William M. Turpin, guardian for Frank W. Turpin, field suit in Federal court yesterday against Joseph. return Lahiere of and $25,000 others to seek- Turpin, basing the claim on alleged fraud. Frank W .

Turpin, according to the. bill, was adjudged incompetent Dec. 4, 1950. It is claimed he was induced to furnish money for the purchase of timber lands by Joseph Laheire and was to share profits from the sales. Property in Marion County, known as the Gaines tracts, was said to have been purchased by principal defendant .

Other, defendants in the suit are Andre J. Lahiere, Josephine O. and Mary E. Lahiere, Southern Timber and Coal Lahiere Lumber and Supply Company, National Timber and Coal tion. Gibraltar Construction Company of, Tennessee, Pioneer Bank, Alexander Peterson, Bernard Peterson, Hamilton National Bank, and American National Bank and Trust Company .

Representing the plaintiff are firms of McCoy, Witt Abernathy and Frazier, Roberts Weill. The bill seeks to have a receiver appointed to take charge of all of the property of the defendants until the case has been settled. The Turpins are residents of Morris County, New Jersey, while the defendants are listed as Chattanoogans. D. D .

and G. C. Wilson, all of Chattanooga, and E. G. Wilson, Atlanta .

Funeral services and burial will be in Miami Wednesday. Colored COWAN-MRS. LELA, 360 North Hawthorne Street, passed away at her home following a lingering illness. Survivors, sister, Mrs. Julia Maddox: nieces, Mesdames Daisy Carter .

city: Mrs. Ira Jones, Buffalo, York: sister-in-law, Mrs. Ella Pinson, Birmingham, Alabama: other relatives and friends: dear friends, Mesdames Katie Heard, Fannie Crutcher, Elease Crutcher, Pearlie Havis, Annie D. Collins and Billie Barnes. all of city .

Funeral services today at 2 p.m. at Hardwick's Memorial Chapel. Rev. E. Moore officiating .

Interment Greenhill Cemetery. body will remain at the funeral home. Hardwick Sons Funeral Home in charge. Phone 7-1244. Army Photo from the Associated Press .

NEW REPLACEMENTS New replacements just in from States stop to talk with Korean veterans Infantry Regiment, 24th Division at rotation center, Ascom City, Korea. the Left to right are Pvt. Joseph W. Payne, Chattanooga, Pvt. Donald a A .

Buss, Clayton, Pvt. a Lloyd Bruning, Wright City, and 19th Infantry Regiment veterans, Sgt. Jack W. Brock, Greens- Senate Gives Marshall Same Courtesy In Testimony as Accorded MacArthur BY ARTHUR Associated Press WASHINGTON, May 7 The Senate tried to be fair. It tried to give the two famous generals the same treatment, right down to the welcoming committee .

Douglas MacArthur had his voluminous say last week. Today it was Gen. George C. Marshall's turn. So at 9:22 a.m .

EST, Sens. Byrd Va.) and Bridges N. came out of the Senate Office Building and joined reporters and photographers waiting on the sidewalk for Marshall. Last Thursday Byrd and Bridges had gone to the airport to meet MacArthur. Friday they had met him here on the sidewalk .

Saturday they had planned to meet him, but MacArthur got in ahead of time. "I figured I'd talk with Marshall now," Bridges said jokingly. "After I get through with my questions, he may not talk with me." Sen. McMahon Conn.) came up and pretended that the welcomers were there to welcome him. Sen .

Brewster Me.) came up and pretended the welcomers, etc. At 9:28, two minutes before scheduled start of the hearing, the ever He looked startled Marshall when arrived. he saw the crowd. Normally Marshall arrives unnoticed, and then sits rea, subject to the primary consideration of the safety of his troops and his basic mission of protecting Japan. "Should it become evident in his judgment that evacuation was essential to avoid severe losses of men and material, he was at that time to withdraw from Korea to Japan." Partly Identical It was at this "low point" in the Allied fortunes that the JCS offered their recommendation, Marshall said, which in part agreed with MacArthur's views .

He said it was not necessary to put the recommendations into force after the Reds were halted. In this list of 16 recommendations, Marshall said the JCS agreed: With the presentation of the combat effectiveness of our tion, stabilize in Koforces as an overriding, considerarea, or evacuate to Japan, if forced out of Korea." (Points and were deleted by the censor.) Continue and intensify now an economic blockade of trade with China. Prepare now to impose a naval blockade of China and place it into effect as soon as our position in Korea is stabilized, or when we have evacuated Korea and depending upon the circumstances then obtaining. Remove now restrictions on air reconnaissance of China coastal areas and of Manchuria. Remove now the restrictions on operations of the Chinese Nationalist forces and give such logistical support to those forces as will contribute to effective operations against the Communists .

Continue to bomb military targets in Korea. For Indicting China Press now for United Nations action branding Communist China as aggressor." Two other proposals were to send a military training mission and military aid to the Chinese Nationalists on Formosa, and for naval and air attacks on Red China if the Reds attacked our forces outside Marshall recomKoreanese mendations "very definitely" would have been carried out had the Allied forces been forced out of Korea. He said that in July, 1950, Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek offered 33,000 Chinese Nationalist troops for use in Korea but MacArthur advised against their use "because of their ineffectiveness and lack of logistic support." But, he added, MacArthur in November urged the use of Nationalist troops- -one of the issues which caused his dismissal. MacArthur said he did not ask for the Nationalist forces until two Red armies moved from their position near Formosa into the Korean war. Then he said with Formosa no longer threatened, he felt the use of Chiang's troops 1- CRUTCHFIELD- Funeral services for Mr .

Dan Crutchfield, who passed away Saturday morning, will be held at Mabel Franklin Funeral Home Wednesday at 1:30 p.m.. Rev. Otis W. Smith officiating. He was a veteran of World War serving overseas in France nine months .

He was a member of Givens-FreemanDavis Post 171, American Legion. Surviving are one cousin, Mrs. Willie Mae Grissom; dear friends, Mrs. Mattie Gray, Mr. John Smith Dr .

G. H. Moore. The body will remain at the funeral home. Interment in National Cemetery .

Arrangements are by Mabel Franklin Funeral Home. CHARGES M'ARTHUR RISKS A-BOMBING From Page One EDSON Staff Writer. around patiently waiting for tardy senators. Byrd and Bridges escorted him upstairs to the same caucus room where MacArthur testified. He shook hands with all the senators, while flash bulbs flashed .

Then he posed at the witness table. "Say something, general," a photographer urged. "I'm doing everything you tell me to," Marshall said, doing everything they told him to. A few moments later reporters and cameramen were shooed out. The same ground rules were used as when MacArthur was here .

Stenographers, working in relays, brought out the copy to be censored and duplicated. The same subscribers it at cents a page. (Tass, the Russian News Agency, bought MacArthur up until Saturday afternoon, when it canceled out. It began again with Marshall.) The only difference was in the size of the crowds. After all, Marshall has been around here a long time, testifying on one thing or another .

About 20 spectators watched the general alight from his car. I asked a photographer, who had come early been there long. "Naw," he said. "I came 20 minutes ago, and all there was was a. couple of photographers .

No would have eased the pressure on his Korea forces. Marshall declared the JCS recommendation went to the National Security Council and the council felt the situation had become so favorable for the Allies that all the proposed actions would not be necessary. The joint chiefs rejected MacArthur's plea for Chinese Nationalist troops, Marshall explained, because of their training, equipment, "and for other reasons which appealed to the chiefs of staff." He said the joint chiefs felt they would not be effective in Korea. The secretary recalled that after the Reds drove the Allies into retreat last November, MacArthur issued several statements criticizling the limitations on his forces. Chairman Russell Ga.) of the Armed Services group asked if these statements tion of any order or regulation?" Marshall replied: "Yes, sir." But he said so far as he knew the general had received "no specific instructions" on the subject until Dec .

16 when the White House says he was asked to clear his statements through the State and departments. MacArthur told the senators he did not recall receiving any such directive until March and he never felt that was disobeying a directive when he made a statement. Marshall did not challenge MacArthur's statement that the U.N. ground. troops fighting under present restrictions- -cannot drive out of Korea .

But he declared the U.S. Eighth Army already had destroyed 26 Red divisions. He added: "If they renew the attack and they meet the same result that came from their attack the last two weeks, we will have almost destroyed again or ruined the fighting power of some -I think it is 34 new divisions." He said the Reds could not continue taking such losses "without wrecking them." DISMISSAL SPEEDED UP AS NEWS 'LEAKED OUT' WASHINGTON, May 7 (P)- Secretary Marshall disclosed today that President Truman decided on April 9 to fire Gen. MacArthur and speeded the announcement 20 hours because of a "leak." Marshall told the Senate Armed Services and Foreign Relations committees that it was hoped that Secretary of Army Frank Pace, then in Tokyo, could deliver the decision to MacArthur, but Pace could not be reached in time. The announcement of MacArthur's dismissal was made by the White House at 1 a.m .

EST on A April 11. The original intention was to transmit notice of the general's dismissal at 8 p.m. EST Wednesday, April 11 (10 a.m. Thursday Tokyo time). "However, late on Tuesday, April would be a tremendous Soviet victorv." The President would not accept Gen .

MacArthur's contention that we have no policy or plan to end the Korean war and that the future outlook is for continuing American casualties without prospect of victory. Cites Chinese Losses The President said that the Chinese rulers already are losing large numbers of their soldiers in the present fighting, and that as these losses increase "it will bethat aggression does not pay." come clearer and clearer to a them "Meanwhile, the strength of all the free nations is growing," he went on. "The Soviet plan of world conquest is becoming more and more impossible to achieve. If we stick to our guns, and continue to punish the aggressors, we can end the aggression in Korea, lang restore inference, peace." he challenged Gen. MacArthur's qualifications to prepare a policy which had global potentialities .

The policy question was not one which could be decided "in the light of Korea alone" because it did not affect Korea, Japan or the Far East alone, but it affected Europe too and had a bearing upon the future of the U.N. and of the whole world. In his testimony before the Senate last week, Gen. MacArthur said he could not answer some of the questions of global policy and his detailed information was restricted to that of a single theater commander. The American people, Mr .

Truman went on, must not yield "either to impatience or defeatism." With reference again to MacArthur's argument that he could not remain silent while restrained from taking measures he thought would end the war quicklv and cheaply, Mr. Truman said that "in a time of crisis, there is a tendency to look for some easy way out regardless of the consequences" We must not be lose sight of the world picture misled, he said, and we must not and of the critical importance of maintaining the unity of the free world if we are to reach a permanent solution. What MacArthur had offered as a quick and easy way out, the President went on, might lead us into a much bigger and longer war. "Such a war would expose our troops to devastating air and submarine attacks," he said. "It would seriously endanger Japan and the Philippines .

It would unite the Chinese people behind their Communist rulers. Would Please Kremlin "Furthermore, deep involvement on our part in a war in China, whatever the outcome there, would have critical military consequences in Europe. There is nothing that would give the Kremlin greater satisfaction than to see our resources committed to an allstruggle in Asia, leaving Europe exposed to the Soviet armies." The President said that those who criticized our policy in Korea "do not understand how the free world can ever win this long struggle, without fighting a third world war." Such persons, he added, "overlook the inner weaknesses of the Soviet dictatorship" and forget that the world is stronger- stronger in its determination, stronger in its staying power, stronger in its human resources -than any system of slavery." Already there are growing signs of internal tension and unrest behind the iron curtain, he said, noting that Yugoslavia has thrown off the Klemlin yoke and that in China herself the failure of the Korean adventure is weakening the hold of the Communist government, making necessary wholesale arrests and executions of political dissidents. the speaking platform. with the President were Vic 10, there were indications that the action to be taken had become known publicly, and it was then decided by the President to accelerate the transmission of the official notification to Gen .

MacArthur by approximately 20 hours. The exact timing of the public release was made so as coincide with the arrival of the in Tokyo midafternoon. "Mr. Pace, in Korea, incidentally, did not receive his instructions, due to a breakdown in power unit in Pusan." DIXON JIMMY, 920 Taft Street. died suddenly Monday evening .

Surviving are mother, Mrs. Cedella Dixon: father. Mr. Dixon: four brothers, Bobby, Tommy, Marshall and Travis Lebron Dixon: grandfather, Mr. Witt Jones, Roopville, three aunts .

Mrs. Emma Le Lay. Roopville, Miss Sylvia Jones, Dayton, Ohio: uncles. Mr. Henry Willis, Gus .

Rolly Dixon, Byron Jones, George Hicks, Mr. Curtis Jones, Mr. Gates Jones; cousins. Mr. Reuben Strickland .

Mr. Nonnie Rasby, Mr. Clinton Wright, Mrs. Lula Wright, Miss Doris Wright, Mr. Cornelius Ridley, other relatives and a host of friends, Funeral arrangements will be announced by Buchanan .

JACKSON MR. ALVIN, 1816 Baldwin Street, died suddenly Sunday night. Survivors are wife. Mrs. Emma Jackson; mother, Mrs .

Katie Jackson, Brownsboro, Ala three sisters, Mrs. Belu Cathron, Mrs. Emma Acklen, Huntsville, Mrs. Allie Vance. Gurley, two brothers .

Mrs. George Jackson, Brownsboro. Mr. Robert Jackson. Brownsboro: sisters in law .

Mrs. Willie Jackson, Mrs. Tillie Jackson: cousins. Mrs. Claud Humphrey, city: Mrs .

Allen Hayes, city: several other cousins and host of friends. The body will be shipped tonight- at 12 o'clock to Huntsville, where funeral services will be Thursday at 2 p.m., at Ebenezer Baptist Church. Rev. C. H .

Ross officiating. Interment in Hayes Chapel Church Cemetery. Arrangements by Buchanan. MATTHEWS CPL. GEORGE who re sided at 1029 East Fourth Street, was killed in a jeep accident in Korea .

Surviving are his wife, Mrs. Beatrice Matthews: son, George H. Matthews father, Mr. Will Matthews; stepmother. Mrs .

Zeta Matthews; one sister, Lenora Wilson; brother, Mr. Edward Matthews: mother-in-law, Mrs. Lula Wilson: six sisters-in-law, Mrs. Louise Favors. Mrs .

Daisy Johnson and Miss Letha Wilson. all of this city: Mrs. Catherine Douthet. Mrs. Rosa Creswell, Detroit; Mrs .

Thelma Matthews; two brothers-in-law. Mr. John Carson. New York City; Mr. Willie Champion, city; nieces .

nephews, other relatives and friends. Funeral arrangements will be announced by Buchanan upon arrival of the remains. OWENS-MR. THOMAS, a pioneer of Hooker, died at the home of his daughter, Mrs. Grace Williams .

2712 Cowart Street, Saturday morning at 8:10 after a short illness. Survivors are three daughters. Mrs. Grace Williams. Mrs .

Lizzie Gurley, city; Mrs. Nannine Alexander, Hooker; two sons. Mr. George Owens. City, and Mrs .

Ross Owens, Booker; granddaughters, Mrs. Louella Humphrey. Mrs. Beatrice Robinson, Mrs. Delore Brown .

Mrs. Catherine Hooke, Mrs. Jeanette Swafford. Mrs. Helen Clay, Mrs .

Rochel Harper, Mrs. Mattie Roberts, Miss Mabel Owens: grandsons, Mr. Jack Owens, Raymond Owens, Hardy Owens, Mr. Luke Hooke, Mr. Calvin Owens, Mr .

Myrt Owens, Horace Owens. Owens, J. Owens: 19 greatgrandchildren; Mrs. M. Owens, Mrs .

Ellen Owens. Mrs. Emma Owens: son-in-law. Mr. Charley Gurley; other relatives and friends .

Funeral services will be held Wednesday at 3 o'clock at Mount Calvary Baptist Church. Hooker. with the Rev. O. C .

Cochran and Rev. Tom Lockett officiating. Interment will be in Hooker. Cemetery. Body will be at the funeral home until funeral hour .

Arrangements by Buchanan. IN MEMORIAM In memory of little Wyman Holland. who departed this life one year today, May 8, 1950. Gone but not forgotten, dear. Is that song we sing all day, God prepared a lovely place for you That day he took you away .

Sadly Missed by Mr. and Mrs. Raymond Holland, Parents; Melinda and Blondene, Sisters: Raymond C. Holland and Lavern Holland, Brothers: Mrs. Cora Kelley, Mr .

and Mrs. Dillard Holland. Grandparents: Pfc. Alfrie C. Kelley, Mr .

Tom Holland, Uncles: Mrs. Lillian Shepherd. Aunt: Mrs. Evelyn Kelles, Mr. Tassroy Kelley, Cousins .

In loving memory of our mother and grandmother, Mrs. Sophia Jones, who passed away vears ago today. Sadly missed by: Mrs. Mary Holland. Mrs .

Lena Sistrunk, Mrs. Carrie Thomas: Mrs. Lucy Byrd, daughters; Willie Jones, son: Anna R. Burns, Eddie McCrary, grandchildren; George Eddie. McCrary, great-grandson .

Phones 4-7441 Day 2-2729 Night FLOWERS 511 TALLEY ROAD FLORIST C. A. GREGG, 7-4445 NIGHT, 4-2907 1004 MARKET ST. City Nite 4-6313 FLORIST 9-6549 W. F .

(BILL) DREW 2109 McCallie Ave. Cosmopolitan Life Insurance Company Issues Legal Reserve Life Insurance. The Funeral Policies Are Serviced by the 605 Pine St. Cosmopolitan Funeral Home Phone 7-3751 HALE'S FLOWERS Phone 6-0151 Nights 6-7725 Ground Floor, Volunteer Building Member Florist Telegraph Delivers, Association .