Along with his contemporaries Elvis Costello, Spandau Ballet, Duran Duran and Howard Jones, Joe Jackson was a very innovative new wave artist, one who seems to be forgotten compared to all those other acts is Joe Jackson.

A classically trained pianist and saxophonist with a taste for jazz and rock, Joe Jackson put out his first album, Look Sharp! in 1979, for A&M Records. It included his signature song, Is She Really Going Out With Him?, and the title track, and showcased his ability to blend various genres into one. He also acted as a bit of a warm up act for the Eighties New Wave sound that followed.

I'm The Man is perhaps his most well known album, which saw a release in late 1979. However, my favorite albums by Joe Jackson are Look Sharp!, Night And Day and Joe Jackson's Jumpin Jive. I really like his songs Is She Really Going Out With Him?, Steppin Out and Breaking Us In Two. I own a few of his albums, and it's quite surprising how he kind of faded after those albums came out. He also had the great drumming of Larry Tolfree and excellent bass playing of Graham Maby backing him up.

He also contributed piano and synthesizer arrangements to Suzanne Vega's classic 1986 hit, Left Of Center, off of the soundtrack to Pretty In Pink.

Over time, Joe Jackson has started to release more jazz and classical themed albums, which are very experimental and certainly worth a listen.

Joe Jackson primarily played a saxophone, but he also played a piano, a Yamaha CP70 electric grand piano, a Hammond organ, and the Mini Moog and Prophet 5 synthesizers.

I certainly hope there are a lot of fans of Joe Jackson out there. Count me a fan, at least.

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6TzKSFbsh2Y

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=n7IGRNWVQkc

I'm not sure if you saw my post back in May (I know, our memory isn't what it used to be), but I basically said I was in Raleigh for a couple of days of training for work and found that Joe Jackson was opening his tour that night at a small theater in Durham. Headed over after work and walked up to get a single ticket and caught the show. I have all of the same sentiment as you, but he still has a lot of gas left in the tank to do a show. Graham Maby is also on another planet as far as how excellent of a bass player he is with Joe Jackson.

Funny enough, as a prog head, I discovered JJ through Symphony No1, which although striving to be a classical album with jazz/rock influences, is basically a progrock masterwork that could fit right in a playlist with ELP and Yes (cuz let's face it, that's what progrock always was). But going back, I really love his rock material. I must have heard "Stepping Out" a thousand times on the radio before I realized it was JJ, and loved it each time. I can't say I'm as much a fan of "Is She Really Going Out With Him", though it's a fun tune, almost purposefully cheesy. It didn't help that I played it for years with our guitarist on vocals, who butchered it. He wrongly felt that JJ wasn't really a great vocalist, and anyone could sing it. He's not entirely wrong (JJ was a composer first, pianist second, vocalist fifth), but it still needs some finesse.

JJ comes from a different place than Costello, though. While Declan Patrick MacManus came from mostly humble rock roots but was way too smart and talented for his own good, JJ was a wide-eyed New England Conservatory pianist who tried something new. It's funny that they ended up in similar places. That said, I would NEVER describe JJ as punk rock in any shape or form, while Costello at least plays the part of having some cred.

I liken JJ to Bobby McFarren, both are first-and-foremost classical guys who almost accidentally stumbled into rock stardom. The only difference is JJ ran with it, while Bobby mostly continued on in the jazz/classical circle.