Recently, Joe Jackson, who gave us “Steppin’ Out,” “Is She Really Going Out with Him?,” and other brilliantly agitated New Wave masterworks, released “Fast Forward,” his twentieth studio album. He also began a national tour; he comes to New York next week. “Fast Forward” falls into a rare and wonderful category: addictively listenable late-career pop. Jackson’s great seventies and eighties albums—“Look Sharp!,” “I’m the Man,” “Night and Day,” and so on—are notable for their energy, shrewdness, and wit, for their enthusiastic eclecticism, for words and melodies that stick in your mind and rattle around there for days. Sometimes his peppery lyrics can startle you; his singing voice can sound accusatory. Throughout his career, Jackson has continued to evolve, turning out pop, jazz, movie scores, and original classical compositions. His 2012 album, “The Duke,” reinterprets Duke Ellington. “Fast Forward” was recorded in four cities—New York, New Orleans, Amsterdam, and Berlin—with musicians ranging from Brian Blade to the Royal Concertgebouw Orchestra to the fourteen-year-old vocalist Mitchell Sink. The album combines the beauty and intelligence of his best earlier work with a new quality: warmth, generosity, possibly even contentment. I find it more moving than anything he’s released in a long time.

Before the tour officially began, Jackson played a small, private New York show at the Cutting Room, a tables-and-chairs joint on Thirty-second Street. The show was taped for broadcast on WFUV. I heard about it at the last minute, and by a stroke of luck was accompanied by an old friend, my earliest partner in Joe Jackson fandom. Neither of us had seen Jackson live. We found a table at the front of a balcony, from which we could see a lot of piano but not much chair.

Jackson came onstage alone, his hair whitish, his suit bluish. Wild applause. He sat under purple and red lights at the baby grand, which had a small electronic keyboard on top of it. In profile, he reminded me of a Hirschfeld illustration, or the line drawing on the cover of “Night and Day.”

Jackson played a few incisive bars. I could see his hands, and occasionally his nose. “What the hell is wrong with you tonight?” he sang. “It’s Different for Girls”! I sat in a state of thrilled shock. His playing and singing were impeccable, full-throated, full of feeling; at sixty-one, he sounds as good as he did in his twenties. “No, not love, she said,” he sang. “Don’t you know that it’s different for girls?” On the recording, from the 1979 album “I’m the Man,” the song has simple orchestration: guitar, bass, and drums, whose taut interplay create a feeling of intimacy and power. It was especially intimate on solo piano. When Jackson wrote “It’s Different for Girls,” he flipped a gendered conversation on its head; for girls—and boys, I assume—it’s refreshing, full of new truths and ambiguities. As a single, it’s different for everyone.

He played “Home Town,” from his 1986 album “Big World.” His home town is Portsmouth, England, which plays a starring role in his 1999 memoir “A Cure for Gravity,” a musical coming-of-age story, full of smart insights, gritty pub-musician tales, and odd, vivid characters. Jackson grew up working-class, in a family mostly uninterested in the arts; in school, he felt like a misfit, bad at sports, socially unredeemed by his talent for violin and piano. He got a scholarship to the Royal Academy of Music, in London, where he studied percussion and grew skeptical of trends in contemporary classical composition. All through school, in his teens and twenties, he played gigs, alone and with bands, determined to make a living, however shabby, as a musician. In 1979, the Joe Jackson Band released its début album, “Look Sharp!,” a recording that continues to amaze us.

“I’m in a nostalgic mood for the moment,” Jackson said. “This is a song by John Lennon.” He played “Girl,” from the Beatles’ “Rubber Soul.” “Girl,” I realized, has a Joe Jackson-ish mood: the minor notes, the regret, the world-weary young-Lennon bitterness, the sighing that comes out as an inhaled hiss. The “you feel a fool!” and “acts as if it’s understood she’s cool, ool, ool, ool!” parts felt deliciously right.

Jackson’s lyrics have often been sideways, sly. He played “Be My Number Two” next; it’s difficult to imagine him writing a song called “Be My Number One.” (No. 1 is the person he’s breaking up with.) He sings about love, of course—you can hear it, for example, in the agony of “Breaking Us in Two” (“Could we be much closer if we tried? We could stay at home and stare into each other’s eyes”), on “Fools in Love” (“I say fools in love are zeroes! I should know because this fool’s in love again”), and on his new album (“Any joker or any king can be a sad bastard, and I’d be one too if it wasn’t for you”). In his book, Jackson writes, “You have to mix a little bit of sour with the sweet if you don’t want to turn people’s stomachs.” Funny, prickly lyrics, such as the first line of his first hit—“Pretty women out walking with gorillas down my street”—have at times been misinterpreted as rage.

The band joined him onstage: Jackson’s longtime friend and bassist, Graham Maby (who first appears in “A Cure for Gravity” as a skinny teen named Bodger), the guitarist Teddy Kumpel, and the drummer Doug Yowell. They began to mix in new songs.

Jackson told the audience that “Fast Forward,” the song, was partly inspired by a thought he’d had about building a time machine. He played a beat: “a dumb and relentless rhythm,” he said, that “sort of reminds me of the dumb and relentless march of time.” He sang about “hitting fast forward” to “some time off in the future, where people will be happy instead of getting dumber and getting scareder all the time—scared of their own shadows, and scared to take a fall.” The mood of the song isn’t dumb and relentless; it’s wistful, or possibly elegiac. “And if I could see myself from some other planet, would I be shaking my head sadly, or would I be laughing, saying that it’s always been the same?” he sang. “And it’s always the old guys bitching about the young guys growing beards, or turning into sissies or something,” he sang. “When they’re trying to hold back time, as if that isn’t weird. Meanwhile the young guys are waiting for respect, when what they want to be is cool.” It’s a generous song, an almost omniscient song. When you notice the piano, it always seems to be descending the scale, yet it’s also bathing us in a kind of harmonic reassurance. At one point Jackson empathizes with the moon, without making a big deal about it, and, somehow, without sounding silly. It’s a song you can listen to over and over—six minutes, wisely pianoing itself into your soul.

They played a stripped-down “Is She Really Going Out with Him?” (when Jackson sang “Look over there!,” the crowd yelled, “Where?,” making him laugh); the tortured “Real Men”; the snazzy, hard-driving “You Can’t Get What You Want (Till You Know What You Want),” with its pithy and forever useful mantra. With the snaking little lovelorn bit about feeling lost and lonely, it empathizes, then gives a pep-talk kick in the pants. The band was energetic and exacting.

The new songs were as evocative live as they are on the album. He played the sweet, grudging love song “If It Wasn’t for You”; “The Blue Time,” about the zone between wake and sleep, and which could almost be a jazz ballad; and “Poor Thing,” in which he contemplates the vastness of time and the universe. “Just think of all of the millions and millions of people who could have existed but didn’t exist,” he sang. “Yet here we are. And the millions and millions of planets and stars. . . . Oh, what a life it is. What can we do?”

This is a different Joe Jackson—still philosophical, but grateful, humbly wise. (He’s no Zen master, of course: he said that the BBC had refused to play “If It Wasn’t for You” because it contained the phrase “sad bastard,” and that he’d suggested “asshole” as an alternative.) The last song on “Fast Forward,” “Ode to Joy,” riffs on his hero, Beethoven, in the chorus. The drummer, Yowell, was extremely groovy—casual and commanding at once. At the end, the band held a pause, then blasted back into music, transcendentally. Joy all around.

“One more,” Jackson said.

“ ‘Look Sharp!’ ” a man yelled.

They didn’t play “Look Sharp!”—they played a sneaky version of “Steppin’ Out”: wispy, with cymbal percussion and a slower tempo, an arrangement that emphasized the song’s melody and its sense of longing. It didn’t have the fevered urgency of the original, of youth. When I hear “Steppin’ Out,” I often remember being about ten, zooming along in carpool on the way to school, listening to the car radio, imagining sophistication, the city, glamour, zipping wildly into the unknown. Jackson has described it as “a romantic song set to a disco beat”—take the disco beat away, and you emphasize the romantic part; do it to a new beat and it becomes “very edgy.”

After a standing ovation, an encore: the band Television’s rocking “See No Evil,” covered on the new album. The finale was the gorgeous, tender “A Slow Song,” from “Night and Day.” Jackson played the song’s delicate melody on the piano—it’s almost a music-box theme—and sang about being brutalized by bass and terrorized by treble. The band quietly left the stage, leaving him alone. He got another standing ovation, and that was that.

A few days after the concert, I talked to Jackson on the phone. He was in Seattle, on the first leg of his tour. He said that he’d written “Fast Forward” over the past few years. “I had a pile of songs growing bigger and bigger,” he said. “I didn’t have an over-all concept.” He considered releasing them as EPs. “Somehow I was stupid enough to think it would be easier to make an album. It was complicated. It became a logistical nightmare.” Yet it’s cohesive—and, as he said later in the conversation, “it’s a fucking great album.”

The range and quality of musicians is part of this. “There’s quite a few people that I wanted to work with who I hadn’t worked with before,” he said. “I met Brian Blade, and I was amazed to find out that he was a huge fan of mine. Stanton Moore, the guy from Galactic, who I wanted to work with on my last album, ‘The Duke.’ Basically, everyone I approached said yes, which is fantastic because it means then you have to actually do it.”

I asked him how he wrote the mesmerizing title track. “I somehow got interested in the series of chords,” Jackson said. “It’s just like, in a very logical way, cycling though the keys, and you end up back where you started again, and you keep going and going and going. It triggered thoughts about the passing of time, how things change yet keep going in cycles. How they change but don’t really change.” I told him my observation about the piano, how it always seemed to be descending, returning to a comforting place, but I didn’t notice it starting over again, going back to the top.

“It’s a cycle, and it goes in minor thirds from B to D to F to A flat and back down again,” he said. “It’s a sort of a clever technical trick—one of those things that sounds simple, but it took a lot of work to figure it out.” The melody reflects the mood of the lyrics. “That song just kept growing and growing and growing,” Jackson said. “It has more words in it than anything else I’ve ever written. Another thing that fed into this was an article that I read, questioning, Are we living in a golden age or a dark age? It really is that extreme. People that think we’re living in just the greatest possible time, and other people think we’re basically screwed. The more I thought about it, the more I started to think that possibly nothing has ever changed. The song is full of ironies and contradictions, and quite a lot of humor as well. It’s kind of bittersweet, like a lot of my songs.”

The wry bit about old guys complaining about young guys growing beards, I said, almost felt to me like he was casting an amused eye on himself, on complaints he might have made in the past.

“Some of my early stuff was infected by the deadly disease of cynicism, which is a disease of the young, I think,” Jackson said. “When you’re young, it seems very clever to be cynical. But as you get older, hopefully, if you’re not completely stupid, you realize that you have to be a bit more positive, as a simple matter of survival. You know what I mean? But also, at the same time—I just did an interview the other day with a guy who thought that my early work was representative of an angry reaction to Thatcher’s Britain, and I just had to laugh. I mean, there was a lot of humor in that as well. A lot of the time, people said, ‘Oh, it’s angry-young-man stuff.’ I was really poking fun. A lot of people were doing that back then.

“I once had a drink with Joe Strummer, from the Clash, and we talked about writing lyrics,” he went on. “And he said that a lot of their lyrics which were taken as angry political commentary were actually just making fun. When they were taken very seriously by journalists, they just had a good laugh about it.”

I liked this, but thought wistfully of Strummer’s political consciousness. “They were very principled,” I said.

“It’s not black and white,” Jackson said.

“Right. That’s not interesting,” I said.

“Yeah, that’s it, really. Black and white is not so interesting. Most things are not black and white.” In his songs, he said, “I’m in gray areas most of the time. Except I don’t really see them as gray. I see them as every possible color in there somewhere.”

“Like the song where you’re between wake and sleep on this album,” I said.

“Oh yeah, ‘The Blue Time.’ That’s a nice one.”

I asked him about “Far Away,” featuring young Mitchell Sink. It begins with Sink singing, “It’s me, and me alone, against the night”; later, Jackson sings, “It’s me, and me alone, against the world.”