ALEXANDRIA, Va – SHRM, the trusted authority on all things work, today announced its own “Tuesday Night Show”. Two entertainment industry icons, Grammy-winning singer and songwriter Kelly Clarkson and comedian and legendary television host Jay Leno will perform live on the Main Stage at the SHRM Annual Conference & Expo 2024 (SHRM24) in Chicago.

SHRM24 will take place June 23-26, 2024, at the McCormick Place Convention Center in Chicago. Those unable to attend in-person will have the option to attend virtually.

Kelly Clarkson will showcase the vocal talent that earned her three Grammy’s and the lovable personality that she displays on her Emmy-winning show, “The Kelly Clarkson Show”. Clarkson, an iconic figure in contemporary music, has sold over 25 million albums and 40 million singles globally, establishing herself as a powerhouse artist. She has triumphed as a coach on multiple seasons of "The Voice" and as the inaugural winner of American Idol in 2002. Her latest album, chemistry, has garnered critical acclaim and a Grammy nomination for "Best Pop Vocal Album." She boasts a Hollywood Walk of Fame star, four Daytime Emmy Awards, three Grammys, and many other accolades.

Jay Leno will perform in an original standup comedy routine, showcasing his renowned sense of humor, which has granted him a multi-decade career in television, hosting the “Today” show and appearing in numerous popular shows such as “Last Man Standing.” Leno, often dubbed "the hardest working man in show business," has left an indelible mark across various entertainment realms. He is renowned for his two-decade tenure as the host of "The Tonight Show with Jay Leno.” Leno produced and hosted CNBC's acclaimed primetime series "Jay Leno's Garage," exploring the captivating world of cars and their passionate drivers. Complementing his television ventures, Leno hosted the revival of the comedy game show "You Bet Your Life."

“We’re excited to welcome musician Kelly Clarkson and television personality Jay Leno to the SHRM24 stage,” said Jamie Bosley, SHRM’s Vice President of Event Strategy & Experience. “Their performances will provide attendees with the ideal blend of fun, relaxation and inspiration, while celebrating being at the world’s largest HR conference.

About SHRM24

SHRM24 will be offered both virtually and in-person. Attendees will have the opportunity to discuss various topics related to talent acquisition and retainment, including but not limited to: HR technology, diversity, equity and inclusion (DEI), employment law, people and talent management, and workplace culture.

To learn more, please visit: https://annual.shrm.org/

To cover the SHRM24, press registration is required. Please request press credentials, contact: press@shrm.org

About SHRM