Thank you so much VetTix and all the people who donated to make it possible for us to go see Kelly Clarkson the Meaning of Life Tour! We feel so blessed to have been there. Somehow we also got lucky and won a ticket upgrade by texting the number they put on the big screen and got to go right up by the stage. What an awesome experience!

Thank you Vet Tix and the other donors! We had a great time and the seats were fantastic! Kelly has an AMAZING voice and a pleasantly corky personality. My friends and I greatly appreciated the opportunity to enjoy the evening at such a cool event!

Thanks vet tix for the Great tickets. loved the openers too. go Kelci Ballarini! Always a great last minute event. Took our cousins and it was their FIRST time at a Q event ever, so they were super excited.

I can't thank vet tix and the donors enough for the wonderful memories we have made with the tickets donated! This is one of the best websites I have ever experienced! Thank you, thank you, thank you for such a great night and for giving military families such a discount! God bless vet tix and their donors!

THANK YOU to the 32 Donors who gave my family tickets to see Kelly Clarkson in Cleveland!!! The concert was a very special night as it was my daughters first concert. Kelly put on an amazing show. It was emotional for me on so many levels. Her music just moves my soul. I can't thank you enough for this experience.

Thank You Vet Tix for the tickets!!! We had great seats and an even greater time!! Thank you to the donors who donated the tickets for a great experience!

Thank you so much VetTix for giving me the opportunity to make memories with my brother and father! Since I was a little girl I remember watching American Idol hoping I could see her one day! You gave me the chance to fulfill a bucket list item of mine! To be able to take my father, who is my biggest supporter in life to a concert, to see Kelly was the best feeling ever!! Thank you so much!

Thank you to the individual donors responsible for donating tickets and vettix for the opportunity to see the Kelly Clarkson concert. We took our daughter who is a huge fan and she absolutly loved it! The look on her face when she found out she was going was priceless! Thank you again.

Thank you very much for the amazing Kelly Clarkson tix! Seats were great and she put on one heck of a show She's so real and enjoyable. Saw her in Kuwait 14 years ago, just as she was making it. So fun to see her now, as a mature and experienced performer. So much fun. Thank you!!!

To those who donated the tickets. I want to send you my deepest appreciation, as I was able to take my wife to an amazing event she was soi thrilled to attend. The seats were amazing, and great experience overall. We cannot thank you enough.