John I (1350-1396), king of Aragon 1387-96, called Juan el Cazador in Spanish (or el Amador de la gentileza, or el Descurat, l'Amador de la Gentilesa in Catalan), John the Hunter, was the eldest son of Peter IV and his third wife Eleanor of Sicily, who was daughter of king Pietro II of Sicily. He was born on December 27 1350 in Perpignan, in the province of Roussillon which at that time belonged to Aragon, and died 19 May 1396 during a hunt in forests near Foixa (Gerona) by a fall from his horse, like his namesake, cousin and contemporary of Castile. He was a man of insignificant character, with a taste for artificial verse.

When on the throne, John I abandoned the Anglophile policy of Peter IV and made an alliance with France in 1387. In the Western Schism, he continued to support the Pope of the Avignon line (Clement VII). In 1387, John I also made an alliance with Castile, and confirmed in 1388 a treaty with Navarre fixing borders between these kingdoms. In 1389-90, Aragonese battled the troops of Count of Armagnac directed to conquest the lands of the taken vassal kingdom of Majorca. The attack went Embordá to Gerona. 1390 the invaders were won by Aragonese troops commanded by Infante don Martin, king's brother (and next king). 1391 he gave legislation about Jews in different cities of Aragon. In 1391, his administration faced a revolt in the vassal kingdom of Sicily, where the population had proclaimed Louis of Durazzo as king. During 1388-90 John I lost gradually all lands of the Duchies of Athens and Neopatras in Greece. John I was protector of culture of Barcelona. He established 1393 the Consistor of Barcelona (jocs florals), to imitate that in Toulouse.

Sardinia had been attempted to subjugate under Aragon since the reign of James II, and gradually the Aragonese had conquered most of the island. However, in 1380's, the remaining independent principality Arborea became fortress of rebellion and Aragonese were rapidly driven back during Eleanor of Arborea (Eleanor Visconti Doria). Continuing in John I's reign, the Aragonese attempted to suppress rebels in Sardinia and regain lost territories. However during John I's time, practically the whole Sardinia was lost.

John I's reign was characterized with disastrous financial administration.

He died without sons, and was succeeded by his younger brother Martin of Aragon. He did have, though, two daughters who reached adulthood.

Children

From his first marriage to Martha of Armagnac (1347-1378), daughter of Count Jean I of Armagnac:

Joanna, who had married Matthew (Mathieu), count of Foix, and they claimed the throne of Aragon after the death of John I. Matthew of Foix invaded Aragonese territories, but was driven back by the new King Martin. Joanna died soon, childless.

From his second marriage to Violant of Bar (1363-1431), daughter of Duke Robert of Bar:

Yolande (Violant), who married Louis II of Anjou, King of Naples, and became the Queen of Four Kingdoms. Yolande and her sons claimed the Kingdom of Aragon.

Jaime (James) (1384-1388).

Antonia (lived only a few months)