John I of Aragon From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

John I (December 27, 1350 – May 19, 1396), called the Hunter (Juan el Cazador in Castilian, Chuan lo Cazataire in Aragonese and Joan el Descurat in Catalan) or the Lover of Elegance (el Amador de la gentileza in Castilian and l'Amador de la Gentilesa in Catalan), was the King of Aragon from 1387 to his death. He was the eldest son of Peter IV and his third wife, Eleanor, who was the daughter of Peter II of Sicily. He was born in Perpignan, in the province of Roussillon, which at that time belonged to Aragon, and died during a hunt in forests near Foixà by a fall from his horse, like his namesake, cousin, and contemporary, John I of Castile. He was a man of character, with a taste for verse. Once on the throne, John abandoned his father's relatively Anglophile policy and made an alliance with France. He continued Aragon's support for the Pope of the Avignon line, Clement VII, in the Western Schism. John also made an alliance with Castile, and confirmed in 1388 a treaty with Navarre fixing borders between these kingdoms. In 1389-90, the Aragonese battled the troops of the Count of Armagnac, who was attempting to conquer the lands of the vassal kingdom of Majorca. The attack went from Empordà to Gerona. The invaders were defeated in 1390 by Aragonese troops commanded by the Infante Martin, the king's brother (and successor). During 1388-90, John gradually lost all lands of the Duchies of Athens and Neopatras in Greece. In 1391, John promulgated legislation on Jews in different cities of Aragon. Also in 1391, his administration faced a revolt in the vassal kingdom of Sicily, where the population had proclaimed Louis of Durazzo as king. John was a protector of culture of Barcelona. He established in 1393 the Consistory of Barcelona (jocs florals), imitating the same office in Toulouse. Aragon had been attempting to subjugate Sardinia since the reign of James II, and gradually the Aragonese had conquered most of the island. However, in the 1380s, the remaining independent principality Arborea became a fortress of rebellion and the Aragonese were rapidly driven back by Eleanor de Bas-Serra. The Aragonese continued in John's reign to attempt to suppress rebels in Sardinia and regain lost territories. However, during John's reign, practically the whole of Sardinia was lost. John's reign was characterized by disastrous financial administration. He died without sons, and was succeeded by his younger brother Martin. Two daughters, however, survived to adulthood. [edit]Family and children

From his first marriage to Martha of Armagnac (1347-1378), daughter of Count Jean I of Armagnac: Joanna, who married Mathieu, Count of Foix. Together they claimed the throne of Aragon after her father's death. Matthew of Foix invaded Aragonese territories, but was driven back by the new King Martin. Joanna died soon after, childless. From his second marriage to Yolande of Bar, daughter of Robert I, Duke of Bar and Marie Valois: Yolande (Violant), who married Louis II of Anjou, King of Naples, and became the Queen of Four Kingdoms. Yolande and her sons also claimed the Kingdom of Aragon. Jaime (James) (1384-1388) Antonia (lived only a few months) [edit]References

This article incorporates text from the Encyclopædia Britannica Eleventh Edition, a publication now in the public domain.

João I de Aragão foi rei de Aragão de 1387 até à sua morte. Ele era o filho mais velho de Pedro IV, e da sua terceira esposa, Leonor, que era a filha de Pedro II da Sicília. Ele nasceu em Perpignan, na província de Roussillon, que na altura pertencia a Aragão, e morreu durante uma caçada na floresta perto de Foixà, devido a uma queda do seu cavalo.