THE BLUEKITE (Kino International), directed by Tian Zhuangzhuang, is, in most respects, a genuine cinematic masterpiece, not only because it is superbly acted and directed, but also because it is a brilliant portrayal of the dehumanizing aspects of Chinese Communism, from the sixties down through the Cultural Revolution, which brutalized China's youth.

The Blue Kite, actually filmed in China and completed abroad over the strenuous objections of the Chinese government, is high human drama which, despite its long running time (138 minutes) never became boring; nor does it really slow down. It takes place, for the most part, in a small Chinese village, and it traces the growing up of a little boy in a society that goes along with the Marxist-Leninist slogans and the fanatical system of political command and personal denounciation.

Lu Liping brings to the role of the young mother a moving and realistic quality, a human dimension that accurately reflects her fear and acceptance of authority and, in the end, her brief, personal revolt which, of course, spells tragedy, as it has for her husband.

Liping is simply brilliant and sensitive to all the nuances, personal and political, in this excellent family tale, which will leave a western audience depressed as it realizes that this vast oppression in China continues to this day, though perhaps to a slightly lesser degree.

The best, and most shocking scenes of The Blue Kite are in the final part, when the young cultural revolutionists go on a rampage against their teachers and, in fact, all older Communists. To the western mind, this kind of deliberate and sadistic mob violence, encouraged by Mao's government, is unfathomable and truly shocking.

In the large cast, the three actors playing the young boy from infant to rebellious teenager, are first-class, and so is Lin Xuejian as the husband and father who is eventually shipped to a penal colony in Siberia and dies there.

There is much beauty, and, much heartbreak in The Blue Kite, and director Zhuangzhuang displays an astonishing ability to portray ordinary Chinese family life under the Communists. Hou Yong's photography rates with the best anywhere.

Not surprisingly, Tian Zhuangzhuang got into trouble for making this great human drama. The government didn't appreciate his frank and deeply human portrayal of Chinese village life and did everything it could to stop the negative from leaving the country.

The Blue Kite, distributed by Kino International and sold internationally by Fortissimo Film Sales in Holland, should enjoy a very strong art house run, and it will certainly be given a very positive critical send-off. Rarely has a contemporary Chinese mainland deserved it more.