Ideas about the definition of National Socialist archaeology have been in constant flux since 1933, the year the NSDAP assumed power in Germany. During the early years of Nazi rule, some international scholars feared that German research traditions would be subsumed by pseudoscientific and occult practices, whilst others believed that the regime would stimulate important innovations and claimed that the main body of archaeological research in Germany was no more tainted by bias than elsewhere.Footnote 7

Rivalry between the ‘scientific’ SS-Ahnenerbe – a research department that supposedly allowed prehistorians to work ‘freely’ under the protection of Heinrich Himmler (1900–1945) – and the amateurish and pseudoscientific NSDAP organisation for cultural policy and surveillance headed by Alfred Rosenberg (1893–1946), the Amt Rosenberg [Rosenberg Office] and its Reichsbund für deutsche Vorgeschichte [Reichsbund for German Prehistory], dominated the limited output of archaeological publications under the National Socialist regime. Post-war, this rivalry would give those German prehistorians who had been members of the SS-Ahnenerbe an ‘alibi’ for their past actions and allow them to continue their work in the post-war Federal Republic of Germany (colloquially known as ‘West-Germany’). It was also in tune with the dominant theory of totalitarianism then prevalent in interpretations of the ‘Third Reich’, which explained events and actions within the regime largely from a top-down perspective.Footnote 8 Research by Michael Kater (1997) on the SS-Ahnenerbe, and Reinhard Bollmus (2006) on the Amt Rosenberg (see also Henschke, 2020), both dating from the late 1960s and early 1970s and both primarily concerned with the inner workings of National Socialist Rule, counted as the key publications on archaeology and Nazism.Footnote 9

During the 1990s, perspectives changed, owing to new research done into the role and position of archaeologists in the ‘Third Reich’ and occupied Europe.Footnote 10 In her seminal article in Antiquity, ‘The past as propaganda: totalitarian archaeology in Nazi Germany’, Bettina Arnold (1990) pointed out that there was still no comprehensive analysis of the effects of the Nazi regime on prehistoric scholarship, nor the role of archaeologists in legitimising it.Footnote 11 Referring to the collective silence on the Nazi past prevalent within the first post-1945 generation of German archaeologists,Footnote 12 she explained the absence of discussion as the result of the ‘reluctance of German archaeologists to come to terms with the past’. She also acknowledged that a new generation of students had started to discuss the topic.Footnote 13

Prior to these new approaches, discussions focused on assessing the degree of Nazi influence on archaeological research and identifying the traditions that had given rise to National Socialist archaeology. These previous approaches entailed a strong focus on the work of Gustaf Kossinna (1858–1931); his innovative research methods, fascinating interpretations of Germanic prehistory in Europe, and German-nationalistic motivations, paved the way for the development of National Socialist archaeology.Footnote 14 They also depicted the SS-Ahnenerbe as an organisation that protected German archaeologists from the ideological pressures of the Amt Rosenberg and its Reichsbund für deutsche Vorgeschichte.Footnote 15

Subsequent changes in approach can be related to the development of alternative insights into the inner workings of the ‘Third Reich’. The ‘Working towards the Führer’ concept developed by British academic Ian Kershaw, which explained how and why officials in Nazi Germany instigated policies to meet Hitler’s perceived wishes, was to become particularly influential.Footnote 16 Previously, the attitude of scholars was generally explained as one of adaptation and reward, based on a mixture of opportunism, self-overestimation, and a ‘civil servant’ mentality. A further important stimulus was the resources-theory, developed by Mitchell G. Ash in 2002.Footnote 17 Ash interpreted the relationship between science and politics as a symbiotic one, with a focus on the exchange of resources, not only financial, but also institutional, personal, cognitive, and rhetorical-ideological. This perspective of mutual ‘give and take’ has helped historians of National Socialist archaeology to see its development differently; not solely determined by internal scholarly interests or adaptation to external political influences. The self-interest of those involved and their scope for manoeuvre was more sharply represented and realised.Footnote 18

An international conference organised by Achim Leube in 1998 at Humboldt University in Berlin and entitled Prähistorie und Nationalsozialismus. Die mittel- und osteuropäische Ur- und Frühgeschichtsforschung in den Jahren 1933–1945 [Prehistory and National Socialism. The Central and Eastern European Prehistory and Early History Research in the years 1933–1945] (Leube & Hegewisch, 2002) proved to be particularly crucial for the development of new ideas and approaches. The papers, finally published in 2002, contained a wealth of empirical data on all aspects of German pre- and protohistoric archaeology during the ‘Third Reich’. Various contributions successfully debunked the polarised image of National Socialist archaeology as a simple rivalry between the SS-Ahnenerbe and the Amt Rosenberg. Moreover, for the first time, the role of German archaeologists in countries occupied by the Nazis was evaluated (Leube & Hegewisch, 2002). However, the continuing problem of extant knowledge gaps was demonstrated by a volume edited by Heiko Steuer, which included nine scholarly biographies of twentieth century prehistorians formerly active in National Socialist archaeology (Steuer & Hakelberg, 2001) and by the in-depth study by Uta Halle, dedicated to the complex history of the Externsteine excavations (Halle, 2002). Halle’s study concluded that no division between an ideology-free tradition-based archaeology (SS-Ahnenerbe) and a corrupted ideologised archaeology (Amt Rosenberg) had ever existed. Instead, her research revealed that the organisations were in constant competition for control of prehistoric research and ultimately represented only different forms of engagement with National Socialism.

In the first decade of the twenty-first century, new critical examination of the German tradition of interdisciplinary Ostforschung [Eastern Research] and Westforschung [Western Research] provided further stimulus and an alternative approach for analysing National Socialist archaeology. After the end of World War I, German academics, backed by diverse scientific institutions, had started to create inventories and descriptions of ‘space’, ‘people’, and ‘culture’ within and outside Germany that they considered ‘German’.Footnote 19 Archaeological research had played a considerable role in this interdisciplinary and highly political – irredentist research programme.Footnote 20

Interactions between the Natural Sciences and the Nazi State were also subjected to detailed scrutiny as part of a major project, The History of the Kaiser Wilhelm Society in National Socialism. This project was undertaken in 1999 by the Max Planck Society to critically investigate the history of its precursor, the Kaiser Wilhelm Gesellschaft zur Förderung der Wissenschaften (KWG) [Kaiser Wilhelm Society for the Advancement of Science]. The KWG was established in 1911 to promote the Natural Sciences in German by setting up research institutions that would function independently of state involvement and intervention. The project concluded that during the ‘Third Reich’, many scientists working for natural science institutions had participated in the Nazi system in diverse ways. This participation was willing and without compulsion from the Nazi state; participants combined their own scientific interests with the regime’s political and military goals to their mutual advantage.Footnote 21 Mark Walker and Carola Sachse concluded insightfully in 2005 that during war-time, German scientists did not care that the regime forced them in certain research directions, rather their concerns focused on what the regime ‘did not forbid them from doing’.Footnote 22

Classical archaeologists in Germany – building on earlier initiativesFootnote 23 – likewise began critical inquiries into the National Socialist past of their discipline at the start of the new millennium. The post-war self-image that classical archaeology had constructed, of a scholarly field shaped by humanism that managed to keep National Socialism at a distance, was soon unmasked as a fiction. Surveying the contemporaneous scientific outputs of classical archaeology (academic and popular publications, teaching, and research projects), Stefan Altekamp concluded in 2008 that the discipline unmistakably contributed to ‘the structural stability of the regime’.Footnote 24 In line with the examination of Ostforschung and Westforschung traditions mentioned above, these inquiries included research networks outside Germany. This was not only because classical archaeologists focused on the Mediterranean, but also because the Archäologische Institut des Deutschen Reiches (AIDR) [Archaeological Institute of the German Reich] maintained overseas branches in Rome, Athens, Cairo, and Istanbul. From the earliest days of the German Empire, the former Deutsches Archäologisches Institut (DAI) [German Archaeological Institute] had been part of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and in consequence, its local branches functioned as both research and diplomatic institutions. The project ‘Geschichte des Deutschen Archäologischen Instituts im 20. Jahrhundert’ [History of the German Archaeological Institute in the Twentieth Century], begun in 2006 by the German Archaeological Institute, provided an important context for this self-inquiry.Footnote 25 Major biographical insights were also generated by the two-volume study Lebensbilder. Klassische Archäologen und der Nationalsozialismus [Life pictures. Classical Archaeologists and National Socialism] by Gunnar Brands and Martin Maischberger (2012/16), which analysed the options and behaviours of archaeologists who were politically active during the Nazi regime or became victims of it.Footnote 26

Reviewing developments since 1990, the year Bettina Arnold published her seminal article in Antiquity, we can see that German archaeologists, in collaboration with European colleagues, have opened up the Nazi past of their research field to critical enquiry in the broadest sense. Biographical approaches now lead the field.Footnote 27 The history of excavations has likewise become a tool for critical reflectionFootnote 28; the history of university research traditionsFootnote 29 and archaeological museumsFootnote 30 has also been taken up. Equally significant is research done on particular regionsFootnote 31and research concepts such as epochs,Footnote 32 ethnic groups, ethnicity, and Volkstumsforschung [Research on Ethnic Germans Abroad].Footnote 33 The role of archaeologists in the SS-Ahnenerbe,Footnote 34 connections with the ‘Völkische Bewegung’ [National Movement],Footnote 35 the role and position of Germanic open air museums and re-enactment activities,Footnote 36 Germanic monuments and symbols as part of a political religion,Footnote 37 archaeological research and cultural policy in the occupied territories under civil administrations,Footnote 38 the German tradition of locally organised ‘Bodendenkmalpflege’ [archaeological monument care]Footnote 39 and archaeological fundingFootnote 40 are also now subjects of research. This exciting diversity is further enhanced by examination of the role of gender relations,Footnote 41 statistics relating to the growth of the discipline,Footnote 42 the use of forced labour,Footnote 43 looting of archaeological sites, objects, and museums,Footnote 44 connections between archaeology, mass violence and the Holocaust,Footnote 45 the effects of regime change,Footnote 46 and the denazification of archaeologists.Footnote 47 Also relevant is research dedicated to the Kampfbund für deutsche Kultur [Militant League for German Culture]Footnote 48 and the Reichserziehungsministerium [Reich Ministry of Science, Education and Culture],Footnote 49 which constituted important flanking organisational infrastructures for archaeological practices in Nazi Germany.

The historiographic overview provided here demonstrates the current diversity and dynamism of critical examinations of National Socialist archaeology, but is far from complete, as it does not include studies done outside Germany and Austria. However, it does provide a picture of the sheer volume of detailed knowledge that has been assembled about the complex entanglement of archaeology and National Socialism since the 1990s. As a result, we now have a balanced understanding of the ways that the German archaeological research tradition, in its broadest sense, flourished during the Nazi dictatorship and World War II.Footnote 50 ‘Totalitarian’ interpretations of archaeologists and their actions under the National Socialist dictatorship, which portrayed them as responding to ‘top-down directives’,Footnote 51 have lost their explanatory power. Instead, we can regard these archaeologists – in no way a homogeneous group – as having had agency and finding inspiration in a shared National Socialist mission. This insight has invoked defensive responses; for example, Georg Kossack’s remark in 1999 that German prehistorians, including members of the SS, had not been involved in Völkermord [Genocide].Footnote 52 Such a defence can be best understood as an attempt to protect the integrity of the established community of German prehistorians from the critical self-reflections of a younger generation that questioned the involvement of their teachers and predecessors in the SS and other Nazi-organisations.

Against this backdrop, the exhibition Graben für Germanien. Archäologie unterm Hakenkreuz [Dig for Germany. Archaeology under the Swastika] organised by the Focke Museum in Bremen in 2013 and initiated by Uta Halle and Dirk Mahsarski, can be regarded as a crowning achievement. This exhibition and its catalogueFootnote 53 had the explicit goal of revealing the close connections between archaeology and politics in the ‘Third Reich’ to the public by demonstrating how excavations served National Socialist political mobilisation. The exhibition focused on the role played by archaeologists in the National Socialist expansion in Europe, which included looting and cultural politics in the context of extreme violence. The exhibits also problematised the ongoing fascination of National Socialist archaeology and demonstrated how certain Nazi-influenced images of the Germanic past are still being propagated not only within Germany, but also within wider right-wing politics further afield.Footnote 54

Despite these developments, it should be noted that discussions continue about what exactly National Socialist archaeology embodied. In his critical review of the Graben für Germanien catalogue in 2015, Ulrich Veit trivialised the socio-political impact of prehistoric archaeology during the ‘Third Reich’, describing it remarkably as a ‘small research field, which was undoubtedly not system-relevant’ (‘ein kleines, im engeren Sinne zweifellos nicht system-relevantes Fach’), without further clarifying this judgement.Footnote 55

This volume provides the first integrated, multi-authored overview of National Socialist Archaeology in Europe. As such, it offers exciting new possibilities for research and comparison at continental, regional, and national levels, and the construction of meta-narratives. However, in keeping with the aims of this book, each individual chapter also provides detailed information about national encounters with National Socialist archaeology.

It begins with an examination of National Socialist archaeology in its home country, Germany (Chap. 2). Dana Schlegelmilch emphasises that National Socialist archaeology was a programme, one that engaged both archaeologists and a wider range of individuals. She provides an overview of the most important institutions for German archaeology and introduces key individuals and networks active in German and European archaeology. She traces the recent history of German archaeology: the Weimar Republic, the years following the Gleichschaltung (the Nazification of all aspects of German society) of 1933, the war years, and the post-war period, characterised by denazification and national division. The expulsion of Jewish, ‘Non-Aryan’ scholars and those opposed to the Nazi regime resulted in a severe academic ‘brain drain’ that also affected archaeology. Nonetheless, archaeology benefitted from the political changes, especially in terms of resources and jobs. Speaking of ‘prehistorians at war’, Schlegelmilch reveals that German archaeologists fulfilled a special function in occupied countries, as trained experts on cultural issues, in many cases with in-depth knowledge of occupied countries and personal relationships with colleagues from them. She also identifies certain dogmas that through the medium of archaeological practices, were increasingly understood as the ‘natural order’. She concludes that many of these dogmas remain uncontested today and represent a crucial legacy of National Socialist archaeology.

The chapter on Austria (Chap. 3) by Daniel Modl and Gudrun Wlach has a strong institutional focus. It provides an overview of the history of museums, historical societies, universities, non-university research institutions, and the monument office in inter-war Austria, a country where National Socialism attracted many followers during the 1930s. According to the authors, the majority of Austrian archaeologists were adherents of the conservative, national Catholic and German National political spectrum, who warmly welcomed the Anschluss of Austria in 1938. In contrast to Germany, the search for ‘Germanic roots’ was not a priority for Austrian archaeology during the Nazi era and the country maintained its own independent research priorities. Austria’s rich Roman past remained a priority and so-called Südostforschung [Southeastern research], a research tradition inherited from the Austro-Hungarian empire, was given a boost by the German-led attack on Yugoslavia in 1941. During war-time, Austrian archaeology suffered from a shortage of financial resources: many male archaeologists were drafted into military service and research projects stagnated. The post-war ‘denazification’ of Austrian archaeology had little impact; most archaeologists and museum personnel remained in position.

In their chapter on Czechoslovakia (Chap. 4), Martin Oliva and Petr Kostrhun reconstruct the complex internal dynamics within the archaeological infrastructure of the Czech lands (Bohemia and Moravia) and Slovakia. Their study encompasses both the inter-war years and the period after 1939, the year of the forced division and partial incorporation of the country into Nazi Germany. Whilst the Monument Office in Vienna strongly influenced archaeology in Slovakia, archaeological practice in the Czech lands was supervised by German archaeologists. The post-1945 communist image of these archaeologists as simply destructive vandals has its basis in fact. However, according to the authors, this does not fully address or represent the good relations that these German interlopers in some cases tried to maintain with Czech colleagues and which were built on a long tradition of German-Czech collaboration.

In the chapter on Poland (Chap. 5), Kamil Niedziółka demonstrates what happened when the National Socialist archaeological project dropped its ‘mask’ and capitalised on Nazi aggression. After World War I, Polish archaeology had helped the recently restored country to justify its ownership of lands that had previously been part of the German Reich. At the same time, German archaeologists began using archaeology to ‘prove’ the idea of Germanic superiority over the Slavic people, supporting German claims to Greater Poland, Silesia, and Pomerania. Polish-German relations within inter-war archaeological studies continued to exist, yet in some cases became overtly hostile. After Germany attacked and conquered Poland, a new situation arose. Niedziółka gives examples of the way German archaeologists used excavations and the looting of museums to find ‘proof’ of the ‘Proto-Germanic’ character of the Polish lands, and the complex and dangerous position of Polish archaeologists who managed to continue with research that contradicted their Nazi occupiers, even in some cases while in hiding.

Examining Scandinavia (Chap. 6), Malte Gasche analyses archaeological developments in Denmark and Norway after the German attack of April 1940 and the resulting occupation. In these two countries, as in Sweden (which remained neutral) and Finland (aligned with Germany after invasion by the Soviet Union and the Winter War of 1939–1940), prehistoric research was well-established, rivalling German archaeology in terms of both methodology and technical expertise. Despite these archaeological rivalries, the two countries had long maintained a tradition of collaboration. There was a strong interest in Scandinavia during the National Socialist era, based on a sense of shared ‘Germanic’ identity, but nonetheless, the Nordische Gesellschaft [Nordic Society] in Lübeck, which fell under the auspices of Alfred Rosenberg, failed to develop closer links between Germany and the Scandinavian states during the 1930s. In the following years, Danish, Finnish, Norwegian, and Swedish archaeologists had to deal with the activities of the SS-Ahnenerbe, which in occupied Denmark and Norway, were carried out under the guise of monument preservation. Gasche draws the conclusion that willingness to collaborate, with some exceptions, was generally limited in Scandinavia.

In the chapter on Iceland (Chap. 7), Angelos Parigoris describes how this neutral country was invaded by British troops a month after the German occupation of Denmark, an act that isolated the island from the theatre of war in Europe. However, as with the Scandinavian countries, a strong sense of Iceland as a ‘Germanic’ nation had long existed. During the inter-war years, German academics roamed Iceland in search of their ‘racial’ Germanic roots, often warmly welcomed by the Icelandic elite and local scholars, keen to co-operate with overseas colleagues. Through a detailed analysis of the academic activities of German scholars in Iceland, particularly an SS-Ahnenerbe-funded Icelandic expedition (cancelled owing to the outbreak of World War II), Parigoris examines and evaluates Icelandic ‘flirtations’ with Nazism.

In their examination of the Netherlands, Belgium, and Luxembourg (Chap. 8), Martijn Eickhoff and Erwin Nuijten analyse how National Socialist archaeology developed in the three countries on the western border of Germany, countries that had well-established national infrastructures for archaeology and strong traditions of scholarly collaboration with Germany. They compare the impact of different regimes of government on the three occupied countries – civil administration in the Netherlands, military administration in Belgium, and the de-facto annexation of Luxembourg (Cdz Area/Territory of the Chief of Civil Administration) – and examine archaeological practices in each country in detail. Eickhoff and Nuijten conclude that that the Nazification of archaeological research in the Netherlands was relatively effective and created a cultural justification for the National Socialist political and racial (anti-Semitic) policies adopted there. As a result, German archaeological policies created and adopted in the Netherlands set the National Socialist standard for developments in other areas of north-west Europe.

In his chapter on France (Chap. 9), Laurent Olivier describes how earlier Westforschung [Western Research] contacts amongst archaeologists contributed to the ‘Germanisation’ of the eastern regions of France, in particular the annexed region of Alsace-Moselle, following the German victory over France in May and June 1940. German archaeologists showed only limited interest in both the prehistoric peoples of France, the Gauls, and the Gallo-Roman period, neither of which could be identified as ‘Germanic’ in origin. Archaeological research in France was not yet professionalised, with the result that German archaeologists assigned to the country could easily stigmatise the amateurish ways in which the French dealt with their own cultural heritage and above all, archaeological remains of perceived ‘Germanic’ origin identified there. Important German organisations and institutions such as the Kunstschutz [Art Protection] of the Wehrmacht, the Römisch-Germanische Kommission (RGK) [Roman-Germanic Commission], the Einsatzstab Reichsleiter Rosenberg and the SS-Ahnenerbe were active. The latter two organisations clashed in Brittany, a region of importance to National Socialists because of its megaliths and its ‘nationalist’ movement. According to Olivier, the National Socialist archaeological programme had a long legacy in France: the work of German archaeologists during the occupation years would form the basis for French research in the post-war era for at least three decades.

In the chapter on Serbia (Chap. 10), Aleksandar Bandović describes how Serbia was placed under military rule by the Wehrmacht after the Germans invaded, occupied, and dismantled the Kingdom of Yugoslavia in April 1941 and how this affected archaeology. Archaeological research in occupied Serbia began in October 1941 in a collaboration between the Kunstschutz of the Wehrmacht and the SS-Ahnenerbe. The archaeological infrastructure of Serbia, with the National Museum in Belgrade playing a central role, was well established and exchange with German colleagues, in particular with the Deutsches Archäologisches Institut (DAI), had started in the early 1930s. Serbian territory was considered archaeologically important by the National Socialists because of wider debates about the origins of classical civilisation, the Indo-Europeans, and European culture generally. Some German archaeologists believed that the Balkans played a key role in the supposed route of the Indo-Germanic migration to the Mediterranean. A museum course given by German scholars in the National Museum between 1942 and 1944, which provided training for a new generation of young Serbian archaeologists, was of particular importance for the development of Serbian archaeology. Its effects can be identified in continued post-war collaboration between German and Serbian archaeologists and the persistence of an ethnic-racial understanding of archaeological cultures in Serbian archaeology.

Alexandra Kankeleit’s investigations into National Socialist archaeology in Greece (Chap. 11) and activities in Crete by Georgia Flouda (Chap. 12) elaborate on the long-term relationships and ties between German and Greek archaeologists, in which the Deutsches Archäologisches Institut in Athen [German Archaeological Institute at Athens] played a crucial role. They also address the disastrous effects of the German invasion of Greece in April 1941 and that of Crete in the following May. Speaking of a ‘gold-rush mentality’ and a lack of institutional structures, Kankeleit describes how the DAI, the Kunstschutz of the Wehrmacht, and units of the Einsatzstab Reichsleiter Rosenberg conducted archaeological research in an avaricious and unscrupulous way. Georgia Flouda describes the activities of the Kunstschutz of the Wehrmacht on Crete in 1941 and 1942 as a tool for the cultural legitimation of the German presence on the island. The occupation of Crete was seen as an opportunity to start systematic archaeological research in a region where German and Austrian archaeologists, in contrast to British, Italian, French, and American scholars, had previously enjoyed only limited access.

After Nazi Germany launched its attack on the Soviet Union on 22 June 1941, the territory of Lithuania was invaded by German troops and the occupation of Latvia and Estonia was completed in July 1941. Soon afterwards, the Reichskommissariat Ostland (RKO) [literally Reich Commissariat Eastland] – the civilian occupation regime in the Baltic states and the western part of Belarus – was established. It was not the first regime change in this region; in June 1940, the Red Army had occupied the Baltic States, and installed new, pro-Soviet governments in all three countries. In the chapter on Lithuania (Chap. 13), Gintautas Zabiela reveals how continuity was maintained within the small archaeological infrastructure of Lithuania during the Nazi-occupation, the role of earlier academic exchange with Germany, and the crucial position of Vilnius University. During the years of occupation, research continued on a small scale, and only a few cases of German looting are known. The training of four students in archaeology, who were able to continue working as archaeologists in Lithuania after the war, represents an important achievement. Zabiela concludes that the following second Soviet occupation caused more damage to Lithuanian archaeology than the politics and resulting changes of the Nazi-era.

In the chapter on Latvia (Chap. 14), Zenta Broka-Lāce ​analyses how the archaeological infrastructure of Latvia continued to function during Nazi occupation, although already reeling from the effects of an earlier Soviet occupation. During the 1920s and 1930s, archaeology in Latvia had become a science of national importance, managed through centralised legislation and entirely supported by the government. The main archaeological agents were the Monument Board and the State Historical Museum. During the Nazi occupation, these institutions primarily worked to protect the country’s archaeological heritage. German officials based in Riga may have made plans for an Ostland-archaeology, but its effects were ultimately limited. Leading Latvian archaeologists maintained their nationalist convictions and protested against the occupation of Latvia not only by Nazi Germany, but also by the Soviet Union.

In the chapter on Estonia (Chap. 15), Erki Russow describes how archaeology had gained a respected position in the independent Republic of Estonia by the end of the 1930s and was relatively well established institutionally. There was a research centre for archaeology connected to the Museum of Archaeology and the University of Tartu. During the first Soviet occupation, Estonian archaeology experienced changes on both an official level (the renaming of institutions and a shift of the research networks towards the Soviet Union) and a personal level (forced career moves and the use of new communist vocabulary). During the subsequent German occupation of 1941 to 1944, Estonian archaeologists tried to restore the pre-war situation, while adapting research agendas to the contemporary political situation. As Germany’s war effort began to fail, they became increasingly dependent on political co-operation from the Estonians and most of their archaeological restructuring plans were set aside. Against this backdrop, Russow concludes that on a broad scale, the visions of communist and National Socialist authorities were relatively similar, as they shared the aim of creating a centralised and ideologically controlled archaeological research tradition.

In the chapter on Ukraine (Chap. 16), Daniel Modl and Dmytro Teslenko describe how museums and archaeological sites in the occupied Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic became the ‘playing fields’ of German archaeologists following the German invasion of the Soviet Union on 22 June 1941 and the establishment in July that year of the civilian occupation regime, the Reichskommissariat Ukraine. German scholars involved were members of two rival scientific organisations, the Einsatzstab Reichsleiter Rosenberg and the SS-Ahnenerbe. The goal of both organisations was the same: to excavate sites and loot museum collections that were interpreted as containing evidence of a Germanic past to legitimise the German occupation of Ukraine. Modl and Teslenko conclude that the four-year occupation of Ukraine had a massive impact on Ukrainian archaeology. There were more than 170 museums in the occupied Ukraine; practically all were damaged or plundered. Archaeological collections looted by the Germans were lost or destroyed during transport or subsequently within Germany due to combat operations and bombardments. Many Ukrainian archaeologists who cooperated with the Germans did not return to Ukraine for fear of reprisals or conviction for Nazi collaboration.

While the countries conquered by the ‘Third Reich’ were confronted with the National Socialist archaeological programme in all its raw expansionism, the experiences of those countries that were at war with Germany but remained free, neutral, or that declared themselves ‘non-belligerent’, were self-evidently of a different nature. Due to the long tradition of international exchange within European archaeology, in which Germany had a central position, the National Socialist archaeological programme also impacted upon the archaeologies of those countries. In the chapter on the United Kingdom (Chap. 17), Katie Meheux examines the complex interactions between British and National Socialist archaeologists before, during, and after World War II. British archaeologists, who had long participated in international networks, organisations, and debates, generally admired National Socialist archaeology for its state funding, robust institutions, innovative fieldwork, and professional opportunities, but regarded associated National Socialist ideological messages negatively. Few British archaeologists challenged the racism of National Socialist archaeology before the outbreak of war; many of them were ‘pragmatic appeasers’ strongly committed to ‘scientific’ neutrality. At the outbreak of war, British archaeologists developed a new international archaeology based on Empire and war-time alliances that ran parallel to racial transnationalism in National Socialist archaeology in Europe. Post-war, British archaeologists did not seek revenge on their defeated National Socialist colleagues, but instead sought ways to reintegrate them into the new international archaeological order.

After the Anglo-Irish Treaty of 1921, Ireland (the Irish Free State until 1937) gained its independence from Britain and remained neutral during World War II. In his chapter on Ireland (Chap. 18), Gabriel Cooney examines the impact of National Socialist archaeology as arising from the activities of one leading archaeologist, Adolf Mahr (1887–1951). An Austrian with strong family connections to the Sudetenland, he was appointed Director of the National Museum in Ireland. In building professional networks, contributing to the establishment of the National Monument Act of 1930, and developing the National Museum into a major national cultural institution, Mahr contributed strongly to the professionalisation of Irish archaeology. However, he was also the leading National Socialist figure in Ireland from 1934 to 1939. Cooney concludes that Mahr undoubtedly made a major contribution to Irish prehistory and archaeology, but his archaeological activities also provided him with a professional cover for his political activities. The political context in which he made his contributions to Irish archaeology will continue to be debated.

In the chapter on Switzerland (Chap. 19) Hansjörg Brem analyses the role and position of prehistoric archaeology in this multilingual country, which despite its large German-speaking minority, managed to remain neutral during World War II. He observes how in parallel with the developments in National Socialist Germany, archaeology in Switzerland contributed to national identity formation under the idiosyncratic banner of ‘spiritual national defence’. While acknowledging the existence of close connections between German researchers and scholars in the German-speaking part of Switzerland, Brem concludes that Swiss archaeologists were generally not active in movements with close ties to National Socialism. However, he also observes that archaeologists championed racist and eugenic ideas. He points at a complex Swiss double role, as the country welcomed persecuted archaeologists both before and during the war, but later on also facilitated the reintegration of former National Socialist archaeologists into the international archaeological community.

Francoist Spain initially remained neutral, but after Italy entered the war in June 1940, switched its status to ‘non-belligerent’ in favour of Germany. In the chapter on Spain (Chap. 20), Margarita Díaz-Andreu describes the relationship between politics and archaeology. She does this through an analysis of the developments of Visigothic archaeology, a research field that leading German archaeologists claimed could highlight the crucial contributions of this Germanic tribe to the birth of the Spanish nation in the early Middle Ages. Although the relationship between Spanish and German archaeologists began in the nineteenth century, German archaeologists only started to show a real interest in the Migration Period of the Iberian Peninsula in the late 1920s. Based on close reading of academic publications, Díaz-Andreu, stresses that in the following two decades, German archaeologists active in Spain, like their Spanish counterparts, did not self-evidently pursue or share political ideas, even when their interpretations were similar. Some archaeologists linked their engagement with Visigothic archaeology to National Socialism or the Falangist ideology, whereas others supported right-wing democratic parties or were Carlist traditionalists. However, whereas German archaeologists generally stressed the superiority of the German race, this racist argument was moderated among the Spanish archaeologists, whose nationalism led them to stress the importance of their Latin heritage and the existence of a pre-Visigothic ‘racial’ substratum.

Portugal was officially neutral during World War II but maintained a close relationship with Britain. In 1944, the country changed its status to ‘non-belligerent’ in favour of the Allies. In his chapter on Portugal (Chap. 21), Sérgio Gomes analyses how National Socialist archaeology, with particular regard to its racial and cultural-historical dimensions, was redistributed during the Estado Novo dictatorship. He begins his analysis with the important observation that archaeological knowledge generally refers to past populations, and as a result could be easily used for a eugenic ordering of society. At the same time, he argues, the research field developed norms of inclusion and exclusion that regulated the archaeological community. Gomes examines the activities of the Portuguese anthropologist António Augusto Esteves Mendes Corrêa (1888–1960), who produced a history of the Portuguese race rooted in prehistoric megalithic monuments, although the regime promoted the medieval foundation of Portugal. He also examines the work of the German scholars Georg Leisner (1870–1957) and Vera Leisner (1885–1972) who contributed to the dissemination of culture-historical understandings of Portuguese prehistory. Their work was not, however, welcomed by the Portuguese archaeological community. German archaeologists working in Portugal developed good relationships with Portuguese colleagues and as a result, contributed to the development of archaeology as a discipline in Portugal.

The National Socialist archaeological programme also resonated with the Axis powers, countries that supported Germany before and/or during World War II: Italy signed a treaty with Germany in October 1936; Hungary, Romania and Slovakia joined the Tripartite Pact in November 1940, followed by Bulgaria in March 1941, and Croatia in June 1941. Finland did not sign the Tripartite Pact but was aligned with the Axis powers in its fight against the Soviet Union. The autonomy of the Axis powers prevented direct National Socialist archaeological interference as witnessed in occupied countries; this did not however imply that there was much critical assessment of National Socialist archaeology by its political allies.

Italy joined World War II in 1940, after France surrendered. In the chapter on Italy (Chap. 22), Stefan Altekamp and Massimiliano Munzi describe how German and Italian archaeology had a long tradition of collaboration and shared ethnic understanding of archaeological cultures. The advent of initially Fascism, and later National Socialism, contributed to a radicalisation of archaeological perspectives on ‘nation’ and ‘race’, culminating in racist orientalism and extreme anti-semitism. In 1938, a collaborative agreement was established between the Deutschen Archäologischen Institut (DAI) and the SS-Ahnenerbe to work on Italian archaeology. On Italian issues, however, the two countries came to disagree, as the quest for Germanic ‘greatness’ on the one side, and the cult of ‘Romanità’ with its imperialist ambitions on the other, did not align comfortably. Nonetheless, although the National Socialist archaeological project on Italian soil may have had a weak theoretical foundation, it eventually helped to disseminate settlement archaeology and medieval archaeology in the country.

Albania, created as an independent state in 1912, was invaded by Fascist Italy in April 1939 and turned into an Italian protectorate. In 1943, the country was occupied by the Germans; this occupation lasted until November 1944, when Albania was liberated. In the chapter on Albania (Chap. 23), Ilirjan Gjipali describes how archaeological research became a foreign affair soon after 1912. In the 1920s, the Albanian government granted concessions for archaeological excavations to France and Italy only. While the French mission created a spirit of cooperation among local institutions, the activities of the Italian archaeological mission had clear connections to the expansionist politics of Italian fascism. Within this context, the mission attempted to prove archaeologically that the connections between two nations began in the Roman period. With Italy’s invasion of Albania, archaeological research in the country became the exclusive domain of Italian archaeologists supported by the newly founded Department of Archaeological Services. With the German occupation, fascist Italian archaeological activities in Albania ended.

In the 1930s, the Kingdom of Hungary increasingly looked to Fascist Italy and Nazi Germany, while adopting a nationalist and irredentist policy orientated towards recovering areas outside the country inhabited by ethnic Hungarians. During World War II, Hungary’s position as one of the Axis powers was initially advantageous, resulting in the settlement of territorial disputes with its neighbouring countries. Hungarian military forces participated in the invasion of the Soviet Union, but the country subsequently engaged in armistice negotiations with the United States and the United Kingdom and in March 1944, German forces occupied Hungary. In the chapter on Hungary (Chap. 24), László Bartosiewicz analyses Hungarian archaeology during the inter-war period and subsequent developments. During these years, a positivist archaeological tradition was developed in the country that only occasionally echoed contemporaneous political conflicts. Hungarian governments generally saw little propaganda value in archaeology. Although there was a strong German influence on archaeological practices in Central Europe, exchange with Hungary was limited. Research on Hungarian ethnogenesis was primarily philological, comparing Finno-Ugric and Turkic linguistic elements. Hungarian ‘Turanism’, which associated Hungarian history and its people with Central Asia, Inner Asia, and the Ural region, also prevented acceptance of an overarching Germanic past as propagated in Germany.

Following the outbreak of World War II in 1939, the Kingdom of Romania officially adopted a position of neutrality. In summer 1940, a series of territorial disputes were diplomatically resolved unfavourably for Romania, as resulting in a military coup that transformed the country into a dictatorship. The new regime joined the Axis powers in November 1940, and its troops participated in the invasion of the Soviet Union. In the chapter on Romania (Chap. 25), Laura Coltofean-Arizancu describes how the territory and population of the Kingdom of Romania doubled after the end of World War I as a result of unification with Bessarabia, Bukovina, and Transylvania. Greater Romania nationalism flourished and was supported by various academic disciplines, including archaeology. Archaeologists worked to demonstrate the validity of the Romanian nation through the medium of the ancient Dacians and Romanian prehistory. German archaeology strongly influenced the development of Romanian archaeology, both in theory and practice. Moreover in 1938, the SS-Ahnenerbe organised a research trip to the country. Coltofean concludes that the National Socialist archaeological project failed to gain the support of Romanian archaeologists. The idea of a unified Romanian nation, as well as the priority given to preserving territorial integrity, were of primary importance to the Romanian authorities and scientific community, rather than a unified Germanic ‘racial’ perspective on European pre- and protohistory. However, the rise of National Socialism and Romania’s war-time alliance with Nazi Germany was nonetheless reflected in some domestic archaeological practices and discourses.

In the chapter on Bulgaria (Chap. 26), Raiko Krauß, Sven Conrad, and Rumen T. Ivanov describe the country’s position during the National Socialist era as ambivalent. Owing to the initial lack of a developed infrastructure for archaeology, most pioneering Bulgarian archaeologists had been trained at German-speaking universities. In the inter-war period, an independent archaeological institute was established in addition to the archaeological museum, founded in 1892. Important art-historical and archaeological writings were published abroad, mostly in German, promoting a self-confident view of ancient Bulgarian art and culture independent of Byzantine influence. Facing a possible occupation following the transfer of German troops to Romania and the invasion of Greece by Italian forces, Bulgaria joined the Tripartite Pact on 1 March 1941. The influential Bulgarian archaeologist Bogdan Filov (1883–1945), who had studied in Würzburg, Leipzig, and Freiburg from 1901 to 1906, and was Prime Minister at the time. The German Wehrmacht used the country as a deployment zone for the invasions of Yugoslavia and Greece. Civilian administrations were set up in the occupied territories, which were also responsible for museums and the preservation of monuments.

The Independent State of Croatia was established in April 1941, after the German-led attack on the Kingdom of Yugoslavia by the Axis powers. It was governed as a one-party state by the fascist Ustaša organisation, and its territory consisted of most of modern-day Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as some parts of modern-day Serbia and Slovenia. In the chapter on Croatia (Chap. 27), Rajna Šošić Klindžić, Ana Solter, and Dragana Rajković describe the archaeological infrastructure of the new state, which was based on existing institutions, but focused on the Sarajevo Museum, the Archaeological Museum in Zagreb, the Chair for Archaeology of the University of Zagreb, and the City Museum of Osijek. They demonstrate how nationalistic ideas that stressed the non-Slavic origin of the Croats flourished. The Croats were considered to have belonged to the Germanic tribe of the Goths and the ‘racial’ and cultural differences between Croats and Serbs were emphasised. In Osijek, the German minority founded a Heimatmuseum that paid special attention to archaeology. The German archaeologist R. R. Schmidt (1882–1950), who had already excavated in Croatia in 1938 and 1939, began an SS-Ahnenerbe funded excavation of the site of Gradac Sarvaš near this city in 1942. His interpretation of the site as embodying a crucial link between the North and pre-Hellenistic Greece, was welcomed both in Croatia and SS-Ahnenerbe-circles.

In the final chapter (Chap. 28), Tim Murray draws the volume to a close, discussing the roots of Nazi archaeology and its continuing legacies. Murray traces the long-term impact of race theory and the deep historical roots of discussions about human nature and cultural diversity. He concludes by stressing the importance of continuing enquiries into the plausibility of archaeological reasoning.