Abstract

The European Credit Transfer System establishes a calculation based on the work students do, rather than direct teaching hours as is the case with the current credit system. These are known as ECTS credits and they represent the amount of work the student needs to do to pass a subject. In short, ECTS credits are the quantity of work needed to learn a subject, including theory, practical classes, seminars, exams as well as anything the student has done individually which can be evaluated. This is where a Wiki would provide a new space for students, where they could and should introduce information on matters related to the subject, as well as edit, correct, expand and improve etc. the already existing information. This information, which would be a collection of web pages in hypertext, would make it possible to create a computer application based on the collaborative work of the students which can be accessed by any student from any Internet connection. At the same time, it can be assessed and therefore form part of the student’s final grade for the subject. The aim of this chapter is to show the methodology which will enable a Wiki to be used for professional learning. Therefore, first the authors define what a Wiki is; second they discuss the Wiki as a collaborative teaching instrument; and third they deal with Wikis as a tool for educational assessment.

Key Terms in this Chapter

Pedagogical Research Component: Aside from its main objective, research allows students to “learn and learn” because it develops autonomy and autodidactic skills. Thus, research is an elemental pedagogical tool.

European Higher Education Area: This is the European educational quality framework created by the Bologna Declaration with the aim of promoting Europe’s economic growth, international competitiveness and social cohesion by encouraging the education, training and mobility of its citizens.

Teaching Methodology: This is the method chosen to achieve a teaching goal. This is normally defined by the teacher of a given subject, so that the student can then follow it. It should be designed in such a way that students acquire the knowledge and skills for which the subject was included in the curriculum.

European Credit Transfer and Accumulation System: The standard measurement for higher education in Europe. It allows graduates to move freely between the different countries affiliated to the system, because it facilitates the recognition of academic qualifications.

Wikipedia: Social encyclopedia.

Collaborative Work: Whereby we add two plus two and get five.