John Elkann is Chief Executive Officer of EXOR and Chairman of Stellantis N.V..

Elkann obtained a scientific baccalaureate from the Lycée Victor Duruy in Paris and graduated in Engineering from Politecnico, the Engineering University of Turin. While at university, he gained work experience in various companies of the Fiat Group in the UK and Poland (manufacturing) as well as in France (sales and marketing).

He started his professional career in 2001 at General Electric as a member of the Corporate Audit Staff, with assignments in Asia, the USA and Europe.

John Elkann is Chairman of Ferrari N.V. and Chairman of GEDI Gruppo Editoriale S.p.A.

Mr. Elkann is a trustee of MoMA. He also serves as Chairman of the Giovanni Agnelli Foundation.

Benedetto Vigna is Chief Executive Officer since September 2021.

Before joining Ferrari, he was President of STMicroelectronics’, Analog, MEMS and Sensors Group, since January 2016 and also a member of ST’s Executive Committee from May 31, 2018. Vigna joined ST in 1995 and founded the Company’s MEMS activities (Micro-Electro-Mechanical Systems). Under his guidance, ST’s MEMS sensors established the Company’s leadership with large OEMs in motion-activated user interfaces. His responsibilities were expanded to include connectivity, imaging and power solutions and he piloted a series of successful moves into new business areas, with a particular focus on the industrial and automotive market segments. During his career Vigna has filed more than 200 patents on micromachining, authored numerous publications and has sat on the Boards of several EU-funded programs including start ups as well as worldwide recognized Boards of Asian and American research centers. Benedetto Vigna graduated in Subnuclear Physics from the University of Pisa.

Davide Abate is Chief Technologies and Infrastructures Officer since January 2022.

Previously he held the position of Head of Technologies at Ferrari since October 2020, and various managerial roles in the manufacturing area such as Head of Prototype Construction from 2017 to 2020.

Prior to joining Ferrari in 2012, he covered technical managerial roles at Ducati Motor Holding.

Mr. Abate holds the Ferrari Corporate Executive MBA from the Bologna Business School and a master in Process Engineering at Bocconi School of Management, as well as a masters’ degree in Automotive Engineering from the Turin Polytechnic.

Andrea Antichi was appointed Chief Manufacturing Officer in January 2022.

Previously he was Head of Vehicle at Ferrari since June 2018. During his career he covered various managerial roles at Ferrari in the manufacturing area such as Head of Engine Assembly and Machining from 2014 to 2018 and Engine Assembly & Machining Process Engineering Manager from 2008 to 2013.

Prior to joining Ferrari in 2006, he held technical roles Piaggio and researcher in Computational Biomechanics at Istituti Ortopedici Rizzoli.

Mr. Antichi holds the Ferrari Corporate Executive MBA from the Bologna Business School, as well as a masters’ degree in Mechanical Engineering from the University of Pisa.

Carlo Daneo is General Counsel since July 2015, a member of the Board of Directors of Ferrari North America Inc. since February 2017, a member of the Supervisory Body of Ferrari S.p.A. since August 2015 and Data Protection Officer of the Ferrari Group from February 2018.

Prior to joining Ferrari, he held several senior positions in the Fiat Chrysler Automobiles (FCA) legal area, including the role of Senior Vice President and Legal Counsel in Finance and Financial Services of FCA from 2008 until 2015 and the role of General Counsel in Fiat Chrysler Finance S.p.A. (previously Fiat Finance S.p.A.) from 2003 to 2015.

He started his career in 1995 with a work experience at the United Nations at the International Trade Center Unctad / WTO in Geneva and since 1996 in the legal profession in law firms with experience in the Corporate, Finance and Capital Markets areas in primary international law firms in Italy and abroad until 2003.

He graduated in Law at the University of Turin, did a master's degree organized by the University Institute of European Studies in international law at the International Labour Organization of Turin and obtained the title of Lawyer.

Liuni joined Ferrari as Chief Brand Officer in September 2022.

Previously, she was Chief Marketing Officer at Pandora, where she played a key part in relaunching the company and boosting its desirability. She has also led Bulgari’s marketing division and global communications. In addition, she spent almost 20 years at Procter & Gamble, where she was General Manager of the Prestige division which includes perfume, makeup and skincare for brands such as Dolce & Gabbana, Gucci and Hugo Boss. This encompassed multiple roles including Regional Leader for the Asia-Pacific region and leading on marketing, communication and product development for the entire portfolio, working closely with the fashion houses.

She graduated in economics at Rome’s Luiss University and has a master’s degree in marketing from the IPSOA business school in Milan.

Marco Lovati is Chief Internal Audit, Risk and Compliance Officer since December 2023, Chief Internal Audit Officer since April 2015 and a member of the Supervisory Body of Ferrari S.p.A. since July 2014.

Prior to such assignment he spent 14 years in the Internal Audit and Compliance department of Fiat Group and Fiat Chrysler Automobiles (FCA), where he covered several senior positions including the role of “Financial & Insurance Companies, Luxury cars” and “Automotive Europe & Financial JV Companies” Head of Audit, also serving as member of the Supervisory Body of different Fiat Group and FCA Legal Entities.

Mr. Marco Lovati graduated in Economics and Business Administration from the University of Turin and holds an MBA in Finance jointly organized by the University of Turin and the Italian Association of Finance Directors (ANDAF).

Mr. Manzoni was appointed as our Chief Design Officer in January 2010.

From 2007 to 2010 he was Director of Creative Design at the Volkswagen Group where he was involved in designing most of the Skoda, Bentley, Bugatti and Volkswagen recent cars as well as redefining the aesthetic philosophy of these brands.

From 2001 to 2006, he worked at Fiat Group as Head of Design for Lancia, Fiat and LCV. He has also held design positions at Lancia and Seat.

Mr. Manzoni holds a degree in architecture with a thesis in industrial design from the University of Florence.

On 28 June 2019, at the University of Sassari, he was awarded an honorary master’s degree in ‘Humanities, Modern Philology and Cultural Industry’.

Frédéric Vasseur was born in Draveil, France on 28 May 1968. In 1995, he graduated in Aeronautical Engineering at ESTACA (École Supérieure des Techniques Aéronautiques et de Construction Automobile) in Paris.

In 1992, while still studying, he established RPM, preparing Formula 3 engines for Renault. In 1996, he set up the ASM team, racing in Formula 3. He ran the operation up to 2015, winning various titles including the French one in 1998 with David Saelens at the wheel, going on to win the European title four times between 2004 and 2007, with Jamie Green, Lewis Hamilton, Paul Di Resta and Romain Grosjean.

In 2004, he created a second team, ART Grand Prix winning eighth teams’ championships across GP2 and GP3 and eleven drivers’ titles including clinching the 2016 GP3 crown with Charles Leclerc.

An enquiring mind and a willingness to explore new avenues led Vasseur to set up AOTech in 2010, a company specialising in driving simulators and CFD design. Two years later, along came Spark Racing Technology, dealing in the design and manufacture of hybrid and electrical systems. The company secured the contract to supply Formula E chassis, when the category for fully electric single-seaters was first set up by the FIA (Federation Internationale Automobile) in 2014.

Frédéric first appeared in the Formula 1 paddock in 2016 as Renault Team Principal. The following year he moved on to become Managing Director of the Sauber Group, as well as Team Principal of the Alfa Romeo Sauber F1 Team, which morphed into Alfa Romeo Racing in 2019, running Ferrari power units.

After the 2022 season, he was asked to take on the role of Scuderia Ferrari Team Principal & General Manager, starting in his new position on 9 January 2023.