Emilia Fox, known for her role as Dr Nikki Alexander in BBC's Silent Witness, has had quite the romantic history before settling down with her TV producer boyfriend, Jonathan Stadlen.

The actress, who is also related to actor Laurence Fox, was previously engaged to comedian Vic Reeves and married to actor Jared Harris.

She met Jonathan through a mutual friend three years ago and they've been inseparable ever since. Emilia recently shared that they express their love for each other every night and feel like a married couple, even though they haven't officially tied the knot.

Before finding happiness with Jonathan, Emilia was engaged to Vic Reeves after meeting him on the set of Randall and Hopkirk. She also dated designer Toby Mott before marrying Jared Harris in 2005.

Unfortunately, their relationship ended in heartbreak after a miscarriage in 2007 and they divorced in 2009.

Emilia told The Sun: "It's fun dating again and finding someone who you really enjoy being with. I love romance. I'm a great believer in second, third - even fourth chances at love."

The next year, Emilia entered into a relationship with actor Jeremy Gilley and welcomed a beautiful baby girl named Rose. Unfortunately, the couple said their goodbyes in 2011.

The star then had a rollercoaster romance adventure with chef Marco Pierre White, who was 13 years her senior. Sadly, in 2016 they also went their separate ways.

But love had another plan for her, Emilia met millionaire banker Luc Chaudhray on the celeb dating app Raya three years later!

Fast forward to 2020, sources revealed to The Sun: "Emilia and Luc are hopelessly in love. They're both parents and looking forward to blending their families into one. They're desperate to start a family of their own too, but only once they are married."

Just when everyone thought bells would soon be ringing, the couple broke off their engagement.

Spilling the beans to the same publication, a source said: "Emilia was disappointed to find they didn't have a future but there's no going back now. It's over."

Word got out that Emilia requested Luc to move out from their London home and returned the ring back.

The actress had previously spoken about the challenges of dating as a mum and expressed her comfort in being single while her daughter Rose was still little.

Emilia confessed in an interview with You magazine: "When children are little, it is difficult, but you can be on your own and that can be a healthy thing. Too often the tendency is to jump from relationship to relationship and I love knowing that I am happy in my own company. Also, my responsibilities to Rose would be a massive consideration before I brought someone new into my life."

Last year she found love again with her partner Jonathan, and the couple couldn't be happier.

Speaking with Good Housekeeping, she shared: "We've met at a time in our lives when we've both had relationships, we both have children and we've both been on our own and, as a result, we're able to communicate freely, openly and honestly about everything. I've not had communications like that in any romantic relationship, ever."