Out beyond the shore of the Western Sea, a great abbey towers above the waves. Tall as any castle, Isola Sombra’s treasures are the envy of princes. Its six colossal spires, armoured in stone walls impervious to the buffeting winds and pelting rains, rise up as if to taunt the gods to which they were once consecrated. The relentless fury of the storms which lately assail the abbey suggests such impertinence has not gone unnoticed. Given those same gods were murdered two years ago, an inquisitive traveller to this once holy site might wonder whose outrage now summons the tempest?

The tiny islet upon which the abbey was built centuries ago is tethered to the mainland by a half-mile-long causeway barely wide enough for two carts to pass each other without one being shoved off the slippery cobbles and into the sea. During the winter months, thick fogs often blanket the causeway, blinding travellers to the unpredictable currents. Anyone foolish enough to attempt the crossing during a squall is likely to find themselves swept away beneath the ocean swells, horses, wagons and all.

Estevar Borros had neither wagon nor horse. He slumped heavily in the saddle somewhat precariously strapped to the mule he’d purchased six months ago at the start of his judicial circuit. He’d named the beast Imperious, though the ostentatious sobriquet wasn’t due to any regal bearing evinced by the mule, but rather for the way its rain-drenched muzzle would turn every few plodding steps so it could glare at its rider and remind him precisely who was to blame for their soggy predicament.

‘The fault isn’t mine,’ Estevar grumbled, his words drowned out by the sleet and rain currently hampering their approach to the causeway. ‘Bring suit against the First Cantor if you’re so aggrieved. It was she who assigned us this gods-be-damned judicial circuit that never ends.’

Imperious offered his own grunt in reply, which Estevar took as agreement that the responsibility did indeed lie some two hundred miles to the northeast with a woman barely nineteen years of age whom fate – and the execrable former First Cantor of the Greatcoats – had placed in charge of the King’s Travelling Magistrates.

Estevar’s ice-cold fingers reached beneath the dripping black braids of his beard to pull up the collar of his muddy crimson greatcoat in a hopeless attempt to protect his neck from the beating rain. Even this small movement drew a groan from him. That damned wound . . . The seven-inch gash just above the bottom rib on his left side showed no sign of healing. This particular ache could not, alas, be blamed on the new First Cantor, but rather on Estevar’s own temper.

Staring into the thick fog ahead of them, he could almost picture that suave, conceited duellist standing there: long and lean, his blade swift as a devil’s tail, his spirit unburdened by conscience. His employer, a wealthy lord caravanner charged with the murder of his own wife, had demanded an appeal by combat after Estevar had rendered his verdict. There had been no necessity to accept the challenge; the evidence had been incontrovertible, and King’s magistrates aren’t bound to cross swords with every belligerent who disagrees with the outcome of a trial. And yet . . . there was that smirk on the too-handsome face of the merchant’s champion, as if no one so wide of girth as Estevar could possibly score a touch against him.

In fact, Estevar had won first blood. His use of an unusual Gitabrian sword bind – rather clever, he’d thought at the time – had sent his smug opponent hurtling to the courtroom floor. A single clean thrust to the forearm with the tip of Estevar’s rapier – hardly more than a scratch – had been precisely the sort merciful and honourable declaration of victory expected of a Greatcoat. When the clerk of the court struck the bell to end the duel in Estevar's favour, he had even extended a hand to assist the man back to his feet.

Arrogance. Sheer, wanton arrogance.

His enraged opponent had pushed himself off the floor with one hand and delivered a vicious rapier cut with the other. Worse, at the instant of full extension, he’d added injury to insult by turning his wrist to add a vicious puncture to an already deep laceration, the sort of wound that invariably leads to infection and rarely heals properly.

The King’s Third Law of Judicial Duelling was unequivocal on the matter: Estevar was the victor. Unfortunately, the local viscount, no admirer of the king’s meddling magistrates, had taken advantage of Estevar’s public humiliation to overrule his verdict. The lord caravanner had ridden away unpunished. His murdered wife was buried in an unmarked grave the next morning, denied both justice and priestly blessings.

Estevar pressed a hand over the nagging wound. There wasn’t so much as a scratch on the leather. The bone plates sewn into the lining would have protected him, had he not been so vain that he’d consented to the duellist’s demand that he fight without it.

‘Surely so redoubtable a physique, one so voluminous in vigour, needs no armour to protect the many, many layers of valorous flesh beneath?’ the tall, sleek fellow had shouted mockingly before the entire court. ‘What use those silly bone plates sewn into the lining of that preposterous garment you “Greatcoats”’ – he’d imbued the word with such irony! – ‘insist on wearing when compared to the blubber straining its seams?’

Fool of a fool of a fool, Estevar’s mother would have chided him – which was nothing compared to the lashing he could expect to receive from the preposterously young First Cantor when this last stop on his judicial circuit was dealt with and he returned to Castle Aramor.

Voluminous, he thought bitterly, pressing even harder against the wound, but failing to ease the sting. Six days and a hundred miles since he’d cleaned and sewn up the cut, but the pain hadn’t abated one jot. Worse, it now felt hot to the touch, suggesting infection. Perhaps if I survive the fever I’ll name the scar ‘Voluminous’ as a reminder to have a thicker skin in future.

‘And now what shall we do, Imperious?’ he asked the mule. ‘We’re under no obligation to heed the abbot’s request for judicial arbitration between his unruly monks. As Venia so reliably reminded us in his letter, Isola Sombra does not consider itself subject to the King’s Laws. Why should we tarry here when we could already be on our way home?’

Despite his optimistic words, Estevar had no illusions about the welcome awaiting him at Aramor once the First Cantor learned that one of her magistrates had lost a judicial appeal he’d been under no obligation to grant in the first place, only to then take a grievous injury due entirely to his inexcusable pride rather than any skill of his opponent. He would be lucky if she didn’t immediately demand he relinquish his coat of office.

Imperious swivelled his sorrel head once again, this time in an attempt to bite his rider’s hand as punishment for bringing him to this hellish place. Evidently, it wasn’t only the First Cantor to whom Estevar owed profuse apologies.

‘Let us away home then,’ he declared, tugging gently on the reins to circle his mount back towards the mainland road. ‘We’ll leave the monks to their quarrels.’

He was about to give the mule’s flanks an encouraging nudge when a voice shouted out from the mists, ‘Hold where you are!’

Man and mule both turned. The grey haze between the mainland and the causeway had thickened, distorting the voice and making it difficult to locate its source. A less experienced traveller might have heard the command of an angry ghost come to exact revenge for some long-forgotten crime. Estevar, however, had investigated many supposed supernatural apparitions during his tenure as a Greatcoat, and quickly decided this one sounded more man than spectre. He patted Imperious’ neck to calm him, but the mule lowered his head and hunched his shoulders, as if determined to leap into battle against their unknown assailant.

‘Who approaches the cursed Abbey of Isola Sombra?’ the hidden figure demanded.

Estevar closed his eyes a moment, allowing the eerie echoes to surround him. The voice was deep, confident, but that gravitas was trained rather than natural. The accent – most notably the rising inflection on the last vowel of the abbey’s name, almost as if he were saying ‘Som–brae’ – suggested a commoner raised in this duchy, not highborn himself, but accustomed to being in the presence of nobles.

He reached back for the oilcloth bag strapped behind the cantle. He’d wanted to protect his rapier from the rain and hadn’t anticipated having to fight his way into an abbey famed almost as much for its hospitality as its wealth. With his fingers chilled to the bone, the knots were proving perniciously difficult to untie. His mind, however, was moving more nimbly, envisioning the unfolding scene from the perspective of the fellow who now sought to block his passage.

He sees only a fat man in a leather greatcoat slouched wearily upon a mule, Estevar thought, someone too slow to present a genuine threat. Someone he can bully as he pleases.

This was, regrettably, a common enough conclusion on meeting Estevar Borros. A magistrate’s first duty being to the truth, he decided it was incumbent upon him to cure this new acquaintance of a potentially fatal ignorance. He coughed briefly before allowing his own deep baritone to rumble across the sandy shore.

‘To you, stranger, is the privilege of greeting Estevar Valejan Duerisi Borros, often called the King’s Crucible. As one of His Majesty’s Travelling Magistrates, the duty of hearing appeals to the King’s Justice throughout the Seventh Circuit of Tristia falls to me. Any fool who stands in the way of that endeavour will soon find himself flat on his back, gazing up at the sky and asking the gods why they cursed him with such poor judgement as to challenge me.’

Not bad, Estevar mused, all thoughts of abandoning the monks to their own devices banished as he drew his rapier. The cadence was a little off, but melodious eloquence is surely too much to ask of a fellow in my feverish state.

At last, a tall figure emerged from the mists. First came the glint of steel, the position and angle suggesting a longsword held in a high guard. Next came the shimmer of a chainmail surcoat partly covered by a hooded cloak of pure white trimmed in silver and emblazoned with three azure eyes across the front.

A Knight of the March of Someil, Estevar reasoned, which explained both the accent and commanding tone.

The chainmail was going to be a problem. Estevar’s rapier was a duelling weapon meant for courtroom trials and back-alley ambushes, not squaring off on the battlefield against armoured knights. Tristian steel came in varying qualities, however, and a Greatcoat’s rapier was as fine a weapon as was ever forged in this benighted little country. Wielded with force and precision, the point could shatter the links of a mail surcoat to find the fragile flesh beneath. That was, of course, assuming its wielder was not already wounded and exhausted.

The wise move would be to fight from atop the mule. The added height afforded a superior position, and Imperious was no shy pony to cower in the face of danger. Should the need arise to flee, being already in the saddle would increase the odds of escape.

But my opponent is a man of war, Estevar reminded himself, trained to slash the throat of his enemy’s mount first to counter his advantage.

He dismounted, hiding his unsteadiness beneath a show of nonchalance. He patted his mule’s reddish-brown mane and whispered into one long, twitching ear, ‘No heroics, my friend. When the first blow is struck, turn tail and run. Find yourself a mare and – well, as I don’t suppose mules can reproduce, just enjoy yourself and think fondly of your old friend Estevar.’

Imperious ignored him, instead issuing a braying warning to the approaching knight. Running away clearly wasn’t the beast’s style.

‘Damned good mule,’ Estevar murmured, bringing his rapier up to a centreline guard suitable for initiating a deceptive flick at the eyes followed by a more powerful – and desperate – thrust to the narrow gap between helm and gorget, which would be his best hope of evading the mail surcoat.

‘Borros?’ the knight called out, coming into full view at last. A handsome devil, you had to give him that. The very portrait of a young chevalier: broad in the shoulder, narrow in the hips, square-jawed and golden-haired beneath a steel half-helm. Even the broken nose lent his otherwise smooth features a determined dignity. No doubt many a lad and lass had swooned over this one. At his side dangled a curved ivory horn. Estevar had known the blare of such instruments to carry for miles across flat terrain. ‘You are truly Estevar Borros, the King’s Crucible?’ the knight asked.

‘The storm is not so deafening that you failed to hear me the first time,’ he replied, widening his stance and raising the blade of his rapier. ‘Now, stop where you are. Inclement weather and poor soil make for arduous grave-digging, and I have more pressing business at the abbey.’

Without warning, the knight rushed Estevar. The fool might well have impaled himself, had not the combination of a magistrate’s quick judgement and a duellist’s quick instincts enabled Estevar to tilt his rapier blade off-line in time to stop the point sliding over the steel gorget and into the knight’s exposed throat.

‘My name is Sir Daven Colraig,’ the young knight declared, hugging Estevar with frantic relief. ‘I am Sheriff Outrider to His Lordship, Margrave Someil. It was he who commanded me to await you here these past seven days.’

‘Seven days?’ Estevar had to suppress a groan when the young man’s exuberant squeezing aggravated his wound. He shoved the fellow away, not quite as gently as he’d intended. ‘You expect me to believe you’ve been out in this storm for an entire week?’

Sir Daven nodded, water dripping from his helm onto the golden locks plastered to his forehead. ‘Indeed, Eminence. The margrave had hoped you would arrive sooner.’

‘My pace was perhaps more leisurely than anticipated,’ Estevar admitted.

Yet why would the Margrave of Someil be keeping abreast of a magistrate’s travels? And why would he make one of his knights camp out in the cold and wet until my arrival?

‘The Abbey of Isola Sombra is less than half a mile across the causeway,’ Estevar observed. ‘The monks are known for their gracious hospitality to all who arrive at their gates. Why await me here? Unless it was to prevent me from reaching them myself?’

Sir Daven slid a gauntleted hand into his cloak and withdrew a cylinder of black leather roughly eight inches long and barely an inch in diameter. The message sheath was banded in azure and bore a silver wax seal of a wasp shattering a shield: the hereditary insignia of the Margraves of Someil. ‘I know the Greatcoats have oft been at odds with the nobles of this duchy, Eminence, but my lord is no enemy to the new king, nor to his magistrates.’

Estevar eyed the black leather tube warily. Bribing magistrates was a common tactic for those with a vested interest in the outcome of a case. The lord caravanner had offered him a small fortune to avoid a trial. Was this some attempt by the Margrave of Someil to secure a ruling against the Abbey of Isola Sombra, whose legendary obstinance in refusing to pay taxes – either to the king or to the local nobility – rested upon the dubious claim that their tiny island was by tradition a sovereign nation unto itself?

‘Please,’ Sir Daven said, jabbing the message sheath at Estevar’s chest, ‘read my lord’s words and heed them, I beg you.’

Imperious attempted to bite off the knight’s hand. When that failed, he snatched the leather cylinder away from him.

‘Cease, you avaricious beast,’ Estevar growled, yanking the crushed tube from between the mule’s teeth. ‘Save your appetite for the abbey, where we shall shortly be feasted as befits visiting dignitaries.’

He undid the azure ties, unfurled the parchment and read quickly, before the rain smudged the ink, rendering the missive illegible. He checked the half-seal at the bottom of the parchment, comparing it with its mate on the other side, a security device. The rich purple-black ink he recognised as a rare mixture made of the iron-gall from an oak tree and the crushed seeds of a berry found only in this duchy: a concoction so carefully guarded by the margraves that even the finest forgers found it near-impossible to reproduce. All of which suggested the document was authentic, which made the five lines scrawled upon it all the more troubling.

From his Lordship Alaire, Margrave of Someil,

Warden of the March, Defender of the Faith,

To you, my friend, in earnest warning,

As you love life and value your soul,

you will not set foot on Isola Sombra.

A blaze ignited in Estevar’s belly, chasing away the cold and wet, even the ache of his wound. When bribery was deemed unlikely to succeed, the nobility all too often resorted to blackmail and bullying.

‘A threat?’ he demanded, crushing the parchment in his fist as the rain poured down even harder, the thunder in the sky above punctuating his outburst. ‘Your precious margrave would seek to intimidate a Greatcoat into abandoning his lawful mission? Does he so fear what the Abbot of Isola Sombra might reveal to me of his activities that he’d stoop to—?’

‘Abbot Venia no longer rules Isola Sombra,’ the knight said icily, his countenance darkening. ‘He who once defied kings now cowers beneath the covers inside his tower while madness and devilry reigns over that holiest of islands!’

Estevar could barely restrain his laughter. ‘Has the cold and damp frozen that helmet to your head, Sir Knight? You speak of two hundred pampered, petulant monks as if they were an army of invading soldiers!’

Sir Daven shook his head, sending splatters of rain onto Estevar’s face and beard. ‘Not soldiers, sir, but warlocks – heretics who dabble in curses and necromancy, perverting their bodies in unholy orgies—’

Estevar cut him off. ‘Enough. I am a Greatcoat, not some backwoods constable to be frightened off with childish tales of witchcraft. As the King’s Crucible, it falls to me to investigate cases suspected of supernatural intervention. I have witnessed hundreds of occult rituals all across this country – some genuine, most elaborate trickery, but none the preposterous pantomime you’re ascribing to the brethren of Isola Sombra.’ He handed the black leather cylinder to Sir Daven. ‘You call yourself a sheriff outrider? If the Margrave of Someil truly believes some nefarious demon worship to have taken hold of the abbey, surely he would have sent a contingent of his finest knights to investigate, rather than have you wait out here in the rain like an unwanted pup?’

The knight refused to take back the sheath, saying instead, ‘Look inside the cylinder, Eminence; a second document awaits your perusal.’

Estevar cursed himself for failing to notice the smaller piece of parchment tight against the inside of the case. He had to dig it out with his fingernail before unfolding what turned out to be an elaborate sketch of a naked man such as one might find in a medical text. What made it unusual were the strange markings covering the body: esoteric sigils in designs unrecognisable to Estevar despite his years of research into the esoteric traditions of Tristia.

‘My Lord did send a dozen of my fellow knights to investigate,’ Sir Daven said defiantly. ‘When they emerged the next morning . . .’ He paused, visibly shaken by whatever memories plagued him. ‘Twelve braver, steadier men and women I have never known, yet not one of them has uttered a word since their return. They sit in separate chambers within the margrave’s fortress, attended to by his personal physicians – not clerics, mind you, trained physicians – who claim their souls have fled their bodies.’

‘There has to be a logical explanation,’ Estevar murmured, returning the picture and the margrave’s message to the cylinder before placing it in a pocket of his greatcoat. ‘There is always an explanation.’

Steel returned to the younger man’s eyes as they locked on Estevar’s. ‘Theories and conjectures do not fall within my purview, Eminence, nor was I sent here merely to await your displeasure.’ He lifted the ivory horn strapped to his side and jabbed his other hand towards the six stone towers rising from the dense greyness. ‘Should anyone or anything come back across that causeway, my orders are to first raise the alarm, then fend off whatever chaos has been spawned in the cloisters of Isola Sombra until help arrives or death takes me!’

Holding the knight’s gaze, Estevar sifted through what clues he could discern in the younger man’s determined expression. Were the clenched jaw and stiff posture signs of the unyielding devotion to duty so often espoused by Tristian knights, or mere melodrama meant to frighten away one of the King’s Magistrates before he could interfere in whatever schemes were unfolding on Isola Sombra?

Estevar’s fever-addled brain rebelled against him, alerting him instead to the flush in his cheeks and the burning ache in his side. What business did he have setting foot upon the ill-fated isle at the end of that storm-drenched causeway armed with nothing but a rapier, his arrogance and a cantankerous mule?

‘Heed my liege’s warning, Eminence, I beg you,’ Sir Daven said, no doubt sensing Estevar’s wavering intentions.

How strange that only moments before, he’d been ready to abandon this place and ignore Abbot Venia’s plea for him to arbitrate the dispute between his contentious monks. Now that this same dispute had exploded into something far more unsettling, Estevar found himself unable to walk away.

He knew himself to be a ludicrous figure in the eyes of many: a foreigner to these shores who dared demand a place among the legendary Greatcoats; a fat, pompous buffoon who insisted on fighting his own duels when younger and fitter men would have refused; an eccentric who alone among the King’s Travelling Magistrates investigated crimes attributed to witches, demons and sundry other supernatural forces. In short, Estevar Borros was a silly fool, driven by his innate stubbornness as much as his affinity for the law. But there was yet one more failing to which he was ever subservient – the one that, even more than his arrogance, had led him to accept the most recent duel: the persistent, impossible-to-quiet voice that had brought him from his homeland across the sea to this strange, troubled nation. The addiction was more potent than any drug, a nagging need that could overpower even the pain of a festering wound in his side.

Looking towards the abbey in the sea, contemplating what chaos awaited, he murmured, ‘I am curious.’

‘What?’ asked Sir Daven, grabbing his arm.

Gently, he loosened the younger man’s fingers. ‘I thank you, Sir Knight. You have delivered your message, fulfilling this part of your mission. No one could fault your courage or your loyalty to your liege.’ He slid his rapier into the sheath ingeniously designed into the leather panel on the left side of his greatcoat, wincing at the sudden sting that was surely his stitches coming apart.

Sir Daven gaped at him as he if were mad. ‘Look at yourself,’ he cried, his frantic voice bubbling over with scorn and unease. ‘You can barely stand – yes, I see you, attempting to hide whatever injury ails you. But even after what I’ve told you, still you insist on crossing the most perilous causeway in the country during a raging storm while the tide rises? I have told you that death and worse await you on the other side – do you presume the rest of us to be gullible dolts deluded by some petty parlour trick?’

‘I think nothing of the kind,’ Estevar replied, taking the reins and tugging his reluctant mule towards the narrow cobblestone road ahead. ‘You claim the monks of Isola Sombra commit unspeakable crimes, dabbling in forbidden occult rituals and desecrating the oldest holy site in the country. Surely that calls for the intervention of a King’s Magistrate, no?’

‘You’re a fool,’ Sir Daven spat, no longer pretending at admiration, or even sympathy. ‘A mad fool! What will be left of you once the monsters prowling that cursed abbey have peeled away the last layers of your arrogance from your flesh?’

Estevar placed a hand on the mule’s neck to steady himself as the two of them began their crossing. Shouting over the wind and rain he replied, ‘According to my sainted mother? Only more arrogance.’

The second knock was louder than the first, a reprehensible criminal act so far as Mer’esan was concerned. Her meditations now fatally interrupted, she reached up a shaking hand to wipe at the undignified spittle at the corner of her mouth.

You were asleep, old woman. No sense pretending otherwise.

But was it really the second knock that had woken her? Or had this been the third? The fourth? How long had this trespasser been banging at her cottage door?

She waited, wondering now if perhaps it had been a dream – a memory of someone from years past: her husband, the new clan prince, slamming his fist against the door, the force of his magic tearing apart spell after spell that she’d so carefully woven upon the cottage.

‘Open up, ya old bag, you’re not dead yet!’

What a strange, incongruous voice . . . female, yet lacking the grace and precision nurtured by Jan’Tep women. Each syllable suffused with a distinctive – and annoying – frontier drawl, as though designed specially to offend the ears.

Certainly it was no way to speak to a dowager magus.

’Touch my door once more and your life is forfeit,’ Mer’esan warned, cursing the feeble wheezing of her own voice that undermined her threat.

A pause – not long enough to account for reflection or reconsideration – just long enough for theatricality. Then, another knock.

Oh, whoever you are, you have signed your own death warrant now.

Mer’esan drew herself up from her chair only to stumble, her legs too old and stiff to hold her steady. She grabbed onto one of the rough wooden posts that held up the cottage roof, the effort sending jarring pains through the joints in her hand, her wrist, her elbow and finally her shoulder.

Old. Too old to strike fear into anyone.

The dowager magus regained her balance and raised her arms. Even through the wrappings of black cloth, six tattooed bands on her forearms shimmered, the metallic inks still gleaming bright after three hundred years, an odd contrast to the withered skin beneath.

The interloper will not see me thus, she promised herself.

The glyphs of the second band on her left arm, those of sand magic, began to glow and swirl, each shape flowing into one of its many variations as she drew forth the source of power to manipulate time. Those of the third band on her right arm did likewise, igniting the magic of blood, and thus the manipulation of flesh.

Again the intruder banged on the door, brazenly, without any sign of contrition. ‘Come on, you crazy old bird,’ she called out. ‘Time you and me had a chat.’

Time. That was precisely what Mer’esan needed. Before facing this invader she must bring back the body that had been hers decades – no, centuries – ago. But to erase the ravages of time from her outward flesh she must first remove the years from muscle and sinew, and to do that, vitality had to be brought back to her bones; to the very marrow of her being.

With trembling fingers she formed the somatic shape of the first restoration spell. Her throat was dry, and the sound that came past her lips was like a faltering breeze across the arid desert. So be it. Such a voice suited sand spells. Her mind held firm to the spell’s mystical geometry, her will lent her dominion over the raw magic, and only then did she speak the seven-word incantation. Oh, how she wished that youth spells needn’t be so intolerably long. ‘An’heda ki’reth sula be’enath men’er inati pha’sha.’

Pain.

Deep inside her body, wasted bone and marrow shattered. The spell transformed the base elements and knit them anew, like an army of ants tearing her apart and remaking her. Relentless. Merciless.

Quickly now, she thought, the next one, before the torment saps your will.

The second spell brought life back to muscle and sinew. The discomfort subsided as aches that had been her constant companions departed, unresisting, knowing that they would soon enough return to their comfortable home.

At last Mer’esan cast the third spell, this one upon her skin. Wrinkles fled, banished by a youthful glow that spread across the canvas of her body. Her hair thickened, a deep chestnut colour flowing from the roots of her scalp to the very tips. Idly her hand came up to twirl a lock around one finger. She’d always loved playing with her hair – a girlish affectation that even power and rank had never seemed to extinguish.

With her youth restored, the dowager shifted her attention to the tattooed band for iron – so that she might bind the trespasser – and to ember, in case she decided to destroy her entirely.

Which she probably would.

‘Come in,’ Mer’esan said, the lightness and clarity of her own voice surprising her – as it always did when she performed these temporary restorations. With a flick of her hand, the seals upon her cottage door came away, giving entry to the woman on the other side.

Into the darkness of the cottage came a puff of smoke, soon followed by a tiny red glow like that of an autumn emberfly. A smoking reed? Mer’esan wondered. This foreigner dares to smoke in my presence as if my home were some travellers’saloon. What will she do next? Demand I serve her a drink and bring out comfort boys for her selection?

‘You always sit by yourself in the dark?’ the imprudent visitor asked.

Mer’esan sent a fraction of her will into the single glow-glass lantern hanging from the centre of the cottage’s ceiling. The light flared like a white-hot sun, forcing the intruder to cover her eyes as she struggled to adjust to the sudden brightness . A petty retaliation perhaps, but it gave the dowager magus time to examine this woman who’d somehow snuck into the palace grounds, entered the gardens and slipped past the guard, all to disturb the sanctity of Mer’esan’s cottage.

The girl . . . No, not a girl – she only seemed so because, well, everyone looked like a child nowadays. The woman wore a broad-brimmed frontier hat, as though she was some Daroman cow herder. Unruly red curls tumbled beneath it down to her jaw, framing a face that wasn’t displeasing, certainly, but whose beauty was subverted by the sharp lines of her features and, most of all, by a wide, self-satisfied smile. Damn the Argosi and their smugness.

‘Well, take a look at you,’ the intruder said, stamping her riding boots on the mat and straightening the black leather waistcoat she wore over a travel-stained linen shirt. She tilted her head as she peered at Mer’esan. ’Did you go and get yourself all made up just for little old me? Why, you look as pretty as a flower and younger than new rain falling on a mountaintop!’

The glib words might have been a compliment, had they been spoken by someone with less mischief in their eyes. ‘Better to say that I am the mountain,’ Mer’esan countered. ‘And you, Ferius Parfax, are in avalanche country now.’

The other’s smile softened, derision becoming something more respectful, though still without a trace of fear. She gave a slight bow of her head. ‘And what a remarkable country it is, ma’am.’

‘A dangerous one. I hope your reason for coming is worthy of the risk.’

’I’m here about the kid.’

‘A Jan’Tep matter.’

The humour in the Argosi’s eyes vanished. ‘Not any more.’

The dowager allowed more of her will to flow into the ember band on her forearm. Let this swaggering gambler see just how easily I could turn her to ash. But the Argosi’s face showed no concern.

‘A simple thought from me will bring my guard,’ Mer’esan warned. The instant the words were passed her lips, she regretted them. The threat was an admission of her own fear. With no way to back away from it, she added, ‘He is a mage of no small power himself – a tribulator, in fact. That is to say he—‘

Ferius Parfax waved a hand negligently. ‘He casts spells that hurt people. I get it.’

Mer’esan found the subtle contempt in the woman’s tone irksome. Few foreigners, even enemies, spoke so dismissively of Jan’Tep magic. So was this self-assurance, or bluff? ‘I wonder, how did you evade his awareness? His sentry spells are rather potent.’

The Argosi took a puff from her smoking reed, which Mer’esan recognized as a means of delaying an answer. Did she, perhaps, not want to reveal her secrets? A good sign then, for it signalled uncertainty. ‘Silk magic,’ the Argosi replied.

‘Silk magic? You mean to say that you—‘

‘Jan’Tep spells for detecting intruders are built on silk magic, ain’t they? What do y’all call it? “Dominion over the minds of others”?’

Mer’esan nodded, her eyes narrowing.

The Argosi put out her smoking reed with a pinch of her finger and thumb, then put it inside her waistcoat before leaning back against the cottage wall. ‘Try it on me.’ She put her hands up in submission. ‘I won’t resist.’

A daring gambit, and a foolish one. If Mer’esan chose, she could use silk spells to do whatever she liked to the Argosi: strip her thoughts bare, fill her with visions of unspeakable horrors, even combine it with iron magic to create a mind chain that would . . . No, never that.

Mer’esan closed her eyes and brought the fingertips of her left hand together as she envisioned the geometry of the spell. She sent her will sliding into the silk band on her right forearm, then uttered the invocation as she opened her fingers wide. A simple unlocking spell would suffice, enabling her to witness the surface thoughts of this woman who’d so brazenly challenged her.

Like a key turning in a well-oiled lock, the Argosi’s mind opened to her – far more easily than Mer’esan had expected. She played about Ferius Parfax’s thoughts as effortlessly as she might rifle through the pages of a book. Since the Argosi had mentioned the boy – what was his name again? He had been here only hours ago and yet already the memory had faded. Ke . . . Kellen? That was it: Kellen of the House of Ke. Mer’esan began there, drawing forth images from Ferius’s memories of him: seeing the boy duelling that little wretch of the House of Ra, defeating him without magic, being nearly killed by his younger sister – Mer’esan would have to keep an eye on that girl – and then Ferius herself, struggling to save Kellen. Other images came, too, but prudence called for focusing on more vital questions: what was Ferius Parfax’s purpose in coming to the Jan’Tep lands so soon after the death of Mer’esan’s husband, the clan prince? What was her mission?

Suddenly the Argosi woman’s thoughts disappeared, her mind completely gone. Somehow, while Mer’esan had been distracted, she had slipped away from the cottage.

The dowager magus opened her eyes, expecting to see an empty room, only to find the Argosi still standing there. ‘How . . .?’

Ferius shrugged, taking out her smoking reed and lighting it once again. ‘Your fancy silk magic is all about the mind, but it needs an ego to bind itself to, a sense of individuality.’ She took a puff from the reed, exhaling a ring of smoke that floated in the air between them. ‘Sometimes it’s healthy to forget yourself a little.’

‘Impossible,’ Mer’esan declared, a sudden tightness in her chest at the very thought of it. ‘No one can lose themselves so utterly as to evade the power of silk magic.’

Another puff of smoke, and another self-satisfied smirk. ‘Impossible for you Jan’Tep, maybe, on account of how you’re all obsessed with being in control of yourselves and everything around you.’

The dowager magus prepared a retort. The Argosi were known to love debate and philosophizing. Well, Mer’esan had lived three hundred years and knew more about rhetoric and philosophy than any wandering gambler could ever imagine. But before she could reply, Ferius Parfax added, ‘Kind of like the way you’re trying to control the kid.’

Ah. At last a weakness, or at least an admission. ‘So your reason for having saved his life is more than passing altruism.’

The Argosi shook her head. ‘See, that’s the problem with you Jan’Tep: you can only see one possibility at a time. I saved Kellen because I saw a boy about to die for no better reason than that he was born into a country so crazy they make children fight each other with magic to impress their parents. If saving his life makes him useful to me in other ways, well, that’s just the way the path twists and turns.’

‘And that path has led you to my door?’

The Argosi shrugged. ’You ordered the kid to spy on me. Just figured we could save time by talking face to face.’

‘The boy confessed to you.’ Mer’esan felt a stab of disappointment. She’d had such high hopes for him.

‘He didn’t say a word. Kellen’s a good kid, trying his best to figure out what’s right.’

The implied slight troubled Mer’esan more than she liked. ‘As are we all. So then, have you come to demand that I desist? Or is it something else? Why do the Argosi seek to meddle in Jan’Tep affairs, now of all times? When our great houses are divided over who will take the seat of the clan prince now that my husband is dead? Is that why you’re here? Because the wanderers sense weakness in us now that our most powerful mage is gone?’

‘Your husband was an idiot.’

The declaration was like a slap to Mer’esan’s face, and despite her own feelings, despite what he had . . . The memory wouldn’t even allow itself to form in her mind. ‘You would not dare to speak so of the clan prince if he was alive.’

Ferius Parfax took a step towards Mer’esan. ‘I know what he did to you.’

Mer’esan opened her mouth, but the words died. Even such a small, unintentional utterance triggered the spell, and the chains tightened themselves around her mind.

The Argosi was staring at her, anger, no . . . fury in her gaze. But tempered with other things too. Determination. Resignation. And one other thing: sympathy. ‘I know the secret you keep,’ Ferius Parfax said. ‘I would break the chain for you if I could.’

‘I don’t know what you’re talking about.’ Please, please, show me some new Argosi trick, unwrap this thing from my soul and prove how clever you are, I beg you!

But there was nothing the other woman could do for her, nothing that Mer’esan herself hadn’t tried hundreds of times. Nothing save look upon her with pity. It was that last that hurt the most. To be pitied by a wandering gambler with no more magic than a half-witted goatherd. How Mer’esan wanted to rage at her, to scream the frustration of almost three hundred years of binding! An atrocity committed by her own—

Even here, even this fleeting thought – not even a word spoken but merely the feeling behind it – and the iron and silk magics clamped down around her throat.

Ferius Parfax spoke softly, barely a whisper, as if in doing so her words might go unnoticed by the spell. ‘I would reveal the secret for you, Dowager Magus. I’d shout it to the world, but it wouldn’t help, would it? The only way around the chain is for the truth to come out through happenstance. That’s the real reason why you want the boy. You’re betting that Kellen will work out the truth on his own and break the binding that way.’

‘You seem confused,’ Mer’esan said. ‘There is no . . .’ She couldn’t even speak its name. Instead, after a gurgling gasp, the spell forced her to say, ‘. . . no point in idle speculation.’

The Argosi nodded. ‘Then we will speak of it no more.’

The constricting pressure around her throat faded, and it was as if Mer’esan was a free woman once again. Free so long as she never thought of it, never tried to speak it aloud. Free so long as the truth burned away at her insides forever.

Ferius Parfax produced a small leather bundle and proceeded to unroll it on Mer’esan’s small rickety table. Inside was a small quantity of blank playing cards, along with brushes and inks. ‘You wish to paint my card?’ Mer’esan asked. ‘That is why you’ve gone to all this trouble to sneak into my cottage?’

‘Why not?’ the Argosi asked, her sly grin back on her face. ‘It’s not like you’re gonna get any prettier with time.’

Suddenly Mer’esan understood. ‘You believe my days are numbered, that I will die soon.’

The Argosi nodded.

‘Then am I . . .’ Mer’esan reached for the word. She’d spoken it only hours before to the boy, Kellen. ‘Am I one of your so-called “Discordances”? Does my life change the course of history?’

The other woman looked up at her, hesitating before answering. ‘Every life has meaning, Dowager. Every life changes the world around it.’

‘Do not patronize me! Am I a Discordance or –‘

‘No, you’re not. I . . . think you would have been, if you hadn’t been . . .’ The Argosi stopped, thankfully, because already the chain was rattling warningly inside Mer’esan’s mind.

Despite the strength and vigour her magics had brought her, she suddenly found it difficult to stand. She made her way to her chair and sank down into it. A wetness on her cheeks surprised her, and Mer’esan realized she was crying. ‘Then why did you come, damn you? Why waste time painting a card of a foolish old woman who means nothing to her own people, never mind to history?’

The Argosi looked stricken, uncertain for the first time since her arrival. ‘It’s the only thing I can think of that I can do for you, Mer’esan of the Jan’Tep.’

And suddenly that was the most important thing in the world: to not pass unremembered, to not have suffered for so long without anyone—

Again the damned chain snapped tight, strangling her, forcing her to forget even the torment that keeping her people’s darkest secret inflicted upon her. Mer’esan had to force herself to push as hard as she could against the binding just to whisper, ‘I don’t want to be forgotten.’

She felt two hands wrapping around her own, and opened her eyes to see Ferius Parfax kneeling before her. ‘I’m going to paint your card, Mer’esan, and the world will remember you. Know why?’

‘Why?’ she asked.

There was steel behind the softness in the Argosi’s eyes. ’Because I will not let them forget.’

Like a thunderclap signalling rain to one who’d only known the desert, Mer’esan suddenly understood how important this was to her, how much fear had lain in the certainty of going unremembered. ‘You would do that for me? A stranger? An enemy?’

Ferius Parfax took her hands away from Mer’esan’s and used them to wipe the tears away before going back to open up the first bottle of ink and dip one of the brushes inside. ‘I will, and I promise to do one thing more for you, Mer’esan of the Jan’Tep.’

‘What is that?’ she asked.

The other woman looked up from her painting, the mischievous smile firmly back in place. ‘I’m going to miss you, you crazy old bird.’

Letter To Falcio

Dear Falcio,

A few hours ago a cleric came to my cell – a proper Venerati Magni, no less – asking whether I wished to make final confession to the Gods. The longer we spoke, the more apparent it became that what he mostwished me to confess was the location of any treasures I might have secreted away from the Dukes prior to their taking the castle. He assured me that unburdening myself would ease my passage into the arms of the Gods.

Having nothing else to divert me whilst waiting for the headman’s axe, I promptly broke down in tears and proceeded to reveal, in precise and exhaustive detail, the wondrously inventive places where I had hidden various jewels and caches of gold spirited away from the castle treasury . . . the list of hiding places includes dung heaps, dead bodies and roughly half the privies in the country. Should you ever meet the smelliest priest in all of Tristia, do, I beg you, apologise on my behalf.

It’s too much to hope that you’ll be allowed in to my cell before I am executed, so I have used what little gold I had squirrelled away to secure three blank casebooks from the library, in the hope that they will reach at least one of you three. Inside, you will find my last ruminations about this sad country that you and I have tried so hard to redeem. May they bring you more insight than they brought me.

And if, by some great chance, the Generals should let you see me one last time, know that I am sorry for the final service I will have asked of you.

Paelis

who was once called King of Tristia,

but was never more nor less than

your friend.

Letter To Kest

Dear Kest,

Were you here with me in this cell, I have no doubt that you would be informing me of the precise odds of these three little books ever reaching their intended readers. No doubt you would also find it necessary to remind me that the odds are only worsened by trying to get the books to you, Brasti and Falcio individually, rather than just sending them out via any other Greatcoats, who will surely have a lower price on their heads than you three will by this point. Please know that I always found your keen intellect in these matters to be at once astute and annoying.

There was something I always wanted to tell you but never seemed to find the right way to do so: there is no shame in love, no matter what others may tell you – and no matter what you may tell yourself. I write this because I am uniquely aware of the unfairness of my final command to you. Forgive me, if you can; there is simply no one else I can trust with such a burden.

Yours with admiration,

Paelis, King of Tristia

Letter To Brasti

Dear Brasti,

Should this book reach you, which is optimistic at best, you will find in its pages my last notes regarding the country and what forces the Greatcoats might encounter after my death. I doubt you will be any more interested in affairs of state after my death than the times when I had to literally command you to pay attention – but there is always some chance that this little book will slip out of whatever pocket you’ve lost it in and Falcio will notice it. Should the copy I’ve sent him not reach him, then perhaps he’ll find yours.

If you do happen to open the book, do try not to rip out the pages to wipe your arse with. I’ve coated them with something that will make that a most memorable experience.

You always were an annoying bastard, but I thank you for having forced me to laugh on occasion, especially now.

Yours in amity,

Paelis, King of Tristia (for a few more hours, anyway)

Old Man Tristia

Tristia is an old man, so starved for hope he has lost even the ability to feel its hunger and now forgets who he once was; he tries to climb one last hill where his feeble eyes can just make out a small, withered fruit tree at the top. He stumbles up that hill, driven by an urge, maybe some last vestige of a better humanity, that’s telling him if he can just get to that tree and taste its fruit, he will remember his name, who he was, for what purpose he had lived. But no matter how hard he climbs, he keeps sliding back down, tearing the skin of his fingers and knees as he struggles to find purchase on the loose shale of the hillside.

He can never make it to the top because he is weighed down by a pack full of useless things he should have shed long ago – things which outlived their purpose ages – centuries– ago. His burden cannot feed him when he hungers; it will not warm him when he is cold; it does not help him find his way when the light grows dim.

What is in that pack? you ask; what burden does the old man carry that keeps him from the tree at the top of the hill?

It is us.

It is the nobility: the Dukes and Lords, the burden of a crushing and brutal system of rule as unjust as it is ingrained.

It is all of us, even me.

The Trattari

When I first discovered that the word Trattariwas, in fact, not an insult but the name used centuries ago by the first order of Greatcoats, I nearly fell over laughing. The word that so torments Falcio that whenever he hears it I can almost see the blood boiling in his veins and smoke emerging from his ears was, in fact, proudly borne by those very men and women we now choose to emulate. I can’t count the number of times I considered revealing this choice little fact to Falcio, only to force the words back down, saving that revelation for another day. I suspect he must have thought me quite mad at times.

The earliest reference to the name comes from the dedication atop a crumbling scroll listing one of Tristia’s first set of laws: Et ellis solé trattari ven armé infirmi contris iniquita.

To save you the effort of looking up the words, that means: And with tattered cloaks will they shield the weakest from injustice.

It was as if, even then, those who made the laws understood the price that would have to be paid by those who enforced them.

Et ellis solé trattari ven armé infirmi contris iniquita.

I take strength in those words. They allow me to believe that the hundred and forty-four commands I have issued to my Greatcoats, these terrible and unfair demands I have made of you men and women who deserved so much better than the weak and foolish King you got, are somehow necessary, perhaps even justified.

Trattari. Tattered Cloaks.

It gives me hope.

The Honori

I have never quite been able to decide whether the word Knighthood is meant to refer to the ancient military orders or whether it’s the name of a rather severe mental disease. How did we ever manage to produce such a high number of men with the same perverse ideas of honour and loyalty? How does one get from, ‘My honour is my life’ to ‘Well, my Lord ordered me to beat that old man to death for his amusement so, here goes’?

To make it worse, most of my subjects appear to actively admire the Knights – or the Honori, as they were once known. I can’t help but think this has something to do with the fine shiny armour and the lovely embroidered tabards. Perhaps I should have asked my mother to sew little gold patches into the greatcoats.

However, as obscene as the Knights are now, the thought that terrifies me more is this: What happens when all these powerful men in armour decide to stop following the orders of their nobles?

The Dashini

I have lost twelve good men trying to root out the lair of those execrable bastards. How is a King supposed to establish any kind of order in his nation when anyone with enough money and influence can simply purchase the death of those they despise? What kind of country breeds such perfect dedication to the art of murder?

Ours.

I always believed the Dashini must have come from somewhere else – somewhere in the East, where it would be comfortable to believe such atrocities are welcomed. But I was wrong: the word Dashinicomes from the archaic Tristian: da, meaning final, and shini, meaning breath. The order of assassins started here, in our very own country.

I believe now that one of my predecessors set his armies the task of rooting out the Dashini; if the scant evidence I have found is correct, the Dashini fled, disgraced at being found. They retreated east, where they added to their already formidable skills the arts of the desert monks in their hidden monasteries: patience; silence; clarity; abandonment of the self. These all sound like fine virtues – until they are adopted by trained killers.

When the Dashini returned to Tristia to continue their Gods-forsaken mission, they were, quite simply, unbeatable in their arts.

There are a few scholars who believe that the Dashini serve a vital function, ensuring that those in power can never rest easy, never be completely assured of their invulnerability, which is, these scholars tell me, as necessary a force as justice itself in protecting a nation from tyranny.

All I know is that the bastards terrify me.

Twelve Greatcoats I lost in my vain quest to remove my fear of the Dashini. Perhaps it is hopeless to try. Twelve. You’d think I had learned my lesson.

Then I sent one more.

The Bardatti

The Bardatti confound me. Why would our ancestors have chosen singers and musicians to be the threads that tie the country together? Why should wandering troubadours be entrusted with carrying the land’s most secret and vital information?

I suppose it makes sense: that in a country like ours, where every nobleman is perfectly happy to murder the King’s messengers and spies if he thinks he can get away with it, there would need to be subtler ways of getting information and evidence safely from one end of the country to the other.

I have spent countless hours in the royal library trying to trace the origins and training of the Bardatti, to uncover their secrets, but of course, there is nothing: the Bardatti have made sure of that. They keep their ways hidden from others and though they swear to me up and down that they serve the monarchy, nonetheless they are not under my command.

It is a hard thing to be King of such an unruly country.

The Rangieri

Trattari, Dashini, Bardatti . . . they are all connected somehow, though we had thought them separate and distinct – after all, what connection could there possibly be between the Greatcoats, travelling judges enforcing the law, with the Dashini, who unleash such murder and mayhem upon the country? But you just have to listen: Trattari, Dashini, Bardatti . . . these words all trace their roots back to archaic Tristian. But there is more: students of such things will recognise the names share not just a time but a place too, placing them all within the same region and century. Does this not suggest more than just a connection but a relationship? And if such a connection did exist, is it also possible that these different orders shared a greater purpose?

When I first recognised this pattern, I began searching for more names in the ancient texts, expecting to find that the Cogneri, the Venerati and the other religious orders were part of it too – but they are not. At some point in ancient times there was a distinct moment when the religious and the secular split apart. The Trattari, the Dashini and the Bardatti have no connection to the churches. Somewhere in our distant past, we began creating orders of men and women whose purpose was to protect the country in ways both varied and baffling to me.

Recently, I found one more name to add to our ranks: the Rangieri.

As best I can tell, the word means ’far walkers’, or perhaps, ‘lost walkers’. However I have never met a Rangieri, nor do I know where to find them.

Perhaps they are indeed lost.

The Religious Orders

It would be easy to think that religion was dying out in Tristia these days – oh, sure, we make our prayers to the Gods and venerate the Saints. We hand out alms to roadside clerics and sit through interminable sermons when we can’t think of a good reason to be somewhere more interesting. But the churches are so fractured, so disorganised, that I wonder how they ever had such rigid and exacting orders defending them. Those few we encounter nowadays are generally old has-beens clinging to the tattered remnants of past glories.

There are two branches of the Venerati: the Venerati Magni, who preach to the wealthy and powerful, and the Venerati Ignobli, who tend to the poor. When I first took power I made some tentative moves to have the two combined – you will remember how well this went over with both the nobles and the Venerati Magni.

I met a Deator once. The man claimed that he could speak for the God War through his ecstatic trances; certainly his pronouncements regarding both the fate of the country and my own fate in particular were as dire as they were certain. I let him finish his speech before I replied, ‘Now tell me something I didn’t already know.’ It was worth it just to see his face.

The Quaestiappear to be the lowest of the low in the clerical ranks: monks clad in plain grey robes who travel our fair land waiting to be chosen by one of the Gods, who will call them to their colours. I wonder that they have such patience.

I might have backed down on the issue of the Venerati, but I did at least stay firm on the issue of the Admorteo. I refused to condone torture in the churches of Tristia; there would be no more mortification of the flesh under the guise of bringing a soul closer to the Gods. I suspect that despite my decree, a few of these remain – should you happen to encounter any Admorteo in your travels, I would be grateful if you would give them a sound beating and see if their souls get any closer to the Gods that way.

I don’t often pray, but Gods help us if the Fidericome back. The damned Honori create enough problems with their skewed notions of loyalty; how much worse are the Church Knights, believing that their violence is doing the work of the Gods themselves?

I had a lovely debate with an old Cogneri one evening in Hervor: over a very fine wine we argued over the question of precedence between religious and secular law, our fascinating discussions lasting into the early hours of the morning. At the end, I thanked the old Inquisitor for his patience, and he kindly informed me that the Gods would likely flay my soul once they finally got their hands on me.

The Sancti

he oddest thing about the Saints is that they do not appear to be connected to the religious orders in any way. Oh, the clerics refer to them often enough in their sermons, and some of their churches are actually dedicated to various of the Saints, but that seems to be the end of it.

The oldest religious texts don’t refer to the Saints, and the Saints themselves – those few I have had the pleasure (or not) of meeting – appear to be completely uninterested in religious affairs. They see themselves as serving some loftier purpose, though they would not reveal it to me for love or money. One of them (who I am almost positive was Saint Anlas-who-remembers-the-world) tried to kill me for having the temerity to ask.

The others I met were no more forthcoming, although undoubtedly friendlier. Saint Laina, in particular, was most accommodating . . .

The Nobli

In theory, the title given to all nobles in Tristia is Magni; however, given that those of lesser birth are called Ignobli, I always felt it more appropriate to think of the nobility as the Nobli. I rather like the word – it sounds small, and just close enough to ‘knobbly’ to give me a laugh as I think about those Dukes and Duchesses, Margraves and Margravinas, Viscounts and Viscountesses, Lords and Daminas, all of them drinking my wine as they await my execution.

I suppose I could have done a better job of explaining to you why simply fighting the Dukes’ army, or even killing the Dukes themselves would have done nothing to win our cause. The truth is, as powerful as they appear to be, the Dukes’ lives are as precarious as that of any ruler: beneath them there’s always a lesser noble eager and willing to take his throne away from him. As venal as they are, I do believe the Dukes are only half as bad as the minor nobles biting at the heels of our country and trying to drain every drop of blood they can from it. I would say they were like rats, but I don’t believe rats reproduce half as fast as nobles do.

As to the Dukes, here are a few final thoughts about them:

Erris, Duke of Pulnam: How that man hasn’t died yet is beyond me. Perhaps it’s because he spends so much time declaring his love for the Gods that they have decided it best to keep their distance from him?

Pulnam is a poor Duchy, but it has just enough farming to make both Hervor and Orison interested in annexing it. You will be able to secure Erris’ support for precisely as long as he believes it will keep dear Patriana off his back.

Hadiermo, Duke of Domaris: The self-styled ‘Iron Duke’ will betray you twice a day if he can, and three times on feast days. It’s odd, given that his Duchy is known for the sturdiness of its wood and iron mines, that its ruler should be so inconstant. Remember this about Hadiermo: his utter untrustworthiness makes him predictable. Once you understand this, despite his own efforts he may well serve as a useful ally in future.

Meillard, Duke of Pertine: I have never shared more than two words with Meillard. He is, by all accounts, a sensible and practical man. Coming from a poor and hard-to-defend Duchy, I suspect this explains why he’s never bothered to curry my favour: he guessed long ago that my rule would end in untimely and bloody fashion. I can’t say that endears him to me.

Ossia, Duchess of Baern: She is the closest thing you will have to an ally in the years to come. Trust her counsel, should she offer any. If things get rough, make for Chevor and from there get word to her. Ossia will help you as far as she can, and when she can no longer, she will, I believe, do you the courtesy of giving you a head-start before she betrays you to the others.

Roset, Duke of Luth: Roset wishes nothing more than for the world to leave him and his little Duchy alone. He likes women, plain food and reading old romances. I sent him a few books from the library once and he was genuinely touched. Mind you, that didn’t stop him from being the very first one to demand my execution at the highly theatrical little trial the Dukes held for me yesterday.

Perault, Duke of Orison: Ah, if only all my enemies were like Perault: handsome, well-spoken, powerful, and utterly stupid. Other than Brasti, I have never met a man who so clearly wanted to soundintelligent without ever intending to do any of the work required to become so. Stay out of Perault’s way, if you can, although I cannot imagine him being long for this world.

Orison is a dull place whose historic function has been primarily to provide the wall between Avares and Tristia. The people there have little love for the south and even less for me, but generally they have no desire to get involved in affairs outside their borders.

Isault, Duke of Aramor: I’ve always thought that being Duke of Aramor is a pretty unpleasant job. Given that the Duchy is home to Castle Aramor and the seat of the Kings of Tristia, being Duke is rather a poor second place. Of all the Dukes, I think I know Isault best. He often comes to swear at me and make demands, always knowing the answers ahead of time – it’s entirely possible he makes these trips simply because he likes the food here better than at home.

I worry that one of the other Dukes will see his Duchy as the easiest to take – and the most valuable. I have made some efforts to protect him and his young family. I hope they do some good.

Jillard, Duke of Rijou: It’s hard to convey my confusion and disappointment in Andreas Jillard. As a young man he was both wise and inquisitive. He travelled in the east for years specifically to expand his knowledge of the world beyond our borders. I remember him coming to Aramor, and my father giving him permission to sleep in the library so he could study old texts on government and the social order. My father thought him mad; I thought him perhaps the best of the next generation of Ducal rulers.

But when his own father died and Jillard took his seat in Rijou, it took very little time before he emerged as every bit as brutal and unscrupulous as his parent. What does it tell you about this country that a young man as promising as Andreas Jillard can become who he is today?

I can only hope that somewhere in there the idealistic young man who wanted so badly to be a great ruler still hides. Redeem him if you can.

Patriana, Duchess of Hervor: My darling Patriana. It will come as no surprise to you to learn that she is, without doubt, the most brilliant and daring of all the Dukes. I know Falcio would probably use different words to describe her. She once came to me with an offer of marriage. I asked her how long after the wedding I would remain alive. ‘Not long,’ she replied, ‘but better a brief and glorious honeymoon than what will await you if you refuse me.’

Beware Patriana. She is not like the others. She plots in years and decades, not in simple gambits, as the other Dukes do. She has known defeat, and she has overcome it, time and again. Every time you unwind one of her conspiracies, you will find another slowly wrapping itself around you.

Perhaps I should have agreed to marry her.

The Inlaudati

Inlaudati: a single word that appears to be almost devoid of meaning. Like so many of the other orders I have described, this one too can be traced back to archaic Tristian – but it is older, and it doesn’t actually appear to be connected to the Trattari and Bardatti.

No, this is something different and altogether terrifying to me.

Inlaudati, as best I can discern, means ‘the unrecognised’. Those few references I can find to it suggest that, unlike the orders of Honori or Cogneri or any of the rest, there have only ever been one or two Inlaudati at a time. In all the histories I have read, they appear almost as poetic devices: ‘Thus did the painter, with her brush most subtle, upon the world her colours place.’ Rubbish both as history and as poetry, if you ask me.

But there are other references too, which imply that there are those who can pull at the strings of the world at a far deeper level, much as I have tried to do. As a student of strategy I have worked to pull strings whose effects I believe will ripple through the next century – but I am no Inlaudati, so I shudder as I think on what actual long-term influence my meddling might have upon the future of this country.

As to the origin of the Inlaudati, I have no real clues. I am almost positive that the Tailor is one, but I know she was born a normal woman. She married a rather terrible man when she was young, and she paid a dreadful price for that. Now she is something utterly different – something her own son has trouble at times recognising.

Maybe that’s the point.

The Tailor's Name

It occurs to me, sitting here, waiting for the headsman, that this is the one time in my life when my mother is unable to cajole me with her usual exhortations about ‘where every thread began and where every thread will end.’

Ever since she began calling herself ‘The Tailor’, she has refused to use the name by which she was known before, nor will she abide having it spoken in her presence. So determined is she in this that, to my knowledge, there is no one now left who remembers her true name. But I do.

You were never a very conventional mother, but you were mine, and you never failed to astonish.

I love you, Margrit Denezia.

Nothing stinks like a capital city in the summer. Streets already crowded with courtiers, craftspeople, lords and labourers begin to burst as endless caravans of merchants, diplomats, and those impoverished by bad harvests or foreign raiders roll through the gates in search of profit or protection. Upon a gleaming white arch at the city’s entrance an inscription bearing the Daroman capital’s motto beckons visitors with a promise: ‘Emni Urbana Omna Vitaris’.

From The Imperial City Flows Prosperity.

Also, sewage.

That’s the thing about great cities: they can solve hunger with more food, security with more soldiers, and almost everything else with more money. But there’s only so much shit you can swirl around before the flagstones begin to reek.

‘This place stinks,’ Reichis chittered above me.

The soft flutter of fur-covered gliding flaps heralded a light thump against my shoulder as the squirrel cat made his landing. My two-foot-tall, thieving, murderous business partner sniffed at my face. ‘Funny, you don’t smell dead.’

‘I’m fine,’ I said, not eager to resume the lengthy argument begun in the early hours before dawn when I went off alone to face the mage who’d been sent to kill me. All I wanted now was a bath, some quiet, and maybe a few restful hours without any attempts on my life.

Reichis sniffed at me a second time. ‘You smell worse than dead, actually. Is that whisky?’ he asked, poking his muzzle in my hair and sounding more than a little intrigued.

A year of living in the capital city of Darome had afforded Reichis the opportunity to expand his list of unhealthy addictions, which currently consisted of butter biscuits, overpriced amber pazione liqueur, several vintages of Gitabrian wines – the expensive ones, naturally – and, of course, human flesh.

‘Did you remember to bring me the mage’s eyeballs?’ he inquired.

‘He wasn’t dead.’

‘That’s not what I asked.’

This is where having a squirrel cat perched on your shoulder perilously close to your soft, tasty human ears, gets dangerous. See, squirrel cats, with their tubby feline bodies, big bushy tails, coats that change colour depending on their mood and furry flaps that stretch between their front and back limbs enabling them to glide from the treetops (or “fly as well as any gods-damned falcon” as Reichis would insist), can – if you stare at them, squinty-eyed, from a distance and preferably through a drunken haze – look almost cute. They’re not, though. Puppy dogs are cute. Bunny rabbits are cute. Poisonous Berabesq sand rattlers are cute to somebody. Squirrel cats, though? Not cute. Evil.

‘Reichis . . .’ I began.

His breath is surprisingly warn when it’s less than an inch from your earlobe. ‘Go on, say it.’

Ancestors, I thought, noting in the periphery of my vision that Reichis’s shadowblack markings were swirling. A year ago he’d wound up with the same twisting black lines around his left eye as I had around mine. Unlike me, though, the possibility of one day becoming a rampaging demon terrorizing the entire continent didn’t trouble him in the least. The idea frankly delighted him.

Rescue from possibly fatal squirrel cat gnawing came in the form of a half-dozen pairs of heavy boots clomping up behind me, followed soon thereafter by the tell-tale click of a crossbow’s safety catch being released. ‘Kellen Argos, by order of Lieutenant Libri of the Queen’s Marshals Service, you are under arrest.’

I sighed. ‘This again?’

The first tentative rasp of the crossbow’s trigger grinding against its iron housing. ‘Get those hands up high, spellslinger.’

I hadn’t even noticed that my fingers had drifted to the powder holsters at my sides. Reflex, I guess, though by now you’d figure I’d’ve gotten used to being arrested on a weekly basis.

I raised my arms and slowly turned to find a half-dozen marshals wearing their customary broad hats and long grey coats armed with the usual assortment of short-hafted maces and crossbows – all trained on me. ‘Would you like me to read the warrant?’ Sergeant Faustus Cobb asked. Short, scrawny, narrow-shouldered and years past his prime, you’d think he’d appear comical next to his younger and more vigorous subordinates. But my experience with the Queen’s Marshals had taught me that age does nothing to diminish how dangerous they are – only how ornery they become when you resist.

Me? I was eighteen, wearier than my years ought to allow. My shirt was still soaked from the booze I’d used to disguise myself as a drunk back at the saloon, and I was feeling a little crabby myself. ‘What’s the charge this time?’

Cobb made a show of reading out the warrant. ‘Conspiracy to commit assault upon the person of a foreign emissary enjoying the protections afforded diplomatic representatives.’

Yep, that’s right: the old man who’d come to kill me, being a Jan’Tep lord magus, held ambassadorial status in Darome.

Cobb went on. ‘Grievous physical abuse.’

Not nearly grievous enough.

‘Theft.’

Knew I shouldn’t have kept any of the coins.

‘Acting against the vital interests of the Daroman Crown and the people it serves.’

That one they throw into almost every warrant. Spit on the sidewalk and you’ve technically ‘acted against the interests’ of the crown.

Cobb paused. ‘There’s something here about “unlawfully being an irritating, half-witted spellslinging card sharp who doesn’t do what he’s told”, but I’m not sure that’s an actual crime.’

And yet, I was pretty sure it was the only crime Torian was concerned about. ‘Funny how she had that warrant already drawn up before anyone found the mage,’ I pointed out.

Cobb grinned. ‘Guess the lieutenant’s got you pegged pretty good by now, Kellen.’

I was really starting to dislike Lieutenant Torian Libri. While there were no end of people in the Daroman capital intent on making my life hell, few displayed her raw determination and consistently lousy sense of humour. ‘You do realize that under Imperial law my rank as Queen’s Tutor prevents you from prosecuting me for any crime without four-fifths of the court first revoking my status, don’t you?’

One of the younger deputies gave an amiable chuckle. I’d let him win at cards with me last week in the vain hope I might win over some of the marshals to my side. ‘Don’t say nothin’ about you bein’ arrested, though.’

‘Let’s go, spellslinger,’ Cobb ordered, motioning for me to walk ahead of him.

Reichis gave a low growl. ‘You gonna take this crap, Kellen? Again? Let’s murder these skinbags. You owe me three eyeballs and this here’s an opportunity for you to pay up.’

‘Three? How many eyeballs did you think that mage had?’ I asked.

One of the marshals stared at me quizzically. She must’ve been new – the others were accustomed to hearing me talk to Reichis.

‘Who can tell with humans?’ the squirrel cat grumbled. ‘Your faces are all so ugly that every time I start counting, I lose track on account of needing to puke. Besides, two eyeballs was what you owed me an hour ago. The third is interest.’

Perfect. Because in addition to being a thief, a blackmailer, and a murderer, Reichis now wanted to add loan shark to his list of criminal enterprises.

‘Let’s pick up the pace,’ Cobb said. ‘You know how the lieutenant gets when you keep her waiting.’

Several of the deputies laughed at that – not that any of them would dare cross her. Reluctantly, I trudged along the wide flagstone street en route to my thirteenth jailing since becoming the queen’s tutor of cards.

‘Hey, what’s that?’ Reichis asked, his nose nodding in the direction of something small and flat floating on the breeze towards us, low to the ground. A playing card settled at my feet.

‘Keep walking,’ Cobb ordered.

I stayed where I was, staring down at the elaborate image on the card depicting a magnificent city on the top half. The bottom was a sort of mirror image, distorted as if reflected by a dark, shifting pool of black water.

‘You drop that?’ he asked, finally noticing the card.

‘Sergeant Cobb,’ I began. ‘Before this goes any further, I need to clarify a couple of things.’

‘Yeah? Like what?’

‘First, I had nothing to do with this card suddenly turning up.’

‘So what? It’s a playing card. Not like you’re the only gambler in the capital.’

As if to contest his banal explanation, a second card drifted down to land next to the first one. Then another and another, each one rotated a little more the the previous, gradually encircling me.

‘What are you playing at, spellslinger?’ Cobb asked, stepping back. I heard the safety catches on several crossbows unlock.

I was now standing in a ring of elaborately painted cards, their rich metallic hues of copper, silver and gold so vibrant they made the street look drab and lifeless by comparison. I turned to the half dozen well-armed men and women charged with escorting me to jail. ‘Marshals, allow me to offer my sincere apologies.’

‘For what?’ asked one as she raised her crossbow to train it on me.

The cards on the ground shimmered ever brighter, blinding me to everything but the coruscating play of colours that drained the light from the world around me.

‘For the inconvenience of my rescue,’ I replied.

I doubt anyone heard me. The city around me faded to a flat, colourless expanse; the buildings, the streets, even the marshals themselves looked as if they’d been carved out of thin sheets of pale ivory. Reichis slumped on my shoulder and began snoring. A figure walked towards me, a lone source of dazzling colour wrapped in the twisting golds of sand magic, the pale blues of breath, and the glistening purple of a silk spell.

A grandiose entrance like this is usually accompanied by the disappointed sigh of my sister Shalla, soon followed by an extensive commentary regarding my dishevelled condition and the annoyances my recent behaviour has caused our noble and much-admired family. Occasionally, though, it’s my father who appears to inform me of the latest crime I’ve committed against our people. That latter possibility was why my hands were now deep inside the powder holsters at my sides.

Ever since I’d left my people more than two years ago, I’d known the day would come when my father’s grand destiny could no longer tolerate my miserable existence. I’d been asked on many occasions by friends and foes alike if I had a trick – some devious ruse – saved up that could outsmart the mighty Ke’heops before he could kill me.

I did. I just wasn’t sure if it would work.

‘Kellen.’

The voice didn’t belong to my sister or father. In fact, I hadn’t heard it in such a long time that I didn’t recognize her. The bands of magical force began to settle, their brilliance diminishing enough that I could finally identify the apparition before me, and found myself standing there, the twin red and black powders I’d normally be using to cast a fiery explosion slipping through my fingers, with absolutely no idea what was going to happen next.

‘Mother?’

The figure gestured at the cards surrounding me. ‘Pick a card, Kellen,’ she said. ‘Any card.’

What is it with people and card tricks lately?

Chapter 2 - The Deck

As a child, I’d firmly believed Bene’maat was the finest mother any Jan’Tep boy could hope for. She had been an island of patience and calm in the otherwise stormy sea of my father’s unyielding ambitions and my sister’s pugnacious temper tantrums. My mother’s prowess as a mage was widely respected in our clan, yet her fascination with astronomy and healing revealed an inquisitive nature not solely consumed with the pursuit of magic as Ke’heops or Shalla were. Or me, for that matter.

If a parent’s second duty is to love their children equally, then Bene’maat had done so admirably in a society that valued Shalla’s raw talent for magic a thousand times more than my aptitude for clever tricks. And if a mother’s first duty is to protect her children, well, then Bene’maat done that pretty well, too – right up until the day she’d drugged me and then helped my father strap me down to a table, inscribing counter-sigils on the metallic tattooed bands around my forearms to forever deny me access to the magic that defined our people as I screamed over and over again for her to stop.

Now the woman I hadn’t seen for nearly three years was standing before me, placidly repeating, ‘Pick a card, Kellen. Any card.’

I considered telling my beloved mother to bugger off, but my family is nothing if not persistent, so I gently settled the slumbering Reichis down on the ground and considered the thirteen cards forming a spell circle around me. I reached for the first one, which depicted architecture in the style of the Daroman capital in which we stood and was titled “City of Glories”.

‘Not that one,’ she said.

‘Why not?’

I heard the answer inside my mind a fraction of a second before her lips moved. ‘That is the keystone. Picking it up would break the spell and end our meeting.’

I’d always been a belligerent child. Life as an outcast had done nothing to cure me of that fault. I reached for the City of Glories again.

‘Please,’ the voice in my mind said just before the apparition did. ‘Forgive the awkward fashion in which our conversation must take place, but I’ve been unable to properly recreate Shalla’s wondrous spell for long distance communication. I’ve had to rely on a much older spell your grandmother invented before you were born.’

For the third time she repeated the same instruction, exactly as she had before: ‘Pick a card, Kellen. Any card.’

She’s not really here, not even in spirit, I realized. Bene’maat must have used silk, sand, and breath magic to record her thoughts and convey them to me within the cards as a series of individual messages, like a bundle of letters tied together with string, the spell encoded with specific responses based on my actions.

The remaining twelve cards fell into four suits unfamiliar to me – which is saying something considering how many decks I’ve encountered. In an Argosi deck, each suit corresponds to a particular civilization on our continent. In more common sets of playing cards created for entertainment, the suits tend to represent symbols meaningful to the culture that created them. The standard Daroman deck, for example, like it’s people, embodies their obsession with military emblems: chariots, arrows, trebuchets, and blades. However the four suits of this new deck before me were unlike any I’d seen before: scrolls, quills, lutes, and masks.

Had my mother devised these suits herself? And if so, what did each one mean?

I selected the Seven of Lutes, reasoning that no one had ever been blasted out of existence by a lute.

The figure of Bene’maat smiled and an instrument appeared in her hands. She began to play a melody that pulled at my heart so unexpectedly I gasped out loud.

‘You always loved this song as a child,’ she murmured. ‘You used to make me play it for hours and hours whenever you were scared or sad.’

I dropped the card as if it were a spider crawling on my hand.

The figure of my mother nodded, somewhat sorrowfully, as if she’d known I would respond this way.

‘Pick a card, Kellen,’ she repeated. ‘Any card.’

I found one that depicted a man carefully arranging quills on a scale. The caption read “Enumerator of Quills”.

My mother’s apparition was now seated at a desk composing a letter. ‘My dearest Kellen. It’s close to two years since last I touched your face. I had never thought such a thing possible. I always assumed you would come ba—’

‘What is this?’ I demanded. ‘Nostalgia? Have you forgotten what you did to me, mother?’ I pulled back my sleeves to show the foul counter-sigils desecrating the tattooed bands on my forearms. ‘You destroyed any hope I had of becoming a mage like you and father and Shalla.’

I hadn’t expected a reply, but I felt an itch in the back of my mind and a moment later, she spoke again. ‘I know you’re angry with us, Kellen. You have every right.’

I was beginning to understand how the magic worked. I wasn’t communicating directly with my mother, but these messages were more than just words scrawled on a page. The spell was made from a more complete collection of her thoughts, capturing a single moment in time during which my mother had bound up all her contemplations on a particular topic and infused them into the card.

A spectral tear slid down my mother’s cheek. ‘It broke my heart, what we did. We believed we were protecting you, protecting the world from what you might become. We had no idea how wrong our actions were.’

You should’ve known, I thought bitterly. A mother is supposed to protect her child, not ruin him.

I didn’t say any it out loud, though. I knew it wasn’t really Bene’maat standing there in front of me, yet still I couldn’t bear to say such hurtful things to my mother.

‘I thank you for your gracious missive,’ I said finally. ‘Are we done now? I have an important appointment in a jail cell. So unless you have some miracle cure for—’

Bene’maat’s arm extended, pointing now to a different card.

I dropped the one I was holding and picked up the Nine of Quills. The expression on my mother’s face changed to a look of determination, and arranged all around her were sketches and diagrams and pages upon pages of esoteric formulae. ‘Every day since you left, I’ve tried to find a way to undo the counter-banding. I’ve searched every book of lore in our sanctums, consulted with spellmasters across the territories. I read every scrap of parchment your father brought back from the Ebony Abbey, hoping to find amidst their knowledge of the shadowblack’s etheric planes the means to repair your connection to the high magics. At times I thought I might be close . . .’

She stopped, squeezing her fists in frustration. The image of her fluttered and faded.

The spell must require perfect focus to imprint the message on the card, I thought. Every time she lost her concentration, she’d had to stop and start a new one.

‘What do you mean, “close”?’ I asked. ‘Are you saying there might be a cure?’

A different card began to glow brighter than the others. The Peddler of Masks. I picked it up.

‘So much of what I’ve been told has turned out to be lies, Kellen. False promises. Supposed secret methods for inscribing new sigils that resulted in nothing more than temporary illusions.’

‘Then it’s hopeless?’

I suppose I shouldn’t have been surprised. Of all the things I lost when I left my people, the one I knew I could never get back was my magic. I’d learned to live with that fact. With my one breath band, my blast powders, my castradazi coins, and all the other tricks I’d learned along the way, I sometimes even prided myself that I could outsmart my enemies without spells. But I still woke up in the middle of the night sometimes with every inch of my skin glistening with sweat, my fingers twitching through dozens of somatic forms I’d practiced thousands of times for spells I would never cast, so desperate for the taste of magic that no food or drink could satisfy me.

Like all my people, I was an addict. My addiction was inscribed in tattooed metallic inks around my forearms. I could never sate that desire. I doubted it would ever leave me.

The apparition of my mother gestured behind me, and I turned to see the Thief of Masks rising from the other cards, beckoning me to take it. When I did, her voice became a whisper.

‘There might be a way.’

I spun back around to see her, still standing where she’d been before. There was an uncertainty in her gaze, though, as if she were afraid someone else might burst into wherever she’d been when she’d created these messages for me.

‘What do you mean?’ I asked.

She looked as if she were struggling to get out the words without losing the concentration required to continue imprinting her thoughts onto the card. ‘Our people have been . . . Wrong about magic, Kellen. Wrong in so many ways and at costs we’re only now discovering. The fundamental forces are vastly more complex than we assumed and can be fashioned in ways we never imagined. There are traditions as old as our own, spread out across the cultures of this continent. Much of the knowledge has been lost even to their own people, but I’ve found traces of it within old songs and stories.’

No wonder she was having so much trouble holding the spell. To hear a Jan’Tep mage admit our people weren’t the only ones who could perform the true high magics was a kind of sacrilege that even I found troubling.

‘There is a place far from here where I believe I might acquire the means to rectify the crime your father and I committed against you, to give you back the chance to become a true mage of the Jan’Tep.’ The look of determination I’d seen in her so often as a child appeared in her features. ‘I swear to you, my son, there is no price I will not pay to buy back your future.’

I swallowed. My breathing was quick, my heart beat faster than it should. The prospect of what my mother was suggesting . . . But I’d travelled the long roads of this continent, seen and heard just about every kind of con game there was, performed half of them myself. Not everything is fake in this world, but nothing of value comes free.

I reached for the card depicting two figures exchanging goods as they stood beneath an open scroll. My people don’t use scrolls for spells or messages. We use them for contracts.

‘Come home,’ my mother said, her voice more a plea than an opening bid. ‘Come back to us. Your father is Mage Sovereign now. He has lifted the spell warrant against you.’

‘Too bad he didn’t mention that to the lord magus who just tried to kill me.’

The apparition of my mother gave no reply. She couldn’t, of course. She would’ve had no knowledge of this latest attempt on my life. Besides, it was a fair bet this guy had been hired by Daroman conspirators rather than my own people.

‘Return to us,’ Bene’maat went on. ‘And even if I fail to return your magic to you, still I can give you a home.’

Home. Such a strange word. I wasn’t sure I knew what it meant anymore.

‘I’ve been scrying you when I could, though you’re very difficult to track,’ Bene’maat said. ‘Not spying on you, I promise, but I needed to see you sometimes, through a mother’s eyes and not through the recounting of your sister and others.’ In the haze behind her, pictures formed and faded, images of events in my life since I’d left my homeland. Scenes of violence, of pursuit, of me sitting alone after the fight looking far more miserable than even I remembered. ‘The brave face you put on for those around you, this trickster’s guise you’ve taken on, it’s not you, Kellen. You weren’t meant for this life. You aren’t happy.’

Happy? I’d spent the past three years facing every mage, mercenary, or monster this continent had to offer. I’d survived them all. Saved a few decent people along the way. Wasn’t that enough? Was I supposed to be happy now, too?

My mother’s fingers were outstretched now, reaching towards me, a desperate hope in her eyes. ‘Come home, son.’

The card in my hand felt heavy. Clammy against my skin. I dropped to the ground and before another could glow or rise or otherwise demand my attention, I shuffled them all together, fully breaking the circle and ending the spell. The cards became dull and flat once again, and the world around me came back to life.

Goodbye, mother.

‘Move real slow now, spellslinger,’ Cobb said.

I heard the marshals shuffling behind me, fingers on the triggers of their crossbows. They seemed neither concerned nor even aware of the cards that had floated here and that I now held in my hand. Probably barely a second had passed for them and this whole event had taken place solely in my mind.

‘Hey,’ Reichis growled from where he was curled up on the ground. ‘Why’d you dump me down here?’

‘Sorry,’ I said to both him and the marshals, stuffing my mother’s strange herald cards into my pocket. I picked up the squirrel cat and settled him back on my shoulder. ‘Let’s get a move on. Time for Torian Libri to lock us up again.’

The marshals chuckled at that, and we all resumed our march to the palace.

‘You know where you went wrong with that Torian female?’ Reichis asked.

‘Don’t start,’ I warned.

There are only three solutions his species have to offer regarding the resolution of conflicts between humans: kill them, rob them blind, or – and this is the one where Reichis derives the most pleasure from devising elaborate and intensely nauseating suggestions – bed them.

‘Should’a mated with the lieutenant the day you met her,’ the squirrel cat said earnestly.

‘Mating works better when the other person doesn’t hate you,’ I said.

A couple of the marshals following behind me broke out laughing. Reichis took their mirth as encouragement – not that he needed any. ‘Nah, that Torian female wants you, see?’ He tapped a paw against his fuzzy muzzle. ‘Smelled it on her the day the queen introduced you two. I swear on all twenty-six squirrel cat gods, Kellen, the marshal’s in heat for you.’

It was, most assuredly, not true. Also, it’s highly doubtful that there are twenty-six squirrel cat gods. Times like these, though? It’s best not to contradict the little monster.

‘Now, here’s what you oughta do . . .’ Reichis tried – and failed staggeringly – to stifle his chittering laughter. ‘First, you’re gonna take off your trousers and perform a ceremonial dance. Human females love that. Next, you turn around and wiggle your bottom at her. Then all you have to do is drop to your knees and start making this sound . . .’

I’m not going to describe the noise he made. Suffice it to say that it was exactly as disgusting than you might imagine and he kept making it all the way to the palace.

Prologue – Tyrant’s Throne, Act 1

Author’s Note: These were the first words I wrote at 3am the night I came up with the central dilemma of the final novel in the series: the discovery of another heir.

Deleted because, while this might be a dramatic (and even enigmatic) introduction to the book, it didn’t fit with the style of the series, which usually opens with a second-person philosophical flourish rather than dark and sinister foreshadowing.

***

All the boy said was, “Oh, Falcio, I am so very sorry.”

The sound of my rapier clattering to the floor was followed by the sensation of falling and then a sudden pain in my knees as they struck the hard stone floor. My arms hung useless at my sides like withered vines from a dying tree.

Brasti was shouting behind me. “What’s wrong with him?”

The creek of his ironwood bow bending under the tension of its string was answered by the whisper of Kest’s blade leaving its sheath. An instant later, the sword’s tip nestled against the neck of the boy who had spoken.

“If this is magic,” Kest said, “I would suggest you stop it now.”

The boy said nothing. He didn’t need to.

“Maybe it’s not magic,” Brasti said, one eye on me even as he kept his arrow aimed at the child. “It’s probably poison. Falcio’s always getting poisoned.”

In fact, it was neither of those things.

It was the blood.

It’s always the blood.

Rhetan’s Statuary – Tyrant’s Throne, Act 1

Author’s Note: After making a deal with Falcio, Margrave Rhetan brings him to see his prized collection of statues, including one of a certain Greatcoat undergoing the infamous Lament.

Deleted for several reasons, first being that I’d originally thought of having this sequence in Saint’s Blood (which is set shortly after the Greatcoat’s Lament) and it didn’t make as much sense in Tyrant’s Throne. Also, it took Rhetan down a darker path and ultimately didn’t serve the story – it would have only made Morn’s argument about the need for a new regime more credible.

***

“I must say, Falcio, that was all rather clever of you,” Rhetan said, winding his way down a circular staircase down through floor after floor of the keep’s main tower.

Kest, Brasti and I followed along behind. “What is it exactly that you wish to show us?” I asked.

“You’ll see. It’s not far now.”

I stopped. “Forgive me, Margrave Rhetan, but if you’re about to take us on a tour of your dungeon so as to impress upon us just how powerful and dangerous you are, I’d just as soon skip the tour and go straight to the threats.”

“Dungeon? Goodness, no. There’s no dungeon here. We have an old one in the east tower which I’m sure you could go visit if that’s your interest.” When we reached a large iron door, he pulled a key from inside his coat. “I suspect you’ll find this much more impressive.”

Beyond the door awaited a great hall, laid out much like the ballroom of a palace with twenty-foot high ceilings and light coming from thick glass windows set in the upper sections of the outer wall. The floors were marble, which was wildly expensive and was odd to find here given how plain Rhetan’s own throne room had been in comparison. But it was the contents of the room that took our breath away. “Saint Gan-who-laughs-with-dice,” I said, lacking anything more sensible to say.

“Welcome to my statuary,” Rhetan said, and extended an arm to show us his collection.

What looked to be two dozen statues, some in stone, some marble, and a few in bronze, were on display throughout the room. The first one we encountered showed two men in battle, one a near-giant in armour holding an oversized battle-axe while the other was a young man with nothing in but a small rock in his hands and a look of determination on his face. I recognized the scene as the legendary fight between King Teorre and his uncle, the usurper Sen Varran.

The next statue showed a woman, her arms laden with food, feeding starving peasants. “That’s the Lady Phan,” Kest said. “Whose new methods of agriculture saved the former duchy of Bijalle and gave it its current name.”

“Imagine what it must have been like,” Rhetan mused, “to see this simple peasant girl coming with that first harvest? To realize that this young woman, uneducated and illiterate, had devised the means to save an entire people? It’s no wonder they changed the name of the duchy to honour her, is it?”

I looked around at the rest of the statues. Each was similarly impressive both in design and in what it represented. “It’s like walking through the history of Tristia’s legends.”

“Wouldn’t a decent book be cheaper?” Brasti asked.

Rhetan laughed. “I suppose, but this isn’t about history, really.”

“Then what is it about?” Kest asked.

Rhetan led us down the centre of the room. “It’s about what I call the Great Acts. Those moments where a man or woman has done something that was simply inconceivable before.”

“Impressive,” Kest said, “but Brasti’s right. It seems a rather expensive hobby.”

Rhetan didn’t answer but rather walked to the end of the room. There, beneath the light of a circular window set in the wall, was what I presumed was another statue, this one obscured in a large grey cloth.

“It’s more than a hobby,” Rhetan said. “To be honest, it’s something of an obsession with me. I come here sometimes and look at these statues and imagine myself being there, in that moment, bearing witness to these magnificent acts…you have to understand, I’m an old man now, and old men rarely get to see anything that truly impresses them anymore.”

“I take it you have a new statue to add to your collection?” I said, pointing to the object covered in the grey cloth.

“Ah, yes. This is quite new. It’s the pride of my collection, really. Cost me an absolute fortune.”

Kest tilted his head as he examined the shape underneath the cloth. “It’s not any larger than the others.”

“Smaller, in fact,” Brasti added.

“Ah, it wasn’t the stone that cost the money, nor even the sculptor’s services, though that wasn’t cheap. No, the expense went into the fate scribes I had to pay.”

“Fate scribes?”

“From the monastery of Saint Anlas-who-remembers-the-world,” Rhetan replied. “I paid them to work with an artist who drew hundreds of sketches from their description. You see, only a few people are still alive who saw the event, and none of them were likely to provide me with the detail required such that the sculptor could do the scene justice.”

“And you’re only unveiling it now?” I asked.

Rhetan smiled. “I’ve viewed it, of course, but you are the first people outside of myself and the sculptor to see it.”

“I would have thought you’d prefer a more august assembly for the unveiling.”

“Ah,” Rhetan said, “there could be no more appropriate audience for this particular statue.”

“Well, what is it supposed to show then?” Brasti asked.

Rhetan’s face took on a look of almost religious awe. “A moment that should have been impossible. An act of unparalleled valour.” He walked behind the statue and picked up a length of rope which was attached to the cloth. “Do you believe that some things are simply beyond the realm of men, and even to tread lightly risks our souls? That for them to occur is a kind of miracle?” He held onto the rope as if waiting for a signal from us.

“I’m bored,” Brasti said. “Is this supposed to be a history lesson? Because if so, it’s working because I feel myself falling asleep.

In one swift motion Rhetan pulled on the rope, and the covering came away, revealing the statue underneath. To me he said, “I was hoping you could tell me if the work is accurate to the original event.”

“Gods…” Brasti whispered.

I said nothing, having lost the use of my wits.

The statue showed a man bound to a tree with branches ru