Summary of the year - 2003

Andy has had another very busy and productive year, having been involved with the production of two albums and two tours. The early part of the year was taken up with Andy mastering Hoovering the Moon, Willy Russell's debut album. A tour with Plainsong followed and then later Andy began work on producing Tim Firth's new album interrupted briefly by a series of gigs with Willy Russell. Oh, and yes, Andy played a one-off gig with the reformed Rutles!

PLAINSONG

The Plainsong UK tour in March and April proved successful with Julian Dawson rejoining Andy, Iain and Griff. The new album Pangolins was well received, with the cover providing lots of comments! The European leg of the tour in May went well and a festival appearance at Tolder was added during August.

WILLY RUSSELL

The early part of the year was taken up with Andy putting the finishing touches to and mastering Willy Russell's impressive debut album - Hoovering The Moon. Then, during July, Andy led a band consisting of some of the musicians who contributed to the album for a series of gigs in Britain and Eire.

TIM FIRTH

Work finished on Tim's as yet untitled debut album just prior to Christmas, so expect a release sometime in the Spring. Andy co-produced this album with Willy Russell and of course contributes to the recording. Other contributions come from members of the Royal Liverpool Philharmonic Orchestra, Loreto Murray, Elaine Grainger, Paul Allen and Mark Griffiths.

www.andyrobertsmusic.com

And - in case you hadn't noticed - we finally outgrew dreamtree (thanks to virgin.net for three years of freespace) and have recently moved into andyrobertsmusic.com with lots of space and a new fast server!

Please bookmark / add to favourites this new site.

We have big plans and a site re-launch in the next month or so. Watch out also for a competition or two, some MP3's (who said at last...) and more great news soon. A big thanks to everybody who emails with comments and recollections. Keep tuned ...

"In Words And Music:

WILLY RUSSELL with special guest TIM FIRTH and the band led by

ANDY ROBERTS

Willy Russell's new album will be premiered at two gigs at the Walls, Oswestry, on the 18th & 19th July.

The performances will be mixed media events with Willy Russell reading some extracts of his work, Tim Firth performing some of his material and then a full set from Willy and the musicians who have contributed to his new album - HOOVERING THE MOON. The band - led by Andy - will include Mark Griffiths, Paul Allen, Tim Firth, Dori Jackson, Loreto Murray, Iain Matthews and Phil Beaumont. Both days will be recorded and filmed.

TICKETS are available direct from the venue on:

Tel: 01691 670970 - Fax: 01691 653820 - Email: info@the-walls.co.uk

What a year - 2002!

Andy has had a very busy and productive year, having been involved with the production of two albums. The recording of the eagerly awaited Willy Russell album is complete and Plainsong's new recording for Blue Rose is nearing completion ready for a release prior to a comprehensive tour.

WILLY RUSSELL

I have been lucky enough to listen to the early demos and more recently to the rough mixes of this remarkable first album. Not surprisingly, the lyrics contain those sharp social observations, which you might expect from a playwright and author who brought us 'Educating Rita', 'Shirley Valentine' and more recently Willy's first novel 'The Wrong Boy'. Musically - it is top notch - Willy is an accomplished tunesmith.... remember this is the man who wrote the musical 'John, Paul, George, Ringo and Bert' and The West End hit 'Blood Brothers'. Andy acted as Producer and Arranger, and of course, plays on this album.

The release of this album will cause more than a ripple....

PLAINSONG

The new Plainsong album is a delight and contains a dozen tracks or so. It's a typical Plainsong record in that some tracks are jointly written by members of the band together with a couple of covers. The sound is a little different from previous Plainsong albums, but still with those wonderful harmonies and great musicianship. In short - It's a gem! Catch Plainsong on the following tour dates during March and April in the UK. (which are still subject to change) The German tour will follow during May.

Next year's tour promises to be exceptional...