Those who have been moved by the lyrically sensitive compositions of David Thomas Roberts and have found them to stimulate mind and soul will understand the delight I recently felt visiting with the composer. This gentleman of many aptitudes was kind enough to generously engage in a series of lengthy telephone conversations with me recently. He was graciously warm and considerate of my musical illiteracies. The conversation was as invigorating as I find his music to be.

We discussed so much, and I regret that there is room to share only a few of the elements we covered along with a summation of his musical creativity. To write about the career of David Thomas Roberts is to undertake a challenging but delightful task. It is challenging because the composer is deeply introspective with a soulfully complex mind. It is difficult to extract and discuss one aspect of his artistic achievements without referencing his other endeavors and interests. He is an accomplished author, poet, visual artist, composer, and pianist.

As a composer he was very descriptive when talking about the influences on his life and especially on his music. I will avoid referring to his early years in Kreole, Mississippi, as humble beginnings, for as I listened to him describe his early life in great detail, I came to realize how much he derived from his childhood. While his family was far from financially well-off in the late 1950s and early 1960s, the experiences that led him to pursue and develop all of his talents, were rich enough to form a sound base for his life and career. It is difficult to describe and explain any one of his talents without considering them all together.

Roots

Roberts was born in 1955 and recalls, “From my earliest childhood, I lived much in my imagination. I was an only child until I was eight and my world consisted of what I imagined, and what I found in books. Books were important to me before I went to school,” he explained, “and there was what came in over television in the late 1950s and early 1960s to feed me the darker aspects of life. I lived a life of singularity, with an ever-imagining mind, from an early age.”

His family’s 10 x 50 foot trailer was too small for a piano but his parents gave him at least two toy facsimiles. “They did the best they could with the obsession I had…to live within musical expression,” he recalled. He also began drawing when he was four. The family’s move to a house in 1962 meant there was space for a piano and, “by the age of eight, I was trying to do all the things I do now,” he reflected.

“I didn’t have parental restraints, [rather] encouragement in fact,” he said, though “later I came into conflict with my parents as artists often do. I wasn’t going to make it easy by getting a job or trying to get along with people…which was a chafing, alienating thing [leading] to a lot of trouble.”

David spoke fondly of a first-grade teacher, Ms. Virginia Eselin, who became his champion. He began taking piano lessons from Amelia Cook in Moss Point, and played his first composition, a waltz, at a recital in 1963. However, after two years of piano lessons, he left his teacher. At age eight, he began teaching himself visual art. “By the age of thirteen, I was forging into territory that would predict my mature style as a visual artist…It is important to note that I was and remain entirely self-taught,” he emphasized.

During our conversation, Roberts spoke of the early musical influences on his development around the age of fourteen. “I worked with rock music…and always had a relationship with popular music. “My ragtime [compositions] would not be the same…without the impact of Rock and Roll and especially the more lyrical dimensions of the rock voice,” Roberts explained.

When he was fourteen, Roberts discovered Rachmaninoff’s Piano Concerto No. 2. Whereas Chopin led him at age eight to “discover the broader, ambitious spectrum of serious, unbridled music making, the Rachmaninoff work brought me back to the idea of equipping myself to become a composer.” At that time, Roberts studied with another local teacher, Theresa Santarelli, from whom he learned a great deal. After about three years, he again went his own way.

At eighteen, Roberts entered the University of Southern Mississippi to study theory and composition. Ragtime works such as For Teresa and The Hattiesburg Winter Waltz date from this period. After transferring to Florida State University in 1976, he became disillusioned with academia, finding it “an impediment to serious work,” and left to begin performing in New Orleans in earlier 1977.

Finding Ragtime

Many influences, from Romanticism to early rock ’n’ roll to various ethnic music “co-mingled” to inspire his original compositions. However, “Frederic Chopin has been the most potent musical force in my life…his expression is foundational to my relationship to the ideal practice of becoming a composer.” Other important influences were Brahms, Schumann, Charles Ives, Erik Satie, and John Cage.

Roberts related in vivid detail, how he discovered Scott Joplin’s work on Joshua Rifkin’s first Nonesuch Album. “After I heard Maple Leaf Rag, which opens side one, and above all Gladiolus, which closes the side, my life was never the same again. You talk about recovering some great, endlessly meaningful, self-revealing piece of lostness! [Joplin’s music] now made everything come together…in my psyche. That is exactly how I became a ragtime composer.”

Works

The compositions of David Thomas Roberts are a beautiful aspect of his total artistry and if his work is not well-known to TST readers, I certainly encourage an immediate acquaintance. In his long career he has written over 150 musical compositions, and over 40 have been commissions. He points out that commission payments are a vital part of his income. His commissioned work includes pieces dedicated to people, places, and events. Victorian Gardens, written for Arlo “Chip” Lusby and commissioned by Danny Matson is one of David’s more recent.

Roberts has been recording since 1978. After two early albums featuring the compositions of others, Pinelands Memoir and Other Rags (Euphonic, 1983) entirely featured his original work. The album contained one of his most popular pieces, “Roberto Clemente,” named for the humanitarian baseball Hall-of-Famer killed in a plane crash taking supplies to earthquake victims in Nicaragua in 1972. 1983 also saw the release of Through the Bottomlands (Stomp Off, 1983), the title track of which would become another of Roberts’ most appreciated works. Many of Roberts’ earlier compositions remain standards in ragtime performance repertoire.