Stephen McGann is a British actor, author and science communicator who has starred in numerous TV series including Catherine the Great, Milk and the Hanging Gale with his brothers! Here's what you need to know about Stephen.

How old is Stephen McGann?

Stephen was born in 1963 making him 60.

Does Stephen McGann have a wife?

Yes – he is actually married to the screenwriter and Call the Midwife Creator Heidi Thomas.

Stephen revealed that the couple are very good at keeping private when it comes to their professional work, insisting that he doesn’t interfere with the writing process whilst Heidi refrains from commenting on his acting.

He said: "We have a certain unspoken thing. I don't look over her shoulder as she writes. She doesn't look at the way I do lines or whatever.

"There's only one thing we share. And that's when I get the script with everybody else and then she gets really nervous because she knows I am reading the script for the first time. She hangs around outside the bedroom door.

"And there was one brilliant moment where I came out of the bedroom. She wants to know if I laugh at the funny bits, cry at the sad bits. And I came out with tears streaming down my face one day and she was chuffed!"

Does Stephen McGann have any children?

Stephen and his wife Heidi have one son, Dominic.

Does Stephan McGann have any siblings?

Stephen has three brothers who also act. Joe McGann, Mark McGann and Paul McGann. Paul, perhaps the most famous McGann brother, has starred in many TV shows and films, including Agatha Christie’s Marple, The Musketeers, Holby City and Doctor Who.

How tall is Stephen McGann?

He stands at 5’11.

Where is Stephen McGann from?

He was born in Kensington, Liverpool.

Stephen McGann in Call the Midwife

If you're a fan of the BBC series Call the Midwife or if you've been on the Call the Midwife tour, you'll know that Stephen plays Dr Patrick Turner, a GP who works closely with the midwives of Nonnatus House including Nurse Trixie Franklin played by Helen George and Nurse Lucille Anderson played by Leonie Elliot.

He has been a cast member since the first season in 2012 and since then has been looking after both the mums and the midwives and nurses at Nonnatus, like when Nurse Barbara Gilbert, played by Charlotte Ritchie, sadly passed away. It has also been confirmed that he will be in the upcoming 13th series of Call the Midwife. After suffering from a mental breakdown after WWII in 1945, and losing his wife in 1957, Doctor Turner married Sister Bernadette played by actress Laura Main and the two went on to adopt a daughter together.

Stephen McGann talks of a Call the Midwife film

Stephen has previously raised the topic of a possible film on ITV show The Morning, mentioning how fans are keen for Call the Midwife to hit the big screen.

He explained: "People are starting to talk about a film. The first answer to that was, anyone who wants to come along and make me a film star, they could come along.

"As long as it is kind of 'Doctor Turner: The Movie' it will be fine. They can come in for a little part around me that will be fine."

Stephen McGann and science

As well as acting, Stephen graduated with a master's degree in Science Communication and is a public speaker. In fact, he actually wrote an essay in the Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine in 2015 which discussed issues of medical accuracy and communication in Call the Midwife.

Where does Stephen McGann live?

Stephen lives in Cambridge with his wife. The couple are quite private, understandably, so we don’t have much more information other than that.

Has Stephen McGann left Call The Midwife?

No! How would the midwives of Nonnatus House do without their trusty doctor and friend, Patrick. Although, he was joined by his son Timothy, who returned from medical school, in last year's Call the Midwife Christmas Special.

Has Stephen McGann written a book?

Stephen published ‘Flesh and Blood: A History of My Family in Seven Sicknesses’ back in 2018. The book explores how various diseases in history have moulded him as a person.

He also wrote a companion book to Call the Midwife called Doctor Turner's Casebook, where he revisits medical cases featured in the TV series and discusses their historical and social contexts.

Flesh and Blood: A History of My Family in Seven Sicknesses

Price: £ 6.89

Alternative retailers

Waterstones£ 8.99View offer

What has Stephen McGann been in?

As well as starring in the West End musicals, Blood Brothers and Footloose, Stephen has also been in The Hanging Gale, The Strauss Dynasty and Emmerdale.

Who did Stephen McGann play in Emmerdale?

From 1999 – 2002, Stephen played haulage boss Sean Reynolds. His time in the Dales came to an end after his character, Sean, got a new job in Chester.

Is Stephen on social media?

You can follow Stephen on Twitter. He does not appear to have Instagram.

tm_source=dynamic&utm_medium=web&utm_campaign=bau_yrs&utm_content=content_prcvip">

Features & Reviews Editor Emily Gilbert has been a journalist since 2016 and has worked across a variety of specialist and lifestyle brands both in print and online. Specialising in product reviews, Emily is the first to know about all the exciting new releases, her favourite being gadgets for the home.