FROM Doctor who to Luther and now Holby City, Paul McGann has had some impressive roles during his 40 year career in show business.

Here's everything you need to know about him...

Who is Paul McGann?

Paul McGann was born on November 14 1959 in Liverpool, the second child of Joe and Clare McGann, and grew up with his four siblings – Joe, Mark, Stephen and Clare – in Kensington.

Their parents encouraged them to develop their talents and his brothers are also actors.

Paul was working in a shoe shop aged 17 when his teacher advised him to audition for the acting course at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art.

His brothers Joseph, Mark and Stephen are actors as well and the four of them played brothers in the 1995 series The Hanging Gale about the Irish Famine.

What was Paul McGann's big break?

Paul's first major role came in 1986 when he starred in BBC drama The Monocled Mutineer in which he played the infamous British deserter and criminal Percy Toplis.

While Paul received good reviews for his performance, the serial caused quite the controversy due to the sensitivity surrounding the Étaples Mutiny in 1917 at the "Bull Ring", a harsh British Army training ground in Étaples, France.

Relevant documents around the incident are sealed until later this year and so what exactly happened is still up for debate.

However, due to controversy the BBC had to remove all planned screenings of the film, which was released on DVD in 2007.

What films has Paul McGann been in?

Paul's next role was far less controversial as he landed the main part in Bruce Robinson's cult film, Withnail and I.

While he primarily focused on TV work, Paul also had small roles in The Three Musketeers and Alien 3.

When did Paul McGann play Doctor Who?

Paul played the eightH incarnation of the Doctor in the 1996 TV film Doctor who.

The film was a joint venture between the BBC, Universal Studios and Fox, and Paul was signed up to play the Doctor if either Fox or Universal wanted to make another TV series.

Despite good ratings in the UK, the film didn't do as well stateside and so Fox didn't pick up the option and Universal couldn't find another network interested in making the series.

As a result, there were no new series until 2005, when the rights reverted back to the BBC.

His image was also used on the covers of the BBC's Eighth Doctor novels and he also played the iconic role in a series of audio plays , some of which were broadcast on BBC Radio 7.

While his time as the Doctor may have been short, people still recognise him for it.

He told the Liverpool Echo: “I was walking the dogs in the park yesterday, very early,” he says. “And some jogger – he must have been 6ft 7ins, he was a man mountain and wearing a hood – ran towards me.

“I thought, oh no, what’s he going to do? And he just jogged slowly past me and said ‘you’re my favourite Doctor’.”

Who does Paul McGann think should be the next Doctor Who?

Speaking on Loose Women, Paul revealed Tilda Swinton would be his choice for the next Dr Who.

Since Peter Capaldi left the hit BBC show a number of big names have been linked to the iconic role.

But Paul thinks it’s time writer Steven Moffat opted to put a woman in the tardis.

aul said: “Steven, the writer, has described it as one character with many faces – so why not a female?”

When quizzed about which actress he would like to see in the role, Paul revealed Tilda was his number one choice.

He explained: “I’d pick Tilda because she’s a great character.”

What's next for Paul McGann's career?

Holby City fans will be delighted to know that Paul has just joined and will start filming his scenes in August.

His character is a “surgical star with irrepressible charm” who goes by the name Professor John Gaskell.

Apparently he will be helping the hospital through a major crisis, and we will get our first glimpse of Paul in role this December.

Is Paul McGann Married?

Paul was married to Annie Milner from 1992 until they split in 2006.

The couple have two sons, Joe and Jack, who are both adults.