Paul McGann News

Paul McGann And India Fisher To Star In Special Live Recording Of Big Finish's Eighth DOCTOR WHO Adventure

Experience a unique live recording of Big Finish’s Eighth Doctor adventure at Cadogan Hall. Join the audience for this special event featuring the beloved Doctor Who character in an exciting audio drama.

Photos: First Look at WITHNAIL & I at Birmingham Rep

New production photos have been released from the Birmingham Repertory Theatre's production of Withnail & I. Check out the photos here!

Photos: Robert Sheehan and Adonis Siddique in WITHNAIL AND I at Birmingham Rep

All new photos have been released of Robert Sheehan as Withnail and Adonis Siddique as Marwood in Withnail at I at Birmingham Rep. Check out the photos here!

Full Cast and Creative Team Set For WITHNAIL AND I at Birmingham Rep

The full cast and creative team have been announced for Withnail and I at Birmingham Rep, working alongside the previously announced Robert Sheehan as Withnail, Adonis Siddique as Marwood and Malcolm Sinclair as Uncle Monty.

Robert Sheehan Will Lead Stage Adaptation of WITHNAIL AND I at Birmingham Rep

Robert Sheehan will lead the previously announced stage adaptation of Bruce Robinson’s 1987 British tragi-comedy film, Withnail and I, premiering at Birmingham Rep this May. The cast will also include Adonis Siddique and Malcolm Sinclair.

Greenwich Theatre Announces Cast For FROZEN

Greenwich Theatre reveals full cast and creative team for their production of Bryony Lavery's FROZEN.

Stage Adaptation of WITHNAIL AND I to Premiere at Birmingham Rep in 2024

A brand new adaptation of Bruce Robinson’s 1987 British tragi-comedy film, Withnail and I, will be directed by the double Olivier Award-winning Artistic Director of Birmingham Rep, Sean Foley and designed by Alice Power.

The Castro Theatre Conservancy Launches 'Save The Castro Theatre'

Today, the Castro Theatre Conservancy (CTC)—a nonprofit organization—launched “Save the Castro Theatre,” a campaign dedicated to preserving and protecting San Francisco's Castro Theatre as a cultural and entertainment venue for motion pictures and live performances.

Katy J Pearson Shares New Single & Video 'Alligator'

The accompanying video, directed by Edie Lawrence, features an eclectic cameo list including Paul McGann (reprising a somewhat familiar character from Withnail & I) and Tom Gould (of the band Pottery). Plus, check out the complete list of upcoming tour dates!

THE BREACH and WOLF CUB Come to Hampstead Theatre This Spring

The Breach by Naomi Wallace, with direction by Sarah Frankcom, will run on its Main Stage from 6 May until 4 June. Wolf Cub, written and directed by Ché Walker, will run at Hampstead Downstairs from 8 April until 7 May.

BWW Review: THE FOREST, Hampstead Theatre

How might Florian Zeller return to the theatre following his Oscar triumph for The Father? London's Hampstead Theatre hosts the world premiere of his latest play, The Forest.

Photos: First Look at THE FOREST at Hampstead Theatre

Hampstead Theatre has released production images for the world premiere of Florian Zeller’s new play, The Forest. Running until 12 March 2022, The Forest is translated by Zeller’s long-time collaborator Christopher Hampton, and directed by Jonathan Kent, who re-unites with Zeller after his critically acclaimed production of The Height of the Storm.

Hampstead Theatre Announces Full Cast & Creative Team For THE FEVER SYNDROME

Hampstead Theatre has announced the full cast and creative team for the world premiere of Alexis Zegerman's vivid, new play, The Fever Syndrome. Directed by Roxana Silbert, The Fever Syndrome will run from 19 March until 23 April 2022.

THE FOREST Leads February's Top 10 New London Shows

London is never short of temptations, whether splashy West End shows, engrossing dramas or bold fringe offerings. From Florian Zeller’s latest to a starry Shakespeare and thrilling art duel, here are some of this month’s most eye-catching openings. Don’t forget to check back for BroadwayWorld’s reviews, interviews and features!

Hampstead Theatre Announces Full Cast and Creative Team For The World Premiere Of THE FOREST

Hampstead Theatre has announced the full cast and creative team for the world premiere of Florian Zeller's new play, The Forest. Running from 5 February until 12 March 2022, The Forest is translated by Zeller's long-time collaborator Christopher Hampton, and directed by Jonathan Kent, who re-unites with Zeller after his critically acclaimed production of The Height of the Storm.

BWW Review: BAD NIGHTS AND ODD DAYS, Greenwich Theatre

Four short plays from a long time ago yield much to reflect upon in this mini-anthology of Caryl Churchill's work.

Greenwich Theatre Reopens With a Trio of Revived Works By Caryl Churchill

Led by acclaimed actor Paul McGann (Withnail and I; Doctor Who), Churchill's earlier works will be brought to life for this limited season. Further casting will be announced in due course.

Barry Williams, ROGUE ONE, GAME OF THRONES and More Among New Wizard World Virtual Experiences

Wizard Entertainment, Inc. (OTCBB:WIZD) brings more 'Wizard World Virtual Experiences' featuring stars of iconic franchises across its digital video platforms in the coming weeks.

YouTube Debuts New UK Special VIRTUALLY HISTORY: THE BERLIN WALL

Today, YouTube Originals and Remarkable TV (part of EndemolShine UK) have teamed up to launch “Virtually History: The Berlin Wall”, a new 30 minute special marking the 30th anniversary of the fall of the Berlin Wall and bringing viewers an immersive new way of history being brought to life.