The LSI Logic logo design is a registered trademark of LSI Logic Corporation.

This Agreement may be enforced separately by each member of the LSI Logic Group and each member of the SSI Group.

All LSI Logic news releases (financial, acquisitions, manufacturing, products, technology etc.) are issued exclusively by PR Newswire and are immediately thereafter posted on the company's external website, http://www.lsilogic.com.

All LSI Logic news releases (financial, acquisitions, manufacturing, products, technology etc.) are issued exclusively by PR Newswire and are immediately thereafter posted on the company’s external website, http://www.lsi.com.

Notices, offers, requests or other communications required or permitted to be given by either party pursuant to the terms of this Agreement shall be given in writing to the respective parties at the following addresses: if to LSI Logic: LSI Logic Corporation 0000 Xxxxxx Xxxx Milpitas, CA 95035 Attention: General Counsel Fax: (000) 000-0000 if to SSI: LSI Logic Storage Systems, Inc.

All LSI Logic news releases (financial, acquisitions, manufacturing, products, technology etc.) are issued exclusively by PR Newswire and are immediately thereafter posted on the company’s external website, http://www.lsilogic.com.

This chip is imple- mented with three layers of metal in the LEA-300K hybrid gate-array technology from LSI Logic.

LSI Logic is headquartered at 1551 McCarthy Boulevard, Milpitas, CA 95035, 408-433-8000, http://www.lsilogic.com.

He ever took senior management staff in C-Cube Microsystems, LSI Logic Inc.

The Innovation Alliance, which tends to represent smaller technology firms (including fabless firms, Qualcomm and LSI Logic), and the National Venture Capital Association, which represents venture capitalists, had previously opposed the reform effort but are now prepared to accept the legislation after considerable modifications (which is now opposed as being too weak by the Coalition for Patent Fairness, which tends to represent larger technology firms).