LSI Logic Corp. will acquire C-Cube Microsystems in an all-stock transaction valued at $878 million.

Under terms of the transaction announced today, each outstanding share of C-Cube common stock will be exchanged for 0.79 of a share of LSI Logic common stock.

C-Cube is a provider for digital set-top box, DVD and emerging CODEC-based applications, such as personal video recording, home media servers, recordable DVD, residential gateway and streaming video.

LSI Logic is a designer and manufacturer of communications and storage semiconductors for applications that access, interconnect and store data, voice and video.

New home sales decline

WASHINGTON (AP) -- New-homes sales fell 2.4 percent in February as the slowing economy depressed activity for a second straight month, the government said today.

The Commerce Department reported that the decline in sales of new single-family homes last month followed an even bigger 10.8 percent plunge in January, which had been the biggest monthly setback in seven years.

The back-to-back reductions marked the first consecutive declines in new-home sales since activity fell for three straight months from July through September of 1999.

SPX pays $197 billion for VSI

MUSKEGON, Mich. (Bloomberg) -- SPX Corp., a maker of industrial and automotive products, said it will acquire VSI Holdings for about $197 million in cash and assumed debt to gain VSI's Internet development products.

SPX plans to pay about $146 million in cash and assume about $51 million in debt, the company said in a statement. VSI shareholders have the option of exchanging their shares for SPX stock or a combination of stock and cash.

Comair pilots walk off job

HEBRON, Ky. (AP) -- Comair pilots walked off the job early today after contract talks with the airline broke off, and union officials said the pilots were prepared to continue the strike for as long as necessary.

Listen now and subscribe: Apple Podcasts | Google Podcasts | Spotify | RSS Feed | SoundStack | All Of Our Podcasts

"I think it's fair to say that there was not a single Comair pilot that wanted this to happen, but we have prepared for this mentally and financially and we are together," union spokesman Max Roberts said after the strike began at 12:01 a.m.

Comair, the nation's second-largest regional airline, serves 95 cities in the United States, Canada, Mexico and the Bahamas and carries more than 8 million passengers annually.

One flight out of Buffalo Niagara International Airport was canceled today due to the pilots' strike, the 10:20 a.m. flight to Cincinnati. Comair handles the Delta Connection flights for the carrier. Other Delta flights from Buffalo to Cincinnati are not affected.

Comair's 1,350 pilots want a company-funded retirement plan, more rest time between flights, higher pay and pay for hours they are on the job, not just flying hours.

Conexant cutting 1,500 jobs

NEWPORT BEACH, Calif. (Bloomberg) -- Conexant Systems said it's cutting 1,500 jobs because demand for its communications chips is falling.

Revenue in the fiscal second quarter will be down 35 percent to 40 percent from the first quarter's $410.4 million, the company said in a statement.

O'Neill to sell Alcoa stock

WASHINGTON (AP) -- Bowing to critics, Treasury Secretary Paul O'Neill said Sunday he will sell his extensive aluminum company stock to avoid possible conflicts.

O'Neill, hammered for two months for keeping about $100 million in stock and stock options from Alcoa Inc., said the decision frees him to focus on economic issues.

He had sold his holdings in General Motors, Citigroup and four investment funds on the advice of ethics attorneys after becoming Bush's chief economic policy maker in January.

Ocean Energy acquires EnSight

HOUSTON (Bloomberg) -- Ocean Energy, an oil and natural-gas explorer, agreed to buy oil and gas fields from EnSight Resources LLC for $121 million to gain reserves in Texas and Louisiana.

Ocean Energy has been increasing production in Texas and Louisiana to take advantage of high energy prices.

Be the first to know

Get local news delivered to your inbox!

* I understand and agree that registration on or use of this site constitutes agreement to its user agreement and privacy policy.