When there are Soviet films about the World War II, which are extremely cruel like the war itself, filled with suffering, tears, honor, heroic human deeds, bravery, life, love, and death, it's kinda difficult to rate and compare any other war films. If we're talking about prisoner-of-war camps, there's no place for music, entertainment, or a matter-of-fact tone in them. Mainly sacrifice and death. These film are both the truth and the nerve. But overall, it was intriguing to learn about a different perspective on the situation with military hostages held by the enemy.

If there is a nerve in the film, it's in Michael Redgrave's character. He is Czech, a former resident of the occupied region of Eastern Europe,…

From Grand Illusion to The Great Escape, most movies about prisoners-of-war focus on escape attempts. Even the first half of William Holden’s plot line in The Bridge On The River Kwai involves his escape. But escaping was far from a common experience for most POWs. The Captive Heart, one of Ealing’s early documentary-style war films, deserves credit for being primarily about the mundane realities of life in a POW camp. Yes, an effort at digging a tunnel figures into the plot, but it’s unceremoniously discovered and dealt with. The bulk of the film focuses on the indefinite, potentially soul-crushing tedium of internment and the important sources of solace POWs find in each other and their infrequent communications with home. Although…

Ealing - and Basil Dearden specifically - were so good at this sort of thing: weaving together disparate stories, laced with emotion and humour, into a satisfying whole. This tells of a group of British prisoners-of-war, captured in 1940, who serve the duration of the war in captivity. The Captive Heart depicts resonantly the hope, the frustration, the boredom, the camaraderie, the disillusion and the longing for home that prolonged incarceration entails. For this it enlists a precision squadron from the wartime generation of actors, all of whom enliven their characters from the spare brushstrokes provided by the script.

We have Basil Redford as the posh Major whose passion is for the gee-gees, Gordon Jackson as a blinded lieutenant, Jack…

The flipside of The Great Escape.

Here there is talk of escape and a passing mention of a tunnel, but no one actually makes a run for freedom, like the vast majority of real life captured service men.

Instead, the film talks about the experience of being held in captivity for years on end with no idea of when it all might end. And at the same time shows us what is going on back home in the lives of loved ones, reminding us that those men who stayed locked up for year after year must have been tortured by thoughts of home.

And those thoughts are expressed (perhaps a little too eloquently) in the beautifully rounded tones of Michael…

'Deep down in the hearts of all of us there dwells a lonely ache, a desperate yearning for those we love, and a fear. A fear of becoming forgotten men.'

Might have well have been exceptional had the narrative stayed with Michael Redgrave's character without darting over to the supporting cast so often, though The Captive Heart still stands as underrated POW film, celebrating the endurance and unwavering spirit of the mostly British prisoners that were caught during the Battle of France and spent all five years of the war in captivity. Basil Dearden directs with matter of fact naturalism and along with cinematographer Douglas Slocombe attempts to capture the rhythms of life in the camp, marking the days, weeks,…

After doing their bit for the war effort, keeping the spirits up on the home front with patriotic propaganda, Ealing Studios seized on the opportunity that presented itself with VE Day to tell a true account of the conflict; epic and yet intimate, a film that dealt with personal defeat and demoralisation, a story that acknowledged that morale could be, and had indeed been, low and that's why Ealing had produced what it did during the war years. That movie is The Captive Heart.

The Captive Heart tells the story of Michael Redgrave's Czech captain who, in the process of escaping certain death in a Nazi concentration camp, stumbles upon a dead British officer and assumes his uniform and identity.…