Victoria are the Sheffield Shield champions for the 2009-10 season after beating Queensland by 457 runs in the final at the MCG.

The Bushrangers were virtually assured of capturing the title when they batted Queensland out of the match over the third and fourth days, as they only needed a draw after finishing top of the table.

They set the Bulls 640 to win and bowled them out for 182 halfway through the fifth and final day.

Legspinner Bryce McGain took 4-70 and paceman John Hastings 3-25, including wickets with his final two deliveries.

Only Lee Carseldine, with 75, and wicketkeeper Chris Hartley (29 not out) showed any resistance.

Victoria's title was their 28th overall and their second in succession, although last season's final against the Bulls was drawn.

This is the first time in three decades the Vics have claimed back-to-back titles.

Queensland's defeat, which included a late collapse of 5-27, was the biggest in a fourth-innings run-chase in a Shield final.

After an even first two days, the Vics took a 48-run lead on the first innings and then turned the game firmly their way through an opening stand of 154 between Rob Quiney and Nick Jewell.

Their partnership was the launch pad for a huge second innings for the Vics, who amassed 8-591 before declaring.

Victoria's Shield win completed another outstanding season for the Vics, who reached the semi-finals of the Champions League in India last year, won the domestic Twenty20 title and hosted the one-day final before losing to Tasmania.

The Bushrangers achieved all that despite having key players regularly absent - either through injury or national call-ups - and Brad Hodge and Dirk Nannes retiring from first-class cricket before the season was over.

David Hussey's second-innings 168 in the final gave him 970 runs for the season, Hastings took 36 wickets for the season and Damien Wright 35, and wicketkeeper Matthew Wade enjoyed another strong season, which included a vital 96 in the first innings of the final.

Queensland's best asset was their fast bowling this season, as Ben Cutting took 46 wickets, Chris Swan 31 and Luke Feldman 30, while wicketkeeper Hartley was the Shield player of the season.