Jean Uayan’s pioneering book sheds light on the spread of Reformation Christianity among Chinese Buddhists in the Catholic Philippines, deepening our understanding of the emergence of what Philip Jenkins has dubbed “the next Christendom.” It has my highest recommendation.

George W. Harper, PhD

Program Director, Theological Studies and Church History,

Asia Graduate School of Theology

Dr Jean Uayan’s A Study of the Emergence and Early Development of Selected Protestant Chinese Churches in the Philippines is another important addition to historiography of religion of the Chinese-Filipino community in the Philippines. How the six churches emerged in the predominantly Catholic Philippines, how the membership and leadership were formed and how they related to the Christian missions of early years, and how the churches resolved issues and challenges, enlighten the readers and fill a serious gap in the body of literature on the study of the Chinese Filipinos.

Teresita Ang See

Founding President, Kaisa Para Sa Kaunlaran Inc.

Executive Trustee, Kaisa Heritage Foundation

In a recent gathering of theological educators in Asia, a church history professor lamented, “There is a dearth of materials on Asian Church History, we need local textbooks, please write about the history of Christianity in your country.” This book meets such a need!

Theresa Roco Lua, PhD

General Secretary, Asia Theological Association

This is a great and significant work on the history of Chinese churches in the Philippines. Aside from helping the existing Chinese churches in the Philippines to go back to see God’s graciousness in establishing his church, the book can be a tool for critical researchers, church historians, and church pastors to study and plan on how to establish new churches in Asia and beyond.

Joseph Shao, PhD

General Secretary, Asia Theological Association (2007–2016)

President, Biblical Seminary of the Philippines

Board member, Chinese Congress on World Evangelism International

Historians have previously shown some interest in Protestant church history in the Philippines, but recently the topic has become more developed. Jean Uayan’s study is one of very few in this area; this is specifically so of Chinese churches. Numerous pages of early photographs and lists, as well as the author’s final reflections, round out the narrative. This is a well-documented work.