The actor John Wayne, who once lived in Pauma Valley, died of stomach cancer in 1979 at the age of 72, but a guest book at the Valley Center History Museum shows that John Wayne signed its visitor log subsequent to that date.

The more recent John Wayne signature belonged to a young man who appeared to be in his late twenties. When questioned by a museum docent about the signature, the young man produced his Texas driver’s license which showed, in fact, that John Wayne was his true name, and he was visiting from his home near Abilene.

In 2007, on the 100th anniversary of the actor’s birth, the local History Museum mounted a tribute profiling Wayne’s acting career along with local memorabilia from Valley Center and Pauma Valley.

What was to have been a six-month exhibit proved to be so popular, that is has remained in place after a dozen years and continues to attract legions of fans.

Wayne’s connection to the area began in 1941 when he built a 3,600 square foot adobe home on Pauma Valley Drive. The house was later used as the clubhouse for the local Country Club and housed visitors and employees needing temporary housing. Subsequent owners razed the home in 1989. The front door of the adobe was rescued by a resident on nearby Wiskon Way and serves today as her front door. An adobe brick from Wayne’s house is part of the History Museum exhibit.

In 1971, Wayne was invited to serve as the first Grand Marshal of the Valley Center Western Days parade. He regularly rode horseback through roads of Valley Center and Pauma Valley, and once declared, “McNally Road [a onetime stagecoach road] is my favorite riding trail.”

According to correspondence with Wayne’s agent in Hollywood, the parade invitation was under consideration; however, the invitation eventually was declined. It was never clear if the cancellation was due to health problems (he had recently been diagnosed with lung cancer) or the need to wrap up filming of the movie “Big Jake” in Mexico.

Finally, the History Museum is often asked about the origin of a Valley Center street named John Wayne Lane. The name has no connection to the actor, and likely was chosen by an early resident of the street who was a Wayne fan.