Announcing his support today for Mitt Romney ahead of the Michigan primary at the end of this month, the state's Governor Rick Snyder declared: 'Our country has never elected a president born and raised in Michigan.'

The endorsement, made in an article in The Detroit News, was the latest in a long line of nods from top Republicans in Michigan.

At a subsequent appearance with the candidate in Farmington Hills, Snyder called Romney a 'native Michigander', adding: 'He understands our state. He is one of us.'

One of us: Michigan Gov Rick Snyder, left, shakes hands with Mitt Romney at The Greater Farmington Area Chamber of Commerce luncheon today

Romney's birthplace: Michigan is widely viewed as a must-win state for the Republican frontrunner - and that's certainly how his own campaign views it

But playing the 'favorite son' - a term his senior aide Eric Fehrnstrom used on Twitter today - in Michigan is fraught with danger.

Across the country, party establishment backing has not sewn up the nomination for Romney.

In some cases, it could even have been counter-productive, making some voters feel they are being railroaded by party bigwigs seeking to bypass them.

Romney lost Minnesota in a landslide despite having the backing of its former governor Tim Pawlenty and he was creamed in South Carolina even though its governor Nikki Haley campaigned tirelessly for him.

Michigan, where Romney was born in 1947, is widely viewed as a must-win state for the Republican frontrunner - and that's certainly how his own campaign views it.

In the 2008 Michigan primary, Romney defeated John McCain by nine points. After losing three states to Rick Santorum last week, defeat in Michigan would be catastrophic.

Romney has a name that is gold-plated in Michigan. His father George, a moderate Republican, was the state's governor from 1963 to 1969 and his mother ran for the Senate in Michigan in 1970.

His wife Ann was born and raised in Bloomfield Hills, Michigan.

'Mitt Romney was born in Detroit,' Snyder wrote. 'His father served with distinction as governor. Before that, he was president of American Motors.

'Mitt grew up with the prospects of the auto industry and of Michigan discussed around the dinner table.'

Romney has taken every opportunity to highlight his Michigan ties.

'I’ve visited every county in Michigan, I think more than once on my dad’s campaign and my mom’s campaign,' he said at a Welcome Home Mitt event in Grand Rapids on Wednesday.

'I’ve gone to the county fairs, where I didn’t always see the best of each county. I saw every county in this extraordinarily beautiful state. I love Michigan.'

Loving affection: The former Massachusetts Gov kisses his wife Ann Romney who was born and raised in Bloomfield Hills, Michigan

Looking at familiar faces in the crowd, he said: 'I've got lots of friends here. There's an old high school friend - we lived across the hall from each other.' He added, to laughter: 'Any old girlfriends here? I have to be careful. Ann's not here today.'

In a new ad airing in Michigan that features family photographs and grainy footage from the time of his youth, Romney states: 'Michigan has been my home and this is personal.'

But Romney veered off message somewhat when talking to Michigan journalists on MLive.com.

Meet and greet: The Republican presidential candidate greets workers on a campaign stop at National Galvanizing in Monroe, Michigan today

When asked the deceptively tricky question of whether he supported the Detroit Tigers or Boston Red Sox, he responded: 'Oh, Red Sox, I'm afraid. I've lived in Massachusetts for how many years now? Forty years.'

Romney had no choice really - he's known as a Red Sox supporter and if he'd plumped for the Tigers he would have been guilty of the mother-of-all panders.

He spoke of his boyhood love for the Detroit Tigers but the take away was clear, he's really from Massachusetts.

Snyder's endorsement, moreover, is unlikely to make much difference.

In 2000, George W. Bush lost Michigan to McCain even though the state's popular governor John Engler had backed Bush.

Santorum's blue collar roots and credibility with social conservatives, a big factor in Michigan, gives him a foothold he can exploit.

Today in Detroit: Santorum's blue collar roots and credibility with social conservatives, a big factor in Michigan, gives him a foothold he can exploit

With Romney yet to seal the deal with conservatives nationally and up against a candidate with momentum and media coverage behind him, victory is far from guaranteed.

Dan Pero, a veteran Republican consultant in Michigan who is not aligned with a 2012 candidate, told me that Romney was 'running the risk' of overplaying his Michigan roots. 'While he was born here and his father was a beloved governor, that was almost 50 years ago. Most voters have no recollection of it.'

In identifying Michigan as home turf, Pero said, Romney was raising the stakes.

'You've got to win your home state. If he doesn't win, the impact on his campaign will be severe.'

Santorum has led in all three public polls conducted since his trifecta in Colorado, Minnesota and Missouri last Tuesday by a margin of between three and 15 points.

He has just under two weeks to erase that gap. That's what he did with Newt Gingrich in Florida but this time running a very aggressive negative ad campaign might drive some voters towards Santorum.

When it was pointed out in the MLive.com interview that all the polls showed him losing Michigan, Romney responded categorically: 'Well, that won't happen.'

If he's correct and he wins on February 28, then the Santorum surge will have been stopped, perhaps permanently, and Romney's path to the nomination could be relatively smooth.