Thanks to the contribution of the Alifakovac bakery, the meals that the users of the Stari Grad National Kitchen in Sarajevo receive on cold January mornings are enriched with Frisian flatbreads.

As they state, the change in the legal regulation, which exempted food donations from paying VAT, facilitated the implementation of this humane decision.

In a world where every day brings new challenges and fierce price increases, every donation makes the lives of those struggling with a difficult reality easier. As many as 638 are fed daily in this kitchen.

“I would like to take this opportunity to thank our neighbors from the bakery. They send 50 flatbreads every day to help our users. Along with a hot meal, our users now also receive this supplement, which means a lot to them ,” said Amir Radeljaš, manager of the Stari Grad National Kitchen.

After food donations in Bosnia and Herzegovina were exempted from paying VAT, obstacles were removed for companies in our country to start the donation process more actively, preventing food from ending up as waste before the expiration date.

The initiators of the “Gram by gram for tons of solidarity” campaign also presented a guide with necessary information for companies and public kitchens, and the first man of one of the largest public kitchens in Sarajevo invited everyone who has the opportunity to get involved.

He points out that every donation is very valuable, and that even the smallest good deeds can have a great impact on the community.

We remind you that the great activist initiative “No one is hungry.” Niko sam” , which after two years brought about a change in the legal regulations in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in the continuation of its activities aims to inform companies and public kitchens, but also to regulate the process of donation and logistics, so that food reaches those who need it most.

In the soup kitchens, they expect the situation on the ground to improve, because the number of hungry people is increasing, and they don’t want to send anyone home without help.

The initiative “No one hungry. I’m nobody.” is part of the “Legal framework for philanthropy” program, which is implemented by the Mozaik Foundation together with partner organizations (Udruženje Pomozi.ba, Mreža za živnište mira, Trag Foundation and Catalyst Balkans) with the financial support of the American government through USAID.