Mudiaga Affe

Calabar, the capital of Cross River State in today’s 21st century Nigeria was before 1914 the capital of the Southern Protectorate. It lost the status to Lagos when the southern and northern protectorates were merged to become what is today known as Nigeria.

Despite losing the status over 100 years ago, relics and tales of a former capital still abound in the ‘Paradise City’.

One of the most prominent edifices that will remind any tourist of the city as a capital city is the ‘Old Residency’, otherwise known as ‘Government House’ which has now become a national monument.

The Old Residency building, originally known as ‘Government House’ was fabricated in Britain in 1884 and erected at old Calabar to accommodate British administration of the Niger Coast Territories.

The edifice, which was renovated in 1986 by the National Museum and Monument, was declared a national monument (No. 20) in 1959. It was the seat of the Oil Rivers and Niger Coast Protectorates and the Protectorate of Southern Nigeria (after 1914) of the resident of the old Calabar province.

In the 1950s, the building served as a ministerial guest house and after the Nigerian civil war, it accommodated the then South Eastern State of Nigeria.

Portuguese traders were said to be the first set of explorers that found Calabar as a safe haven for commercial activities. Their arrival which later attracted other European explorers, brought about the commercial and religious boom that brought Calabar to fame.

While the commercial aspect of the European exploration may have gone into extinction following dilapidated buildings of United African Company, John Holt, Yamaha, among others that are scattered around the Bay Side axis of Calabar, the religious facet has survived for over a century with exponential expansion.

During the era of slave trade, the Calabar waterways was a major exporting route used by the European traders. It is on record that out of the 2, 579, 400 slaves that were traded out of Africa between 1690 and 1807, about 31.1 per cent of them emanated from Calabar.

The then capital city of Calabar also had the Bricksfield Prison which accommodated the late siege, Chief Obafemi Awolowo, among other Nigerians as prisoners. The prison has since gone into extinction but the wall which forms part of the fence of the State Library is still visible.

The activities of a Scottish Christian Missionary, Mary Slessor, who was famous for putting a stop to the killing of twins in the Southern Protectorate of Nigeria during the colonial era of the late 1800s, were another factor that brought the ancient city of Calabar to fame.

She was inspired into evangelism by the works of another great Scottish missionary, David Livingstone, but her legacies have proved to surpass that of her mentor. This is so because her name still rings bell not only in Calabar and Nigeria by extension but also in her native country, Scotland, where her image was put on the Clydesdale Bank’s £10 note in 1997, replacing the image of Livingstone.

The Presbyterian Church of Nigeria was founded by United Presbyterian Church of Scotland missionaries led by the Rev. Hope Masterson Waddell. He arrived in Calabar and founded the first Presbyterian church in 1846. Rev. Waddell founded the Hope Waddell Training Institution in Calabar in 1894. History has it that Nigeria’s first president, Dr. Nnamdi Azikiwe, had in the 1920s attended the school.

Other notable figures that were once housed in Calabar were Oba Overanwen of Benin. The then Benin monarch was exiled to Calabar with his two wives and died in 1914. His residence, which was said to be located along Calabar Road, has gone into extinction. Others were King Jaja of Opobo (who was later exiled to West Indies) and Nana of Itsekiri, who was also deported to Calabar.

In the narration of an 87-year-old engineer, Chief Bassey E. Bassey, the early European explorers found Calabar as a safe haven for business activities because of the relative peace in the old city.

According to Bassey’s analysis, the explorers also later became comfortable following discoveries that Calabar was a land of carnivals.

He said, “They settled in Calabar because they found out that the port was a safe haven for trading activities. Calabar was also a place of showbiz. In those days, you had a lot of band troupes converging in Calabar for various carnivals. They came in waves and this is where they disbanded.”

Apart from the commercial, religious and social attractions that brought fame to Calabar, a capital Nigeria never had, there was also the aspect of courteous behaviour of the women and the cuisines, which Bassey described as unique.

“The ladies have similar behaviour as that of the French ladies. People admire them a lot and when they get closer, you discover that they are great cooks. Young women here are trained specifically on how to take care of the home. They are taught how to cook different cuisines and that is an attraction on its own,” he added.

Bassey, however, lamented that the 1913 ceding of Bakassi and parts of Cameroons by British colonial masters to their German counterpart, was one great error in the history of Calabar.

“Around 1913, the British ceded Bakassi and part of Cameroons to Germany. The move was greeted with a massive protest because it was not part of the agreement reached when they came to settle in Calabar. The British colonial masters never really had access to ownership of land, so, they had no right to cede Bakassi and part of Cameroons to Germany,” he said.

With respect to the ethnic colourations of the groups that make up what is today known as Calabar, a 64-year-old retired Director in the Cross River State Ministry of Information, Oqua Itu, who holds a traditional title of Ntufam, noted that the first set of Europeans that came to Calabar named the city Cambar.

Itu said the old city of Calabar is occupied by the Efik, Qua and Efut people, adding that they all believe in one traditional culture that had held them together for centuries.

He said, “Before the European came, there were three ethnic groups operating in Calabar. The Efik, Qua and Efut are autonomous in their rights but we have the same culture (Ekpe) which holds us together. The three groups have had good relationship and operated for several centuries without any problem.

“The first set of Europeans that came were the Portuguese. They came for their business exploration. They gave the name Cambar when they first came. The thinking was that the sea was accessible and the environment was serene and peaceful. It was from Cambar that they eventually formed the word Calabar.

“The Europeans came in contact with the Efik who were around the beach side and they started trading. Of course they brought in illicit gins and snuff to give to the people. Sometime around the late 18th century, King Eyamba (1) wrote to the Queen of England to send educationists and by January 1846, the Scotland Mission arrived.

“The team was led by Rev. Hope Waddell. They came aboard a ship tagged ‘Waree’ and berthed along the estuaries of the Calabar rivers. A day after, they used government steamer, piloted by Captain Beecroft, to bring them onshore to the town and they immediately went to see King Eyamba to inform him that they had arrived.

“They requested for land to build the school and they erected Duke Town School by the beach. It was opened on May 10, 1846 and that was the beginning of the coming of Christianity to this part. The next group that came in were the Catholics in 1903.

“One thing that held us together in Calabar was the culture and our people have lived here long together without skirmishes. Because the Europeans came in with double mind, they became interested in slavery and they came to terms with the fact that Calabar was the most comfortable place to become the capital of the Oil River Protectorate, which later became Niger Coast Protectorate and subsequently Southern Protectorate.”

From Itu’s analogy, the bulk of colonialists accessed other parts of Nigeria through the Calabar estuaries, adding that Calabar had during that era enjoyed the influence of British colonial masters.

“The first area of operation of the white people who colonised Nigeria was in Calabar. It was from here they moved to other parts of the country. That is why you find the Old Residency here. After the amalgamation of the northern and southern protectorates by Lord Lugard in 1914, the capital was moved to Lagos.

“As the then capital city, Calabar enjoyed a lot of British influence. The Calabar people also adopted the British style of dressing. They brought education and Christianity. It was also a commercial hub with a lot of British companies. Unfortunately, they are no more in existence,” he said.

Itu, however, stated that with the passage of time, the tide changed from Calabar to Lagos and now Abuja.

“Time and tide changes, Lagos was a capital but today, it is Abuja,” he stressed.