Not to be confused with White Fang (TV series).

Quick facts for kids

The Legend of White Fang Genre Adventure Created by Jack London (book) Developed by Crayon Animation Starring Rick Jones

Patricia Rodriguez

Michael Rudder

Mark Hellman

Pierre Lenoir

Neil Shee

Terrence Scammell

Thelma Farmer

Anik Matern Country of origin Canada

France No. of seasons 1 No. of episodes 26 (list of episodes) Production Executive producer(s) Micheline Charest Release Original network Family Channel (Canada) Original release 1992 ( ) – 25 June 1994 (1994-06-25)

The Legend of White Fang is a Canadian animated series based on the 1906 novel White Fang by Jack London. The show centers the main dog protagonist and a young human companion, 12-year-old female Wendy Scott, in the place of the novel's male trail guide, Weedon Scott.

Canada-based Cinar produced the series for the pay-TV network Family Channel, Global Television Network and TF1 in France. HBO later broadcast in the United States. Writer, journalist and popular Canadian historian, Pierre Berton, was a history consultant to the series.

Plot

12-year-old Wendy, a brave and kind girl, befriends wolf-husky mix White Fang. They share many adventures in Yukon's rugged Klondike territory during the Klondike Gold Rush where they encounter wolf packs, gold thieves, First Nations people, otters, poachers and treacherous avalanches.

Cast

Mark Hellman as White Fang

Patricia Rodriguez as Wendy

Terrence Scammell as Weedon/Alex

Pierre Lenoir as Sgt. Oakes

Neil Shee as Raven Moon

Michael Rudder as Beauty Smith

Rick Jones as Matt

Thelma Farmer as She Wolf

Anik Matern as Jeannie/Bella

Eramelinda Boquer

Sonja Ball

A.J. Henderson

Thor Bishopric

Michael O'Reilly

Kathleen Fee

George Morris

Susan Glover

Richard Dumont

Vlasta Vrána

Harry Standjofski

Bronwen Mantel

Jeannie Walker

Daniel Brochu

Greg Morton

Liz MacRae

Maria Bircher

Norman Groulx

Gary Jewell

Gordon Masten

Alan Keiping Legros

Dean Hagopian

Pauline Little

Johni Keyworth

Arthur Holden

Teddy Lee Dillon

Ian Finlay

Jane Woods

Carlyle Miller

Episodes