Sandra Goldbacher Goes Back, Moves Forward with "The

Governess"

by Anthony Kaufman

A period piece with a flare for the modern, Sandra Goldbacher’s

impressively photographed “The Governess” is an ambitious first effort.

Riding on the recent wave of new British films to come to the U.S.,

Goldbacher’s filmmaking history is not unlike her fellow compatriots.

She went to film school, went through a “usual period of struggling,”

then went on to direct both documentaries, commercials and two short

films for British television, “17” (for Channel 4 and British Screen),

and “Picadilly Circus by Night” (for the British Film Institute). But

it was her original, feature length screenplay, “The Governess,” that

set her apart from the pack.

Developed from a fictional diary which Goldbacher wrote, “The Governess”

follows the internal and external life of Rosina Da Silva, a 19th

Century Sephardic Jew, living in London in the 1940’s. When her father

dies in a murderous accident, the once wealthy family learns they are in

debt. To support herself, the headstrong Rosina ventures out from the

sheltered haven of her thriving Jewish community and journeys to an

isolated Scottish Isle in the guise of a Protestant governess named Mary

Blackchurch. There she finds not just money to send home, but a burning

desire for the man of the house, Charles Cavendish (Tom Wilkinson), his

early experiments with photography, and the family and culture she left

behind.

With the success of her previous work, Goldbacher was able to get Sarah

Curtis on board as a producer and British Screen to help finance the

film. Curtis most recently produced the Judi Dench Oscar-nominee “Mrs.

Brown” and helped Goldbacher bring in other financiers like France’s

Pandora Cinema and Sony Pictures Classics which came on before

shooting. Another notable member of the production team is Executive

Producer, Sally Hibbin, a founding member of Parallax Pictures (the

filmmaking cooperative which includes such leading British directors as

Ken Loach and Les Blair.)

But perhaps the biggest financial boost came not from a production

company, but from cover girl “Good Will Hunting” starer, Minnie Driver,

who accepted the part of Rosina early on in the film’s evolution. “It

was absolutely crucial that Rosina be played by someone with charisma

and the maturity to hold the film,” says producer Curtis, “someone

fiercely independent and an original. Minnie has that combination of

qualities. She’s a very strong personality, a real screen presence, and

a brave actress unafraid to tackle big, difficult things.” Driver was

Goldbacher’s first choice for the role, “She was the only one I

approached with it,” she says. One of the reasons Goldbacher wanted

Driver for the lead was, “There’s a real modernity about her.” She adds,

“But an ability to be vulnerable and lay herself open completely, which

is what I really wanted.”

Goldbacher’s transition from shorts and documentary work to features

“felt quite natural to me,” the writer-director notes. “Making

documentaries you’re always getting a performance out of people,” she

says. “With a documentary, you’re constructing things more, you have to

cajole people.” In contrast, her relationship with actors on her

feature film felt less strained. And the large crews she worked with

for commercials prepared her for the extensive feature film staff

backing her on “The Governess.” At first meeting, Goldbacher is petite,

soft spoken, (so soft-spoken my tape recorder barely picked up her

voice) and hardly the hearty helmer one thinks of to pull off an

elaborate period film such as “The Governess.” But Goldbacher contends

the poetic visuals and lavish settings have “always been my style.”

Speaking about the ornate scenes which introduce the viewer to the

subterranean world of the wealthy Sephardic Londoners, she says, “I

wanted that particular section to have as much saturated colors, and to

give her background in the Jewish community a sense of warmth.” This

was to counter “the gentile world as Rosina sees it,” when she travels

to Scotland, “which is harsh and cold, bleak and disturbing. Hopefully

all the visuals have emotional connections,” Goldbacher adds.

Although Goldbacher says she “grew up loving 19th Century novels,” she

wanted a period film with a modern touch. Citing Jane Campion’s “The

Piano” as inspiration, she and her crew worked hard to set the visuals

and mood apart from the standard costume dramas that audiences are used

to. Ashley Crowe, the D.P., used the film’s thematic metaphor of

photographic discovery to help shape the look of the film. “Early

photographs were all taken with soft, natural daylight, so I’ve tried to

simulate that kind of look and keep true to that style.

Photographically, this film had so much to offer. The light on the Isle

of Arran was spectacular.” Crowe continues, “In Cavendish’s workroom,

I’ve tried to simulate the soft, North light early photographers got

with the skylight. A lot of the key interiors are scenes at night, so

we used a lot of candlelight.” Goldbacher also notes the use of a

certain architectural lense called a swing shift lense which functions

like a bellows to throw off the angle of light. Production Designer,

Sarah Greenwood sums up, “We wanted it to look like life as it would

have been, a reality that’s believable. I think sometimes we have a

sanitized vision of what a period looks like, very quaint, very pretty.

This is not conventional period material where you do a thousand and one

drawing rooms.