Sandra Goldbacher is an English producer and director who directed television spots for brands including Baileys, The Observer, Philips, Evian, and Wella.

BIRTHDAY BIRTH SIGN January 1st, 1960 Sagittarius BIRTHPLACE AGE London, United Kingdom 64 years old

Early Life:

Sandra Goldbacher was born in London, United Kingdom.

Career Highlights:

Goldbacher debuted her career by directing advertisements for brands including The Observer Philips, Evian, Wella, Johnny Walker, and Baileys.

She has produced two boxing documentaries for Channel Four and two documentaries for the BBC series Building Sights.

In 1994, Goldbacher produced i.e Two short films: Seventeen, starring Rachel Weisz, and Piccadilly Circus By Night. In college, she produced films.

Also in 1999, A BAFTA Award was nominated for the best rookie for Goldbacher’s debut feature film, The Governess, starring Minnie Driver and based on a fictional journal she kept.

In addition to, Me Without You, her second picture, released in 2001 stars Michelle Williams and Anna Friel. Also, It was written by Goldbacher and Laurence Coriat. The picture had been in development before The Governess, but finance for the other project arrived earlier.

The “over-intense” connection between two adolescent females is examined in Me Without You. There, A friendship she had as a youngster that was partially modeled on the movie. Likewise, Both movies contained Jewish themes and characters.

Goldbacher directed Ballet Shoes, a television movie based on Noel Streatfeild’s book, starring Emma Watson for BBC One in 2007.

Moreover, She oversaw the direction of two episodes of Dominic West’s The Hour’s second season in 2012.

In 2016, she directed A 1967-set episode of the television series Endeavour. Likewise, She also directed two episodes of Victoria, a British television program, in 2016. She was the episode director of Anne with an E in 2017.

Moreover, In 2018, she directed the first season of the Amazon TV series Ordeal by Innocence, starring Bill Nighy and Alice Eve.

The Accident, a four-episode Channel 4 miniseries about a tiny Welsh village and how it deals with a horrific explosion, was produced and written by Jack Thorne and was directed by Goldbacher in 2019.

Personal Life and Relationships:

After earning a degree in French Literature from Sussex University, Goldbacher attended Middlesex University for a year to study cinema and video.

Sandra Goldbacher was married to Peter Salmi in 1999 and has one kid.

Related With:

In Seventeen TV movie, she cast Christien Anholt, Emily Aston, and Emma Bird.