The only Italian winner of the Nobel Peace Prize (1909), Ernesto Teodoro Moneta was an Italian patriot who first fought for the unification of Italy under the Savoy dynasty and then enlisted with his brothers to fight in the Cacciatori delle Alpi regiment led by Giuseppe Garibaldi. He later became the editor of the newspaper Il Secolo through which he promoted the needs of Milan's urban proletariat

In 1909 Guglielmo Marconi became the first Italian to win the Nobel Prize for Physics at only 35 years old. He was awarded the prize thanks to his intense efforts in the development of wireless telegraphy. The award was decided after the usefulness of radio telegraph signals was made clear by their application in radio rescue operations: thanks to this new invention, the passengers of the transatlantic Republic were rescued in 1909

Grazia Deledda was a world-famous Sardinian writer and the only Italian woman to win the Nobel Prize for Literature. Her style swings between Verismo and Decadentism, and her powerful and tragic feelings are expressed in all their force, especially when she talks about her beloved Barbagia. She was awarded the Nobel Prize in 1926 " for her idealistically inspired writings which with plastic clarity picture the life on her native island and with depth and sympathy deal with human problems in general."

Luigi Pirandello, the world-famous Sicilian writer, received the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1934 when the fascist regime was raging in Italy: in order to avoid to mention Mussolini, Pirandello was the only winner in the history of the Nobel Prize who did not make a speech of thanks. He was awarded the Nobel Prize 'for his outspoken and ingenious renewal in the art of the stage and drama'. His most famous works include Il Fu Mattia Pascal, Così è (Se vi pare), Il berretto a ragli and Sei personaggi in cerca di autore.

In 1938, at the height of the Fascist era, the Stockholm Academy awarded Enrico Fermi the Nobel Prize for "the identification of new radioactive elements produced by neutron bombardment and for the discovery, in connection with this study, of nuclear reactions caused by slow neutrons". The newspapers of the fascist regime joyfully acclaimed the feat of the 'Italian genius'; Enrico Fermi was considered the greatest nuclear physicist in the world, and for four long years no one noticed that his conclusions were wrong: it was Otto Hahan, Lise Meitner and Ida Noddack, at different times, who pointed out to the great physicist that what he had achieved was not the enlargement of the nucleus but the fission of the atom. In 1945, the Nobel Committee partially recognised the error and awarded the Nobel Prize to Otto Hahan, not recognising the contribution of the two women.

Renato Dulbecco was born in Catanzaro in 1914 and was one of the most important Italian geneticists. He was awarded the 1975 Nobel Prize in Medicine together with his students Baltimore and Temin for demonstrating that the genetic material of the virus is incorporated into the DNA of the host cell and becomes part of the cell's genome.

Rita Levi-Montalcini was a sensational neurologist from Turin, known all over the world and much loved in Italy. Her studies on nerve cells led her to discover the nerve growth factor, a sensational discovery that was finally recognised by a woman. "The discovery of NGF (Nerve Growth Factor, a protein useful for the development of the nervous system. The discovery of NGF (Nerve Growth Factor) is a fascinating example of how a keen observer can extract valid hypotheses from apparent chaos. Previously, neurobiologists had no idea what processes were involved in the proper innervation of the body's organs and tissues.

"Because, following in the tradition of medieval jesters, he mocks power by restoring dignity to the oppressed". With these beautiful words, King Gustav of Sweden awarded Dario Fo the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1997. During his long career, this versatile artist from Lombardy was a writer, author, director, playwright and a great connoisseur of Italian Commedia dell'Arte, but above all, he was a man politically committed to improving his country.

Giorgio Parisi is a Roman physicist with a long academic career behind. He was recently awarded the Nobel Prize for Physics together with his colleagues, the Japanese Syukuro Manabe and the German Klaus Hasselmann " for the discovery of the interplay of disorder and fluctuations in physical systems from atomic to planetary scales ". In particular, the prize was awarded to the Italian physicist thanks to his physico-mathematical calculations that are fundamental to all manifestations of the complexity of nature, from atomic to cosmic dimensions, including the formations of flocks of birds.

Giorgio Parisi's studies will be fundamental in addressing the challenges facing human society in the years to come, such as climate change. As President of the Accademia dei Lincei, Giorgio Parisi has also been very active in the last two years in the fight against the Sars-Covid19 epidemic, stressing the absolute importance of sharing epidemiological data throughout the scientific community.