originally serialised in the Saturday Evening Post, the fictional Hawaiian detective Charlie Chan has appeared in a variety of media, including books, films, radio programs, comics, and television shows. Both the character and the resulting franchise have also generated a steady wave of critical analysis. From Eugene Franklin Wong’s (1978) landmark study of Asian stereotypes in American media to Jessica Hagedorn’s (1993) literary anthology that infamously declared Chan Is Dead, to Yunte Huang’s (2010) biographical investigation of the real Honolulu detective behind the character, academic debate about the representation of Chan’s Chinese heritage on page and on screen has remained both abundant and animated. It has also repeatedly fallen victim to two traps. First, limiting an analysis of Chan’s representation to just the page and screen ignores the full scope of the character’s transmedia reach. For example, as Jonathan Gray argues, merchandising not only diversifies a franchise’s ...

As a frontier for many immigrants of diverse ethnicities or nationalities, San Francisco has long been a space that witnesses or even inspires many identity-based social movements, including Asian American struggles rooted in Chinatown. In contrast to what outsiders may imagine, however, these ethnic movements have never been coherent, and the term “Chinese American,” along with the “imagined community” it conjures up, becomes highly indefinable when put under different contexts. In fact, as my article points out, the tension of racial politics within Chinatown itself rises and falls as the relationship between the U.S., PRC, and ROC changes. In order to explore this split of identification of Asian, especially Chinese, American people, the article examines the seminal film Chan is Missing, directed by Wayne Wang, a story featuring two Chinese American taxi drivers as they roam around San Francisco in search of their acquaintance Chan.

In “Trippers and Askers,” the first chapter of Maxine Hong Kingston’s Tripmaster Monkey: His Fake Book (1989), the novel’s protagonist Wittman Ah Sing and his love interest, Nanci Lee, talk about the limited roles available to Chinese actors in American media. Nanci reflects on her experiences auditioning, complaining that a director criticized her performance of an oriental peasant because she did not “look oriental” enough and refused to speak broken English.1 “Can’t you act more oriental? Act oriental,” she was instructed.2 To prevent Nanci from “los[ing] the will to audition” or changing herself cosmetically to fit other roles, Wittman promises to write her a play “where the audience learns to fall in love with [her] for [her] ochery skin and round nose and flat profile and slanty eyes, and [her] bit of an accent.”3 As a playwright, Wittman’s task is to create roles that will provide Chinese-Americans like Nanci a platform to express themselves in new ways, disrupting rigid fictional stereotypes of what it means to be a Chinese-American perpetuated by U.S. popular media during the 1960s.