Provision of accurate traffic information in real time is essential for every Intelligent Transport System (ITS) development. With growing number of stakeholders involved in the ITS, it becomes a necessity to establish robust and reliable system for immediate traffic report notification for either all, or targeted groups of ITS users. The fact that communications make gradual transition towards the Internet Protocol (IP)-based systems offers an opportunity to exploit the existing IP-related signalling/notification mechanisms for possible deployment in ITS. Here we present the concept of utilisation of the Really Simple Syndication (RSS) and Geospatial RSS (GeoRSS) in provision of near-real-time notification and distribution of the latest traffic information, based on the Traffic Information System as a system for continuous traffic situation awareness monitoring. The GeoRSS-based system for traffic information syndication monitors the release of the latest traffic information report (provided by Traffic Information System), and notifies subscribers in targeted geospatial zone about them. Using proposed communication protocol and a dedicated client installed in vehicle, driver is automatically and immediately provided with the latest traffic information related to the road segment in current use in the user-friendly form (preferably voice, but the addition of a dedicated geospatial data layer for vehicle navigation device is an option). The utilisation of the GeoRSS protocol allows for geospatial filtering, thus reducing the amount of data traffic. Mobile internet is a communication back-bone, with end-users allowed to choose the most appropriate option for network access. Proposed concept is validated using a simple research prototype, comprehensively presented in this paper. Performance of GeoRSS-based traffic information distribution system is discussed, providing an outlook in contribution to situation awareness enhancement and the range of possible applications. The paper concludes with an outline of existing syndication-for-ITS opportunities, and the plans for further developments.

Corporate Authors:

ITS Japan

Tokyo, Japan

ITS America

1100 17th Street, NW, 12th Floor

Washington, DC United States 20036

ERTICO

326 Avenue Louis

Brussels, Belgium B-1050

Authors:

Filjar, Renato

Vidovic, Kresimir

Drilo, Boris

Saric, Dinko

Dadic, Ivan

Sevrovic, Marko

Zupanovic, Dino

Conference:

17th ITS World Congress

Location: Busan , Korea, South

Date: 2010-10-25 to 2010-10-29

Publication Date: 2010

Language

English

Media Info

Media Type: DVD

Features: Figures; References;

Pagination: 10p

Monograph Title: 17th ITS World Congress, Busan, 2010: Proceedings

Subject/Index Terms

TRT Terms: Driver information systems; Intelligent transportation systems; Real time information; Traffic data; Traffic flow

Identifier Terms: Really Simple Syndication

Uncontrolled Terms: Geospatial data

Subject Areas: Data and Information Technology; Highways; I70: Traffic and Transport;

Filing Info