Application Areas

Traffic Management

Description

This center-to-center application area covers the interface between a traffic management center and other centers and supports the following capabilities:

Exchanging near real-time traffic data and control information to support a regional traffic management strategy.

Providing information to maintenance and construction operations for the efficient management of maintenance activities.

Providing near real time traffic information for use by traveler information providers (organizations that provide traveler information directly to the traveling public) and other centers such as emergency management, transit management, maintenance and construction management, and the media. Traffic and incident information collected by the media is collected by the traffic management center.

Developing a view of potential incidents by acquiring event information from other centers.

The extent to which information and control are shared between centers is determined through working arrangements among agencies or jurisdictions.

National ITS Architecture Interface

This application area focuses on the distribution of road network information by the Traffic Management Subsystem (TMS) to other centers. The TMS disseminates current and forecasted traffic information to EM, ISP, MCMS, TRMS, and the Media, as well as to Traffic Management Subsystems in neighboring jurisdictions to ensure efficient and effective management of various traffic situations. Coordinating information is exchanged between Traffic Management Subsystems to allow remote control of another center's field devices. The TMS also gathers information from the Media and Event Promoters via center-to-center interfaces. Finally, this application area includes an interface to report HOV lane violations.

Applicable Standards

In general, the following standards are applicable to Traffic Management deployments. To determine which specific standards are applicable for a deployment you will need to determine which architecture flows will be needed for the Traffic Management piece of your deployment. Contact your local FHWA ITS Division Specialist or an ITS Standards Program Field Support Team contact

Standard Development Status ITE TMDD 3.3 ITE TMDD Traffic Management Data Dictionary (TMDD) Standard for Center to Center Communications; Published ITE TMDD Guide TMDD & MS/ETMCC Guide Standard for Functional Level Traffic Management Data Dictionary (TMDD) and Message Sets for External Traffic Management Center Communications; Published NTCIP 1102 Octet Encoding Rules (OER) Base Protocol; Published NTCIP 1104 Center-to-Center Naming Convention Specification; Published NTCIP 2104 Ethernet Subnetwork Profile; Published NTCIP 2202 Internet (TCP/IP and UDP/IP) Transport Profile; Published NTCIP 2303 File Transfer Protocol (FTP) Application Profile; Published NTCIP 2304 Application Profile for DATEX-ASN (AP-DATEX); Published NTCIP 2306 Application Profile for XML Message Encoding and Transport in ITS Center-to-Center Communications (C2C XML); Published NTCIP 8003 Profile Framework; Published NTCIP 9001 NTCIP Guide; Published SAE J2266 Location Referencing Message Specification (LRMS); Published SAE J2354 Message Set for Advanced Traveler Information System (ATIS); Published SAE J2540 Messages for Handling Strings and Look-Up Tables in ATIS Standards; Published SAE J2540/1 RDS (Radio Data System) Phrase Lists; Published SAE J2540/2 ITIS (International Traveler Information Systems) Phrase Lists; Published SAE J2540/3 National Names Phrase List; Published

Deployment Resources

Deployment resources can be found in the deployment resources section.