Jack’s brother, author Dave Dempsey, conducted the following interview for his website davedempseybooks.com.

We’ve collaborated on two books, but my brother Jack Dempsey is an author of many works of his own, with an emphasis on Michigan history and the Civil War. He has written a new biography to be published April 29, Michigan’s Civil War Citizen-General, Alpheus S. Williams.

Characteristic of all his work, the new volume is meticulously researched and is a story well old. I asked Jack to talk about his latest book.

How did you get interested in the General?

I first came across him in writing Michigan and the Civil War, published in 2011. His dramatic performance at the Battle of Antietam, featured in the 2015 Michigan at Antietam book, really drew my curiosity about the rest of his story. He served the entire four years of the Civil War – why was he never promoted? Why is there a statue of him on Belle Isle, and not for other Michigan generals? Why is George Armstrong Custer more renowned?

Why are his life and career a story worth telling?

He came to frontier Detroit from New England as a young man to begin a new life – a story that certainly parallels the recent narrative about an underappreciated community with much opportunity. His character got him elected and appointed to various municipal offices. His interest in military affairs led him to join the “Brady Guards”, a militia unit similar to today’s National Guard. His Civil War record was exemplary. Then he served in Congress as a representative from Detroit and followed principle over party. He truly is an inspirational figure.

What was his most significant military achievement?

It has to be his performance at Gettysburg, where he saved the Union right wing. Close behind is his saving the entire army at Chancellorsville. Neither have been written about or appreciated even by noted Civil War historians.

Where did you find materials about him?

His wartime letters were published by Wayne State University Press in 1959, and they’ve become one of the most recognized sources for colorful and quotable insights. The Burton Historical Collection also contains his journals and other original materials. He also was praised in numerous recollections by veterans, beginning in 1865 and continuing into the early 20th century. Somehow, none of the leading writers about the Civil War checked into this documentation to build out his story. His post-action reports are set forth in a well-recognized source, popularly known as the Official Records. There even is a manuscript at the Huntington Library in California that reflects his attempt at setting history straight, if only someone would look into his full record – hopefully my book will help rectify that.

Why is he largely forgotten today?

Because he was a Michigander, and the culture of this State doesn’t adequately appreciate our heritage. So-called “political generals” – those who didn’t attend West Point or serve in the prewar Army – have long been regarded in the literature as inept, corrupt, or foolish. Williams didn’t attend the U.S. Military Academy, and his service in the War with Mexico in the 1840s involved guerilla conflicts, not against regular forces. So his capabilities were underestimated. His superiors, including Meade and Sherman, didn’t try to advance his career. In a way, putting his statue on Belle Isle did him a disservice, since it isn’t in the heart of Detroit where it would be noticed. I’m blessed to be the first to be commissioned to write a biography of this great public servant.