Table of Contents Executive Summary Introduction and Role of the Australian Tattooists Guild Existing Schemes/Perceived problems with NSW/QLD Proposals for future reform ATG industry recommendations Conclusion Consultation Legislation Media Appendices Attachments ATG Duty of Care ATG Code of Conduct Data Analysis Industry Impact Statements Civil Liberties Australia supporting submission THE AUSTRALIAN TATTOOISTS GUILD – DRAFT SUBMISSION FOR CONSULTATION WITH STATE 2 GOVERNMENT

Executive Summary This report provides an analysis and evaluation of the current and prospective licensing and regulation of the tattoo industry in Australia. Broad consultation investigating the current culture and concerns of professional tattoo artists has been considered during the writing of this report. Methods of analysis of the existing systems have included comparisons to other industries currently regulated and licensed by State Government. The recommendations offered suggest constructive ideas that are workable for any state government and offer insight into where problems have occurred and why. Information has been contributed from various groups including Civil Liberties organizations and government departments. Surveys have also been conducted on behalf of the ATG to gauge public opinion in regards to the provisions set out by the recent Tattoo Parlours Act 2013 (QLD) and Tattoo Parlours Act 2012 (NSW). Relevant data to the tattoo industry has also been supplied. Results from this research show that the existing systems do not provide the tattoo industry with any productive outcomes. Prospects of licensing and regulation of the tattoo industry in its current form are not positive or conducive to future growth of the industry. Nor do they protect the interests of the individual. This report also finds that current systems have the potential to the put the public at risk, as well as permanently damage this unique industry. The major areas of concern require investigation and corrective action by state governments. THE AUSTRALIAN TATTOOISTS GUILD – DRAFT SUBMISSION FOR CONSULTATION WITH STATE 3 GOVERNMENT

Introduction to the guild The Australian Tattooists Guild (ATG) was founded in February 2013 by a group of professional tattoo artists in response to the implementation of the licensing and regulation of the tattoo industry in NSW and QLD. The ATG launched nationally in 2014 with the aim of uniting and supporting professional tattoo artists nationwide, whilst also providing through the Guild’s structure a professional set of standards for tattoo artists to uphold. The ATG have developed these standards and codes, in consultation with the wider industry to provide tattoo artists with a solid foundation on which to practice. As a part of the membership criteria for our organization, all artists are required to adhere to these standards. Since its formation the group has continued to liaise with government and media to make sure its members interests are represented, and that any further regulation and legislation of tattooing in this country will be in the best interest of the professional standards that the Guild upholds. The ATG is a not-for-profit organisation dedicated to protecting the history, culture and future of Australian Tattooing as well as elevating and advancing this art form. We have an ongoing and larger vision to create national accreditation standards and industry-specific education in order to protect the industry from non-professional tattooists and suppliers. It is through this submission that the ATG hopes to initiate a transparent and responsible dialogue that facilitates the necessary consultation by the various state governments. Subsequently, the ATG aims to achieve a better out come for the impending licensing and regulation of the tattoo industry in states where the licensing has not yet been implemented, as well as influence any changes to the existing systems. The ATG supports efforts that are being made to remove any potential criminal elements that may exist within the tattoo industry or the wider community but would ask the government to consider this submission when drafting legislation that may potentially be invasive and or intrusive to tattoo artists lives and working practices, and which may ultimately threaten the future of this unique industry. THE AUSTRALIAN TATTOOISTS GUILD – DRAFT SUBMISSION FOR CONSULTATION WITH STATE 4 GOVERNMENT

Existing Schemes/ Perceived problems with NSW/QLD Lack of industry consultation The fact that neither NSW or QLD governments engaged in any real industry consultation resulted in schemes that have now created problems for both professional tattooists and the general public alike. There exists a distinct lack of awareness within legislation of the way the culture and industry of tattooing in Australia operates. The issues that have been created through this lack of insight continue to cause ongoing strain on professional tattooists in licensed states, as most now feel disillusioned with the systems in place. It is perceived that an opportunity to introduce some much-needed structure into this small but thriving industry has been missed. Proof of professional practice/ Amateur operators Due to the lack of a provision for any proof of professional practice in existing schemes, the industry is now experiencing many new tattoo businesses opening with amateur operators who have little to no experience. Despite the tattoo industry currently having no accredited training regarding the wider technical practices of the art form, it is broadly accepted that any tattooists who wish to become professionally employed within the industry would first spend time working in a professional, council registered studio to gain the skills necessary to ensure that best practice is adhered to. Throughout Australia, tattoo studios frequently encounter clients who have had work applied in unregistered premises by amateurs. The potential health risks for this practice are enormous and go beyond concerns of cross contamination. Inexperience and lack of integrity can lead to both fibrosis and psychological problems for the client. This continues to be a major concern to both professional tattoo artists and the public alike. Due to the structuring of current licensing in N.S.W and Q.L.D, many areas where tattoo studios have ceased to operate, presumably due to licenses being denied, have now seen new business opening with operators who have little to no experience in the industry. THE AUSTRALIAN TATTOOISTS GUILD – DRAFT SUBMISSION FOR CONSULTATION WITH STATE 5 GOVERNMENT

The single current requirement for licensing being that an individual only has to prove a lack of criminal involvement and close association with organised motorcycle gangs (OMCG) is inadequate if this industry is to be protected and preserved. In a climate of fear that has been created by existing legislation being solely aimed at identifying and targeting individuals, this new risk has left many professional artists waiting for an incident to occur. It is foreseen that governments may then over-react and impose even more stringent provisions in order to rectify what they have created. The ATG had been hopeful that the introduction of regulatory legislation would address the ongoing epidemic of amateur tattooing beyond simply imposing fines for individuals operating without licenses. The ATG have offered suggestions as to how these issues may be overcome in the recommendation section of this submission. State to state recognition of licenses The nature of the industry and its professionals is quite transient - it is not uncommon for artists to work at more than one studio, and often within various states. Licensing is currently not being recognised between any states and tattoo artists are now faced with having to meet requirements in more than one state to continue to regularly operate in this way. This well-established practice of tattoo artists travelling interstate allows for the experience and shared knowledge in an industry that relies on this sort of conferencing in order to maintain and promote higher learning and experience. This cultural specificity has not been observed or written into any legislation or licensing regime thus far. Whilst it is acknowledged that implementing arrangements to facilitate mutual recognition of licensing requirements between states is a complex process, it is one that needs mentioning due to the impact that it creates. THE AUSTRALIAN TATTOOISTS GUILD – DRAFT SUBMISSION FOR CONSULTATION WITH STATE 6 GOVERNMENT

License Renewal Both the NSW and QLD licensing systems have neglected to put in place any structure to facilitate the renewal of licenses. Both tattooists and operators currently have to undergo the entire licensing application process again once their licenses have expired. This includes finger and palm printing as well as police checks. QLD unlike NSW have also neglected to write any policy that allows for current licenses to continue once the expiry date has been reached. The QLD DFT are currently advising licensed tattooists to reapply 2 months prior to the expiry date of licenses. Professional artists, many of whom waited lengthy periods to receive their licenses due to the time lag in the processing of initial applications, are now fearful that they will be unable to trade legally whist they wait again for their new licenses to arrive. The professional community is struggling to understand why a system of renewal is not in place. It is also perceived that this is a waste of government funds and police resources. Lack of education for license application There is no requirement for proof of cross- contamination certification on application of the operators or tattooists license within existing schemes. This constitutes another serious public health risk if the applicants do not have up to date, relevant information and are not educated/ trained to deal with potential communicable disease’s being transmitted to the public. It is a current requirement of the QLD government, Public Health Act 2003 (Infection Control for Personal Appearance Services) that tattooists require an infection control qualification – HLTIN402B – (Maintain Infection Control Standards in Office Practice Settings). The certification of this qualification is not however required as apart of the licensing application and it is understood that many tattooists operating within this state do not hold this qualification. The ATG strongly suggest that governments must ensure there is a provision written into future and existing legislation that requires all tattooists applying for a license to have this relevant and important accreditation. THE AUSTRALIAN TATTOOISTS GUILD – DRAFT SUBMISSION FOR CONSULTATION WITH STATE 7 GOVERNMENT

Police involvement/ powers of entry Enforcement provisions currently allow police to enter licensed studios with sniffer dogs for the purpose of general drug, fire arm or explosives detection without notification. Tattoo studios are required by health guidelines Australia-wide to be a sterile environment. An animal entering this environment would cause serious cross- contamination issues and could potentially interrupt the business of any tattoo studio that was being searched in this way for an extended period. The studio would have to be closed and clients asked to leave, potentially mid- tattoo, whilst the entire studio was sterilized. The ATG believe it is not unreasonable, if Law Enforcement Agency’s are or continue to be allowed entry into tattoo studios nationally, that written notice be given unless a court issued warrant is in place. Strain on Police resources re-Finger and palm printing The requirement of applicants to provide finger and palm prints in existing schemes has had a particularly negative affect on the psyche of the industry. Many artists perceive they have been treated as criminals whilst never having committed an offence. An ongoing problem experienced during this part of the application process was the lack of notification for the police stations required to take fingerprints. This process obviously stretched police resources. Many applicants were repeatedly told they could not book a time at there local Police station to have their prints taken, many were repeatedly turned away and often long waits of up to several hours occurred. Many instances were reported of police officers being completely unaware of the process required, or their part in the process, and were having to access the department’s website to confirm their role. THE AUSTRALIAN TATTOOISTS GUILD – DRAFT SUBMISSION FOR CONSULTATION WITH STATE 8 GOVERNMENT

Police checks should provide interested agencies with all information required. It is also recognized that as it is a requirement of applicants to consent to a full national police check, any criminal conviction will become apparent. It is obvious that these prints are being used to create “criminal profiles” for tattoo artists for future reference. It is perceived that finger and palm printing is incongruent with the determination of whether an individual is a fit and proper person. It is also a demoralizing process. The ATG are of the opinion that these provisions are also a questionable breach of civil liberties and an unnecessary requirement for a tattoo artist, and/or operators who simply wish to continue their small business venture. It is also perceived to be a waste of police resources. Lack of infrastructure The lack of staff training within the Dept. of Fair Trading Offices in both NSW and QLD was very apparent when it came to any questions regarding the legislation and licensing scheme that was outside of the information listed on the department’s websites. Tattooists often had to deal with staff that had no idea of the application process and could not provide answers to simple questions. It was not uncommon for the receiving officers to have to read from the website in order to ascertain the appropriate actions necessary for receipt of the application. This distinct lack of training for those attending to the applications meant that often applications were incorrectly processed. There was a real lack of information in particular for the licensing of operators who were working under or within a company structure, as to who was to be licensed. This information did not specify if a director or the company itself required licensing. Information was also not specific as to whether or not separate licenses were required for any other partners regarding tattooing within the umbrella of the company. Often the licensing agent gave THE AUSTRALIAN TATTOOISTS GUILD – DRAFT SUBMISSION FOR CONSULTATION WITH STATE 9 GOVERNMENT

several different answers because these situations had not been pre-empted even though these are standard small business operating practices. A common complaint about the licensing process was the lack of notification of the new laws, the deadlines and the necessary requirements. Relying on media that is fast becoming out of date, such as newspaper notification does not help the studios make the transition in an efficient manner. It is perceived that the most efficient method of notification of any licensing regime’s introduction and cut-off dates would be most efficiently facilitated by local council, as all professional studios should be registered. It is however acknowledged that local government may not get involved with consultation and awareness for regulatory changes. The ATG express interest in providing consultation re any future schemes that require broad notification of tattoo studios and would be interested in aiding in the facilitation of information to the industry. Effect on Business Insurance Another disturbing occurrence since legislation has been introduced, has been the large numbers of insurance companies either terminating their contracts or refusing to renew them with property owners who have tattoo studios as tenants, This has been experienced nationally. Many tattoo studios have had their tenancies terminated due to property owners not wanting to become liable for the large excess being asked by offshore insurers. It is now recognized that few if any Australian insurance companies will accept tattoo businesses as clients and many have now decided not to renew contracts, some after periods as long as 15 years. In most cases it has been reported that insurance company’s are directly linking these decisions to the current situation with OMC’s and the decisions government’s are making to deal with them. The ATG have been provided with a statement that evidence’s this trend. See appendix. THE AUSTRALIAN TATTOOISTS GUILD – DRAFT SUBMISSION FOR CONSULTATION WITH STATE 1 GOVERNMENT 0

Proposals for future reform The proposals below are for the provision of solutions to the existing problems regarding licensing systems currently in use in NSW and QLD and offer suggestions that should be considered when any new systems are being implemented in other states and territories. They should be noted in addition to the other concerns listed in this submission paper. 1. Regular meetings between the government and the ATG regarding the preparation of new tattoo legislation or licensing procedure so as to foresee any difficulties in both introducing new legislation and resulting regulation in regard to the unique nature and culture of the tattoo industry. 2. The current status of communications network between the licensing agent and the police be assessed when considering application deadlines and grace periods, should police intelligence and Police Commissioner approval be required of any tattoo licensing system. 3. A national police report from a government-approved agent (such as those available readily online by existing companies) be acceptable as part of the application process, thus reducing the administrative burden on the police service and any consequential communications problems between the police and the licensing agents. The ATG suggest that the cost of this police check be taken into consideration when Government is scheduling fees for any licensing. 4. Any future licensing scheme of the industry that requires police involvement needs to ensure a high level of transparency as to what information is being collected for and to what end it will be used. Due to no information being given to applicants, other than their police history was being checked for any potential connections to criminal organizations, an atmosphere of fear was created. Many tattoo artists who had previously worked in studios owned by OMCGs were left for extended periods, (due to the lengthy transition times of applications) not knowing weather they would be granted a license due to the lack of information that was made available. State governments should take it into consideration when drafting legislation for the tattoo industry that many tattoo artists with no links to any OMCGs have worked in businesses that were/are owned as legitimate businesses by OMCGS. It should also be noted that as recently as a decade ago many studios in Australia had some connection or were frequented by OMGS, meaning many of the tattoo industry’s most senior artists have at some point worked with or for OMCGs. This point should be carefully considered when agencies are determining whether or not to issue licenses to tattoo artists on this connection alone. It should also be noted that like most industries, many individuals hold criminal records for various crimes. 5. The ATG are of the opinion that the only crimes that should be deemed undesirable for the procurement of a license are those of a sexual or overtly violent nature. THE AUSTRALIAN TATTOOISTS GUILD – DRAFT SUBMISSION FOR CONSULTATION WITH STATE 1 GOVERNMENT 1

6. Staff in the licensing agency be briefed on the new application process, or alternatively a separate office within the agency be trained to receive and process the new licenses. We strongly advise licensing procedures for operators to be clarified in relation to potential small business structures; including trusts, public and private companies, partnerships and joint ventures. Receipt of the application must be made available upon application to the registering party so as to provide proof to any enforcing agent of the application process having started. 7. A mail out to inform in person the new requirements needed for the licensing procedure, along with very specific and thorough FAQ on the licensing agent’s website. 8. The scrapping of unnecessary fingerprinting requirements of the license application. If this questionable process is deemed to be necessary by state government’s, all police clerical staff need to be notified of the new license requirements and any potential burden placed upon their office. 9. The International tattoo artist’s temporary license be extended to multiple entry permits in order to insure that Australian conventions, tattoo artists and the general public do not loose the attendance of these artists. 10. The introduction of provisions that ensure individuals applying for a tattoo artist’s license have a minimum 12 months practice in a Council Registered studio. 11. Governments actively encourage professional tattoo artists to undertake the industry standard education by introducing provisions that weave course certification into licensing systems. THE AUSTRALIAN TATTOOISTS GUILD – DRAFT SUBMISSION FOR CONSULTATION WITH STATE 1 GOVERNMENT 2

ATG Industry Recommendations 1. The ATG believe the best outcome for current and future licensing of the tattoo industry would be achieved through the provision of education to the industry. Any future licensing of the tattoo industry should require the applicant to obtain the current industry standard course qualification for cross-contamination and sterilization, thus ensuring that all licensed tattoo artists have this important qualification. The ATG is of the opinion that this course could potentially be offered as a part of the licensing process, whereby any fee charged for the tattooist’s license would cover the cost in full or part of this course. As some members of the tattoo artists industry already hold this important qualification, it is suggested that any fee imposed under the licensing structure be adjusted accordingly. The ATG’s Duty of Care stipulates that it is the tattooist’s responsibility for their client’s health and safety, and ensures that clients receive a quality of care and treatment that complies with both profession-specific and generic standards of practice. 1 1 The ATG is currently working with a national RTO course provider to modify the existing recommended/required course HLTIN402C (Maintain infection control standards in office practice settings) to modify the existing course so that it becomes more industry specific. This current industry standard course is nationally recognised and is a unit offered predominantly to nurses and healthcare workers training and working in the health care sector. Unfortunately this course does not cover elements that deal specifically with the practical area of the tattooing practice. It does however cover extremely important subject matter that is relevant to the tattoo industry. The existing course unit is available both online and in-house with current cost being in the area of $450.00. The ATG is currently developing a set of information packages that will be available to its members via the ATG website to provide tattoo artists with industry-specific practice information. This is a step we are taking to ensure the high standards the ATG upholds are met until such time as an industry-specific course is developed in the future. THE AUSTRALIAN TATTOOISTS GUILD – DRAFT SUBMISSION FOR CONSULTATION WITH STATE 1 GOVERNMENT 3

2. The ATG recommend that all applicants for a license must provide a statement of professional practice. Proof of a minimum 12 months experience in a council-registered studio would remove the problem of amateur tattooists obtaining professional licenses. This lack of requirement for proof/statement of professional practice poses a public health risk due to the nature of tattooing. An accredited cross-contamination course will provide individuals with an appropriate level of hygiene to operate and practice within the tattoo artist’s industry. It will not however prevent individuals from doing damage, such as Fibrosis / Hypertrophic scaring. It will also not prevent the psychological trauma that can be experienced by a client due to a lack of artistic knowledge and integrity on the part of the tattooists. The ATG suggest that proof of 12months practice may be obtained through the signing of a statutory declaration, which states the period of professional practice by an individual within a council registered studio. Either the tattoo studio proprietor or the individual could sign this declaration. Individuals who are in training but have not yet been employed in the tattoo studio for the full 12 months could be issued with a probationary license, which allows them to have access to the business but not to partake in any skin penetration practices. It is thought that this probationary status could be held on a register, which was accessible to interested agencies via the Internet, thus reducing the burden on departments to produce hard copy licenses. The ATG is encouraging this position through its membership structure, which requires tattooists to provide proof of qualification and experience in order to achieve full membership. 3. Individuals applying for a tattoo artist’s license must be required to work in council-registered premises. The requirement for all individuals applying for a license to work in council- registered premises would eliminate the on-going problem of non-professional individuals practicing tattooing which continues to be a concern of professional tattoo artists and the general public. This requirement would also ensure that all professional tattoo artists have access to professional standard sterilization equipment as required by regulation. Confirmation of a studio’s registration should be checked via a council database. The ATG’s Code of Conduct stipulates that tattooists must carry out their work in adequate professional premises that embody standard occupational and safety provisions as well as conforming to health department standards. The ATG’s Duty of Care stipulates tattooist’s obligations to refuse service if their ability to practice safely is jeopardized; this includes instances where unsafe premises or lack of access to proper THE AUSTRALIAN TATTOOISTS GUILD – DRAFT SUBMISSION FOR CONSULTATION WITH STATE 1 GOVERNMENT 4

equipment compromises the safety of the public. 2 4. The ATG recommend that states recognise tattoo licenses from other states Mutual recognition is a common practice within many industries operating in Australia today. It is understood however that the process to facilitate this is complex. The ATG suggest that states recognise licenses from other states with a potential online registration of interstate artists. Due to the cost of licensing within each state and the frequency with which tattooists travel it is recommended that tattooists not be charged for this registration. The ATG’s Code of Conduct stipulates members strive to contribute to the development of tattoo knowledge, culture and education. Freedom to travel and work from state to state stimulates and furthers the industry through healthy discussion and exchange of information.3 5. The ATG recommend that visiting overseas tattoo artists be eligible for multiple permit/ temporary licenses. The Australian tattoo industry and the tattoo collecting community are extremely fortunate to receive some of the worlds most highly accomplished tattoo artists who travel to Australia annually. Not only do these international artists visit as guests in tattoo studios, they also attend our growing numbers of International tattoo conventions. International tattoo artists also facilitate the important feature of conferencing within the industry. The ATG suggest that in order to accommodate this important relationship, multiple permits/ temporary licenses be made available to visiting international professional tattoo artists for this purpose. The ATG is encouraging this position through it’s membership structure, which makes provisions for international artists visiting Australia to be included in the ATG, thereby encouraging all tattooists operating in Australia adhere to the ATG’s codes and standards. 2 The experience of tattooists with local council health officers Australia-wide, who inspect tattoo studios, is more often than not that the Council Officer is unaware of working practices within the tattoo industry. The ATG proposes that councils endeavor to educate its officers through the undertaking the current industry course so that a broader understanding of the working practices of the tattoo industry may be obtained. This may also assist officers in providing information to individuals who are registering a premise for the first time as well as recognizing and achieving an ongoing standard within existing studios. 3 It is common practice within the tattoo industry today that tattoo artists travel interstate to do what is called within the industry “a guest spot" at other tattoo studios. This important feature of our industry allows a tattoo artists to not only showcase his/her work in another area but also provides an opportunity for the exchange of information/education with other artists. This practice has also, in part, been responsible for the evolution of the tattoo industry. THE AUSTRALIAN TATTOOISTS GUILD – DRAFT SUBMISSION FOR CONSULTATION WITH STATE 1 GOVERNMENT 5

6. The ATG supports applicants for a tattoo license having to partake in police checks. The ATG recognises that due to the nature of the tattooing practice individuals who have been convicted of any sexually based or overtly violent crimes would not be desirable within this industry. The ATG recommend that it would be appropriate for a period of 10 years to elapse since any conviction for a crime of such nature, After which period it would be appropriate for an individual to hold a license. The ATG’s Code of Conduct stipulates members must uphold the law in the conduct of their professional activities and members must be removed from any affiliation with any criminal organization, including OMCGs. 7. The ATG recommends that finger and palm prints should not be required The ATG are of the opinion that finger and palm printing is incongruent with the determination of whether an individual is a fit and proper person. 8. The ATG recommend that any potential future Bill be named the 'Tattoo Industry Bill’. The ATG, in conjunction with broad industry consultation, are of the opinion that the 'Tattoo Parlour Act’ as is named in other states is inappropriately named. Tattooists nationally have taken offence to the word “Parlour” being used to describe a piece of legislation that aims to license and regulate the tattoo industry. This term that may have been used to describe a tattoo studio nearly two decades ago is now considered out of date and offensive. 4 4 The definition of the word "parlour" as is defined by the Oxford standard dictionary and again in the British free dictionary is as follows - Parlour: reception room in an inn or club where visitors can be received. We do not believe this word appropriately describes the tattoo industry. The wider industry takes offence to the use of the word "Parlour" being used in a piece of legislation that is aimed at licensing and regulation of the tattoo industry. The word “parlour” has negative connotations and is inaccurate by definition. THE AUSTRALIAN TATTOOISTS GUILD – DRAFT SUBMISSION FOR CONSULTATION WITH STATE 1 GOVERNMENT 6

Conclusion The Tattoo industry is alive and thriving in Australia today. Within Australia there are some of the industry’s most accomplished artists who are recognised both nationally and abroad. Over the last decade tattooing has evolved globally, with an interest in this art form now becoming widespread. Many talented and refined artists have chosen to join this industry, now today tattoo artists are revered for the incredible skill they impart into their work, with many artists having lengthy client waiting lists. The discerning collector may now choose from a variety of styles that for the most part were not available in the past in such a refined way. The tattoo artists responsible for these pieces work incredibly hard and the industry has become very competitive. A culture within the tattoo industry now exists whereby the hosting and sharing of knowledge is paramount, with artists striving to achieve the highest standards. Tattoo artists travel regularly, both nationally and internationally to attend conventions and facilitate the conferencing of knowledge. Many tattoo artists today extend their skills to outside of the traditional settings and mediums, and paint to exhibit their work in galleries around the world. Tattoo artists are known to regularly contribute their artwork to a wide range of media platforms and are regularly being sought to contribute to both private and community projects. Standards within the industry are now rising very quickly and individual artists are having to seek out and apply ever-changing technologies to their work. Most tattoo artists now have expectations of themselves and the studios they work in to provide a professional and well-equipped environment, so as to achieve the best outcomes for clients and themselves. It is partly due to this fact that the majority of tattoo artists who now practice within this industry do so independently of any known criminal organizations or OMCG’s that once owned some of Australia’s tattoo studios. The ATG believe this is a point that needs emphasising and clarifying due to existing schemes having a strong emphasis on identifying individuals and their connections to organized crime. The response from tattooists, both nationally and internationally has been one of dissatisfaction at the direction in which the legislation regarding the tattoo industry in Australia has taken. THE AUSTRALIAN TATTOOISTS GUILD – DRAFT SUBMISSION FOR CONSULTATION WITH STATE 1 GOVERNMENT 7

The majority of tattoo artists feel that an opportunity to have some responsible input from governmental licensing and regulatory systems has thus far been missed. The overwhelming majority of artists are pro licensing and regulation and would welcome responsible action by state governments. It is hoped that through this submission some insight will be gained into what is required in order to promote and protect this ancient and unique art form. Written and compiled by T.Dukanovic and J.Roelink, ATG THE AUSTRALIAN TATTOOISTS GUILD – DRAFT SUBMISSION FOR CONSULTATION WITH STATE 1 GOVERNMENT 8

Government Departments Elizabeth Birbilis - Senior Policy and Planning Officer Communicable Disease Prevention and Control Health, VIC Michele Cullen, Department of Health, Vic Karen Manwaring, TAE, VIC Protection Branch VIC Department of Health Dr Michael Ackland - VIC Deputy Chief Health Officer VIC Consumer Affairs, VIC Australian Government Department of Education, Employment and Workplace Relations Consumer Affairs Victoria, VIC Victorian Building Authority, VIC Centre for Adult Education, VIC David Gould - Principal Environmental Health Officer Disease Prevention and Control Communicable N.A.V.A, NSW Australian Council for the Visual Arts, NSW Department of Fair Trading, NSW Peter Reinhold - A/Director Business Services Division QLD Office of Fair Trading Department of Health, NSW Department of Health, SA Department of Health, WA THE AUSTRALIAN TATTOOISTS GUILD – DRAFT SUBMISSION FOR CONSULTATION WITH STATE 1 GOVERNMENT 9

Department of Health, Tasmania Department of Health, N.T Department of Immigration and Citizenship Department Fair Trading, QLD Department Fair Trading, NSW MP’S David Shoebridge MP - NSW Greens, Legislative Council Fiona Patton, Eros, MP, VIC Campbell Newman MP- Premier of Queensland Jarrod Bleijie MP – QLD Attorney-General and Minister for Justice Jack Dempsey MP - QLD Minister for Police and Community Safety Annastacia Palaszczuk MP - QLD Leader of the Opposition Lawrence Springborg MP - QLD Minister for Health Peter Reinhold - A/Director Business Services Division QLD Office of Fair Trading Donna Hansen - Senior Communication Officer QLD Office of Fair Trading Kerry Millard MP, member for Sandgate QLD Private organisations Darren Martin, Mayfield RTO Bruce Warlow, BMR, Registered Accountant Civil Liberty Victoria Justice Action, VIC THE AUSTRALIAN TATTOOISTS GUILD – DRAFT SUBMISSION FOR CONSULTATION WITH STATE 2 GOVERNMENT 0

Danny Gum - Director Parmia Insurance Industry Consultation Josh Roelink, Rock of Ages, Lennox Head, NSW Geordie Cole, Tattoo Magic, Fitzroy, VIC Tashi Dukanovic, Green Lotus Tattoo, Brunswick, VIC Hal Cheshire, Green Lotus Tattoo, Brunswick, VIC Matt Cunnington, Westide Tattoo, QLD Emily Rose Murray, VIC Brian Grady, Korpus, Brunswick, VIC Mim d’Abbs, Darwin City Tattoo, NT James Bird. Green Lotus Tattoo, VIC Jane Laver, Chapel Tattoo, Prahran, VIC Louie Poupos, Pure Vision, Abbotsford, VIC Colin Creed, Tattoo Machine, VIC Wade Larkin, Black Throne Tattoo, QLD Clint Steele, Black Throne Tattoo, QLD Greg Heasly, Tattoo Connection, Knox, VIC Paul Braniff, Gold Coast Tattoo, QLD Luke Braniff, Skin FX Tattoo, Gold Coast, QLD Adam Keenan, Sideshow Tattoos, VIC Moses David Mezoghlian, The Darling Parlour, NSW Shelly Burr, Tidal Tattoo Torquay, VIC THE AUSTRALIAN TATTOOISTS GUILD – DRAFT SUBMISSION FOR CONSULTATION WITH STATE 2 GOVERNMENT 1

Peter Pav, Man’s Ruin, VIC Nathan Shepherd, 13 Crowns, NSW Jacob Gwynn, Anja Tattoo, NSW George Theodosiou, Armani Artspace, ACT Yuna Kim, Artist Lounge, VIC Peter Jones, Australian Tattoo Co, VIC Anthony Faulkner, Bad Apples Tattoo Emporium, QLD Leigh DK Tressider, Base 9, VIC Dean Macdonald, Beauty 4 Life, Vic Luke Bishop, Bishops Mobile Tattoo Parlour, QLD Sofee Lee, Black Rose Tattoos, NSW Ken TMD Taylor, Blacktown Tattoo, NSW Antony Leprovost, Blue Lady Tattoo, VIC Greg Smart, Bodycraft Tattoo Australia, NSW Davin Evans, Brunswick Tattoos, QLD Duane E Cash, Cairns City Tattoo, QLD Mathew McMiles, , Cairns City Tattoo, QLD Teresa-Jane Day, Capricorn Body Art, VIC Jane Laver, Chapel Tattoo, VIC Daniel Pollock, Conspiracy Tattoo, NSW Michael Glenda, Crimson Art Collective, VIC Sam Hillcoat, Crush City Tattoo, QLD Kieran Tyrrell, Cyco City, VIC THE AUSTRALIAN TATTOOISTS GUILD – DRAFT SUBMISSION FOR CONSULTATION WITH STATE 2 GOVERNMENT 2

Matthew Mooney, Dagger and Lark, VIC Simon Jackson, Daredevil Tattoos/The Gallery Tattoo Studio, VIC Mick Butterworth, Deep N Dark Tattoo Studio, WA Liz Wilson, Deep N Dark Tattoo Studio, WA Scotti Allsop, Devils Ink, VIC Mark Cummings, DH West Coast Tattoo, WA Manni Massa, Distinkt Tattoo, VIC Elliot Ross, Elliot Ross Tattoo, QLD Wade Johnston, Vic Market Tattoo, Nth Melbourne, VIC Damian Gerding, Empire Tattoos Oxenford, QLD Scott Boys, Eruption Tattoo Art Studio, VIC Paul Lazarou, Eternal Ink Tattoos, VIC Josh Stewart, Evocative Ink, NSW Ryan Smith, Foothills Tattoo, WA John Ross, Graffiti for the Soul, QLD Richie Blackheart, Green Lotus, VIC Jacob Ellul, Green Lotus Tattoo, VIC Jesse Mosen, Green Lotus Tattoo, VIC Nicole Draeger, Green Lotus Tattoo, VIC Erin Davies, Green Lotus Tattoo, VIC Davo Voodoo, Third Eye Tattoo, VIC Justine Hefel, Hammer & Forge Tattoo Studio, QLD Simon Wilson, Highline Tattoo, NSW THE AUSTRALIAN TATTOOISTS GUILD – DRAFT SUBMISSION FOR CONSULTATION WITH STATE 2 GOVERNMENT 3

Nicholas Mclaren, Honey Ink Tattoo Studio, NSW Anthony Smart, Impulse piercing and tattoo, NSW Kangiyugh, Ink Addict, QLD Fred Hopkinson, Ink Addict, QLD Kate Newton, Inked Out Tattoo Studio, QLD Sean McAndrew, Inkhouse, NSW Lisa Binns, Inkplosion Tattoo, QLD Mr. PingPong, Inner Vision Tattoo, NSW Simon Strelein, King St Tattoo, NSW Benny Bones, Korpus, VIC Teniele Sadd, Korpus, VIC Lisa Kearns, Kustome Kulture & Purely Piercing, VIC Zakaria Khanat, LDF Tattoo, NSW Joel Kelly, Liquid Silver, VIC Nerida Nicolson, Little Tokyo, NSW Courtney Dunne, Lost City Tattoo, WA Kerrie Trimmer, Lucky Fifteen Tattoo Emerald, QLD Peta Jamieson, Lust for Life, QLD David Ransom, Lust for Life, QLD Malika Love, Malika Rose, QLD Ellie Thompson, Manly Tattoo, NSW Lloyd Nakao, Manly Tattoo, NSW Beki David, Nimbin Tattoo Studio, NSW THE AUSTRALIAN TATTOOISTS GUILD – DRAFT SUBMISSION FOR CONSULTATION WITH STATE 2 GOVERNMENT 4

Emma Doddrell, No Regrets Tattoo, VIC Tam Bozic, On the road, WA Jamie Lee Robinson, Private Studio, VIC Mitch Love, Private Studio, QLD Emily Murray, Private Studio, VIC Stuart Pagdin, Progression Tattoo, SA Rob Sloan, Rob Sloan Tattoo, NSW Sophia Baughan, Shanghai Charlies, NSW Alex Coles, Sideshow Tattoo/Vivid Ink, VIC Ryan Anderson, Sin City Tattoos, VIC Josh Charlton, Sink or Swim Tattoo, QLD Bob Tate, Skin FX, QLD Tom Daysh, Skin FX Tattoos, QLD Simon Kelly, Skink, VIC Stephanie Stiletto, Soulfire Studio, QLD Al Mitchell, Southcoast Tattoo/Southside Tattoo, NSW James Brown, Splash of Colour Rye, VIC Jesse Petrie, Splash of Colour, VIC Eddy-Lou, STR Body Modifications, NSW Zane Donnellan, STR Body Modifications, NSW Shannon Richmond, STR Body Modifications, NSW Nicole Brosing, Studio 64, QLD Evan Griffiths, Tama Tattoo, VIC THE AUSTRALIAN TATTOOISTS GUILD – DRAFT SUBMISSION FOR CONSULTATION WITH STATE 2 GOVERNMENT 5

Karl Swallow, Tattoo Junction, QLD Sean Jackson, Tattoo Magic, VIC Danny Young, Tattoo Magic, VIC Adrian Krygsman, Tattoo Magic, VIC Benno Clark, Tattoo Power, ACT Vic James, The Darling Parlour, NSW Sasha Raff, The Darling Parlour, NSW Adrian Mcghie, The Dead Man’s Hand, QLD Jack Douglas, The Forgotten Son, VIC Melanie Knight, The Forgotten Son, VIC James Skarvellis, The Grevvile Inn Tattoo Studio, VIC Ben Halin, The Iron Buddha, NSW Kyle Green, The Marked Heart, VIC Lelia Paniagua, The Needle’s Kiss, QLD Megan McNamara, The Needle’s Kiss, QLD Ray Shuttleworth, The Needle’s Kiss, QLD Samuel Bartlett, The Painted Ape Tattoo Studio, QLD Clare Miles, The Painted Lady Tattoo Studio, QLD Noel Wilkinson, The Tatt Shop, WA Mike Draper, The Tattoo Gallery, SA Dave Fagan, The Tattoo Gallery, SA Andrew Paris, The Tattoo Gallery, SA Charz Kirlew-Mind, The Tattoo Gallery, SA THE AUSTRALIAN TATTOOISTS GUILD – DRAFT SUBMISSION FOR CONSULTATION WITH STATE 2 GOVERNMENT 6

Morag Draper, The Tattoo Gallery, SA Marshall, Third Eye Tattoo, VIC Gerad Black, Tidal Tattoo Toquay, VIC Todd Bailey, Todd Bailey Tattoo, NSW Dennis Feijo, Trademark Ink, QLD Luke Muller, True Love Tattoo, QLD Jesse Berderow, True Love Tattoo, QLD Benji Tobin, True Tattoo, QLD David Beattie, Under The Gun Tattooing and Body Piercing, QLD Lim You Yun, Unique Tattoos, WA Adrian Farley, Unique Tattoos, WA Will Sharpe, Very Sharpe Tattoo, NSW Mark Lording, Vic Market Tattoo, VIC Chris Jones, Vic Market Tattoo, VIC Pablo Morte, Vic Market Tattoo, VIC Hank Chrisholm, WA Ink, WA Jonkia Miller, West Coast Tattoo, WA Adam Smith, Whiskey Lane Tattoo Co, QLD Sash Trajkovski, Wicked Ink, NSW Joe Campbell, Wicked Ink Penrith, NSW Stevie-Lea, XIII Crowns Custom Tattoos, NSW Emily Jane Breadner, Voodoo Tattoo, NSW Dave Clayton, The piercing Urge, VIC THE AUSTRALIAN TATTOOISTS GUILD – DRAFT SUBMISSION FOR CONSULTATION WITH STATE 2 GOVERNMENT 7

Jamie Randall, Foundry Tattoo, QLD Clare Hampshire, Korpus, VIC Age Grech, GFMS Dermagraphic Artistry, NSW DC Young, Iron Anvil, NSW Laura Weller, 383 Tattoo, QLD Ben Koopman, Blue Lady Tattoo, VIC Lisa Harley, The mark of the Gypsy Tattoo & Piercing Studio, NSW Jack, Progression Tattoo, SA Kane Berry, Green Lotus Tattoo, VIC Blake Heppell, Skin FX Tattoo, QLD Brooklyn Seawright, Lust for Life Tattoo, QLD Caitryn Foster, Leviathan Tattoo Gallery, Vic Brett Eberhard, LDF Tattoo, NSW Thao Tran, Adorned Empire, WA Camilla Zavattaro, Rock of Ages Tattoo Parlour, NSW Leigh Andrea, King of Rings, VIC Aureole, Lust for Life Tattoo, QLD Charlie Wad, Fraser Coast Tattoo Amy Duncan, Tama Studio, VIC Aaron Reed, Loco Tattoo, QLD Robert McCranor, White Skull Tattooing, NSW Kaspa-Jayy Thomas Snoad, Lees Tattooing and Body Piercing Studio, QLD Dom Greco, Desperado Ink, Vic THE AUSTRALIAN TATTOOISTS GUILD – DRAFT SUBMISSION FOR CONSULTATION WITH STATE 2 GOVERNMENT 8

Davo Voodoo, Third Eye Tattoo, Vic Kelly McKinnon, Black Diamond Tattoo Port Adelaide, SA Ronnie Kelleher, Kings Cross Ink, NSW Ash Faulkner, AuthentInk, NSW Mark Lonsdale, Little Tokyo, NSW Ashleigh Brombal, Method Art Collective, QLD Colette Withers, Tattooing by Colette, WA Tom Wallace, Tattoo Paradise, QLD Peter Jones, Australian Tattoo CO, VIC Legislation Health (Infectious disease) Regulations 2001 Tattoo Parlor Bill 2012 (NSW) Tattoo Parlor Bill 2013 (QLD) Explanatory Notes Tattoo Parlor Bill 2013 (QLD) Law Enforcement (Powers and Responsibilities) Act 2002 Crimes (Criminal Organisations Control) Act 2012 Codes of Practice, Safe work Australia Police Powers and Responsibilities Act 2000 Amended Constitution of Australia 2003 Victorian Bill of Human Rights THE AUSTRALIAN TATTOOISTS GUILD – DRAFT SUBMISSION FOR CONSULTATION WITH STATE 2 GOVERNMENT 9

Victorian Health Department Guidelines, Tattoo/Body Art industries Health guidelines for personal care and body art industries, Vic Gov Department of Human Services Public Health Act 2010 NSW Health Services Act 1997 NSW Public Health Act 2005 QLD Public Health Act 2011 SA Public and Environmental Health Act 2011 NT Media Alex Mann - Journalist for 7.30 Report, ABC TV Adam Collins - Journalist for Catalyst, ABC TV Neil Doorley - Journalist for Courier Mail Halina Baczkowski - Journalist for ABC Radio Brisbane Gabrielle Burke - Journalist For ABC Radio Brisbane Emma Sykes - Journalist for ABC Radio Brisbane Melanie Petrinec - Journalist for Gold Coast Bulletin Stephanie Bedo - Journalist for Gold Coast Bulletin Ashleigh Stevenson - Journalist for ABC News Lucy Sweeney - Journalist for ABC News Kin Stephens - Journalist for Brisbane Times Lucy Carroll - Journalist for The Sydney Morning Herald Tom Tilley - Journalist and Presenter for Hack, Triple J Radio Sarah McVeigh - Journalist for Hack, Triple J Radio THE AUSTRALIAN TATTOOISTS GUILD – DRAFT SUBMISSION FOR CONSULTATION WITH STATE 3 GOVERNMENT 0