Anne Sweeney

I'll be honest with you: This is the only job I'm focused on right now. And I love it." Anne Sweeney deftly has deflected yet another inquiry about her aspirations for the top job in the Walt Disney Co. empire when her boss, chairman and CEO Robert Iger, steps down in 2015. A nudge for a more revealing answer proves futile. Sweeney laughs and begins to repeat herself: "This is the only job …"

It's quintessential Sweeney: careful, deliberate, unfailingly polite.

Certainly her present job — as co-chair of Disney Media Networks, and president of Disney/ABC Television Group — would require no small amount of focus. She oversees nearly 10,000 employees at ABC (the entertainment and news divisions plus daytime), eight local stations, seven cable networks (including ABC Family, Disney Channel, Disney XD and Disney Junior), Hyperion Publishing, Radio Disney, ABC Studios and Disney's 50 percent stake in A+E Networks. This year, Disney Media Networks saw revenue increase 4 percent to $19.4 billion while operating income grew 8 percent to $6.6 billion. She receives 300 to 500 e-mails a day ("I read through them quickly, and I delegate well"). Most of each day is spent in meetings ("But lucky me, I like everyone on my team"). And she travels to New York (where ABC News, Hyperion and various other businesses are based) about once a month.

"I believe in having total clarity around our goals," she says. "I believe in creating these goals together as a group and making sure they're aligned with Bob Iger's goals for the Walt Disney Co. And more than anything, making sure people understand that they have a responsibility to one another. And when one of us has a great victory, it is a result of everyone working together. And quite honestly, we share the failures as well."

THR's most powerful woman in entertainment for a third straight year, Sweeney, 55, a married mother of two who had early aspirations to be a teacher (her mother and grandmother were teachers, and her daughter is pursuing a master's in education at Stanford University), says she never plotted a high-powered career trajectory for herself.

"I really moved through my career based on curiosity about something," she says. "I never looked at a title and said, 'I want that.' "

Nonetheless, Sweeney's achievements would seem to reveal canny career management in addition to smarts and an ability to delegate and inspire.

"She has a unique combination of professionalism and warmth," says Katie Couric.

Sweeney was instrumental in the deal that brought Couric to ABC Daytime and also made her a special correspondent for ABC News. "There's something very appealing about someone who is a straight-talking, direct executive, who I think was genuinely excited about the prospect of me coming to ABC," adds Couric. "I never felt like there was that unctuous quality that you sometimes see in executives who are trying to lure you to come to a place."

Sweeney was in the studio audience Sept. 10 for Couric's first show (it was the most successful talk show launch in a decade, since Dr. Phil). And she still watches Katie, just as she watches all of the morning news shows and ABC's entertainment lineup (which still boasts the top-rated comedy and drama on TV with Modern Family and Grey's Anatomy, while Entertainment chief Paul Lee has ordered full seasons of freshman series Nashville and The Neighbors). She was at the Good Morning America staff meeting July 9 after Robin Roberts announced on air that she was suffering from a rare blood disorder and would undergo a bone marrow transplant. And she was on the phone before 6 a.m. with ABC News president Ben Sherwood the morning GMA snapped Today's 16-plus-year morning news win streak.

"We found out at 8:31 a.m. on April 19," says Sherwood. "I would say she found out around 5:31 a.m. [L.A. time]."

Sweeney has been invaluable in the news division's joint venture with Univision, says Sherwood, who credits her experience launching networks earlier in her career at Nickelodeon then FX. And she spearheaded Disney's Day of Giving, a companywide effort that has raised $19 million for the Red Cross to help those affected by Hurricane Sandy. She was in constant communication with the news division when an ABC crew was briefly abducted in 2011 during the demonstrations in Cairo. And she checked in on an ABC News employee who during the Thanksgiving holiday choked on a grape in the cafeteria and had to be saved by the Heimlich maneuver.

"She's the leader of a 10,000-person organization," says Sherwood. "And she leads it with real vision for where she wants the company to go, and she leads it with a real personal touch."

Collaborative and available, Sweeney is a natural mentor, especially to other women.

"I was in a meeting in her office a couple of months ago, and I looked around, and it was all females. It wasn't because we were dealing with a female enterprise; it happened because every position of leadership in the room were all women," recalls Couric. "And I'm not anti-man. But I do think some of the highest positions have been and continue to be closed off to women. I think until you get women at the highest positions, that's when you start creating a truly level playing field. And I think it's only a matter of time until the very top is occupied by a woman as well."

As a kid I was always: A great reader who kept reading even when the lights went out with a flashlight under the covers. I loved good stories. I knew when a character was a good character. That was the beginning of all of this for me: great storytelling.

Favorite way to unwind: Binge-watching Revenge and Scandal on multiple devices.

Totally starstruck around: There are a few: Julie Andrews; Richard Sherman, who wrote the music for Mary Poppins; and Dick Van Dyke. I was in a meeting with Julie years ago, and she started to read to us from one of her children's books. I almost put my head on the table.

Proudest moment this year: The Day of Giving we put together across every ABC show for victims of Hurricane Sandy. We raised about $19 million for the Red Cross.

What I'd tell my 22-year-old self about working in Hollywood: "Relax."

Stacey Snider

This summer, rumors swirled that Snider was in talks with Comcast to take over Universal. Although those discussions broke down, Snider shored up the standing of the 80-person DreamWorks by extending financing with backer Reliance, which committed another $200 million-plus, allowing Snider, 51, and partner Steven Spielberg to make 8 to 10 movies over the next several years. It was a disappointing year at the box office for DreamWorks — People Like Us bombed with $12.4 million. However, Snider and the studio are ending on a high note: Spielberg's awards darling Lincoln has turned into an event movie for adults, earning north of $85 million to date.

Moment I knew I wanted to work in the business: I was in law school, and to make money I wrote briefs for a law firm and coverage of scripts for an agency [APA]. I made $50 a script. There was something about those first couple synopses. … I felt thrilled.

Who gave me my first big break: The University of Pennsylvania alumni connection. I reached out to a lot of alums, including producer Bob Cort, who sent me to Tom Pollock, who said I should be an agent. I applied at CAA and Triad, and I got the job in the mailroom at Triad.

Most exciting decision we've made as a company this year: Going into business with Mister Smith, David Garrett's new company, which is allowing DreamWorks to make output deals with European distributors.

When I leave work each day, I can't wait to: See my family and get comfortable. I could set a land-speed record for getting out of my clothes and into sweats, Uggs and a ponytail.

My indulgence: Sugar. Every morning I swear off it, and every night I have Oreos.

Can't get through my work day without: Tea, hot. Working-class PG Tips.

Most surprising songs on my iPod: Blue Valentine soundtrack.

My proudest moment this year: Seeing Lincoln. And I was proud that last year we had two best picture noms.

Totally starstruck around: Steven Spielberg. He's one of the only people in my life where the experience doesn't get old.

Best advice I've ever gotten: From Peter Guber: "The material will determine your fate."

Top three shows on my DVR: The Daily Show, The Rachel Maddow Show and Homeland.

Embarrassed to admit I watch: Any Dateline true-crime specials that start with, "She was a good-time girl …"

Eileen O'Neill

As the leader of two divergent brands in the Silver Spring, Md.-based Discovery portfolio, O'Neill has maintained the flagship quality of Discovery Channel (the No. 8 network among men 25-to-54 in the third quarter, thanks to the success of Shark Week, Sons of Guns and Bering Sea Gold; quarterly earnings for the company were $206 million) while guiding a rebrand of TLC from the home of dry documentaries to a repository for subculture reality (Here Comes Honey Boo Boo, Breaking Amish) that often draws as much criticism as it does high ratings. O'Neill, 46, who has a 12-year-old son with her partner, makes no apologies for Honey Boo Boo, the show about a sassy 7-year-old beauty pageant aspirant and her rural Georgia family. It ranked No. 1 on ad-supported cable in its Wednesday night time slot among all key demographics and has been picked up for a second season. And she points out that "in the same year we hit pop-culture gold with Honey Boo Boo, we also potentially furthered science and safety technology with Plane Crash," part of the Discovery series Curiosity.

Moment I knew I wanted to work in the business: I was a starving grad student [at Bowling Green State University in Ohio], eating popcorn and Kraft mac and cheese, and a big, glossy Discovery Channel intern packet was sent to me in the mail.

Who gave me my first big break: Former Discovery Channel president Clark Bunting, who recognized my passion — despite having no experience for program scheduling — and moved me from business affairs to Travel Channel scheduling.

When I leave work each day, I can't wait to: See my family and then check the FiOS "What's Hot" app in primetime to see who is getting traction.

Favorite way to unwind on the weekend: Walking our beagle, Riley.

My indulgence: Ben & Jerry's Milk & Cookies ice cream.

Can't get through my workday without: Teasing [TLC senior vp production and development] Howard Lee about something; listening to sarcasm from [Discovery/TLC spokesperson] Laurie Goldberg and being first to comment on Nielsen overnights.

Most surprising song on my iPhone: My team won't be surprised that I have the theme song from Rocky.

Proudest moments this year: Discovery aired Space Jump Live to record Sunday afternoon numbers, and TLC rocked prime with Long Island Medium and Breaking Amish.

Totally starstruck around: Josh Charles and Harrison Ford.

What I'd tell my 22-year-old self about working in Hollywood: "Don't work in Hollywood; commute there from Washington, D.C."

Best advice I've ever gotten: From my dad in a greeting card: "Protect yours; kick theirs."

When my relatives are confused about what I do, I tell them: I watch TV.

Top three shows on my DVR: The Good Wife, Scandal and Downton Abbey.

Embarrassed to admit I watch: iCarly.

Nina Jacobson

The producer is responsible for one of Hollywood's hottest new franchises, The Hunger Games. The Lionsgate film, released in the spring, was a global goliath, taking in nearly $690 million (No. 7 for the year). After being unceremoniously fired as president of Disney's film division — her partner had just delivered their third child when she got the call — Jacobson, 47, formed her production company and began scouting for projects. She set up the Diary of a Wimpy Kid series at 20th Century Fox before nabbing the rights to Suzanne Collins' young-adult novel The Hunger Games. There are three more movies to go (the third book is being split into two films). The Hunger Games: Catching Fire opens in theaters Nov. 22, 2013.

Moment I knew I wanted to work in the business: When I started film theory at Brown, and all I wanted to do was watch movies. I felt as excited as I ever did when I sat down in a movie theater.

Who gave me my first big break: Producer Lauren Shuler Donner. She agreed to meet me when I graduated from Brown and hired me to do free-lance research. Her office also let me know what jobs were becoming available at other companies, and I got a job with Joel Silver in 1987.

Toughest decision I had to make this year: Figuring out how to reload Hunger Games when Gary Ross left as director and make sure we chose the right person. It has turned out to be the right call to bring on Francis Lawrence.

When I leave work each day, I can't wait to: Go home and see my kids, who are 14, 12 and 6.

My indulgence: I'm a binge television-watcher. I'll watch an entire series on my iPad.

Can't get through my workday without: Playing word games.

Most surprising song on my iPod: The soundtrack to Pitch Perfect.

Proudest moment this year The release of The Hunger Games.

Totally starstruck around Julie Andrews.

What I'd tell my 22-year-old self about working in Hollywood: "Don't lose your confidence when things don't go your way."

Worst advice I've ever gotten: Someone told me once, "You can't be a great mom and a kick-ass studio executive at the same time." Not true.

Top three shows on my DVR: Game of Thrones, Homeland and Sons of Anarchy. I'm also into Nashville.

Maren Christensen, Gwen Marcus, Rebecca Prentice, Rita Tuzon and Leah Weil

Maren Christensen

Executive vp and general counsel, Universal Studios

She oversees $7 billion a year in operations for a studio and theme parks business. Her specialty is antipiracy matters, which landed her amid the SOPA debate. She also put out several legal fires, including convincing the makers of a copycat Battleship movie to desist.

Moment I knew I wanted to work in the business: I was a junior associate in the early 1980s and working real estate cases. I was bored to death.

When I leave work each day, I can’t wait to: Get home to the Marina peninsula.

When my relatives are confused about what I do, I tell them: I protect movies.

Top three shows on my DVR: Homeland, Revolution and Meet the Press.

My indulgence: Wheat Thins.

Gwen Marcus

Executive vp and general counsel, Showtime

Showtime’s top lawyer has ridden the network’s Homeland-fueled streak to greater industry prominence. A 28-year veteran, Marcus, 56, also had a seat at the table for distribution deals with DirecTV, Cablevision and AT&T, which went smoothly — notable when ugly carriage disputes often spill into the headlines.

Toughest decision I had to make this year: What to wear to the Tony Awards.

When I leave work each day, I can’t wait to: Veg out in front of MSNBC.

My indulgence: Semisweet chocolate morsels right out of the bag.

Embarrassed to admit I watch: Property Virgins on HGTV.

Rebecca Prentice

Executive vp and general counsel, Paramount

Paramount’s top lawyer, 58, was crucial to DreamWorks Animation’s transition to Fox. She won a giant suit over rights to The Godfather.

Moment I knew I wanted to work in the business: When I walked on the Paramount lot. That was 1996.

When I leave work each day, I can’t wait to: See my husband and have a nice dinner. We’ve been married 19 years.

Favorite way to unwind on the weekend: We go to Joshua Tree or Yosemite.

Embarrassed to admit I watch: Chelsea Lately.

Rita Tuzon

Executive vp and general counsel, Fox Networks Group

Tuzon, 53, protects billions in News Corp. assets, putting her on the front line of Fox’s legal war against Dish’s AutoHop commercial-skipper and its battle to win more retransmission consent fees from TV distributors. She’s also knee-deep in Fox’s proposed mega-deal to carry Los Angeles Dodgers games, which could be worth more than $6 billion when closed.

Proudest accomplishment this year: The long-term deal with Major League Baseball.

My indulgence: Never staying in a crappy hotel, even if I’m paying

for it.

Can’t get through my workday without: Starbucks — seven pumps of chai tea latte.

Top three shows on my DVR: New Girl, Modern Family and Justified.

Leah Weil

Senior executive vp and general counsel, Sony Pictures

Weil, 52, wrangles the team that protects Sony Pictures’ $8 billion-plus in annual revenue. She’s basking in the success of Skyfall — which, thanks to a dizzyingly complicated distribution and co-financing deal with MGM and the Broccoli family, hit screens with a Sony logo.

Toughest decision I had to make this year: I can’t talk about that, I’m a lawyer!

Proudest moment this year: Watching my groups pull off a public art project that was spearheaded by my government affairs team.

Worst advice I’ve ever gotten: “Keep your head down.”

Favorite way to unwind: Watching the San Francisco Giants.

Deborah Barak, Bernardine Brandis, Beth Roberts and Jana Winograde

Deborah Barak

Executive vp business operations, CBS Network TV Entertainment Group

Barak, 55, supervises all talent negotiations, producer deals and licensing fees for CBS, which this year included renewing Ashton Kutcher’s deal on Two and a Half Men and huge renewals for the Academy of Country Music Awards and the Kennedy Center Honors.

Who gave me my big break: Nancy Tellem, who hired me at CBS 27 years ago.

When I leave work each day, I can’t wait to: Do yoga. It’s the best for stress relief and bad backs.

Favorite way to unwind on the weekend: Hike with friends.

My indulgence: A glass of wine with dinner.

When my relatives are confused about what I do, I tell them: I can get you tickets to anything.

Top three shows on my DVR: The Good Wife, Homeland, Modern Family.

Embarrassed to admit I watch: Too much news!

Bernardine Brandis

Executive vp business and legal affairs, Walt Disney Studios

By shepherding the negotiations for Disney's two biggest 2013 movies, Oz: The Great and Powerful and Johnny Depp's The Lone Ranger, Brandis, 59, married with two teenagers, has proved the master of the megadeal.

Toughest decision I had to make this year: How much to pay the highest-paid talent in a bad economy.

Proudest moment this year: Getting a modestly budgeted movie, Saving Mr. Banks, put together with a remarkable cast: Tom Hanks, Emma Thompson, Paul Giamatti. It doesn’t get much better than Tom Hanks playing Walt Disney on the Disney lot.

Best advice I’ve ever gotten: “Tell it straight, say it straight.”

When my relatives are confused about what I do, I tell them: My children used to think my job was bringing them home DVDs.

When I leave work: I hope that at least one of my children still living at home is willing to have dinner with me.

My indulgence: Buying boots.

Can’t get through my workday without: Coffee and reality checks with my team.

Most surprising songs on my iPod: Akon and Ne-Yo. My son slips them all in there.

Beth Roberts

Executive vp business affairs, NBCU Cable Entertainment, and COO, Universal Cable Productions

After 15 years at the company, Roberts, 54, wears two hats that allow her to oversee business affairs for NBCU’s cable channels (USA Network, Syfy, Bravo and E!) and work closely with Bonnie Hammer to define the company’s studio division.

Proudest moment this year: In August, I traveled to Toronto and visited the sets of all the shows we produce there. It was amazing after looking at budgets for so long to see all this come to life.

Toughest decision I had to make this year: Trying to figure out what to wear to the Emmys.

When I leave work each day, I can’t wait to: Get into comfortable shoes.

My indulgence: Taking all of my vacation days.

When my relatives are confused about what I do, I tell them: I get deals done so you’re not watching color bars on the television.

Jana Winograde

Executive vp business affairs and administration, ABC Entertainment Group

Winograde, 48, was key to reaching a deal in the Modern Family cast renegotiations. She also worked on Jimmy Kimmel’s contract extension when his show moved to 11:35 p.m. and made the deal for the Nashville soundtrack that churned out four hits before the show debuted.

Who gave me my big break: [The CW chief] Mark Pedowitz, who hired me as a director of business affairs at ABC.

Favorite way to unwind on the weekend: On the soccer field.

My indulgence: Home decorating.

Most surprising song on my iPod: “The Climb” by Miley Cyrus.

Totally starstruck around: Diablo Cody.

Proudest accomplishment this year: We made our budgets despite a number of fiscal challenges.

Nancy Josephson

Josephson, who grew up amid the business as the daughter of ICM founder Marvin Josephson, paved the way for Ricki Lake's return with her daytime talk show and has clients up and down the dial, including So You Think You Can Dance's Cat Deeley, Giuliana Rancic, Craig Ferguson and Tyra Banks, the latter of whom expanded into the publishing space with a three-book deal and young-adult series Modelland.

Moment I knew I wanted to work in the business: Watching my dad work. He would bring clients home; I got to go to dinner with the group Chicago! I remember it being so surreal.

Who gave me my first big break: ICM's Sam Cohn. He worked with Meryl Streep, Sigourney Weaver, E.L. Doctorow — an amazing client list. He's the one who said I had to come work there, even though I was Marvin's daughter. He took me under his wing and taught me to represent people you're passionate about. I have an eclectic client list, and I got that from Sam.

When I leave work, I can't wait to: Get home to my family. I have one kid left at home and will sit with him for dinner … and then go out for another business dinner.

My indulgence: Great handbags. You can call it an addiction. I tend to splurge. I have that new Celine and love it.

Can't get through my workday without: My assistant, Ellen.

Most surprising song on my iPod: Carly Rae Jepsen's "Call Me Maybe" is such a happy song. It's really more for 12-year-old girls, but whatever.

Proudest moment this year: All three of my children graduated: my son from Stanford, my daughter from high school, and my youngest son is now at Harvard-Westlake. And I managed to keep working the entire time.

Totally starstruck around: Mick Jagger and Bono. I'm insane for both.

What I'd tell my 22-year-old self about working in Hollywood: What I told my son, who's 22: "Always tell the truth. You'll never get in trouble."

Best advice I've ever gotten: From my dad, in a memo he wrote in 1973 that I have at my desk: "Always tell your clients what you're doing for them."