Columnist Matt Drudge on Starr's wife, Arsenio, Primary Colors, and Howard Stern

It Might Be Starr's Wife

The Drudge Report learned late Tuesday that Whitewater independent counsel Kenneth Starr may be leaving the investigation due to pressures that have been mounting at home from his wife. "Malibu is a gift he is giving her," emailed a very secure source in Virginia. "She's been horribly uncomfortable under the increasingly intense spotlight that comes with her husband's job ... it has been almost ruinous on them personally....Pepperdine will feel like paradise after all of this."

Meanwhile, Monday's absolute party at the White House turned to absolute confusion on Tuesday as Starr warned the Associated Press: "I think that it is wrong, it is erroneous and it is a very dangerous thought" to read too much into my departure. "We are very far along in this investigation and it would be very wrong, very wrong, very misguided, for anyone to make any judgment with respect to the future of this investigation," he told the wire's Kelly Kissel.

Starr's archenemy, James Carville, called Starr's departure "weird"; Bloodsport author James B. Stewart tells CNN viewers that Starr's departure "could be meaningless." But heat lowered as Rush Limbaugh announced that his sources are indicating that no charges will be brought against the Clintons.

An earlier Drudge remit suspecting that W. Hickman Ewing Jr., Starr's top deputy, will emerge as the favorite to become the new independent counsel receives a wide airing.

—

Harbert in to Save "Arsenio"

Can former ABC entertainment president Ted Harbert save the troubled Arsenio show? Dreamworks SKG on Tuesday announced the signing of Harbert with confidence and pomp. But behind the scenes, his first job, to rescue the company's high profile sitcom starring Arsenio Hall, immediately takes on the feel of an emergency room rescue.

Arsenio is buzzless just two weeks away from opening night (March 5). (One source does say the show has picked up since executive producer Tim O'Donnell [Dave's World] joined the production. Reportedly, there have even been a few smile-twitches seen on the faces of The Suits at a recent taping.)

"It's going to be interesting to see if Ted can go from running the entire network to running 30 minutes on Wednesday night," a former underling of Harbert's at ABC said after Katzenburg's announcement.

—

Author Joe Klein Sued for US$100 Million

Daria Carter-Clark of Harlem, New York has brought a $100 libel suit against Primary Colors author Joe Klein for implying that she had a sexual affair with the main character in the best-selling political novel based on Bill Clinton's first run for the presidency. Rita Ciolli in Wednesday's Newsday gets the first interview since Carter-Clark filed the stunning lawsuit last December.

The shapely legs that are described in Colors as 'shocking, a gift from God' are hers, the teacher tells Ciolli. So is the adult literacy program described in the opening scene. But it's the fictional part, the scene with the sex, that people remember and is the source of tremendous pain.

The novel has caused her endless ridicule and difficulty on the job, she says. Carter-Clark adds that the suggestion she had any sexual liaison with Clinton is humiliating: "I am outraged. I don't think that any writer, any person, has the right to do this to another person."

The novel opens with a scene based on a 1991 visit by then-Gov. Clinton to the New York Public Library-sponsored program in Harlem that is run by Carter-Clark. What didn't happen, she says, is the incident at the end of the first chapter when Stanton, Klein's Southern governor running for president, is undressed in a hotel bedroom with the librarian who hosted his visit that morning.

—

There She Goes

John Broder, who recently switched Timeses, reports in Wednesday's New York Times: "Some White House officials are increasingly pessimistic that Alexis Herman can be confirmed as secretary of labor." White House aides privately concede to Broder that the nomination faces many further weeks of congressional delay and may ultimately fail. A senior White House aide now predicts that "Republicans will delay public testimony on Herman's nomination until a separate congressional inquiry into campaign donations has reviewed her White House political activities." "That'll be sometime in 1999," the official barks to Broder.

—

Stern Strong, But "Saint" Stinks

A Paramount executive now predicts Howard Stern's movie will take in over US$200 million in worldwide grosses. "We are preparing for 'total cash,'" is how it was explained during a recent sunny afternoon visit to the studio lot. "Drudge, print it ... the incredible success will surprise everyone over the next month." (Stern has turned into a hero down on Melrose.)

But the executive's mood immediately turned cloudy when pressed about the future Paramount stink film, The Saint, and its potential to drain some or all of Private Parts' profits. (Sumner Redstone will demand answers.) For the past week the town has been talking trash about the Val Kilmer movie, also set for release in March. The studio recently made the mistake of screening the budget bloat to select media. They have since canceled all future previews.