"HERE'S YOUR LIFE" is a sweet, gentle, technically wise movie about a young man's growing up in northern Sweden during World War I. It is a first feature by Jan Troell, the 27-year-old Swedish director who also photographed the movie, edited it and wrote the screenplay with Bengst Forslund. He may be just a little too facile for his own good.The movie, which opened yesterday at the Fifth Avenue Cinema, is full of frozen frames of birds caught in mid-air, of slow motion equations of lyricism, of leafy forests, of sunsets, of snowscapes, of long, deliberate camera movements, the end of which you often will guess. It is, in fact, so damned full of what passes for poetic vision, especially in Swedish movies, that by the end of almost two hours I was ready to opt for Andy Warhol's "Empire," the world's most minimal movie effort.This is a very personal and perhaps slightly overstated response, prompted principally by Troell's editing, which allows the exuberance of the director to turn into self-indulgence. There is much in the movie that is good and firm, and as quietly aware as the hero, Olof, whom Eddie Axberg plays with such seeming effortlessness.At the beginning of the movie, an adaptation of Evvind Johnson's semi-autobiographical novel, Olof, almost 14, is sent out to work in a remote lumber mill when his father becomes ill. A quite thinking, observant boy, Olof fights with his stupid foreman, moves on to a job as a candy butcher in a movie theater, and later tours the carnival circuit, cranking a manually operated movie projector. In the accepted chronology of post-puberty literature, Olof learns about life, death, sex and politics.As written and played, the vignettes are softly oblique, never as heavy handed as they might be, as when young Olof has his first affair. It's with the eager daughter of a blacksmith. Far from being the shattering experience he expects, it all develops rather easily, like going for a swim. For such a young director, Mr. Troell has a nicely nostalgic way of handling his humor.None of the episodes, however, are treated in particular depth. Instead, they are too prettily photographed, dressed up with symbols and poetically paced so that often the eye simply must look away from the screen towards an exit sign. It's the kind of movie that could end at almost any point—like a serial.The excellent supporting cast includes Ulla Sjoblom, as a good-natured older woman who supplements Olof's initial sexual experience; and Per Oscarsson (who was so fine in "Hunger"), as a young man with whom Olof, finally a socially conscious activist, tries with comic futility to organize a strike of railroad workers.The Swedish dialogue is translated by English subtitles that are sometimes maddeningly cryptic.

The CastHERE'S YOUR LIFE, screenplay by Jan Troell and Bengst Forslund, based on Evvind Johnson's "Romanen om Olof" ("The Story of Olof"), directed by Mr. Troell and produced by Svensk Filmindustri; released by Brandon Films. At the Fifth Avenue Cinema, at 12th Street. Running time: 110 minutes.Olof . . . . . Eddie AxbergOlivia . . . . . Ulla SjoblomLundgren . . . . . Gunnar BjornstrandNiklas . . . . . Per OscarsonLarsson . . . . . Ulf PalmeMaria . . . . . Signe StadeTHE realistic tutelage of a young interne by an altruistic, tough-minded old doctor in a charity clinic of 18th century-Japan is the basis of "Red Beard," a stately but interminable film that arrived yesterday at the 55th Street Playhouse. The picture was shown here three years ago at the New York Film Festival.It is a perfectly respectable drama teaming the great director, Akira Kurosawa, and Japan's leading film actor, Toshiro Mifune, as the elder doctor of the title. The master director is simply incapable of a shoddy film, as evidenced here by his typically searching close-ups, excellent photography and grasp of human behavior that is consistently persuasive and telling in minute details. As for Mr. Mifune, he is his usual granite self—strong, brooding and exquisitely restrained, with an expression of piercing awareness.But the story, for some reason, is stretched out for three long hours. And for all its wisdom and altruistic footnotes, it develops and seems constructed like an old Dr. Gillespie-Dr. Kildare package, with one case history woefully piling atop the next. Indeed, this is precisely what happens, with one teary tale giving way to an even drearier one. And this misery, eked out word for word with much moaning and handwringing, unfolds in molasses cadence.The most compelling chapter, involving the rescue of a mistreated child from a brothel and her rehabilitation, comes toward the end. It also provides a fine, welcome spurt of action, when Mr. Mifune performs a bone-cracking defense against a gang of murderous toughs. In a good cast, Yuzo Kayama does well enough as the impressionable interne.But television viewers, accustomed not only to the old Kildare movies but to the latter-day Ben Casey exercises, may find the picture not only reminiscent but musty. "Red Beard" is well meant and well made, no question about it. But it unfolds familiarly and, at 185 minutes, practically forever.

The CastRED BEARD, screenplay by Masato Ide, Hiden Oguni, Ryuzo Kikushima and Akira Kurosawa; directd by Mr. Kurosawa, a Toho-Kurosawa production, presented by Frank Lee International Pictures. At the 55th Street Playhouse, east of Seventh Avenue. Running time: 185 minutes.Doctor Nilde (Red Beard) . . . . . Toshiro MifuneYasumoto . . . . . Yuzo KayamaMori . . . . . Yoshio TsuchiyaOsuki . . . . . Reiko DanMental Patient . . . . . Kyoko KagawaOtoyo . . . . . Terumi Niki