Contractual framework

On January 1st this year, the local railway service operated by Renfe Rodalies was transferred from the Spanish Central Government to the Government of Catalonia. 197 trains and around 900 workers provide the service. This is the first time that a regional government in Spain has taken over functions that have been, until now, exclusive to the Central Government.

To manage the transfer, the Catalan Government – Renfe

Operadora Mixed Coordination and Control Body was set

up, with four representatives each from the autonomous

Government and the railway operator. Moreover, the

Catalan Government has appointed the technical director of

Barcelona Metropolitan Transport Authority as technical

coordinator of the Rodalia local railway service.

The powers transferred concern management, regulation,

planning, coordination and inspection of the service, as well

as setting the fares.

According to the transfer agreement, the Catalan Government

undertakes to continue with the current contract-programme

signed with the Spanish Government until 31 December

2010. After that date, the Government will be free to

negotiate a new contract for the 2011-2015 period or to

appoint a new operator from 2012.

For its part, the State will assume the entire Renfe Operadora deficit, which is estimated at around 117.2 million euro per year. This amount includes operating loss, depreciation on investment and financial costs. The agreement specifies that the Catalan Government will assume no losses sustained by Renfe Operadora either in 2010 or in the previous years.

When the current contract-programme expires, the Catalan

Government will be free to renew it with Renfe or to appoint

a different operator to run Barcelona local railway services.

Whether or not Renfe continues to operate the service, the

State Administration will transfer to the Catalan Government an amount equivalent to the deficit generated by the provision of the service.

The Catalan Government may establish different quality

levels and its own fare policy. It may also modify the

standards of service from those agreed between the Spanish

ministry and Renfe (increased frequency, capacity of trains,

etc…).

Actions carried out

Over the first half-year since the service was transferred,

progress has been made over four lines of action:

Extension of the daily service span and increased weekend

services;

Increased the comfort, with the purchase of 59 new trains,

reducing the average age of the train fleet to 10.7 years;

Improved information and customer services, previously

a serious shortcoming;

Launch of a “mystery shopper” programme;

Introduction of automatic public address systems and

information monitors at 70 of the 108 stations that

form the network;

New image for Renfe Rodalies.

As a consequence of these improvements, the average user

quality rating has risen from 6.24 to 6.31 in the six months

since the Catalan Government took over responsibility for

operating the system.