Stosur was just nine years old while teammate and fellow Queenslander Ashleigh Barty was not even born when Australia last contested a semi-final.

As the Australians face Germany in Brisbane this weekend for a place in the final against either the Czech Republic or Italy, they know their destiny lies in their hands.

“I’ve never thought about it because we’ve never really been so close, but it would be one of those things, if we were able to achieve that, then for sure it would be great,” Stosur said.

“It’s a very unique prospect to say that you’ve been in a winning Fed Cup team, I guess for us especially, given that it’s been so long.”

Australia last won the Fed Cup in 1974.

“I don’t’ think any of us go out to practise every day saying, ‘Wow, we can do something for the first time in 40 years’,” Stosur said.

“It doesn’t help you win anything. You have to focus on your own game.”

Germany are in a similar position, reaching the competition’s last four for the first time in 19 years.

On rankings, the visitors have the better numbers.

German team leader Angelique Kerber, is No.7 in the world after making her career breakthrough losing to eventual champion Stosur in the 2011 US Open semi-finals.

Now ranked 28th, Germany’s Andrea Petkovic has been as high as No.9 and capped her comeback from injury by winning the Charleston title earlier this month.

“Kerber has been in the top 10 now for a couple of years … she knows how to play these big matches,” said world No.19 Stosur, who enjoys a 2-0 win-loss record against the German, having also won their 2012 Fed Cup clash in Stuttgart.

“You’ve got to really respect her game because she’s where she is for a reason.

“Petko, last week she won Charleston, so she’s showing some very good form.

“It’s certainly not out of our reach to get over this team but there’s a lot of work to do to be able to do that.”

Stosur landed in Brisbane refreshed from an extended break following her disappointing third-round exit at Charleston.

The former world No.4 has only made it past the third round at one tournament this year, in Hobart in January.

“All year I’ve felt pretty good on court and injury wise I’ve got no problems so that’s a good feeling as well, it’s just I’ve played lots of matches where I’ve lost in three sets and had some really close ones,” Stosur said.

“I don’t think it’s from not playing well or anything like that, it’s just sometimes you don’t get through them.

“Obviously you’ve got to find that missing link to be able to get through those and hopefully that’s going to happen soon.”