Spoilers ahead!

Hero Wanted (2008) is a double-whammy for Sons of Anarchy fans, seeing as it features both Kim Coates and Tommy Flanagan, working together for the first time, shortly before SOA got started.

Fair warning: it's a confusing sort of movie on first watch. The timeline is very choppy, with numerous flashbacks to events in the past that aren't clearly signposted as such, so you're frequently left scratching your head to understand quite what's going on and where you are in terms of the big picture.

It follows the story of binman (really) Liam Case, played by Cuba Gooding Jr, who's trying to get over the death of his wife and unborn child when saving a young girl from a fiery death in a car accident gives him a taste for playing the hero. He masterminds a plot to knock over a local bank (with the help of none other than Mr Daryl Dixon himself - Norman Reedus) and have the pretty bank teller fall madly in love with him for saving the day. What could possibly go wrong?

Well, Reedus' choice of bank-robbing accomplices, that's what - who happen to include Messrs Coates and Flanagan. We should note at this point that Kim's character is called Skinner McGraw, which is precariously close to Feathers McGraw, the penguin villain of Wallace and Gromit: The Wrong Trousers. What is it with Coates and penguins? (When we review Bad Cop we'll explain our Coates/penguin association...)

Anyway, Skinner's brother Lynch gets trigger-happy during the heist, shoots the unfortunate bank teller in the head, and everything goes tits up. Liam gets a bullet in the guts too. Overall...not a good day!

Once Liam recovers, he decides to get revenge on the scumbag who left his would-be girlfriend in a coma - that being Skinner's little brother Lynch. He achieves this via the ultra-efficient methods of burning him with an electric fire, stabbing him in the junk, and finally smacking him in the head with a wok. This eventually attracts the attention of Ray Liotta's detective, but more pertinently, it pisses off Skinner. Flanagan doesn't believe Liam has the "juice" (he really says that - this is before SOA, remember) to bump anyone off, but Skinner's adamant, and they set out to put some fear of God into our hapless heroic binman by threatening his comatose girlfriend.

Sadly for Skinner, this only results in Liam coming to the nightclub where the gang hangs out, and there's a showdown which results in Skinner getting shot to death in the gents' lavs. And if you're watching this movie for Coates, you'd probably be minded to turn it off at that point - but don't. Kim shows up in a couple more flashback scenes after Skinner's death, one of which includes some perv-worthy kissage that's not to be missed.

Fangirl highlights:

He looks pretty damn sexy in that leather coat, although the gold bank-robbing mask is a bit terrifying.

Seeing Coates play the leader of the pack is nice. There's something super sexy about the way Skinner swans around his nightclub hangout.

There's a kissing scene...be warned, it has the potential to set a girl on fire!

TTC (Time to Coates): 00:12:30

TTCD (Time to Coates Death): 00:36:32 (but keep watching, because he's in flashbacks after he dies)

Kim quota rating: ❤❤

What's so strange about this movie is that it subverts the usual convention of killing off the baddies in reverse order of importance. The sad result for us is that Kim is Coatesed far too soon for him to really get his teeth into Skinner's particular brand of scumbaggery. We would have loved to see more of Skinner and his motley crew; we're sure their antics were worthy of their own movie.

Overall rating: ★★

Hero Wanted has a very strong cast, and a promising premise, but it's not a straightforward watch. It's also pretty violent and sweary, so not for everyone, but you really can't argue with the double SOA hit of Coates and Flanagan!

KC Tropes

Character tropes

Scumbag: Who'd think someone with the angelic-sounding moniker 'Skinner McGraw' would be a violent bank robber?

Death tropes

Coatesed: Shot to death. In the toilets. Dignified.

Killed By A Star: Cuba Gooding Jr. And not the last time CGJ will kill him, either... Stay tuned for Sacrifice!

A Piss Before Dying: Seriously, Kim cannot ever take a pee in a film without getting murdered shortly thereafter.

Sex tropes

Kiss Me, Coatesy: In one of the flashback scenes he's totally eating the face off some random woman. We don't like her very much. Lucky cow!

General tropes

Badass Longcoat(es): During the bank heist he's sporting an outrageously sexy leather trenchcoat. WANT.

Hostage Situation: In the bank with lots of poor innocent citizens.

Nightclub Hangout: He, Flanagan, and Reedus chill there with their other mooks and lackeys.

Please Not The Face: Cuba Gooding Jr bites his nose shortly before shooting him dead. Talk about insult added to injury. You can't blame CGJ though - Coates is very nommable (though that may not have been CGJ's primary motive...)

Very Fine Hat: We're not sure anyone really looks THAT good in a beanie...

Vice Squad: Knocking back the booze in the villain nightclub.

What Fucking Swearing: He effs and blinds his way through the movie. Almost every other word. We're oddly okay with this.

You Look Familiar: Loads of this: most notably a pre-Chibs Tommy Flanagan (Sons of Anarchy), Cuba Gooding Jr (Sacrifice), and Ray Liotta (Unforgettable).

What should have happened:

He really should have learned by now that going to the loo is the Coates-movie equivalent to teenagers having sex in a slasher flick. If he'd just held it in, he'd still be alive!

Gimme Gimme Gimme:

Buy Hero Wanted at Amazon.com

Buy Hero Wanted at Amazon.co.uk