David L. Robbins Biography

David L. Robbins was born in Richmond, Virginia, on March 10, 1954. He grew up in Sandston, a small town east of Richmond. Both his parents, Sam and Carol, were veterans of WWII.

In 1976, Robbins graduated from the College of William & Mary, in Williamsburg, Virginia, with a B.A. in Theater and Speech. He did not know what to do for a living, having little real theatrical talents, so he decided to attend law school. He received his Juris Doctorate at William and Mary in 1980. Robbins practiced environmental law in Columbia, S.C. for a year before turning his energy to a career as a freelance writer in 1981. He began writing fiction in 1990.

Robbins has published eight novels: Souls To Keep, a cosmic love story (published by HarperCollins in 1998); War Of The Rats, a book set during the battle of Stalingrad (Bantam in 1999); The End of War, a novel about the fall of Berlin at the end of WWII (Bantam in 2000); Scorched Earth, a story placed in the American South about a church burning and contemporary racism (Bantam, 2002); Last Citadel, an epic of the great tank battle of Kursk on the Eastern Front of WWII (Bantam in 2003); Liberation Road (Bantam 2005), a sweeping tale of the battle for France in WWII told through the perspectives of two minorities in the U.S. Army, a black truck driver and a rabbi chaplain; The Assassins Gallery (Bantam, 2006), an alternate history political thriller supposing the assassination of FDR; and The Betrayal Game (Bantam, 2008), a follow-up to The Assassins Gallery, detailing the CIA's attempts to kill Fidel Castro. His latest book is Broken Jewel, the story of the great airborne rescue of the Los Baños internment camp in the Philippines. Broken Jewel also invokes the tale of the Comfort Women, the still-unresolved Japanese atrocity of sexually enslaving a quarter million conquered women.

Robbins is an accomplished guitarist, studying the works of Latin classical. At six feet six inches tall, he stays active with his sailboat, shooting sporting clays, weightlifting, and traveling to research his novels. He is founder of the James River Writers, a non-profit group in his hometown of Richmond that helps aspiring writers and students work and learn together as a writing community. He is currently engaged in co-founding The Podium Foundation, a non-profit which will bring writing and critical reasoning programs to the students of Richmond's high schools. He also teaches advanced creative writing at his alma mater, the College of William and Mary. He resides in Richmond.