Dave Robbins has been in the country music business for more than 25 years, writing songs that have fueled the careers of artists who illuminate his body of work through the refracted light of their own interpretations. In 1983, he helped pen his first No. 1 hit, “All My Life,” which crossover-king Kenny Rogers took to the top of the AC charts. Dave Robbins soon became instrumental in the success of country band Restless Heart, composing several of their hits including “The Bluest Eyes In Texas,” which was a No. 1 hit in 1988 and remains a country standard today.

Dave Robbins is best known as a founding member of the multi-platinum country band, Blackhawk, which he joined in the early 1990s and for whom he plays keyboards and occasionally sings. He also co-wrote the band’s No. 1 hit song, “Every Once In A While,” which catapulted Blackhawk to fame and spurred sales of more than 7 million albums. Today, in addition to Blackhawk, Dave Robbins also tours with the Southern rock band, The Outlaws.

But while Dave Robbins has had great success in the public eye, his personal life has been a different story.

“Fifteen months ago I thought my life was over,” he confesses in the new I Am Second short film.

Dave Robbins said he has spent an entire lifetime struggling with temptation including alcohol, sex and porn. Seven years into his marriage with his wife Mary Lynn, his infidelity nearly ruined the couple’s marriage.

“I got sober and thought that would fix everything and all the other stuff would stop as well,” Dave Robbins said. “Eventually, going down the path I was and the more success I got in my career, I thought I could have what I wanted and do what I wanted to do. I created this dual life.”

His behavior led him to relationships with other women outside of his marriage.

“I kept my wife in the dark about everything … I was present but not present,” he said.

Before he knew it, he was in too deep. Having run out of lies, his wife figured out what was happening.

“I’ve read that infidelity is – next to the death of a child – the worst pain,” Mary Lynn Robbins said in a cameo in the I Am Second film. “You’re in this pit and you don’t feel like there’s any way out. And then you have to tell your kids …

“It is so hard to believe that anyone can come home to their family and lie to them like he did,” she continues.

Dave Robbins admits it was a tough time of not knowing what they were going to do. Mary Lynn received conflicting advice from friends; a lot recommended she leave her husband but a few reminded her God can do anything – even heal a marriage.

In the end, Mary Lynn made a decision most do not. She chose to fight for her marriage, which forever changed the Robbins’ life.

“As painful as it was, as heartbreaking as it was, I still knew that I would be committed to my marriage vows. I knew I had to forgive him, and I was going to walk out that forgiveness,” Mary Lynn Robbins said.

To see how this forgiveness impacted the Robbins, watch the full film on http://www.iamsecond.com.

About I Am Second

Headquartered in Plano, Texas, I Am Second is a movement centered on raw, authentic and transparent stories of living Second to inspire others to do the same. For information, visit http://www.iamsecond.com.

-30-

FOR INFORMATION, CONTACT:

Kristin Cole, 972-267-1111

kristin@alarryross.com