DALLAS, July 24, 2013 /PRNewswire/ -- The Andrew Wyly Film Company recently acquired the film rights to four books authored by Harry Turtledove:

How Few Remain

The Great War: American Front

The Great War: Walk in Hell

The Great War: Breakthroughs

Turtledove has been dubbed "The Master of Alternate History," and his novels have been credited with bringing alternate history into the mainstream. His style of alternate history has a strong military theme with scenes of combat happening throughout many of his works and has sold tens of millions of copies.

Wyly is passionate about Turtledove's series of works due to his interest and background in history—he earned his undergraduate degree in history from Denison University. "I'm looking forward to utilizing my skills as both a filmmaker and historian to bring audiences an entertaining twist on American History while maintaining the integrity of the novels," Wyly stated.

How Few Remain

The Series takes place in America starting in the year 1881. The events occur in an alternate universe where the Confederate States of America didn't lose the Civil War and continued their existence. The point of divergence is September 10, 1862 during the American Civil War. In our timeline a Confederate messenger lost General Robert E. Lee's Special Orders 191, which detailed Lee's plans. The orders were soon found by Union soldiers, and using them George McClellan was able to defeat the Army of Northern Virginia at the Battle of Antietam.

In How Few Remain, the orders are instead recovered by a trailing Confederate soldier. McClellan is caught by surprise, enabling Lee to lead the Army of Northern Virginia to victory. Lee forces McClellan into battle on the banks of the Susquehanna River in Pennsylvania and destroys the Army of the Potomac in the battle of Camp Hill in October. Lee goes on to capture Philadelphia, earning the Confederate States of American diplomatic recognition from both Britain and France, thus winning the war (which is known as the War of Secession in the alternate timeline) and independence from the United States.

Wyly is meeting with several studios and networks to find the right partner to develop and produce the 10 episode mini-series with. For more information about this project, or to contact The Andrew Wyly Film Company, please visit www.howfewremain.com.

About The Andrew Wyly Film Company

The Andrew Wyly Film Company was formed in 2007 when it funded and produced an independent short film and a feature film. The company's intention is to create a top-tier independent film company. With three projects currently on the slate, the company is committed to producing, marketing and distributing two to three movies per year. The films are action and historical scripts. A-list talent with a high level of production value.

The Andrew Wyly Film Company has the unique ability to make high quality, affordable movies in the United States. Our team has signatory agreements with the WGA, DGA, SAG and other unions that enable us to work with their guild members on low-budget Scale rates or in many cases, as negotiated rates. Additionally, we have many outstanding vendor relationships that offer A-list camera, grip, electric and sound equipment, post-production and other key production services at affordable rates. We are known for our nurturing talent. What is formed is a family-like relationship on set and in post-production. People who work with us form a bond that lasts for a lifetime. As a result, The Andrew Wyly Film Company has a network of associations throughout the film and television industry allowing us to produce the highest quality entertainment.

The Andrew Wyly Film Company works with some of the most highly acclaimed filmmakers in the business. By inspiring casts and crews with the spirit of collaboration, the company helps foster the kind of environment where creativity flourishes–and very special films are made.

About Andrew Wyly

Andrew Wyly is an author, entrepreneur, investor, and film producer. Born and raised in Los Angeles, California, with some schooling in Switzerland, he has been a Texan by choice since 2004. After earning a BA in history from Denison University, Andrew worked as a sales agent for Green Mountain Energy and managed a hedge fund portfolio. He is an active participant in several political organizations. In 2007, he created the Andrew Wyly Film Company. Blood Shot, his first feature film, was completed last year. Also in 2012 he co-authored his first book, Texas Got It Right! with his father, Sam Wyly.

About Harry Turtledove

Harry Norman Turtledove earned a Ph.D. in Byzantine history in 1977 from UCLA after failing out of his freshman year at Caltech. His dissertation was on The Immediate Successors of Justinian: A Study of the Persian Problem and of Continuity and Change in Internal Secular Affairs in the Later Roman Empire During the Reigns of Justin II and Tiberius II Constantine (A.D. 565-582).

In 1979, Turtledove published his first two novels, Wereblood and Werenight, under the pseudonym "Eric G. Iverson." Turtledove later explained that his editor at Belmont Towers did not think people would believe his real name was "Turtledove" and suggested that he come up with something more Nordic. He continued to use the "Iverson" name until 1985 when he published his "Herbig-Haro" and "And So to Bed" under his real name.

In the 1980s, Turtledove worked as a technical writer for the Los Angeles County Office of Education. In 1991, he left the LACOE and turned to writing full time. From 1986-1987, he served as the Treasurer for the Science Fiction Writers of America.

He is married to mystery writer Laura Frankos, and they have three daughters. His brother-in-law is fantasy author Steven Frankos. Turtledove won the HOMer Award for Short Story in 1990 for "Designated Hitter," John Esthen Cook Award for Southern Fiction in 1993 for Guns of the South, the Hugo Award for Novella in 1994 for Down in the Bottomlands. "Must and Shall" was nominated for the 1996 Hugo Award for Best Novelette, the 1996 Nebula Award for Best Novelette and received an honorable mention for the 1995 Sidewise Award for Alternate History. The Two Georges also received an honorable mention for the 1995 Sidewise Award for Alternate History. The Worldwar series received a Sidewise Award for Alternate History Honorable Mention in 1996. On August 1, 1998, Turtledove was named honorary Kentucky Colonel while Guest of Honor at Rivercon XXIII in Louisville, KY.

MEDIA CONTACT

Allison M. Allison

[email protected]

214-354-4688

SOURCE The Andrew Wyly Film Company