Harry Turtledove is one of those writers I’ve been aware of for years, even though I very rarely read any of his stuff. For those who have useful information stored in their memory instead of a bunch of sci-fi trivia, Turtledove is one of the more successful writers of “alternate history,” a sub-genre of fiction for people who watch the History Channel too much.

The whole point of alternate history is to ask “what if things went differently?” Drawing from Turtledove’s bibliography, the premises can range from “what if the British put down the American Revolution?” to “What if time-traveling racists gave Robert E. Lee AK-47’s so slavery was never abolished?” Though it should be also noted Turtledove writes a lot of “outright” sci-fi/fantasy as well; guy’s pretty prolific. And when I stumbled across Three Miles Down, Turtledove’s latest (and presumably the first in a new series? More on that later), I figured I’d check it out– especially since I hadn’t heard much hype about it elsewhere.

Three Miles Down centers on Jerry Stieglitz, a geeky grad student in marine biology at UCLA. Due to his expertise with underwater microphones, as well as his knowledge of science fiction, Jerry gets recruited by the CIA to work on Project Azorian, a top secret effort to recover a crashed Soviet submarine. Only that’s just the secret cover, and the real target of the mission is to recover the mysterious, dormant alien craft that sank that submarine. So there’s the alternate history/sci-fi bit, right there.

Three Miles Down is … basically the first act of a sci-fi movie, stretched to novel length. Set in 1974, the book is stuffed to the gills with period detail. Like, in the first paragraph of the book, Jerry sits on shag carpeting, while wearing bell-bottoms, to listen to Steely Dan on cassette. It’s like Turtledove just wants to go “It’s the 70’s, get it!” right off the bat. Turtledove covers the bigger events of 1974 as well, including Watergate and Nixon’s subsequent resignation. And, of course, since Jerry is an aspiring sci-fi writer himself, the book is absolutely littered with mentions of classic sci-fi, to the point that Jerry Pournelle pops up as a character in the last few chapters. Thankfully, there’s enough substance to the rest of the book that all the shout-outs just make Jerry seem genre-aware rather than obnoxiously nerdy.

While quite readable (I finished the book a bit sooner than I thought I would), Turtledove has an … odd structure to Three Miles Down. The actual “secret conspiracy to dredge up an alien spaceship” part moves along at a fair clip– until a stretch in the middle of the novel where Jerry’s taken off the project and returned to LA. What follow are several chapters of slice-of-life stuff as Jerry re-acclimates to a “normal” life, in exacting detail. A quirk of Turtledove’s writing I noticed the last time I tried reading one of his books (like, over 10 years ago), is that he absolutely loves to detail just what a character’s eating any time they have a meal. Which, on the one hand, is a fair way to introduce little setting details and/or build connection with the reader: everybody eats, after all. On the other, Turtledove does this so much that it almost feels like filler. It’s like he just said “oh hey, is this chapter too short? Guess Jerry gets to eat a steak!”

So yeah. There are several chapters in the middle of the book that easily could have been condensed in order to give Three Miles Down a leaner plot. Which makes things even more frustrating, as the third act of the book gets into full cold-war sci-fi espionage mode, until it just … stops. On a cliffhanger, no less. Which, admittedly, is an easy way to get people to read the sequel, and heck, I’m probably gonna give the next book a shot, whenever it comes out. It’s just that the cliffhanger ending feels abrupt, to the point where I had to scroll through my e-reader app a bit to make sure the rest of the book had downloaded.

Still, Three Miles Down is an enjoyable enough read that never gets bogged down in the minutiae of military history like a lot of alternate history novels tend to do. If you’re in the mood for a mashup (and tribute to) classic sci-fi and 70’s spy thrillers, Three Miles Down might be worth checking out– though on the other hand, you might also wait for the inevitable sequel so you get the whole story.