Most logos are distributed vector-based. There are several vector-based file formats, such as EPS, PDF, and SVG. Simple images such as logos will generally have a smaller file size than their rasterized JPG, PNG, or GIF equivalent. You can read more about Raster vs Vector on the vector-conversions.com.

SVG or Scalable Vector Graphics is an XML-style markup-driven vector graphic rendering engine for the browser. Generally speaking, SVG offers a way to do full resolution graphical elements, no matter what size screen, what zoom level, or what resolution your user's device has.

There are several reasons why SVG is smart to store logo assets on your website or use it for print and paper collateral. Benefits including small file size, vector accuracy, W3C standards, and unlimited image scaling. Another benefit is compatibility — even if the facilities offered by SVG rendering engines may differ, the format is backward and forward compatible. SVG engines will render what they can and ignore the rest.

Having the SmarTone logo as an SVG document, you can drop it anywhere, scaling on the fly to whatever size it needs to be without incurring pixelation and loss of detail or taking up too much bandwidth.

You can download the SmarTone logotype in vector-based SVG (Scalable Vector Graphics) file format on this web page.

According to wikipedia.org: "A logo (an abbreviation of logotype, from Greek: λόγος, romanized: logos, lit. 'word' and Greek: τύπος, romanized: typos, lit. 'imprint') is a graphic mark, emblem, or symbol used to aid and promote public identification and recognition. It may be of an abstract or figurative design or include the text of the name it represents as in a wordmark."

Logos fall into three classifications (which can be combined). Ideographs are abstract forms; pictographs are iconic, representational designs; Logotypes (or Wordmarks) depict the name or company's initials. Because logos are meant to represent companies brands or corporate identities and foster their immediate customer recognition, it is counterproductive to redesign logos frequently.

A logo is the central element of a complex identification system that must be functionally extended to an organization's communications. Therefore, the design of logos and their incorporation into a visual identity system is one of the most challenging and essential graphic design areas.

As a general rule, third parties may not use the SmarTone logo without permission given by the logo and (or) trademark owner. For any questions about the legal use of the logo, please contact SmarTone directly. You can find contact information on the website smartone.com.

We strive to find official logotypes and brand colors, including the SmarTone logo, from open sources, such as wikipedia.org, seeklogo.com, brandsoftheworld.com, famouslogos.net, and other websites; however, we cannot guarantee the SmarTone logo on this web page is accurate, official or up-to-date. To get the official SmarTone logo, please get in touch with SmarTone directly or go to smartone.com.

By downloading the SmarTone logo from the Logotyp.us website, you agree that the logo provided "as-is." All the materials appearing on the Logotyp.us website (including company names, logotypes, brand names, brand colors, and website URLs) could include technical, typographical, or photographic errors or typos.

We do not claim any rights to the SmarTone logo and provide the logo for informational and non-commercial purposes only. You may not use or register, or otherwise claim ownership in any SmarTone trademark, including as or as part of any trademark, service mark, company name, trade name, username, or domain registration. You do not suppose to share a link to this web page as the source of the "official SmarTone logo" Thank you.

The color red is a warm, vibrant color that is often associated with strong emotions such as passion, love, and anger. It is also often associated with power, strength, and determination. In design, red can be used to create a bold, attention-grabbing visual impact. It is also often used to represent danger or warning, as it is the color of stop signs and warning lights. In fashion, red is often used to add a pop of color to an outfit and can be used to make a statement or stand out in a crowd. The color red is also associated with love and romance, and is often used in Valentine's Day and Christmas decorations.

It's important to note that these associations are not universal, and different people may have different emotional responses to colors.