SmartOne, a company specializing in consulting and data valuation for artificial intelligence (AI), founded in Madagascar where it employs over 1,200 people - many of whom are from marginalized communities - is pleased to announce a partnership with Mila - Quebec Artificial Intelligence Institute, the world's largest academic research center in deep learning. Founded by renowned AI researcher Yoshua Bengio, Mila brings together a research community of over 1,000 members in the field of machine learning. The partnership aims to leverage the respective expertise of SmartOne and Mila in deep learning algorithms.

"We were born in Madagascar, and the AI boom has enabled us to bring value to our clients in multiple industries worldwide by contributing to the performance of their algorithms while creating sustainable jobs and career opportunities for our young Africans. The partnership with Mila is a significant step as we relocate our headquarters to Montreal, where we aim to benefit from the vibrant AI ecosystem and dynamic research efforts. We are excited and proud to work with the entire Mila community to generate new ideas and innovations that improve the world we live in, based on shared values such as ethics and justice. I am confident that the expertise of SmartOne in transforming high-quality data combined with the innovations driven by Mila will enable us to do more, better, and for the benefit of all," said Shahysta Hassim, CEO of SmartOne.

"SmartOne's solutions for data annotation have the potential to help AI companies become more agile and efficient in these time-consuming processes. We are delighted to begin our collaboration with this promising company which has recently established an office in Montreal," explained Stéphane Létourneau, Mila's Executive Vice-President.

About SmartOne

SmartOne's mission is to ensure that the data used to educate AI algorithms is trustworthy, unbiased, and, most importantly, value-generating. With 1,200 employees spread across its offices in Madagascar, Paris, London, and now Montreal - its new headquarters - the company has gained expertise in over 40 verticals through more than 300 projects since 2016. SmartOne firmly believes that humans and machines working together can achieve more than humans or machines alone, and that bridges must be built between the most advanced societies and those in development, such as North America and Africa, the birthplace of the company.

About Mila

Founded by Professor Yoshua Bengio of the University of Montreal, Mila is an artificial intelligence research institute that brings together over 1,000 researchers specializing in machine learning. Based in Montreal, Mila’s mission is to be a global hub for scientific advances that inspire innovation and development of AI for the benefit of all. Mila is a non-profit organization recognized worldwide for its significant contributions to the field of deep learning, particularly in language modeling, machine translation, object recognition, and generative models. For more information, visit mila.quebec