SmarTone has transformed its customer experience and network performance by implementing Ativa, Infovista’s cutting-edge automated assurance solution, across its 3G, 4G, 5G and IMS network.

SmarTone, committed to delivering consistent and exceptional experiences to its customers, sought an innovative assurance solution to optimise service and customer monitoring, enhance troubleshooting capabilities and elevate overall customer satisfaction. Following an exhaustive selection process, SmarTone chose Infovista’s passive probing solution, Ativa, for its comprehensive assurance capabilities and future-proof technology, highlighted by its cloud-native, virtualised and open architecture.

The mission at SmarTone is to deliver unparalleled services to their customers. To achieve this, they required a solution that not only empowers them to elevate the quality of service and overall customer experience but also drives their daily operations with a customer-centric approach. Ativa provides them the data intelligence necessary to optimise and scale their business.

The Ativa solution by Infovista has equipped SmarTone with enhanced monitoring and troubleshooting capabilities, offering valuable insights into voice and data, including intelligence on OTT applications delivered over mobile and 5G fixed wireless access (FWA) broadband. Its flexibility has facilitated the delivery of customised solutions aligned with SmarTone’s specific requirements, while its support for Open APIs has enabled integrations with third-party systems, ensuring a smooth export of data and analytics.

Infovista’s solution has transformed SmarTone’s troubleshooting, enhancing their service and customer experience. The implementation of Ativa Solution has indeed resulted in tangible benefits for SmarTone. The solution has been instrumental in reducing mean-time-to-repair (MTTR), minimising trouble tickets, and significantly improving overall customer experience (CX), net promoter score (NPS) and customer retention rates. Moreover, it has optimised team efficiency by reducing time and effort spent on operational processes.