@terry2012 said:

@Parallax_Hal_Jordan: Yes you are getting them confuse. Because when Vegeta said the skinny buu Turn Majboo into cococlate that when he became Super boo. It even said when he absorb them he take on the character of them. Meaning they are not the same.

What? i even show you scans of Boo's back to normal (Super Boo)...He was (at first) Super BooGohan because he absorb :Gohan,Gotenks and Piccolo (don't count Majin Boo,that's why he is Super Boo xD)

When Goku & Vegeta removed Gohan, Boo turn into his previous form (Boo Piccolo) and later they remove Piccolo,Goten and Trunks and he turn Super Boo (i don't know how you can't see it,it's all in the scans i provide,it's the same Boo that get roflstomped by Gohan) and then is when Goku said even with Vegeta's help they'll loose...After all that,Vegeta remove Majin Boo and Super Boo return to his very first form: KId Boo...

Even more,you said Goku was talking about BooGohan,and that's not true if you see the scans i post in my previous reply

It was a uberstomp. Janemba was toying with Goku. And in that video Goku was throwing and trying everything he had at Janemba.

Yes "everything"...just few kicks,punches and random energy balls...no kienzan,no kamehameha,etc

Yes Goku has fought in Ssj3 in the manga. I don't know why you said that given the fact that you show images from the Manga. That is the same manga you got the scans from, which probably from mangahere.com. Here I show you in the picture below.

I never said Goku did not fought in Ssj3,he didn't fought with: Super Boo,Super BooGotenks and Super BooGohan,and that's true...and it's a shame that you show me a scan where they're not fighting and said something like that. So,you look for that scan and that's it?you didn't read the next one? here it is:

Ups,the fusion has disappeared and BooGotenks didn't even connected a single blow on him. You didn't prove me wrong,they did not fight ;)

And no,they aren't from mangahere.com,i get the scans from mangafox

So Goku did fought Majboo, Bootenks, Boohan, and Kid boo.

Yes,he fought Majin Boo and Kid Boo (don't know why you say this,i already said it). But he didn't fought BooGotenks nor BooGohan,please show me scans of they fighting each other (and with fight, i didn't mean not fighting at all)

@Phoenix6000: It is not Super Boo at wheel. He doesn't have the same mind set nor is he the same character. In the post above your post it show a scan that said he takes on the characteristics of those he absorb. Which is stated by Vegeta and the Kibito Kai. When he absorb anybody he takes on the characteristics of those he absorb. Like Majboo when he was nice, Super boo was different, because of his mind set, Bootenks was different because of his mind set, Boohan was different because of his mind set, and last but least Kid boo was different because of his mind set. With every different Boo Goku encounter he approach them differently and not the same. Because if they were they same then it wouldn't have been no need for him to approach them differently instead of the same. If it was true, then Kid boo would be at the wheel in stead of Super boo if they are the same. Which you are not claiming at your in post that would contradict almost everything you said. the Bold statement is not false, it is exactly what Goku said.

SSJ Vegito > Buuhan > Buutenks > Ultimate Gohan > Buff Buu > Piccolo-Buu > SSJ3 Gotenks = Super Buu > SSJ Gotenks (post-RST) > Base Gotenks (post-RST) > SSJ Gotenks > SSJ3 Goku >= Kid Buu > Fat Buu > Evil Buu > Good Buu > Majin Vegeta/SSJ2 Goku

Wrong, it goes like this, Ssj Vegito> Vegito> Buuhan> Bootenks> Ultimate Gohan> Goku SSJ 3> Kid Boo >Boo Piccolo>Super Boo= SsJ3 Gotenks> SsJ Gotenks> Base form Gotenks> Evil Boo> Majboo> Majin Vegta=SSJ2 Goku. There is no such thing as Buff Boo, and Good Boo.

@Parallax_Hal_Jordan: He not afraid, and not because Gohan was there. He didn't finish him off because he want somebody else to be the hero and not himself. That why he had a serious look on his face and the fact that he power down after Boo went down to Boo Piccolo. You can see in that scan that he power down on purposely because he thought it was over for Boo and Boo insure him that he had a insurance plan just in case it was going to happen like that. That when he absorb Gohan. Boo Piccolo was not beyond Goku. In fact he was not afraid of Bootenks, but he was afraid of Buuhan when he told Vegeta. Otherwise he would had power down to his base form if he was that afraid of him.

@terry2012 said:

@Phoenix6000: It is not Super Boo at wheel. He doesn't have the same mind set nor is he the same character. In the post above your post it show a scan that said he takes on the characteristics of those he absorb. Which is stated by Vegeta and the Kibito Kai. When he absorb anybody he takes on the characteristics of those he absorb. Like Majboo when he was nice, Super boo was different, because of his mind set, Bootenks was different because of his mind set, Boohan was different because of his mind set, and last but least Kid boo was different because of his mind set. With every different Boo Goku encounter he approach them differently and not the same. Because if they were they same then it wouldn't have been no need for him to approach them differently instead of the same. If it was true, then Kid boo would be at the wheel in stead of Super boo if they are the same. Which you are not claiming at your in post that would contradict almost everything you said. the Bold statement is not false, it is exactly what Goku said.

SSJ Vegito > Buuhan > Buutenks > Ultimate Gohan > Buff Buu > Piccolo-Buu > SSJ3 Gotenks = Super Buu > SSJ Gotenks (post-RST) > Base Gotenks (post-RST) > SSJ Gotenks > SSJ3 Goku >= Kid Buu > Fat Buu > Evil Buu > Good Buu > Majin Vegeta/SSJ2 Goku

Wrong, it goes like this, Ssj Vegito> Vegito> Buuhan> Bootenks> Ultimate Gohan> Goku SSJ 3> Kid Boo >Boo Piccolo>Super Boo= SsJ3 Gotenks> SsJ Gotenks> Base form Gotenks> Evil Boo> Majboo> Majin Vegta=SSJ2 Goku. There is no such thing as Buff Boo, and Good Boo.

Good Buu and Buff Buu do exist. Old Kai asked Kibito Kai and he confirmed the muscled form was the same one taken when Kid Buu absorbed South Supreme Kai. Likewise, Good Buu is what remains of Fat Majin Buu after being split from Skinny Evil Buu.

My power chain is the correct one, since Goku acknowledged he was inferior to base Super Buu (and SSJ3 Gotenks by extension). Goku also said SSJ Gotenks (pre-RST) would be more powerful than himself and nothing contradicts that. No getting around it, pal. Best you can do is ignore it, which is even more hilarious since someone already provided the scans.

EDIT: You're misconstruing what I'm saying. Fat Buu and Kid Buu are different personalities altogether, as explained in the manga. I'm saying that all forms of Super Buu have the same mindset and they do. All Super Buu gained from the Z-fighters was extra power and knowledge, his persona does not change but his mannerisms did.

What you're saying is that if someone goes to the gym and bulks up, they're somehow a different person (psychologically) than they were the day before. It doesn't work like that.

@Parallax_Hal_Jordan: "What? i even show you scans of Boo's back to normal (Super Boo)...He was (at first) Super BooGohan because he absorb :Gohan,Gotenks and Piccolo (don't count Majin Boo,that's why he is Super Boo xD)"

Your scan show him not turning him back to normal fully which is Kid Boo. He wasn't even done change back to his normal state and that exactly what scan is. Super Boo is not his normal, Kid Boo is his normal. Majin Boo does count because he was absorb by Evil BOO, that how he became Super Boo. The rest doesn't count because he be came something different. Ultimate Gohan was fighting Super Boo until he become Bootenks.

"When Goku & Vegeta removed Gohan, Boo turn into his previous form (Boo Piccolo) and later they remove Piccolo,Goten and Trunks and he turn Super Boo (i don't know how you can't see it,it's all in the scans i provide,it's the same Boo that get roflstomped by Gohan) and then is when Goku said even with Vegeta's help they'll loose...After all that,Vegeta remove Majin Boo and Super Boo return to his very first form: KId Boo..."

I know what happened and I see that, but you fail at is that Super Boo is not his normal it never have and if never will. Again Kid Boo is his normal , not Super Boo. What Goku stated is hyperbole, because Goku said that all the time. Because did he not say that Kid Boo was the strongest he ever fought? how can that be when he was fighting Bootenks? and since you claim he was afraid of Bootenks, and Super boo that would be understatement. Because if that was true then why didn't Goku say lets do the fusion dance while they were inside Super Boo instead of being mad at Vegata for destroying the ear ring? They had that as a second choice.

"I never said Goku did not fought in Ssj3,he didn't fought with: Super Boo,Super BooGotenks and Super BooGohan,and that's true...and it's a shame that you show me a scan where they're not fighting and said something like that. So,you look for that scan and that's it?you didn't read the next one? here it is:"

I never say you said Goku didn't fought in SSj3, he did fought with : Bootenks and that's true.... No it a shame that I show you a scan of what is going on and you can't understand it. What do you think they were doing while Gohan was looking for earring? I did read the next one after that. and what you see is The Fusion ended and Gohan find the earring. It common sense, do you think Bootenks stood there and not attack Goku while Gohan searches for the earring? They were fighting and Goku was buying time for Gohan to find the earring. That why they did the anime they way they did? It make sense. The writer did drawn all of the fights through because he probably was lazy or tired. So I did prove you wrong. Otherwise the Boo saga would have been short and not worth to being it to animation.

"And no,they aren't from mangahere.com,i get the scans from mangafox"

They are same scans because Mangahere get it first before Mangafox. and they get it from Mangapandafox. So technically they are same except for mangastream, which is the most correct.

"Yes,he fought Majin Boo and Kid Boo (don't know why you say this,i already said it). But he didn't fought BooGotenks nor BooGohan,please show me scans of they fighting each other (and with fight, i didn't mean not fighting at all)"

He fought Bootenks at Ssj 3 which I already show you scans and you show scans, but you don't understand what is actually going on there. I never said he fought Boohan, unless you count the fusion then yes he did.

@terry2012 said:

Your scan show him not turning him back to normal fully which is Kid Boo. He wasn't even done change back to his normal state and that exactly what scan is. Super Boo is not his normal, Kid Boo is his normal. Majin Boo does count because he was absorb by Evil BOO, that how he became Super Boo. The rest doesn't count because he be came something different. Ultimate Gohan was fighting Super Boo until he become Bootenks.

Now you are nitpicking and going with semantic,we were always talking about Super Boo (that's what i meant with "normal"),so my point wasn't refuted yet. Vegeta and Goku removed all the people Boo has absorved and he turn back to Super Boo (plain and simple),and that's true. And you never answer me about you being wrong when you said "Because it was Buuhan that he was afraid of with Vegeta help." He said that when Boo was already Super Boo,not BooGohan

I know what happened and I see that, but you fail at is that Super Boo is not his normal it never have and if never will. Again Kid Boo is his normal , not Super Boo. What Goku stated is hyperbole, because Goku said that all the time.

Again,when i said "normal" i meant Super Boo (no one absorved,except of course,Fat Boo).Did you see his face?to you that's hyperbole?lol,priceless...And if you wanna come here with "He didn't want to hurt Vegeta's pride"...to late,Vegeta already knew Goku can turn Ssj3 xD

Because did he not say that Kid Boo was the strongest he ever fought? how can that be when he was fighting Bootenks?

Because he didn't

Because if that was true then why didn't Goku say lets do the fusion dance while they were inside Super Boo instead of being mad at Vegata for destroying the ear ring? They had that as a second choice.

Omg,check your facts dude (or,read the manga):

he did fought with : Bootenks and that's true.... No it a shame that I show you a scan of what is going on and you can't understand it. What do you think they were doing while Gohan was looking for earring? I did read the next one after that. and what you see is The Fusion ended and Gohan find the earring. It common sense, do you think Bootenks stood there and not attack Goku while Gohan searches for the earring? They were fighting and Goku was buying time for Gohan to find the earring. That why they did the anime they way they did? It make sense. The writer did drawn all of the fights through because he probably was lazy or tired.

They didn't even trade blows,Gotenks's time was out before he can connect a single blow. And your excuse of Toriyama being lazy or tired...is just lol. I mean that's the only real fight that was never drawn?hilarious. After that we saw Vegetto vs BooGohan,Goku vs Kid Boo,Vegeta vs Kid Boo and even Mr Satan vs Kid Boo...but the only one missing is Goku vs BooGotenks..seems legit

So I did prove you wrong

No,you didn't

I never said he fought Boohan, unless you count the fusion then yes he did.

Yes,you did:

@terry2012 said:

@Parallax_Hal_Jordan: Yes you are getting them confuse. Because when Vegeta said the skinny buu Turn Majboo into chococlate that when he became Super boo. It even said when he absorb them he take on the character of them. Meaning they are not the same.

It was a uberstomp. Janemba was toying with Goku. And in that video Goku was throwing and trying everything he had at Janemba.

Yes Goku has fought in Ssj3 in the manga. I don't know why you said that given the fact that you show images from the Manga. That is the same manga you got the scans from, which probably from mangahere.com. Here I show you in the picture below.

So Goku did fought Majboo, Bootenks, Boohan, and Kid boo.

@Parallax_Hal_Jordan:That wasn't reply to. It was reply to some else. You going off the manga and the person I'm replying to is not going off the manga. Now where does it say it was referred to you?So you reply for no reason. And yes his base form is more powerful than Buuhan. The fact that he toyed with him in only SSJ1 should clearly show you that he can. And I quite sure he could have went to SSJ2 and SSJ3 in that form as well. You didn't prove me wrong in your other reply Lol.

@Phoenix6000: He didn't fought anyone worthy, so that doesn't count. In fact none of them does, because they are no longer alive. They are dead, so they don't exist anymore. With that being said, you can not ranked because we don't know where they stand. Good Boo is not what left of Majin Boo, he is gone as well. Only his characteristic is left with him, but not him. By the way, they were taken out pretty easily. None of them were good fighters at all. Good Kaioshen and the Big one Kaioshen were they only good ones so your power chain is incorrect. Because Superem Kai kept getting surprise by Goku and them. and the Kai's fought Kid Boo and every time he absorb one of them he was weaken himself....And he took two out of them with no effort. So no way is your power chain is correct, it is wrong, they are not even at the level of SSJ3.

@terry2012 said:

@Phoenix6000: He didn't fought anyone worthy, so that doesn't count. In fact none of them does, because they are no longer alive. They are dead, so they don't exist anymore. With that being said, you can not ranked because we don't know where they stand. Good Boo is not what left of Majin Boo, he is gone as well. Only his characteristic is left with him, but not him. By the way, they were taken out pretty easily. None of them were good fighters at all. Good Kaioshen and the Big one Kaioshen were they only good ones so your power chain is incorrect. Because Superem Kai kept getting surprise by Goku and them. and the Kai's fought Kid Boo and every time he absorb one of them he was weaken himself....And he took two out of them with no effort. So no way is your power chain is correct, it is wrong, they are not even at the level of SSJ3.

I assume you're referring to the Kais? Or the Gotenks forms? Unfortunately for you, they all count and we know with 100% certainty where they fall on the power chain. The kais were unable to lift the Z-sword, which Gohan accomplished with SSJ2. We also know that only ONE Kai weakened Buu, Daikaioshin. This is stated both in manga and Daizenshuu. What this means is that (despite what you think), South Kai increased Buu's power and he became Buff Buu. This is confirmed by Kibito Kai.

We also know Buu's power split when Evil Buu emerged. Evil Buu received a majority of it and that's why he was able to overcome Fat Buu. Super Buu could utilize 100% of that power, something Fat Majin could not do because Daikaioshin's pure heart and good nature kept him restrained.

Next we have Goku claiming Gotenks would be stronger than himself and nothing contradicts that. You're claiming the contrary thus it's your task to provide the evidence to discredit Goku's remark. So far all you've done is deliver baseless speculation and personal conjecture.

From reading your replies, I've already gathered that you know nothing of Dragon Ball, outside of what you watched on Toonami. It's hysterical watching you claim things that aren't true, while at the same time you pick and choose what you want to hear.

Example: Goku never battled Buutenks in the manga. If was never shown because the fusion expired before the fight began. Your excuse for claiming it did happen was that Toriyama didn't feel like drawing it. Goku vs. Buutenks is anime filler, and the anime is non-canon due to its habit of forming inconsistencies.

That's not how canon works, kid. You don't get to decide and in this instance the manga speaks for itself. Until you prove otherwise, Goku's statement of being inferior to base Super Buu still stands.