by Jeremy Carden

This is one debate that is still going on between Dragonball fans. One has to wonder if this debate is discussed more than the Goku vs. Superman issue.

In any case, we all know that there are multiple forms of Majin Buu with Kid Buu being the original form until he started absorbing other beings into his body or when he split into a Good and Evil Buu.

The point of this blog is to go over my personal ranking of the Majin Buus from strongest to weakest.

I’ll be using facts, dialogue, fights and evidence from both the anime AND manga. This will help give you all an understanding of how and why I rank the Majin Buus in the order that I do from strongest to weakest.

Also understand that despite filler not being considered canon, I will use it for my discussion.

For example, Super Saiyan 3 Goku’s “fight” with Super Buu Gotenks/Piccolo absorbed (Buutenks) was filler.

So was Goku and Vegeta’s fight with Super Buu Gohan Absorbed (Buuhan).

Here are the Buus up for discussion:

Kid Buu

Buff Buu-Kid Buu after absorbing South Supreme Kai

Fat Buu-Buff Buu after absorbing the Grand Supreme Kai/Daikaioh

Good/Mr. Buu-The Good Buu after splitting from his evil side

Evil Buu-the Evil Buu after splitting from his good side

Super Buu-the resulting Buu after Evil Buu eats Good Buu

Super Buu-Gotenks/Piccolo absorbed or “Buutenks”

Super Buu-Piccolo/Goten/Trunks absorbed or “Buuccolo”

Super Buu-Gohan/Goten/Trunks/Piccolo absorbed or “Buuhan”

Now here is how I rank them from strongest to weakest:

1. Buuhan

2. Buutenks

3. Buff Buu

4. Buuccolo

5. Super Buu

6. Fat Buu

7. Kid Buu

8. Evil Buu

9. Good Buu

These are the topics that I will be going over to support my theories:

The power of the individual Buus including things like speed, durability, power and danger level

The power of the beings that he absorbed

Comparing the split between Good and Evil Buu to that of the split of the Original Namek

Comparing Fat Buu’s “endless power” to Gohan’s power drop after the Cell Games

Overall, I’m going to throw everything I have at this in order to prove why thoughts on this so I hope you appreciate the hard work but also have patience because I know this is a long blog but it is covering some solid information in order to help you understand what I’m talking about.

Another thing that I do want to make note of is that I will not be using Uub or Majuub in my rankings because I don’t think it would be fair because he is Majin Buu reincarnated and before fusing with Good Buu he was 100% human. I will however make reference to him a couple of times though.

And no I will not be including the Majin Buus from the video games where he absorbs Frieza, Cell, Vegeta or Yamcha/Tien!

So, to get things started let’s take a look at what Majin Buu is. He is a creation by the evil wizard Bibidi who made Buu as a weapon of destruction in his conquest to rule the galaxy.

As Kid Buu laid waste to planet after planet in an endless domino effect of destruction there was little to no opposition that could stop him.

Even when the Supreme Kais came to fight none of them were able to defeat Buu.

Later on, Shin or Supreme Kai or Eastern Supreme Kai (whatever you want to call him) told Vegeta that back in his time all of the Supreme Kais were defeated by Buu and would have been able to destroy Frieza with a single blow

In the anime, he says that the Supreme Kais were all 1,000 times more powerful than Frieza

Just a couple of comments about that statement:

Due to Supreme Kai’s lack of knowledge about the Super Saiyans, I think it is safe to say that he also did not know about Frieza’s multiple forms.

With that in mind I feel that he was comparing his former Kai associates to Frieza 1st form which was clocked at 530,000.

By doing math based on his statement 530,000 times 1,000 would equal 530,000,000.

That number is over triple Frieza’s 100% power which was 120,000,000 but again this is all assumption based on Shin’s comment to Vegeta.

In any case, the Kais themselves were powerful but not powerful enough to defeat Kid Buu who effortlessly took them all down.

Save for South Kai and Grand Supreme Kai but I will get to my thoughts on their individual powers below.

Majin Buu can regenerate from molecules as Piccolo mentioned when Super Buu reformed after being blasted by the Super Ghost Kamikaze Attack followed by Piccolo and Super Saiyan Gotenks blasting the remaining bits of Buu to dust and the smoke from that reformed into Super Buu once again.

He can mold his body into different shapes and forms

A “volleyball” as seen when he uses the Mystic Ball Attack

Like the Nameks can extend and retract his limbs for long range combat

Fat Buu entraps people in his stomach to suffocate them by expanding his body

Super Buu has been shown to liquefy himself and “force feed” his enemy until their bodies explode into pieces

Something else worthy of note is his ability to break through dimension walls however it seems that he is only capable of doing this if he is EXTREMELY angry

Buu has a LONG list of powers that make him a very dangerous and unpredictable foe

His most famous power seems to be the Candy Beam which changes his opponents or anything that it hits into the food item of his choice; mostly candy or desserts

The only forms of Buu not shown to have this ability is Buff, Kid and Evil Buu. It is understood that Buutenks could use the technique as well but of course I’m sure he wouldn’t change his own competition (Mystic Gohan) into candy.

Buu’s speed varies depending on what form he is in. It seems safe to say that Buuhan is the fastest Majin Buu with the only being seen to be faster than him being Vegito.

Kid Buu is arguably the fastest but only if you throw the Instant Transmission or Instantaneous Movement into the equation but remember that is a technique not his own natural speed

I mean on multiple occasions Buu is seen outmaneuvering the Z-Fighters;

Fat Buu appeared in front of the fleeing Super Saiyan 2 Gohan who told Shin that he was pretty confident about his speed

Super Buu after absorbing Gotenks and Piccolo was easily able to swat around Mystic Gohan

Vegeta was no match for Kid Buu’s speed regardless of what form he was in whether it was base or Super Saiyan 2

Another thing to consider is that Majin Buu has an innate ability to mimic techniques used against him in battle.

This was seen when Fat Buu used a Kamehameha Wave on Super Saiyan 3 Goku after Goku used it against him to blow a hole in his chest

Kid Buu did the same just by seeing Kibito Kai using the Instantaneous Movement to escape the exploding Earth

During Uub’s fight with Goku at the end of DBZ, Vegeta mentions that the kid is learning how to fight while he’s fighting

Alright, so with all of these abilities taken into account let’s break it down into individual categories: stamina and durability

Stamina

This has to be my favorite thing to discuss concerning Majin Buu because like the Energizer Bunny, this guy just keeps going and going and going…

There are only a few times when I can remember Majin Buu actually being tired

When Good Buu tries to hit Evil Buu with a melee barrage but not one punch lands he is seen catching his breath before being kicked away by Evil Buu

One could argue that it was because Buu had just lost a lot of power in the fission with Evil Buu taking more of his power and abilities leaving the Good Buu in a weakened state

Super Buu wasn’t tired but was seen reeling after a head butt from Gotenks

Buuhan was extremely tired from his fight with Vegito even to the point of not being able to fully regenerate but I’ll get to that once I discuss his durability

Kid Buu’s only time showing to be even remotely exhausted was when he delivered a fierce barrage of attacks to Good Buu’s stomach and said “Whew…” before wiping his forehead.

Let’s take a moment and discuss Kid Buu’s stamina for a second because I feel like he went through the most:

After reverting from Super to Buff to Kid Buu, he shots a Ki blast strong enough to destroy Earth but it is deflected by Vegeta so he uses the Planet Burst which has enough power to destroy Earth TEN TIMES!!!

He then destroys countless planets one after the other before going to Grand Kai’s Planet and easily took out the fighters there including Pikkon, Olibu, Krillin and all the others before being “called” to Supreme Kai’s Planet to fight against Goku and Vegeta

He is asleep before Goku powers up at Super Saiyan 2 to fight then goes Super Saiyan 3 before passing out due to exhaustion

Buu then takes out base form Vegeta before he engages in battle with SS3 Goku once again

After taking down Super Saiyan 2 Vegeta with ease…

In comes Mr. Satan!

Followed by a bout with the Good Buu

Then ANOTHER round with base form Vegeta

And finally we see Kid Buu vs. the Spirit Bomb!

He even manages to push back the bomb on a weakened Goku something no other villain has been able to do!

Until he finally meets his end when Goku’s power is restored and he goes Super Saiyan to finish the fight.

BUT WAIT!!!!

How did Kid Buu send back the Spirit Bomb although he doesn’t have a pure heart?

Just like the Super Saiyan transformation, the word “pure” could mean A LOT of things. Kid Buu does have a GOOD pure heart like Goku. Kid Buu had a pure EVIL heart!

King Kai nor any other being in Dragonball for that matter makes a good distinction of pure in terms of good and evil. I mean Krillin handled the bomb and although he isn’t evil, Krillin isn’t pure either. He lusts but not Roshi-level lust for women due to his desire for a girlfriend. I mean do you remember his girlfriend (filler) Marron?

Also remember the bomb was created by Krillin it was handed to Krillin by Goku and then pure hearted Gohan was able to bounce it back at the off guard Vegeta

Keep in mind that in Super Android 13, Goku turned Super Saiyan but it was only after the bomb was created so it could explain why Goku’s body absorbed it because the bomb was fading away and instead of letting that energy escape, Goku opted to use it to grant him the energy to finish the killer robot

Frieza is more or less 100% evil like Kid Buu but he was straining to push it back because he was off guard but not strong enough to push it back like Kid Buu

So, it could be a matter of power vs. pure beings. With that in mind it could just be that Kid Buu had more energy than the exhausted Goku and was able to push back the Spirit Bomb until Goku is restored to full power once again

Of course in the manga, after regenerating from Earth’s explosion he goes immediately to where Goku and Vegeta are to battle

Not only that, the battles that took place were Kid Buu vs. SS3 Goku, then SS2 Vegeta, a brief comical fight with Hercule and his last “serious” bout was against Good Buu followed by Vegeta stalling him for Goku to launch the Spirit Bomb

In any case, Kid Buu is pretty much all but unstoppable because as Goku pointed out fighting against him was like fighting a hamster on a wheel because no matter how much Ki he puts out he still doesn’t get anywhere.

But then again the same can be said for anyone fighting against Buu because he is pretty much all but unstoppable.

Durability

This is another interesting topic because it is nearly impossible to generate an attack powerful enough to completely destroy Majin Buu so not even a trace, cell or atom of him remained.

The only attack that was able to do so was the Super Spirit Bomb.

I will say that I do not believe Buu to be as durable as Cell.

Why?

Take a look at Krillin’s Destructo Disk for example;

After throwing it at Perfect Cell, the attack bounced off his neck and then crumbled to pieces with Cell just standing there in the process.

When using the attack on Kid Buu, it was able to cut him in half.

Even when Goku returned to Earth, he launched a surprise disk that cut Buutenks in half as well.

So he isn’t completely indestructible but thanks to regeneration and an almost limitless stamina he is all but unbeatable.

Though as seen after suffering from Super Vegito’s Perfect Game and Final Kamehameha attacks, Buu’s regeneration does have limits and if he is blasted too much the process sometimes does an incomplete regeneration and Buu has to put strain on himself (similar to Nail on Namek) to make himself whole again.

The only fighters shown to overpower or at least hold their own against Buu was Super Saiyan 3 Goku, Super Saiyan 3 Gotenks, Mystic Gohan, Vegito and arguably South Kai during his brawl with Kid Buu and Grand Supreme Kai against Buff Buu.

Danger Level

Kid Buu MIGHT win in terms of which Buu is the most dangerous and I agree due to him being 100% evil, a killing machine and basically doing what he was created for; being a weapon of galactic destruction

Heck he even tried to kill his creator once!

The only Buu I’d challenge Kid Buu with in this category is Buuhan but only due to him being far more powerful not to mention smarter (thanks to Piccolo in his head). True he isn’t as unpredictable because Kid Buu will either toy with you or simply kill you along with the planet you are on.

However, Super Buu can break through dimensions when pissed off and while Kid Buu does have a hyper scream I don’t know if he can do that with his Kiai. It might have to do more with power and anger than just anger. Super Buu was much weaker than Buuhan and he was only able to open up ONE dimensional wall to exit the Time Chamber while Buuhan opened up MANY gateways if you wanna look at it that way. Now if it is about power then Kid Buu would fall short.

Super Saiyan 3 Gotenks mimicked the ability but remember Super Saiyan Gotenks and Piccolo tried multiple times but it wasn’t enough but when he went Super Saiyan 3 did it everything just fell into place and BOOM they escaped so indeed power might play a factor.

Buuhan was about to rip apart the ENTIRE universe if Vegito wasn’t able to punch his lights out.

Kid Buu could destroy the universe given time and thanks to Instant Transmission it would be one planet blowing up after the next.

However, I might have to lean toward Super Buu or Buuhan in this category due to him breaking down dimensional walls all at once!

Now let’s take a look at the opponents who Buu squared off against and yes I will be including filler anime fights

1. Fat Buu vs. Dabura

Dabura mocked Buu for his behavior and he paid for it! Buu simply gouged his eyes and kicked him into a mountain. It stunned Gohan and Shin while Babidi screamed with glee at how powerful his “pet Majin” was. For the first time we see Goku stunned at the sudden show of Ki from Buu while he and Vegeta were far off in their battle.

2. Fat Buu vs. Super Saiyan 2 Gohan

While trying to escape, Buu swatted Gohan into the ground while beating down the Supreme Kai and when Gohan got back up he kicked Buu only for the point of impact to pop back out of Buu’s head like nothing happened. Kind of like a memory foam mattress and while Gohan rushed Buu he easily blasted Gohan into the air. But due to Shin’s interference he was able to save Gohan’s life.

3. Fat Buu vs. Supreme Kai

Shin threw everything he had whether it was the huge Ki blast seen in the picture or an eye Kiai blast it was clear that he was not match for the Majin who was about to eat him until…

4. Fat Buu vs. Dabura (Round 2)

Dabura threw a spear that Buu easily pulled out of his stomach and regenerated from. The Demon King still damaged from Buu’s earlier attack threw a barrage of melee and then Ki blasts that did nothing to Majin Buu whole then dodged his Stone Spit and countered with his Candy beam turning him into a giant cookie ending Dabura’s life

5. Fat Buu vs. Majin Vegeta

The 100% Super Saiyan 2 Majin Vegeta (thanks to Goku’s Senzu Bean) put up a good fight but was unable to keep up with Buu’s constant regeneration and even with the Final Explosion blowing him to bits…

Buu reformed!

6. Fat Buu vs. Super Saiyan 3 Goku

The debut of the Super Saiyan 3 form was the first to really show Majin Buu a REAL challenge. However, the more Ki Goku put out fighting, it seemed that Buu’s power continued to increase as well. Indeed showing that we never really see the Fat Buu’s FULL power due to captivity in his ball capping his power and this “exercise” helped him tap into it again

7. Fat Buu vs. base Gotenks

The cocky Fused Gotenks was easily defeated by Fat Buu and had to go back to the Lookout with a bruised body and ego after going on about how he was going to bring back Buu dead!

8. Good Buu vs. Evil Buu

If you ask me I think Evil Buu took over 50% of the power after splitting from Good Buu given how EASILY he was able to defeat his “better” half. I’d estimate at least 60%-75% of the power was given to him and after using his trademark move, Evil Buu blew back the Candy Ray to turn Good Buu into chocolate (talk about karma!)

9. Super Buu vs. base Gotenks

This fight was mostly just for show thanks to Trunks’ plan of putting on a show and then surprising Buu with his Super Saiyan forms. Even after his first melee brawl he realized that Super Buu was more powerful than he thought

10. Super Buu vs. Super Saiyan Gotenks

After kicking it up a notch showing that he could go Super Saiyan after fusing, Gotenk was still no match for Buu’s power and speed but due to his multiple and wacky attacks he managed to keep Buu at bay

11. Super Buu vs. Super Saiyan 3 Gotenks

This was a great fight showing that Gotenks proved the old saying “Anything you can do I can do better!” Buu was irritating Gotenks but whatever the Majin threw at him, Gotenks would throw right back! Mystic Ball from Buu turned into the Super Buu-Buu Volleyball attack from Gotenks! When he was finally about to finish the job…his Super Saiyan 3 power was gone!

12. Super Buu vs. base Gotenks

Enter “normal” Gotenks trying to stall Super Buu but to no avail. When your own Super Ghost question your orders you know you are screwed…

13. Super Buu vs. Mystic Gohan

Mystic Gohan came on the scene and simply dominated Super Buu, really there isn’t much to say here except why Gohan didn’t use any Ki attacks to simply kill Buu…

14. Buutenks vs. Mystic Gohan

Which is something he would come to regret once he absorbed Gotenks and Piccolo easily beating Gohan. If you ask me I think the anime’s take on this fight was more accurate than the manga. In the manga, Buu dominated Gohan the ENTIRE fight but in the anime, it was shown that the two were more or less even but only when Buu started taunting him (thanks to Piccolo) was he able to chip away at Gohan’s confidence causing the mighty hero to fight sloppy

15. Buutenks vs. Tien

Kudos to Tien for saving Dende’s life with his Tri-Beam to deflect Buu’s blast but it was to no avail when he aimed for Buu to no damage at all but that’s understandable this guy was beating Mystic Gohan to a pulp!

After Goku returns on the scene, he is easily knocked out with a swift kick from Buu’s lower half. At least Goku DID consider to fuse with him later on but due to being out cold that was out of the question

16. Buutenks vs. Super Saiyan 3 Goku

This was more about Goku stalling than actually fighting similar to his ight with Fat Buu so Trunks could get the Dragon Radar, he was waiting for Gohan to find the Potara Earring. This proved how Buu outclassed the Super Saiyan 3 in power AND speed with Goku not being able to land a punch. He landed a Kamehameha Volley (one blast to the chest) only because Buu was off guard blasting at Gohan

17. Buuhan vs. Super Saiyan Goku and Super Saiyan Vegeta

I love watching this fight but if one Super Saiyan 3 couldn’t handle Buutenks then two Super Saiyans wouldn’t have a prayer against the much more powerful Buuhan

18. Buuhan vs. base Vegito

Buuhan couldn’t inflict any damage on Vegito even after many punches and energy blasts. It seemed clear that Vegito could have defeated Buuhan without even going Super Saiyan (as Old Kai said in the beginning)

19. Buuhan vs. Super Saiyan Vegito or as most people call him “Super Vegito”

If base form Vegito could finish the job, then the 50 times more powerful Super Vegito could handle it as well. Beating Buu to the point that even his regeneration powers were starting to wear thin

20. Super Buu vs. Super Saiyan Goku and Super Saiyan Vegeta

Its true that the 2 Saiyans “beat” the first Super Buu but it was just a mind puppet I guess you could say but really they were in Buu’s head so they couldn’t really defeat him

21. Kid Buu vs. the fighters on Grand Kai’s Planet

Buu easily defeated all of the other fighters…um yeah that’s about it

22. Kid Buu vs. Super Saiyan 2 Goku

A very good fight with Goku even blowing Buu to bits at one point…only for him to regenerate. Filler only but still worth watching showing Goku could hold his own!

23. Kid Buu vs. Super Saiyan 3 Goku

The only fight that shows Buu being pushed back instead of doing all of the pushing…until Goku collapsed from exhaustion

24. Kid Buu vs. base Vegeta

After his rival passes out, Vegeta takes the stage! But why he decided to fight in base form is over my head. He just saw Super Saiyan 3 Goku pass out why wouldn’t he go Super Saiyan 2 to fight?

25. Kid Buu vs. Super Saiyan 3 Goku (Round 2)

This fight was good but the highlight is Vegeta finally realizing Goku is #1. And if not for his toying around before, Goku could have ended this fight instead of stalling for Vegeta to have a shot at winning

26. Kid Buu vs. Super Saiyan 2 Vegeta (Round 2)

Really something to see due to how “even” Super Saiyan 2 Goku and Buu were but how easily Vegeta got beaten but you can’t keep a good Saiyan down because Vegeta delivers some of his best pride dialogue in this battle! All seemed lost until the greatest hero ever stepped up to help out!!

27. Kid Buu vs. Hercule

That’s right Mr. Satan!!!! Who holds Buu off due to Good Buu torturing Kid Buu’s head. But he actually dodges a couple of Buu’s attacks that even manages to impress Goku!

28. Kid Buu vs. Good Buu

Honestly, the only reason Good Buu could hold his own was due to his regeneration abilities and the fact that he knew just about all of the same moves as Kid Buu but as the battle went on we see for the first time Majin Buu (in any form) run out of energy!

29. Kid Buu vs. base Vegeta (Round 3)

After being wished back, I can see why Vegeta wouldn’t be as durable as he was before while dead and his power wasn’t quite back yet so I guess I can see why he didn’t transform for this fight but he managed to stay alive in order for the Spirit Bomb to be complete!

30. Kid Buu vs. base/Super Saiyan Goku using the Spirit Bomb

Goku was exhausted and after some straining, Buu managed to throw back the blue ball until Goku’s Ki was restored and was able to finish the job!

Now let’s take a look at the strength of the people he absorbed:

South Kai as Shin pointed out is one of the Supreme Kais who could kill Frieza with one blow. Considering that he was the strongest of the 4 Supreme Kais of his time with the Grand Supreme Kai seemingly the only person in the Kai or guardianship position that could exceed his power, he was certainly not a fighter to be taken lightly.

If you ask me, I feel that South Kai is AT LEAST in the power level range of a Super Saiyan 2. The reason I say this is because as I mentioned before he was able to hold his own against Kid Buu in a melee brawl. I mean the only one shown to do that against Kid Buu was Super Saiyan 3 Goku. Heck, South Kai even managed to rip off one of his arms!

I estimate Supreme Kai/South Kai/Shin to be around the power of the Ascended Super Saiyans in the Cell Saga like Super Vegeta so I’d imagine South Kai to be in the range of Super Saiyan 2 or above but not quite at Super Saiyan 3. I think he’s strong but not THAT strong.

The reason I don’t believe him to be that powerful is because one kick from Buu pretty much jacked up his face as you’ll see in another picture from their battle. Goku was bleeding but it took A LOT from Kid Buu to make that happen to the Super Saiyan 3.

Grand Supreme Kai being the leader is the strongest and with South Kai by my estimation being near or above a Super Saiyan 2, this guy has to be strong! Is he at Super Saiyan 3 power?

Not sure…

But in any case he sure has some interesting techniques due to slicing up Buff Buu into pieces with a mouth blast! I’m sure he must use that on his food…

Piccolo or Kamiccolo is a fighter who I don’t wager to be as powerful as Gohan was against Cell. After his trip into the Time Chamber, I feel that he had the power to rival that of Ascended Super Saiyan Trunks and Vegeta after their first trip into the Chamber. He didn’t lounge around during the 7 years in between the Cell and Buu Sagas as Gohan did but I don’t think he spent ALL of his time training like Vegeta. It seems that most of his time was spent on the Lookout with Dende and Popo most likely just teaching Dende how to be a good guardian.

That being said, he probably increased his power but not to the point where he was double the power of his Cell Saga persona.

Gotenks as a Super Saiyan 3 is hands down one of the most powerful fighters in the Dragonball universe. His strength is above Super Saiyan 3 Goku and it could be argued that he did have the power to kill Super Buu but due to Buu’s endurance, Gotenks’ cockiness preventing him from finishing the job and the time limit on both his Super Saiyan 3 power and fusion time running out kept him from victory.

Goten and Trunks are more or less even and I think in base form they’d be around the power of Frieza’s 1st form of 530,000 and as Super Saiyans that would put them over 26,000,000 but again that is just an estimate and I’ll get into more detail in another blog.

Mystic Gohan is the strongest of any of the people that Buu had ever absorbed. His power was greater than Super Saiyan 3 Gotenks or Goku. He was the only fighter capable of going toe to toe with Super Buu.

Absorption

The purpose of Absorption: This is just a point I’d like to make regarding the power of Kid Buu.

Why does Majin Buu in any of his forms absorb another being into his body?

Essentially it is to add more power to his already impressive power level.

If you ask me that is the overall purpose of it.

I believe that the one exception would be Piccolo. True he was absorbed at the same time as Gotenks who was obviously absorbed just for his power which Buu knew would only last for 30 minutes in order to defeat Mystic Gohan.

Piccolo was more or less an extra bonus because think of it this way, if he had just absorbed Gotenks, Buu would of course be extremely powerful but he wouldn’t really know what to do with the power.

Super Buu on his own was a bit more mindful than Fat Buu but not the brightest fighter as seen when Gotenks used the Super Ghost to fool him into thinking a piece of candy was on the floor of the Time Chamber to have him drop his guard and get blown up.

But with Piccolo, he’d be able to outsmart his opponent using not just power but psychological warfare which he used well against Gohan to lower his confidence slowing taking away his power in the sense that he wouldn’t be able to fight at his maximum because his emotions would cloud his judgement.

I mean the reason I think Buff Buu is STRONGER than Kid Buu is because Buu would not have absorbed him in the first place unless he felt that South Kai was a being worth absorbing.

West and North Kai didn’t do much against Buu and when he faced South Kai it was shown to be his first real challenge, someone who Buu couldn’t just swat away like he did the other 2 Kais or the inhabitants of the numerous planets he destroyed.

If anything, Buff Buu is like Buff Cell or Ultra Super Saiyan in that it is just raw power.

I mean when he faced Grand Supreme Kai it seemed like he finally met his match because of one mouth blast chopped Buu into pieces and then made him explode.

He probably figured that of course this Kai was stronger than South Kai and wanted to add the extra power to his being but did not know the power of Grand Kai wouldn’t be the ONLY thing he’d absorb.

It seemed that Grand Kai’s goodness was more powerful than Buu’s evil. Explaining why he became the fat and jolly Buu rather than the killing machine Kid Buu or the tank that was Ultra/Buff Buu.

I don’t think South Kai’s goodness was stronger than Kid Buu’s evil I mean we don’t see much of Buff Buu but I doubt he was anywhere near as gentle as Fat Buu.

The reason I am including this is because a lot of people think that Kid Buu is the strongest.

To all of the people who say that answer this question for me: if Kid Buu (who Super Saiyan 3 Goku said he could defeat but only if he could emit 100% of his Ki at once to kill him) is stronger than Buuhan then why didn’t Goku just go Super Saiyan 3 and defeat him in the Fusion Saga?

The answer; BECAUSE HE COULDN’T!!!!

Remember Goku was so desperate for extra power when Buuhan was going to allow him til the count of 5 to find someone to fuse with that he was about to throw the Potara Earring to HERCULE!!!

Even before he threw it he contemplated the pros and cons:

1. Mr. Satan’s lack of Ki knowledge could do more harm than good

2. He DOES know basic martial arts

3. Fusing with him could actually LOWER Goku’s power rather than increase it!

If not for him sensing Vegeta’s Ki, that fusion would have happened

Remember against Kid Buu, he and Vegeta both agreed that they did not want to use the Potara again due to it being permanent.

Goku says that since Buu isn’t a fused being anymore that it wouldn’t be fair and he opted to fight solo; this happened in both the anime and manga

Instead of using the Fusion Dance as Old Kai predicted they did the next best technique; Rock, Paper, Scissors!!

Going off another piece of dialogue that makes fans speculate that Goku could not defeat Super Buu (even before absorbing the Z-Fighters) due to him saying that if they escaped Buu’s head they way that they were now (being in their base forms and the highest Goku could go is Super Saiyan 3 and Vegeta could go Super Saiyan 2) and he said Fusion was their only option to survive when getting to the outside.

Makes sense to me due to how strong Gotenks and Gohan are and they were the only ones who could smack around Super Buu like he was nothing.

Of course how can I talk about this subject without going into detail about Super Saiyan 3?

Goku said that if he really tried he could have defeated Majin Buu or more specifically the FAT Majin Buu but he wanted Goten, Gohan and Trunks to have a shot at saving the world because he wouldn’t be around forever.

However in the manga he sounds a lot less confident in his abilities to defeat the Fat Majin Buu when compared to the anime where he says “probably” but even so in the manga he wasn’t so sure

Later on he tells Vegeta that if he fought Kid Buu at 100% from the start he could have defeated him not to mention he needed a moment to collect the Ki needed to kill him but he couldn’t do that with all of the high paced fighting that he was doing with Kid Buu

Not to mention the Super Saiyan 3 confirmed that if Vegito was “here” the battle would be over in no time

This is one reason why I say that Kid Buu might actually be weaker than the Fat Majin Buu (not the Good Buu I mean the Buu we see after absorbing Grand Supreme Kai and the first Buu we see in the series after his ball is opened).

Here is one topic that needs to be discussed: Potara Earrings vs. Fusion Dance

A common misconception is due to the Old Kai’s double-talk. When Goku says that he’ll do a Fusion with Gohan and then beat Buu, Old Kai is quick to scold him. He says that Buu isn’t just going to wait around while the two practice the moves and align their power levels and he made a good point.

I’m sure at that point Buu knew that Gotenks’ fusion wasn’t going to last much longer and the last thing he needed was an even more powerful fused being going up against him when he was about to lose his main source of power!

In any case here is what the manga says about this moment:

If you ask me I think that Old Kai was referring from the pros and cons of the Potara Earrings vs. the Fusion Dance. In that case I could see why the earrings are “stronger” than the dance.

When it comes to the earrings all the users have to do is place one on the opposing earring as their fusion partner and BOOM there is an instant fusion.

From what I can tell there are only 2 drawbacks;

1. The Fusion is permanent

2. If one or both of the people fusing is in a powered up state (like Super Saiyan for example) when the merger takes place there will be a considerable amount of strain placed on the fused body and since most beings can not stay in their powered up forms forever it will shorten their life force or lifetime.

Now let’s look at the Fusion Dance in terms of cons;

1. One false move in the “dance” execution and the Fusion will fail resulting in either a fat or old and frail being

2. It takes a lot of practice and a good memory to remember the moves correctly

3. Both people have to emit the same Ki levels for the dance to work

4. Both people have to be of similar size

5. Depending on the power of the fused being it could actually do more harm than good with some fused beings being so powerful that it actually shortens the amount of time they can stayed fused; Super Saiyan 4 Gogeta only lasts 1/3 or 10 minutes of the total 30 minutes of Fusion

6. After a fusion (failed or successful) the two are unable to fuse for a full hour which isn’t good especially if you are fighting an extremely tough opponent

So, when you look at it that way, the Potara Earrings ARE stronger than the Fusion Dance. However, that doesn’t mean the resulting being is more powerful than the Fusion Dance.

Again, this is up to fan speculation because this is what it boils down to if you are trying to compare the power of Super Saiyan Gogeta and Vegito.

Here is where I get to the part of the blog where I confirm two things that I actually kind of doubt myself about;

1. Whether Buff Buu IS more powerful than Buuccolo

2. If Fat Buu IS more powerful than Kid Buu

Here is how I look at it when it comes to Buff Buu based on the power of South Kai. As I mentioned before, I think he is near or above the Super Saiyan 2 level. Piccolo is not as strong as a Super Saiyan 2 but still pretty powerful. Don’t forget that Buuccolo also has the power of Goten and Trunks. HOWEVER, in their people pods the two hybrids are in their base forms so the question remains as to whether or not Super Buu could access their Super Saiyan power. I know Piccolo is more powerful than them regardless of their form.

In any case, if Buuccolo is less powerful than Buff Buu then it doesn’t really matter because he is indeed a lot smarter. Buff Buu is like a rhino or tank just charging into his opponents with his huge body.

In a battle, I think that Buuccolo COULD win due to having brains and power.

I did list Super Buu to be more powerful than Kid Buu regardless of whether he is fused with anyone or not but also notice that Buff Buu is above him because Goku and Vegeta mentioned that he was increasing in both body and power instead of decreasing after ripping out Good Buu’s pod.

Though when he reverts to Kid Buu they mention he got “manageable” in that they could beat him but they were not prepared for his wild and berserk nature.

In any case, in terms of raw power I think that Buff Buu exceeds Buuccolo but in terms of who would win a fight I think it would be Buuccolo if he can come up with strategy and technique to overcome the raging beast

Now here is where I try to confirm why I feel that the Fat Majin Buu if more powerful than Kid Buu;

For one as I mentioned before, the purpose of absorption is to increase the already incredible power of a being by incorporating the power of another.

In both the anime and manga, it is suggested that by absorbing South and Grand Supreme Kai, Majin Buu’s power was dropped due to the Kai’s good influcence over him. Remember Kid Buu was 100% evil but by absorbing the Kais he not only took their power but also some of their personality traits and along with that was goodness. As I mentioned before, South Kai’s goodness wasn’t enough to overpower Buu’s evil but when Grand Supreme Kai was absorbed so was his goodness and that seemed enough to overcome Buu’s wild nature.

If you ask me I don’t think Buu’s power dropped where the Kais “took away” his power. I think it was just buried inside if that makes sense.

For comparison let’s look at Gohan: Remember it was said that the Fat Buu’s power just kept on increasing and it was like a bottomless well that was never ending.

It might sound wrong but actually it makes A LOT of sense.

He spent centuries in his ball so it makes sense that his power became “contained.”

From his brief fight with Dabura to his fight with Super Saiyan 3 Goku, it was said that the more powerful his opponent, the more Buu’s power increased.

Remember that Gohan reached his peak during the Cell Games when he finally delivered the final blow to the Android.

Though for 7 years, he spent his time going to school and studying like his mother wanted and actually dropped his power because when he went Super Saiyan 2 against Kibito, Vegeta said that he was a lot more powerful as a kid.

However, he still had a lot of power contained and it had to be released thanks to the efforts of Old Kai. I mean Goku and Vegeta were even at Super Saiyan 2 but more powerful than Gohan but after his power up, Mystic Gohan had the power to be stronger than Vegeta or even a Super Saiyan 3 Goku and Gotenks.

It is like an athelthe who was at his peak but stopped training and working out for a long time, their strength drops. The same with Majin Buu being in that ball so long or Gohan sitting at his desk studying so long, his power was still there but it is “hidden” once again.

Of course the best way to illustrate my point is to compare the fights between the dead Super Saiyan 3 Goku vs. Fat Buu against the alive Goku at Super Saiyan 3 fighting Kid Buu BUT while in the Other World.

I think this level of Super Saiyan should be a clear indicator of how strong Buu is.

The real question is: Is Goku stronger as a Super Saiyan 3 while dead?

I know that he said a living body chugs more energy than a dead one and in Other World, Super Saiyan 3 was “easy.”

Against Fat Buu, he didn’t take much if any damage at least on the outside of his body but against Kid Buu it was clear that he was damaged and passed out from exhaustion.

Perhaps his power isn’t different whether or not he is dead or alive. It might just boil down to the fact that while he is dead, he is better equipped to handle the form without the strain on his body.

When he was fighting Fat Buu, it was said multiple times that Majin Buu’s power was increasing to keep up with Goku’s beacuse he said that the more power he puts out the more powerful Buu became.

Against Kid Buu it seemed clear that the Majin was able to keep up with Goku but it was never said that he was getting stronger just that he had the speed and endurance to keep up with Goku. Though it has to be mentioned that the battle took such a toll on Goku that it got to the point where his attacks were not even fazing Buu anymore.

Similar to 100% Frieza vs. Goku on Namek, Frieza’s body was being strained by his power and he was getting weaker the longer the fight went on

So, if it were a battle between Fat Buu and Kid Buu I think that Fat Buu just might come out on top but with the Instant Transmission it might be possible for Kid Buu to win due to his berserk nature vs. the laid back nature of Fat Buu.

Really it is similar to Buff vs. Buuccolo in that it is more than just raw power but abilities.

Those were the only points that I felt needed to be addressed in terms of any doubts that I was having before.

Which is the best Buu?

When it really boils down to it, there are only TWO pure Majin Buus and those are Evil and Kid Buu. All of the other Buus have another being inside of them taking away from his pure Majin nature in both power, personality and danger level.

Look at the fission from Good Buu like Kami and King Piccolo

We have an extremely powerful being (Fat Buu) who is generally good but due to an unseen evil in their heart it must be expelled and the result is two beings of equal power but one good and the other evil.

However, in Buu’s case it is clear that the evil side is far more powerful than the good.

And that makes perfect sense!

Remember Kid Buu was 100% evil and only “good” after absorbing the 2 Kais and even then he wasn’t completely good and not completely evil.

And remember Fat Buu was generally good and hungry like Grand Supreme Kai however you could tell he was still somewhat evil. His eyes would open whenever he was mad or about to do something evil like kill people for no reason at all showing that the destructive Kid Buu was still inside of him somewhere.

The reverse can be said after Evil Buu eats Good Buu and the evil takes over with the Good holding him back with candy cravings and not killing Hercule

So, when you think about it Evil Buu is the physical manifestation of the evil inside of Fat Buu and really he could be interpreted as another form of Kid Buu.

Kind of like Gray Hulk is to Bruce Banner in that he is smarter and can talk clearer than Green Hulk; similar to Evil Buu and Good Buu

It is obvious Good Buu got the short end of the stick with Evil Buu pretty much easily swatting around his good counterpart and for some reason after coming together again to form Super Buu he could sense Ki…

Yeah I have to scratch my head on that one because it was as random as Vegeta learning how to do it after his beam collision with Goku back in the Saiyan Saga due to him saying as a Great Ape that he could “feel” Goku in the area while he was collecting Ki for the Spirit Bomb

In terms of which is the strongest or best Majin Buu then the obvious winner is Kid Buu since he is a PURE Majin Buu who is stronger than Evil Buu.

Though when you throw in his multiple incarnations including his Fusion with other beings then of course Buuhan is #1

Kid Buu

One thing about Kid Buu that makes it difficult to measure his power is that he never fights seriously.

It seems like he’ll gladly take an attack that blasts him to bits but reforms like it was nothing.

It seemed that Super Saiyan 2 Goku was holding his own against Kid Buu but the Majin was EASILY able to beat Super Saiyan 2 Vegeta who is equal in power to Goku. That might be due to Goku being a superior marital artists than Vegeta or because Goku and Kid Buu was sizing each other up before the real fight began when he went Super Saiyan 3.

Though it is the unpredictability of Kid Buu that makes him one of my favorites I will say that much about him.

We saw the limits of Buuhan’s power since he could mimic the moves of the fighters he absorbed and because Vegito was more powerful than him so he had to pull out all the stops and from what we’ve seen I don’t know why people think that Kid Buu could defeat him

I mean take away the dialouge from the Kais about Kid Buu being the most powerful and please explain WHY he is stronger. I mean we are talking about Kibito Kai (50% Supreme Kai) who didn’t know the Super Saiyans existed, the Potara Earring effects and the list goes on about how bad of a guardian he is. So, why take his word so seriously?

In conclusion:

I just feel that Super Buu or more specifically Buutenks and Buuhan were far more powerful than Kid Buu. The main reason why is that their existence demanded Fusion to be used to compete or beat them.

After Gotenks’ Fusion time ran out, Super Saiyan 3 Goku was confident that Gohan alone could finish off Buu

Well until Buu absorbed Gohan as well making Goku desperate for a Fusion partner

Goku was pretty confident in his own abilities to defeat Kid Buu and seriously, I think that he could do it if he had the time to gather the necessary Ki.

So that pretty much sums up why I feel that Buuhan is far more powerful than Kid Buu and why I rank them from strongest from weakest the way that I do.

Regardless of what the anime or manga says, I just feel that it is for a reason given the fact we are shown powerful characters like Mystic Gohan, Super Saiyan 3 Gotenks and Vegito who outclass Super Saiyan 3 Goku in power but Buu proved to be more powerful than Gotenks and Gohan.

Now it is time for the fans to speak up as to whether or not you agree with me and why.

Thanks for reading!