Majin Buu is a demonic anime and manga character who features in Dragon Ball Z.

Contents

1 Biography

1.1 Origin

1.2 Majin Buu Saga

1.3 Aftermath

2 Overview

2.1 Personality and attributes

2.2 Powers and abilities

3 Forms

3.1 Fat Buu

3.2 Evil Buu

3.3 Super Buu

3.4 Kid Buu

4 Notes

5 Alternate Versions

6 In other media

6.1 Television

6.2 Video games

7 Appearances

8 External Link

Biography

Origin

Majin Buu (Japanese: 魔人ブウ, Hepburn: Majin Bū) (5 million years ago - May 8, 774) was a small child-sized being said to had been created by the evil wizard Bibidi around 5 million years ago for the purpose of terrorising the universe. Endowed with vast power and fighting skills, as well as a malleable and nearly indestructible body, Buu was able to destroy entire cities or even planets with ease. This monster was a virtually invincible force of destruction, and, because of his absolutely wild and ruthless nature, he could not be controlled, even by Bibidi himself. Following Bibidi's will- while it amused him to do so- Buu and Bibidi eventually made their way to the Sacred World of the Kai, where the rulers of the universe and Bibidi's sworn enemies, the Supreme Kais, lived peacefully. Whilst there, he battled the Supreme Kais, slaying the Kais of the North and West. Buu attacked the South Supreme Kai who was the strongest of the Kais where the warrior gave him enough of a challenge that Buu used one of his most dangerous powers for the first time. This saw him absorbing the South Kai, adding his power to his own and becoming a musclebound monster. Majin Buu then made an attempt on the life of one of the last of the Supreme Kais namely the the East Kai Shin. However, he was saved by the intervention of the Grand Supreme Kai, who inflicted immense damage on Buu, but was unable to kill him due to Buu's regeneration. As the Grand Supreme Kai's power easily sliced Buu into pieces, Buu decided to absorb him as well- becoming a fat, child-like creature. Due to the innocence of the Grand Supreme Kai's soul, this Buu was much less evil and wild than the original Buu. As Buu became calmer and easier to control, seeing his opportunity, Bibidi finally managed to seal Majin Buu inside of a Sealed Ball without much resistance from the latter. Bibidi was then killed by Shin a short time later, which meant the madness of Majin Buu was believed to have ended for good. The sphere that contained Buu was then buried on Earth with the intention that it would never be opened again. In time, legends spoke of Majin Buu even into the modern era. A young Frieza was told by his father King Cold that Majin Buu was among the few beings he was not to challenge due to the power of the entity.

Majin Buu Saga

Five million years later, Bibidi's doppelganger and son Babidi enacted his plan to release Majin Buu. Arriving on Earth, he went about to find the spherical prison containing the power of the being and went about collecting energy to release it. Using the energy generated by the battles of his Majin servants- including Majin Vegeta- Babidi was able to revive Buu, whom he planned to use to conquer the universe. Buu's first opponents were Dabura (whom he turned into a cookie and ate), Gohan and the East Supreme Kai (both of which he easily defeated). Buu next battled Vegeta, having shaken off Babidi's influence, who managed to temporarily destroy Buu at the cost of his life.

Babidi soon had just as much trouble controlling Buu as his father did, only able to keep him in line by threatening to reimprison him. After Buu battled Super Saiyan 3 Goku, he became fed up with Babidi and killed him. Striking out on his own, he began destroying cities on whim, as well as battling Gotenks. However, Buu also began to experience odd bursts of conscience, healing a young blind boy. Finally, he met Hercule Satan, who befriended him, and adopted a puppy, Bee. Hercule made him promise not to kill anyone else, which Buu happily agreed to. However, when the gunman Van Zandt shot Bee, Buu was turn between his newfound friendships and his desire for revenge. This conflict split Buu in two- one half, identical to the good Majin Buu, became Mister Buu, while the other (known as Evil Buu) represented the weakened evil of the true Majin Buu. Evil Buu killed Van Zandt, and the two halves of Buu battled. Unfortunately, Evil Buu was victorious, devouring his good half. The new version of Majin Buu (known as Super Buu) resembled an "adult" version of Buu's original form.

Although restrained (at first) from harming Hercule or Bee due to the influence of Mr. Buu, Super Buu wreaked havoc across Earth, using a powerful attack to slay every other living being on the planet. Looking for entertainment, Super Buu battled Super Saiyan 3 Gotenks within the Hyperbolic Time Chamber, but when Piccolo became worried that Gotenks would lose, he destroyed their way back to the real world, hoping to trap them all there. Desperate, Buu tapped into his full power and ripped a fissure in the dimensional fabric of the Chamber, breaking out. Once on the Lookout again, Buu was in a frenzy, turning all the people on the Lookout into food and eating them before Gotenks and Piccolo could escape and follow him. Soon afterward, Gohan arrived to fight Super Buu, and nearly defeated him, leading Buu to absorb Piccolo and Gotenks. With Gotenks' power and Piccolo's fighting skills, Gohan was severely outclassed, until Goku arrived.

Goku planned to use the Kai Earrings to fuse with Gohan into a super-warrior, but Buu- having lost much of his strength when Gotenks' fusion wore off- prevented that by absorbing Gohan, attaining the peak of his power. Goku managed to fuse with a temporarily resurrected Vegeta, forming Vegito, who easily thrashed an increasingly angry Buu. Allowing Buu to absorb him (but not assimilate him), Vegito was split back into Goku and Vegeta, who freed Gohan, Piccolo, Trunks and Goten. They also ripped out Mr. Buu, despite Super Buu's attempts to stop them, resulting in his reversion to the original Buu- Kid Buu.

After he came to his senses, transforming from Super Buu after Vegeta removed the good Majin Buu from Super Buu's head, Kid Buu attempted to destroy the Earth with a small yet incredibly powerful energy ball, but it was deflected by Vegeta's Final Burst Cannon. Kid Buu then created a massive energy ball and flung it towards the Earth. Goku and Vegeta realized that they would be unable to stop it and made an attempt to escape with Gohan, Goten, Trunks, and Piccolo. However, the only three that they were able to grab nearby were Mr. Satan, his dog Bee, and Dende. Kibito Kai appears and grabs onto Goku's hand (and grabbing on to Vegeta by his sleeveless jumpsuit), and teleports them away with Kai Kai while Gohan, Goten, Trunks, Piccolo, Yajirobe, Korin, Captain Ginyu, Tien Shinhan, and Chiaotzu are left on Earth, where it is then shortly and completely obliterated. Regenerating after the explosion, Kid Buu goes off in search of Goku and Vegeta, teleporting to many planets as he goes and destroying them upon sensing the Saiyans' absence. Along the way, in an anime only filler scene, he finds the Grand Kai's Planet, where Pikkon and Olibu approach him and start taunting him, leading a number of dead warriors risking their existence against him including Krillin and Yamcha. After a victorious scuffle with Krillin, Kid Buu prepares to eliminate all the dead warriors once and for all. But before he can finish him and the other dead warriors, Kid Buu manages to sense the increasing combat powers of Goku and Vegeta, and teleports off to the Sacred World of the Kais seeking strong opponents. Upon arriving, Kid Buu battles with Super Saiyan 2 Goku and Goku has the upper hand, although Kid Buu is not fighting at his maximum. Once he powers up, Goku transforms into Super Saiyan 3 and fights evenly with him.

Psychotically destructive, the reborn Kid Buu destroyed Earth and numerous other worlds, searching for anyone he could fight. In a face-off at the Supreme Kais' planet, Goku and Vegeta (and, briefly, Mr. Buu) battled him, but were unable to stop him more than briefly. Goku was finally able to destroy Buu by drawing on the people of Earth to create the most powerful Spirit Bomb ever- despite his resistance, Buu was finally wiped out.

Aftermath

He was then invited to Bulma's birthday party where among the attendees was the God of Destruction Beerus. The two had an argument when the god-like being wanted a pudding dessert that Buu refused to share with Beerus.

Overview

Personality and attributes

In appearance, Majin Buu was a demonic being whose form varied depending on which incarnation was created. The common characteristics were that he had a pinkskin, black eyes with red pupils, a tail like structure on his forehead and several holes on the top of his head.

Kid Buu's personality was very similar to that of a very young, spoiled, selfish child, in that he retains no form of compassion or remorse for any of his actions. Furthermore, due to his selfish and capricious personality and mind-set, he is incapable of developing empathy and comprehending the nature of his actions. It can also be said that Kid Buu is very similar to that of a low-functioning sociopath. Kid Buu is also, like a child, very unpredictable in his behavior and actions, sometimes randomly falling asleep during battle, or acting like a monkey by banging his chest with his fists.

Furthermore, his sheer insanity makes him impossible to reason with, which, while difficult, was possible to accomplish with Super Buu. While Innocent Buu and Super Buu made time for small talk during combat, Kid Buu relents his assault only to taunt his opponents when they are down. His power and dangerous behavior is witnessed when he destroys entire planets for no reason and without showing any signs of remorse. Kid Buu's strongest attack - the Planet Burst - is in the anime said to be capable of destroying the Earth ten times over, which makes it so powerful that Goku notes that even he and Vegeta together would not be able to stop it. While he was incredibly powerful, Kid Buu never kept his guard up, which allowed his body to be blasted apart by beings weaker than himself, as shown by how Super Saiyan 2 Vegeta was able to blow his body apart with a barrage of ki blasts.

Unlike Innocent Buu, Super Buu does not feel doubt in any of his actions and will kill innocent people for his own benefits. He takes a sadistic pleasure and enjoyment in the suffering, fear, and destruction he brings to others. Super Buu develops qualities of both Good Buu and Evil Buu, with Super Buu retaining Good Buu's short temper, tendency to act nonsensically at certain points, and urges to act violent, while also gaining a little more intelligence, something Evil Buu showed in his battle with Good Buu, as well as his stern, no-nonsense approach to matters. Two instances include Super Buu taking a break to drink soda during his fight with Gotenks, and going crazy for cake while roaming around Earth, causing Old Kai to label him a 'buffoon'.

Powers and abilities

The creature that was Majin Buu had a wide range of abilities at his disposal and was potentially the most powerful opponent in the Dragon Ball Z universe.

Kid Buu displays almost infinite stamina. Shortly after his planet-busting rampage, he battles Super Saiyan 3 Goku, Super Saiyan 2 Vegeta and the Good Buu one after another and manages to outlast them all without showing any obvious signs of fatigue. This is also applied to his healing abilities, as Kid Buu seems to recover at an unlimited rate, making him nigh unstoppable unless destroyed completely.

Buu's power changes depending on who he absorbs. According to Goku and Vegeta, his power spikes up when he changes from normal Super Buu to the huge Buu but goes back down when he reverts back to Kid Buu; though Goku and Vegeta underestimate him due to his size. Later, Kibito Kai commented that, while on Earth in this state, Kid Buu is more dangerous than ever not because of his power, but due to his uncontrollable nature.

He had a large number of energy attacks which he was capable of doing by the manipulation of his Ki energy. These blasts of Ki energy typically took the form of pinkish strikes. The sheer nature of his ability meant that his Ki was incredibly powerful as evident when Gohan Buu in anger began screaming with the sheer strength of his cry ripping apart reality and the planet around him.

Among the techniques known to him included:

Human Extinction Attack (人類絶滅攻撃, Jinrui Zetsumetsu Kōgeki) :

Shocking Ball (電撃ボール, Dengeki Bōru, lit. "Electric Shock Ball") :

Planet Burst (プラネットバースト, Puranetto Bāsuto) :

One notable extension of this ability was the Human Extinction Attack which the Adult Majin Buu unleashed on the Human race after he grew bored of waiting for Gotenks. By lifting a single hand into the air, Majin Buu was able to direct dozens of Ki blasts that encompassed the globe and killed every single Human being on the planet Earth. Only those that were skilled fighters were able to avoid the attack and those that subconsciously Majin Buu wanted to allow to live. The ultimate attack of Majin Buu was capable of charging a massive Ki energy ball which he only demonstrated in his Kid Buu form. This large energy attack was done so on a single hand and thrown into the planet where its destructive power easily destroyed a world and everything on it; including Majin Buu.

One of Majin Buu's more powerful abilities was the capacity to regenerate from even the smallest part of his body which rapidly recreated him. Through this, he was capable of surviving most forms of attacks made against him which included a large Ki blast that destroyed the one who used it. In addition to this, he was even easily capable of surviving an Ki attack that was destroyed a planet as a single sample of himself would reform at a rapid rate.

A notable link to his regeneration was his absorption attack. His pinkish skin had a malleable nature to it as it was capable of either hardening or turning into a soft liquid styled substance. As such, he was able to turn into an amorphous mass allowing him to encompass a Humanoid enemy and literally absorb them into his body. He was also equally capable of doing this either parts of his body if they were separated from him and through his mental control he was able to direct these limbs which expanded when they reached an enemy. His absorption powers made Majin Buu very dangerous as he gained all the strengths of the enemies he absorped thus potentially growing stronger and stronger. However, a notable problem with this was that with each absorption, his personality changed and hosts who were of good character were capable of influencing the resultant Majin Buu as was the case with Fat Buu. Equally, new bodies that were absorbed also increased his intelligence.

There were a number of additional abilities Majin Buu possessed which varied depending on the form. In the Fat Buu and Gohan form, he was able to fire a Ki attack from the tail like structure on his head. Through this, he was capable of turning an enemy into a type of candy or chocalate. The helpless enemy was powerless whilst Majin Buu ate them and gained their powers. However, a sufficiently powerful enemy was capable of retaining their power even whilst they were in candy form.

In addition to this, he demonstrated an ability in his original Kid Buu form which appeared to have been lost upon his transformation into other forms. This was the capacity to copy any ability by simply observing it. All it required was a single moment the enemy using this power and Kid Buu was capable of copying it and using it extensively.

Forms

Fat Buu

Evil Buu

Super Buu

Super Buu was created when Evil Buu redirected Fat Buu's candy beam back at himself. Taking the Fat Buu candy and eating it, Evil Buu went through a transformation which led to the formation of Super Buu. Taller and thinner, this Buu was more evil and destructive then the previous forms with the desire of only fighting worthy fighters. His vocabulary is more limited

Super Buu was capable of absorbing enemies thus increasing his powers and intelligence. Taking over Gotenks and Piccollo, Super Buu was capable of fighting a powered up Gohan easily. However, when fighting against a powered Goku, Super Buu absorbed Gohan adding to his power once more.

Kid Buu

The original true form of Majin Buu and perhaps the most powerful of them all. This form was a smaller version of the original Super Buu but was even more powerful possibly suggesting that absorption of his enemies actually diluted his powers. Unlike the previous forms, this Majin Buu never spoke and was a pure fighting machine that delighted in the destruction it caused. It was also capable of mimicking enemy combatant moves by simply observing them.

Notes

Majin Buu was created by Akira Toriyama and was introduced as the major antagonist in the final arc of Dragonball Z.

Buu, Bibidi and Babidi take their names from the song "Bibbidi-Bobbidi-Boo" in the Walt Disney movie Cinderella.

In Saikyō Jump v1 #6 (2014), Toriyama stated that Buu had actually existed since Time Immemorial where he cycled between rampages and long hibernation. During numerous iterations of this cycle, he absorbed the evil elements of mankind, becoming steadily more violent and evil. The evil wizard Bibidi merely knew the means of calling Buu from out of his long slumber.

Alternate Versions

In Dragon Ball GT, Buu appeared in the alternate continuity setting where he remained in the company of Hercule whilst the evil part of him was reborn as a powerful human fighter named Oob.

In other media

Television

Video games

In Dragon Ball Xenoverse, Fat Buu and Kid Buu appeared as playable characters in the video game.

In Dragon Ball FighterZ, Fat Buu, Super Buu and Kid Buu appeared as playable characters in the fighting video game.

In Jump Force, the Fat Buu appeared as a playable character in DLC in the crossover fighting video game where he was voiced by Japanese actor Kôzô Shioya.

Appearances

Dragon Ball Z:

Dragon Ball GT:

Dragon Ball Super:

External Link

Dragon Ball Encyclopedia Entry

Comicvine Entry

Wikipedia Entry