Is it crazy that Majin Buu didn’t make it to our list of The Most Powerful Dragon Ball Characters?

That just goes to show you how powerful the characters continued to get over time throughout the course of the show (and how many new powerful friends and foes continues to be introduced).

Now with our Anime Workouts Database growing like crazy here at SHJ I’ve been doing my best to add fun listicles like most powerful one I just mentioned, and Majin Buu will fit perfectly into one that’s coming up!

It’s a good excuse to add to our Dragon Ball Z Workouts Database that holds all of our Dragon Ball inspired character workouts, and Majin Buu will be right at home there.

Majin Buu Stats:

Real Name: Majin Buu

Height: Super Buu = 8″0

Weight: N/A

Anime: Dragon Ball Z

Powers: Yes

Majin Buu has a ton of different forms that we see throughout the series, the most popular likely being Good Buu, but Super Buu is the only height listed within the Wiki Fandoms.

For that reason I listed Super Buu’s height (which is extremely tall) and used mainly pictures of him.

Wolverine was the shortest spot among comic characters we’ve seen at 5’3, prior to the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles coming in at 5’2, (and Gimli even shorter) – but Damian Wayne (Robin) is only 5’4. Goku isn’t that tall either, though, standing only 5’7, with Miles Morales only an inch above him.

One Punch Man falls in at 5’9 right there with Ryu, Nightwing at 5’10, and then Spider-Man, Daredevil, and Green Arrow coming in around 5’11 and Beast joining them.

We’ve had Superman and Eddie Brock’s Venom at 6’3, and Captain America, Scorpion and Batman at 6’2, and Carnage at 6’1. Thor and Cyborg are towering over them at 6’6, Thanos and King right there with them at 6’7, Bane at 6’8, and Deathstroke right below at 6’5, and Black Manta at 6’4.

Ronan and Sagat are 7’5, and Doomsday came in at 8’10, and I doubt any characters are touching that anytime soon.

But, don’t worry if you’re not the same height or weight range.

We write these routines to be utilized by anyone and everyone.

Want The Unofficial Dragon Ball Z Workout Booklet?

Grab The Unofficial Dragon Ball Z Workout Booklet and Unleash Your Inner Super Saiyan!

Majin Buu Diet and Nutrition

**Keep in mind: this section will be nearly identical for each hero, unless I mentioned differently (for example someone like Hulk may get something specifically different)**

Every hero needs to still have a good diet.

Unfortunately we can train like them, but I don’t think any of us are suddenly getting their powers, or the ability to magically stop caring about nutrition.

You can’t out train your diet, so I want to still give some pillars for nutrition.

You can start by checking out The Nutrition Pillars on the site, but I’ll break down some more information for you guys as well.

Guys like Dwayne Johnson and Kevin Hart incorporate 80/20 dieting with big weekly cheat meals, Hugh Jackman, Tom Hopper, Benedict Cumberbatch and Terry Crews utilize intermittent fasting (something I use daily as well), Ariana Grande, Mustafa Shakir and Madelaine Petsch are vegans, Brandon Routh and Frank Grillo opt for paleo, and tons of others utilize their own variations as well.

It’s all about sustainability.

AND, there are a thousand different ways to reach your goals, so finding the most sustainable way is what’s important.

Which is why our Academy utilizes multiple different Nutrition Classes (Greek Gods, Vikings, Spartans, Hunter Gatherers, Monks, Samurais, Minimalists, SuperHumans) to allow people to choose what is right for YOU!

Curious where over a hundred celebs fall in their dietary choices ranging from High Protein and Keto to Vegetarian, Vegan and Intermittent Fasting? Want exclusive celeb meal plans? Check this out.

Need Help Choosing The Best Dragon Ball Z Inspired Workout?

Take The Dragon Ball Z Workout Placement Quiz Now!

Majin Buu Workout Routine Research

We’ve made it to “the fun part”.

And, if you don’t know by now, I say that every single time we get to the workout routine research section for character workouts.

Majin Buu is a weird character to build a routine around in the sense that we really could be writing four or five (or even more) separate routines based on all the different Buus we see throughout the course of the show.

To tell you a bit about what I mean we’ll start with some information from Majin Buu’s Wiki Fandom.

Here’s how they explain it:

Majin Buu has many forms, all of which are linked below. However, each form has a different personality and goals, essentially making them separate individuals. All of Majin Buu’s forms are simply referred to as “Majin Buu” in the series, but the various forms get their common names from various Dragon Ball Z video games.

For the sake of pulling information from specific characters I’ll be talking about Super Buu and Good Buu!

Here’s how Super Buu’s Wiki Fandom explains him:

Super Buu, also called Majin Buu, is the result of Evil Buu eating Good Buu in a chocolate form. This new Majin Buu has tremendously more power and increased mental capacity than the previous incarnation. In this form, Buu has very little patience and extremely dangerous fits of anger, even possessing the power to rip through dimensional walls if angered enough. He is the main antagonist for the Fusion Saga part of the Majin Buu Arc.

And Good Buu’s Wiki Fandom states:

Good Buu, also known mainly as Majin Buu, is the result of the Innocent Buu using fission to split into good and evil halves. He would go on to become a member of the Z Fighters and live with Mr. Satan. After the battle against the pure Majin Buu, Buu is referred to as Buu instead of Majin Buu and to the world he becomes Mr. Buu. Good Buu possesses the Grand Supreme Kai as part of his being and eventually temporarily awakened this part of himself.

Both Buu forms are extremely powerful.

For the sake of having some kind of power to build out our routine around, here’s what Super Buu’s Wiki Fandom tells us about his power:

Super Buu is essentially the same entity as the fat Majin Buu, but with the evil in control instead of the good, as such he is not as restrained as the fat Buu and has access to the power of the South Supreme Kai.

Super Buu takes absolutely no damage from base Gotenks’ attacks and proves to be able to hold an advantage over Super Saiyan Gotenks in combat (in part thanks to his regeneration) – though Gotenks is still able to damage him and almost kills him when he utilizes Kamikaze Ghosts. However, Super Buu has a great disadvantage against Super Saiyan 3 Gotenks and gets desperate, only surviving the fight because Gotenks’ fusion time ran out. He also stood no chance against Ultimate Gohan and was easily beaten down. Super Buu is so powerful in his base form that Goku thought that he and Vegeta would not win in a fight against him even if they teamed up in their current states inside his body.

Super Buu can increase his power via absorptions: after absorbing Gotenks and Piccolo, his power skyrocketed, allowing him easily overpower Ultimate Gohan (or in the anime; match him, and overpower him after playing mind games). Goku is too scared to fight him even as a Super Saiyan 3, with him in the anime also overpowering Super Saiyan 3 Goku in a quick bout. The absorptions grant Super Buu the vast power of Super Saiyan 3 Gotenks, the intellect of Piccolo, and an even greater supply of power from Gohan later on. Upon absorbing Gohan, Super Buu becomes one of the strongest characters in the original manga. However, Super Buu finds himself completely outmatched by Vegito, the Potara Fusion of Goku and Vegeta. In the manga, Vegito decides to immediately go Super Saiyan, suggesting that Base Vegito might still not be strong enough to engage Buu. In the anime, however, Buu is completely dominated by Vegito using only his base form, with Vegito only going Super Saiyan for fun, however, once Buu tapped into his rage and let out an extremely powerful Vice Shout, Super Vegito had to get serious to stop Buu. Base Vegito also said that, if Buu were to calm down and track his energy rather than his movements, Buu would be able to keep up with him.

It also helped that they start with “Super Buu is essentially the same entity as the fat Majin Buu”.

So for this one we’re going to be training to be extremely overpowered with a mix of strength, endurance, speed and some optional training with our MMA, parkour, HIIT and endurance training.

It’s going to take a lot of volume, but I think we can handle it.

Ready to Transform?!

Check out all The SHJ Programs and start unleashing your inner SuperHuman.

Majin Buu Workout Routine

Training Volume:

4-6+ days per week

Explanation:

We’re using 4 days of weight training per week that’s going to have a bit of cardio but also focus on strength, explosive power, and all around speed. On top of this we’ll also be adding in our additional resources for MMA, parkour, HIIT and endurance work that you can add in 1-2 days per week if possible.

Want To Upgrade This Workout?

The Superhero Academy now comes with an Upgrade Your Workout Tool that allows Academy members to turn any SHJ workout into a 4-8 week fully planned regime detailing exact weights to lift and including reverse & traditional pyramid training, straight sets, super sets, progressive overload and more.

Majin Buu Workout Routine: Sample Workout Schedule

Monday: Majin Weight Training A

Tuesday: Majin Weight Training B

Wednesday: Buu Optional Training

Thursday: Majin Weight Training C

Friday: Majin Weight Training D

Saturday: Active Rest Day

Sunday: Rest Day

Majin Buu Workout: Weight Training A

Warm Up:

800m walk

800m jog

Workout:

Power Cleans

4×5

Upright Barbell Row (Sub EZ Bar or Plate)

3×8

Barbell Squats

4×10

Leg Press

3×10

Lying Leg Curl (Hamstring Curls)

4×10

Cable Crunches

4×25

Majin Buu Workout: Weight Training B

Warm Up:

800m walk

800m jog

Workout:

Barbell Bench Press

4×8

Dumbbell Incline Bench Press

4×8

Pullups

5×10

T-Bar Rows

3×8

Standing Barbell Press Behind Neck

4×8

Dips

3×10

Standing DB Lateral Raises

4×10

Majin Buu Workout: Weight Training C

Warm Up:

800m walk

800m jog

Workout:

Power Cleans

4×5

Dumbbell or Barbell Shrugs

3×15

Front Squats w/ Barbell

4×10

DB Lunges

4×6 each leg

Hanging Leg Raises (Sub Knee Raises)

3×20

Bulgarian Split Squats (Light)

4×6 each leg

Majin Buu Workout: Weight Training D

Warm Up:

800m walk

800m jog

Workout:

Barbell Bench Press

5×5

Barbell Incline Press

3×8

Dumbbell Flyes

3×8

Pull Ups

5×10

Bent Over Dumbbell Rows on Bench

3×8

Dumbbell Pullovers

3×10

Majin Buu Workout: Additional Training Resources

MMA Training Resources:

Deathstroke Workout Routine

Daredevil Workout Routine

Moon Knight Workout Routine

Sagat Workout Routine

Anna Diop Workout Routine and Diet Plan

Ryan Potter Workout Routine and Diet Plan

Frank Grillo Boxing Workout

Parkour Training Resources

The Nightrunner Parkour Workout Routine

The Assassin’s Creed Parkour Workout Routine

The Robbie Amell Parkour Workout Routine

Endurance Training Resources:

Constance Wu Workout Routine and Diet Plan

Ewan McGregor Workout Routine and Diet Plan

Kid Flash Workout Routine and Diet Plan

Grant Gustin Workout Routine and Diet Plan

How To Train After Your First 5K (Workout Included)

HIIT Resources:

The Best HIIT Workouts to Add to your Workout

Jump Rope Workout Database