Looney Tunes was the name given to the American animated short films produced by the Warner Brothers studios beginning in 1930. The cartoons became known for their trademark phrase “That’s all, folks!” which was often uttered by a character at the end of the short films. (See also animation.)

Spurred by the success of Walt Disney’s Mickey Mouse cartoons, Warner Brothers contracted with Leon Schlesinger to produce an animated short that incorporated music from the studio’s extensive recording library. Schlesinger subcontracted the work to animators Hugh Harman and Rudolf Ising, who were experimenting with the new technique of using synchronized sound to create animated talkies. Their first animated film for Schlesinger, Sinkin’ in the Bathtub (1930), used bawdy humor and was a hit with moviegoers. Warner Brothers ordered more of the shorts, and the Harman-Ising studio added a second series of animated films under the banner of Merrie Melodies. Initially, Looney Tunes was more story-driven and Merrie Melodies featured music, but over time the two names became virtually interchangeable.

Harman and Ising left Warner Brothers in 1933. The remaining staff included some of the foremost directors, animators, and story men of the day, such as Tex Avery, Bob Clampett, Friz Freleng, Chuck Jones, and Robert McKimson. The addition of voice actor Mel Blanc and composer Carl Stalling completed a lineup that would preside over the golden age of Warner Brothers animation. Throughout the 1930s and ’40s, a parade of enduring characters debuted under the Looney Tunes and Merrie Melodies names, including Porky Pig, who stuttered his first lines in the short I Haven’t Got a Hat (1935); Daffy Duck, who debuted in Porky’s Duck Hunt (1937); and Bugs Bunny, a “wascally wabbit” whose true personality began to emerge in A Wild Hare (1940).

In the 1950s the Warner Brothers animation studio returned to the original Looney Tunes/Merrie Melodies model of making music a main part of the story line. Rabbit of Seville (1950) reworked Italian composer Gioachino Rossini’s comic opera, while One Froggy Evening (1955) explored genres ranging from opera to ragtime. What’s Opera, Doc? (1957) introduced generations of cartoon lovers to German dramatic composer Richard Wagner’s Ring cycle of operas.

By the time the studio released the Academy Award-nominated High Note (1960), the era of the theatrical animated short was drawing to a close. Warner Brothers closed the animation studio in 1963, but the Looney Tunes brand remained profitable. The original shorts were renamed and were shown as Saturday morning cartoons. The full-length theatrical releases The Great American Chase (1979) and The Looney, Looney, Looney Bugs Bunny Movie (1981) were compilations of classic Warner Brothers cartoons tied together with the loosest of plots.