Proventia Solutions, a Finnish technology and professional services company specialised in corporate sustainability issues and Hyperion (NASDAQ:NYSL), the global leader in Business Performance Management software, today announced the delivery of sustainability management and reporting software for global engineering and technology corporation Metso Oyj. The state-of-the-art software solution combines Proventia's sustainability management and reporting solution with Hyperion´s market-leading financial management and reporting tool in a single platform and user interface.

"We strongly feel that non-financial information such as emission calculations, employee health and safety issues and energy efficiency calculations should be managed and reported with the same kind of accuracy, processes and systems as financial data. This allows companies to use non-financial information efficiently in their management processes and truly find value in non-financials. With this Hyperion partnership, we can offer our customers a great opportunity to integrate our sustainability management framework with the leading financial data management solution. We are glad to see that innovative companies such as Metso share our vision and prove this in practice," said Mikko Valtonen, Managing Director of Proventia Solutions.

With the joint solution by Proventia Solutions and Hyperion, corporations can not only save time and costs by combining their financial and non-financial data management and reporting processes, but also get clear benefits and increased data management capabilities from a single reporting process and unified software tools.

"It is important for us to utilize our existing Hyperion Financial Management system to also manage our non-financial information. This saves time and helps us synchronize our reporting processes, which leads to better efficiency and more reliable non-financial reporting. Additionally, this allows us to provide our various stakeholders, such as investors, with accurate and reliable information, while supporting the sustainable development of our own operations," said Vice Precident Jouko Yli-Kauppila, in charge of IPR and Environmental Management at Metso Corporation.

Hyperion is developing its market-leading financial management systems to encompass non-financial data management together with Proventia Solutions. "Systematic monitoring and analyzing of non-financial data enables the integration of non-financials to business performance measurement. This way, management is able to gain a more thorough picture about the performance of its organization, while helping to integrate important responsibility issues into existing decision-making processes. This has been proven to create value to our customers," said Mika Salminen, Managing Director, Hyperion Finland.

Proventia Solutions is a sustainability focused software and professional services company. Proventia Solutions creates value for its customers by combining in-depth sustainability knowledge with the latest information technology solutions. Proventia Solutions has two offices in Finland and operations in Europe, China and USA through partners.

Proventia Group, founded 1999, is a technology company focused on increasing customers business efficiency and sustainability performance. Proventia Group consists of five business units. Proventia Solutions is sustainability focused software and professional services company, Proventia Automation is recycling automation technology provider, Master Automation Group is a supplier of intelligent and environmentally friendly production automation solutions. WinWind develops and markets wind power mills, Finnkatalyt provides exhaust gas purifiers and HFT Network is a provider of integrated environmental services.

Hyperion Solutions Corporation is the global leader in Business Performance Management software. More than 11,000 customers rely on Hyperion software to provide visibility into how their businesses are performing and to help them plan and model to improve that performance. Using Hyperion software, customers collect data, organize and analyze it, then communicate it across the enterprise. Hyperion offers the industry's only Business Performance Management solution that integrates financial management applications with a business intelligence platform into a single system.

Named one of the FORTUNE 100 Best Companies to Work For (2004), Hyperion serves global customers in 45 countries. A network of more than 600 partners provides the company's innovative and specialized solutions and services. Hyperion generated revenues of $703 million for the fiscal year that ended June 30, 2005 and is traded under the Nasdaq symbol HYSL. For more information, please visit www.hyperion.com.

More information:

Proventia Solutions Managing Director Mikko Valtonen

tel. +358 14 621 485 or +358 50 591 2044

Hyperion Finland, Managing Director Mika Salminen

tel. +358 9 4134 6200 or +358 40 510 6466