DEFINITION

Hyperion is the business division of Oracle that’s known for corporate performance management (CPM) and business intelligence systems. The Hyperion portfolio includes products for financial management, budgeting, planning and forecasting (BP&F), financial reporting, database management, financial consolidation, treasury management and analytics. Oracle’s Hyperion was named the leading CPM Suites vendor by Gartner in 2006. That helped Oracle get 28% combined market share in CPM Suites. For Oracle Hyperion Planning, it is formerly owned by Hyperion Solutions Corporation as a budgeting and forecasting application that can improve business predictability. Oracle Hyperion Planning uses Essbase (a multidimensional database product sold by Hyperion) as a database and calculation engine, a relational repository for business logic, and includes a web-based user interface.

ESTABLISHING

Hyperion Solutions Corporation was purchased by Oracle Corporation in March 2007. Oracle formerly aquired Hyperion in the same year.

ABOUT THE SYSTEM IN MAXIS

As in Maxis Berhad, they are using Hyperion Oracle software system in most of their division and as a basic data management system for the Maxis Broadband division that we are chose to analysis. For the division Maxis Next Generation Broadband (NGBB) Home Fiber, the system is reduced planning, budgeting, and forecasting cycles by weeks or months. It is also improve accuracy of plans and forecasts and eliminated time lag between when plans are updated and reports are refreshed. One of a good things also, it is reduced cost of ownership through superior application deployment, management tools and packaged data integration. Lay the foundation for the transition to Enterprise Business Planning.

EXTRAS

Not only Maxis using this software, there are many other companies using it. It is formerly use worldwide such as United Kingdom, North America, Finance decision makers, Pharmaceuticals and Healthcare company, and many more.

Example of Hyperion Oracle System in Maxis

Example of Hyperion Oracle system in Maxis

Keep visiting us for more updates. Thank you guys.. 🙂