CHICAGO — Hyperion Solutions Corp. last week held its annual user conference here, its first since the Sunnyvale, Calif., company acquired query and reporting tools vendor Brio Software Inc. in October. At the conference, Hyperion CEO Jeffrey Rodek spoke with Computerworld about developments in the market for decision-support software, such as business intelligence and business performance management tools.

When it comes to using business intelligence or BPM tools across a corporate enterprise, what kind of impact are you seeing on the relationship between the CIO and the CFO? Today, these larger enterprise systems — whether it’s our Essbase or a large [financial] consolidation system — are often IT’s way into the business. So IT is part of the evaluation, part of the solution and ends up partnering with the CFOs. The CFOs realize that if they’re going to be change agents for their companies and affect things other than just for the finance people, they need their partner, the CIO, to help them do that.

Do you think users are clear on the distinctions between BPM and business intelligence? Not yet, no. People use different terms to describe this whole area, and sometimes they say BPM, but a lot of times they don’t. What they do say is, “I want more accurate data,” “I want to get better insight,” or “I want the ability to plan and model on the fly.” All of that is business performance management. To do BPM, you need to do rolling forecasts, financial consolidation, customer and product profitability calculations. You can’t just say, “[Show me] sales by customer,” which is what people think of when they say BI.

All this talk lately about the tech spending upturn — are you seeing evidence of it? I think it’s a little bit real. The bigger thing for us is to grab a bigger market share and not just wait around for the total IT spend to go up. There’s no reason we can’t get to be three times as big as we are today.

Hyperion CEO Jeffrey Rodek

BI dashboards, or portals, are gaining momentum, but many companies struggle with the cultural issues of getting end users to actually adopt them. Do you see that with your own customers? Yes. You see it in two ways. One is in trying to wean them off that spreadsheet. They say, “Don’t take away my Excel!” So with a lot of the dashboards, you make them look like Excel. The second, bigger thing is the cultural transformation. One of the presentations here at the conference, for instance, was on dashboards for the sales force. At first, when the sales force saw the dashboard, they thought it was great. Then they started realizing how the executives could look at it and see everything in their pipeline. That was a big change.

More From Rodek