Hyperion Planning & Budgeting – History

The new Hyperion planning and budgeting is the idea backed by a worth sharing history. If we look back, we will be amazed to know that Hyperion Solutions Corporation was a software company initially located in Santa Clara in California, and was acquired by Oracle Corporation in 2007. Since then, many products were developed from the Business Intelligence and Business Performance Management markets perspective. In 2013, it was developed and sold with the name of Oracle Hyperion products. In 1998, there was a merger between Hyperion Software (IMRS) and Arbor Software.

Since, we can see the changing history in different years; we would like to share some.

In the year, 1981, IMRS was founded by Marco Arese & Thomas

Then in 1983, IMRS launched financial and management consolidation software which is popular with the name “Micro Control”.

In 1985, IMRS hired Jim Perakis as CEO and during his tenure; the growth reaches from $1M to almost $300M.

IMRS then became a public company in 1991, and launched ‘Hyperion’

Then Arbor Software launched Online Analytical Processing Software in 1992, which is the first version of Essbase.

In 1995, after the excellent success of “Hyperion” product, IMRS changed its name to “Hyperion Software Corporation” and then the name of product was known with “Hyperion Enterprise”

After the Arbor acquired AppSource, Hyperion Software merged with Arbor in 1998 and the company was renamed as “Hyperion Solutions”.

In 1999 Jeffery Rod eke was named CEO and Chairman of Hyperion.

In 2001, Godfrey Sullivan was named COO and President of Hyperion.

Then Brio Technology and the Alca Group were acquired by Hyperion in 2003.

In 2006, Hyperion acquired Upstream and Beat ware.

And then in 2007, Hyperion acquired Decisioning.

Then on 1st March 2007, Oracle Corporation announced to purchase Hyperion Solutions Corporation for $3.3 billion in cash. This transaction was completed on 18th April, 2007 and then Hyperion started to operate as a division of Oracle. From then, Oracle has been giving an extended support for majority of Hyperion Products (v11.1.2.x) to 2018. Then the Hyperion BI tools were successfully bundled into Oracle Business Intelligence Suite Enterprise Edition.

Hyperion Planning & Budgeting – Competitors

The top 5 competitors of Hyperion Planning & Budgeting includes

IBM Cognos

Prophix

Anaplan

Adaptive Insight

Vena

However, more competitors include

Workday Adaptive Planning

G2 Deals

Planful

IBM Planning Analytics with Watson

SAP Business Planning and Consolidation

SAP Analytics Cloud

One Stream

CCH Tagetik

Jed ox

Board

Hyperion Planning & Budgeting – Market Trends

The vendors of Hyperion in the business intelligence space are often categorized into:

The combined big four mega vendors named

IBM Cognos

Microsoft BI

SAP

BusinessObjects

However, the independent vendors include

SAS

Tableau

MicroStrategy

QlikView

Hyperion has long list of products. Some famous products include Essbase, Hyperion Enterprise, Hyperion Planning, Hyperion Business Modeling, Hyperion Strategic Finance, Hyperion Enterprise Performance Management Architect, Enterprise Reporting Cloud Service, and so on.

In this blog, I tried to address and cover Hyperion Planning & Budgeting History, Competitors and Current Market Trends. Hope the efforts will help you.