British Prime Minister David Cameron faced signs of unrest from within his own Conservative party yesterday after the ruling coalition took a beating in mid-term elections.

Outspoken lawmaker Nadine Dorries said Cameron could be removed, and others from the right wing of the party also went on the attack after voters suffering from a double-dip recession switched to the Labour opposition.

"Unless there is a dramatic change of tack, it is almost certain that David Cameron and George Osborne will be replaced within a year," Dorries wrote in the Mail on yesterday's newspaper.

Dorries - dubbed "Mad Nad" in the British press for her colorful views - said party chiefs needed only 46 signatures to replace the prime minister and chancellor and would get them by Christmas.

"Their downfall will have been brought about by arrogance and a sneering disregard for true Conservative values," she wrote.

Dorries' attack was the second in two weeks after she branded the pair "two posh boys who don't know the price of milk." Both Cameron and Osborne come from aristocratic roots.

Capping the worst month of Cameron's two years in power, Labour took control of 32 councils in Friday's elections and won more than 800 seats at the expense of the Conservatives and their coalition partners the Liberal Democrats.

Veteran Conservative lawmaker Brian Binley said yesterday that Cameron should "wake up and smell the coffee," while another, Bob Stewart, called for some "sanity" in Wednesday's Queen's Speech.

The speech is delivered by Queen Elizabeth II in parliament but it is written by the government to set out their plans for the coming session of parliament.

Richard Ryder, who was chief whip for former Conservative prime minister John Major, urged Cameron to develop "strategy and vision."

Cameron "seems to lack coherence, so nobody knows what he stands for, what his beliefs are, what his convictions are," Ryder said.

In the elections the Conservatives also found themselves squeezed from the right by the anti-Europe UK Independence Party (UKIP) - a toxic development as the Conservatives have traditionally been divided over European issues.

Even the Conservatives' sole success in the elections - the re-election of Johnson as London mayor - poses a problem for Cameron as his former schoolmate has been mooted as a potential leadership challenge.

Cameron also faces potential embarrassment on Friday when his friend Rebekah Brooks gives evidence to a public inquiry into the phone-hacking scandal at Rupert Murdoch's News of the World newspaper.

British media reported that Brooks, the former head of Murdoch's British newspaper wing News International, regularly exchanged text messages with Cameron which could be called as evidence by the inquiry.

AFP