A STANDARD HISTORY OF

Georgia and Georgians

By LUCIAN LAMAR KNIGHT

ILLUSTRATED

VOLUME VI

\

THE LEWIS PUBLISHING COMPANY CHICAGO : : NEW YORK

1917

1-

.K r ).

v~

V. (o

COPYRIGHT 1917 BY

THE LEWIS PUBLISHING Co.

I

X, ii

Georgia and Georgians

W. C. LYLE, M. D. The great advances made in recent times in every de partment of science have resulted in a growing tendency to specialization, which is nowhere more' manifest than in the medical profession, many able practitioners devoting themselves to one particular line of work. One of the leading specialists in Augusta is Dr. "W. C. Lyle, who for several years past has given his attention to diseases of the eye and ear, in which line of practice he has already won considerable fame. Doctor Lyle was born in Carrolton, Georgia, August 15, 1871, the son of William Alien and Anna (Avery) Lyle. The parents, both natives of Gfeorgia, are-still living in Car rolton, where they were educated and married, and where "William A. Lyle, now sixty-three years old, was formerly in the cotton business. Mrs. Lyle is of the same age as her husband. Three children were born of their mar riage, namely: Dr. William C. Lyle, of Augusta; Joseph M-, of Augusta, who is manager for the Atlantic Compress Company; and Charles A., who is cash ier of the. First National Bank of Carrolton, in which place he resides.

William C. Lyle acquired a practical education in.the schools of Carrol ton, and subsequently entered the medical department of the University of Georgia, at Augusta, where, after a thorough course of instruction, he was graduated in 1893, with the first honors of his class. He then began the general practice of his profession in this city, and so continued for a number of years, being very successful. In 1909 he took post-graduate work in the Manhattan Eye and Bar Hospital, at New York, and in the following year was a student in the same line of work in Vienna, Austria, where he remained for twelve months. Returning home in 1910, he gave up general practice and has since devoted himself to his specialty that of ophthalmology and otol ogy with marked success. Doctor Lyle holds various official positions. He is professor of otology and attending otologist and laryngologist at the Uni versity Hospital, and at the Children's Hospital of Augusta; a director of the University Hospital, vice dean of the medical department of the Univer sity of Georgia; a member of the County, State, Southern, and American Medical associations, being secretary and treasurer of the Georgia Medical Association; secretary to the board of directors of the city and state medical departments, and a member of the city board of health. A fellow of the American Academy-College of Surgeons, he received the degree of P. A. C. S. in 1914. His name is a familiar one in medical circles throughout the state, his ability being recognized and admired by his professional brethren. In politics the doctor is a democrat, while religiously he is affiliated with the Presbyterian Church. He is a popular member of several of the leading clubs of Augusta, including the Country Club, the Commercial Club and the Rotary Club. On November 7, 1895, Doctor Lyle was married to Miss Katheryn New, daughter of Dr. W. C. New, then a well known dentist of Carrolton, Georgia, who is now deceased. Doctor and Mrs. Lyle have no children.

2783

2784

GEORGIA AND GEORGIANS

JOHN P. JARDINE. Few manufacturers are more prominent or more widely known in South Georgia than is John P. Jardine, of the enterprising and progressive City of Douglas. He has been an important factor in business circles and his success in his undertakings has been so marked that his methods are of interest to the industrial world. Starting at the bottom of the business ladder, his energy, promptness, notable reliability, keen perception, honesty of purpose and a genius for devising and executing the right thing at the right moment, combined with every-day common sense, has brought him to a foremost position among men of business and to the proprietorship of one of Douglas' important enterprises, the Douglas Foundry and Machine "Works.

Mr. Jardine was born in the City of Glasgow, Scotland, March 24, 1868, and is a son of J. -M. and Elizabeth (Pinkerton) Jardine, natives of Scotland. In 1870 the family emigrated to the United States, settling first at Rutland, Vermont, where the home of the Jardines continued to be located until 1880. In that year the father brought his children to Georgia and settled in Ware County, the mother having died in Vermont at the age of forty years. After locating in Georgia, Mr. Jardine engaged in agricultural pursuits, in which he met with marked success, due to his native thrift, energy and industry, and finally, on reaching advanced years, retired from active pursuits. He is now living quietly, in hale and hearty old age, at his home in Douglas, being in his seventy-eighth year. He has had a long and useful career, and now, in the evening of life is enjoying the comforts that only a lifetime of useful activity will bring. Of the three children of J. M. and Elizabeth Jardine, John P. is the second in order of birth.

John P. Jardine attended the public schools of Rutland, Vermont, and was twelve years of age when brought by his father to Georgia, his education being completed in the district schools of Ware County. His studies com pleted, he turned his attention to farming, but this did not prove congenial to the youth, and two years later he started to learn the machinist trade. Having mastered this vocation he worked for a time as a journeyman, and then, with his father, organized a stock company, known as the Brunswick Foundry, Machine and Manufacturing Company. This concern had a suc cessful career of ten years under the management of Mr. Jardine and his father, but in 1893 they disposed of their interests and moved to Nichols, in Coffee County. Here, also, they met with success, and continued to operate until 1903, when John P. Jardine came to Douglas, and, in company with Mr. Larsen, founded the Douglas Foundry and Machine Works. After four months Mr. Jardine purchased his partner's interests, and since that time has continued as sole proprietor.

The Douglas Foundry and Machine Works is typical of many of the con cerns which, starting in a small way, have been developed into enterprise^ of industrial importance. From its inception its growth has been steady and consistent, and at the present time from eight to twelve experienced machin ists are given regular employment in the manufacture, re-building and repairing of all manner of machinery. A brass plant is connected with the establishment, in which all the brass fittings used are manufactured. Mr. Jardine is a man of keen foresight, excellent managerial ability, marked enterprise and indefatigable industry. His resourceful ability has enabled him to overcome whatever obstacles have appeared in his path, and he has been quick to recognize and improve opportunities, while his judgment has been rarely at fault in an estimate of business openings and trade transac tions. Politically, he is a democrat, and his fraternal connections are with the Independent Order of Odd Fellows and the Woodmen of the World. He has always been ready to give unselfishly of his time and abilities in the public service, and at the present time is a member of the Douglas City Council. He belongs to the Baptist Church.

GEORGIA AND GEORGIANS

2785

Mr. Jardinc was married to Miss Anna M. Owens, daughter of J. ~W. Owens, of Brunswick. She died September 8, 1908, having been the mother of four children: Miss Anna K., born in 1895, at Waynesville, Georgia, a graduate of the Douglas public schools; R. J. W., born in March, 1894, at Brunswick, a graduate of the Douglas schools and now engaged in business with his father as a machinist, -a young man of much mechanical ability and talent; Miss Lola E., born in 1898, at Nahunta, Wayne County, a graduate of the Douglas schools; and George M., born in 1904, at Douglas, and now a student. In June, 1909, Mr. Jardine was again married, being united at Pearson, Georgia, with Miss Bettie Courson, daughter of L. J. Courson, of Coffee County, and to this union there has been born one son: Daniel, born in 1910, at Douglas.

JEREMIAH S. ATEES. After this well known Jefferson lawyer had com pleted his high school education, he was obliged to rely upon his own efforts to promote him further in the world, and qualifying for a state license as a teacher he spent several years in that vocation and used the earnings to pay his way through law school. Mr. Avers has for many years been a lawyer with rising reputation and influence in Jackson County, and is a man of considerable landed property and city real estate.

He was born in Habersham County, Georgia, March 23, 1870, a son of R. "W. and Mary (Guest) Ayers. In the maternal line the great-grand father was Sanford Guest, who served as a captain of cavalry in the Revo lutionary war, lived in South Carolina for a number of years and finally removed to Franklin County, Georgia, where he died. The grandfather was also Sanford Guest, a lifelong farmer of Franklin County, who married Elizabeth Addison. The paternal grandfather, Nathaniel Ayers, was born in "Virginia and early in life removed to Georgia. He married Mackann Walters, and" both died in Franklin County. R. W. Ayers was born in Habersham County and his wife in Franklin County. The father is now liv ing in the Town of Cornelia at the age of eighty-five years. During the Civil war he enlisted from Habersham County, served as a private with the Thirty-seventh Georgia Regiment, and was wounded on the field of Manassas, and still carries the bullet in his shoulderblade. For many years he lived and prospered as a farmer at Ayersville Station. His wife is also living at the age of eighty-four. The nine children born to their union were: Joseph B. Ayers; Robert Pleasant Ayers; Mrs. Lucy Garrard; "William J. Ayers; Mrs. Eliza King; Mrs. Cynthia Hughes; Jeremiah S.; George Ayers, deceased; and Mrs. Beulah Loudermilk. All are still living except George.

Jeremiah S. Ayers acquired his early education in Habersham County, and also attended school at Toccoa and Carnesville. Then came the interval during which he taught school and earned the money necessary to' put him through the law department of the University of Georgia, where he was grad uated LL. B. in 1895. After his admission to the bar he moved to Jefferson in Jackson County, and has been identified with the local bar for twenty years. During 1911-12 Mr. Ayers was honored by the people of Jefferson with the office of mayor, to which his administration lent dignity. He has recently been elected a member of the General Assembly of Georgia by the largest majority over his opponent and leading the ticket in the county over his associate elected at the same time.

Mr. Ayers is a member of the County Bar Association, and for many years has been prominent in fraternal circles. He is past master of the Blue Lodge, a member of the Royal Arch Chapter, is a past master of the Knights of Pythias, a past grand of the Independent Order of Odd Fellows, and a past sachem of the Improved Order of Red Men. His church is the Baptist.

On December 12, 1905, he married Miss Eva McNeill, of a well known Henry County, Tennessee, family. Her father was N. W. McNeill, who serve3

2786

GEORGIA AND GEORGIANS

with the rank of captain in the Confederate army.. Her mother is still living. At their home in Jefferson three children have been born to Mr. and Mrs. Ayers: Sanford, born in September, 1906, and attending school; Nathan, born in 1908, and also in school; and Richard Winston, born in November, 1910.

HON. WILLIAM LITTLE PHILLIPS. Thirty-eight years of continuous con nection with the bench and bar of Jefferson County have made Hon. William Little Phillips, judge of the City Court of Louisville, one of the best known figures of the Middle Circuit and the dean of the legists still in active practice. A minister's son, he experienced the usual privileges accorded one with such family connections in being reared in a home of refinement, but, as is also usually the case, was compelled from the start to make his own way in the world. What success he has attained, and it is not inconsiderable, is there fore the result of his own efforts.

Judge Phillips, who has never left his native city, was born at Louisville, Jefferson County, Georgia, June 3, 1857, and is a son of the Rev. David Gardner and Julia (Little) Phillips. His father was born at a place known as The Rocks near Raleigh, Rowan County, North Carolina, February 1, 1817, and was graduated from Erskine College of Due West, South Carolina, subsequently completing a course in the Presbyterian Theological Seminary at the same place. He entered the ministry of the Presbyterian Church.and began preaching at Louisville, Georgia, later filling various pastorates in Jefferson County. He was the organizer of the first church of the presbyterian faith at Louisville, and his entire life was devotedly given to the work of his Master. For forty-two years he labored unselfishly in Jefferson and o^her counties of Southern Georgia, not alone as a minister but as a pro moter of the cause of education, he for many years being county school com missioner for Jefferson County. He was not a success in the way that the world views material prosperity' and never accumulated large means, but the work which he accomplished as pastor and educator cannot be over estimated, while the love and veneration in which he was held by his people furnished a reward far more sweet to him than worldly accumulations. He was successful in rearing eight children, who jdolized him, and who have since grown to be credits to the communities in which their lives have been passed, and to the training of their revered parents. When he died in 1899, rounding out a life of eighty-three years, the whole community mourned. Like her husband, Mrs. Phillips led an ideal Christian life, and also like him she was held in the warmest affection by all who came in contact with her lovely character. She died in 1883. The children born to Reverend and Mrs. Phillips -were as follows: Judge William Little, of this review; Eloise, who is the wife of J. W. White, editor of the News Farmer, the only paper published in Jefferson County; Martha, who is the wife of Thomas Hardeman; Rev. David Gardner, D. D., pastor of the A-R Presbyterian Church of Chester, South Carolina; Julia, who is the wife of W. W. Abbott, president of the First National Bank and of the Abbott Manufacturing Company, of Louisville, Georgia; John R., who is an attorney at law of Louisville; Lois, who is the wife of J. B. Polhill, architect, builder and. merchant of Louisville; and Enoch Bothwell, a merchant of Bartow, Florida.

William Little Phillips was educated at Erskine College, a Presbyterian institution of Due West, South Carolina, where he was graduated'with the degree of Bachelor. of Arts. His legal studies were pursued under the preceptorship of Cain & Polhill, of Louisville, following which he was ad mitted to the bar by Hon. H. V. Johnson, then judge of the Superior Court and formerly governor of Georgia. In 1878 Judge Phillips began the practice of his calling at Louisville, and here he has continued through thirty-seven years of faithful devotion to the best tenets and ethics of his honored calling, being the dean in active practice of the Middle Circuit. He is attorney for

GEORGIA AND GEORGIANS

2787

the Bank of Louisville, of which he was a founder, and is now vice president and a member of the board of directors. His professional connection is with the Georgia Bar Association. In 1911 he was given recognition of his abil

ities when he was appointed by Governor Joseph M, Brown to fill out the unexpired term of Judge R. L. Gamble, as city judge, to which office he was

reappointed by Governor Slayton in 1912. At the present time he is filling his second term, one of the most dignified, impartial and learned jurists of the bench of the Middle Circuit. While his profession and his judicial position occupy his time to a large extent, he has also been interested in the

cultivation of land, and at this time owns some 2,000 acres. During a period of a quarter of a century, Judge Phillips has been an elder of the Pres byterian Church.

In 1881, at Louisville, Judge Phillips was married to Miss Ella Skinner, who died in 1889, leaving one son-. James Gardner, who is now successfully engaged in farming in Jefferson County. Judge Phillips was again married in 1891, when united with Miss Lena Everitt, daughter of John B. and M.

Everitt, of Thomas County, Georgia, and they are the parents of two chil dren: Mary, who is a graduate of the Due West Women's College; and Mil

dred, who is completing her education.

CAPT. WILLIAM A. FULLER was born in Henry County, Georgia, April 15,

1836. He left his father's farm at the age of nineteen and immediately entered the service of the Western & Atlantic Railroad, where he remained for about twenty years. He retired from the railroad in 1876, and entered the mercan

tile business in Atlanta, in which he continued until the year 1881. With the exception of a few months' service with the Georgia Pacific Railroad in the early '80s, Captain Fuller never re-entered active business life after his retirement in 1881. In 1863 Governor Joseph E. Brown commissioned

him captain in recognition of his services in defeating the object of the An drews raid of 1862, which was designed to burn the bridges of the Western & Atlantic Railroad between Atlanta and Chattanooga and cut the Confed

erate base of supplies. Captain Fuller died at his home in Atlanta, Decem

ber 28, 1905.

ROBERT J. HENDERSON was born in Newton County on November 20, 1822. After being well educated he took up the work of his father as a farmer and miller, and was in prosperous circumstances prior to the Civil war. A prom

inent citizen of his section, he was a major in the State Militia before the Civil war came on. When that struggle opened he became colonel of the Forty-second Georgia Regiment, and was afterward promoted to be brigadiergeneral. His farms were devastated by Sherman's army and his mills

destroyed. Returning from the army he rebuilt his flouring mills in Newton County, and resumed his former occupations. After many years of indus

trious effort he retired from business in 1892 and moved to Atlanta, where he died in February, 1894.

S. L. TVTOORE. Admitted to the Georgia bar twenty-five years ago Mr. Moore is one of the best known members of the Statesboro bar. He has ren dered much public service and his long career as ordinary, an office he filled twelve years, is deserving of special mention.

He was born in Bulloch County, Georgia, February 22, 1863, a son of S. L. and Anna A. (Mingledorf) Moore. His mother was born in Chatham County and his father in Bulloch County, and the latter was a member of the Georgia Secession Convention at the beginning of the war between the states. He died at the venerable age of eighty-nine in 1902, while the mother passed away in 1914 aged eighty-seven.

Next to the youngest of their five children, S. L. Moore had the usual

2788

GEORGIA AND GEORGIANS

experiences and opportunities of a Georgia boy reared in a fairly well-to-do family, and afterwards by his own efforts he gained a college education. He was graduated A. B. from Emory College in 1887 and then took up the study of law under Col. J. A. Brannen at Statesboro.

On being admitted to practice in 1891 he at once located at Statesboro and there is hardly a lawyer in that section, of the state better known and more highly esteemed for his ability and worthy attainments. Many years ago Mr. Moore represented his home county in the State Legislature, was mayor of Statesboro in 1899, but rendered his most important service to the public in the office of ordinary, which he filled from 1900 to 1912, and has recently been elected for another four years' term in the same office, beginning Janu

ary 1, 1917. Besides his large law practice he is vice president of the Sea Island Bank

of Statesboro and is one of the board of trustees of the First District Agri cultural College. He is a democrat, a member of the County Bar Asso ciation and of the Masonic order. His church is the Methodist Episcopal.

On October 8, 1891, in Screven County, he married Miss Mary L. Edenfield, a daughter of the late Alien Edenfield. To their marriage have been born four children: C. L. Moore, who was born at Statesboro in 1894 and is now attending the medical college at Atlanta; Sadie M., born in 1899, and a student in the Milledgeville College; Mary Lou, born in 1905 and S. L,, Jr., born in 1908, both attending the public schools of Statesboro.

ROBERT R. GUNN. The feeling of self respect arising from the conscious ness of talents well employed, is, in itself, an assurance of success. "When a choice of the law is made by a young man, it means not only years of the most careful and diligent study but the assumption, later on, of responsibili ties which mean as his life work, the balancing of might and right and often of life and death. There is little ease in the life of a busy lawyer and when a youth deliberately puts aside the allurements of a life of leisure that wealth and social environment make possible in order to devote every effort to become a useful and vital factor in the great scheme of life, he deserves some meas ure of credit and usually is abundantly rewarded. Among the thus situated young attorneys of Crawfordsville, Georgia, is Robert R. Gunn.,

Robert R. Gunn was born at Crawfordsville, September 23, 1893, and is a son of Ulysses S. and Olive Belle (Allford) Gunn. The father of Mr,, Gunn was born in Georgia and for many years has been the leading merchant at Crawfordsville and a representative citizen. He is a member of the school board and is prominent in all local movements of moment. He married Olive Belle Allford and they have had six children, the eldest of whom was Robert R. and the other survivors, Mary "Olive and Gladys, reside with their parents at Crawfordsville. On both sides the family connections are of high char acter, and the family home is' a center of the pleasant social activities of the

city. Following his graduation from the Crawfordsville High School, in Septem

ber, 1910, Robert R. Gunn entered the University of Georgia at Athens, and in June, 1914, was graduated from the law department with credit. He was admitted to the bar in the same year and on returning to Crawfordsville went into the offices of Alvin G. Golucke. He has demonstrated his legal ability on many occasions individually, and enjoys an honorable reputation as a lawyer, and controls an important law business of this part of the county.

Mr. Gunn is a Royal Arch Mason and belongs also to the Knights of Pythias. In college he enjoyed his connection with the Sigma Chi fraternity and retains his membership in the same. In politics he is identified with the democratic party but so far has given comparatively little attention to the field of politics, his profession closely claiming his time and interest. It is not too much to say that he seems to have a brilliant future before him.

GEORGIA AND GEORGIANS

2789

COL. EDWIN G. KALBFLEISCH. The courage that makes one stand firmly to his purpose in spite of all discouragements is the very quintessence of char

acter and it is character that counts in the battle of life. Hampered for many years by lack of education and ennobling environment, one of Augusta's well known men, now prominent in the law and a leader in civic affairs, re tained that nature given proud spirit of courage that enabled him, through

deep waters to swim to shore and find a solid foundation rock beneath him. Men of this type of experience never boast of what they have accomplished but their history, simply told, has a mighty influence in encouraging others similarly situated. It is not so difficult a voyage to a safe port when weather is fine and wealth has provided a sound ship, but to run the rapids in a leaky

canoe without oars and still reach the haven is as remarkable as it is creditable. Edwin G. Kalbfleisch, a representative member of the Augusta bar and

officially identified for years with the city's most important public concerns, was born September 7, 1866, at Ninety Six, Greenwood County, South Caro lina. His parents were John and Mary (Hobbs) Kalbfleisch. "The father

was a native of Germany and came to America with his parents when a child. He settled in Augusta when this city was but an inconspicuous village. For some years of his life he was a Government contractor but subsequently removed to a farm in Richmond County, Georgia, where he died at the age of sixty-five years. The mother was a native of Wilkes County, Georgia. She

died in 1893 at the age of sixty. Edwin G. Kalbfleisch was the elder of his parents' two children. He had

few educational opportunities in boyhood, beginning at the early age of twelve years to provide for himself as a worker in the cotton mills. The environ ment he found so distasteful that he determined to escape from these bonds,

finding his opportunity by way of a freight car, in which he traveled many miles before being discovered. It required ingenuity as well as courage for this child of thirteen years, uneducated and untrained, to make an honest living and in search of employment he visited many cities including Atlanta,

Chattanooga, New Orleans, Cincinnati and Birmingham. It was in the last named place that he came to the end of his resources, having expended every^ thing but his integrity and courage. This was his situation when he applied for work in a sash, door and blind manufacturing plant. When told there

was no vacancy that he could fill he assured the proprietor that he must have some kind of a job in order to live honestly, and so impressed the manu facturer that work was provided for him and thus he entered upon the first steady job he ever had, this leading to his learning the carpenter 'trade and an acknowledged place, later on, in the greater industrial army. He secured

employment with the Thompson Sash, Blind & Door Company of Augusta after returning here when eighteen years old.

In 1888 Mr. Kalbfleisch went to work for the Georgia Railroad Company as a carpenter in the mechanical department and remained with the railroad for a number of years. He was a skillful mechanic but he constantly felt an impulse to be much more and began to feel the disadvantages of lack of education. Confiding his ambition to a friend, a wise one as events proved, he

accepted his advice and entered a night school and made rapid progress al though his days were full of the hard work his occupation made necessary. He discovered that his inclination led him in the direction of the law and in 1904, at the age of thirty-eight, after study under the guidance of Judge Joseph Reynolds, he successfully passed the bar examination and in Feb ruary, 1905, he started in the practice of his profession.

The fine courage which had enabled Colonel Kalbfleisch to overcome previous obstacles still accompanied him when he entered the arena of the law at Augusta in competition with old professional men of experience and thoroughly trained young men of fortune and family. And then he had faith

in himself. Many of his first eases were in the branch of criminal law and had

2790

GEOEGIA AND GEORGIANS

he decided to pursue that line he undoubtedly would have met with great success but he soon discovered that such a course would involve him in undesired political trouble and he determined to make a specialty of advisory office work and title and probate law. He has developed a large business in this branch and is a recognized authority on titles.

On August 1, 1886, Colonel Kalbfleisch was married to Miss Maggie Tice, who was a daughter of Seyburn Tice, of Augusta, who died of tuberculosis in 1890. They had two children, the younger of whom is deceased. The surviv ing daughter, Ethel, married John W. Pierce, one of the largest plantation owners in the South and they have one son, John W. Pierce, Jr. On January 13, 1902, Colonel Kalbfleisch was married to Miss Emma Ivey. A new im pulse entered into his life with this marriage and he attributes much to her devotion and encouragement during his years of struggle.

Colonel Kalbfleisch has always been a friend of the laboring man and has been most generous to this class in the way of professional service. For many years he has been president of the Federated Trades and president of the Carpenters' Union. He was largely instrumental in bringing about the set tlement of the Georgia railroad strike and what one man said was the thought of many, "He is really too big for this town.'' He has been shown apprecia tion in numberless ways. He made the draft for the new Municipal Court Bill which recently was passed by the Legislature. He served as a member of the city council for one term. At the time of the disastrous flood, in 1898, he took full charge of the city offices, during the mayor's absence and re established order out of chaos. "While in the council he was chairman of the fire department and was exceedingly useful in its re-organization and in securing its equipment and apparatus, is a member of the police commission and of the city flood commission. He has been tendered many other civic offices but has accepted few. He was appointed a member of the National River and Harbor Committee by Governor Hoke Smith and is also a member of the Southern Commercial Congress.

Colonel Kalbfleisch is very popular with lovers of the great national game of baseball in this section. He re-established the Augusta team of which he has been president. The present outlook is that this team stands a fine chance of winning the pennant in the South Atlantic League.

GARKETT A. GREEN. It is specially gratifying to note the status of Hon. Garnett A. Green as one of the representative members of the bar of his native county and to record also that he is serving, in 1915-16, his second term as representative of Wilkes County in the State Legislature of Georgia. He is a scion, in both the paternal and maternal lines, of honored and influen tial pioneer families of Wilkes County, and here he is well upholdirfg the prestige of a name that has been long one of prominence in this section of the state. He is engaged in the practice of his profession at Washington, the county seat, and Wilkes County has no citizen who is more loyal and progressive than this able and popular young lawyer.

Mr. Green was born in Wilkes County on the 5th of April, 1885, and is the only child of Theodoric M. and Metta (Andrews) Green, both of whom likewise were born and reared in this county. Theodoric M. Green was a son of John Bland Green and the maiden name of his mother was Leonard, she having been a native of Wilkes County, where she passed her entire life. John Bland Green was born in Virginia and was a representative of a family, of English origin, that was founded in the Old Dominion in the colonial period of our national history. Upon coming to Georgia he established his home at Washington, which now thriving and beautiful little city was then a mere village. He was a skilled carpenter and became a prominent contractor and builder of Wilkes County, many of the fine old residences still standing in Washington being monuments to his memory, and here being found also

GEORGIA AND GEORGIANS

2791

a number of business buildings that were erected by this honored pioneer. The maternal grandparents of him whose name introduces this review were Judge Garnett Andrews and Amuelt (Ball) Andrews, both of whom were residents of Washington, Wilkes County, at the time of their death, Judge

Andrews having been for many years one of the most prominent and influen tial members of the bar of this section of the state and having been judge of the. Northern Circuit of the Superior Court of Wilkes County at the time

of his demise. The parents of Mr. Green were reared and educated at Washington, and

here their marriage was solemnized. The father long held precedence as one of the leading merchants of Washington, where he built up a large and profitable business and where he ever held impregnable vantage-ground in

popular confidence and esteem. He accorded gallant service as a soldier of the Confederacy during the Civil war, his youthful loyalty having prompted

him to enlist when he was a lad of but sixteen years and his ability and valor having brought to him promotion to a lieutenancy in the Twentyseventh Georgia Battalion of Light Infantry. He was a citizen of the highest civic loyalty, ever ready to aid in all normal undertakings advanced for the general good of'the community, and his character was the positive expression

of a strong and noble nature. His desire was not for political preferment of a personal tirder but he was a stalwart advocate of the cause of the demo cratic party. He was a zealous communicant of the Methodist Episcopal Church, as is also his widow, who still resides in the beautiful old homestead in Washington, a gracious gentlewoman who has been a leader in the repre sentative social activities of the community and one whose circle of friends is coincident with that of her acquaintances. Theodorie M. Green died in 1913, at the age of sixty-seven years, and in his passing Wilkes County gave uniform recognition of its loss of one of its most honored and useful citizens.

Garnett A. Green continued to attend the public schools at Washington until he had completed the curriculum of the high school, in which he was

graduated when sixteen years of age. In 1906 he was graduated in the law department of the University of Georgia, in which institution he had pre viously taken an elective course of two years in the academic or literary department. From the university he duly received his degree of Bachelor of Laws, but to fortify himself still more fully for his exacting profession he . completed a course in the law school of historic old Yale University, from which he received the supplemental degree of Bachelor of Laws in 1907. Early in the following year he established himself in the practice of his profession at Washington, and here his success has been unequivocal and

pronounced, his practice extending to all courts of the state and his repre sentative clientage attesting his ability as an advocate and also as a counselor. He has appeared in connection with many important litigated causes and his reputation is based on results achieved. He is a member of the Wilkes County Bar Association and is a zealous worker in the ranks of the democratic party. as a candidate of which he was elected representative of Wilkes County in the State Legislature in 1912. He served during the General Assembly of 1913-14 with characteristic loyalty and efficiency, and the estimate placed upon his services was shown in his re-election in 1914, for the sessions of 1915-16.

Mr. Green is affiliated with the Masonic fraternity and the Knights of Pythias, is a communicant of the Protestant Episcopal Church, and he resides with his widowed mother in the fine old homestead, which has long been a center of most gracious hospitality. Mr. Green is a director of the Exchange Bank and also of the Citizens' Bank, the two leading financial institutions of Wash

ington, and Wilkes County can claim no citizen of greater popularity than this native son.

2792

GEORGIA AND GEORGIANS

HBESCHEL P. COBB. The bar of Savannah is a body of brilliant men and one of its youngest members, Herschel P. Cobb, has, through- sheer ability won recognition and in a comparatively short time built up a law practice that testifies to his industry and perseverance as well as to his sound knowl edge of law.

Herschel Paschal Cobb was born in Stewart County, Georgia, April 29,

1884, and is a son of Abraham J. and Joanna (Peed) Cobb, both natives of Georgia and present residents of Savannah. Abraham J. Cobb was born in

1850, in Columbia County, and his wife some ten years later, at Butler, in

Taylor County. For many years Mr. Cobb prospered as a farmer in Stewart County, in which section he was influential as a citizen. To Abraham J. Cobb and wife seven children were born, as follows: Hyman S., who is

employed as a salesman at Savannah; George C., who is interested in the grocery business in this city; Herschel P.; Robert C., who holds a position with the Atlantic Coast Line Company; Mrs. Sally Lou Williams, who resides in Alabama; Belva, who lives with her parents in Savannah; and Bernice, who died in infancy.

When Herschel P. Cobb was yet a child his parents removed to Richland, Georgia, and there he attended the grade schools and the high school and still later enjoyed advantages in a business college at Maeon, to which city he then went to make his home. During the following year he satisfactorily held a clerical position at Macon and prudently saved his earnings, having

-an ambitious end in view, this being the completion of his education in the University of Georgia at Athens. He matriculated in the literary depart ment and passed his freshman year in the midst of congenial surroundings. He then found his resources exhausted but .fortunately his courage and

determination had not abated and after leaving the literary department of the university, Mr. Cobb went to Statesboro, the judicial center of Bulloch County, and became a court stenographer and assistant to the leading lawyers at that point. This addition to his income finally enabled him to return to the university and to continue his studies, working as secretary to Professor

Snelling, the dean of the university. He not only proved useful and neces sary to his employer but honorably earned the means with which to com fortably complete his course in law. In 1908 he was graduated and received his coveted degree of Bachelor of Law, with virtually concomitant admission to the bar of his native state. It is not surprising that a young man so deter mined, self-denying and industrious should have accomplished the end he had in view and this same determination has been one of the foundation stones in his professional success. Close application in his clients' interest has been comparatively easy for him for it has been one of the rules of his life.

Immediately after graduation Mr. Cobb started into practice at States

boro, as junior member of the law firm of Strange & Cobb. His initial success was encouraging and justified his confidence in himself and he soon began to look for a wider field of work, finding it in Savannah, to which city he came after a year of practice in the courts of Bulloch County, in the autumn of 1909. Here he has displayed fine professional qualities, his thoroughness and accuracy, his quickness of deduction, his persistency have all won

approval from bench and bar while his faithfulness to his clients hasr made him many personal friends. He has now a large and important law business extending into several counties in Southern Georgia and he has appeared in connection with a number of celebrated cases presented before the courts of

Savannah. At Columbia, South Carolina, on November 11, 1910, Mr. Cobb was united

In marriage with Lillian Bigham, who is a daughter of John Bigham and wife

and the youngest of their twelve children. She is a lady of many accomplish ments and a favorite in the city's pleasant social life as well as a charming mistress of a hospitable home. Mr. Cobb owns valuable property at Savan-

GEORGIA AND GEORGIANS

2793

nah and a fine farm in Chatham County. In politics He is a democrat but so

far has not been exceedingly active in public affairs as the demands of his profession largely occupy his time and attention. Self-reliant and successful, Mr. Cobb has every reason to take pride'in what he has accomplished and the example he has set for others who may find themselves similarly situated in

their early manhood.

ENOCH CALLAWAY JONES. Some of Georgia's most prominent families of

the planter class are represented in the above name. Enoch Callaway Jones, now a retired business man of Atlanta, has the distinction of being a veteran of the Confederate army, was for a number of years a farmer, successful both as a corn and cotton raiser and for more than twenty-five years a resident of Atlanta.

Enoch Callaway Jones was born in Meriwether County, Georgia, Febru

ary 4, 1838, a son of John and Elizabeth (Strozier) Jones. The family is descended from one of those Welsh families of Jones which settled in Vir ginia about 16207' About that time there came to this country five young mjgn: Anthony, Cadwallader, Peter, John and Philip Jones, the first three from Wales and the last two from England. John perished in the Indian massacre of 1622, Philip was dead in 1623, though it is not known whether or no>*Te was killed in the Indian massacre, while Anthony, Cadwallader and Peter reared families, of which the descendants of Peter are far the most

numerous. One of Peter's descendants, known as Col. Peter Jones, founded the Qity of Petersburg, Virginia. He was also known as "Sweat-house Peter," from a system of curing tobacco of which he was the inventor, and was one of the prominent men of his day. Willis Jones, grandfather of Enoch C., was suppled to be a native of Wilkes County, Georgia, but a greater proba

bility is that he was born in Virginia and came to Wilkes County as a youth in that great tide of emigration which flowed in from Virginia and North Carolina between 1784 and 1800. The Strozier family was founded in Georgia by Reuben Strozier, a Dutchman, who came direct from the Nether

lands to Wilkes County, Georgia, where he married Margaret Callaway, and had seven children. Reuben Strozier was the maternal grandfather of

Enoch C. Jones. .Through these lines there is a very extended relationship, and branches of the family stock are found in many of the Southern states. Enoch C. Jones had two uncles, Madison Jones and Early Jones, who went to Texas while that country was a republic. Another uncle, Willis Jones, died in Harris County, Georgia. One of his aunts, Matilda, married Simeon Poteat of Texas; his aunt Arthie married a Mr. Floyd, and another aunt married a Mr. McKenzie.

John Jones, 'father of Enoch C., was in his generation one of the largest

planters in Georgia, and during the high tide of his activities grew as high as a thousand bales of cotton a year. His various plantations included one in Dougherty County of 2,500 acres, two in Baker County of 3,000 acres or more each, two in Meriwether County aggregating 3,000 acres, while his total land holdings approximated more than 12,000 acres. At the close of the war, when negroes were freed, he was the owner of 337 slaves. He marketed his

cotton at Griffin, then a market for the wagon trade for a hundred miles around, and it was at Griffin that he acquired the sobriquet which stuck to

him through life as "Cotton Jones," a title which distinguished him as one of the most extensive cotton raisers in all Georgia. By his marriage to Eliza beth Strozier there was a large .family. The son Reuben, who died suddenly on the street in Atlanta and left four children, was a farmer, represented his senatorial district in the General Assembly, was active as a Mason, and his

devotion to Sunday School work is indicated in the fact that he taught in Sunday School for thirty-five-years without missing a Sunday. John, the second child, died at the age of twenty-one. Willis was a farmer, and his

2794

GEORGIA AND GEORGIANS

grandson is Dr. Willis B. Jones of Atlanta. Anne V. married Oarlton B. Callaway at Macon. Dr. Chandler D. Jones died at Atlanta leaving three children. The next child is Enoch C. Morgiana married Raeburn Phillips

of Macon. Piamus W. was the owner of 2,500 acres of land in Baker County, and though not so large an operator was almost as famous a cotton grower as his father, having the reputation for years of putting the first bale of cotton on the market and growing more cotton to the plow than any man in Georgia; he represented Baker County for years in the General Assembly, and never married. Otis was a farmer and lawyer of Coweta County, and his son Otis also took up the law and practiced at Newnan. The youngest child, Orrie, married William Flanders of Macon, and was the mother of four children.

Enoch Callaway Jones during his youth attended Irvin College in Ten nessee. At the age of twenty-one, in 1859, he married Indiana Callaway,

daughter of Parker and Susan Callaway of Wilkes County, where her father 'was a large farmer and money lender. After his marriage Mr. Jones settled in Wilkes County with his father-in-law. His career had hardly begun when the war between the states broke out, and he enlisted in Company A, First Regiment, First Brigade of Georgia State Troops, one of those commands known as "Joe Brown's Pets." He went through the siege of Savannah, and

then followed the fortunes of that remnant known as Hardee's Command, among other engagements participating in the battle at Honey Hill, South Carolina. After the war Mr. Jones settled on a 1,600-aere plantation owned by his father in Baker County, and in its management laid the foundation of his prosperity. He was a farmer and planter there twenty years, and was noted as the largest corn grower in the county and also produced about

150 bales of cotton annually. In 1887 Mr. Jones removed to Atlanta. His foresight enabled him to perceive to some degree at least the future destiny of the metropolis of the southeastern.states, and in 1890 he sold his farm and began investing his money in central property in Atlanta. It is needless to say that his judgment has been well justified, and the properties which he has owned and some of which he still holds represent a considerable fortune. Mr. Jones has spent a long and active life, has accepted every responsibility with determination and courage, has prospered in material circumstances, at

the same time rendering an adequate service in return, and has thus come into a green old age, surrounded by children and the comforts of life, one of the most esteemed of the older residents of Atlanta. His chief interest now lies in the Trinity Methodist Church, of -which he has long been an active

member. His first wife died in 1869, and in 1871 he was married in Baker County

to Amelia Jones, daughter of Col. Augustus and Mary Jones, her father having been killed in the second battle of Manassas while leading a Confed

erate regiment. Mrs. Jones died in 1895, and in 1897 he was married at Nevada, Missouri, to Adra Davis, daughter of Dr. Joseph and Susan (Kuykendall) Davis. By his first marriage there were two children: Callie,

who died in childhood; and Elizabeth, who died after her marriage to Gideon Fleming of Albany. The children of the second wife are: Edgar Jones, who was educated in the Neal School and then took up the real estate business in Atlanta; Hugh A., who was educated in the Georgia School of Technology and the Eastman Business College, has extensive interests as a farmer but resides in Atlanta; Julian J., a resident of Atlanta and engaged in the real estate business, was educated in the School of Technology and by his mar

riage to Myrtie Barge of Atlanta has three children.

SIDNEY LANIEB. It seems incredible, when one stops to consider Sidney Lanier's reputation in this year of 1911, that his work could have been done in less than forty years of life. Poet, linguist, mathematician, lawyer, and

GEORGIA AND GEORGIANS

2795

musician;.a master of literature, as well as the greatest poet of the South;

burdened through life with a feeble body and constant ill health, which

finally cut him off in the flower of his days his was indeed a master mind.

There is perhaps no one who would dispute his supremacy as the premier poet

of the South, and he ranks in our country now with Longfellow, "Whittier,

and Lowell. The London Times the most conservative paper in the world,

.and which through all its history has been noted for its editorial ability

and the quality of its criticisms adjudges Lanier to have been '' the greatest

master of melody of any of the American poets." ^

II Sidney Lanier was born in Macon, Georgia, oil February 3, 1842; son of Robert S. and Mary (Anderson) Lanier. His father was a lawyer, of Hugue

not descent. His mother's people were of Scotch origin. He was graduated

from the sophomore class of Oglethorpe College in 1860; was a tutor in Ogle-

thorpe for the next year, and in April, 1861, enlisted in the Second Georgia

Battalion. He served through the campaign of 1862 in Virginia; and in

1863 his battalion was mounted and saw service in North Carolina and Vir

ginia. In 1864, he took command of a blockade runner, and while in that

service was captured and imprisoned at Point Lookout, Maryland. He was

released in February, 1865. He was a clerk in Montgomery, Alabama,

- 1865-7; and was married in December, 1867,' to Mary Day, daughter of Charles

Day^ of Macon, Georgia.

The year 1868 found him teaching a country academy at Prattsville, Ala

bama }, but in May of that year, disabled by a hemorrhage of the lungs, he

returned to Macon. He took up the practice of law with his father and

stayed in Macon until December, 1872, when he went to San Antonio, Texas,

hoping to be benefited by the climate. He found ho benefit, and in the spring

of 1873 he settled in Baltimore, Maryland, where he was a flutist for the Pea-

body Symphony Concerts. He was a devoted lover of music and proficient on

the banjo, the guitar, the piano, the violin, and the flute. From time to time

he was a contributor of poems and articles to magazines, and a constant trav

eler in search of health, which was always denied him. In May, 1874, he

visited Florida, under a contract with a railroad company interested in the

development of that state, to write them a book on Florida. The little book

which was the product of this visit, entitled "Florida: Its Scenery, Climate,

and History," was brought out in 1875, and is one of the most delightful

volumes ever written about any American state. At the suggestion of Bayard

Taylor, he wrote the cantata for the opening of the Centennial Exposition

--,

in 1876, Dudley Buck writing the music. A brief course of lectures given by

yhim upon "Elizabethan Verse," followed by a Shakespearean course, led to

"his appointment in 1879 as lecturer on English Literature in Johns Hopkins

University. At the same time he conducted three lecture courses in young

ladies' classes. He was forced finally from illness to discontinue his lecture

course, and in April, 1881, he made his last visit to New York to arrange for

the publications of his books. "While there he was taken so seriously ill that

they were compelled to take him to a camp in Western North Carolina, where

he died on September 7, 1881, aged thirty-nine years and seven months.

Reference has been made to the vast range of Lanier's knowledge. He

.

was a poet and musician of the highest order of ability. As a linguist he had

mastered French, German, and Spanish. He could easily have been a pro

fessor of mathematics, so profound was his knowledge of that science a most

unusual thing in a man of poetic ability. Added to all this, he was an accom

plished lawyer. Four years of his brief life were spent in the service of his

country. And yet, in his brief thirty-nine years he accomplished so much

that his reputation has grown steadily year by year, until today it is

worldwide. In 1888 a beautiful memorial bust of the poet was unveiled in

Baltimore.

His published works include: "Tiger Lilies;" "Florida: Its Scenery,

2796

GEORGIA AND GEORGIANS

Climate, and History;" Poems; "Some Highways and Byways of American Travel;" "The Boys' Froissart;" "The Boys' King Arthur;" "The Science of English Verse;" "The Boys' Mabinogion;" "The Boys' Percy;" "The English Novel, and the Principle of Its Development;" Poems (edited by his wife, 1884), besides many notable contributions to magazines. There is a wide variation in the character of Lanier's work, running as it does, from poetry to prose but there is no variation in its quality. Always and every where the quality is of the highest. Some of its subjects appear very com monplace, as for example, the poem entitled "Corn;" but the poem is not commonplace. "The Sonjlof the Chattahoochee" and "The Marshes of Glynn" are poetic gems now recognized as classics the world over and have made famous two widely distinct features of Georgia's scenery. His last work, "Sunrise," a beautiful song composed when he was too feeble to carry his hand to his mouth, has been well characterized by Lucian Knight as "his life's sublime recessional."

MAJ.-GEN. LAFAYETTE McLAWS was born in Augusta on January 15, 1821. Before he concluded his first year in the University of Virginia h$ iwas appointed a cadet at West Point Military Academy, and in 1838 entered that school, from which he was graduated four years later. He was commissioned lieutenant in the army and sent to the frontier. Before the actual opening of hostilities in the Mexican war, he joined the army of General Taylor on the Texas frontier. Stationed at Fort Brown, the young lieutenant was. assisting valiantly in the defense of that beleaguered post (May 3-4, 1846), while General Taylor was fighting the battles of Palo Alto and Eesaca de la Palma. He accompanied Taylor's army; took part in the hard fighting around Monterey; was transferred to Scott's army and assisted in the siege of Vera Cruz. On account of feeing health he was sent back to the United States on recruiting duty. During the last part of the war he was employed in convoying trains from Vera Cruz-to the City ofSMexico.

The years after the Mexican war were spent largely on the frontier. In 1851 he "was commissioned captain of infantry, and served in the Utah Expe,dition (1858), and did much escort duty in protecting emigrants crossing the plains and in escorting Mormons to Califorina.

When Georgia seceded Captain McLaws immediately resigned and offered his services to the state. On May 10, 1861, he was commissioned major in the Confederate army. On June 17, 1861, he was promoted colonel of the Tenth Georgia Regiment; and on September 25, 1861, was promoted brigadiergeneral. He participated, in all the Maryland and Virginia campaigns, com manded a division at Gettysburg which was transferred to Georgia in Sep tember, 1863, and in the following year was placed in command of the Dis trict of Georgia to obstruct Sherman's march to the sea. After the war he returned to Georgia and entered the insurance business; in 1875 was appointed collector of internal revenue at Savannah, and later postmaster and post warden. He died at his home in that city in 1898.

FRANK H. COLLET. To have been for more than forty years continuously engaged in the practice of his profession at Washington, the judicial center of Wilkes County, stands to the credit of Judge Colley, whose character, ability and achievement have long given him precedence as one of the fore most members of the bar of Northeastern Georgia. His name is wfitten large on the annals of jurisprudence in this part of the state and he is consistently to be designated as the Nestor of the bar of Wilkes County, a man of strength, resourcefulness, loyalty, high attainments and impregnable integrity and a citizen whose influence has ever been given to the furtherance of those things that conserve the best interests of-the community and of society at

large.

GEORGIA AND GEORGIANS

2797

*

Judge Colley is a native of Georgia and is a scion of a family that was founded in this commonwealth of the Union more than a century and a

quarter ago. At La Grange, Troup County, Georgia, Judge frank H. Colley was born

on the 27th .of June, 1848, and he is a son of Henry F. and Isabella M. (Harris) Colley, both of whom were born and reared in Wilkes County, this state, the original representatives of the Colley family in Georgia having come to this state from Virginia in 1782.' Francis Colley, grandfather of him whose name initiates this review, was for many years a planter and influ ential citizen of Wilkes County, and with the same line of industrial enter

prise the maternal grandfather, Archibald Harris, was actively identified after his removal from Virginia to Georgia. The paternal great-grandfather

of Judge Colley was a patriot soldier in the war of the Revolution, and the subject of this sketch has in his possession 1<he sword carried by his maternal grandfather, Archibald Harris, in the War of 1812.

Henry F. Colley was reared and educated in Georgia, and had become a substantial planter and loyal and influential citizen of Wilkes County long

prior to the Civil war, the ravages of which brought to him much financial loss, as was the common portion of the citizens of the fair Southland. He promptly tendered his aid in defense of the Confederate cause when the war was precipitated and became captain of his company in Lawton's famous brigade. He sacrificed his life in battle, as he was killed in the engagement

at Games' Mill, V-irginia, on the 27th of June, 1862. Captain Colley was forty-one years of age at the time of his death and his name has enduring place on the perpetual roster of the gallant sons of the South who went forth

to battle in the cause of the Confederate States of America. The wife of Captain Colley survived him by many years and was summoned to eternal rest at the age of sixty-nine years. Of their seven children Judge Colley of this review is the eldest son and of the other children four are now living.

In his youth Judge Colley was afforded the advantages of the schools maintained in the fine little city that is now his place of residence, and in

1867 he was graduated in Mercer University, from, which he received the degree of Bachelor of Arts. In the closing period of the Civil war he had served about sis months as a youthful volunteer in the Confederate army, having become a member in the battalion commanded by Judge William

*Gibson, of Augusta. After the completion of his higher academic education Judge Colley con

tinued to give close attention to the study of law, under the effective preceptorship of Judge William Reece, of Washington, until he had proved himself eligible for and was admitted to the bar of his native state. This recognition came to him in 1872 and during the long intervening period of

more than forty years he has continued in the active and successful practice of his profession at Washington, retaining at all times a large and repre sentative clientage and having high reputation as a versatile and resourceful trial lawyer and as a counsellor of broad and accurate knowledge of the

science of jurisprudence. He is a charter member of the Georgia State Bar Association and one of the honored members of the Wilkes County Bar

Association. Judge Colley has given most timely and effective service as a staunch

advocate of the principles and policies of the democratic party, and he served three successive terms, 1874-9, as representative of Wilkes County in the lower house of the Georgia Legislature, besides which he represented his

district in the State Senate in 1884-5. He served one term as solicitor general of the Circuit Court and under the administration of Governor Terrell he was appointed judge of the City Court of Washington, though he resigned the office after a short time, to give his undivided attention to his large private law business. He is a member of the board of trustees of the

Vol. VI 2

2798

- GEORGIA AND GEORGIANS

public library of Washington and is affiliated with the time-honored Masonic fraternity.

In September, 1876, was solemnized the marriage of Judge Colley to Miss Kate Toombs, daughter of Gabriel Toombs, of "Washington, whose

stately old homestead at Washington is the present abiding place of Judge and Mrs. Colley. Judge and Mrs. Colley have four children. Misses Marian and Kathleen, both of whom remain at the parental home, were graduated in the Lucy Cobb Institute and they are popular figures in the representative social activities of their native city. Archibald Toombs Colley was gradu

ated in the United States Military Academy, at West Point, and is now serving as lieutenant of his company in a regiment of the United States Army station in the Philippine Islands. He wedded Miss Madaline Burgess and they have one child, Catherine. Carroll Dempsey Colley, the youngest of the children, was afforded the. advantages of the University of Georgia, there after studied law under the preceptorship of his father and of Judge William

Wynn, and he was admitted to the bar in 1910. He is now associated in practice with his father and is one of the representative and popular younger

members of the bar of Wilkes County. He married Miss Mida Wootten, of Washington, and they have one son, Frank H., who was born in April, 1915j, and who was named in honor of his paternal grandfather.

SAMUEL ALEXANDER, M. D. Medical examiner and a member of the staff

of surgeons connected with the Atlantic Coast Line Hospital at Waycross,

Dr. Samuel Alexander was born at Creswell, North Carolina, February 10,

1891, being the second in a family of five children born to M. M. and Sarah E.

(Woodley) Alexander. His parents were both born in North Carolina, and

his father was a merchant at Creswell until his death in 1905 at the age of

fifty-two. The mother is still living at the age of forty-two. The other four

children are Mrs. Mary Spruill, Miss Sarah, M. M. and W. A. Alexander, all

of them living at Creswell.

Doctor Alexander attended public school at Creswell, Trinity School and

the Trinity Park High School at Durham, continued his' studies in the

University of North Carolina for a year or so, and in 1913 graduated Doctor

of Medicine from the University of Maryland at Baltimore. He gained

valuable experience in the Woman's Hospital of Baltimore and in the James

Walker Memorial Hospital at Wilmington, North Carolina, before accepting

his present position with the Railway Hospital at Waycross. He has been

engaged in his present duties since February, 1914.

He is a member of the County, State and Eleventh District Medical Socie

ties and the American Medical Association. He also belongs to the college

fraternity Kappa Psi and the Theta Nu Epsilon. In politics he is a

democrat.

,

HEBEB J. MORTON, M. D. A physician and surgeon whose excellent attain

ments and definite skill have combined with a specially gracious personality to gain to him secure place as one of the representative members of his pro

fession in Burke County, Georgia, Doctor Morton is engaged in the practice of his profession at Waynesboro, the judicial- center of the county, where he

has a substantial and important clientage and is also definitely popular as a

cultured, progressive and public-spirited citizen. Dr. Heber Jones Morton takes merited satisfaction in adverting to the

historic Old Dominion State as the place of his nativity and to the fact that he is a scion of an old and honored family of that commonwealth. He was born at Keysville, Charlotte County, Virginia, on the 23d of August; 1884, and is a son of Jacob William Morton and Annie (Jones) Morton. The doctor was named in honor of his mother's brother, Dr. Heber Jones, who was a dis tinguished representative of the medical profession and who won special

GEORGIA AND GEORGIANS

2799

prominence and honor, for his effective service as president of the Memphis Board of Health during a severe epidemic of yellow fever in the City of Memphis, Tennessee, his faithful, unselfish and arduous work in behalf of the sufferers having gained to him the gratitude of the entire community, as shown by the fact *hat the citizens of Memphis later presented to him a splendid chest of silver, as a testimonial of appreciation and esteem.

Jacob W. Morton likewise was a native of Keysville, Virginia, and his wife was born in the State of Arkansas. For many ^ears he was an influential . citizen and prominent real estate broker at Keysville, and his sterling char acter and worthy achievement gave him .inviolable place in popular con fidence and good will. He was a valiant soldier of the Confederacy during the entire period of the Civil war up to the time of the Battle of Gettysburg, where he was wounded and incapacitated. He was prominently concerned with the civic and material progress and upbuilding of his native town after the close of the war, and there he continued to maintain his home until his death, in 1911, at the age of sixty-eight years, his cherished and devoted wife having passed away- in 1905 and both having been earnest communicants of the Protestant Episcopal Church. Mrs. Morton was a daughter of John Thompson Jones and Caroline (McEwen) Jones, who were residents of Lexa, Arkansas, at the time of their death. Jacob W. and Annie (Jones) Morton became the parents of five children, of whom three are living, Doctor Morton of this review having been the fourth in order of birth; Carrie is the wife of Charles A. Osborne, of Keysville, Virginia; and Lucy is the wife of Edward W. Hudgins, of Chose City, that state.

In the public schools of his native town Doctor. Morton continued his studies until he had completed the curriculum of the high school, and there after he was afforded the advantages of such admirable institutions, in turn, as the Hoge Military Academy, at Blackstone, Virginia, and fine old Hampden-Sidney College, that state, in which last mentioned institution he completed his specific literary education. In preparing himself for his exacting profes sion he was signally favored in being able to complete a thorough course in the medical department of the University of-Georgia, in which he was graduated as a member of the class of 1909 and from which he received his degree of Doctor of Medicine.

After his graduation from the medical school, which department of the uni versity is established at Augusta, Doctor Morton engaged in practice in that city, where he became associated with Dr. Thomas D. Coleman, one of the oldest and most influential physicians and surgeons of that section of the state. During the year of this alliance Doctor Morton was enabled to gain * valuable experience and to profit largely through the counsel and instruction of Doctor Coleman, who accorded him kindly consideration and assistance.

In 1910 Doctor Morton established his residence at Waynesborb, Burke County, where he has since continued his effective activities as a zealous and efficient representative of his profession and where he has built up a large and successful general practice, which extends into all parts of the county. He is local surgeon for the Savannah & Northwestern Railroad and is a valued member of the board of health of Waynesboro. The doctor continued an ambitious student of his profession and keeps in close touch with the advances made in medical and surgical science, both by recourse to the best standard and periodical literature pertaining thereto .and by individual research and investigation as well as through active affiliation with the Ameri can Medical Association, the Southern Medical Association, the Georgia State Medical Association and the Burke County Medical Society. He holds mem bership in the Alpha Kappa Kappa college fraternity^and as an under graduate he took specially active interest in athletic affairs in the various educational institutions which he attended. He was a member of the baseball and football teams and is still an enthusiast in athletics and outdoor sports,

2800

GEORGIA AND GEORGIANS

being specially fond of hunting and fishing, and enjoying the recreation that his automobile affords aside from its practical value in connection with his professional work. The doctor is a communicant of the Protestant Episcopal Church, and his wife holds membership in the Presbyterian Church, as does she also in the United Daughters of the Confederacy, both being popular and valued factors in the representative social activities of their home city.

On the 25th of September, 1907, was solemnized the marriage of Doctor Morton to Miss Mary L. Womack, who likewise was born at Keysville, Vir ginia, but who was reared in the fair old City of Richmond, that state, where her father, Frank Womack, is a representative business man,

HENRY REEVES. The profession of the law is a good test of a man's native ability and industry, for there is no other that requires stronger men tality or more settled habits of hard work and perseverance in order to attain even a reasonable success. One of its leading representatives in Troup County is the subject of this memoir, Henry Reeves, who is now serving as solicitor of the city courts of La Grange. Mr. Reeves was born in Meriwether County, Georgia, July 26, 1872, the son of Madison and Mary (Render) Reeves, both his parents being natives of that county. The father was a farmer by occu pation and during the war a Confederate soldier. He owned a large planta tion and conducted his farming operations on an extensive scale, being a well known and highly respected citizen. His death took place in 1904 when he had attained' the age of sixty-nine years. He had then been a widower for a number of years, his wife having passed away at the age- of forty-nine, December 20, 1886. She was the daughter of Robert L. and Elizabeth (Anderson) Render, natives of Wilkes County, Georgia, who settled in Meri wether County in the early forties, being among the early settlers in that county. Mr. Render was an extensive planter. To Madison and Mary (Render) Reeves six children were born, one of whom, Robert, died at the age of two- years. The others were: Wiley A., now engaged in the cotton warehouse business in La Grange; Walter T., a wholesale grocer and banker, of Tupelo, Mississippi; Madison, a prominent farmer and merchant of Tupelo, Mississippi; Henry, the subject of this sketch; and Elizabeth R., wife of J. F. Pope, of Wilsonville, Alabama.

Henry Reeves acquired his literary education in the country schools of Meriwether County and at Mercer University, being graduated in law in 1901. He then began the practice of his profession in La Grange and in a comparatively short time had built up a good clientele. In 1903 he was appointed by Governor Joseph M. Terrell solicitor of the city courts 6f La Grange and in the following year was elected to the same office, in which he has continued to serve up to the present time through successive re-elec tions. In May, 1916, he was elected mayor of La Grange, which office he now holds. He has a good general practice outside of the city courts and is one of the leading attorneys on the Coweta Circuit. In religion Mr. Reeves is a Baptist and is serving as superintendent of the Baptist Sunday School. His society affiliations are with the Masons, Knights of Pythias, Red Men and Odd Fellows. He is a member of the executive committee of the State Sunday School Association. As a citizen he is public spirited and is always ready to correspond with outside parties seeking information in regard to local condi tions. A man of gentlemanly instincts, educated and refined, he has a wide circle of friends who hold him in high esteem.

Mr. Reeves was married June 12, 1906, to Miss Susie Thomas, of Chambers County, Alabama, a daughter of E. Walton and Samantha (Stanley) Thomas, residents of Prattwlle, that state. He and his wife are the parents of three children: Elizabeth, born March 25, 1907, in La Grange; Henry R., Jr., born May 16, 1910, and Walton, born March 25, 1913. Mrs. Reeves is an

active member of the Methodist Church.

I

GEORGIA AND GEORGIANS

2801

JOHN SOUTHWELL TYSON. Late grand secretary of the -Grand Lodge of Georgia Independent Order of Odd Fellows, and grand scribe of the Encamp ment, John Southwell Tyson was of an old Georgia family whose ancestors came from North Carolina and settled in Effingham County, Georgia, many years prior to the Revolution. He was the eldest son of Thomas Tyson, whose wife was Miss Elvira Southwell, and he was born in Effingham County in 1835. Early in life he located at Savannah, Georgia.

When the war between the states occurred' he promptly volunteered and was commissioned a first lieutenant in siege of heavy artillery, serving as such at different forts and fortifications on the coast, and until he was detailed with the rank of major to look after the transportation of troops for the Confederate States toward the latter part of the war.

After the war he became prominent in railroad transportation service in Georgia, was master of transportation for the Atlantic and Gulf Railroad, which road was virtually demolished during the war and is now a part of the Atlantic Coast Line, one of the principal railways of the South. It was due in great part to his untiring work that the road became the valuable property it was twenty years later. On account of ill health, after more than twenty years' service he resigned his position. Later he became grand treasurer of the Grand Lodge of Independent Order Odd Fellows, of Georgia, and a few years afterward became grand secretary of the grand lodge of Georgia Odd Fellows, which position he held up to the time of his death. He died in Savannah, Georgia, February 11, 1910.

John S. Tyson married Miss Anna Rosa Thompson, a native of Augusta, Georgia. To their marriage were born six children: Charles M., William G., John S., Jr., Easton Y., M,rs. Caroline Tyson Thomson and Miss Anna R.

Tyson.

CHARLES M. TYSON, now serving as judge of the City Court of Darien, was born in Savannah, Georgia, July 7, 1862, and is the eldest son of the late John S. Tyson. As "a boy he attended the public schools of Savannah, and after graduating went to work with a cotton exporting firm. Later he took up the study of law in the office of the firm of Tompkins & Denmark, and finished his studies under the firm of Denmark & Adams.

After being admitted to the bar Judge Tyson located in Darien, Georgia, for the practice of law, his present home city. He has lived in Darien since 1885, with the exception of eight or nine years, when he lived at Sandersville, Georgia.

Judge Tyson married Miss Emma Lawson, of Sandersville, a daughter of William Hugh Lawson. Mr. Tyson died February 27, 1906. She was the mother of three children: William Southwell, who is now a junior at the University of Georgia, Rosa Lawson and Glenn Cheatham Tyson, who are attending the Darien High School.

Judge Tyson has represented Mclntosh County in the House of Repre sentatives of the Georgia Legislature, for several years assisted the late C. S. Nbrthen, secretary of the Georgia Senate, as one of the clerical force of the Senate, and in 1913 and 1914 was state senator -from the Second District. He was for many years connected with the state militia, serving with the Mclntosh Light Dragoons, the Georgia Hussars and the Washington Rifles, being captain of the last named for over eight years, and is now a retired captain of the National Guard of Georgia. For many years he has been a real factor in Darien's civic, commercial and industrial life. He is a past master of his Masonic Lodge, was county school commissioner for five years and a director and president of The Darien Bank, ice factory, electric light plant and the saw and planing mill at Darien.

JUDGE EUGENIUS A. NISBET was a native Georgian, born in Greene County, December 7,1803. He graduated from the University of Georgia before he was

2802

GEORGIA AND GEORGIANS

nineteen with the highest honors of his class and at once commenced to study law. His training included a course in the famous school of Litchfield, Con

necticut, and in 1823 he was admitted to practice by special act of the Legis lature, as he was not yet of age. He located at Madison, in the Ocmulgee Circuit, for many years the home of strong lawyers, and, notwithstanding his youthfulness soon obtained a large practice. Shortly afterward he was

sent to both houses of the State Legislature. In 1837 he moved to Macon and served two terms in Congress', commencing 1838 and 1840. While in Con

gress he learned that his firm had endorsed and become liable on a very large debt, which indeed for that day was an immense sum. He resigned from Congress, returned to Macon, secured the release of the junior member of the

firm, and paid the holder of the claim. But we are told that for twenty years the consequences of this strain upon him taxed his energies; and though he

accumulated a good estate, it was not until he was an old man that he was finally able to discharge the last cent of the debt contracted to pay the surety obligation.

In 1845 the Supreme Court of Georgia was created and Judge Nisbet was appointed one of its three members. He returned to the practice of the law in 1853. He was elected to the Provisional Congress of the Confederate

States in 1861, but declined because Of ill health. His last public service was as a delegate to the secession convention of January, 1861, and wa chairman of the committee which drafted the famous ordinance of secession. Judge Nisbet was the author of the first fourteen volumes of Georgia Reports, and

his decisions are frequently quoted as authority on the law, both in the United States and England. He died in March, 1871.

WILLIAM R. PHILLIPS, statesman, lawyer, and soldier, was a native of South Carolina, born during the year 1828. Soon after being admitted to practice, in 1850, he located at Marietta. During the year 1854 he was appointed solicitor-general of the Blue Ridge Circuit, holding this office until

1857. Soon after General Phillips had obtained the surrender of the Georgia

Arsenal from the Federal officers he was placed in command of the camp of

instruction, near Marietta, where thousands of Georgians were trained to meet the exigencies expected in the coming contest. Resigning this position he at once set himself to- organizing Phillips' Legion, which, when completed, consisted of fifteen companies of infantry, six of cavalry, and one of artillery. This command did good service throughout the war, first in West Virginia, then being transferred to Lee's army just before the seven days' fight around

Richmond. General Phillips' command was noted for many deeds of gal lantry on several occasions.

After the war General Phillips returned to Marietta and followed success fully the practice of his profession and farming for many years. His only subsequent public appearance was during the session of the Legislature, 1877-78, in which he had to deal with bankrupt railroads, and other legacies

of debt and mismanagement. He died about 1908.

J. ALFRED RASBURY. A man of distinctive enterprise and initiative ability, Mr. Rasbury has directed his energies most effectively in the domain of trade journalism, of which he has become a prominent and influential representa tive, with a record of admirable achievement and with a reputation that far transcends local limitations. He is now publisher and ma.naging editor of the trade periodical entitled Refrigeration (formerly "ICE"), a paper that was founded by him in J906 and which is an effective 'exponent of the ice-making and refrigerating industry and the only publication in the South .representing these lines of business enterprise. Under his effective management this trade journal of laconic title has been made notably successful as an exponent of

GEORGIA AND GEORGIANS

2803

the interests to which it is devoted, and has proved a valuable advertising vehicle, owing to its wide and constantly increasing circulation, so that it yields very appreciable financial returns to the progressive publisher, who is recognized as one of the progressive and essentially representative business men of the younger generation in the City of Atlanta.

John Alfred Rasbury claims the Lone Star State as the place of his nativity, but is a scion of old and honored families of prominence and in fluence in Georgia. He was born in the City of Lampasas, Texas, on the 14th of October, 1874, and is a son of Reuben L. and Nonnie L. (Brannon) Ras bury, both of whom were born and reared in Georgia, where their marriage was solemnized. The father was a gallant soldier of the Confederacy during the Civil war, in which he served as a member of the command of Gen. Wade Hampton. His father, John Rasbury, was a well known and influential citizen of Fulton. County, Georgia, for many years, prominent in public affairs and associated with business interests in Atlanta; he served as sheriff of Fulton County prior to the Civil war. Alfred Brannon, maternal grand father of him whose name introduces this review, was a leading cotton merchant at Columbus, Georgia, and was the owner and operator of the historic steam boat '' Nettie Quill,'' which ran the blockade of the Chattahoochee River during the war between the states of the North and the South, and thus succeeded in keeping the City of Columbus supplied with necessary provisions. The parents of Mr. Rasbury passed the closing years of their lives in Alabama and Georgia.

After due preliminary training in the public schools of Alabama, J. Alfred Rasbury was matriculated in the University of Alabama, in which he was graduated. The major part of his independent career has been marked by close identification with trade journalism. He was for some time editor and general manager of the widely known industrial magazine entitled Dixie and for a considerable period he was general manager of a cotton trade pub lication at Charlotte, North Carolina. Upon his return to Atlanta he founded the monthly publication, Practical Machinist, a paper devoted to the industry of machinery construction, the title of the publication later being changed to that of Southern Machinery, and in 1914 it was consolidated with the Tradesman ofChattanooga, Tennessee, where the joint publication has since been issued as The Iron-Tradesman, He was one of the organizers of the W. R. C. Smith Publishing Company, of Atlanta, of which he continued to serve as secretary until 1906, when he resigned this office and severed his connection with the company, this action having been taken that he might give his attention to the founding and management of his present publica tion, Refrigeration, which has become one of the most successful and influen tial of Southern trade journals, its offices being at 803 Walton Building.

On the 2d of June, 1898, was solemnized the marriage of Mr. Rasbury to Miss Clara F. Langley, of Anniston, Alabama, and their pleasant Atlanta home is situated in the attractive district known as West End Park.

B. R. TROTTER. Proof is not wanting but rather abundant, that neither wealth nor influence are necessary in America to reach an honorable and independent position in life, and also that success comes more readily when natural inclination is given its way. Thus the well known journalist and publisher, B. R. Trotter, editor and proprietor of the Advocate-Democrat, at Crawfordsville, Georgia, might have been disciplined into becoming a fair agriculturalist had he remained on the home farm, but it is reasonably certain that he would have been a discontented one because all his inclinations directed to an entirely different field of effort. Had he not followed these natural leadings, even with some hardships, Georgia would have lost one of its earnest, capable, influential newspaper men.

B. R. Trotter was born at Cleveland, Georgia, November 4, 1889, and is

2804

GEORGIA AND GEORGIANS

a son of B. and Jane (Reap) Trotter, the former of whom was born in Georgia in 1860 and the latter five years later. They are among the highly esteemed residents of Cleveland, the father formerly having been a well known farmer in White County. They have four children: 0. F., a resident of Atlanta, Georgia; B. R., of Crawfordsville; Mrs. Ernest Southard, of Decatur, Georgia; and Edward, of Cleveland, Georgia.

In boyhood, at different places in White County, including Cleveland and Mossy Creek, B. R. Trotter had educational advantages, attending for a time the high school at the latter point. He then entered the printing office of the Cleveland Courier as an apprentice and afterward worked in other offices, first at Washington, then at Tifton, later at Eatonton and again at Washing ton, all in Georgia, subsequently establishing himself as a resident of Lincolnton, Georgia, where he was very active in public affairs and in 1914 was elected mayor of the place. From there he came to Crawfordville and purchased the Advocate-Democrat, the only paper of the county. Under his able man agement and with his introduction of improved machinery in the plant, its old prestige has not only been revived but its circulation is growing right along. Mr. Trotter conducts his paper as a democratic journal and his able editorials leave no doubt as to his opinions on both world-wide and local affairs. He is a man of considerable substance, owning entirely his electrically operated plant as well as a handsome residence property.

On April 3, 1910, Mr. Trotter was united in marriage with Miss Ruby Dorsey, who is a daughter of W. H. Dorsey, her parents yet living in White County. Mr. and Mrs. Trotter have one child, Edith, who was born in Novem ber, 1914, at Lincolnton. Mr. Trotter is well known to members of the press in the state and his co-operation may always be counted on when movements are on foot looking toward further newspaper progress. Advertisers find his journal a. fine medium, one of the important features of his office being all modern equipments for this branch of the trade.

WALTER G. GREEN. A native son of Burke County and a scion of one of the oldest and most honored families of the county, Judge Walter Gresham Green is a cultured, broad-minded and public-spirited citizen whose sterling character and fine mental powers have gained to him unqualified popular approbation and have resulted in his being called upon to serve in various offices of distinctive public trust. Since 1909 he has been the valued and efficient incumbent of the office of ordinary of his native county, and his mature judgment, inflexible integrity and business sagacity have conspired to make his administration of probate affairs signally able and commendable. He is essentially an influential and representative citizen and is altogther worthy of special recognition in this history of his native state.

Walter Gresham Green was born on the homestead plantation of his father, about eight miles from Waynesboro, the county seat, and the date of his nativity was January 23, 1862. He is a son of Jesse P. and Mary Jane (Gresham) Green, both likewise natives of Burke County. Jesse P. Green was a son of Jesse P. Green, who was born in Burke County, as was also his wife. It was given to Jesse P. Green to become one of the most extensive landholders and slave-owners of Burke County, where he wielded large and benigant influence in community affairs until the time of his death, at an

advanced age. Edmond Byne Gresham and Sarah (Anderson) Gresham, the maternal

grandparents of Judge Green, likewise were residents of Burke County dur ing their entire lives, and thus it becomes evident that on both the paternal and maternal sides the subject of this review is a representative of very early pioneer families of the county. Edmond B. Gresham became possessed of a large landed estate, held a generous retinue of slaves, served as a mem-

GEORGIA AND GEORGIANS

2805

ber of the Georgia Legislature and was a prominent factor and a leader in political affairs in Burke County.

Jesse P. Green, father of Judge Green, was the younger of the two sons who attained to years of'maturity, and his brother, Moses Patterson Green, fully maintained the family prestige in the field of agricultural operations, having been the owner of. a large plantation and a force of slaves prior to the Civil war and having continued his activities in Burke County until his death, in 1870, at which time he was fifty years of age. Jesse P. Green was likewise an honored and influential citizen and representative planter of his native county, but his life was cut short when he was in the very prime of his young manhood. He died April 18, 1864, at Lake City, Florida, where he succumbed to an, attack of pneumonia, his age at the time of his demise having been twenty-four years. Of his three children Judge Green is the second; Clara, the third, died at the age of eight years; and Jesse P., the first born, is one of the prominent planters and highly honored citizens of Burke County, Judge Green himself never having severed his allegiance to the basic industry of agriculture and being still the owner arid operator of a fine planta tion which is eligibly situated in the immediate vicinity of Waynesboro, but he maintains his home at Waynesboro and, as a matter of course, his headquarters as a county official. Mrs. Mary Jane (Gresham) Green long sur vived the husband of her youth and eventually became the wife of Dr. Green B. Powell, who was one of the leading physicians and surgeons of Burke County at the time of his death, which occurred in Burke County, his widow surviving until she had attained to the age of sixty-six years, dying November 24, 1905. The only child of this union was Dr. Louis B. Powell, who was a talented physician and surgeon, who practiced his profession in both the cities' of Atlanta and Macon and who was a resident of Waynesboro at the time of his death.

Judge Green acquired his early education in the public schools of Waynes boro and after completing the curriculum of the high school he attended Mercer University, where he acquired his higher academic education. After leaving college he gave his close attention to the work and management of his homestead plantation until 1896, when he removed with his family to Waynesboro, where he has since maintained his home and where the people of the city and county have demanded much of his time and attention in the capacity of a public official. He has served as a member of the city council, as city treasurer, as a member of the board of trustees of Waynesboro Academy, and finally, since 1909, as ordinary of the county, a position in which he has been retained by successive re-elections three terms. He has been a recog nized counselor and leader in popular sentiment and action in his native county, and every trust reposed in him has been held inviolable. As ordinary of the county he has been instrumental in effecting the amicable settlement of many estates and in reconciling contesting heirs without recourse to litiga tion. Popular confidence in his fairness, his integrity and his judgment have

e him in his official capacity, as well as in his private relations, a resourcefactor in maintaining peace and good will among his fellow men and also in saving to many large expenditures that litigation would have involved. Thus it may readily be understood that as ordinary of the county he is em phatically the right man in the right place. Judge Green is affiliated with the Kappa Alpha college fraternity, and the Royal Arcanum, is a stalwart and effective advocate of the cause of the democratic party, and his abiding Christian faith is shown not only in his daily walk in life but also in his active service in the Methodist Episcopal Church, South, of which both he and his wife are devout members and in which he has served as steward for many years. In May, 1887, was solemnized the marriage of Judge Green to Miss Annie Lou Cox, who was born and reared in Burke County and who is a daughter

2806

GEORGIA AND GEORGIANS

of Patterson and Thcone Allona (Fulcher) Cox, who continued their resi dence in Burke County until their death. Judge and Mrs. Green became the parents of seven children, all of whom are living, namely: Hugh, Louise, Ruth, Walter Gresham, Jr., Julian Cox, Annie, and Theone Allona. The older son, Hugh, is engaged in mercantile business in his native county; Louise is the wife of William G. Johnsto'n, of Waynesboro; and the other children still remain members of the happy family circle in the parental home.

HON. A. J. CROVATT. A former judge of the Glynn County Court at Brunswick, Mr. Crovatt is now one of the oldest attorneys practising in the Brunswick Circuit. He has represented the interests of important litigants in this district for fully thirty-five years. His work has brought him a high standing- as a lawyer and as a public official and citizen 'he is one of the leading men of Southern Georgia.

Born at Charleston, South Carolina, June 2, 1859, he is a son of William and' Theatra (Williams) Crovatt. His parents were both born in South Carolina, and his. father was a Charleston business man. During the war he enlisted as a private in the Confederate army, and after the war he continued to live in South Carolina until 1869, when he removed to Brunswick, Georgia, which was his home until his death at the age of sixty-five. His wife died at Brooklyn, New York, in 1910, at the age of sixty-five.

The older of two children, Judge Crovatt as a boy attended the Tarrant Academy at Charleston, and also Charleston College. He finished the sopho more year in the latter institution and in 1880 was graduated from the Caro lina Military Institute, now the Citadel, at Charleston. He belongs to the chapter of the Sigina Alpha Epsilon fraternity of the Military Institute.

In the meantime he had already determined upon the law as his profession, and after study in the office of Andrew J. Smith of Brunswick he was adOrder of Elks, the Improved Order of Red Men and the Knights of Pythias, at Brunswick except when official duties prevented.

For nine years he has filled the important office of judge of the County Court of Glynn County and to his judicial office he brought a rare combina tion of sound legal learning and mature judgment. His first political office was as county solicitor, which he filled in 1882. He has also been mayor of Brunswick three'times, in 1884-85 and again in 1903. He was president of the Brunswick Board of Education, has served as chairman of the Democratic Executive Committee, is a former director of banks and other local enterprises, is counsel for the Jekyl Island Club and several railways, and is a member of the County, State and American Bar Associations. Fraternally his relations are with the Independent Order of Odd Fellows, the Benevolent and Protective Order of Elks, the Improved Order of Red Men and the Knights of Pythias. His church is the Episcopal.

In 1880 at Brunswick he married Miss Mary Lee Schlatter, daughter of Col. Charles L. Schlatter. Colonel Schlatter was a very prominent railroad man both in the North and in the South, and formerly served as chief engi neer and vice president of the Brunswick & Western, now part of the Atlantic Coast Line. Judge Crovatt and wife have two sons. William Cecil, born at Brunswick, a graduate of the public schools, finished his education in Emory College and is now a member of the United States Marine Corps. Alfred Hayne, the younger son, graduated from Emory College and Mercer Univer sity Law School in 1904, and is now in active practice at Brunswick, where he is serving as solicitor of the City Court. He is a member of the Sigma Alpha Epsilon college fraternity. There is also one daughter, Mary Lee Crovatt, who is graduated from the Lee School for Girls at Cambridge, Massa chusetts, and is now living in New York City.

JAMES A. STOTHART, M. D. In point of years of active service, Dr. James A. Stothart is one of the oldest physicians at Savannah. His boyhood was

GEORGIA AND GEORGIANS

2807

spent during the dark days of the Civil war, and a boy at the time he worked as a cotton mill hand and contributed his wages to the support of the family.

He also worked his way through college after the war. All his success can be credited to his indomitable energy and great ambition to make something of himself in the world. For years he has enjoyed a very enviable position in

his profession. * Born in Aiken, South Carolina, February 14, 1854, James A. Stothart

is a son of William and Lucinda (Lashley) Stothart, the former a native of

Scotland and the latter of North Carolina. William Stothart when a young man came to America and took up-contracting in North Carolina. He built

the State Capitol Building at Raleigh in that state and after fifteen years of business there removed to South Carolina and died in 1876 at the age of seventy-six. The mother passed away at Augusta, Georgia, at the age of

severity-five. There were ten sons in their family, among whom Dr. James was second, and the other five still living are: John H. Stothart of Augusta;

Edward W. Stothart of Savannah; P. N. Stothart of Milwaukee, Wisconsin; B. II. Stothart of South Carolina; and A. N. Stothart of Augusta, Georgia.

Dr.. James A. Siothart's early environment and circumstances have already been briefly suggested. He enjoyed a very limited attendance at local schools. Afterwards he attended an academy in South Carolina, and finally earned the

money necessary to put him through college preparatory to his work in the medical profession.

Throughout his career Doctor Stothart has never had any aspirations for

political office, but during his early manhood in South Carolina, in reconstruc tion days, he almost necessarily took an interest in the many serious problems involved in the politics of the time and rendered some conspicuous services

which call for special mention. The great aim of all the better class of white citizens at that time was to restore the control of the government to those people where it properly belonged. From 1868 to 1876 the state government

was under the control of the carpet baggers and negroes, and to rid the state

of that element required more than peaceable measures. The elections were completely managed and controlled by the colored race backed by men like R. K. Scott, Frank J. Moses and D. H. Chamberlain as governors. Even the

state military was composed largely of negroes with carpet bag white officers. The white voters had no show at the ballot box and were often driven from the polls by armed negroes. Arms were furnished these negroes by the carpet bag governors above mentioned.

In 1874 Doctor Stothart who was then a young man of twentyyears, helped organize a military company in Aiken County where he resided, and during the first two years served as its first lieutenant. This company was known as the Graniteville Rifle Company. It rendered valuable service both to the

county and state during the radical administration under negro domination. Prior to 1876 many negro military associations existed in South Carolina, and these all drew their supplies of arms from the carpet bag state government.

Under such auspices depredations and crimes of all kinds were committed and there was no recourse because the state officials were composed of corrupt republican carpet baggers from the North. It was to counteract this wave of violence over the state that military companies were formed in every county, their members being recruited from the better class of whites.

During Doctor Stothart's connection with the Graniteville Rifles that

organization was called out to patrol the towns for days and nights together to prevent destruction of property