Full text of "The Relief Society magazine : organ of the Relief Society of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints"

See other formats

s^Z? Reliefsociety^ magazine i Vol. XIII JANUARY, 1926 No. 1 CONTENTS Greeting of the Year Grace Ingles Frost 1 Portrait of Annie D. Palmer, Winner of First Prize, E. R. Snow Memorial Contest 2 Where Hollyhocks Grew Annie D. Palmer 3 Maud Chegwidden, Winner of Second Prize, E. R. Snow, Memorial Contest 4 Nativity Maud Chegwidden 5 Letter to Prest. Clarissa S. Williams and the Gen- eral Board May Booth Talmage 6 Editorial— Bells 17 Adult Education and the Relief Society 18 Where the Relief Society Goes 18 Eliza R. Snow Memorial Contest 19 Father Interferes Elizabeth Cannon Porter 20 Development of Present Interest in Nutrition Jean Cox 23 George Bernard Shaw Alice Louise Reynolds 29 Of Interest to Women Lalene H. Hart 31 Sunday School Song-Writing Contest 34 Notes from the Field Amy Brown Lyman 35 Guide Lessons for March 41 Conventions and Conferences 55 Organ of the Relief Society of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints Room 20 Bishop's Bldg. Salt Lake City, Utah $1.00 a Year— Single Copy, 10c. Canada and Foreign, $1.25 a Year — 15c Single Copy Entered as second-class matter at the Post Office, Salt Lake City, Utah MRU a* -'N For our success we are indebted to our friends Bennett Glass & Paint Co. 65 West First South ft PHO*E WAS. 1273 ICE CREAM 1 CANDY- CAKE PUNCHES deliciously different Call Your Nearest KEELEY Dealer For Our 30c or 50c Special Brick GO VIA SAN FRANCISCO TO LOS ANGELES AND RETURN, IT COSTS NO MORE TO SEE ALL OF CALIFORNIA 52 IN ONE COMPLETE TRIP VIA $C^50 Southcrn Pacific Lines THREE TRAINS DAILY FROM SALT LAKE CITY AND OGDEN PROPORTIONATELY LOW FARE FROM ALL OTHER POINTS IN UTAH, IDAHO AND MONTANA STOPOVERS ALLOWED AT ALL POINTS. TICKETS ON SALE DAILY. For Complete Information, Tickets and Reservations, Call Phone or Write. P. BANCROFT, General Agent. 41 South Main Street. Wasatch 3008 Wasatch 3078. !* Temple and Burial Clothes COMPLETE SUITS FOR MEN AND WOMEN Variety of Grades and Prices Prompt and Careful Attention To Mail — Telephone — Telegraph Orders Open Daily, 9 a. m. — 5 p. m. General Board Relief Society Phone Wasatch 3286 23 Bishop's Building Salt Lake City, Utah When Buying Mention Relief Society Magazine =N An OVERALL with a Classy Appearance MOUNTAINEER IKS? OVERALLS GUARANTEED FOR QUALITY FIT AND SERVICE A clean, neat appearing garmen for the Store Clerk, the Flom Mill Operator, the Dairyman, the Garage man, the Teamster. None Too Large None Too Small S Mothers, do you know that ™ the best leather soles will wear three times longer than poor ones? They are water proof too. You just try the Royal Shoe Repairing Co. V \ and see 38 So. Main Street, Salt Lake City "Parcel post a specialty *♦..«> BUILDING LOANS At advantageous interest rates. \ Build a . ^Uttttr'Xomt ' iVe'll Jinanctyoa Ashton-jfenkuig €k 32 Vtain. Street ivomtrh 123 Sou (pk» City When Buying Mention Relief Society Magazine -^ Mothers: Save the time of bread baking by buying this new uniformly baked loaf of (L You could not bake a loaf at home like this at such little cost. 10c At Your Grocers Royal Baking Company =y r -\ All Up-To-Date Libraries Both Public and Private Contain Bound Volumes of the RELIEF SOCIETY MAGAZINE Following are the bound volumes we have for sale: Vol. Vol. Vol. Vol. Vol. Vol. Vol. 8 Vol. 9 Vol. 10 Vol. 11 Vol. 12 1915, Leather and Cloth Bound. 1916, Leather and Cloth Bound. 1917, Leather and Cloth Bound. 1918, Leather Bound Only. 1919, Leather and Cloth Bound. 1920, Leather and Cloth Bound. 1921, Leather Only. 1922, Leather Only. 1923, Leather and Cloth Bound. 1924, Leather and Cloth Bound. 1925, Leather and Cloth Bound. Prices Per Volume, Leather, $3.50; Cloth, $2.75 Postage Extra, 15c Per Volume RELIEF SOCIETY MAGAZINE 20 Bishop's Bldg. Telephone 3123 Salt Lake City V; When Buying Mention Relief Society Magazine Books for Mothers and Their Children Any book you wish on any phase of home making, we can supply you. Books for the leisure hours of children is our specialty. State the age and reading preference, and request us to send a list of titles. DESERET BOOK COMPANY 44 East South Temple Salt Lake City Resolve — ^ To Cook Electrically In 1926 ii crv No Smoke No Soot (3> i E&S&3&&3&&: No Ashes No Fumes UTAH POWER S- LIGHT CO. Efficient Public Service To Our Patrons and Friends — All those who have not yet subscribed to the Relief Society Magazine, we urge to do so that they may have the full volume for the year 1925. When Buying Mention Relief Society Magazine !^ ^ Ask for one of our folders describing the different services we offer. LAUNDRY Hyland 190 Distinctive Work Office 319 S. Main St. INDIVIDUAL SACRAMENT SETS NOW IN STOCK Best in the Market Will Last a Life Time, 36 Glasses in Each Tray RECOMMENDED BY PATRONS. REFERENCES FURNISHED. Made especially for L. D. S. Churches, and successfully used in Utah and intermountain re- gion, also in all Missions in the United States, Europe, and Pa- cific Islands. Basic metal, Nickle Silver, heavily plated with Solid Silver. SIMPLE, SANITARY. DURABLE Satisfaction guaranteed. Inquiries cheerfully answered. Bureau of Information Temple Block Salt Lake City THE HALL MARK OF PURITY Learn to associate Young Samson's smiling, healthy face with Clover Leaf milk. He is a symbol of its purity and of our Responsibility. CLOVER LEAF DAIRY 159 W. 1st So. Wasatch 2177 To Our Magazine Subscribers We call your attention to the very high class firms who advertise in the Magazine, and ask, Whenever possible, to give them your loyal support and patronage. Also kindly mention having read their advertisement in the Magazine. We hope by your assistance to prove our value as a medium through which to advertise. Magazine Management When Buying Mention Relief Sccictv Magazine GREETING OF THE YEAR By Grace Ingles Frost I bring you happiness. Will you not receive it? Will you not tune your heart and mind to harmonize With God's great, universal law of service, That you the greatness of my gift may realize? The soul unkind, the idle hand will grasp it; To have and hold it, man must ever be One with the will Divine, in thought transcending The grovelings of his own mortality. WHERE HOLLYHOCKS GREW Mrs. Annie D. Palmer, Provo, Utah, Awarded First Prize in the Eliza R. Snow Memorial Contest. By a little brown cottage, quaint and low, Grew the hollyhocks in a crowded row, Red, pink, and white, on stalks so tall They could look right over the garden wall — Right over where Billy and Joe and Ned Played mumblepeg in a clover bed. They could beckon too, As flowers do, Till the Laddies came for a nearer view. There were six of us in the old brown nest, Freckled and plain, and quaintly dressed; But rich in our mother's endless store Of game and fable and make-believe lore. We peopled the earth with pebbles or blocks, Or "grand folks" made of hollyhocks. And day by day, They came that way, The neighbor urchins, to learn our play. Of things indoors, it seems as though There was nothing bright but the lamplight glow That formed a halo 'round her head, When, folding her hands our mother said: "The Lord is good. Let us kneel in prayer, And thank him for his tender care." Oh, mother mine, Such prayers as thine Are the prayers that reach the throne divine! Her way was ours. In happy play We lived in castles grand and gay. We journeyed far; we sailed the seas; We sang with birds, buzzed with the bees; We danced and feasted in gorgeous: halls, In our mimic world with hollyhock dolts. And in a row, With heads bowed low, We prayed her prayer devout and slow. The cot has fallen to decay, Ned, Billy, and Joe are far away; White the five of us who on earth remain, Are matrons now, stilt freckled and plain. Forgotten is much of the childhood tore, But I love the hollyhocks more and more, For the summer air, Of the blossoms fair, Seems filled with love and my mother's prayer. NATIVITY Mrs. Maua Cheqwidden. Murrau. Utah. Awarded Second Prize in the Eliza R. Snow Memorial Contest. I never knew what pain could be Before this hour; I could not guess This bitter, blinding agony, This breathless fight, this black distress. How can I bear it? Welcome death Would be — but no, I cannot die; I can but suffer, while my breath Comes faster and the dark draws nigh. Oh Mary Mother, now I know The agony that tore thee so! I never knew what love could be Until from out the mists of pain I heard that cry. Such ecstacy, Such joy then flooded heart and brain! A thousand torments now are nought; No more is pain, no more is grief. This miracle that love has wrought Brings love again beyond belief. Oh Mary Mother, was it thus The Christ Child held thee rapturous? THE Relief Society Magazine Vol. XIII JANUARY, 1926 No. 1 Letter to Prest. Clarissa S. Williams and the General Board From May Booth Talmage, President of the Relief Societies of the European Mission October 9, 1925. Dear Sister Williams and Members of the Poard: While reading in the Relief Society Magazine a report of your recent conference, it seemed as if the year since last? I saw you had been swept away, and that I was back in the dear old Assembly Hall listening to your voices and drinking in ,the inspiration of the occasion. How our magazines and newspapers do bridge the distance between us! (If one only forgets to look at the dates.) I am frequently asked : "What are your impressions of Eng- land?" Sir A. Conan Doyle said, when in Salt Lake City, that "A man should travel before he writes a book." He might well have added "and live among a people before attempting to give impressions." Had this letter been written within a month after arriving, there might have been later an apology or explanation due. Even now I feel great need of caution in expressing myself, lest more time and a clearer understanding may change my point of view. Take the weather as an illustration. During the first few months it rained almost every day and one was never safe to venture forth, without an umbrella, no matter how bright the morning's outlook. We were told that this condition had prevailed for a year or more so we concluded there could be no really fine weather in Liverpool. The months of May, June, and July, how- ever, were simply glorious, with not more than half a dozen uncomfortably hot days and almost no stormy ones. It was especially interesting to me to note the attitude of people during the gloomy periods. One seldom heard a com- plaint or even a remark about it. The people simply dress for the LETTER TO GENERAL BOARD 7 occasion — stout shoes (or boots as they call them), rain coats and umbrellas; and thus equipped they sally forth to work, or to places of amusement, or to church, as a matter of course- We have had as large an attendance at meetings, when members came through a downpour, as when the weather was fair. But the sunny days were the subject of universal comment. On the street cars or in the shops or anywhere one listened to the refrain, "Isn't it lovely today?" T admire this philosophical attitude very much. It is appar- A TYPICAL DEVON LANE ent in many phases of life, especially along the line of one's employment. If such be of an unpleasant character, well, it must be done, so why complain ? — rather be thankful that one has work in a land where unemployment is a vital problem. (Three millions of men were reported idle last winter.) But when a holiday comes ! From the Premier down, the English people are out to enjoy it. The expression is often quoted that "an Englishman's home is his castle," but one must have really seen the castles with their 8 RELIEF SOCIETY MAGAZINE walls and fortifications before one can understand the significance of the high brick walls that surround so many English homes. At first they seem rather forbidding, especially to a person who is accustomed to seeing no partitions save lawns or flowers or hedges, but he later comes to feel that these enclosures are built thus, not because the owner desires to exclude his friends, but because he loves the privacy and retirement thus afforded. One is apt at first to criticize also the crooked streets, the names of which change without warning and prove so baffling TORQUARY, GIVING A GLIMPSE OF THE BAY, SOUTHERN ENGLAND to the uninitiated. But when the spring comes and the hawthorn blooms, when the leafy boughs overhead form a delicate green tracery against the blue of heaven, these crooked ways become "The Green Lanes of England," luring one on and on with a keen curiosity to see what added charm will be unfolded just beyond the bend. The quiet beauty of the landscape as one trav- els in the open country, the low velvety-green, rolling hills, the LETTER TO GENERAL BOARD 9 magnificent old beech and elm and oak trees with their moss and lichen-covered trunks are a constant source of inspiration. The road between Liverpool and Stratford-on-Avon in the time of the Rhododendron defies description. These lovely flow- ers that we see in florists' windows at home, grow here as tall as lilac trees and transform the parks into masses of purple glory. We were very glad the trips to our conferences took us along such pleasant roads. We admire intensely all this natural beauty, also the wonder- ful art treasures found in the galleries and museums and the costly monuments found everywhere, but we are led to wonder if these are in any sense a compensation for the contrasting pictures one is forced to look upon. We have read and heard much of the "slum districts" and "the children of the slums," but in my visits to the large cities of America it has never come to my experience to visit these dis- tricts ; therefore, I have for comparison only the cities of the Latter-day Saints, and so I say in all truth that my imagination had failed to grasp the meaning of the terms. I .have seen more evidences of real poverty and destitution — 'more crippled children (and grown up people, too), during the past year than in all my life before- It makes one long for the power to change or lift the burden from these lives. Of course, among our members Relief Societies are a source of great encouragement and uplift. The courage shown and effort put forth by our sisters here under circum- s'ances seldom found at home are indeed wonderful. Since arriving it has been my privilege to visit all the fifteen conferences of the British mission, which, of course, include those in England, Scotland, Ireland and Wales. But in addition to this it has been my opportunity to visit the Branch Relief Societies in Birkenhead, Halifax, Hucknall, Derby, Glasgow, Belfast, Liver- pool, London and Lowestoft, and also a district conference in Manchester to which came the officers of all the branches in that conference save one. These latter visits have really given me a much clearer idea as to the manner in which our Societies do their work than I gained from the reports given at the conferences. The conditions — social, educational, and spiritual — vary so in the different branches and conferences that one is safe only in making one generalization — i. e., that in the main the sisters are all putting forth heroic efforts to meet the problems that face them, and whether the societies have a membership of three, as in our smallest branch, or thirty, as in some of the large branches, we find a spirit of earnest desire to carry the work on in the best manner possible and also a sincere appreciation for the gospel and the blessings that have come through its teachings. 10 RELIEF SOCIETY MAGAZINE Our Trip on the Continent Again we are in Liverpool after a seven weeks visit to the conferences on the Continent, and what an illuminating experi- ence it has been ! One may read of a country, study its geography and topography, listen to lectures, both illustrated and otherwise, concerning it, and even see its scenery and people depicted at the "movies," yet find one's self confronted daily by delightful sur- prises when the actual experience of a personal visit is afforded. From our missionaries and from friends who had traveled, as well as from the official reports that are sent in at stated inter- vals, we had learned of the great revival of interest in the gospel that is being shown on the Continent, but words and figures do not half tell the story. One must feel the spirit of it all before he understands. But how can one hope to convey in a single article any idea of even all the really important events of a two months' trip when each day was crowded with things worth more than passir#^ notice ? The outstanding" occasion was, of course, the great confer- ence at Chemnitz at which the Swiss-German mission was di- vided, but there were other conferences held in Breslau, Hamburg, Stuttgart, Zurich and Amsterdam, as well as a Relief Society convention in Berlin, and special meetings in Dresden, Hannover, Brounswig, Uelsen, Nurnberg, Munich, Basel, Interlaken, Frank- furt and Cologne. The attendance at the conferences ranged from four hundred to more than fourteen hundred while that in the branches was between seventy and three hundred. In each place visi'ed we were overwhelmed by the warmth of welcome and the generous hos- pitality we received. How can we ever express our appreciation to the elders who were at the trains to bid us welcome, to carry our suit cases, to show us places of interest when we were not engaged in holding meetings, to take us to the trains and wave adieus until we were out of sight? Could we follow the dictates of our hearts, there would be personal letters written to hundreds of mothers to congratulate them on the possession of such manly sons — sons who are giving earnest, devoted service without measure and whose sincere testi- mony oftimes filled our eyes with tears of joy. May we hope that each mother will take this as a personal tribute to her son. How can we ever repay the many dear sisters at whose tables we enjoyed such delicious meals, and who gave a warmth of wel- come that permeated the very atmosphere? How can we convey our loving gratitude to the sweet little maidens who came to us in almost every conference with such quaint ancl charming curtsies, and filled our arms with fragrant LETTER TO GENERAL BOARD 11 blossoms or other gifts, and welcomed us in language that at least our hearts found no difficulty in comprehending? How thankful we are that the language of flowers and music and loving welcome need no interpreters, since these were given to us without stint in so many tongues. In response to an urgent wire from President Tadje, Presi- dent Talmage, our young son John and I, left Liverpool on Aug- ust 13 and went direct to Breslau instead of going by way of Basel as had been planned- The journey across Holland and Ger- many was full of interest. The far-famed wind-mills, the neat substantial homes, with their bright red roofs, the well kept gardens — always a mixture of vegetables and brilliant colored flowers — the lovely groves and prosperous fields, were seen in quick succession from the time we left Rotterdam in early morn- ing until we reached Berlin, some ten hours later. There were no uncultivated stretches — no barren wastes — only scenes of quiet, pleasant beauty ; with but one thing to mar. Women were out in great numbers doing the work of men; raking or pitching hay, driving teams, picking potatoes and even working on the stacks, and threshing grain. It seemed to us that women who must bear and rear families would find this added burden rather heavy. Even in the large cities on the Continent the sight of women carry- ing large baskets of produce, vegetables, laundry or wood upon their backs is all too common. But this is said in passing. We rested over night in Berlin, then were taken by President Browning of Ogden for a few hours sight-seeing before proceed- ing to Breslau. Of course we walked "Unter den Linden/' went through the Schloss, the Palace of the former kaiser, in which structure also are seen the rooms occupied by Frederick the Great, just as he used them. We had many thoughts as we pictured the pomp and ceremony and brilliancy of the State functions held within those walls and realized how great the change ! Breslau is well nigh on the borderland of Poland. Before the war it was part of the Dresden conference, and this happened to be the first time in its history that a President of the European missions had been present since the Breslau conference was organ- ized, also it was my first experience attending a conference in a foreign country. President Victor Taylor of Provo was in charge and excellent preparations had been made to make it the success it proved to be. We were here joined by President Tadje and at the opening session were amazed to find an audience of seven hundred people. Three sessions were held on Sunday, as was the case at all. the conferences, and in each place the program for the Sunday School was planned with as much care and carried out as sucessfully as we find in our most up-to-date stakes at home. We were very thankful for even the meager knowledge of the language learned 12 RELIEF SOCIETY MAGAZINE in the classes of dear Brother Maeser at the Brigham Young Academy, which enabled one at least to follow the thread of the theme. On Monday evening we had our first opportunity of attend- ing Relief Society meeting. There are three branches in Breslau and we found them to be taking the lessons as prescribed. Along the line of their material efforts, the amount and excellence also amazed us greatly. We had the pleasure of visiting two of the Relief Societies in Breslau, one a work and business meeting, the other when a lesson was in progress, and found efficient hand work being done in the one, and in the other a very able presenta- tion and intelligent discussion of the lesson, which was participated in by nearly every sister present- The same interest and evidence of efficiency were manifest in the societies in Dresden, Berlin, Basel, and in fact wherever we had the opportunity of visiting. On the last evening of our stay in Breslau the Relief Society sisters of all three branches tendered a reception to the visitors which was attended by fully two hundred and fifty people. Hundreds of articles were on dis- play that had been made during the year to present to the mem- bers of the Branch at Christmas time. The sisters certainly are to be highly commended for their unselfish devotion both in the cause of Relief Society work and in their attitude toward the elders. They try to show their appre- ciation for the blessings that have come to them through the gospel by looking after the needs of these young men, inviting them to meals, mending their clothing, etc., and as far as possible taking the place of the mothers who are so far away. As a result of thus carrying out the admonition of the Master, much joy is experienced among our members. From Breslau we went to Dresden and spent a few days at the comfortable Mission home with President Tadje and family who were just getting settled. They had moved up from Basel less than two weeks before. President and Sister Hugh J. Cannon were guests at the home, also Brother Jean Wunderlich, who acted as official interpreter for us throughout the trip and to whom our grateful thanks are due. While Presidents Talmage, Tadje and Cannon were working out the details for the division of the mission, we had an oppor- tunity to visit a few places of historic interest. The Dresden Art Gallery is reputed to be one of the best three in the world. Scores of the original paintings by] the old masters are found here but the one around which the greatest interest centers is Raphael's famous Sistine Madonna. It hung in a room all by itself and it veritably baffles description. Another experience of unusual interest was the baptismal service held on the banks of the river Elbe, near the place where THE SISTINE MADONNA CHILDHOOD HOME OF KARL G. MAESER Brother Karl G. Maeser was baptized. About a hundred mem- bers gathered in the evening and eight others were added to our number through complying with the ordinance of baptism. The scene was deeply impressive- The lights from the opposite shore, from the bridge, and from a beautifully illuminated boat that glided silently along, were mirrored in the river. These with the music of our hymns and the spirit that prevaded the occasion com- bined to make an impression that is enshrined among my choicest heart memories. We went to visit Meisen, the birthplace of Utah's Great Edu- cator, and through the factory at that place where the famous Dresden China is wrought, but an account of this deserves a spe- cial article so we shall hasten on to Chemnitz. On Sunday, Aug- ust 23, the great mission was divided. Brother DeMar Anderson was in charge of the arrangements for the conference. A vast audience of 1400 people assembled in the Hohenzollern Hall and more than fifty elders were in attendance, some having come from distant conferences. President and Sister Charles S. Hyde of the Netherlands mission had joined us there and thus were four mis- sion presidents with their wives convened for the first time at any conference of our Church in Europe. The mission was divided with a line running north and south. The eastern section being designated as the German-Austrian mission while the western portion retained the former name, Swiss- German mission. President Fred Tadje, who has so ably pre- sided over the combined field for more than two years was made President of the German-Austrian mission and Sister Eliza Tadje LETTER TO GENERAL BOARD 15 sustained as the President of the Relief Societies. As head of the Swiss-German mission, President Hugh J. Cannon was sustained", and Sister Sarah Richards Cannon given charge of Relief Society work." President Cannon came to the field rich in experience also, he having served as President of the German mission when it was alone, also he presided for several years over the Swiss- German mission after the two were combined. The occasion was full of interest from the beginning. In addition to the conference meetings proper, meetings were held which were devoted specifically to the special needs of Mutual Improvement work, to that of the Sunday School and of the Relief Society, and a wonderful manifestation of spiritual uplift was experienced. It was indeed an epoch-making event in the history of Germany. An account of the special Relief Society meeting held in Dresden, where reports were given by the presi- dents of these Societies as to conditions in the different missions, and where plans were discussed for the year's work, will be sent to the department of "Notes from the Field" as will also a few other items that belong specifically to that department. From Dresden we went to attend the Hamburg conference stopping enroute to hold meetings at Hannover, Brounswig and Uelsen. We were accompanied to the two last named places by President Llewellyn McKay of the Hannover conference and we were overwhelmed by the warmth of welcome extended and were delightfully surprised to see the wonderful progress the Church is making in these small districts. Uelsen is unique in the fact that our fifty members there have been brought into the Church through the efforts of friends. No elder has ever labored in that branch. One young man be- came converted elsewhere, went back and gave his message to his friends and they to their friends. We were told by the president that the branch was like one united family and all working earn- estly to spread the gospel message. They had induced thirty-nine non-members to come to the meeting, although the adult mem- bership of the Church there numbers but thirty. Of these, sixteen formed a splendid choir. The conference at Hamburg, on August 30, was quite on a par with any we attended. Brother Wells C. Bowen was the able conference president. A distinguishing feature was the rendition by the combined choirs of "The Vision" and "The Martyrs" in such a manner as would have brought joy to their composer — Brother Evan Stephens. A fine hot dinner was brought in and served by the sisters of the Relief Society to more than fifty elders and visitors, during a recess taken in the eight-hour mis- sionary mee'ing held on Monday. It was prepared away from the hall and was no small undertaking. It was the only time on our trip that we had the pleasure of sitting at the table with all 16 RELIEF SOCIETY MAGAZINE the elders of the conference, and their presence as well as the dinner was indeed greatly appreciated. We bade adieu to many of these large beautiful cities with just a tinge of regret because our limited time did not permit us to visit their places of interest, but while our missionary work was always of first importance we did appreciate the occasions of sight-seeing that sometimes came between appointments. President and Sister Cannon and Brother Wunderlich went on from Hamburg to their home in Basel. We left Hamburg for Berlin and attended meetings of the Improvement Association in three of the six branches, on Tuesday, also Wednesday and Thursday nights- These were in a flourishing condition, the de- tails will, however, be sent to our Mutual magazine. On Sunday Sept. 6, the Relief Society convention was held. It was on this occasion that I felt the greatest handicap through the difference in our languages. I longed for an understanding of the reports that were made so that I migh't give constructive criticism and intelligent help, but President and Sister Tadje are in close touch with all phases of the work and were well prepared to convey all necessary instructions a't the officers meetings. A fine spirit prevailed throughout all the gatherings, however, and the music was of an exceptionally high order. President Brown- ing and all his elders had put forth very great efforts to bring the people together, this being a special occasion and not the regular Berlin conference which was scheduled for a date three weeks later. We were pleasantly surprised at the afternoon session to find Professor and Mrs. Beal present. They were enroute from Heidle- berg to Scandinavia. A visit to the magnificent Palace at Potsdam with its wealth of art-treasures and its wonderful gardens ; a trip to Charlotten- berg, with a never-to-be-forgotten impression of the last resting place of Germany's adored Queen Louise; a night at the Berlin Opera House, where a marvelous rendition of Wagner's "Tan- hauser" stirred my soul to its depths, were among the most appre- ciated events in Berlin aside from those connected with our work. From Berlin we accompanied President and Sister Tadje back to Dresden and spent the night. This concluded our visit to the German- Austrian mission and we left on August 8, to join President Cannon in Nurrmerg and begin our work among the people over whom he presides, and concerning which another article must tell. We left the one with feelings of deep admiration for the splendid condition of the work as we found it, of sincere appre- ciation for all the favors shown and warm friendships found, and left our blessings with all our members there and especially those who had contributed so much to the pleasure of our visit. THE RELIEF SOCIETY OF THE CHURCH OF JESUS CHRIST OF LATTER-DAY SAINTS Motto— Charity Never Faileth THE GENERAL BOARD MRS. CLARISSA SMITH WILLIAMS President MRS. JENNIE BRIMHALL KNIGHT .... First Counselor MRS. LOUISE YATES ROBISON .... Second Counselor MRS. AMY BROWN LYMAN - - - General Secretary and Treasurer Mrs. Emma A. Empey Mrs. Lotta Paul Baxter Mrs. Ethel Reynolds Smith Mrs. Jeanette A. Hyde Mrs. Julia A. Child Mrs. Barbara Howell Richards Miss Sarah M. McLelland Mrs. Cora L. Bennion- Mrs. Rosannah C. Irvine Mrs. Annie Wells Cannon Mrs. Julia A. F. Lund Miss Alice Louise Reynolds Mrs. Lalene H. Hart Mr. Amy Whipple Evans Mrs. Nettie D. Bradford Mrs. Elise B. Alder Mrs. Lizzie Thomas Edward, Music Director Miss Edna Coray, Organist RELIEF SOCIETY MAGAZINE Magazine entered as second-class matter at the Post Office, Salt Lake City, Utah Editor ........ Clarissa Smith Williams Associate Editor ...... Alice Louise Reynolds Assistant Manager - - - - - Amy Brown Lyman Room 28, Bishop's Building, Salt Lake City, Utah * — i» Vol. XIII JANUARY, 1926 No. 1 EDITORIAL Bells "Ring out the old, ring in the new." In thousands of cities in the civilized world the New Year will be ushered in with the chime of bells. Bells have come to be very significant in our lives. They beckon forth tens of thou- sands of people to Church every Sabbath day, and college youths and maidens daily to recitations in the many Universities of our land. Bells often announce a wedding, and in extraordiary cases a birth ; and there have been times when they have tolled the passing of a soul. Seven years ago, they were used over much of the world to announce the signing of the Armistice. They have been put to new uses in recent years. A few weeks ago the people of Utah heard the ringing of the famous old London bell known as "Big Ben," transmitted over the radio from California. It was five o'clock when it struck, those who listened heard the five strokes distinctly. Judging from the applause following the striking many people heard it in the state of California. The New Year's vacation was ushered in by the sound of the Liberty Bell, in Independence Hall, sent from broad- casting stations all over the nation. There is in Geneva, a replica 18 RELIEF SOCIETY MAGAZINE of the Liberty Bell that interests American visitors, since it is a gift from America to that city. It was used to call to order the first session of the League of Nations. Adult Education and the Relief Society During the late sessions of the Utah Educational Association the organization was addressed by Dr. L. J. Richardson, director of the Extension Division of the University of California, whose theme was ''Adult Education." After describing the very effi- cient manner in which Denmark educates the adults of her nation, he discussed the agencies in the United States that are contribut- ing to the education of Adults. He mentioned, in particular, among women's organizations, the Federated Clubs and the League of Women Voters. Had Dr. Richardson been acquainted with the work of the Relief Society we feel sure he would have included it also, for the Relief Society has been putting over an intensive program for the education of the adult women in the Church for a goodly number of years. That the work is being taken up with vim and interest is supported by numerous reports that reach the office. Among the latest is that of Miss Johanna Sprague, head librarian of the Salt Lake City Public Library, who has been doing everything in her power to accommodate the many Relief Society workers who go there for books to assist them in the preparation of their lessons. She says no library could meet the demands made upon it by Relief Society workers because they are so numerous and so per- sistent. What is true in Salt Lake City is doubtless true in other communities. Where the Relief Society Magazine Goes The Relief Society Magazine reaches forty-four of the forty- eight states of the union at the present time, and will at the begin- ning of next year find its way into all the states of the Union. Utah, Idaho, Arizona, Wyoming, California and Nevada, are the six states receiving the largest number of magazines. New York, Pennsylvania and Massachusetts, are the three states of the East with the longest lists of subscriptions. On the Western coast, California comes first with Oregon second and Washington third. Of the states that are in close proximity to the Canadian border, Idaho, Washington and New York are the three states having the greatest number of subscribers. In the middle states, Illinois, Kansas and Nebraska lead ; and in the South, New Mexico, Texas, and Florida are ahead of other (Southern states. EDITORIAL 19 Canada has the largest number of subscriptions outside the United States ; while Mexico has perhaps its sha^e under present conditions. Having covered North ^America our list shows that the Magazine is sent to Hawaii, South America, England, Scotland, Ireland, New Zealand, Australia, South Africa, British India, Nor- way, Sweden, Denmark, Holland, Germany, Switzerland, Syria, Friendly Islands, Society Islands, Samoa. Subscriptions during the past year have shown the greatest increase in California, Canada, the Eastern States, Great Britain and New Zealand, with California leading in North America and Great Britain leading across the seas. Eliza R. Snow Memorial Contest The committee consisting of Mrs. Julia A. F. Lund, Mrs. Louise Y. Robison, Miss Sarah M. McClelland, Mrs. Cora L. Bennion and Mrs. Ethel R. Smith selected for the judges of the contest, Mrs. Annie Wells Cannon, of the General Board, Miss Leah Wooley, of the L. J>. S. University, and Mr. James H. Langton, of the Deseret News Staff. Fifty poems were submitted to the committee whose members sifted them carefully and handed what they regarded as the best to the judges. The judges were unanimous in awarding first prize to Mrs. Annie EX Palmer, of Provo, Utah, second prize to Mrs. Maud Chegwidden of Murray, Utah. Mrs. iCarrie Tanner of Salt Lake City, Mrs. Bertha Rosevear, of Toronto, Canada, and Miss Janet Blake of Glasgow, Scotland, will receive honorable mention. We are very happy that two contestants from outside of the United States are sharing in the honors of the 1925 contest. Editors' Note The letter of Mrs. May Booth Talmage takes the place of the usual travel article in the current issue of the magazine. Father Interferes By Elizabeth Cannon Porter Angela's father and mother met on the stair landing. "How is Angela feeling?" he asked. "Rather bad, I'm afraid." "H'mph. It's a good thing that we stopped it when we did," he replied laconically and passed on. Such is man's attitude to- ward the emotions of women. Every member of the household knew how Angela felt, for it was always reflected in her music. Tonight she had played pieces full of heartache, — the "Flower Son," "Marchita," "Alone." It had been a bad day for Angela. The night before she had seen Doon Barker at the theatre with Mrs. Alys Berry and it had made her sick. Mrs. Berry was a divorcee and evidently Angela's successor in the young man's affections. Barker had come to see Angela until her father interfered. In fact, he had been calling and taking her out about three nights a week- They saw each other on an average of every other day. Miss Stone played the piano at the kindergarten. Her father noted that she was late for breakfast ; that she was listless for her work, through so much going around. So Mr. Stone, very courteously, asked Mr. jBarker what his intentions were toward his daughter. Whereat young Mr. Barker lamely replied that he didn't have any. He was just "out for a good time.". So Mr. Stone suggested that he discontinue his fre- quent calls at his actions might be misinterpreted. The result was that Donn still called to see the girl but he didn't ask her to go out. He took others out. When questioned about it, he evaded. Then he did not tell the truth about his excursions. He had said that he wasn't at a certain place with a particular person, when he was. So, Mr. Stone sharply requested him to discontinue his visits. Angela, who was in love with him, pined. It was in vain that she determined that she wouldn't care; she did- The mind does not control the heart. Her reason told her that her father was right, but it hurt her greatly. Her father suffered with her, for his daughter was his soft spot. "We Americans are the best business men on earth, yet the biggest business of all, — that of getting married and perpetuating the race, we leave to chance and misadventure," he ruminated. That her lover had so quickly consoled himself with a woman of the Berry type was a blow to Angela's pride, for she knew that she had beauty, charm, education, standing, and family ahead FATHER INTERFERES 21 of the older woman. Yet Doon did not care enough about her to make the slightest effort for her. People are egotists. No matter what a man does, a woman who has been associated with him is inclined to believe that in his heart of hearts, she is "the one." But Angela had too much of the older woman. Yet Doon did not want her bad enough to meet the necessary requirements. He preferred the "easiest way." The sight at the theatre had hurt her beyond words. She had watched the couple as the fascinated monkey surveys the python. With her heart pounding in her chest she had seen the other woman's animated face turned up to his. and his returning slow smile, — the smile that Angela knew so well. Somehow in the darkness she had arisen and stumbled out. During the night her mind reviewed the details of her association with him, — his tenderness, his "darky "dash," even his bragadocia when he told her of things that he was going to do. The next morning she doggedly thumped at the piano, though she had to inhale spirits of ammonia to keep from fainting. "No man is going to spoil my life," she ,thought fiercely that afternoon. Doon did not love her; he was obviously a man not to be trusted and, as such, was no good to her- She picked up a magazine. It had a story in it about an opera singer who did not cry over spilled milk ; she hunted the nearest dairy. Marthe, the French Prima Donna, was giving advice on how ,to manage men, to another woman: "Nefer run after a shentleman when 'e ees running. Marthe, she 'as been lofed by many messieurs. When zey run, always she sit quiet. When zey come back, varee often Marthe no want zem." But as the night wore on loneliness engulfed Angela. Her mother stealing in on her found her head in her arms at the piano. "What's the matter, Angela?" asked M>s. Stone smoothing the brown head. "Is it Doon?" "Yes," admitted the girl miserably. "I saw him at the show last night with that Berry woman." "That shows what he is. It only corroborates your father's judgment." Mrs- Stone bristled. "If he hurts you like this now, what would he have done later on ? I -guess that you're not the only victim of his 'amusement of the hour.' He is essentially selfish. Young people think that parents should not interfere with their love affairs. Fathers and mothers who have brought children into the world, cared for them, sacrificed for them, fed and clothed and educated them, have a right to be consulted about their marriages, too. Parents have their children's interests at heart. They can often see things which youth, blinded by emotion, cannot recognize- After the first infatuation wears off, a success- 22 RELIEF SOCIETY MAGAZINE ful marriage is built upon integrity, honor, work, and kindness." "I know." "Your father investigated and had his reasons for taking the course that he did. People seeing a couple together all the time naturally jump at the conclusion that they're engaged, and a girl looses perfectly good chances that she might have in other directions." Struck by the unhappiness in her daughter's face, Mrs. Stone hastened to add : "Perhaps I'm breaking a confidence to tell you, but Bob Leonard called to see your father at the office just before he left on his mission. He explained his sentiments toward you. He said that he did not think that it was right for a man to tie up a young girl during a prolonged absence, but that he would like permission to court you when he came back. Your father con- siders him a very fine type of manhood," she added significantly. "Did he really?" Angela's face shone April-like through her tears. Poor old Bob, whose letter had lain unanswered in her bureau drawer these past five weeks that she had been mourning the ne'er- do-well Barker. Every time that Bob had tried to get sentimental she had instinctively warded him off- The night of his farewell she had purposely timed their return from the party so he would have to run for the car, and he would have no opportunity to exact a promise from her. That night when Angela went to her room she donned a corduroy robe, turned on the light at her bedside table, and penned a long, very kind, letter to Bob Leonard in New Orleans. The End. John Galsworthy describes Queen Victoria's funeral in the following language: "The Queen was dead, and the air of the greatest city upon earth gray with unshed tears. Soames crossed Park Lane on the morning of the funeral procession, to the rails in Hyde Park. In '37, when she came to the throne, coaches still ran ; men wore stocks, shaved their upper i;ps, ate their oysters out of barrels ; women said, 'la,' and owned no property ; there were manners in the land and pigsties for the poor. Well-nigh two generations had slipped by — of steamboats, railways, telegraphs, bicycles, elec- tric light, telephones and now these motor cars." Development of Present Interest in Nutrition By Jean Cox, State Supervisor of Home Economics Education The present interest in nutrition is the result of different lines of investigation through a relatively long period of years. The first foods investigation was an economic one and dealt largely with studies in prisons, reformatories, dormitories and families, in an endeavor to find costs of foods. Out of this de- veloped an appreciation of the value of low-cost foods such as beans, bread, potatoes, cheaper cuts of meat and cereals. As a result of these studies, people in charge of different institutions prided themselves upon low food costs. Much emphasis was placed on foods that cost 7c, 10c, 15c, 20c a day. When the greatest emphasis was given to these studies of foods, food prices were low. It is interesting to note, at this period, that 40c-50c per day per individual represented luxury. As a result of low priced and monotonous diets in these institutions low resistance resulted and very often malnutritional diseases resulted. Following this interest in low priced foods, Drs. Leibig and Atwater and others began to analyze foods and classify them in terms of chemical elements. From these studies and experiments our present knowledge of food values has resulted. The first accepted divisions in terms of chemical composition were carbo- hydrates, fats, protein, ash and water. Considerable emphasis was placed on the different foods belonging to these different classes. The term Carbohydrate, for example, is a combination of two words meaning carbon and water. The purest forms of carbohydrates are sugar and starch. Others belonging to this class are cereals, vegetables and fruits, but these have combined with them some ash, flavoring substances, or small amounts of protein and fats. The fat division includes butter, cream, animal and vegetable fats and oils. The chemical term for fats is hydro- carbons as they, too, are composed of the two elements found in water and carbon- The hydrocarbons, because of different com- binations of these elements, however, give a higher fuel value than the carbohydrates. The protein class which includes meats, fish, milk, cheese, eggs, beans and peas, is more difficult to understand, because other chemical elements are included in proteins. A very great deal of study and investigation has been devoted to the analysis of protein foods. Some of the most skilled chemists have devoted years of their lives to unlock the mysteries surrounding differ- ent kinds of protein. While much has been accomplished, the 24 RELIEF SOCIETY MlAGAZINE field is still open to further investigation. In order to understand some of the difficulties of the protein investigation, it might be well to compare the different parts of protein molecule with the old puzzle pictures and balls which demanded considerable skill in getting the different parts to fit. Studies of different kinds of protein have been intensely interesting to the investigators in the fields of chemistry as well as physiological chemistry. Pro- teins have been compared to the letters of the alphabet as there are so many combinations of the elements possible. Different proteins, as we know them, are composed of several distinct com- binations of elements known as amino acids. Combinations of these amino acids build up the different kinds of proteins and upon the kinds of amino acids in different classes of protein de- fends the quality of that particular protein in terms of building and maintaining tissues of the body. The field is still open to further investigation as only recently another amino acid was isolated. This painstaking study of the protein molecule paved the way for the more recent feeding experiments of hundreds of animals, as it was found that the feeding of different kinds and combinations of amino acids produced definite results in terms of growth and maintenance. After the chemistry of foods was studied to some extent, attention was directed towards their physical value in terms of heat and energy. Careful experiments were made as to the amount of heat or energy produced by different foods within and with- out the body. With the development of these studies, the caloric or heat measure of different foods was determined. Tables show- ing 100 calorie portions was the outgrowth of these studies. Diets were made in terms of 100 calorie portions to meet the needs of different individuals having various energy demands. Costs of various kinds of foods were determined in terms of 100 calorie portions. Major interest was developed in this phase of nutrition about twelve or fifteen years ago- These studies helped to deter- mine the value of different foods in terms of its chemical as well as physical values. Studies of the effect of special diet under carefully controlled conditions showed that all hundred calorie portions in different classes of foods did not produce parallel results in human and animal nutrition. Further studies indicated that there were other factors besides meeting energy value and protein requirements to be considered in getting optimum nutri- tion. The whole development of vitamines and emphasis on ash requirements have resulted largely from the keen interest in feed- ing experiments. At the present time the interest in nutrition has extended and expanded into another field that has more interest and understand- ing for the average homemaker. This is the field of biological chemistry. This pertains1 to the effect of different kinds and pro- INTEREST IN NUTRITION 25 portions of foods upon animals in different stages of their develop- ment. Upon studies made in this field of nutrition much of our present enthusiasm is due. While many of these experimental studies as to the physiological value of different foods have neces- sarily been upon animals, these studies have also extended to some experiments on humans. ! While not all results have been similar, the results of many experiments on animals and humans have been parallel. While these studies had their beginning in state experiment stations to determine the food value of different foodstuff upon animals of different ages, thousands of carefully controlled experiments have been carried on in laboratories to show the food value of different kinds and proportions of foods at different stages of the animal's development. Among the first of these classic animal experiments is that of Hart and Humphreys, McCollum and Stenlock, which was car- ried on at the Wisconsin Experiment Station. The experiment was carried on to determine the value of the corn, oat and wheat plant and grain. The animals employed were young heifer calves as much alike as they could be. It was found that the animals fed on the entire corn plant and grain made a satisfactory growth and reproduced their young. The ones fed on the wheat plant and grain were much below normal. The animals were small, the young were born dead several weeks too soon and weighed only 46 pounds as compared to the corn fed calves which weighed 73 to 75 pounds each. The wheat fed mothers did not reproduce live calves. Those heifers fed on the oat plant and grain, while not as good as the corn, were better than the wheat- Early nutrition studies fifteen years ago were concerned with the kind of diet that would make young creatures grow. At that time it was generally believed that the chemical analysis showed the quality of the food. Mjany experiments were carried on to show the value of known food substances. Experimenters in dif- ferent laboratories were impressed with the fact that there were other food factors which contributed to the success or failure of the experiments. It was also generally believed by these investi- gators that if the diet were complete enough to induce growth for a few weeks that the diet was complete. In 1915 McCollum began observing the span of life and effects on this of different foods and combinations of foods. Many careful studies and observa- tions indicated that length of infancy, maturity, reproduction, senility and death were closely connected with the amount and kinds of food. In terms of length of life McCollum found .only one-half dozen out of two or three hundred food formulaes were satisfactory. In connection with these experiments careful studies have been made regarding the different segments in the span of life. Considerable study has been centered on the middle portion of life 26 RELIEF SOCIETY MAGAZINE ' before senility appears. There is considerable evidence that unsat- isfactory diet contributes to early aging. Experiments found, among other things, for instance, that milk is not a perfect food after about one-half normal adult growth is attained. When animals are restricted to milk diet they grow old rapidly. Experi- ments showed that milk and generous portions of whole grain pro- duced an approximately normal animal. They also proved that 5% of liver in addition to milk produced much more satisfactory development than an equal amount of beefsteak. McCollum is of the opinion that liver is a better form of protein for children than egg yolk. i j An interesting observation was made by a nutrition class under the direction of one of our best trained nutrition teachers. She had the girls in her nutrition class list the names of the stu- dents of the school who were notably large or small. She assumed the responsibility of finding out from individual conference whether or not the individual had or had not used much milk and root and green vegetables. She was particularly careful to deter- mine the use of green leaf and root vegetables. The returns were strikingly in favor of the use of milk, green leaf and root vege- tables as the largest people had satisfactory family food habits and the smallest ones had not had the habit of using these import- ant foods. This correlation between size and foods parallels ani- mal experiments carried oh in many laboratories. Careful experiments upon rats and guinea pigs have been carried on under carefully controlled conditions and when repeated a sufficient number of times the conclusions are considered ,cor- rect. Experiments found in repeating certain experiments, for instance, that after a short period on unsatisfactory diets that the animal looked unhappy, something went wrong with the lungs, the coat became rough, hair shaggy, perhaps appetite was below normal, the animal lost weight, gradual decline was noticeable and death resulted. These conclusions are not snap judgments. At the Johns Hopkins laboratories they have filed away life records of more than 5,000 animals and can duplicate with fidelity the growth experiments of these experimental animals. McCollum also believes that results would be duplicated with similar experi- ments on humans. Experiments by Sherman, Mjendell and others give additional proof of the effect of diet on well being. The biological angle in nutrition is only in its infancy. When more definite conclusions are reached in animal experimentation, more conclusions regarding nutritional failure in humans will be reached. Studies of skeletons in museums show that diets of certain kinds have produced good or bad bone development. The skeletons of the ancient Egyptians show the worst teeth of any of the people of antiquity. One of the reasons attributed by Dr. McCollum for bone failure was excessive use of cereal grains- INTEREST IN NUTRITION 27 The nutritional history of animals is recorded by the thou- sands in terms of carefully examined and photographed sections of bones. Dr. McCollum says he can not only produce certain definite bone defects by carefully selected diet but he can also write the nutritional biography of the animal by' examining the skeleton. These and other comments of prominent investigators should increase interest and enthusiasm for the present biological emphasis in nutrition. Care must be taken, however, that over emphasis on the so- called protective foods does not result in too little attention to caloric requirements. The biological building stone in any nutri- tional program would surely topple if the foundation were not carefully built with food economics, composition of individual foods and carefully determined caloric values. Experiments with animals and observations on individuals and groups of children and adults have added a human interest to the general interest in nutrition. Experimental studies with animals have accentuated health characteristics, e. g., McCollum lays considerable stress upon ner- vousness, apprehensiveness and restlessness of the malnourished animals. These and many other studies plus careful observation of health characteristics in animals and humans have made it possible for Dr. Chaplin of the New York Nutrition Council to formulate the ifollowing manifestations of good growth and nutrition : "A well built body shows the following points : Strong, even teeth, closing well, no cavities ; eyes clear and bright, no puf finess under eyes ; clear skin ; good color in cheeks, lips, eyelids, and ear lobes ; even shoulders and flat shoulder blades, deep broad chest ; straight back; flat abdomen; firm muscles and sufficient, firm subcutaneous tissue ; straight legs ; normal size of knees and ankles ; strong foot arches ; antero-posterior foot position ; good posture. — A body in good running order is indicated by: Alert expression; unobstructed breathing; clear, red tongue; steady nerves, no restlessness, i. e., repose; cheerful disposition; good muscular co-ordination ; no distress on ordinary exertion ; proper weight for height, age and type." George Bernard Shaw By Alice Louise Reynolds George Bernard Shaw is one of the literary characters who keeps continuously in the limelight. He is not the best balanced of British playwrights, but he is the most brilliant of the group. He is noted for the something different that characterizes all of his pertinent sayings, and because of this the English speak- ing people listen to him no matter what he says. Were the question asked in London, "Who is George Bernard Shaw?" nine out of every ten persons in the street might answer much like this : "Shaw ? He's that confounded Irishman who insists that everything is right that the other fellow thinks wrong, and that everything is wrong that the other fellow thinks right. Of course, he is brilliant, but he's a bally impossible chap, doncha know." It was my good fortune in 1911 to listen to Mr. Shaw's famous lecture on music and drama in the schools delivered be- fore the school board of the public schools of London and the teachers of that city. I shall as nearly as possible make a record of what Mr. Shaw said on that occasion. Richard Curl, an Eng- lish critic, has described the wit of George Bernard Shaw as "smart and breathless," and, truly, it matters little whether one meets him in drama or public lecture, one is constantly impressed with his keen wit, which is, in the main, sparkling and unexpected. Mr. Shaw began: "Before delivering this lecture I decided to ask permission of the board of control to visit the schools, to see if the schools are as they were when I attended as a boy. When I attended school, school was a prison. I found them now, as they were then, a prison. Now if pupils could come and go as they chose (as you may from my lecture — anyone who feels he is not getting the worth of his money) your schools would not be prisons. Such procedure would compel the teacher to furnish something for the pupil of real and of vital interest to him,. "You have the privilege of using the Bible in the public schools. The Bible is a product of art, but as some of you use it, it were better to place the city directory on the blackboard and ask that it be committed to memory ; it would be far more service- able. "The spirit of art is all important. A drama not interpreted correctly may give just the opposite impression to that the author intended to convey. Some people call 'Mrs. Warren's Profession' GEORGE BERNARD SHAW 29 bad. If the cast cannot interpret it, it may be bad, but played as it should be played, played as I have seen it played, on some occasions, it would make crime hideous. "I distinctly recall when Wagner's 'Ring' was first presented in London. We had the best musicians and the best instruments in the United Kingdom, but it did not go. Every musician in London knew that it was not right; people who were not musicians knew that something was wrong. "Finally, an orchestra from a not very important German city was invited to come to London and teach the English orchestra how to play the music of Wagner's 'Ring.' They were not on the whole skilled musicians, and they brought with them a motley set of instruments not nearly so good as those used by the Lon- don orchestra, but the moment they began everybody knew that at last London was hearing Wagner's 'Ring.' The German mu- sicians knew how to interpret the music. "I would have in every public school in the land a good piano. I should not be so particular about pupils running the scales, or knowing many of the other technicalities of music com- monly taught in the public schools. I should seek to have a single motif from Mozart, Beethoven, or some others of the great composers played over and over on the piano, until the children learned to love the music of the masters. If this were done the halls where classic music is presented would not be abandoned for entertainment that is both cheap and vulgar. "A few evenings ago I found myself in a city of southern England. I was very glad that I was in that city, for I recalled the fact that the church service there was read in an unusually effective manner, so I went to the evening service. The church was beautiful in design; all the decorations did but heighten the beauty of design ; the music was good, and the clergyman's voice quite exceptional in tone, while the reading of the service was most impressive. "After church I dropped into one of the theatres to see The Girl Who Took the Wrong Turning.' It was most unfortunate for 'The Girl Who Took the Wrong Turning' that I had attended the church service. "Schools are too prone to fit the student to the curriculum. They too often insist on pupils trying to learn something they cannot learn. When I was in school they told me the lie that if I would study Latin it would make the study of all other languages easier. It never did, and to this very day I cannot translate Latin. If I go into a building that has a proverb in French, Ger- man, or Italian I can usually extract the meaning, but I never can get the meaning from a Latin proverb. "I know the cheap houses of amusement are crowded, and 30 RELIEF SOCIETY MAGAZINE the better plays neglected. I know the public is not found in the houses where my plays are presented. Still there are signs of improvement. There was a time, in certain towns in Lancashire, that the cock fight was the only form of amusement that would interest any considerable number of people. Now they go to plays where the conventional hero, heroine, and villain figure. The dude with his hair parted in the middle attracts them. This is a step forward, for at least they are getting some notion of keeping their faces clean from such performances. "Don't be fearful of leaving good books around. Boys will read them if they can get at them. I know of a boy of twelve, who read a volume of Sir Oliver Lodge and said he enjoyed it. He had not yet learned his father's excuse, that he was so tired after baking buns all day that he must be amused when he goes to the theatre and must not be required to think." Almost an hour was spent in discussion after the lecture. Some teachers resented most heartily some of his statements, oth- ers disagreed, while yet others seemed to delight much at all that he said. During the hour Shaw was at his best. He had an opportu- nity to make clear many points misunderstood — a thing that fre- quently happens with Shaw. Occasionally persons in the audi- ence grew bitter, greatly to their own disadvantage, for the best of them were no match for Shaw. A critic, who writes of Bernard Shaw's new play, "Androcles and the Lion," recently presented at St. James Theatre, London, rather aptly describes the same sort of thing as occurred during the hour's discussion. "It is an old tale now to say he is "a good shot. He is too practiced a hand at discovering the weaknesses of men not to get a good hit. He makes us all feel a little bit foolish. He touches our cherished pretenses, he shows up our inconsistencies, he assumes to have no reverence for our gods. But he is not always grinning. He is serious and wise, and like the fools of Shakespeare, has many half sad, even half mad things to say, so that he sets us wondering why he should be jester at all." ^5^ Of Interest to Women By Lalenc H. Hart Will you give some suggestions for the emergency meal ? An emergency shelf is the most practical situation-saver a housekeeper can have. Place several good menus that are easily and quickly prepared, and are good food combinations. Write out recipes and with small clips fasten to menus. Then put on the shelf all the canned foods and package goods needed in preparing the meal. Regular supplies, of course, can be used for the or- dinary staples; such items as a can of milk, a bottle of olives, capers, canned fruits or cherries, a jar of choice jelly or marma- lade will suggest many others that you know how to use best. Many delicious combinations have been evolved through the preparation of the emergency meal. To prevent pricked fingers when sewing, especially when quiltingJ, protect the tips of the fingers most used with strips of adhesive tape. This allows as much freedom as if the fingers were bare and one cannot prick through the plaster. For rolling crackers or bread crumbs, small salt and sugar sacks are very handy. They keep the crumbs from scattering and less time is required for making them fine. A small piece of absorbent cotton placed in the palm of the hand when wearing kid gloves will absorb moisture of the hands and prevent stained gloves. An inexpensive towel rack nailed two feet from the floor on the wall of the back porch is handy for children to slip their umbrellas into when coming in from school. If you use stoves, or grates do not buy celluloid toys for the children. A creeping baby who struck the stove with a rattle was badly burned. The celluloid bursts into flames and burns so quickly; it is that which causes the danger. Then, too, they are easily broken. If candies, such as fudge or panoche, are made for packing, try cooking them in tiny muffin pans. The pieces will be uniform and will not break as readily as when they are cut. When emptying the dish or kettle which is likely to be hard to wash, pour a little boiling water into it, cover tightly with a 32 RELIEF SOCIETY MAGAZINE lid and place on the back of the stove. The steam will soften the dried on foods. The enamel is not chipped by scraping. When making pudding or dessert sauces, where thickening- is required, mix thoroughly the dry cornstarch or flour with the sugar. Pour hot liquid slowly over this mixture and stir con- stantly no lumps will form and results will be just as good as when it is stirred with milk or water. Less time is required. The unpleasant task of taking castor oil may be partly over- come by putting the dose in orange or lemon juice with the tiniest bit of soda added to make it foam. Some children consider Jt a treat instead of medicine. I have saved time and money by using the following for washday. Prepare a tub of warm suds and add three or fourt tablespoons of ammonia, put clothes in this, rub soiled spots with soap, and soak for twenty minutes or until ready to wash. Wring out and put into washing machines, run twenty minutes. Wring out, rinse in two waters, then in the bluing water. The ammonia releases the grease and dirt and is much cheaper than soap used for boiling. The clothes will be just as white and fresh. — Mrs. S. P., Brigham City, Utah. It is such an easy way to open the backdoor and give the bottle or empty can a throw which gives the yard an untidy appear- ance and adds danger to some one who might step on them, lit is just as easy to keep a sack in a convenient place and place all such, articles in it. Then they can be easily and quickly removed without waste of time and energy in picking them up. — Mrs. T. T., Victor, Idaho. If in an emergency you want to boil an tgg that is cracked, wrap it in a piece of waxed paper, screw the ends of the paper tight and put into hot water. The white of the egg will set before the paper untwists. — L. W. N., Clifton, Idaho. Another little suggestion for boiling eggs, when a large num- ber is to be cooked, is to place them in a thin muslin sack, such as the cereal bags, or a wire basket and put into a kettle of boiling water. When the eggs* are done lift out the bag and dip quickly in cold water. The eggs will be uniform in texture. — Louise,, Canada. Sometimes matches are lighted by scratching the painted wood work. These marks may be removed by rubbing with a piece of lemon or a cloth dipped in vinegar diluted with wateit Wash OF INTEREST TO WOMEN 33 surface with clear water and polish. — Mrs. R. G., Pine Valley, Utah. Save all your empty spools until you have several dozen. Sometime when you are dyeing, color the spools and put them into a box. They will serve the children for building blocks. With several slender sticks, such as are used in making penny suckers, all kinds of wagons, houses, etc., can be made with them and the children enjoy them as well as the more expensive blocks. — Mrs. G. R., Duncan, Arizona. Small pieces of cloth and scraps that can not be used for any- thing else may be found useful in wiping out dishes of all kind, such as greasy pans before they are washed. This saves time and a greasy unsanitary dish cloth. — Mrs. B. K., Logan, Utah. When mending the feet of silk stockings, use woolen dress goods or pieces of old silk stockings as near the same! shade of the stocking as possible. Place a small patch underneath the hole, or better still just before the hole appears, then darn with cotton which is not too heavy. The patch will reinforce the thin place and will prolong the life of the stocking. — Mrs. M. L. A., Dayton Idaho. There are no idle words where children are. Things spoken in their hearing carry far, Producing fruit of evil or of good To our great future human brotherhood. The word dropped lightly from our careless lips Into the fertile child mind seeps and drips. And intertwines with thought and impulse so It may decide the path some soul shall go! The eager child mind may not know it hears — The words may fall upon unwitting ears. But natheless the record's graven deep: Subconsciousness a copy clear will keep. So speak not thoughtlessly when They are by; Your words fall not on sterile soil or dry. Thoughts sown in plastic minds are carried far; There are no idle words where children are. — Strickland Gillilan. Sunday School Song- Writing Contest With a desire to secure suitable new songs for use in the Sunday Schools, The General Board of the Deseret Sunday School Union announces the following contest : Writers are invited to submit original, heretofore unpub- lished poems, not to exceed four verses, on any of the following subjects : 1 . Sacrament. 2. Book of Mormon. 3. Word of Wisdom. 4. Tithing. 5. Mother's Day. 6. Promotion (ideal involved in). 7. Closing Hymns. 8. Pioneers. 9. Missionary or Enlistment Hymns. 10. Songs Adapted to Meetings of Teachers (Union). 11. Hymns of Praise. 12. Hymns on Virtues (love, forgiveness, etc.). For the poem, on each of these subjects, deemed by the judges to be best suited to the purpose, the General Board will award a prize of $10, making twelve prizes. The winning poems will be published later, and prizes will be offered for appropriate musical settings. Songs suitable for the Kindergarten and Primary Departments will be welcome. Poems on the "Sacrament" must be in the office of the General Board of the Deseret Sunday School Union, 47 East South Temple, Salt Lake City, Utah on or before February 1, 1926. The contest closes April 1, 1926. Poems which have already been published will be barred from the Contest. The Board reserves the right to reject any or all poems submitted. Manu- scripts accepted become the property of the Deseret Sunday School Union, together with the right to copyright and publish. Manuscripts should be signed with a nom de plume, the name of the writer to be enclosed in a sealed envelope, on the outside of which should be written the nom de plume. Literary Lessons, 1926 List of authors to be studied in the Literature Lessons dur- ing 1926. 1. John D. McCrae and Robert W. Service. 2-3. Mark Twain (Samuel L. Clemens). 4. Booth Tarkington. 7. Edwin Arlington Robinson. 5. Joaquin Miller. 8. Jean Webster. " 6. Amy Lowell. 9. New Poets of the West. Notes from the Field By Amy Brown Lyman PRIESTHOOD CONVENTIONS To be held in connection with quarterly conferences during the months of January, February and Mjarch, 1926. Beginning in January, 1926, Priesthood Conventions will be held throughout the Church. In connection with them, the women of the auxiliary organizations — Relief Society, Young Ladies' Mutual Improvement Association, Primary Association, and women supervisors and principals of the Religion Classes — have been invited also to hold special sessions. The stake presidency is to appoint the presiding officer and also a committee representing the organizations concerned, to make assignment of the topics. Following is the program arranged for these meetings : Morning Session 10:00 a. m. Meeting of Stake and Ward Executive Officers (only) of Relief Society, Y. L. M. I. A., Primary Association, and Women Supervisors and Principals of Religion Classes Opening Exercises to be held conjointly with the Priesthood. Prayer. I. Co-operation of Women's Auxiliaries in : 1. Supporting the Priesthood (5 minutes). 2. Promoting sympathetic interest among the women of the organization (5 minutes). 3. Supporting organization programs (15 minutes') : A. Relief Society. B. Y. L. M). I. A. C. Primary Association. D. Religion Class. 4. Raising the Standard of Class Work (10 minutes). A. Selection of class teachers. a. Looking to the needs of the organization and qualifications of the individuals. b. Bringing in new workers as class teachers. B. Supporting the Teacher- training movement. C. Emphasizing the importance of preparation. 5. Meeting the Problems that Lead to Juvenile De- linquency (15 minutes). A. By avoiding late hours. B. By providing suitable recreation. 36 RELIEF SOCIETY MAGAZINE C. By providing supervised recreation. D. By providing opportunities for a. Health. b. Education. c. Culture. d. Spiritual development. II. Testimony Bearing (30 minutes). Dismissal. . Afternoon Session 2:00 p. m. Meeting for All Women of the Stake Opening Exercises. I. Woman's Responsibility in Working for the Following Church Standards (30 Minutes) : Reverence for sacred places and things ; observance of fam- ily prayers ; obedience to law ; respect for authority ; ob- servance of the Sabbath day ; attendance at Sacrament meetings ; observance of the Word of Wisdom ; observance of Fast day; payment of tithes and offerings; personal purity. II. The Importance of Co-operation Among the Women of the Church in Maintaining These Standards : 1. In the home (10 minutes). 2. In the church (10 minutes). 3. In the community (10 minutes). III. The Value of Bible Reading (20 Minutes) : "Search the Scriptures ; for in them ye think ye have eter- nal life : and they are they which testify of me." John 5 :39. Psalm 19:7-14. 1. What the Bible is: A. Word of God. (Deut. 31:9-13; 17:18-20; Book of Mormon, 1 Nephi, chapters 3, 4, and also 5 : 10-15.) B. Greatest book of literature extant. C. Inspiration of writers, poets and preachers. D. The one book (until the restoration of the gospel) to which all good Christians looked for comfort, for wisdom and for spiritual guidance. 2. The Value of Reading the Bible: A. Christ and his Apostles quoted from Old Testa- ment. B. Bible brought about the Reformation. C. Convinced founders of our Church that the gos- pel was not upon the earth. D. Inspired boy Joseph Smith to seek the Lord in prayer (James 1:5). NOTES FROM THE FIELD 37 Pocatello Stake. % 'V ;H:;;:j'; ;'^>;\ . :;'""r- y ''.^ . , ■•$&'*i" ■- . fir &K»^ fe'l't^f^1 1 |/ ' /f ]P$j \ i Pocatello First Ward Relief Society boasts of an excellent choir which gives very efficient service and adds greatly to the interest of their meetings. . Northern States Mission. A literary and musical program of unusual interest was given in Detroit, Michigan, Friday, October 23, under the auspices of the Relief Society and the Mutual Improvement Association of the Detroit Branch. Mr. Edgar A. Guest, the poet, whose work is known and appreciated by thousands, read a number of his compositions. He was assisted by Madam Hughes Thomas, who was in charge of an excellent musical program. Those present greatly appreciated the rare privilege of hearing the poems they so much admire given new force and meaning through the per- sonal interpretation of the author himself. The purpose of the entertainment was to add to the building fund of the Detroit branch, and Mr. Guest's hearty response to aid in this cause was most gratifying to all. When Mr. Guest was approached regard- ing the matter he expressed his admiration and appreciation of President Heber J. Grant, his personal friend, and added that he would be very glad to give of his time and talent in the interest of the proposed new chapel for the Detroit branch. Nebo Stake. Mrs. Mary Stevens of Nebo stake has made an enviable rec- ord as a visiting Relief Society teacher, having served steadily foj forty-three years. Her district was known as the west mountain district, which extended from the railroad south to Lake Shore. 38 RELIEF SOCIETY MAGAZINE For seven years Mrs. Stevens had charge of this district alone. The visits were made with horse and buggy, with Mrs. Stevens driving. Twin Falls Stake. The latest Relief Society conference was much appreciated in Twin Falls stake. The work emphasized by the General Board visitor on teachers' work, and work and business meetings, is being taken up throughout the stake. Ward conferences have been held in all the wards, with members of the stake board at all meetings. Twin Falls First ward held a most interesting conference, Sep- tember 13. A program emphasizing teachers' work, the work and business meeting, and welfare work was carried out. A special feature was the play "Out of Work" which was most suc- cessfully presented. To increase the efficiency of the visiting teachers in the stake, a campaign is being started under the direc- tion of the stake board. A pennant is to be given to the ward obtaining the highest percent of work accomplished under the following heads : Attendance at union meeting, attendance at work meeting, number visits made. A nutriition class under the Agricultural Department of the state is being held in all the wards once a month. Here children are weighed and measured and a careful record kept in order lo facilitate the follow-up work. A teacher-training class is held in Twin Falls where two members from each ward attend to get instructions which they in turn give a class held in each ward. Seiner Stake. The class work in this stake is being carried on very effi- ciently due to the excellent class leaders. The stake has special- ized during the year on 100% monthly teachers' visits. Some of the wards have reached this standard and the others are not far behind. The stake board plans carefully all work in advance and makes the visiting schedule for board members several months ahead. The stake board holds a social annually for all Relief Society workers. Raft River Stake. A very successful health conference was held in this stake in August. The state field nurse, in company with the Relief So- ciety stake social service leader, made all preliminary arrangements. Due to the scattered conditions it was thought advisable by the state doctor and the local doctor to hold a one-day conference in two different localities, rather than a two-day conference in one place. One hundred forty-three women and children were exam- ined at the two conferences. The doctors and nurses were assisted with the weighing, measuring and recording by the president of the stake Relief Society, Mrs. Abbie C. Ottley, and the presidents NOTES FROM THE FIELD 39 of the various ward Societies. Since the conference the field nurse has been back doing the follow-up work. She, in company with President Ottley and Mrs. Home, has visited every home which had members who had been examined. The nurse expressed herself as being well pleased with the way mothers were follow- ing the doctors' instructions and the mothers expressed themselves as being thankful for this service. ORGANIZATIONS AND REORGANIZATIONS North Central States Mission. Mrs. Harriet H. Allred has been appointed president of the Relief Society of the newly organized North Central States mis- sion. She has in her mission seven organizations, all in a prosper- ous condition. Mrs. Allred is the wife of President J. G. Allred. Hyrum Stake. On Sunday, August 9, 1925', the presidency of the Relief Society of Hyrum stake was reorganized. Mrs. Lovisa H. Allen and Mrs. Elizabeth Critchlow were honorably released from their positions of president and counselor. Mrs. Allen and Mrs. Critch- low had worked together as president and counselor for twenty- two years, and under their faithful leadership, together with that of their co-workers, Relief Society work has grown and flourished in Hyrum stake. On August 25, the Relief Society workers of Hyrum stake entertained in honor of Mrs. Allen and Mrs. Critch- low and they were each presented with beautiful wrist watches. The following were appointed as the new presidency : Mrs. Susan Nelson, president ; Mrs. Emily O. Savage and Mrs. Hazel A. Peterson, counselors. Gunnison Stake. Due to change of residence from Gunnison stake, Mrs. Ida Swalberg has been honorably released from her position as presi- dent of the Relief Society of the stake. Mrs. Swalberg was capable and energetic and during her short term of office she established the Relief Society work on a sound basis. She leaves her old home community with the love and blessing of all of her Relief Society associates. The new officers appointed for Gunni- son stake are : Mrs. Amelia C. Larson, president ; Mrs. Angie Willardsen and MJrs. Sylvia Metcalf, counselors; Mrs, Elvira Mellor, secretary- treasurer, and Mrs. Clara Bardsley, assistant secretary-treasurer. Garfield Stake. On August 30, 1925, the Garfield stake Relief Society was reorganized. Mrs. Sarah S. Larson and her associates were hon- 40 RELIEF SOCIETY MAGAZINE orably released, with deep appreciation for the excellent work they have accomplished in the Relief Society cause. The following officers were sustained to fill the vacancies: Mrs. Irene N. Rowan, president ; Mrs. Esther B. Mathews and Mrs. Fern Whit- taker, counselors ; Mrs. Katherine C. McKay, secretary-treasurer. Liberty Stake. The Liberty stake Relief Society was reorganized in Sep- tember. Mrs. Myrtle Ballard Shurtlif f, who has made an enviable reputation as a progressive and efficient stake president, asked to be released in order that she might give more time to> the needs of her growing children, to whom she is ardently devoted. Mrs. Shurtliff also expressed the belief that for the good of the organ- ization and for the good of the members, such positions should not be held indefinitely but should be passed around in order to give opportunity for a variety in leadership and for the develop- ment of the greatest possible number of workers. In honor of Mrs. Shurtliff, the Relief Society women of Liberty stake at- tended the temple in a body, 357 strong, and gave service in the interest of her family. During the month of December a social was given in honor of Mrs. Shurtliff and her retiring board at the home of the new president, Mrs. Hazel H. Greenwood, when a program was given and games played. Refreshments were served and appropriate gifts were made to the retiring officers. The new presidency are: Mrs. Hazel H. Greenwood, president; Mrs. Ida D. Rees and Mrs. Ruby W. Henderson, counselors. Mrs. Margaret M. Cannon was retained as secretary-treasurer. But far on the depths there are billows That never shall break on the beach; And I have heard songs in the silence That never shall float into speech, And I have had dreams in the valley Too lofty for language to reach. From 'The Song of the Mystic." — Father Ryan. Guide Lessons for March LESSON I Theology and Testimony (First Week in March) THE PROPHETS OF THE MOSAIC DISPENSATION A. What is a Prophet ? Generally speaking a prophet is one who foretells, but from a theological point of view, a prophet is one who foretells by the direct power of God. His foretelling must be miraculous ; i. e., based upon super-human aid. The Apostle Peter clearly points out that true prophecy is a gift to man, not something to be acquired as is the case with the astronomer, who by his observa- tion and mathematical calculations can predict to the minute the time when a planet will be in a certain place. (See I Peter 1:21.) B. Prophets, Seers and Revelators. A prophet speaks or writes the future as God has decreed it. If he sees what he predicts he becomes a seer. Thus, all true prophets are revelators but not essentially seers. The seer may see into the past the present or the future and make no revelation of his vision. At the close of one of the greatest visions the seer was forbidden to write all that he had seen. (See Book of Mor- mon, I Nephi 14:28.) One of the chief privileges of the revelator is that of giving doctrine or laws under the authority of God. As we have seen in a previous lesson, Moses was a prophet, seer and revelator, with the revelator function predominating, making him the great law- giver. Samuel was a prophet and revelator to Eli. (See I Sam. 3:11-14.) The wide range of his visions as a seer has led to the belief that this gift was the most prominent in his life. (See I Sam. 9:715.) Amos appears to have been more of a prophet than a seer, and as a prophet he was terribly denunciative. (See Amos 3:1-2; 4:14.) C. The Qualities of a True Prophet. 1. Righteousness. 2. Complete surrender to God (See Ezek. 2:1-7). 3. Fearless faithfulness (See Ezek. 3:17-21). 42 RELIEF SOCIETY MAGAZINE D. False Prophets. There were imposters, not a few, who spoke in the name of the Lord as prophets. (See Jer. 29:8, 9, 21 ; 38 :19.) These were theological imposters who studied the trend of public sentiment and made predictions which they thought would give them public preference. They used the name of the Lord while possessed with the spirit of the evil one. With them it was not a question of the will of the Lord but of the wish of the people. That these emmissaries of the evil one were objects of denunciation by the true prophets is shown in Jeremiah 29:8, 9, 21, and that they had influence with kings, in Jeremiah 37:19. The qualities of these false prophets were : 1. Alertness. 2. Dexterity in deception. 3. Audacity in assumption of authority. (See Micah 3 :5-ll.) E. Some of the Prophets Closely Related to Our Dispensation: 1. By Their Words: Job : "For I know that my Redeemer liveth, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth." (Job 19:25.) Daniel: "And in the days of these kings shall the God of heaven set up a kingdom, which shall never be destroyed : and the kingdom shall not be left to another people." (Dan. 2:44.) Mf'cah : "But in the last days it shall come to pass, that the mountain of the house of the Lord shall be established in the top of the mountains, and it shall be exalted above the hills ; and people shall flow unto it. And many nations shall come, and say, come, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, and, to the house of the God of Jacob ; and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths : for the law shall go forth of Zion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem. And he shall judge among many people, and rebuke strong nations afar off; and they shall beat their swords into plowshares, and their spears into pruning- hooks : nation shall not lift up a sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more." (See Micah 4:1-3.) 2. By Their Works, as Messengers from Heaven. (a) Moses, (b) Elias, (c) Elijah. Each of these had his definite mission. (See D. & C. 110.) QUESTIONS AND PROBLEMS 1. Give evidence that a true prophet is more than a person who truly foretells the future. 2. Distinguish between the gift of a seer and that of a revelator. 3. Prove that Samuel's prophecies never failed, and tell why. (Seel Sam. 3:18, 19.) 4. What part of Micah 4:1, 2, 3 has been fulfilled? What GUIDE LESSONS FOR MARCH 43 part is being fulfilled and what part is still awaiting fulfilment ? 5. Discuss the characteristics of the false prophets of the Mosaic Dispensation. 6. Wherein does Daniel 2 :44 give assurance that the young people of this Church will not fail in their faith nor in their works ? 7. What specific work of (a) Moses, (b) Elias, (c) Elijah, makes each of them closely related to us? 8. How many of the thirty nine books of the Old Testa- ment are named after prophets? Work and Business TEACHER'S TOPIC FOR MARCH HOME Make the home beautiful, O, let the sweetest flow'rs Blossom where the lov'd ones pass away the many hours. Make the home beautiful, make it pleasant and fair. Beautify, beautify, let your heav'n be there. — Evan Stephens. Some things that make a home beautiful : a. Cleanliness and order both of the inside and outside sur- roundings. b. Flowers in the garden and in the house. c. Lawn, vines, trees and shrubs. d. Paint. e. Absence of flies. What a beautiful home means to the individuals in the home and to the community. a. Effect of beauty, cleanliness on character. b. Civic pride in homes. c. Favorable impressions made by well kept homes. A home does not need to be expensive in order to be beauti- ful. A humble cottage well kept with fresh curtains and blossoming flowers radiates the true spirit of home. It is suggested that teachers be prepared with names of flow- ers that will bloom each month in the flower season, to give to those they visit. 44 RELIEF SOCIETY MAGAZINE LESSON III Literature (Third Week in March) MARK TWAIN— LESSON II The Innocents Abroad, one of Mark Twain's travel books, is characteristic of the great American humorist. Mjuch of his humor results from what was very largely, at his time, an Amer- ican point of view relative to Europe. While what he says is in no way complimentary to the intelligence of the American people, it is at least sincere and free from hypocrisy, although at times it is woefully extravagant. His extravagance, however, is entirely fitting, because it is one of the devices he uses to create humor. Another device frequently used by Mark Twain for humorous effect is that of contrast. Rome is pretty generally conceded to be the most interesting city in the world, yet this is what Mark Twain writes about it : "What is it that confers the noblest delight? What is that which swells a man's breast with pride above that which any other experience can bring him ? Discovery ! To know that you are walking where none others have walked ; that you are behold- ing what human eye has not seen before ; that you are breathing a virgin atmosphere. To give birth to an idea — to discover a great thought — an intellectual nugget, right under the dust of a field, to invent a new hinge, to find the way to make the lightning carry your messages. To be the first — that is the idea. To do something, say something, see something, before anybody else — these are the things that confer a pleasure compared wjth which other pleasures are tame and commonplace, other ecstacies cheap and trivial. Morse, with his first message, brought by his ser- vant, the lightning ; (Fulton, in that long drawn century of sus- pense, when he placed his hand upon the throttle-valve, and lo, the steamboat moved ; Jenner, when his patient, with the cow's virus in his blood, walked through the small-pox hospitals un- scathed ; Howe, when the idea shot through his brain that for a hundred and twenty generations the eye had been bored through the wrong end of the needle ; the nameless lord of art who laid down his chisel in some old age that is forgotten now, and gloated upon the finished Laocoon ; Daguerre, when he commanded the sun, riding in the zenith, to print the landscape upon his insig- nificant silvered plate, and he obeyed ; Columbus, in the Pinta's shrouds, when he swung his hat above a fabled sea and gazed abroad upon an unknown world ! These are the men who have really lived — who have actually comprehended what pleasure is — who have crowded long lifetimes of ecstasy into a single moment. "What is there in Rome for me to see that others have not GUIDE LESSONS FOR MARCH 45 seen before me? What is there for me to touch that others have not touched ? What is there for me to feel, to learn, to hear, to know, that shall thrill me before I pass to others? What can I discover? Nothing. Nothing whatsoever. One charm of travel dies here. But if I were only a Roman. If, added to my own I could be gifted with modern Roman sloth, modern Roman super- stition, and modern Roman boundlessness of ignorance, what be- wildering worlds of unsuspected wonders I would discover ! Ah, if I were only a habitant of the Campagna five and twenty miles from Rome ! Then I would travel. "I would go to America, and see, and learn, and return to the Campagna and stand before my countrymen an illustrious discov- erer. I would say : " 'I saw there a country which has no overshadowing Mother Church, and yet the people survive. I saw a government which never was protected by foreign soldiers at a cost greater than that required to carry on the government itself. I saw common men and common women who could read ; I even saw small children of common country people reading from books ; if I dared think you would believe it, I would say they could write, also. In the cities I saw people drinking a delicious beverage made of chalk and. water, but never once saw goats driven through their Broadway or their Pennsylvania avenue or their M/ontgomery street and milked at the doors of the houses. I saw real glass windows in the houses of even the commonest people. Some of the houses are not of stone, nor yet of bricks ; I solemnly swear they are made of wood. Houses there will take fire and burn, sometimes — actually burn entirely down, and not leave a single vestige behind. I could state that for a truth, upon my death-bed. And as a proof that the circumstance is not rare, I aver that they have a thing which they call a fire-engine, which vomits forth great streams of water, and is kept always in readiness, by night and by day, to rush to houses that are burning. You would think one engine would be suf- ficient, but some great cities have a hundred ; they keep men hired and pay them by the month to do nothing but put out fires. For a certain sum of money other men will insure that your house shall not burn down ; and if it burns they will pay you for it. There are hundreds and thousands of schools, and anybody may go and learn to be wise, like a priest. In that singular country, if a rich man dies a sinner, he is damned ; he cannot buy salvation with money for masses. There is really not much use in being rich, there. Not much use as far as the other world is concerned, but much, very much use, as concerns this ; because there, if a man be rich, he is very greatly honored, and can become a legislator, a governor, a general, a senator, no matter how ignorant an ass he is — just as in our beloved Italy, the nobles hold all the great places, even though sometimes they are born noble idiots. There, 46 RELIEF SOCIETY MAGAZINE if a man be rich, they give him costly presents, they ask him to feasts, they invite him to drink complicated beverages; but if he be poor and in debt, they require him to do that which they term to 'settle'. The women put on a different dress al- most every day; the dress is usually fine, but absurd in shape ; the very shape and fashion of it changes twice in a hundred years; and did I but covet to be called an extravagant falsifier, I would say it changed even oftener. Hair does not grow upon the American women's heads ; it is made for them by cunning workmen in the shops, and is curled and frizzled into scandalous and ungodly forms. Some persons wear eyes of glass which they see though with facility perhaps, else they would not use them ; and in. the mouths of some are teeth made by the sacriligious hand of man. The dress of the men is laughably grotesque. They carry no musket in ordinary life, nor no long pointed pole ; they wear no< wide, ^reen-lined cloak ; they wear no peaked black felt hat, no leathern gaiters reaching to the knee, no goatskin breeches with the hair side out, no hobnailed shoes, no prodigious spurs. They wear a conical hat termed a 'nail-keg;' a coat of saddest black; a shirt) which shows dirt so easily that it has to be changed every month, and is very trouble- some ; things called pantaloons, which are held up by shoulder straps, and on their feet they wear boots which are ridiculous in pattern and can stand no wear. Yet dressed in this fantastic garb, these people laughed at my costume, In that country, books are so common that it is really no curiosity to see one. Newspapers also. They have a great machine which prints such things by thousands every hour." Speaking of the people of Portugal, Mark Twain mas the following to say : "The good Catholic Portuguese crossed himself and prayed God to shield him from all blasphemous desire to know more than his father did before him. The climate is mild ; they never have snow or ice, and I saw no chimneys in the town. The donkeys and the men, women and children of a family, all eat and sleep in the same room, and are unclean, are ravaged by vermin, and are truly happy. The people lie and cheat the stranger, and are desperately ignorant, and have hardly any reverence for their dead. The latter trait shows how little better they are than the donkeys they eat and sleep with. The only well-dressed Portu- guese in the camp are the half dozen well-to-do families, the Jesuit priests, and the soldiers of the little garrison." As a goodly number of people have no doubt seen the moving- picture entitled "The Hunchback of Notre Dame," we shall include part of M)ark Twai