Year Title Summary 1995 Cool Devices A series of animated hentai pornographic videos released as OVA, human trafficking is part of several episodes. 2002 Lilya 4-ever A Swedish-Danish film based loosely on the real life of Danguolė Rasalaitė, portrays a young woman from the former Soviet Union who is deceived into being trafficked for exploitation in Sweden. 2004 Spartan A David Mamet film centering on the hunt for the daughter of a high ranking US official who has been kidnapped by an international sex slavery ring. 2004 Svetlana's Journey Based on true events,[1][2] Michael Cory Davis's film depicts the trials of a 13-year-old who loses her family and is sold to human traffickers by her adoptive family. Drugged, raped, and forced to endure continuous abuse by her "clients" and traffickers, she attempts to commit suicide, but survives. 2004 Sex Traffic Two sisters are trapped in a multibillion-dollar, worldwide business in which young women are forced into prostitution. 2006 Ghosts A documentary by independent filmmaker Nick Broomfield, follows the story of the victims of the 2004 Morecambe Bay cockling disaster, in which smuggled immigrants are forced into hard labour. 2006 Holly An American film about a 12-year-old girl, sold by her poor family and smuggled across the border to Cambodia to work as a prostitute in a red light village. The Virgin Harvest is a feature-length documentary which was filmed at the same time.[3] 2006 The Unknown Woman An Italian film by Giuseppe Tornatore centered around a Ukrainian woman caught in the human trafficking and sex trade. 2006 The Virgin Trade: Sex, Lies and Trafficking A documentary by Stuart Kershaw exploring international sex tourism in Thailand's red light districts. 2006 Human Trafficking A TV miniseries imitating real life events. 2007 Eastern Promises A film by David Cronenberg featuring a British midwife who unravels a gang of Russian slavers when she seeks relatives to a baby of a sex slave named Tatiana. 2007 The Sugar Babies A documentary film by Amy Serrano which highlights the plight of Haitian victims of human trafficking in the Dominican Republic. It was produced by Claudia Chiesi, Constance Haqq, Thor Halvorssen Mendoza and funded by the Human Rights Foundation, The Fund for a Just Society, The Crowley Children's Fund, The Pujals Family Foundation and The Nord Family Foundation. 2007 Trade An American-German film which deals with human trafficking out of Mexico and a brother's attempt to rescue his kidnapped and trafficked young sister. It is based on Peter Landesman's article about sex slaves, which was featured as the cover story in the 24 January 2004 issue of New York Times Magazine. 2007 The Jammed An Australian film portraying human trafficking in Australia. 2008 Call + Response A documentary and concert film combining contemporary musicians' performances with an investigative report on worldwide human trafficking including hidden camera footage from brothels in Thailand. 2008 Dimanasus Prophecy A movie by Dzmitry Vasilyeu addresses human trafficking in Eastern Europe.[4] 2008 Taken A film by Pierre Morel and starring Liam Neeson, wherein the main character's daughter and her friend are taken by traffickers in Paris. In his quest to find his daughter, the movie depicts foreign girls in Paris who are "trafficked" with the purpose of forcing them to prostitution. 2009 Redlight A documentary film about human trafficking in Cambodia that premiered at the Woodstock Film Festival[5] 2010 The Whistleblower A Canadian-German-American biographical crime drama film directed by Larysa Kondracki, written by Kondracki and Eilis Kirwan, and starring Rachel Weisz.[6] The film portrays proven and recorded real life events which occurred in Bosnia and Herzegovina to an American police officer (Kathryn Bolkovac) from Nebraska while working as a United Nations Peacekeeper contracted by Democra Corp., a pseudonym for a present American military contracting company DynCorp, which was then made into a movie. Dyncorp has also been accused of rapes, murders and underage child sex trafficking in Latin America and countries like Afghanistan, Bosnia, Iraq, Kuwait and the Ukraine.Template:Citation needed 2011 Nefarious: Merchant of Souls An American documentary about human trafficking written,[7] directed, produced, and narrated by Benjamin Nolot[8] 2011 Not My Life A documentary film about human trafficking and contemporary slavery[9] 2012 Abduction of Eden An American film based on the story of Chong Kim, who was kidnapped and sold into a domestic human trafficking ring in the mid-1990s. The film's main character, Eden, a young Korean-American girl, is abducted near her home in New Mexico and forced into prostitution by a domestic human and drug trafficking ring located outside the bright lights of Las Vegas, Nevada. In 2014 Kim's story was reported to be false by the non-profit organization Breaking Out.[10]