Infobox soap character

series = All My Children

name = Adam Chandler, Sr.

caption1 = David Canary as Adam Chandler

first = December 1983

last =

cause =

nickname =

alias =

gender = Male

age =

born =

death =

occupation = Founder, owner, Chairman, CEO of Chandler Enterprises

Owner of IncredibleDreams.com

Former owner and operator of "Adam's Place", a bar formerly known as The Pit

Former owner of WRCW

Former owner of a fertility clinic

Former owner of Tempo Magazine

Former producer of the movie "Raising Kane"

title = CEO

siblings= Stuart Chandler (identical twin brother)

Charlotte Chandler (sister; deceased)

spouse = Althea Chandler (divorced)

Erica Kane (divorced)

Brooke English (invalid)

Dixie Cooney (invalid; deceased)

Natalie Marlowe (invalid)

Gloria Marsh (divorced)

Liza Colby (three times divorced)

Arlene Vaughan (divorced)

Krystal Carey (divored)

children = Skye Chandler Quartermaine (former adoptive daughter, with Althea)

Hayley Vaughan (daughter, with Arlene)

Adam Chandler, Jr. [J.R.] (son, with Dixie)

Anna Claire Chandler (daughter, with Gloria; deceased)

Colby Chandler (daughter, with Liza)

relatives = Ross Chandler (nephew)

Scott Chandler (adoptive nephew)

Lorenzo Santos (grandson; via Hayley)

Adam Chandler III (grandson; via J.R.)

Julie Rand Chandler (adoptive great-niece)

residence = Chandler Mansion

300 River Road

Pine Valley, Pennsylvania

episode =

portrayer = David Canary (1983-present)

creator = Agnes Nixon

color = #C80815

Adam Chandler, Sr. is a fictional character from the daytime drama "All My Children", portrayed by David Canary, from 1983 to present. Adam has risen from his humble beginnings in the small town of Pigeon Hollow, West Virginia to become one of the wealthiest men in Pine Valley, Pennsylvania. He can be considered one of the most devious individuals on the show. His business dealings can and have gotten him into severe trouble. He has a close relationship with his family, and is especially close to his identical twin brother, Stuart.

Adam is one of Pine Valley's most frequently married characters. He resides at Chandler Mansion (300 River Road), and since September 21 2005 to late 2007, had been married to Krystal Carey. He has had a long-standing feud with Palmer Cortlandt; although that front quieted down, as Palmer is no longer seen often. He paid schemer Ava Benton to break up the romance of his own daughter (Colby) and her boyfriend (Sean Montgomery), and after she found out about her father paying Ava, she moved out of his house. On August 9 2007, he posed as Stuart to be close to Krystal, and held her baby daughter, Jenny Carey, for the first time.

His son, J.R., cut off ties with him on December 27 2007 when he found out that Adam had evidence that could dismiss the charges brought against him for the supposed murder of Zach Slater, but did nothing to present such vital information.

Four of Adam's five children have survived into adulthood: Skye, Hayley (Vaughan), J.R., and Colby. Three of them are alcoholics; Colby has started to follow the same path. With the exception of Colby, all are in recovery.