Quiz Answer Key and Fun Facts

1. What year did Adam Chandler arrive in Pine Valley, PA?

Answer: 1983

David Canary also appeared on the soap "Another World" as Stephen Frame.

2. What city in West Virginia are Adam and Stuart from?

Answer: Pigeon Hollow

Palmer Cortlandt is also from Pigeon Hollow and his real name is Pete Cooney. Palmer and Adam are life long enemies.

3. In 1984, what famous politician did Adam introduce Erica to?

Answer: Mayor Koch

New York City Mayor Koch made a cameo appearance in 1984 on "AMC". Adam wanted wow and woo Erica into marrying him so he introduced her to the mayor.

4. Where did Adam marry Gloria Marsh?

Answer: On a yacht

Gloria was going to renew her vows to Adam when she found out he set up his own kidnapping. Adam was actually there with Gloria the whole time posing as Stuart, his twin brother.

5. Adam has been married to Brooke English, Erica Kane, Barbara Montgomery and Liza Colby.

Answer: False

He was married to all of the above except for Barbara Montgomery. Barbara was married to Travis Montgomery and Tom Cudahy in the years she was on "AMC". Barbara and Travis ended up moving to Seattle.

6. What sneaky trick did Adam pull on Erica when they were getting divorced?

Answer: Stuart signed the divorce papers

Adam sent Stuart down in his place to the Caribbean to have the divorce papers signed without Erica's knowledge.

7. Where did Adam and Dixie enjoy their first night of illicit passion?

Answer: Chandler boathouse

Their affair led to Dixie getting pregnant with Adam Jr. an heir to the fortune. Adam wanted a son and Dixie gave that to him so he married her. Adam went on to prove Dixie as an unfit mother and had her committed to Laurel Hill, a mental institution.

8. While married to Liza, Adam had an affair with Brooke English, his ex-wife.

Answer: True

Brooke and Adam shared several afternoon delights until Jamie and Tad became wise to what was going on between them.

9. David Canary was the second actor to play the part of Adam and Stuart Chandler.

Answer: False

From 1983-2004, David Canary was the only actor to play Adam and Stuart. David Canary started his career on the broadway stage.

10. Who did Adam lose Chandler Enterprises to in 2003?

Answer: Michael Cambias

Michael Cambias was ruthless in Pine Valley. He single handedly took over Chandler Enterprises, Fusion and Enchantment at the same time he was tormenting the Kane women. Cambias raped Bianca and got her pregnant.

Source: Author crazybombshell

This quiz was reviewed by FunTrivia editor ladymacb29 before going online.

Any errors found in FunTrivia content are routinely corrected through our feedback system.