Kyushu Railway History Museum: Attractions for the Whole Family

The Kyushu Railway History Museum is a popular family destination in Kitakyushu City, Fukuoka Prefecture. In recent years, railway fans and Instagrammers from across Japan have visited here.

Today's article will introduce things to see and do at the Kyushu Railway History Museum. When you visit, you're sure to find plenty of places to snap a fantastic train photo!

*The information in this article is from a 2019 interview. For the latest information and news, please check the museum's official homepage (English PDF available).

The Kyushu Railway History Museum is a three-minute walk from Kitakyushu's Mojiko Station.

The museum is closely tied to the Kyushu Railway Company, which was the first company to establish a railway line in the Kyushu Region.

The Kyushu Railway Company was started in 1888. Its head office was originally located in Fukuoka's Hakata Ward. In 1891, it was moved to its present-day location near Mojiko Station.

As the railway network spread throughout Kyushu, it quickly became one of Japan's largest companies. Then, in 1907, it became a state-owned enterprise as the result of a new government policy.

The Kyushu Railway Company's former headquarters was reconstructed in 2003 as the Kyushu Railway History Museum. Various exhibitions highlight the beautiful railways and train culture in Kyushu.

Today, the museum's historical significance has not been overlooked.

In 2007, it was designated as a Heritage of Industrial Modernization. Then in 2014, it was registered as a National Tangible Cultural Property.

Let's take a look at the various museum facilities and their special features!

Enjoy Hands-On Experiences in the Main Building

On the first floor of the main building, a wooden train carriage and station platform from the Meiji Period have been recreated. You'll see figures of a train conductor and staff members selling bento lunch boxes.

Museum visitors can also get a close look at the car's wooden interior.

Our writer was surprised to see that the seats were inlaid with traditional tatami (straw mats). This railway car gives off a definite retro atmosphere!

The driver's seat has been converted into a driving simulator, making it a popular spot to have a hands-on experience.

From kids dreaming of becoming a conductor to adults who want to experience being a train driver, everyone can enjoy a visit here (100 yen per game).

At the Railway Diorama, visitors can operate shinkansen train models on miniature tracks, including the 800 series Tsubame and the Limited Express Aso Boy! (100 yen each time).

At the times listed below, you can watch a free train panorama show. During the presentation, model trains will appear to run along the tracks throughout the diorama.

By pressing the corresponding button on the panel (see photo above), visitors can choose which train they would like to see operate.

*Starting times for the Kyushu Railway Panorama Show (shows are about 10 minutes long)

- Weekday Shows: 11:30, 13:00, 14:30, 16:00

- Shows on Saturdays, Sundays, and National Holidays: On the hour from 10:00 until 16:00

There's also a gift shop on the first floor. According to shop staff, the most popular items are the chopsticks and socks patterned with train motifs, and keychains decorated with train station names.

These make wonderful souvenirs for friends, colleagues, and especially kids.

On the second floor, you'll see an exhibit featuring equipment and furnishings once used in the station building. There are also old train tickets, a ticket puncher, telephone, electric fan, and a train lunch box (ekiben) on display.

A particularly memorable display is the collection of round nameplates identifying different trains. Historically, these signs were placed on the front of the lead car.

These signs really create a retro feeling. For many railway enthusiasts, this is a dream collection!

Part of the second floor is devoted to various train and railway line exhibitions.

These themes change about every two months. On the day of our writer's interview, there was a special exhibit featuring Yufuin no Mori—a limited express panorama train that runs from Hakata (Fukuoka Prefecture) to Yufuin (Oita Prefecture).

Train Exhibitions: See Famous Vehicles All in One Spot!

At the train exhibit, retro models of the following train series are on display: 59634, C59-1, EF10-35, ED72-1, KIHA07-41, KUHA481-603, KUHANE581-8, SERA1239, and the 14 Series sleeper train.

The train that stands out among these is the KUHANE 581-8. This is the world's first overnight sleeper train, given the name Gekko.

The seats inside fold out into comfortable bunk beds.

The seats inside KIHA07-41 have wooden frames inlaid with indigo-colored sofa cushions.

The overhead rack is made with an old-fashioned mesh design, and even the hand straps are made of wood! When you're inside a retro train like this, you can't help but curiously pull down and lift up the shutters.

Miniature Train Park: Become a Train Conductor!

At the museum's Miniature Train Park, visitors can drive a mini-train along a 450-centimeter-wide railway track. Mini-trains include the 885 Series Kamome, 787 Series Tsubame, 883 Series Sonic, 72 Series Yufuin no Mori, and the 813 Series local train (300 yen per drive).

Please note that there's a limit of three people per mini-train. Operations will be suspended if it's raining or windy.

Experience the World of Kyushu Railways

Many famous trains operate in the Kyushu area, including the Limited Express Yufuin no Mori, A-Train, Aso Boy!, Ibusuki no Tametebako, and the SL Hitoyoshi steam locomotive. All of these trains have been instrumental in creating a new craze in Japanese railway excursions.

It would be difficult to check off riding all of these trains on a single trip. So in the meantime, why not visit the Kyushu Railway History Museum and immerse yourself in the world of these regional railroads?

Kyushu Railway History Museum

2-3-29 Kiyotaki, Moji-ku, Kitakyushu City, Fukuoka Prefecture 801-0833

For the latest from MATCHA please check our Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram!