Mack P. Harrison, 90, of Point Blank passed away May 1, 2010, in San Jacinto County. He was born Aug. 9, 1919, in San Jacinto County.

Viewing will be held today from 11 a.m. to 7 p.m. at the Williams and Sons Funeral Home. Funeral services will be held on Saturday, May 8, 2010, at noon at Mt. Enterprise Tabernacle, F.M. 946 N., in Oakhusrt. The Rev. C.E. McGowen will preside. Burial will follow in the Todd Robinson Cemetery in Point Blank.

Aurtha Harrison, Tony McGowen, James Harrison III, Darryle White, John Booker, Michael Harrison, Spiller Harrison and Aaron McGowen will serve as pallbearers.

A veteran of the United States Army, Mr. Harrison was honorably discharged in December 1945. He recieved numerous decorations and citations, American Theater Campaign Medal, Good Conduct Medal and Philippine Liberation Medal with one Bronze Star just to name a few. He was a loving father and friend to many.

He is survived by his children, Bozell Hines, the Rev. Charles McGowen, both of Huntsville, Aaron McGowen of Goodrich, Spiller Harrison and Aurtha Harrison, both of Point Blank, Sadie Pouncy of Houston, Ola Portilla of Coldspring, Beverly Whitaker and Janell Phillips, both of Huntsville, Martha Norman, Joyce Scott, Audrey Harrison, Corrine Fletcher, Victoria Redd and Rezeter Lewis, all of Point Blank; 54 grandchildren; 74 great-grandchildren, 33 great-great-grandchildren; and a host of other relatives and friends.

Published on May 6, 2010

Plant a Living Memorial

In Memory of MackHow does it work?

Send Flowers: When Is the Ordering Deadline?

Next-Day Delivery

ANY DAY OF THE WEEK

Order any time up till the day before

Same-Day Delivery

MON-FRI Order by 2:00PM

SAT & SUN Order by noon

Morning Delivery

TUES-SAT Order by 3:00PM

The day before

SAT & SUN Order by Saturday

Note: These are general guidelines; some florists may not be able to operate within these timelines. During peak periods such as Valentine’s Day, Memorial Day and most holidays, florists are not always able to keep up to demand. Tribute will contact you if there are any issues.

Plant a tree: How does it work

When your purchase is complete, a post will be made on the tribute wall of the deceased signifying the planting of a memorial tree.

An official certificate recognizing your purchase will be included with your email receipt. You can then forward the email to the family or print it and give it to them personally.

After an order is placed, our forestry partners will plant the tree in the area of greatest need (nearest the funeral home), according to the planting schedule for the year.

Due to seasonal conditions, the tree planting takes place during the spring and summer.

Tree Planting Timeline

Orders placed in:

January - May

Planting will take place in Spring or Summer of the same year.

June - December

Planting will take place in Spring of the following year.

Hide Detail

In Memory of Mack

Plant a tree How it Works Plant a tree