John “Jack” P. Harrison Jr., 90, passed away peacefully on January 31, 2018. Born in Sunbury, Pennsylvania; he was the son of the late John and Mary (Hemerka) Harrison.

After graduating from Southside High School in Elmira NY, Jack entered the United States Coast Guard. He attended Ithaca College and earned both Bachelors and Masters degrees in Music Education.

On August 23, 1947, he married his high school sweetheart, Carolyn Smith; last August they celebrated their 70th anniversary.

Jack went on to receive another Masters Degree in Guidance from Siena College. He began teaching music in the Scotia-Glenville school system in 1953 and went on to be a guidance counselor at Scotia-Glenville High School during the 1960's and '70's. Subsequently, Jack worked at the Bureau of Guidance; State Education Department, retiring in 1985. After his retirement he continued working as a consultant there until 2003.

He was very passionate about music; playing and teaching music was an important part of his life. Jack continued to make music in his local Senior Citizens Orchestra into his 80's. He was also an active member of the Scotia-Glenville Lions Club.

Jack led an extraordinarily active life. Jack and his sons built their summer home on Galway Lake together. On summer days and even into the fall he could be seen swimming up and down the shoreline almost daily; at age 60 he successfully swam around the perimeter of the lake - about 6 miles. He was always an active participant in the Ruback's Grove community at Galway and served as an officer in various capacities over the years. He also loved other outdoor activities, such as camping, canoeing, and birding - especially with his family.

During the cold winter months, Jack would travel to St. Augustine Beach in Florida with Carolyn for some southern warmth and relaxation by the sea. In his spare time, he enjoyed writing "pomes" (poems) which he often shared with his grandchildren.

What was always so remarkable about Jack was his humanity. He had a positive impact on hundreds of people and treated everyone he met with warmth, humor and compassion.

He was predeceased by his brothers Eugene (Beverly) Harrison and Edwin (Mary) Harrison and his beloved grandson, James Harrison. He was also predeceased by sister in laws Louise (Arthur) Miller, Lucille (Allyn) Robinson and Barbara (William) Belig.

Survivors include his loving wife, Carolyn; his sons, John (Valerie) Harrison, David (Regina) Harrison, and Michael Harrison; grandchildren, John, Sarah and Hannah Harrison; Also surviving are his brother-in-law and sister-in-law Carlton (the late Emily) Smith and Edna (the late Robert) Cook, as well as his sister-in-law Louise Harrison.

Calling hours for Jack will be held on Sunday February 4, 2018 from 4pm to 6pm at the Glenville Funeral Home, 9 Glenridge Road, Glenville. Funeral services will follow at 6pm at the funeral home.

Memorial contributions in Jack’s name may be made to the Scotia-Glenville Lions Club, PO Box 2001 Scotia, NY 12302.

Online condolences www.glenvillefuneralhome.com