Dr. Izora P. Harrison, a distinguished Educator of Higher Education and Community Advocate. During her 37 year tenure at Calhoun Community College, she served as Counselor, Coordinator of Student Information Services, Director of Financial Aid, Director of Minority Student Affairs, and Director of Services for Special Student Populations. She established the first Black Student Alliance organization; served as Secretary, Vice-Speaker, and Speaker of the Calhoun Community College Council and Cabinet; was awarded the Outstanding Administrator Award and nominated for The Alabama College System Chancellor’s Award for Administration; was a Multiple Year Honoree of “Who’s Who Among American Teachers”; and was featured in the Huntsville Times/Comcast Hometown Heroes for “all the many students who have a better life because of her commitment beyond the job”. She was a dedicated member of the Alabama Education Association; elected to the state Postsecondary Executive Board and ultimately presented the State’s “AEA Outstanding Postsecondary Achievement Award”.

​

Among her efforts to facilitate transfer of community college students to senior colleges and universities, she was chosen Member and ultimately Chair of the Advisory Board, for the Undergraduate School of Social Work at Alabama A & M University. Dr. Harrison was inducted into the Practitioners Hall of Fame, Nova University (now Nova Southeastern University), Fort Lauderdale, Florida “for excellent contributions leading to The Improvement of Educational Practice” and for her successful efforts toward minority student recruitment and retention in higher education. Her visionary leadership wrote the proposal to fund the First Educational Opportunity Center (EOC) in the Southern region of the United States, and was responsible for selecting and training personnel throughout the state of Alabama. She was nominated to the Regions Financial Corporation of “Black Achievers in Education”. Within the community, she has served on the United Way Board of Directors of North Alabama, the Huntsville Sickle Cell Foundation, Harris Home for Children, Community Services Advisory Board of the Community Action Agency, and the Mayor’s Homeless Advisory Committee. Through the Leadership Huntsville Program, she participated in Inside Huntsville/Madison County (now referred to as Huntsville Connect). She has been nominated for the Girl Scouts’ Madison County Women’s Scroll of Honor, and Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity, Inc.’s Humanitarian Award for Community Service. Dr. Harrison, like her husband, the late Commissioner Bob Harrison, has been a long-time civil and community service advocate.