Sharon Krevor-Weisbaum takes great pride in her role as Managing Partner of Brown, Goldstein & Levy while continuing her active practice on behalf of a varied client base. Clients and colleagues alike recognize Sharon as a trusted advisor willing to share her extensive experience, knowledge of the law, passion, and sense of justice openly and freely. She strives to develop deep client-lawyer relationships that emphasize the unique voice and needs of each one of her clients.

It is this commitment to justice that makes her a passionate and forceful advocate for individuals with disabilities and their families who confront barriers in education, high-stakes testing, employment, housing, and accessing state and federal services and supports. Sharon represents college and university students with disabilities in Americans with Disabilities Act litigation to ensure that they have equal access to their curriculum and other services offered by the universities. She has significant experience collaborating with colleges and universities, and litigating where necessary, on issues involving the needs of students with disabilities. She has played a significant role in working with the Office of General Counsel for various universities in resolving OCR and/or other complaints brought by university students. All of these cases have involved university disability services offices and have resulted in systemic-change settlement agreements focused on ensuring sustained changes in university culture surrounding curriculum accessibility.

In a recent disability rights case, Sharon fought on behalf of a 26-year-old man with muscular dystrophy who was denied a community placement. The Office of Administrative Hearings reversed a decision by the Developmental Disabilities Administration. This decision will allow Sharon’s client to live as independently as possible in a community setting, while surrounded by professional staff who will be able to provide him the unique care he needs in his day-to-day life.

Sharon is equally passionate and forceful in her representation of non-profit and for-profit entities that provide supports and services to individuals with disabilities, whether serving as a proactive general counsel or as an aggressive advocate for her corporate clients. In her representation of community-based mental health and addiction service providers—organizations that provide housing and support services to individuals with developmental disabilities, senior care providers (including nursing homes and assisted living facilities), and providers of personal home care—Sharon understands and appreciates the difficult balance her clients must achieve as business entities and service providers.

As a former Assistant Attorney General for the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene, Sharon has built the knowledge, experience, and relationships with regulators that allow her to counsel and defend health care providers effectively in actions involving licensure and regulatory compliance. She also uses this experience to represent individual health care professionals, including physicians, nurses, counselors and pharmacists, before professional disciplinary boards.

In partnership with others at Brown, Goldstein & Levy, Sharon works to provide her clients with the legal talents that will best serve their needs, whether through advocacy, education, litigation, or negotiation. Sharon considers it an honor to serve as a member of the legal community and to serve her clients with compassion and rigorous advocacy. Her dedication to legal practice extends to her colleagues across the State of Maryland, too. Sharon served as co-chair of the MSBA Managing Partners Group, which she and others began in March 2020 as the realities of COVID-19 hit and managing partners had to make immediate, difficult decisions. Since then, she actively helped lead this group until June 2023, when she turned over her role to others. The group, of which she remains an active member, provides managing partners a collaborative forum to share ideas, facilitate opportunities, and provide the resources necessary to drive their firms forward.

A client of Sharon’s recently wrote:

“Thank you for all that you have done for our family – you are really amazing – smart, kind and caring, all accompanied by an incredible work ethic. It is such a wonderful feeling to find someone of your caliber and integrity. We hope more families like ours are lucky enough to find you.”