''THE FOUR SEASONS'' is a fond, generous movie about characters who might have easily lent themselves to satire. Alan Alda, who wrote and directed the film and fits comfortably into its balanced cast, shapes the material almost as if he were offering a toast. A group of middle-aged, middle-class principals vacation together on the four occasions to which the title refers. They cook and trade quips and have heart-to-heart talks by the dozen. They use these holidays for celebrating the status quo, and for applauding their own continuing affection for one another.

There's an element of complacency in this, but Mr. Alda lets it go. He's not after another ''Bob and Carol and Ted and Alice.'' He's interested in poking mild, friendly fun, and in making his characters warmly and immediately familiar to an audience. And he succeeds in presenting a gentle, likable, frequently funny glimpse of everyday types doing their everyday best to get by.

In ''The Four Seasons,'' which opens today at Loews Tower East and Loews Astor Plaza, Mr. Alda casts himself as the fellow whom the other would perhaps most like to swat with a frying pan. That's because even in moments of great peace and relaxation, Mr. Alda's Jack Burroughs creeps up behind his friends and asks them what they're really feeling, or why they don't really talk to him as honestly as they could, or other equally feather-ruffling queries. Carol Burnett plays Kate Burroughs, the wife who has long since gotten used to this, and Jack Weston and Rita Moreno are Danny and Claudia Zimmer, who also love Jack but wish he'd knock it off.

The cozy little sixsome is rounded out by Nick and Anne Callan (Len Cariou and Sandy Dennis), and you don't need an eight-ball to guess which marriage is headed for trouble. Miss Dennis's Anne is a fidgety photographer whose specialty is still-life shots of vegetables. Nick tires of her almost as soon as the audience does, and shocks his friends by taking up with a pretty young thing (Bess Armstrong), who squeals with glee when he gives her a bottle of Shalimar.

The action in this largely uneventful movie revolves around the Nick-Anne breakup and the ripples of fear and surprise it creates among the others. But most of the film is devoted to joking and chatting and horsing around. A sequence on a yacht in the tropics is witty, well played and almost as pleasantly relaxing for the audience as it's supposed to be for the characters. Even the occasional confrontations - people are always wandering off in permutations or two or three to air their differences - have a soothing air. No one in ''The Four Seasons'' ever goes to bed angry, and there's no particular reason to want them to.

Mr. Alda's direction is particularly strong for bringing out his actors' humanity, and for developing a comic timing that helps unite the cast. Though Mr. Alda and Miss Burnett are certainly capable of scene-stealing, their roles are less sharp-edged than those Mr. Alda has written for Miss Armstrong and Mr. Weston, who are the film's brightest lights. As Ginny, a stewardess whom Nick takes for his new tootsie, Miss Armstrong is both deliciously oblivious to her effect on the others and, later, believably wounded by their resentment. Mr. Weston has the hilarious job of playing a dentist who prides himself on his international gourmet cooking, and who must watch his loved and cherished brand-new Mercedes sink into a frozen pond.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.