Three new species of Conoidea are described from Red Sea, Gulf of Aden and Philippines. Awheaturris lozoueti sp. nov., from Philippines, is the first representative in the recent Indo-Pacific molluscan fauna of a hitherto Miocene fossil genus. Taranis adenensis sp. nov., from Gulf of Aden, is the first species certainly referable to genus Taranis Jeffreys, 1870 reported in the Gulf of Aden and the smallest described member of this genus in the Indo-Pacific region. Mioawateria vivens sp. nov. represents the first member of the genus Mioawateria Vella, 1954 reported in the Red Sea. The status ofMioawateria is discussed and photographs of its type species, Awateria (Mioawateria) personata Powell, 1942, from thePliocene of New Zealand, are presented for the first time.

The genus Austrodaphnella Laseron, 1954, previously known only from Australian waters, is here reported from the Arabian Peninsula. Two species occur: A. yemenensis new species, from Yemen, Southern Red Sea, and A. alcestis (Melvill, 1906) new combination, a deep water species known only from the Gulf of Oman. SEM photographs of both species are provided.

Based on specimens from the Museo di Zoologia dell' Universitè di Bologna, Taranidaphne dufresnei gen. & sp. nov. is here described from Yemen, Red Sea and Gulf of Aden. The new genus is compared to Taranis Jeffreys, 1870, which it resembles mainly in apertural features. A total of four recent species are at present included in the genus. A redescription of Daphnella (Pleurotomella) amphitrites Melvill & Standen, 1903, and notes on Daphnella (Pleurotomella) nereïdum Melvill & Standen, 1903, species assigned to the new genus and originally described from the Gulf of Oman, are included. Bela erythraea Jousseaume, 1895, from Atacka, Suez, Red Sea, is here regarded as a synonym of Pleurotoma (Bela) hongkongensis Sowerby, 1888, from Hong Kong, a species also referred to Taranidaphne. The lectotype and a paralectotype of Bela erythraea are figured. A lectotype for Daphnella (Pleurotomella) amphitrites is designated and figured; syntypes of Pleurotoma (Bela) hongkongensis and Daphnella (Pleurotomella) nereïdum are figured for the first time.