The family of Raphitomidae is currently considered a well supported clade of the Conoidea. The type genus Raphitoma Bellardi, 1847 is well known in the mediterranen Seas with about 40 species, some of which are still undescribed. Morphological analyses carried out on the genus Raphitoma Bellardi, 1847 (Mollusca Neogastropoda Conoidea Raphitomidae) from Mediterranean Sea allowed to identify a new species which is described in the present paper.

In this work, the authors revise 10 pairs of northeastern Atlantic sister cryptic species of the genus Raphitoma Bellardi, 1847 as currently conceived. The species within each pair differ only or mostly in their protoconch morphology, which reflects their larval developmental type (multispiral vs. paucispiral, corresponding to planktrotrophic vs. non-planktotrophic development, respectively). Of the ten studied pairs, one (R. histrix/R. pseudohystrix) includes species with almost allochronic ranges; one pair includes species with allopatric ranges (R. oblonga NE Atlantic, R. alleryana Central editerranean Sea); the remaining 8 studied pairs include exclusively Mediterranean species. Four species are described as new: R. skylla Pusateri & Giannuzzi-Savelli n. sp., R. kharybdis Pusateri & Giannuzzi-Savelli n. sp., R. bartolinorum Pusateri & Giannuzzi-Savelli n. sp., R. ebreorum Pusateri & Giannuzzi-Savelli n. sp. Neotypes are designated for Raphitoma hystrix Bellardi (type species of Raphitoma), Pleurotoma laviae Philippi and Pleurotoma philberti Michaud (type species of Philbertia); lectotypes are designated for Clathurella pseudohystrix Sykes, C. servaini Locard, C. purpurea var. denseclathrata Dautzenberg & Durouchoux, Philbertia alleryana Sulliotti, Ph. papillosa Pallary, Pleurotoma bicolor Risso.

Th e Cancellariidae living off the western African coast, the mid-Atlantic Islands and in the Mediterranean Sea are reviewed. Twenty species are studied: 3 Admetula, 1 Axelella, 2 Bivetiella, 4 Brocchinia, 1 Cancellaria s.l., 1 Nothoadmete, 1 Loxotaphrus, 2 Solatia, 1 Sveltia, 2 Tribia, and 2 Trigonostoma. Trigonostoma gofasi n. sp. is distinguished from the western African T. scala (Gmelin, 1791) n. comb. by its multispiral protoconch, wider umbilicus, smooth columellar callus, axial ribs on the sutural ramp not reaching the suture, and the absence of a siphonal fasciole; and from the central western American T. goniostoma (Sowerby, 1832) in its wider umbilicus, more deviated columella and in being less elongate. A species of Solatia which has previously been recognised as new, is not named due to lack of adequate material. Th e species name in the combination Voluta cancellata Linnaeus, 1767 is declared nomen protectum, making the senior name Murex scabriculus Linnaeus, 1758 invalid as nomen oblitum. A neotype is designated for Murex scala Gmelin, 1791. A lectotype is designated for Cancellaria minima Reeve, 1856, Cancellaria similis Sowerby, 1833, Voluta lyrata Brocchi, 1814, Cancellaria angasi Crosse, 1863 and Cancellaria rigida Sowerby, 1832; the latter name refers to a West African and not a West American species. Distribution data are updated, and relations to fossil taxa are indicated when applicable. Th e protoconchs of 17 species are fi gured; only the protoconch type of the bathyal species Brocchinia decapensis and Nothoadmete euthymei n. comb. remain unknown. Egg capsules attributed to one of the North West African Bivetiella are figured.