What is the GIMP

GIMP is an acronym for GNU Image Manipulation Program. It is a freely distributed program for such tasks as photo retouching & image composition and image authoring.

GIMP is written and developed primarily on GNU/Linux and runs best under X11 on that platform, or varieties of UNIX. It is also available for Microsoft Windows and Mac OS X.

The GIMP at GUADEC

GIMP related talks at GUADEC

Other graphics talks at GUADEC

Typography and graphic design for programmers

Liam Quin

The future of rendering in GNOME

Owen Taylor

GStreamer Internals

Benjamin Otte

Digital Photography in a GNOME Environment

Hubert Figuiére

Sponsors

GIMP conference activities

The GIMP Developers Conference, also known as GIMPCon, is a gathering of GIMP and GEGL developers from all over the World. It is a vital opportunity for the GIMP developers to meet each other and discuss the direction which the software will take over the coming years.

There have been two GIMP Conferences previously, both in Berlin, and both graciously hosted by the CCC (the Chaos Computer Club), a much less chaotic bunch of guys than their name suggests.

Last year's GIMP Conference was a sub-event of the Chaos Communications Camp, a camping trip with broadband and laptops. During the camp, we discussed ways we could make the GIMP better both technically and as a community, which led up to the 2.0 release at the end of March.

At this year's conference we will discuss, among other things,

What we expect from a replacement for the PDB (Procedural Database)

How we will integrate GEGL into the GIMP

Managing plug-in distribution

The GIMP's organisation

The GIMP, Live!

Two of our resident graphics designers, Jakub Steiner (jimmac) and Tuomas Kuosmanen (tigert) are giving a user-day GIMP demonstration on Wednesday. Last year, jimmac presented a series of tutorials on basic GIMP techniques to a crowd of over 100 people, and held them captivated for nearly 3 hours.

This is an opportunity to see what the GIMP can do in the hands of professionals, and to pick up some tips for your own use. A spectacle not to be missed.

About the GIMP

Started in 1995 by Spencer Kimball and Peter Mattis, the GIMP has evolved into a mature and powerful application. The current release is version 2.0, which has major improvements over its predecessors in the user interface, making the GIMP more accessible for casual users as well as graphics professionals.

GIMP is expandable and extensible. It is designed to be augmented with plug-ins and extensions which allow access to its capabilties via a number of languages. The advanced scripting interface allows everything from the simplest task to the most complex image manipulation procedures to be easily scripted.

The software comes with lots of features, some are newly implemented and available with the 2.0 Release. A short list over the most interesting features are: