The science behind pool and spa equipment has come a long way in the past 30 years. We now have the ability to install a virtually maintenance free pool or spa with the new innovations on the market today.

Pentair Salt Water Generators use common table salt to produce all the chlorine a pool needs, safely, effectively, and automatically. The system offers the same sanitation performances as manual chlorine addition without the draw backs. No need to buy, transport, and store chlorine compounds as well as subject your body to it when you swim.

A well balanced water produces a more trouble free pool or spa. The Pentair Intellichem Water Chemistry Controller automatically monitors pool PH and sanitary levels and delivers just the right amount of CO2 to adjust the PH and controls the salt water generator without having to check or adjust them. It’s built-in Langelier Saturation Index Calculator lets pool owners know went the water is in or out of balance and adjust them automatically. The Intellichem can work independently or with other Pentair automation products.

Pentair has harnessed the instant neutralizing power of ultraviolet light to eliminate virtually all unhealthy microorganism in residential pools in a matter of seconds. With a Bioshield UV Disinfection Sterilizer installed you will be able to zap all kinds of unwelcome guests like cryptosporidium, giardia, ecoli and other waterborne pathogens that can cause RWI’s (Recreational Water Illnesses).

The Pentair Easy Touch Control System allows full control off all pool and spa features, offering a new level of convenance. This Panel allows for full system set up, programing and everyday operation. In addition you can access equipment via optional indoor control panels, spa side remotes, and wireless handheld remotes. When used with Screen Logic 2 Interface you gain added control of the pool or spa anywhere across the globe, using either a I Phone, I Pad, IPad Touch, Mac, or PC.

When this system is installed with an automatic vacuum and safety cover, the pool and spa become virtually maintenance free. The installs can be pretty technical but when done properly, they safe the customer time, money, and headaches!