Life is Beautiful simply as one critic put it is “Exceptional, well-crafted, uplifting.”(CSM Staff) Perhaps the quality of the movie — ranging from superb soundtrack to great actors — and strong themes are the most obvious reasons for the foreign film’s success in the United States. Yet the film’s success and ability to still resonate with viewers despite the film being decade old is the message. Protecting child innocence through criticized distractions in the face of adversity and having hope for the future. Perhaps such a situation is especially relatable to 2020 given the coronavirus pandemic and such an uproot of daily life.

Critics of Life is Beautiful argue the film downplays the severity of the Holocaust, yet the darker reality is understading why Americans are attracted to a watered-down version of the Holocaust. Perhaps this film only becomes more evidence for Holocaust deniers.

Almost everyone can appreciate humor; It transcends all borders resonating with just about anyone lighting up the darkest of darks. Perhaps this is one of the obvious reasons for the success of the movie Life is Beautiful. Guido, the main character and well known comedian, ensures the movie is in no short of laughs but the movie progresses and strikes other emotions. Everybody needs a bit of laughter. Perhaps the phrase “laughter is the best medicine” is particularly indicative of the importance of laughter in darker times — especially a global pandemic. From laughing, a viewer will very quickly go to crying as the movie displays the dark sides of the Holocaust yet pushing the notion of optomism through several themes.

Overall, many viewers are able to relate to the themes portrayed. From the moment the movie starts readers fall in love with Guido. A man that despite small obstacles, is able to see the beauty in life. Even in the concentration camp, Guido’s hope and determination to shroud evil from his son strikes the heart string of almost every viewer. Hope is a powerful emotion and is relatable to many Americans especially as we battle a pandemic from which he likes we’ve never seen. A theme in the movie is having hope despite adversity and Americans are extremely sympathetic to this message. Mostly because everybody faces adversity and such determination is inspiring to viewers. Almost everyone can relate to experiencing feelings of fear, anxiety and disillusion from the global catastrophe we have been facing. This movie brought back much needed hope — he is able to have hope in a literal death camp — and showed with determination obstacles can be overcome especially with family by your side.

Strong Familial bonds especially the ones displayed in the movie highlight the importance of family during tragedy which also drives positive response from Americans. Emphasis on the nuclear family and love could be considered a driving force of American life especially during the movie’s conception(1997). Families, especially the nuclear family, have become extremely important in American culture. Almost re-emphasizing the importance of family is the coronavirus pandemic. During lockdown the familial bonds have only grown stronger as American families found creative ways to pass the time from playing classic board games to finger painting. Such a strong family bond found in Life is Beautiful is glorified by American culture however not as much as children are idolized.

Children are the future, and everything to some. Part of such merriment of children is their innocence. It’s delicately beautiful and something that many try to protect for as long as possible. Such is a theme in Life is Beatiful as Guido attempts to distract his five year old from one of the greatest attrocties to ever be committed (the Holocaust). Canceled school, birthday parties, play dates. No doubt unsettling for a five year old(Lowry). “there’s something to be said for trying to keep things as normal as possible while acknowledging that life is going to be different for a while.”(Lowry) Is a child meant to be involved in such affairs — a global pandemic? This is the underlying message Guido promotes in Life is Beautiful. That the problems arising in the world are meant to be borne by the adults who are ultimately responsible for such problems. The innocent children should not have to bear such responsibilities. Perhaps distractions such as Disney Plus, ipads and video games aren’t the worst alternative though we must wonder why Americans believe children must be shielded.

American culture has a strong tendency to shield children from the truth. Perhaps this is why the movie is so relatable to Americans. There is a commonly held belief that children are not capable of understanding the horrors of the world. Guido the main character in a specific scene translates the German guards rules into a game. By doing so, Guido convinces his five year old child he is playing rather than in a concentration camp. Yet readers must wonder why Americans are so prone to protecting child innocence particularly when most of the world’s youth is forced to deal with harsh reality. Perhaps there is another reason Americans are deeming the Holocuast as too horrific for children to learn.

There is an overarching, chilling notion that Americans are purposely shielding their children from the Holocasut. The film repreataedly tones down the violence and horrors associated with the Holocaust to many critics displeasement. “there are those who resent what they (wrongly, in my view) perceive as the story’s suggestion that the experience of an execution camp could be willed away, deflected or denied.”(Logan) Could this watered down version of the Holocasut be used as evidence that the Holocasut was “not that bad”? Perhaps the film is a shroud for the Holocasut deniers. American infatuation with this film could have dark repercussions.

People learn history to understand mistakes of the past to have a brighter future. Arguably failing to teach children the true horrors of the Holcaust will be a disservice to all of humanity. The events of the Hoocasut can’t be forgotten because they serve as a reminder that humans are capable of dark deeds. We are in danger of repeating our mistakes if we don’t take the time and effort to recognize our shortcomings. On another note recognizing the Holocasut is also to pay respects to the innocents that perished during the event.

Often Americans and even people in general tend to focus on the triumphs rather than the failures. We as Americans like to win. It’s as simple as that. Life is Beautiful is arguably one of the lightest Holcoasut movies in the sense that many actual horrors of the Holocaust are removed or glossed over. Starvation and intensive labor is almost excluded from the film as the main characters seem to be faring well. There is no mention of the human experiments nor the gas chambers in which so many people perished. Thus, this Holocaust movie is not necessarily a Holocasut movie due to the fact that much of the Holocasut is left out. To a certain degree, Americans are attracted to this idea. The movie paints the Holocaust almsot as “the Holocaust wasn’t as bad as people say”. This is a common Holocaust denier statement and recognizing this movie as a Holocaust movie or even American attraction to this movie is overall concerning. Yet in relation to the Coronavirus pandemic, Life is Beautiful displays positive effects.

Life is Beautiful continuously connects with viewers perhaps even more so due to the Coronavirus pandemic. As we start to return to normalcy in our daily lives, we take the lessons recognized in Life is Beautiful and apply them to our lives regardless of lockdown or not. Taking a page out of Life is Beautiful maybe we can see the positives resulting from the pandemic. A restored importance in family along with arguably a reinvigoration of mental health awareness. Being optimistic, humorous and hopeful is our best defense in defeating the coronavirus. And as we exit the pandemic and move into the future we’ve only grown stronger. Truly Life is Beautiful.