Nathan Douglas, the 21-year-old triple jumper who sprang to prominence with a personal best of 17.46 metres and a silver medal at the European Indoor Athletics Championships in Birmingham earlier this year, provided the inspiration for a group of teenagers at the Norwich Union-sponsored sports:hall athletics finals at the NEC in Birmingham.

Winners of the multi-discipline indoor event include Olympic 4x100m relay gold medallist Mark Lewis-Francis, who won the under-15 boys all-round title in 1998; Olympic heptathlon bronze medallist Kelly Sotherton, who won the under-15 girls all-round title in 1992; Olympic heptathlon gold medallist Denise Lewis and Britain's leading long-jumper, Jade Johnson.

On an afternoon of fierce competition, Douglas said: "I think sports:hall hits the mark with youngsters. The athletes enjoy it. Sports:hall was the first place where I did the triple jump. It teaches you the basics and at the same time it's fun."

The event, in its 35th year, focuses on shuttle sprints, shot put, standing triple jump, standing long jump, high jump and speed bounce. This year's names to look out for are girls' under-15 winner Abby Sandford, from Dorset, and boys' under-15 winner Ciaran Dolan, from Fermanagh.

Fields in Trust (FIT), formerly the National Playing Fields Association, have strongly condemned inconsistencies in the Government's new strategy to get schoolchildren active, insisting it simply masks newly released figures which show that school playing fields continue to be sold off.

Nineteen school fields were sold last year, according to FIT, with many more under threat. Moreover, according to FIT, which is the charity regarded as the guardians of the nation's playing fields, the Government's latest initiative announced by Ed Balls, the Secretary of State for Children, Schools and Families, to increase the use of recreational space for activities, has been copied straight from FIT literature.

The Government have pledged £225 million to end the 'no ball games' culture, and to revamp playgrounds, a move FIT have urged for some time.

Helen Griffiths, media manager at FIT, claimed: "This is yet another 'flagship' Government initiative, but we could be forgiven for thinking that Ed Balls has been reading some Fields in Trust literature. For some time now, we have been calling for an end to the 'no ball games' culture which dominates so many of our public parks and open spaces, and urging people to adopt our 'Please Play on the Grass' slogan."

There is an alleged moratorium, dating back to October 1998, on the sale of school playing fields. But after a change in parliamentary procedure, whereby the Secretary of State for Education had to agree every school-field sale, followed by further tightening of the legal framework in 2002, new figures have revealed that school fields are still vulnerable to developers.

Alison Moore-Gwyn, chief executive of FIT, said yesterday: "We need to stop seeing the sale of fields as a quick financial or planning fix and create legislation that truly values and protects these open spaces."

Two state schools pupils, Ashley Hill and Anthony Goodwin, from Derby Moor Community Sports College, have stolen a march over their public-school rivals by winning the National Schools Under-16s Fives doubles title, held at St Paul's School, Barnes, one of the bastions of the sport.

Fives is dominated by several independent schools, yet Derby Moor CSC, a state comprehensive in Littleover, Derby, have trained their pupils to play on two refurbished fives courts used by a group of adults enthusiastic about the game.

It is the school's second major success. Hill and Goodwin also won the West of England Under-16 Schools Doubles at Sherborne in January.