After spending Labor Day weekend at home writing code on his personal computer, eBay founder Pierre Omidyar launches AuctionWeb, a site "dedicated to bringing together buyers and sellers in an honest and open marketplace."

A story is circulated that Pierre created eBay to help his wife collect Pez candy dispensers. Later, it’s revealed that the story was a fabricated one.

Pierre hires employee #1, Chris Agarpao, to help coordinate the fast-growing company’s online operations. Over twenty years later, Chris is still an eBay employee.

Pierre and Jeff rent a small suite (#250) at 1025 Hamilton Avenue in San Jose, CA, in what’s now known as Building 6 (Music) on the current eBay campus.

Beanie Babies, Ty Warner’s line of cuddly stuffed animals, take the world by storm. $500 million worth are sold on eBay alone, representing more than 6% of our total volume.

After a successful Initial Public Offering (IPO) in September, we list shares on NASDAQ under the symbol EBAY. Expected to trade for $18, our shares shatter expectations and reach $53.50 in just one day.

The eBay Foundation becomes the first corporate foundation to be endowed with pre-IPO stock. Since then, it has given over $76 million to nonprofit organizations worldwide.

On June 10, 1999, the site goes down. In the middle of the night, CEO Meg Whitman rallies more than 50 engineers from eBay and SunMicrosystems to fix the problem. Less than 20 hours later since the outage began, eBay is back up and open for business.

We continue growing in the U.S. and around the world! In San Jose, the company moves into additional buildings at our current headquarters, then known as eBay Park.

We hold our first eBay University course, teaching users how to become master sellers. The format proves to be a huge success, and eBay University classes continue to be offered around the world today.

We introduce a new fixed-price feature, "Buy It Now," which allows users to buy an item instantly at a set price.

Our first Application Programming Interface (API) goes live. Now developers across the world can harness the power of eBay by building their own custom interfaces with unique functionality.

eBay Stores, a new online storefront directory, launches as a way for people to have their own customized online businesses for just a few dollars a month.

We unveil Auction for America, enabling more than 100,000 users to raise over $10 million for the victims of September 11 and their families. To date, our Giving Works program has supported over 30,000 charities.

We purchase PayPal, unifying the web’s largest marketplace and an innovative system for secure and hassle-free payment. Being part of eBay Inc. for more than a decade enabled PayPal's strong growth and global leadership position in digital payments. Together, PayPal and eBay’s strong synergies benefit both businesses for years. PayPal is spun off 13 years later into an independent company in July 2015.

We grab some worldwide recognition by claiming the 8th spot on Fortune's list of Fastest Growing Companies.

We launch our North America brand campaign, The Power of All of Us, celebrating the power of e-commerce and built on the idea that people are basically good.

We announce our agreement to acquire Rent.com, the leading website for rental housing in the U.S. In 2012, we sell Rent.com to Primedia.

We launch a local classified advertising site called Kijiji. Named for the Swahili word for “village,” Kijiji connects users with their neighbors in search of goods and services in almost a dozen countries. Kijiji is now a part of eBay Classifieds.

Our Main Street program launches as a grassroots community of e-commerce advocates interested in how public policy may affect their ability to buy and sell online. Today, the global network numbers over 275,000 members!

We complete our acquisition of pioneering Internet communications company Skype. In 2009, we sell Skype to a group of investors while retaining a 30% stake in the company.

We join the United Nations Global Compact, the largest voluntary corporate responsibility initiative in the world, demonstrating our belief in the power of business to drive positive social and environmental impact.

A Frank Mulder designed gigayacht becomes the most expensive item ever sold on eBay, auctioning off for $168 million, according to news reports.

PayPal debuts its first mobile application, allowing millions of PayPal users to send money on the go. In 2008, PayPal launches a mobile app for iOS, making it one of the first apps to launch in the Apple app store for the iPhone.

The eBay Green Team starts with 40 passionate San Jose based employees. Since then, Green Teams have taken root with thousands of employees who promote sustainable business practices, inspire environmentally conscious actions and volunteer for green projects in their communities.

Celebrated for our supportive work environment, eBay Inc. lands a coveted spot on Fortune magazine's list of the 100 Best Companies to Work For (and again in 2009).

The PayPal campus becomes the greenest building in San Jose with the opening of the city’s first LEED® Gold-certified building. At the time of opening, the campus was also home to San Jose’s largest commercial solar installation to date.

eBay is one of the first companies to launch an iPhone application and is featured during the Apple app store launch. Today, the app is available on other operating systems including Android.

eBay becomes the first Internet company to be awarded America’s highest honor for technological achievement, the National Medal of Technology & Innovation. The award recognizes our outstanding contributions to entrepreneurship worldwide.

We bring in the leading web-based payment platform Bill Me Later, offering buyers even greater flexibility in their online purchasing. Soon after, eBay and PayPal team up to offer customers a “Bill Me Later” option during checkout. Today, the service is known as PayPal Credit, joining PayPal Working Capital to offer consumers and businesses a powerful range of flexible credit solutions.

Jack Sheng of eForcity Inc. sets an eBay Marketplaces record, becoming the first seller to receive a feedback score of 1,000,000. In honor of this, we named a conference room after him.

In recognition of our commitment to a discrimination-free workplace, eBay receives a perfect 100% rating from the Human Rights Campaign – a distinction the company has continued to receive for every subsequent year until the present day.

We launch the WIN program to support women in building lasting, successful careers in the company. WIN also provides opportunities for women at all levels to learn, grow, and develop.

eBay is on the iPad during its launch! Our new iPad app takes advantage of the tablet’s stunning visuals to build a beautiful and easily shoppable venue. The app is one of the first featured at the Apple keynote debuting the iPad.

We announce the acquisition of ecommerce specialist GSI Commerce, now known as eBay Enterprise. eBay Enterprise provides commerce technologies, omni-channel operations and marketing solutions to brands and retailers of all sizes.

We’re honored to be named one of the world's most ethical companies by the Ethisphere Institute, a leading business ethics think tank. We will go on to receive this designation for four years straight.

PayPal announces PayPal Here, the first mobile payment solution that allows small businesses to accept nearly any form of payment, no matter their size.

PayPal pilots its Working Capital initiative, a new loan program for Small Business. By the end of the year, Working Capital enables thousands of SMBs to borrow tens of millions of dollars. In 2014, the program expands to Australia and the U.K.

Advancing our commitment to cleaner energy sources, we open the world’s first data center to use Bloom Energy Servers™ as the primary, on-site power source, instead of the traditional electric utility grid.

Pointing the way to the physical storefront of the future, we unveil three connected storefronts at San Francisco’s Westfield Shopping Mall. Customers can browse items in a virtual window, pay using PayPal, and arrange for free home delivery.

A well-preserved copy of Superman #1 is sold for $3.2 million on eBay. It’s the most expensive comic book ever sold.

eBay and PayPal announce plans to become independent companies in 2015, enabling both to sharpen their strategic focus and hone in on innovative growth opportunities in their respective markets.

The partnership allows BigCommerce merchants to seamlessly list their products and manage their inventory on eBay, opening up access to more than 169 million customers around the world.

As shopping habits evolve, eBay is staying ahead of the trend, by launching a smart, personal shopping assistant that you can converse with, powered by AI and running on Facebook Messenger.

We are proud to join with the White House in pledging to close the gender wage gap. Based on a 2016 internal study on gender pay equity, we determined that in the U.S., women employees earn 100% of what men make in the same role.

After the devastating Ghost Ship Warehouse Fire in Oakland, CA, eBay and Golden State Warriors superstar Steph Curry team up to raise $45,201 in a charitable auction. 100 percent of the proceeds go to benefit the Oakland Fire Relief Fund.

Powered by structured data and designed to drive highly personalized shopping experiences, the new homepage makes it easy for customers to find that perfect item and get inspired by products that match your style and interests.

The move allows shoppers to filter their search results by shipping times, and guarantees delivery in 3 days or less on 20 million items, with no membership required!

Including more than 50,000 deals in the United States and quickly expanding to Germany and the UK, eBay guarantees that an eligible deal will be the best price online, or we’ll match the lower price of a competitor.

Powered by industry experts and our proprietary verification methods, the eBay Authenticate program guarantees the authenticity of luxury bags sold on eBay. The program has plans to expand to other luxury categories in the near future.

These features allow shoppers to use pictures instead of words to search eBay’s 1.1 billion listings, spanning the new and truly unique. Enabled by artificial intelligence and machine learning, these innovative ways to shop help you quickly find the things you love, making the entire internet shoppable on your mobile device.

In an effort to continue to increase the opportunities available to small business owners and aspiring entrepreneurs, eBay partners with Kiva.org, the microlending platform, to help expand their reach on our global platform.

In partnership with the city of Akron and local small business owners, the program helps educate and empower local entrepreneurs to grow and scale their business online, through integrating inventory onto eBay’s global marketplace.

In partnership with Adyen, a global payments processor, eBay will begin managing the payments flow within the marketplace, simplifying the end-to-end experience for buyers and sellers. The transition will be a multi-year journey.

We reach an agreement to acquire Giosis’ business in Japan. The acquisition expands our footprint in Asia, and bolsters the strength of the Qoo10.jp platform to offer more inventory to our Japanese consumers from all over the world.

eBay unveils a clever solution using Augmented Reality (AR) that enables millions of sellers to quickly select the best USPS flat rate box for items they need to ship.

eBay raised a record amount in 2018 by connecting buyers and sellers to the causes they care about most.

GLIDE’s 20th annual eBay for Charity Power Lunch with Warren Buffet is sold for a record-breaking $4,567,888. The auction has provided over $30 million to support San Francisco’s most vulnerable residents.

eBay lands a no. 8 spot in Indeed’s 2019 Top-Rated Workplaces list, up from our fifteenth ranking in 2018.

We celebrate 25 years of eBay with a toast to the community that powers our marketplace.

eBay launches a new post-sale authentication service for all watches sold for $2,000 or more in the U.S., providing an extra layer of confidence for shoppers browsing new, pre-owned and vintage watches.

eBay announces the appointment of Carol Hayles and Mohak Shroff to its Board of Directors. Separately, the company also announced that Jesse Cohn will step down from the Board of Directors. Additionally, eBay founder Pierre Omidyar, will step back from board responsibilities, and transition to the role of Director Emeritus.

eBay continues to attract top sneaker sellers and bring the most coveted inventory to the marketplace at the most competitive prices by expanding its Authenticity Guarantee program to new and pre-owned collectible sneakers.

eBay announces a new program with strict standards featuring refurbished inventory from the world’s leading brands and backed by industry-leading warranties. With a range of products to fit different needs and budgets, eBay Refurbished offers buyers an affordable and sustainable alternative to shopping new.

Using computer vision technology, the new tool will streamline listing creation for the marketplace’s massive trading card community.

As part of the company's tech-led reimagination, eBay begins to roll out the sale of NFTs on its open marketplace.

As part of eBay's longstanding commitment to consumer safety, the new online portal allows participating authorities to flag and take down a listing, outside of the existing consumer reporting facility on site.

eBay expands its Authenticity Guarantee service to include handbags, offering a selection of tens of thousands of new and pre-owned handbags from designers like Saint Laurent, Gucci, Celine and more — marked with a badge of Authenticity Guarantee.

New tools allow users to create personal trading card portfolios to view, manage, track the value of and list items.

McDonald’s and eBay announced agreements with Lightsource bp to purchase power from what will be Louisiana’s largest solar project.

The deal furthers eBay’s vertical expansion strategy in sneakers and offers customers added confidence in the purchase of high-value items.

Artificial intelligence enables new ways for sellers to display their sneakers with an interactive and high-definition 3D view.

eBay is honored with an 2022 Employees’ Choice Award by Glassdoor, recognizing it as a best place to work among U.S. companies with more than 1,000 employees.

As the company's first Investor Day under CEO Jamie Iannone, the event features presentations from global leaders across the business about eBay’s long-term growth strategy and the new features and products that will accelerate eBay’s tech-led reimagination.

The event debuts a line of "Re-Concept cars" to show how car enthusiasts can build, fix, or maintain their dream car using parts and accessories sourced from eBay.

Pop culture enthusiasts on eBay now have access to new and exclusive product releases from Funko.

A 31,000-square-foot, secure facility and digital marketplace, the eBay vault helps trading card enthusiasts to manage their collections while bringing an added layer of confidence to every transaction.

GLIDE and eBay's annual Power of One Charity Auction Lunch with Warren Buffett celebrates its grand finale with a historic winning bid of $19,000,100. In total, the auction has raised over $53 million to support San Francisco's most vulnerable residents.

The deal combines eBay’s reach and reputation with KnownOrigin’s leading technology to empower a new wave of NFT creators, sellers and buyers.

In collaboration with the Gemological Institute of America, eBay expands its authentication services to its fifth category to foster even more confidence in the shopping and selling environment.

The deal strengthens eBay’s parts and accessories category by bringing the myFitment companies' valuable, tech-based tools in-house to help sellers increase sales and customer satisfaction.

eBay announces the appointment of Aparna Chennapragada to its Board of Directors. Separately, the company also announced that Katie Mitic has decided to step down from the Board of Directors.

The deal complements eBay’s focus category strategy and builds on its offerings to bring even more selection to trading card enthusiasts.

Bringing 3PM Shield to eBay is part of eBay’s ongoing commitment to provide sellers and buyers with a safe and trusted platform enabled by technology. 3PM Shield enhances eBay’s ability to address suspicious or harmful seller behavior, and potentially problematic items.