Kip Moore shared more details about his most personal body of work to date today, revealing to Rolling Stone that his upcoming third studio album on MCA Nashville SLOWHEART will be released on September 8th. Having navigated the path from the staggering success of the release of his smash-hit debut album UP ALL NIGHT, to the resounding critical acclaim that followed with his sophomore offering, WILD ONES, has hit his stride with the upcoming release of SLOWHEART. Moore co-wrote 11 out of 13 tracks, and was the sole producer on seven of the tracks, as well as co-producing five more on the collection that is “between the rough edges of Americana, rock and the evocative storytelling of country, produced to let every guitar lick ring true and every edge and wail of Moore’s voice reverberate raw but strong” (Rolling Stone). He also played guitar throughout the recording, while singing the majority of the harmonies, giving him a new found respect for the talented background vocalists within the Nashville community and resulting in the impactful authenticity of this record.

As Rolling Stone aptly describes, “The Georgia native is nothing if not steadfast: he does what he wants, how he wants it, and doesn’t try to shuffle his emotions under the table. He talks openly about depression and self-doubt, and, on Slowheart, about the life of a grown, modern man, one who wants a family sometimes but seeks a few no-strings thrills at others. He sings about fighting for a relationship at all costs, but also knowing when to pour the last round; and about how music is his real lover, while everything else is just an affair.”

With a wayfarer impulse, Moore followed years on the road touring building one of the genre’s most fervent followings with an extended break exploring the rest of the world, including stops in Iceland, Hawaii, Australia, Costa Rica, Park City and more. This time of reflection culminated in a striking sense of clarity, showcased in Moore’s upcoming collection. With a tip of the hat to 90’s rock and roll, the anthemic “Bittersweet Company” is destined for a spot on the setlist of Moore’s revered live show, as well as “Last Shot” with it’s encore-ready, emphatic chorus. Moore also serves an unflinching wake-up call in the form of the groove-driven track “Blonde,” while he lays bare a more vulnerable layer in the committed ballad, “Try Again.”

“This is the record I’ve been waiting to make,” said Moore. “The one that leaves you with a peace in your heart, knowing you did it exactly the way you wanted to. The one that makes it okay if you fail, because it truly came from your soul and no other place. You can’t go wrong if you can lay your head on your pillow with no regrets.”

SLOWHEART Official Track List:

1.Plead The Fifth

Luke Dick, Josh Kear

2. Just Another Girl

Kip Moore, Westin Davis, Ben Helson

3. I’ve Been Around

Kip Moore, Dan Couch

4. Fast Women

Kip Moore, Blair Daly, Westin Davis and Troy Verges

5. Bittersweet Company

Kip Moore, Josh Miller, Troy Verges

6. Sunburn

Kip Moore, David Garcia, Josh Miller, Steven Olsen

7. More Girls Like You

Kip Moore, Steven Olsen, Josh Miller, David Garcia

8. The Bull

Jon Randall, Luke Dick

9. Blonde

Kip Moore, Steven Olsen, Josh Miller, David Garcia

10. Good Thing

Kip Moore, Josh Miller, Troy Verges

11. Last Shot

Kip Moore, Dan Couch, David Lee Murphy

12. Try Again

Kip Moore, David Garcia, Josh Miller

13. Guitar Man

Kip Moore, Dan Couch, Westin Davis