HYANNIS — The crowd was already on its feet before Kip Moore took the blue-washed stage. When the lights faded, cheers erupted as the country band set up in darkness.

Moore and his four-piece band delivered a high-energy country concert to an equally spirited audience. Although it was a cool Saturday night, Moore brought the heat with his opening song, “Wild Ones.”

Switching between 10 electric guitars, plus Moore’s acoustic, the band showed off its instrumental prowess. Moore set down his guitar for “Just Another Girl,” freeing him to jump on a box downstage and high-five a row of fans between dance moves.

The crowd ate up each moment when Moore wasn’t planted behind the mic with a guitar. For “Beer Money,” Moore let the crowd belt the first verse while he conducted, casually.

Moore’s laid-back vibe didn’t compromise his intense vocals and focused guitar licks. He took a few swigs from a bottle of Jack Daniels throughout the night, raising a glass during “Reckless (Still Growin’ Up).” A handful of fans raised cups of Miller Lite in response.

Things slowed down after “Dirt Road,” when Moore expressed gratitude for the Northeast, saying he always feels love when he plays here. He then rewarded fans with a refreshing rock cover of The Who’s “Baba O’Riley,” pouring the same passionate, growling vocals into each chorus as if it were his own song.

Moore again put his guitar aside for his hit track, “Somethin’ Bout a Truck,” locking eyes with fans while bass guitarist Manny Medina rocked out on the harmonica. Moore got the cue he had to wrap up soon, per the Melody Tent’s curfew, which sparked raging boos from the crowd. After a quick huddle with the rest of the band, Moore kept playing.

He sang two more tracks — “More Girls Like You” and “Heart’s Desire” — before pausing to share his frustration that the world seems to revolve around social media.

Moore introduced each band member, sharing personal stories of financial struggle in pursuit of music. He again expressed how thankful he is for being on that stage after the hardships he has faced.

The concert wrapped up with Moore’s solo acoustic performance of “Guitar Man,” lit by a single spotlight and a dozen cellphone flashlights from the crowd.

“I'll play ‘em fast, I'll play ‘em slow, I'm the guitar man.”

Who: Kip Moore

When: Saturday night only

Where Cape Cod Melody Tent, Hyannis

In concert