At this point in his career, Kip Moore has become a bit of a mainstay in the UK's country music scene. Last year he neared the top of the bill at the Country 2 Country Festival, and this weekend he dominated the hallowed stage of the Royal Albert Hall for the enormous Highways Festival from Live Nation.

Despite this (and the fact he later had more than 5,000 Brits on their feet screaming Guitar Man back at him) Kip is almost a demure character when we met backstage.

Speaking exclusively to Express.co.uk, the 43-year-old star couldn't wait to praise the fans that have continued to attend his shows on this side of the pond year in, year out.

"I feel super grateful," he smiled. "I know that we've built something rock solid here. They've been loyal to us, coming through the years, and we've been loyal back to them. And there seems to be a mutual love happening that keeps building every year."

And, despite being so far from home in Nashville, Tennessee, UK country fans bring Kip back home when he hits the stage.

READ MORE: Morgan Wade talks second album pressure and getting back to the 'sad s**t'

"I feel like this [British] audience is really hanging on the lyrics," Kip went on. "Maybe a hair more [than other audiences]."

No doubt envisioning the thousands of people who were mere hours away from seeing him light up the stage, the effortlessly cool Kip peered into the distance and stressed: "I want them to understand that we notice how they keep showing up.

"We're very aware of them flying from wherever they're from to these different countries and spending their hard-earned money on us. None of that's lost on us. These shows keep filling up, and it's never lost on us."

This leg of Kip's tour is made even more special by the fact his latest record, Damn Love, only hit store shelves weeks prior. And the reception he has received from his fans has been monumental, he explained.

Don't miss...

Voyager - 'If we were going to crash and burn it would have happened' [EUROVISION]

Lord of the Lost - 'We're representing alternative music, not Germany' [INTERVIEW]

Morgan Wade talks second album pressure and getting back to the 'sad s**t' [INTERVIEW]

(Perhaps) more importantly though: Kip is head over heels in love with his new record.

"It's the first record that I, personally, have made that there's not a track I wanna skip while playing live," Kip grinned through his Southern drawl.

13 years in the industry does take its toll, though. Kip - of course - feels pressure from every angle when he's gearing up to write and record a new album; most of all from his critics. What is his secret to keeping himself excited and engaged in his own creativity? It all comes down to expanding his sonic vision at every turn.

Damn Love is Kip's fifth record, and it is certainly the most interesting and diverse body of work he has released thus far - even though he is starkly realistic about the size of his career thus far ("There's still not a lot of commercial success happening, [but] the crowds are getting bigger and bigger every time.") With that in mind, Kip pointed out that pushing himself further on each album is how he makes sure he never loses that spark, Kip tells me.

Invalid email

We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. Read our Privacy Policy

"I keep it exciting by not allowing myself to listen to the outer noise," Kip growled. "[They say:] 'Oh Kip we need you to... you're getting away from what you did on the first record,' or: 'You're not the same guy.' I have to stretch!"

To be completely candid, Kip confessed his creative spontaneity and passion are somewhat filtered through critiquing other artists. "I couldn't imagine—" he started, before readjusting. "Sometimes, I listen to records and I'm like, there's not one ounce of difference in five records [from] an artist. All these records sound the exact same! That's where I would lose my mind. For me it's stretching - sonically - is the main thing."

Kip seems like he's in a good place creatively. And, despite being weeks out from Damn Love's release, he's ready to get started on a new album.

"I've already written a whole n'other project," he chuckled. "I've written an entire record that I'm ready to record now. I don't know when you're going to get to hear, but I do know this: There's always been three years between my records; that will not be the case this time. You're going to be waiting a year and a half - tops."

Kip Moore - Damn Love is out now.