Kip Moore is making his way back to Cedar Rapids this spring. This time, he'll delight fans during an outdoor concert.

Moore has been to Cedar Rapids twice in recent years, but this will be the first time he's played under the stars.

Back on October 3, 2014, Kip hit the stage of the Paramount Theatre and rocked the joint. Here are a couple of videos of his performance that night.

Just over two years later, on November 17, 2016, Moore joined Jon Pardi for a show at the then U.S. Cellular Center. After that show I wrote,

Kip Moore hit the stage around 9:30 and played for a solid 90-minutes. Near the end of his set, he joked that he was breaking curfew and that it was costing him $100 a minute, but he was having too much fun to stop. Moore, on more than one occasion, thanked the fans for coming out on a Thursday night when they all had to work the next day. Everyone crowded onto the jam-packed floor area wasn't thinking a thing about work the next morning, I assure you. The beers were raised high in the air throughout the night, but never quite as much as when Kip launched into "Beer Money." Another favorite moment was when it was just Kip and his guitar on "Hey, Pretty Girl," a song that perfectly matches his voice. And I can't forget Kip singing the praises and magical powers of a pickup in "Somethin' 'Bout A Truck," his only #1 song to date. The song seems to exude summer and on a mid-November night that felt more like summer than late fall, it was made all the sweeter."

Below are photos from that show, and a video of just Kip and his guitar from that warm November night.

As you can see, Kip was sharing his love of Indian Motorcycles with the audience. He had purchased his own Iowa-made motorcycle in September of 2015 at a Nashville dealer.

Enough about the past. Kip Moore will be in Cedar Rapids on Friday, June 10 at the McGrath Amphitheatre. He'll be joined at the show by Runaway June.

Tickets for the show go on sale on Friday, April 1 at 10 a.m. Our special presale will start at 10 a.m. on Thursday, March 31 at 10 a.m. We'll be sending out presale information Wednesday afternoon, March 30. To get it sent straight to your phone, download our free app here.