In 11 years of being property editor, I've never seen anything like this.

Tucked away from view and accessed only by foot, you find this five bedroom home converted from a former railway signal box, engine room and waiting room.

You park at the current Haddiscoe station, cross the existing line and then walk past some cottages and then up some old wrought iron steps, literally in the middle of the countryside but then, at the top of the steps, you see ahead of you, what still looks like a brick, canopied waiting room on a platform, with another platform opposite, but where the track used to be, now grass. No trains run here, now.

This was the Great Eastern railway line from Great Yarmouth to Beccles, which ran for 100 years, from 1859 to 1959, until it closed, one of numerous lines brought to a halt following the Beechings cuts.

What used to be a busy station with people waiting for the trains is now a quiet haven, with the line overgrown with grass.

But, incredibly, whereas the line closed, the infrastructure remained and 18 years ago, the current owners bought the left over railway buildings privately. So, this will be the very first time it has come on the market for sale.

Much of the railway memorabilia such as signage had been stolen but what remained was the signal box complete with its barrelled, pitch pine ceiling inside and solid staircase which would have been used by the station master, every time a train was approaching.

The signals have all gone and long levers he would have used, but the large windows remain giving you the most incredible view out over the river Waveney.

Looking directly ahead, you can see massive brick boulders in a line, the remains of what would have been the railway bridge.

It gives you a fantastic view because the station master would have needed a clear view ahead of the train approaching. This room is now an upstairs living room with that splendid view.

What also makes this house so unusual, is the fact it is all constructed on tall concrete 'stilts' because it needed that elevated view.

The owners have also converted two other brick buildings, the original engine room and a store to create a family home with a large kitchen, bathroom, a master bedroom with a dressing room, four further bedrooms and a cloakroom.

It makes a fantastic home with the most stunning views from all the windows, out to the Broads and countryside with no other dwellings visible, anywhere near.

Then there is the waiting room a little walk from the main house which has been beautifully converted by the owners into a one bedroom holiday let.

The space has been cleverly adapted so there is a double bed as a top bunk with space for a sofa beneath, a kitchen and there is the original fireplace where once shivering rail passengers would have waited in the warmth for their next train.

The only thing there wasn't room for, was a lavatory, so the owners have installed an outside portable toilet.

The property is set in 3.75 acres of totally secluded countryside and comes with a private mooring of approximately 40 ft.

Although this home is secluded and you do have to walk the last leg of the journey to it, you can, of course, get on the train, literally a couple of minutes' walk away, at the existing station, with the line taking you to Norwich one way and Lowestoft, the other.

The owners have one child who goes to school in Norwich daily using this route and there is a school bus which stops nearby for their youngest child, who goes to school locally.

I can honestly say, I've never seen anything like this property which has been given a remarkable new lease of life.

Fore more information, contact Musker McIntyre on 01502 710180 www.muskermcintyre.co.uk

The video has been filmed by Musker McIntyre.