Henry Washington Younger was a businessman and father to the Younger outlaws Cole, Jim, John and Bob. He was the father of fourteen children. He was the son of Colonel Charles Lee Younger and Sarah Sullivan Purcell and married Bersheba Leighton Fristoe in about 1830.

Henry Washington Younger was born on February 22, 1810, in Harrisonville, Missouri, United States. His birth geographical coordinates are 38° 39’ 12” North latitude and 94° 20’ 56” West longitude, with an altitude of 292 meters above sea level. Henry Washington Younger passed away at the age of 52 in 1862.

Astrologically, Henry Washington Younger falls under the Sun sign of Pisces, with Gemini as his Ascendant, Libra as his Moon sign, and Cancer as his Black Moon Lilith sign.

Planets

Planets represent different aspects of personality, life themes, and energies within a birth chart, influencing individual characteristics, motivations, and experiences.

Planets in Signs

Planets in a zodiac sign denote how the energies and qualities associated with those planets express themselves within the context of the themes and attributes of that particular zodiac sign.

Sun Pisces Moon Libra Ascendant Gemini Midheaven Aquarius Mercury Aquarius Venus Aquarius Mars Aries Jupiter Aries Saturn Sagittarius Uranus Scorpio Neptune Sagittarius Pluto Pisces Ceres Taurus Chiron Aquarius Eros Capricorn Hygiea Libra Juno Leo Pallas Aries Vesta Cancer Black Moon Lilith Cancer North Node Libra South Node Aries Part of Fortune Capricorn Vertex Scorpio

Sunin Pisces3° 30’ 53”

The Sun in Pisces in the Natal Chart makes you a sensitive and mystical healer. You are aligned with your subconscious wisdom and can be […] Read more »

Moonin Libra11° 40’ 13”

The Moon in Libra in a Natal Chart makes you sensitive and sincere. You are kind and gentle, and you seek partnerships to soothe your […] Read more »

Ascendantin Gemini16° 3’ 8”

Gemini Ascendant in the Natal Chart makes you passionate about your ideas. You are talkative and open up quickly about your ideas. You can be […] Read more »

Midheavenin Aquarius22° 55’ 35”

Aquarius Midheaven in the Natal Chart makes you erratic and explosive. You have a unique and unconventional approach to your career path. You can be […] Read more »

Mercuryin Aquarius20° 50’ 17”

Is Mercury in Aquarius good or bad? Mercury in Aquarius is an intense placement that enhances your intuition and intellect. The Aquarius Mercury placement brings […] Read more »

Venusin Aquarius28° 22’ 46”

Aquarius Venus in the Natal Chart makes you unusual and brilliant. You value people who inspire breakthroughs. You love epiphanies that help you understand the […] Read more »

Marsin Aries2° 29’ 27”

Aries Mars is a powerful placement, as Mars is this sign’s planetary ruler. You are charming and can be energetic and optimistic. You are passionate […] Read more »

Jupiterin Aries23° 12’ 15”

Aries Jupiter in the Natal Chart is a generational placement. You can find greater nuance by studying the Jupiter in Aries house placement. The Jupiter […] Read more »

Saturnin Sagittarius14° 31’ 57”

Sagittarius Saturn in the Natal Chart brings stability and security through your visionary nature. You are part of a progressive generation. You find ways to […] Read more »

Uranusin Scorpio14° 16’ 26”

Uranus in Scorpio in the Natal Chart makes you eager to pursue your higher mission. You are focused and obsessed with rebelling against the status […] Read more »

Neptunein Sagittarius8° 57’ 35”

Sagittarius Neptune in the Natal Chart indicates you are part of a generation born to help society expand. You help others grow and push boundaries. […] Read more »

Plutoin Pisces15° 4’ 24”

Your generation is part of a movement to bring emotional healing and unity to society. Yet you can be prone to illusions and may become […] Read more »

Ceresin Taurus14° 3’ 24”

Ceres in Taurus in the Natal Chart indicates you are down to earth and practical. You find reasonable ways to express love and show others […] Read more »

Chironin Aquarius17° 34’ 7”

Aquarius Chiron in the Natal Chart is an ideal placement for healing and self-expression. You are true to your authentic desires and channel intense creative […] Read more »

Erosin Capricorn17° 23’ 9”

What does Eros in Capricorn mean for your personality? You are comforting and sensual. You are affectionate and can be gentle and romantic. You have […] Read more »

Hygieain Libra6° 36’ 26”

Hygiea in Libra in the Natal Chart makes you peace-loving and harmonious. You maintain your health by being conscious of balance. You are empathetic and […] Read more »

Junoin Leo4° 29’ 34”

Juno in Leo in the Natal Chart indicates you are passionate about marriage and protecting your home. You are eager to pursue your love interests […] Read more »

Pallasin Aries12° 24’ 0”

Pallas in Aries in the Natal Chart makes you passionate, and you have a dramatic and zealous approach to sharing your message. You can be […] Read more »

Vestain Cancer2° 41’ 58”

Vesta in Cancer in the Natal Chart makes you sensitive and nurturing. You can be emotional and use your gifts to comfort others. You are […] Read more »

Black Moon Lilithin Cancer8° 8’ 38”

Cancer Black Moon Lilith in the Natal Chart makes you dramatic and caring. You are sensitive and hurt easily. When offended, you lash out and […] Read more »

North Nodein Libra17° 4’ 1”

Libra North Node in the Natal Chart makes you eager to heal wounds through partnerships. Your relationships are critical to fulfilling your destiny. You use […] Read more »

South Nodein Aries17° 4’ 1”

Aries South Node in the Natal Chart makes you a leader with a passionate personality. You are driven by a desire to learn from others. […] Read more »

Part of Fortunein Capricorn24° 12’ 28”

Capricorn Part of Fortune in the Natal Chart makes you thrive with repetition. You seek commitment and stability. Your lucky breaks occur when you remain […] Read more »

Vertexin Scorpio8° 51’ 5”

Scorpio Vertex in the Natal Chart indicates an ideal placement for being a change agent. You are daring and use your gifts to help others […] Read more »

Planets in Elements

Planets in elements denote how the fundamental energies and qualities associated with those planets interact with the elemental nature of the signs they inhabit, shaping an individual’s overall temperament and approach to life.

Air Element

The air element in astrology corresponds to three signs; Gemini, Libra, and Aquarius. This element is associated with new insights and perspectives. The air element […] Read more »

Fire Element

The fire element in astrology is associated with passion and motivation. This element brings creativity and intensifies planets and natal houses. Your competitive nature comes […] Read more »

Water Element

Astrologers and other occultists study the water element to understand emotional healing. This element relates to love and compassion. Numerous planets in water signs in […] Read more »

Earth Element

The earth element in astrology is associated with practicality and grounding. This element is associated with career and wealth. Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorn are signs […] Read more »

Planets in Qualities

Planets in qualities signify how the inherent attributes and tendencies of those planets align with the modalities of the signs they occupy, influencing an individual’s style of action, decision-making, and engagement with the world.

Cardinal Quality

The Cardinal quality in astrology is associated with new seasons and initiative. Cardinal signs mark the equinoxes and solstices. The Cardinal modality represents the extremes […] Read more »

Fixed Quality

The second Quality in astrology is the Fixed modality. Fixed Signs follow the Cardinal Signs, bringing strength and endurance. These signs build upon the foundation […] Read more »

Mutable Quality

The third Quality astrological signs are grouped into is mutable. Mutable Signs come at the end of a season. Mutable Signs are associated with flexibility […] Read more »

Planets in Houses

Planets in a zodiac house signify where in life’s areas and experiences the energies and influences of those planets are predominantly focused and expressed.

Sun Tenth House Moon Fifth House Mercury Ninth House Venus Tenth House Mars Eleventh House Jupiter Eleventh House Saturn Sixth House Uranus Sixth House Neptune Sixth House Pluto Tenth House Ceres Twelfth House Chiron Ninth House Eros Eighth House Hygiea Fifth House Juno Third House Pallas Eleventh House Vesta First House Black Moon Lilith Second House North Node Fifth House South Node Eleventh House Part of Fortune Eighth House Vertex Sixth House

Aspects

Aspects reveal the dynamic relationships and interactions between planets within a birth chart, influencing the way their energies combine and manifest in an individual’s life experiences and personality traits.

Within this birth chart, there are 24 major aspects, alongside 12 minor aspects, as well as 6 extra aspects.

Major Aspects

Major aspects highlight significant connections between planets, providing insights into key dynamics, challenges, and potentials shaping an individual’s life journey and psychological makeup.

Jupiter Sextile Midheaven Pluto Square Ascendant Saturn Square Pluto Uranus Trine Pluto Saturn Opposite Ascendant Uranus Quincunx Ascendant Mercury Conjunct Midheaven Mercury Sextile Jupiter Moon Sextile Saturn Moon Sextile Neptune Moon Quincunx Pluto Moon Trine Ascendant Sun Conjunct Venus Sun Square Neptune Mercury Trine Ascendant Venus Conjunct Midheaven Venus Sextile Jupiter Mars Trine Neptune Saturn Conjunct Neptune Neptune Square Pluto Ascendant Trine Midheaven Neptune Opposite Ascendant Mercury Square Uranus Mercury Conjunct Venus

Explore detailed articles on the major aspects in this birth chart, gaining deeper insights into this cosmic identity. Dive into each aspect and uncover how it shapes Henry Washington Younger’s life journey.

Mercury Conjunct Midheavenorb: 2°

Mercury conjunct Midheaven in the Natal Chart makes you intellectual and outgoing. Your career brings opportunities to express your creativity and intelligence. You are thoughtful […] Read more »

Mercury Sextile Jupiterorb: 2°

What does Mercury sextile Jupiter mean? When this aspect appears in a Natal Chart, it typically brings an inquisitive energy. A person with this in […] Read more »

Moon Sextile Saturnorb: 3°

When the Moon is sextile Saturn in a Natal Chart, this typically indicates that a person is responsible and more on the serious side. They […] Read more »

Moon Sextile Neptuneorb: 3°

You are likely sensitive and intuitive if you’ve got the Moon sextile Neptune in your Natal Chart. Even if you aren’t the most loud or […] Read more »

Moon Quincunx Plutoorb: 3°

Someone with the Moon quincunx Pluto in a Natal Chart will likely be secretive, emotionally intense, and self-destructive. They typically have inner thoughts and feelings […] Read more »

Sun Conjunct Venusorb: 5°

When the Sun is conjunct Venus in your Natal Chart, you are exceptionally romantic. Others see you as beautiful, and you have a gift for […] Read more »

Sun Square Neptuneorb: 5°

The Sun square Neptune in the Natal Chart makes you dreamy and mystical. Yet you aren’t open to expressing your unique traits because you are […] Read more »

Venus Conjunct Midheavenorb: 5°

Venus conjunct the Midheaven in the Natal Chart makes you stand out from the crowd for your exceptional grace and beauty. You are a charming […] Read more »

Venus Sextile Jupiterorb: 5°

Venus sextile Jupiter in a chart typically indicates that a person is generous, kind, and loving. They are optimistic, especially when it comes to their […] Read more »

Saturn Conjunct Neptuneorb: 6°

Saturn conjunct Neptune in a chart can create the potential for both stability and instability. Someone with this aspect in their chart may lean more […] Read more »

Mercury Conjunct Venusorb: 8°

Mercury conjunct Venus in the Natal Chart makes you sensitive to words and ideas. You are diplomatic and think of ways to make others feel […] Read more »

Minor Aspects

Minor aspects represent subtler connections between planets, offering additional nuances and layers of interpretation to understand more detailed influences on an individual’s personality and experiences.

Mars Square Vesta Saturn Quincunx Ceres Uranus Opposite Ceres Sun Quincunx Juno Sun Trine Vesta Moon Opposite Pallas Ascendant Trine North Node Ascendant Sextile South Node Jupiter Square Part of Fortune Neptune Quincunx Black Moon Lilith Pluto Sextile Ceres Chiron Trine Ascendant

Discover additional layers of meaning with this collection of articles on the minor aspects found in Henry Washington Younger’s birth chart. Delve deeper into these cosmic nuances to gain a richer understanding of this astrological profile.

Saturn Quincunx Ceresorb: 0°

Saturn quincunx Ceres in a chart disconnects practicality and responsibility from affection and caring. People with this quincunx aren’t necessarily cold or uncaring, but they […] Read more »

Sun Quincunx Junoorb: 1°

The Sun quincunx Juno in the Natal Chart makes you question your abilities. You are creative, but stifle your artistic side to please someone special. […] Read more »

Sun Trine Vestaorb: 1°

The Sun trine Vesta in the Natal Chart makes you eager to show your spiritual routines. Your creative interests make you feel spiritually aligned. You […] Read more »

Extra Aspects

Extra aspects, though less emphasized than major or minor aspects, contribute subtle nuances and intricacies to the overall astrological interpretation, offering additional insights into an individual’s personality traits and life experiences.

Eros Square North Node Eros Square South Node Chiron Trine North Node Chiron Sextile South Node Black Moon Lilith Trine Vertex Hygiea Square Black Moon Lilith

Explore how these extra aspects contribute to the intricate tapestry of Henry Washington Younger’s life path through subtler influences. Dive into each extra aspect and uncover the hidden gems that shape a unique cosmic identity.

Black Moon Lilith Trine Vertexorb: 1°

The Black Moon Lilith trine the Vertex in the Natal Chart makes you confident and open about your desires. You are independent and self-assured. You […] Read more »

Houses

A house starting in a zodiac sign indicates the area of life where the qualities and themes of that sign are particularly emphasized and influential within an individual’s birth chart.