1/15/1844 - Crazy times coming, on the Jackson County, Missouri farm of respected landowner (the family has properties in Jackson and Cass Counties, mail contractor, and merchant, Henry Washington Younger and his wife, the daughter of a prosperous local farmer, Bersheba Leighton Fristoe, a boy who will one day make savage history (the seventh child of fourteen she will bring into the world) is born ... Thomas Coleman "Cole" Younger.

Cole

Growing up, Cole does well in school and attends church with his family every week and will later describe the farm he calls home as a "garden spot." But it is a garden full of snakes and not a good place to grow up at all as the residents of the area struggle with the slavery issue that will soon plunge the entire nation into civil war. Well enough off to afford house slaves for tending to chores and serving meals, Henry Younger is nevertheless a Union man and against the state's secession, a position his son Cole disagrees with emphatically. When the Civil War breaks out in 1861, Henry's position becomes untenable as he loses thousands of dollars in stolen and damaged property as both sides see him as an enemy. Spurred into choosing a side at seventeen when he gets into a fight over a girl at a country dance with a older member of the Missouri militia, Cole leaves home and joins the pro-Confederate riders of school teacher turned guerilla, William Clarke Quantrill, and soon identified as such, his father is the first member of the family to pay the price for his son's decision. Going about his business near the town of Westport, in July of 1862, Henry is shot in the back three times and killed by a member of the Kansas militia. Seven months later, knowing his family has secretly been providing food and clothing to her guerilla son, militia soldiers show up at his mother's home and burn it to the ground. And the atrocities against the Youngers continue when three of Cole's sisters and two female cousins are arrested as spies and jailed in a three-story brick building in Kansas City. On August 13, 1863, the building suddenly collapses and one of the Younger cousins is killed (along with three other women, one of which is the sister of southern guerilla, William T. Anderson, who will earn the nickname, "Bloody Bill" reaping vengeance for her death) ... a death Cole believes was deliberately instigated to eliminate women sympathizing with the Southern cause.