The Hooters are a rock band from Philadelphia, United States. Band has been active since 1980. Despite being active for almost 40 years now, they released only 6 studio albums and 1 EP. I hope that other fans of the band won’t fault me for saying that they released “only” 6 studio albums. All their songs are great, but one would hope that a band that’s been with us for as long as The Hooters have been, that we would see more albums. Then again, maybe if they would release albums more regularly their music would end up being more watered done. It’s a double edged sword wanting more music from your favorite bands.

What I especially like about The hooters is that they have toured extensively throughout US and Europe and I’m thankful for that to them. As a resident of the UK, it’s not easy to travel to their shows in America. Visiting their gigs in UK and elsewhere in Europe is much more feasible for me. Another thing that I like about the band is that they stuck together long enough to tour in the age of good quality video drones so that we can enjoy in concert footage of theirs recorded with one of these bad boys.

This website is made by one lone fan of The Hooters, as a tribute to this great band, whose avid fan I’ve been for over 20 years. Their music has really helped me through some bad times and I hope that other people will discover their music, to help them through their own bad times. On this website my plan is to post a bit about band history, their music & discography, news and updates, social updates, and last but not least, various media, like photos and concert footage that I like.

This video from a concert at Tower Theatre in Philadelphia, from 1986, is right about the time that the band was starting getting into its own. During those times there obviously weren’t any full HD camera, affordable video drones or anything like that, to capture a better recording. Video posted above is actually taken from a VHS, so quality isn’t all that great. Still this video allows us to see what the band looked like at their beginnings, when playing live. Sharing that kind of stuff is what we’re going to be focusing on here on the website.

“The Hooters” have this tendency to focus on Germany during their shows. It’s no wonder really, they are very popular there, just like David Hasselhoff. Since I’m based in the UK, I usually have to travel to see their shows, but I don’t mind. I like to think of traveling as an added bonus to seeing their shows. It would be great if they added more shows to their US tour, the US audience is somehow always ignored by the band.

NOTE: for all of you that will be following us on our Europe tour, please take a look at Zen Travel Croatia, company that will be selling tickets for our concerts. They can also organise your complete European trip, including transport, accomodation etc etc.