5th Abel Gance (after La Folie du Docteur Tube, Napoleon, Mater Dolorosa and Au Secours!)

Buckle up, this is a long one…

I’ve been searching for a copy of this for years because I’m fascinated by the spectre of disaster that swirls around this. Gance was riding high on success when he made this, the darling of European cinema for La Roue and Napoleon, and the massive bomb that this became derailed his career permanently. If you look at Gance’s artistic philosophy, it’s perhaps not surprising that he was completely out of step with the 30s. Unlike the realist world of Renoir or the poetry of Carné, Gance was heavily influenced by the Romantics of the 19th century. Here, all…

if you're as excited as i was to learn that one of the first sound features made in france was an apocalyptic disaster film, let me temper your enthusiasm. when the typically ambitious abel gance project ran over 3 hours, his backers seized control and hacked the film beyond recognition so it's a bit hard to judge fairly at this point. what is fair to say is that it nearly ruined the visionary director's career and he was confined to 'safe' projects thereafter. based on an 1894 novel about the imminent collision of a comet with earth, the film featured the director and his then wife in stagey melodramatic performances and its oddity is established in the first scene: the…

The end of the world, based on the same source as August Blom's (better) silent film of 12 years before.

I saw the 'complete' as opposed to American version.

Let's be honest: 4% of Gance's film is brilliant (i.e. the falling elevator); 16% is at least interesting; and 80% of it is the most appalling work that can be excused by saying, "Well, this was the early years of sound."

Seriously, folks: there are scenes in the first 15 minutes of this film that would shame a British "quota quickie" of the time, or a PRC/Tiffany/Monogram studio's work from the dregs of Hollywood. It improves, but there are serious air pockets during the flight.

Yes, part of this can be…