Musical Adaptations of Anna Cora Mowatt's "Fashion"

A Brief Summary of Production Details

"Fashion! or Life in New York; A Comedy with Music"

Theatre: Royal Playhouse

Opening Date: January 20, 1959

Book: credited to Anna Cora Mowatt

Music: Complied and Arranged by Deems Taylor

Direction:

David Fulford Choreography:Rhoda Levine Scenery:Donald Bailey Tirrell Costumes: Maganini Lighting:Donald Bailey Tirrell Musical Direction: William Hess Producers: David Fulford and William Dempsey

Time and Place: New York City, 1845. The Tiffany’s house.

Synopsis: The pretentious New Yorker Mrs. Tiffany has illusions of social grandeur and surrounds herself with culture, has an all-French staff, and entertains anyone she believes has aristocratic connections. Mrs. Tiffany insists that her daughter Seraphina wed the Count di Jolimaitre even though she does not love him. Mr. Tiffany prefers more down-to-earth society and is often seen with Adam Trueman, a businessman with some sketchy legal episodes in his past. When the calculating Mr. Snobson get hold of damaging information, he tries to blackmail Trueman and aims to marry Seraphina himself. A long-lost granddaughter of Trueman’s helps him save his reputation, and she also exposes the count as nothing more than a French chef named Gustave Treadmill. Mr. Tiffany puts his foot down and sends his wife and daughter to stay in the simple rustic country home of Trueman to learn less refined values. (Synopsis quoted from Off-Broadway Musicals since 1919: From Greenwhich Village Follies to The Toxic Avenger by Thomas S. Hischak)

CHARACTER

DESCRIPTION

ORIGINAL CAST MEMBER

Mrs. Tiffany Enid Markey Prudence

Dee Victor

Millinette Margot Hand Gertrude Rosina Fernhoff Seraphina Tiffany June Ericson Miss Proudacre Carollee Campbell Mrs. Tiffany’s Harpist Marietta Able Adam Trueman Will Geer Count Jolimaitre Fredric Warriner Mr. Tiffany William Swetland T. Tennyson Twinkle Al Corbin Augustus Fogg Francis Dux Snobson Stanley Jay Zeke Stephen Daley

Musical Numbers

Resources

Here is a link to the script of this musical.

.

Further Reading

BacktoIndexPage