Tourist Places of the Mira Canton

The Mira Canton has beautiful landscapes and a wide variety of environments thanks to its geographical location, which allows it to be recognized for its beautiful tourist and natural attractions that are perfect for national and foreign visitors.

Mira is known as the " Balcony of the Andes ", because this place has several viewpoints, where you can see the Andes Mountains that are shown before your eyes, added that you can also see

Hoya del Chota Valley, the Iguán Hill to the North, and we cannot fail to mention its multicolored mantle of meadows and crops around the entire city.

Attractions of the Mira Canton

Find the most visited sites of Mira, located in the Province of Carchi, such as the emblematic Church of Mira, a place visited by many tourists every year.

Sanctuary of the Virgin of Clarity

This place is a colonial-style church that was built at the end of the 15th century, it has a nave, on whose main altar is the image of the Blessed Virgin of Charity. The origin of the virgin is not known for sure, but it is believed that it dates back to 1545. You can also find the Holy Custody itself that is bathed in gold; as well as you will see the baptismal stone, a colonial bell dating from the time of Governor Nycolas Lopes Narchyn Ynyra . That is not all, instead there are also two pictorial works: “ Las Almas ” painting and “ Divina Pastora ” made by Luis de Rivera.

Uyama Ecotourism Complex

This place has a perfect climate to enjoy its crystalline waters from natural slopes, these run permanently so that the waters are always fresh. In addition to that it also has a pool with a long slide, as well as cabins to stay, a perfect lagoon for sport fishing. It is not far from Mira, only 7 km away on the road to the city of Ibarra.

Hostería Paraíso Escondido

The hostel is located in the Tulquizán sector, approximately 30 minutes away from the town center of Mira. The place offers its visitors ecological cabins, natural pools with water from springs, as well as ecological crops, the possibility of sport fishing, horseback riding on ecological trails , it is really a perfect place for adventure tourism in sight.

Rio Blanco Stone Museum

This attraction is located in Río Blanco, in which you can observe its display of stones with different shapes and colors, which were naturally carved by the clash of water from the river. You can see that many have shapes that look like the characteristic natural silhouettes of animals, as well as mountains, men, stars, and more. Nor can you miss a natural spectacle that many enjoy, this is the union of the crystalline waters of the Blanco River with the murky waters of the Mira River .

Gaen Artisan Group in Mascarilla

This is a craft store where masks are exhibited and sold, as well as ceramic objects inspired by Afro-Ecuadorian culture, they are meticulously crafted with very beautiful details made by the women of the site.

Sankofa Artisan Group in San Juan de Lachas

In this workshop, useful and decorative objects made of ceramics are exhibited and sold, which are also adorned with rampira straw, each object is different and keeps the particularity of the identity of the place. .

Other Sites of Interest