News

Tech News

Review: Sony Xperia P smartphone

This story is from August 19, 2012

Review: Sony Xperia P smartphone

At first glance, the Xperia P looks like a compact version of the Xperia S.

At first glance, the Xperia P looks like a compact version of the Xperia S.

Key Highlights

Sony Xperia P features a 4-inch TFT display with a resolution of 540x960 pixels, and pixel density of 275ppi. It is powered by a dual-core 1GHz processor along with 1GB of RAM.

NEW DELHI: At first glance, the Xperia P looks like a compact version of the Xperia S. However, we realised very quickly that it's much better in terms of build quality and overall aesthetics.

Unlike the larger Xperia S, it has unibody construction with a matte finish rear. The trademark transparent strip at the bottom has capacitive buttons for back, home and menu. This is unlike other Xperia phones where the buttons were actually placed above the transparent strip, leading to confusion in operating the device.

The 4-inch display features Sony's WhiteMagic technology and Mobile Bravia engine. Sony claims, and we verify that the screen really does have one of the best whites we have seen in a phone and that too with remarkable sharpness across the entire screen. However, there is a flipside — the black levels are no so great. Most of the time, the blacks look more like a shade of dark grey — more apparent while viewing videos and photographs.

The phone's performance across apps and multimedia usage is smooth thanks to the dual core processor. However, even with 1GB of RAM, it did struggle with multitasking. The phone currently runs Android 2.3 with a planned upgrade to Android 4.0, expected within a few months.

The Xperia P feels lacking in the still camera and battery life department. Even though the phone has an 8MP autofocus camera with image stabilisation, the image quality is disappointing. Other than the images shot outdoors in sunlight, there is visible noise in each image, even with ample light. The full HD video recording is a saving grace with excellent image quality and great sound.

In the battery department, the 1,305 mAh battery struggles to last a full day with constant data connectivity — disappointing for a phone at this price. Another issue that might turn away potential buyers is the nonexpandable storage — you're stuck with 16GB. The phone does offers USB on-the-go support for added storage, but the adapter cable is not included in the box.

We think that even though the Xperia P looks complete, it feels expensive and lower value compared to the Motorola Atrix 2. The Atrix 2 has a larger display, dual core processor, 1GB RAM, expandable storage and a larger 1,785 mAh battery. And it's cheaper than the Xperia P, priced at Rs 22,990.

End of Article

FOLLOW US ON SOCIAL MEDIA