The Spurs have talked to teams in the lottery, including the Toronto Raptors and Sacramento Kings, who hold the fifth and seventh picks, respectively. The Kings are determined to get a frontline point guard, and have also talked with the Denver Nuggets about Raymond Felton. It’s unclear who the Spurs would prefer to take if they acquired a high lottery pick.

Would the Kings be willing to send the No. 7 pick to the Nuggets for Raymond Felton and the No. 22 pick? The Kings have had interest in Felton but it’s probably going to take them giving up the No. 7 pick to get him. I wouldn’t be shocked to see the Nuggets grab Jonas Valanciunas or Bismack Biyombo if they could get up to No. 7.

Karl has expressed interest in bringing back Raymond Felton, who, arguably, was Denver’s best player down the stretch in the regular season (Felton faltered at times in the postseason). But Felton wants to be a starting point guard. Denver’s starting point guard is Ty Lawson. The Nuggets will try to convince Felton to buy into Denver (he’s not a free agent, however), and they’ll do their due diligence in the coming months considering a trade, talking with teams that need a starting point guard.

“My hope is Raymond and (Ty) could stay together and kind of work the point guard position into a two-guard position,” Karl said. “When we play them together, I still think that is one of our most powerful weapons. It wasn’t as successful against OKC, but in those last few games, (but) it was really important to us. I still think that both of them are fantastic little guards, and I would like to have both of them back next year.” Felton, however, is prideful. When he was with the Knicks, he was one Rajon Rondo away from making the Eastern Conference all-star team. With Denver, he comes off the bench. Felton dropped hints this spring that he wants to be a starter. To do that likely would require a trade. The Nuggets surely will listen to offers for Felton. The 26-year-old is entering the final year of his contract and will make $7.5 million next season, compared with Lawson’s $1.6 million.

Denver finds itself down 2-0 in this best-of-seven series NBA playoff series. All looks grim. But want to make Felton angry? Mention the possibility of a sweep by the Thunder. “We’re definitely coming back to Oklahoma City,” Felton insisted Wednesday, his dare-me feistiness in sharp contrast to the sullen atmosphere of the visitors dressing room. “We’re going home to bounce back, get these next two games, one game at a time, and make it a series. We’ll get our confidence back and be better prepared when we come back here. We’re definitely coming back.”

Reserve point guard Raymond Felton on Monday went on the record with Denver reporters saying he hoped to draw the Thunder in the opening round. Felton, according to the Denver Post, said he felt like his team owed Oklahoma City because the Thunder was talking trash in the teams’ final two regular season meetings, both Thunder wins. Nuggets coach George Karl was even more candid. Karl was quoted as saying, “There’s no question there’s a cockiness to Oklahoma City.”