Raymond Felton is an extremely important player for the Oklahoma City Thunder on and off the court. His minutes throughout the 2018-19 season fluctuated quite a bit, but Felton made great use of what he was given as a veteran spark off of the bench.

In the 2017-18 season, Felton appeared in all 82 games for Oklahoma City and was the defined backup point guard averaging 16.6 minutes per game. With the acquisition of Dennis Schroder in the summer of 2018, Felton slipped down the depth chart to the team’s third point guard. Felton’s court time this season fell to 11.5 minutes per game, by far the lowest of his career. He also only appeared in 33 games all season.

Even with the demotion on the depth chart, Felton accepted his role and stayed positive. As the team veteran, he put an emphasis on helping the young guys on the team develop both on and off the court.

Felton was given the most court time when Russell Westbrook was injured or in foul trouble. This is where he proved he could still be a key asset on the team. On the season, Felton averaged 4.3 points and 1.6 assists on 92.3 percent shooting from the free throw line.

After a regular spent mostly on the bench as a vocal leader, Felton saw an increased role in the playoffs. Head Coach Billy Donovan felt comfortable playing him over some of the young, inexperienced players that he played more during the regular season.

In Oklahoma City’s five playoff games in 2019, Felton played in every single game and was even used as an off the ball guard next to another point guard. His playoff experience that had included 42 games coming into this year was something Oklahoma City trusted him by.

Although he is slated to be a free agent this summer, Felton has made it very clear he loves his role in Oklahoma City and wants to come back. The feeling is mutual from the front office, and Felton will more than likely be in a Thunder uniform once again next season.

In his exit interview, Raymond Felton was asking if he had thought about coming back, considering he is a free agent this summer. “Yeah, no question. I love it here. I love this organization, I love this team, I love this city,” Felton said. “I’m a guy at the point of my career like I want to be just settled and enjoy playing the game that I love, and enjoy being in the city that loves me back and loves their team and there is no better place than here, really. So yeah, I would love to come back but you know free agency hits and we’ll see what happens.”

Felton, if brought back, will more than likely play under a veteran minimum contract once again worth around $2.4 million. He would be beneficial to the Thunder locker room as a mentor going forward. He is a big brother to the young players on the team, and most of them refer to Felton as Unc, short for uncle.

Raymond Felton and Terrance Ferguson both spend a lot of time in the offseason in Texas, and Felton several times has said he plans on working with him a lot this summer to help Ferguson’s game evolve. Felton in his exit interview mentioned he is going to help him with ball handling and moves off the dribble to make him a more complete scorer.

In limited minutes for the Thunder, Raymond Felton was extremely important. His stats don’t tell the whole story, and he is essential to the chemistry of the team. He is definitely a player that understands his role and does the most with it. He truly cares about the development of the roster and the direction of this franchise and should be brought back next season.