The annual AFL Anzac Day clash in New Zealand will take on extra significance this year when St Kilda and Carlton meet at Wellington's Westpac Stadium in round 4.

Not only will it mark the centenary of the Gallipoli landing, but it will also celebrate the lives of two fallen heroes who played for the Saints and Blues before making the ultimate sacrifice on the battlefields of World War I.

Incredibly, Claude Crowl (St Kilda) and Fen McDonald (Carlton) were not only believed to have perished on the first day of the Gallipoli battle, but they also debuted in the same match 104 years ago at Princes Park.

The connection between Crowl and McDonald wasn't known to the AFL prior to the 2015 fixture release in October.

In all, 17 VFL players are believed to have died in the Gallipoli campaign - six of them on its first day on April 25, 1915.

One hundred days out from this year's Carlton-St Kilda match, Saints coach Alan Richardson and Blues coach Mick Malthouse were both on hand at Melbourne's Shrine of Remembrance to not only pay tribute to those who had perished fighting in wars for Australia but also express their humility at being involved in such a special occasion.

"We are privileged to have the opportunity to honour all past and present service men and women by playing in the Anzac Day Centenary clash," Richardson said.

"What makes this especially powerful is that, sadly, St Kilda and Carlton have a direct link to Anzac Day through the deaths of past players Claude Crowl and Fen McDonald.

"It's quite incredible and humbling to think that 100 years ago to the day when we play our game in New Zealand, those two young men and many others were killed at Gallipoli. They were just 22 and 23 years of age, which is the average age of an AFL player.

"It is an amazing day, it's a real privilege for the footy clubs to represent the competition and sport in general.

"It was a great experience last year to travel to New Zealand and see how committed the New Zealand people were to join in and celebrate and pay their respects to those that have fallen and I can only imagine how significant this day will be given the enormity of the occasion ... and I'm sure the significance won't be lost on our players and it will be incredibly exciting."

Malthouse added: "We see this game as an important opportunity to educate our players and fans about the stories of those who fought and especially those who lost their lives in World War I.

"The Anzac Day Centenary is an important moment in Australia's history and I know both clubs are deeply honoured to be part of the commemorations.

"For the club, supporters and everyone, I think it gives great meaning to the Anzac name.

"I'm guilty of this as much as probably a lot of Australians, is that we celebrate the 25th of April but I just wonder how many times we've actually thought of New Zealanders ... and in this case we really open up our mind and hearts to all the people that committed to the Anzac cause.

"It's a great reminder, it's humbling, it's more than a game ... it's a remembrance of what took place."

Malthouse hoped the St Kilda-Carlton fixture would become a regular occurrence on Anzac Day and stressed the day should not just be the domain of the traditional Essendon-Collingwood blockbuster.

"I'd treat it as a great privilege to be a part of it each year," Malthouse said. "The disappointing thing with football is that ... not every player will have that opportunity (to play on Anzac Day).

"It is the grandest day in Australia's history and it's a great opportunity to experience that feeling when you play or coach or be part of it.