Our firm has had a presence in the DFW area since 1972 and we take pride in developing strategies for financial challenges for individuals, families, and small businesses. We are a process-driven financial planning firm and work side-by-side with our clients to provide premier service for today and tomorrow.

1847Financial Dallas/Fort Worth is proud to be among a select group of firms across the country affiliated with The Penn Mutual Life Insurance Company, a leader in life insurance and investment services, for more than 175 years.

Why Partner With Us

Are you a financial professional wondering if the grass is greener elsewhere?

We are passionate about helping financial professionals build their practices using our Grass Roots Program and helping find the right solutions for your clients. If you’re looking to partner with a team that will give your practice the strong roots to thrive, schedule a time to discuss by contacting (469) 737-4044.

Our Program

Why Choose Us

Grow

Grow your practice using time-tested systems and marketing resources for lead generation, client acquisition, servicing, digital marketing and branding of your business.

Earn

Enhanced compensation, office space, and travel rewards with very low expenses, allowing you to keep more of what you earn.

Products

Utilize competitive products spanning every major category for insurance and protection, as well as investments and securities.

Experience

Easier path to success with over 150 years of Field Leadership experience, so you’ll never go on an appointment unprepared.

Business

Unique system and technology with rapid business processing. Cases issue quickly, so you get paid faster.

LEAP

Access to a unique LEAP financial planning system.

LEAP®, Leap-The Model for Financial Success™, The Leap Model™, Macro Manager™, Personal Macro Economics Process™, Wealth In Motion®, Protection, Savings, and Growth Model®, and Lifetime Economic Acceleration Process™ are trademarks and service marks of Leap Systems, LLC which is an independent affiliate of Penn Mutual Life Insurance Company (PML). HTK is a wholly owned subsidiary of PML. Trademarks belong to their respective owners.

Today, we're faced with two big dilemmas: saving enough for retirement, and stretching those savings, as Americans are living longer, more productive lives. A comfortable retirement will likely depend on personal savings and self-funded retirement plans. We can help you plan and prepare ahead of time so you can comfortably enjoy retirement.