A Foxconn subsidiary in Fort Worth is cutting 115 jobs permanently, saying it’s due to a loss of business from key customers.

Job cuts at the S&B Industry Inc. plant on Park Vista Boulevard begin July 21, according to a notice to the state.

Advertisement

The S&B manufacturing facility repairs and refurbishes wireless technology products, said Jean Chang, human resources director at the plant.

Advertisement

Related:Balfour & Co. to cut nearly 200 employees as it plans Dallas exit

Business Briefing

Become a business insider with the latest news.

Or with:

Google

Facebook

By signing up you agree to our Terms of Service and Privacy Policy

Some employees may be able to transfer to other operations, Chang said in a notice filed with the Texas Workforce Commission. But it’s not clear if the location is closing. S&B also provides forward and reverse logistics for e-commerce companies.

Taiwanese electronics maker Foxconn is one of Apple’s largest suppliers and is one of the largest electronics manufacturers in the world.

Advertisement

During the Trump administration, Texas and other states went after Foxconn investments in the U.S. The biggest one went to Wisconsin but ended up being scaled back significantly.

Twitter: @MariaHalkias

Looking for more retail coverage? Click here to read all retail news and updates. Click here to subscribe to D-FW Retail and more newsletters from The Dallas Morning News.

Advertisement

Related Stories

Meet the All-Star Globe Life employees serving Rangers fans for decades

For veteran concessions bartenders, chefs and managers at Globe Life Field, the past year has been a heyday, not just for the World Series champions but for the operation behind the scenes at the stadium. Many food service workers at the ballpark have put in decades for the Rangers. This week’s All-Star Game was the cherry on top.

US gained 206,000 jobs in June, a sign of continued economic strength

Friday’s report from the Labor Department also showed that the unemployment rate ticked up from 4% to a still-low 4.1%.

Hurst Starbucks joins other Texas stores in unionizing

Employees at another North Texas Starbucks voted to unionize last week, following a nationwide trend.