Hercule Poirot, Christie's famous detective from Belgium, has been portrayed many times in films, but never quite like this. Here we get Tony Randall, wildly, he introduces himself at the beginning of the film, giving us a much more energetic version of the character, played with a light touch of arrogance, exasperation and charm. He is less the fussbudget that others, including Christie, have made him out to be, and more actively engaged. I have to say that it is my favorite interpretation yet.

The film itself is a bit of a mixed bag, never really sure if it wants to fully be a comedy or a mystery. As a comedy it fails as its humor is a little too…

There's a killer on the loose in London, and the only thing linking the victims are their initials, the one AA, the second BB. Luckily, Hercule Poirot just happens to be on the scene, and ready to solve another case.

It's almost immediately obvious that what we have here is an attempt to cash in on the success of the Margaret Rutherford Miss Marple series of films, another Agatha Christie detective, a contemporized setting, a script which takes a semi-comedic approach to the material, that unmistakable Ron Goodwin score, and just to drive the point home, a cameo from Miss Marple and Mr Stringer.

And clearly they were aiming for a new franchise, with Tony Randall cast in the lead…

Frank Tashlin’s mystery thriller in which Belgian sleuth Hercule Poirot examines a number of killings done in alphabetical order. Starring Tony Randall, Anita Ekberg and Robert Morley.

Adapted from the novel The A.B.C. Murders by Agatha Christie, which was published 29 years earlier, the story concerns Hercule Poirot (Tony Randall) who investigates a sequence of homicides in London in which the victims are murdered rendering to their initials.

Tony Randall gives an okay performance in his role as the Belgian detective who doesn’t show a great deal of determination in terms of trying to find out who is accountable for causing all the trouble in the English capital, while Robert Morley is Captain Hastings, Hercule’s sidekick involved not offering much…

"I thought you'd given up smoking?"

"This is a celebration."

"Oh, really? What are you celebrating?"

"I'm celebrating my first cigarette in 51 days."

A man named Albert Aachen is found dead, with a copy of the ABC Rail Guide found next to him. When the next victim has the initials 'BB'. the police suspects a serial killer. Meanwhile, detective Hercule Poirot (Tony Randall) is approached by a mysterious woman (Anita Ekberg) who is somehow involved in the murders ...

The Alphabet Murders is a comedy directed by Frank Tashlin, based on the novel The A.B.C. Murders by Agatha Christie.

The movie doesn't adhere very closely to the source material, one of Christie's greatest novels, even though this doesn't necessarily…

Why hijack a known property - other than the fact it is known and thus provides marquee recognition - only to then dawdle in its margins, reducing the already light to silly scribble?

Agatha Christie rightly complained that film versions of her novels were generally poor with only Murder on the Orient Express being the just-so exception shortly before she died. As to why she permitted her estate to be repeatedly purloined in this manner - and then to be serially disappointed with the results - isn’t clear.

It was to her inheriting daughter, Rosalind, that a firmer canonical grip came to the fore timed with the 1980s British televisual penchant for true-to-the-spirit retro-detectives. Thus the accurate and superlatively produced…

This is Agatha Christie on LSD and maybe with an extra generous helping of the funny kind of mushrooms. Followed by more LSD.

It is a terrible movie. It's whacky as you can get and mostly not in a good way. Tony Randall attempts and fails at some sort of an accent. I think it's supposed to be Belgian? Maybe French? At times it's British. Sometimes he sort of veers Eastern European. And he's absolutely godawful horrible in this part.

I wish I could find more information about its production history on the web, because originally Zero Mostel was apparently supposed to play Hercules Poirot, and while that does not seem the most intuitive casting to me, it makes much…