(door being shouldered)

(dramatic orchestral music)

(sword unsheaths)

Thank you

Poirot!

Of course.

[Voiceover] I'm Richard Brody, and this clip

is from The Alphabet Murders,

a 1965 detective comedy, directed by Frank Tashlin.

It's based on a nover by Agatha Christie,

featuring the Belgian detective, Hercule Poirot.

Played by Tony Randall, in the style of Peter Sellers'

Inspector Clouseau, complete with comic accent.

What Monsieur Poirot?

This, this.

That?

It tugs!

[Richard] Poirot turns up in London to see his tailor,

just in time to get incolved in a murder investigation.

A circus clown, peculiarly, and significantly,

named Albert Aachen, is killed

while rehearsing his diving act.

And, Poitot tries to solve the case.

The leading clue is a book,

left at the scene of the crime, ABC London.

When another person, the bowling instructor

Betty Barnard, is killed,

Poirot realizes that the killer is working

his or her way through the alphabet.

(suspenseful orchestral music)

An extraordinary sleuth, with ordinary cares,

Poirot, having given up smoking, has gained weight,

and heads to a steam room to get into shape.

There he's followed by

the British Secret Service Agent, Hastings,

Who joins him rather unwillingly in the investigation.

(Rule, Britannia! played by parade)

The movie is made like the permanent answer

to a familiar trivia question,

Who is the most Hitchcockian director of all time?

Not Brian De Palma, not Claude Chabrol,

but, surprisingly, Frank Tashlin.

He started out making Loony Tune cartoons,

and was best known for such flamboyant,

reflexive, media-centric comedies as

The Girl Can't Help It, and Will Success Spoil Rock Hunter?

As well as a bunch of films starring Jerry Lewis,

who considered Tashlin his mentor.

Already, in 1965, Tashlin saw Hitchcock not

as a reflector of realities, but as a fabricator of myths.

He treated Hitchcock's films

as pop culture artifact to be cannibalized.

He separated Hitchcockian affect

from Hitchcockian substance.

As a sort of one man, American New Wave.

Tashlin took Hitchcock as a tool box of themes and styles,

that were themselves a more crucial

and central aspect of contemporary life,

than any of the events that Hitchcock depicted.

Hitchcock, a sort of existential moralist,

filmed ordinary people facing matters of life and death,

with a comedy that seemed cosmic.

A Gods-eye toying with human destiny.

Tashlin brought the same sort of existential

gamesmanship to people who were themselves

infused with media consciousness.

Killers who played the media,

detectives who know of their media ties counterparts,

and Hercule Poirot, who seems to be

cultivating his public image in real time,

even as he tries to solve a case.

He lives his life reflexively, as if he himself,

were a character in his own movie.

(bowling ball rolls to a strike)

Tashlin borrows the highly inflected,

riotously inventive visual styles of Hitchcock,

and adds a visual comedy all his own.

He took Hitchcock not just as a master stylist,

but as a master mythologist, a fabulist.

Not as a reflector of American realities,

but as a creator of psychological realities,

by means of his images, moods, and stories.

The tale of mystery, of crime, and detection,

is a pretext, a pre, text, for visual invention,

and for the free play of imagination,

the film makers', the viewers', and even the characters'.

The complex intriqgues and elaborate plots

see to tickle what Poirot calls his little grey cells.

But, they're also a stage on which he struts.

The proximity, or rather the idea of violent death,

liberates the wildest

and strangest depth of creative invention,

and lends the oppressive dullness of daily life,

the tailor, quitting smoking, the middle-age pot belly,

the bowling alley, the doctor's office, a jolt of energy.

Murder happens rarely, but murder stories

happen all the time, as if in, all channel,

around the clock play.

And Tashlin, extracts the comedy from a world

that tells itself macabre stories for fun.

The death of the fictional victims

are the life of the modern mind.

In this scene, Poirot follows the aristocrat,

Sir Carmichael Clarke to a casino.

He fears that the man with the initials C.C.

Will be the murderer's next victim.

Tashlin films the gaming tables with a gleeful vigor.

In a spectacular tilt, Poirot turns up in the distance,

as the unseen observer.

Then, in a remarkable series of Hitchcockian

point-of-view shots, Tashlin fuses the viewer's gaze

with the detective's.

Transforming the glossily stultifying formalities

of the casino into a theater of horror.

But Tashlin isn't done.

Catching the scent of imminent death in the air,

Poirot, framed in an exhilarating crane shot,

that unifies space and time, enters

the scene of the crime and becomes the observer, observed.

(suspenseful orchestral music)

Sir, please excuse me.

Thank you.

Sir Carmichael, Sir Carmichael.

Sir Carmichael

Please leave me alone.

Please listen to me sir.

Stand up, I want to talk to you.

Sir, believe me, your life is in danger.

I have some questions to ask you.

Believe me, sir, your life is in danger.

(dart gun fires)

(patrons scream)