Tina arrived in Llanview with the notion that Ted Clayton, AKA Tom Clarkson, was her biological father and was later shocked to find out that dear old dad was in fact Victor Lord! Although Mitch Lawrence tried to get Tina to scheme with him for a shot at Viki’s inheritance, Tina refused but found herself charged with murder after Mitch shot Harry O'Neill – and pinned the crime on Tina!

After making it through the drama of being cleared of all charges in the O’Neill murder, Tina set her sights on Clint Buchanan but Dorian Lord halted her plan to fake a pregnancy in its tracks. Clint saw this opportunity to use Tina’s affections as a way to get Viki to regain her life through jealousy by overpowering Niki Smith and coming back to him!

However, Tina’s one true love was had in Clint’s son, Cord Roberts and the two faced many obstacles to stay together – one of the biggest being Cord’s mother’s hatred for Tina! Although Max Holden was paid heavily to take a pregnant Tina to Argentina, Cord followed his heart there as well, only to believe that Tina had died after a fatal fall down the Iguazu Falls. Sadness ensued when Tina believed she’d lost her son during the fall as well, but her scheming ways resurfaced after meeting up with Gabrielle Medina – a woman who had Max’s child! Though Tina managed to convince Gabrielle to allow her to raise her baby, by saying she and Max were happily married, upon her return to Llanview Cord’s mother found out the truth when Tina tried to pawn the baby off as Cord’s and forced Tina to cut ties and divorce her son for good!

In later years, Max came to Tina’s rescue after finding out her son had never died in Argentina. After they returned to claim her son CJ from the fearful Rolo, Tina fell in love with and planned to married Max – but called out Cord’s name instead during the wedding! In the end, Tina and Cord found their way back to each other and said their I dos during a double ceremony with Asa and Renee. Although Tina claimed she loved Cord, her lies overpowered that love leading to their divorce. But they didn’t stay apart long… Cord married Tina once again after their daughter Sarah was born.

The years brought Tina many more trials and tribulations including Cords presumed death, her marriage to Cain Rogan and her fling with David Vickers! Though Tina finally left Llanview in 1997, she returned in June 2008! And everyone knows, where there’s Tina, there’s trouble, which ultimately led to her leaving Llanview again in November after Viki disowned her for allowing Tess to hold Jared and Natalie hostage in Llanfair's basement!

Tina returned in 2011 for the reading of Victor's will.