Scottish developer, formed in 1996. Since its inception, Vis has worked with major publishers, gaining an international reputation, and has grown from 8 to over 110 employees. Vis develops games software for major console platforms and PCs and provides interactive content for the converging technology, media and telecommunications (TMT) sectors, particularly in Interactive Digital Television ("iDTV") and broadband telecommunications. The company is headed up by Chris van der Kuyl, CEO.

The company you are trying to view is not available on IndieDB. Only publishers and developers which have games, mods and other content released on IndieDB are listed. View VIS Entertainment on ModDB.

Continue browsing the company list, to find the profile you are after.

Animation Labs

No members Developer

A developer of vorpX, a 3D-driver for DirectX9-11 games that is specifically geared towards VR-devices like the Oculus Rift.

Adsumsoft

1 member Developer

We are a tiny but dynamic game development and consultancy company based in Singapore and founded by game designer, academic and author Roberto Dillon...

Ulpo Media

2 members Developer

We are a chilean indie developers group, we look to create a place in the complicated internet world. We want to make videogames of any type, always giving...

Aterdux Entertainment

9 members Developer

Aterdux Entertainment first formed as a team of four passionate gamers back in 2002 in Belarus, with love for RPG and strategy. Their first project was...

Wingman Games

No members Developer

Wingman Games is an Australian based game developer

HotGen

No members Developer

HotGen is the trusted games and toy developer for some of the world's leading entertainment brands and works in partnership with the premier powerhouses...

YoYo Games

2 members Developer

GameMaker Studio caters to entry-level novices and seasoned game development professionals equally, allowing them to create cross-platform games in record...

Google

6 members Developer

Google Inc is a multinational public cloud computing, Internet search, and advertising technologies corporation. Google hosts and develops a number of...

Wildgrass

5 members Developer

Our small team at Wildgrass strives upon the ideal of creating a wide variety of compact experiences that are packed with memorable moments and respect...

New Star Games Ltd

1 member Developer

Based in Oxford, UK, New Star Games are a small independent company with a passion for sport.

Kollide Entertainment, LLC

1 member Developer

Kollide Entertainment is founded by industry veterans Joeyray Hall and Kevin Caldwell whose experience spans over 23 years of game and software development...

Interstellar Game Studios

1 member Developer

Behind Interstellar Game Studios stands Reinhard Zach, single-handedly responsible for design and development. After working the last couple of years...

No groups were found matching the criteria specified. We suggest you try the group list with no filter applied, to browse all available. Join now to share your own content, we welcome creators and consumers alike and look forward to your comments.