Lawrence Yep

1948-

INTRODUCTION

PRINCIPAL WORKS

AUTHOR COMMENTARY

GENERAL COMMENTARY

TITLE COMMENTARY

FURTHER READING

(Full name Laurence Michael Yep) American novelist, playwright, editor, autobiographer, and author of folklore, juvenile novels, juvenile short stories, and picture books.

The following entry presents an overview of Yep's career through 2007. For further information on his life and career, see CLR, Volumes 3, 17, and 54.

INTRODUCTION

A noted novelist, short-story writer, and playwright, Yep is one of the first Asian-American writers to dedicate himself to bringing the cultural values and historical significance of Chinese Americans into literature for young readers. Often biographical in nature, Yep's works highlight the "outsider" role, capturing the sense of displacement often felt by immigrants and children of immigrants. While this narrative strategy is often recognized as giving a voice to a neglected segment of American society, particularly Asian Americans, Yep's contemplation of what it means to be different often echoes the uncertain identities of a disparate teenage readership, earning his works a large and diverse audience. Winner of several important awards within the children's literature genre—including a Newbery Honor selection for Dragonwings (1975)—Yep is perhaps best known for his "Golden Mountain Chronicles," an ongoing series which relates the immigrant stories of seven generations of the Young family, from their small Chinese village in Kwangtung in the mid-nineteenth century to their difficult adaptation to their new American home. For Yep, as he notes in the preface to these books, the series "represent[s] my version of Chinese America—in its tears and its laughter, its hunger and its fears, and in all its hopes and dreams." Now the author of over sixty books for young readers across several genres, including mystery, fantasy, science fiction, and nonfiction, Yep is perhaps the most prominent contemporary Asian-American children's writer.

BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION

Yep was born on June 14, 1948, in San Francisco, California. His parents, Thomas Gim and Franche Yep, ran a grocery store in a predominantly African-American neighborhood, and the young Yep attended a bilingual parochial school whose student body was drawn primarily from San Francisco's large Chinatown area. Yep spoke no Chinese, being a second-generation Chinese American, which earned him the scorn of many of his Chinese-speaking classmates. His father had emigrated from China at age ten in 1910, and his mother had been born in Ohio and raised in West Virginia. He began writing while in high school, and one of his teachers challenged him to submit his works to various publications. Published professionally by the age of eighteen, following high school, Yep moved to Milwaukee, Wisconsin, to attend Marquette University. While at Marquette, Yep was introduced to his future wife, Joanne Ryder, whom he met at the school newspaper. One of Yep's most notable early publications, the 1968 short story "The Selchey Kid," was sold to the science fiction magazine The Worlds of If and was later republished in the anthology The World's Best Science Fiction of 1969. In 1968, after only two years at Marquette, he transferred to the University of California-Santa Cruz, graduating in 1970. He next enrolled in the State University of New York-Buffalo, where he gained his Ph.D. in 1975 and studied under the esteemed novelist John Barth. During his graduate work, he continued to stay in contact with Ryder, who was now an editor at HarperCollins. At her suggestion, Yep tried his hand at writing for young readers, the result of which was his first published book, Sweetwater (1973). After his earning his Ph.D., Yep moved back to California where he worked as a part-time instructor of English at Foothill and San Jose City Colleges while composing his second novel, Dragonwings. The work was a popular and critical success, and Yep began writing full-time. He has taught both creative writing and Asian-American Studies at the University of California, Berkeley and Santa Barbara. Yep was awarded a NEA fellowship in fiction in 1990. Now the author of a wide canon of works dedicated to capturing the Asian experience in America, Yep's diverse body of literature includes several young adult series—among them, the "Chinatown Mystery" series and the ongoing "Tiger's Apprentice" series—as well as several novels intended for adults. Now mar- ried to Ryder, he resides in Pacific Grove, California, and the ninth book of his "The Golden Mountain Chronicles"—an autobiographical series of juvenile novels—called The Dragon's Child: A Story of Angel Island is scheduled for release in 2008. Yep has received numerous awards and accolades for his body of work, including Newbery Honor Book awards for Dragonwings and Dragon's Gate (1993) and the 2005 Laura Ingalls Wilder Medal for his overall contributions to children's literature, among many others.

MAJOR WORKS

Sweetwater, a science-fiction novel published in 1973 while Yep was still a student at SUNY-Buffalo, focuses on Tyree, a young man who belongs to a group of transplanted space-colonists called Argans. Among the first groups to settle the planet Harmony, the Argans are now a racial minority within the planet's growing population, and Tyree and his fellow Silkies—half earth-dweller, half amphibian—must scavenge in order to survive. Their struggle for survival in a frequently hostile environment forms the novel's central thematic concerns with a variety of issues, including family bonds, individual freedom, cultural traditions, and racism. In Yep's second novel, Dragonwings, he forgoes the fantastic allegories of Sweetwater and deals directly with his Chinese-American heritage. In preparation for writing the book, he spent six years researching Chinese-American history, uncovering much information on the bachelor societies that provided a social interchange for Chinese men working in America to provide for their families back in China. In the course of Yep's research, he discovered two brief newspaper articles from the year 1909, detailing the efforts of a Chinese-American bachelor named Fung Joe Guey to build a flying machine. Published in 1975 and reissued in a twenty-fifth anniversary edition in 2000, Dragonwings tells the story of eight-year-old Moon Shadow, a young boy who leaves his mother in China's Middle Kingdom to join his father in the bachelor society of turn-of-the-twentieth-century San Francisco. Moon Shadow's father, Windrider, a kite builder, came to the United States to earn money for his family, but also to explore unknown frontiers. Together, father and son fulfill Windrider's dream of flying his own plane.

Dragonwings is the first volume in Yep's "Golden Mountain Chronicles," a loose-knit novel series following seven generations of a Chinese family across one-and-a-half centuries of history, which includes The Serpent's Children (1984), Mountain Light (1985), Child of the Owl (1977), Sea Glass (1979), Dragon's Gate, Thief of Hearts (1995), and The Traitor (2003). The Serpent's Children is set in nineteenth-century China amid the Taiping Rebellion. The novel concerns Cassia, a young girl who, along with her family, joins a revolutionary brotherhood working to eliminate the corruption brought by the ruling Manchu dynasty and the wealthy landowners in their now-impoverished Kwangtung Province. Mountain Light follows Cassia and her father as they return from a trip through China's Middle Kingdom, joined by another traveler, a young man named Squeaky Lau. On the eventful trip, taken on behalf of the revolution, the clownish Squeaky finds that he possesses his own inner strength and is able to bring out good in others. Although he and Cassia fall in love, Squeaky joins the mass migration to the western United States, "land of the Golden Mountain," where he faces the chaos brought about by the California gold rush. Dragon's Gate continues the story of the revolutionary family as Otter, Cassia's fourteen-year-old adopted son, travels to America and works on the Transcontinental Railroad as part of a Chinese work crew carving a tunnel through the Sierra Nevadas during the 1860s. A winner of the Boston Globe-Horn Book Award, Child of the Owl, like Dragonwings, is set in San Francisco's Chinatown, but this time, the year is 1960. The plot revolves around Casey, a young Chinese-American girl raised by a gambling-addicted father—and later her suburban uncle—who is confused by her dual American and Chinese heritage. Having been exposed only to American culture and therefore having no means by which to identify with her Chinese background, Casey finds new options for living opened to her when she is sent to live with her grandmother, Paw-Paw, in Chinatown. Paw-Paw tells Casey a lengthy legend about an owl which symbolizes family unity and tradition, providing the young girl with a new way of communicating her feelings. Continuing the "Golden Mountain Chronicles," Sea Glass focuses on Craig Chin, a boy whose search for acceptance by both Caucasians and Chinese Americans ends in rejection. Moving from his home in San Francisco's Chinatown to a small town, Craig is dubbed "Buddha Man" by his Anglo schoolmates and is disparaged by a Chinese neighbor for behaving like "the white demons" he attends school with. Pressures from Craig's sports-minded father to try out for a school team do little to help him assimilate into school culture, but finally, an uncle provides the teen with the tools to help him develop his self-acceptance. In The Traitor Yep brings readers to 1885 and the Wyoming Territory, where he introduces Chinese-American Joseph Young—the son of Otter Young of Dragon's Gate—and Michael Purdy, a Caucasian who is looked down on in his rustic coal-mining town because of his illegitimate birth. Because of their dual outcast status, the boys become friends and, when racial tensions against Chinese mill workers erupt in the event known as the Rock Springs Massacre, the Purdy family helps Joe and his parents escape from the angry mob.

Also rooted in Yep's personal history, The Star Fisher (1991) and its sequel Dream Soul (2000) are based on the lives of the author's parents. The Star Fisher finds fifteen-year-old Joan Chen moving from the Midwest to a small Southern town in the late 1920s. As part of the first and only Chinese-American family to arrive in Clarksburg, West Virginia, Joan finds that she must take early steps in building bridges of understanding in her new community and gradually helps her more traditional parents find a way to assimilate into the community. In Dream Soul Joan is now fifteen. The illness of her strict father causes her to rethink the value of her Chinese heritage, as well as its legends, and, when her family responsibilities increase, Joan is able to deal with a family crisis with both wisdom and maturity. Apart from his family's personal history, Yep also returns readers to the Asian-American past in such books as Hiroshima: A Novella (1995), When the Circus Came to Town (2002), and The Earth Dragon Awakes: The San Francisco Earthquake of 1906 (2006). In Hiroshima, Yep paints a portrait of the events surrounding the U.S. government's decision to drop an atomic bomb on Hiroshima, Japan, on August 6, 1945, thereby accelerating the end of World War II. Focusing on one of the "Hiroshima Maidens"—girls and women who survived the bombing and who were eventually sent to the United States for reconstructive surgery—Yep describes both the actual bombing and its tragic and devastating long-term aftermath. The Earth Dragon Awakes recounts the Great San Francisco Earthquake, which occurred on April 7, 1906, through the experiences of nine-year-old Chin and eight-year-old Henry Travis. Henry is the son of an affluent banker, while Chin, son of the Travis's houseboy, lives with his immigrant family in a lower-class tenement; despite the differences in their family's affluence, the earthquake affects both of their lives in dramatic ways. Also based on an actual event—this time taking place at the turn of the twentieth century—When the Circus Came to Town introduces ten-year-old Ursula, an imaginative girl who lives with her family at a Montana stagecoach station. Fortunate to survive a small-pox epidemic, Ursula is left with a face so disfigured that she fears being seen by others and refuses to help her father in the kitchen. When a Chinese cook named Ah Sam is hired to replace the girl, Ursula befriends the man, and the two realize that they share a love for the circus. When a racist traveler breaks Ah Sam's spirit, Ursula braves the stares of the public to reunite him with his relatives.

In addition to realistic fiction, Yep has also written fantasies and mysteries, as well as a number of novels featuring modern-day children in typical modern-day predicaments. His mystery novels The Mark Twain Murders (1982) and The Tom Sawyer Fires (1984) feature nineteenth-century writer Mark Twain as a young reporter in San Francisco who turns sleuth in response to a series of odd occurrences. Mystery again figures in The Case of the Goblin Pearls (1997), one of a series of books—"The Chinatown Mysteries"—featuring a group of pre-teens who solve mysteries within their Chinese-American communities while also learning about their varied cultural heritage. In The Case of the Goblin Pearls, Lily Lew and her flamboyant actress aunt go in search of a set of priceless pearls stolen from a local sweatshop owner by a masked robber. The first volume in Yep's "Tiger" trilogy for middle-grade readers—which includes Tiger's Blood (2005) and Tiger Magic (2006)—The Tiger's Apprentice (2003) introduces a network of ancient Chinese characters whom, inspired by the Chinese zodiac and ancient Chinese legends, secretly exist on Earth. Eighth-grader Tom Lee is introduced to this network by his elderly grandmother, Mistress Lee, whose cluttered antique store holds the secrets of the Lore, and soon finds his destiny woven into the network. After Mistress Lee is killed by a creature who robs her home of a beautiful artifact, Tom takes her place as a Guardian of the Lore and agrees to help retrieve the artifact, which turns out to be a phoenix egg that will only hatch into a world that has achieved total peace. During his quest for the egg, Tom accepts the guidance of a shapeshifting tiger known as Mr. Hu, another guardian of the egg. Other new friends, such as the dragon Mistral, a golden rat, and a flying monkey, join Tom in his battle against Vatten and his evil Clan of Nine, who hope, by possessing the egg, to harness its power for apocalyptic purposes.

Best known for his juvenile and young adult works, Yep has also reached out to younger audiences with books like Cockroach Cooties (2000), Skunk Scout (2003), and Later, Gator (1995), all of which focus on a young boy named Teddy. In Later, Gator, the boy's prank gift of a creepy-looking alligator back- fires when he realizes that his younger brother actually takes a shine to his new pet, unaware that it will not live long in captivity, while Skunk Scout finds him joining his brother on a camping trip that challenges both the resources and the resilience of the likeable young boys. In addition to full-length fiction, Yep has also compiled several volumes of short stories based on Chinese folktales and legends. The Rainbow People (1989) collects twenty stories adapted from the recollections of Chinese immigrants living in Oakland, California's Chinatown that were recorded by a U.S. government-sponsored program during the 1930s. Many of the stories, which Yep divides into sections according to their theme, have their origins in southern China, the birthplace of many of Oakland's Chinese immigrants. Another story collection, Tongues of Jade (1991), includes both stories and background information that puts each tale, whether it be a ghost story or a love story, into sociological and historical perspective.

CRITICAL RECEPTION

While Yep has published several best-selling children's works, his popularity in critical circles almost eclipses his popularity with readers, with children's literature experts devoting a large body of scholarship to his canon. Lingyan Yang and Zhihui Fang have called Yep "[a]rguably the best creative artist in Chinese-American children's and adolescent literature" and further noted that the author is "important to the canon of contemporary American children's literature." Noted fantasy and science fiction writer Andre Norton has called Yep's debut juvenile novel Sweetwater "outstanding. It is difficult to believe that this is a first novel. The extremely competent handling of alien background, plus excellent characterization, suggests rather a long apprenticeship in the craft." This critical appreciation for his distinct narrative voice continues today as evidenced in such reviews as Horn Book Magazine's assessment of Star Fisher, which they have termed "disturbing but never depressing, poignant but not melancholy, for the principal characters … are individuals with a strong sense of their own worth, facing difficulties with humor, determination, and pride." Similarly, Kirkus Reviews has hailed Yep's When the Circus Came to Town for its "simple plot [which] uses perfectly believable characterizations to discuss deceptively complex emotions and issues for those who would mine its lessons, but Ursula's own story of healing is rewarding enough for those who read from the younger child's point of view."

PRINCIPAL WORKS

Juvenile and Young Adult Works

Sweetwater [illustrations by Julia Noonan] (juvenile novel) 1973

Dragon of the Lost Sea (juvenile novel) 1982

Kind Hearts and Gentle Monsters (juvenile novel) 1982

The Mark Twain Murders (juvenile novel) 1982

Liar, Liar (juvenile novel) 1983

The Tom Sawyer Fires (juvenile novel) 1984

Dragon Steel (juvenile novel) 1985

The Curse of the Squirrel [illustrations by Dirk Zimmer] (juvenile novel) 1987

The Rainbow People [illustrations by David Wiesner] (folklore) 1989

Dragon Cauldron (juvenile novel) 1991

The Lost Garden (autobiography) 1991

The Star Fisher (juvenile novel) 1991

Tongues of Jade [illustrations by David Wiesner] (juvenile short stories) 1991

American Dragons: A Collection of Asian-American Voices [editor] (juvenile short stories, poetry, and essays) 1992

Dragon War (juvenile novel) 1992

Butterfly Boy [illustrations by Jeanne M. Lee] (picture book) 1993

The Man Who Tricked a Ghost [illustrations by Isadore Seltzer] (picture book) 1993

The Shell Woman and the King [illustrations by Yang Ming-Yi] (picture book) 1993

The Boy Who Swallowed Snakes [illustrations by Jean and Mou-Sien Tseng] (picture book) 1994

The Junior Thunder Lord [illustrations by Robert Van Nutt] (picture book) 1994

Ghost Fox [illustrations by Jean and Mou-Sien Tseng] (picture book) 1994

Tiger Woman [illustrations by Robert Roth] (picture book) 1994

City of Dragons [illustrations by Jean and Mou-Sien Tseng] (picture book) 1995

Hiroshima: A Novella (juvenile novella) 1995

Later, Gator (juvenile novel) 1995

Tree of Dreams: Ten Tales from the Garden of Night [illustrations by Isadore Seltzer] (juvenile short stories) 1995

Ribbons (juvenile novel) 1996

The Dragon Prince: A Chinese Beauty and the Beast Tale [illustrations by Kam Mak] (picture book) 1997

The Khan's Daughter: A Mongolian Folktale [illustrations by Jean and Mou-Sien Tseng] (picture book) 1997

The Cook's Family (juvenile novel) 1998

The Imp That Ate My Homework [illustrations by Benrei Huang] (juvenile novel) 1998

The Amah (juvenile novel) 1999

Cockroach Cooties (juvenile novel) 2000

Dream Soul (juvenile novel) 2000

The Journal of Wong Ming-Chung: A Chinese Miner: California, 1852 (juvenile novel) 2000

The Magic Paintbrush [illustrations by Suling Wang] (picture book) 2000

Angelfish (juvenile novel) 2001

Lady of Chiao Kuo: Warrior of the South (juvenile novel) 2001

Spring Pearl: The Last Flower [illustrations by Kazuhiko Saro] (juvenile novel) 2002

When the Circus Came to Town [illustrations by Suling Wang] (picture book) 2002

Skunk Scout (juvenile novel) 2003

The Earth Dragon Awakes: The San Francisco Earthquake of 1906 (juvenile novel) 2006

"Golden Mountain Chronicles" Series

Dragonwings (juvenile novel) 1975

Child of the Owl (juvenile novel) 1977

Sea Glass (juvenile novel) 1979

The Serpent's Children (juvenile novel) 1984

Mountain Light (juvenile novel) 1985

Dragon's Gate (juvenile novel) 1993

Thief of Hearts (juvenile novel) 1995

The Traitor (juvenile novel) 2003

The Dragon's Child: A Story of Angel Island [with Dr. Kathleen S. Yep] (juvenile novel) 2008

"Chinatown Mystery" Series

The Case of the Goblin Pearls (juvenile novel) 1997

The Case of the Lion Dance (juvenile novel) 1998

The Case of the Firecrackers (juvenile novel) 1999

"Tiger's Apprentice" Series

The Tiger's Apprentice (juvenile novel) 2003

Tiger's Blood (juvenile novel) 2005

Tiger Magic (juvenile novel) 2006

Adult Works

Seademons (novel) 1977

Shadow Lord (novel) 1985

Monster Makers, Inc. (novel) 1986

Fairy Bones (play) 1987

Pay the Chinaman (play) 1987

Laurence Yep (essay date 2006)

SOURCE: Yep, Laurence. "Paying with Shadows." Lion and the Unicorn 30 (2006): 157-67.

[In the following essay, Yep discusses his personal life, writing career, and his own personal identification with the recurring "outsider" theme that links together many of his juvenile and young adult works.]

Dreams have always fascinated me, and I collect dreams and folktales about dreams the way other people do stamps; and that fascination with dreams has woven itself into my stories. I think the tale that best captures the bittersweet nature of dreams is a story recorded by the Greek historian, Plutarch, who wrote of a famous courtesan, Thonis, whose clients had to make appointments months in advance, which is exactly what one rich man did. However, the night before the appointment, the rich man had a dream in which the courtesan visited him. The dream was so spectacular that when he woke up the next morning, he decided that no flesh-and-blood woman could ever match what happened in his dream so he canceled the appointment. Upon reflection, Thonis decided that this would set a bad precedent for business and so she sued him for the favors that she had done him in the dream.

The judge, Bocchoris, listened to both sides of the case and then he ordered Thonis to hold out her hands with her palms upward. Then he commanded the rich man to fill a vase full of gold coins and move it in such a way that the shadow of the vase crossed the courtesan's palms. When the rich man had done so, the judge made his ruling, "For dreams a person pays and is paid with shadows."

Of course, most dreams are far more elevated than that of the rich man's; and yet I think the human condition itself is defined by the need to dream—even if we know we will usually only grasp shadows; and the Chinese are no different than other groups. America, though, has its own peculiar effect upon dreams and dreamers; and it is the interplay between dreams and America's shadowy coins that has defined the Chinese American experience.

Though I could not have put it into words at the time, even as a child I think I suspected the bittersweet nature of dreams not only as a result of my family history; but because I had personally witnessed how powerful dreams could be in San Francisco's Chinatown when I went to school or visited my family there. Those dreamers had worked beside my grandmother and mother in the factories where they had shared one another's hopes for the future as they deveined shrimp, bottled artichoke hearts, or sewed clothing. I knew those dreamers because they had picked fruit with my father and taught him how to make kites.

And neither the dreams of my Chinatown schoolmates nor the dreams of my friends in my own Afro-American neighborhood were my dreams; for there were times when I felt apart from either group.

So, as a child, I turned to fantasy and science fiction because in those novels, ordinary children are taken to strange new lands where they must learn new languages and customs. Ironically, fantasy and science fiction were truer to my emotional reality than the so-called realistic books of the 1950s because fantasy and science fiction spoke about adapting; and that was something I did every time I got on and off the bus. In fantasy and science fiction, I discovered a mirror for my dreams of finding a niche in which I could fit.

When I began writing, it was natural to try my hand at science fiction. At the time, I was attending school in Milwaukee. In the late sixties, there were few Asians in the city, let alone on the campus so that I felt homesick for San Francisco and especially Chinatown. I found myself returning there in my imagination if not in body; and I wrote a story, "The Selchey Kids," based on my memories of an earthquake while I was at school in Chinatown. I sold it to a pulp magazine, The Worlds of If, and it was subsequently anthologized in The World's Best Science Fiction of 1969.

With that encouragement, I went on publishing more science fiction. When I look back at those early stories, I realize I was writing about myself as an Outsider. The stories are told either by alienated heroes or are even the first-person narratives by aliens. (I later even wrote a Star Trek novel, Shadow Lord —now out of print—about Mr. Sulu on a planet whose inhabitants are experiencing the same wrenching cultural changes that Japan did during the Meiji era).

At first, I thought of myself as a science fiction writer for adults; and I wrote and published for that market. However, when I was in graduate school in Buffalo, a friend, Joanne Ryder (whom I later married), became an editor at HarperCollins and asked me to write a book for children.

Again my fiction was a vehicle that carried me back home in mind if not in body. In Sweetwater, I projected Chinatown onto a faraway world but imagined it as half-flooded. Even in that book, I unconsciously gave the aliens, or Argans, a society with the same structure as the bachelor society of nineteenth-century Chinese America.

At the time that I began working on my first children's novel, I had also been studying creative writing with John Barth as well as modern fiction in preparation for my dissertation on William Faulkner. However, as intellectually rewarding as my studies were, I felt increasingly as if I were in the literary version of what John Fowles referred to as the ebony tower—the post-modern equivalent of an ivory tower constructed by an art grown so self-referential that it had become almost a closed system and accessible only to a relatively small group of cognoscenti. As challenging as the mental games were, I became uncomfortable with the air of cool detachment, which emphasized form over content, dispassion over passion. More importantly, it seemed to me that too many writers were afraid to present their own personal beliefs, taking refuge instead in a technical virtuosity which juggled various standards but refused to acknowledge any as personally important. Though the display of skill was dazzling, the approach ultimately seemed a sterile dead end.

So I found it refreshing to write for children because it was necessary to express the story in concrete terms they would understand. Instead of literary gamesmanship, I had to write about elemental relationships: that of a parent to a child or a sibling to a sibling. Rather than dwelling uncomfortably in the ebony tower, writing for children forced me to make contact with the emotional core of my stories; and at the time there was one story in particular that fascinated me.

Even in the midst of writing and publishing my science fiction, I was also struck by the true story of the Chinese American inventor, Fung Joe Guey, who not only created his own telephone system but also built and flew his own airplane in 1909 in Piedmont, California. In his passion for modern technology, he was a science fiction hero come to life. Through the impersonal language of science and mathematics, he had found a way to communicate with the largely hostile American majority.

What really attracted me to his story was the scope of his dreams; for this was not simply the story of building a better mousetrap. Fung Joe Guey dreamed of flying; and the dream of flight is something humans have been pursuing from prehistoric times when, in the caves of Lascaux, France, a Stone Age artist painted a bird man with the power of flight. It was a dream that appealed not only to adults but to children of all races and across all eons.

From things I had heard and seen and read, I began writing about a dreamer, Windrider, and the people he knew. Despite race riots and earthquakes, he sets out to build his own airplane when he hears about the Wright Brothers; and that novel became Dragonwings.

His quest is told by his son, Moon Shadow, who acts not only as a point of view for the reader but for me as well. I had grown-up as a child of the 1950s but the story had to be told by a child of the 1900s so it was more than a narrative device to tell the story through the eyes of an eight-year—old boy; rather it was close to the process of self-discovery that I was going through myself as a writer exploring my heritage.

Moreover, Windrider and Moon Shadow had to be put into their proper context, which meant writing about the Chinatown in which they lived—the bachelor society of the 1900s. Like the small, intimate Chinatown that I knew as a child, the characters in my fictional Chinatown also knew one another and kept introducing me to their friends and family and I began to write their stories down in turn.

At first, I had no overarching vision other than to recapture what I had seen firsthand in San Francisco's Chinatown. Even when I finally created a plan for subsequent books, my characters frequently upset my outlines. I could no more control them than one can keep one's family in their seats at a Chinese banquet. Like one's friends and relatives who refuse to follow the seating chart and hop from table to table instead in a cheerful anarchy, my own characters moved about through the novels with the resulting dramatic and comic complications.

My characters' stories eventually became the record of seven generations of Chinese Americans and their adventures through 150 years of American history; and their stories have grown into a series of nine novels which HarperCollins is currently bringing out in a uniform edition called The Golden Mountain Chronicles.

When I was a child, I was often scolded by the old-timers in Chinatown for being so Americanized. It didn't matter that wars and politics had forced them to live most of their lives in America so that the small rural China they remembered only existed in their imaginations. They still referred to themselves as guests of the Golden Mountain. Their dreams were rooted firmly in China and they regarded their stay as temporary, organizing themselves in America mainly by their ties to China—by family, clan, and home district among others.

The guests' attitude puzzled me as a child; and it was only many years later that I began to understand it when I began to research Chinese American history. R. H. Tawney once wrote that the average Chinese peasant was like a man standing in a pool of water that reached up to his chin—the slightest disturbance would send ripples that could drown him. In China, wars, rebellions, bandit raids, feuds, taxes, plagues, plant diseases, droughts, and floods could destroy a peasant family (Tawney 77).

So, the first group of Chinese—the predecessors of the old guests I had known—had left their homes because they dreamed of helping their families to survive. They followed that dream—even though many of them were repaid with death either on the ships or in the gold fields of California.

Not only had the dream exercised a terrible power over the guests but it was coupled with their innate sense of superiority as Chinese. To them, they were citizens of the Middle Kingdom, the center of the world; and that citizenship acted like a psychological armor protecting them against all the uncertainties and stresses as they left their harsh life in China for a harsher existence in a barbarian wilderness. I wrote about this original generation of guests in two novels, The Serpent's Children and Mountain Light, tracing their adventures in crossing the ocean and then in surviving the gold fields.

For every story of a guest who succeeded, however, there are thousands who lived and died in poverty; and even the rich ones found that true success itself was a shadowy thing; and this was especially true for the children of the guests who grew up like princes and princesses in China. As the saying went, "Their feet never touched dirt." It was a shock when that next generation came to America and found out what sacrifices had paid for their dreamlike existence in China. In Dragon's Gate, a young boy named Otter, raised in luxury in China, joins his father and uncle in the Sierra Nevada Mountains where they are working on the transcontinental railroad.

The working conditions were horrendous, and the winter of 1867 was the worst of the century so that the Chinese lived underneath the snow. It would take too long to catalog all the ways that they died. Suffice it to say that, when the railroad was done, ten tons of bones were shipped back to China for burial. It is estimated that they represent twelve hundred dead or ten percent of the work force. And there are no statistics on how many were permanently injured (Lai and Choy 57).

There was no way to sugarcoat such grim facts; and yet from their letters, I know that children of all races identify with Otter's dilemma: he is the helpless victim of a world created by adults. Though the risk is far greater and the humor far less, Otter is as the prey of adults' apparently arbitrary rules as Alice is when she enters Wonderland.

By 1885, in The Traitor, Otter, the hero of Dragon's Gate has grown-up and is working as a coal miner in Rock Springs, Wyoming, with his son, Joseph, who is a native-born so Americanized that the other Chinese miners, with the typical guest mentality, despise him, for their revulsion reaches deeper than their rejection of the material American culture. In their view, Joseph's acculturation is a slide into barbarism. His own attempts at justification are undermined by the violent hostility of the American community that surrounds the Chinese miners.

However, the native-born Joseph cannot feel the same emotional connection to China that the China-born guests do, nor does he share in their dream of eventually journeying to a country that is almost as exotic to him as it is to the Americans. Instead, America is his home—even if the majority of Americans lump him in with the China-born and want to expel him as well.

While the guests draw their identity from and sustain their mental wellbeing by their bonds to family and clan, Joseph sees the darker side of those links. Even in the midst of Otter's and Joseph's grinding poverty, their extended family back in China expects them to support the family's lavish lifestyle. Even though he can ill afford to send money, the filial, China-born Otter dutifully sends larger and larger remittances back to China; but his native-born son perceives their family in China as selfish leeches. It is as much family politics as guest prejudices that drive Joseph into insisting he is an American—even though events mock his dreams.

Joseph represents a generation that embodies two very different cultures, Chinese and American, which, by their very nature, often are at odds with one another. Among other things, American culture emphasizes competition while Chinese culture emphasizes cooperation; American culture stresses individual goals while Chinese culture stresses the groups, as Philip Elliot Slater explains in The Pursuit of Loneliness: American Culture at the Breaking Point.

To borrow an analogy from Chesterton, Joseph is like a man with his right foot upon the back of one galloping horse and his left upon the back of another. Finding and maintaining a balance between the two cultures is difficult and virtually impossible when they move in opposite directions.

In casting aside Chinese tradition, Joseph attempts to define himself on his own terms; but in doing so he threatens the guests' own sense of identity and superiority, feeding their animosity to him; and yet his desire for self-definition places him squarely in the American tradition. While Chinese immigrants have undergone change in subsequent generations, such as in Malaysia, Joseph's metamorphosis is specific to the American continent where self-activated and self-determined transformations form the bedrock of American history and myth. From almost the creation of American culture, sixteenth- and seventeenth-century writers were referring to America as the new Eden and immigrants as new Adams and the new Eves. It has even become part of our folklore about the "self-made" man or woman (see Leo Marx's The Machine in the Garden).

The metamorphic possibilities reach far deeper than material and social levels to an individual psychological one as well. On a continent where a dissatisfied person could go into a new area where no one knew you, an individual could create any desired persona. In its extremes, this self-invention could border on delusion. Stephen Leacock wrote affectionately about an irrepressible Canadian version in his short essay, "My Remarkable Uncle." At the opposite end, Herman Melville's chameleon-like antihero of The Confidence Man represents that impulse run cruelly amok.

However, as was true for many immigrant groups besides the Chinese, the new Eden frequently proved the opposite. Joseph and his father, Otter, find themselves in the middle of one of the worst race riots in American history. In that one bloody day, striking American miners methodically and viciously murdered the Chinese miners who replaced them; but even in the midst of this tragedy, Otter is sustained by his dreams. As fragile as dreams may seem, they possess an incredible power in their own right. I saw that power demonstrated in the housing projects in both my Afro-American neighborhood of San Francisco and Chinatown: my childhood friends were like flower seeds trapped beneath a rock, fighting and struggling to find the sunlight.

In a current project, Red Warrior, Otter's great-grandson, Barney, and his friend, Calvin, find themselves in the middle of the Great Depression of the 1930s. This is the generation of my father, mother, uncles, and aunts. Like my father, Barney was a straight-A student in school because, like all good Americans, he had been taught that if you want to achieve your dreams of success, you must get an education; and also like my father, Barney finds that when he graduates, the only job he could get was picking fruit. The entire generation raised during the Depression was paid in shadows.

However, also like my Father, Barney has an option that previous generations didn't have. Just as Fung Joe Guey had technology, Barney has sports. The story is based on a professional Chinese American basketball team, the Hong Wah Kues, who barnstormed across America during this period. Ironically, Barney will be a celebrity when he visits Wyoming, which had previously driven out his grandfather, Joseph.

Child of the Owl and Sea Glass were about my own generation, which had sunk its roots so deep in America that they had lost touch with its roots in China. In Child of the Owl, Otter's great-great-granddaughter, Casey, has a dream in which she is transformed into an owl. I find that a myth can act like a lens that helps bring an experience into focus; and an owl seemed symbolic of her dilemma—for the very same act, she could feel as wise as an American owl and yet as disrespectful as a Chinese one.

I also set the novel in the small, intimate Chinatown that I had known as a child—just before the new immigration and fair housing laws were to alter it. In fact, I made the novel so specific in detail that some people were able to use it as a guidebook to Chinatown.

And yet though I rooted the novel firmly in my own childhood, I receive a good many letters from children who identify with Casey's situation as an outsider. For adolescence is synonymous with being an outsider. Growing up means growing away—not only from one's parents but from one's childhood beliefs. Moreover, adolescents are alienated from their own bodies which are going through embarrassing physical changes. Casey's quest for an identity is a key concern of her age group. Though I felt alone and isolated as a boy, I realize now that my emotions were actually quite common to my age group.

Sea Glass grew out of a trip to Marysville to interview Uncle Lung (Joe Kim) who ran the Bok Ti temple. While Marysville had once been a thriving Chinatown, servicing the migrant Chinese workers, it was now almost a ghost town. The contrast between its once vibrant history and the contemporary reality was striking.

So I combined the dying Marysville Chinatown with the sleepy beach resort town of Santa Cruz that I had known in the early sixties when I had been a student there. Craig Chin, Calvin's son, is apprehensive about leaving San Francisco's Chinatown for Concepcion's little one; but his father dreams of a better life for his family.

Unfortunately, Craig sticks out like a sore thumb in the suburban school. His father, Calvin, thinks that basketball will provide a way for Craig to make friends with the white students—just as basketball had helped Calvin create a niche for himself within society. However, the inept Craig is hopeless at sports. It is at this juncture that Craig meets one of the last of the Chinese abalone fishermen, Uncle Quail, an eccentric who makes him understand that he does not have to follow his father's dreams but can find his own.

By the 1990s, Casey's daughter, Stacey, is leading a life far different than anything of which her great-great-great-grandfather, Otter, would have dreamed. For one thing, Stacey is quite at home in her American suburb where she is popular with the other students—even though, as the child of an interracial marriage, she physically embodies the mixture of American and Chinese cultures.

However, because of the changes in immigration and fair housing laws, a new immigrant transfers to her suburban school. Coming from mainland China, she carries a set of assumptions that are different from acculturated Chinese Americans like Stacey, whose family has been here for generations. Not only is the immigrant contemptuous of Stacey's ignorance of Chinese ways but she is repulsed by Stacey's physical mixture of American and Chinese features; and her contempt reveals to Stacey just how fragile her dreams are. Stacey's search for new ones brings her back to San Francisco's Chinatown, the womb, as it were, for her family's dreams.

First-person, third-person, omniscient narratives all affect the way my characters' dreams are presented as well as the shadowy coins with which they are paid for those dreams. Genre also influences the way they appear. In scales and fangs, a Chinatown auntie might be a dragon as in my fantasy series, Dragon of the Lost Sea or the new one, The Tiger's Apprentice. In a cloth coat, she might be a detective like Auntie Tiger Lil in my mystery series, The Case of the Goblin Pearls, The Case of the Lion Dance, and The Case of the Firecrackers.

Just as my characters reach for their dreams and grasp shadows, I, as a writer, do the same thing when I dream of mastering my craft; for the craft of writing for children has an extra dimension since children's writers must not only take into account the interests of young readers but must also deal with the expectations adults have for those children.

To paraphrase T. S. Eliot, who once said that every age gets the Shakespeare it deserves, I would suggest that every age gets the child it deserves. In his Centuries of Childhood, Philippe Aries demonstrates how a society's image of children is mirrored in its literature and visual arts. Until the Romantic Age, children were treated as miniature adults both in clothing and entertainment. However, when Romantic writers began to speak of children as innocent angels, children began to be treated almost as a separate species from adults and not only clothing but stories were tailored specifically for them—or rather for the way adults perceived them at the time.

In the seventeenth century, Red Riding Hood was told to both adults and children who would have heard a sexually charged and, by our standards, gross tale (analyzed by Robert Darnton in The Great Cat Massacre and Other Episodes in French Cultural History). Like many folk tales, it is almost shocking to our modern sensibilities and yet audiences of that time considered it cautionary entertainment. By the nineteenth century such folk tales were altered according to the new concepts of what children were.

And so for what sort of child do I write? I speak to the children similar to the children I knew when I was young—the outcasts and the survivors—and from the letters I receive from children I know I have struck a responsive chord.

The optimism of the 1950s has given way to the cynicism of the twenty-first century, and the lowering of our expectations has created a kind of cool, ironic detachment prevalent in today's children's movies, books, cartoons, and other entertainments. However, by de-emphasizing emotional bonds and personal relationships, they also make each member of the audience feel isolated and cutoff, that is, they each feel like an outsider.

For outsiders, dreams have a special cogency; and in my writing, I've tried to show that dreams have a value independent of money. Dreams are what tie us to an authentic core—though their shape and material may vary from age to age. It is the need to dream that lies at the heart of my stories and dreams, a need that resonates within the soul like the vibrations of a bell whose music far outlasts any shadows.

Works Cited

Aries, Philippe. Centuries of Childhood. Translated from the French by Robert Baldick. New York: Alfred Knopf, 1962.

Darnton, Robert. The Great Cat Massacre and Other Episodes in French Cultural History. New York: Basic Books, 1984.

Lai, H. Mark, and Philip P. Choy. Outlines: History of the Chinese in America. San Francisco: Chinese-American Studies Planning Group, 1973.

Leacock, Stephen. "My Remarkable Uncle." Toronto: McClelland and Stewart, 1989.

Marx, Leo. The Machine in the Garden: Technology and the Pastoral Ideal in America. Oxford: Oxford UP, 1964.

Melville, Herman. The Confidence-Man. 1857. New York: Oxford UP, 1999.

Slater, Philip Elliot. The Pursuit of Loneliness: American Culture at the Breaking Point. Boston: Beacon P, 1970.

Tawney, R. H. Land and Labor in China. 1932. Boston: Beacon P, 1966.

Yep, Laurence. The Case of the Firecrackers (Chinatown Mysteries, No. 2). New York: HarperCollins, 1999.

———. The Case of the Goblin Pearls. Chinatown Mysteries 1. New York: HarperCollins, 1997.

———. The Case of the Lion Dance. Chinatown Mysteries 2. New York: HarperCollins, 1998.

———. Child of the Owl. New York: Harper and Row, 1977.

———. Dragon of the Lost Sea. New York: Harper and Row, 1982.

———. Dragon's Gate. New York: HarperCollins, 1993.

———. Dragonwings. New York: Harper and Row, 1975.

———. Mountain Light. New York: Harper and Row, 1985.

———. Sea Glass. New York: Harper and Row, 1979.

———. "The Selchey Kids." World's Best Science Fiction of 1969. Ed. Donald A. Wollheim and Terry Carr. New York: Ace, 1969.

———. The Serpent's Children. New York: Harper and Row, 1983.

———. Shadow Lord: A Star Trek Novel, No. 22. New York: Pocket Books, 1985.

———. Sweetwater. New York: Harper and Row, 1973.

———. The Tiger's Apprentice. New York: HarperCollins, 2003.

———. The Traitor. New York: HarperCollins, 2003.

Dianne Johnson-Feelings (essay date 1995)

SOURCE: Johnson-Feelings, Dianne. "Children of the Owl: The Idea of Identity." In Presenting Laurence Yep, pp. 64-86. Boston, Mass.: Twayne Publishers, 1995.

[In the following essay, Johnson-Feelings studies Yep's dialogues about childhood identity among his Chinese-American protagonists in Child of the Owl, Sea Glass, and The Star Fisher.]

Child of the Owl

Laurence Yep writes about outsiders and aliens not only in his novels, but in his short stories and picture books as well. His award-winning science fiction story "The Selchey Kids," also his first published piece, is particularly striking and disturbing, too. The protagonist, Duke, does not start off as an alienated person, but as part of a family and a community until a devastating flood destroys his reality. "I kept away from the mob, walking to the opposite end of the hill which was now an island. I huddled on the spot, looking out toward where our house should be, under the water, wondering why I was the only one left in an ugly, confusing world and wishing I wasn't. Family, friends and even identity were lost in barely half an hour. I decided then that I wouldn't worry about friends or attachments or other natural things that could be so easily broken."1 At this point, one of the few things he is sure of is that "I belong to the species of Man. … I have no identity, only the inheritance of my humanity" ("Selchey," 94).

As the story unfolds, however, Duke's very humanity is called into question when Uncle Noe (Dr. Noe Selchey, a scientist and friend of Duke's parents) decides to let Duke know who he is ("Selchey," 97). Or perhaps, what he is: the product of "Director Noe Selchey's spermatazoa [sic] and a dolphin ovum carefully developed by radiation" (103). But despite thoughts of suicide both before and after gaining this knowledge, Duke decides, "I had come two thousand miles to find myself in the city and on the City I would build something new" (107). This decision is largely based on the relationship that Duke forms with one of his half sisters, Pryn. Her response to the idea of suicide is that "death is waste, death is the end of change and change is the purpose of man. … [Suicide is] not natural" (95). At the end of the story, Duke's own stance about the crucial concept of change is similar: "Man lives in the context of nature. He plays by the rules of the game but unlike other creatures, he can manipulate the game by changing the rules. Each alternation requires man to adjust again to the new game and on and on, ad infinitum. I've forgiven Noe because I understand the lonely man who hid in science" (108).

Though "The Selchey Kids" takes place in the future, it is still related very much to Yep's historical fiction and contemporary realism. It is related to those books with Chinese/Chinese-American characters as well as to those with European-American characters. His characters live "in the context of nature," but his books call into question what nature actually is. What is the relationship between nature and human nature? How do humans cope with change, whether environmental or otherwise? What is the nature of loneliness and individualism in the context of humans as essentially social beings?

Child of the Owl, an American Library Association Notable Children's Book, responds, to some degree, to all of these questions. The issue of loneliness (and aloneness) is particularly tangible for the 12-year-old main character, Casey Young, whose mother is dead and who has spent her short life traveling from one town to another with her jobless, gambling father, Barney. The real action of the book begins when Barney ends up in the hospital, where Casey sneaks in to see him even though the rules forbid children from visiting. When a nurse sees Casey, she knows that she is related to Barney because "You are the only Chinese on this floor." Barney reacts with a joke: "Gosh, I hope it isn't catching."2 This is just a small hint that "Chineseness" is an issue in the story and that differentness and aloneness are issues as well—but not in the way that one might guess. Casey does not end up in a situation that makes her feel alone because she is the only Chinese—like her father in the hospital. Rather, she finds herself in circumstances where she is surrounded by other Chinese but does not feel that she is a part of them.

Because her father cannot take care of her, Casey first goes to live with her mother's father, Uncle Phil ("the Pill"), and his family. But when that arrangement does not work out, he sends Casey to live with her maternal grandmother in Chinatown. Casey is struck by the look of the place, the architecture. "But it was the people there that got me. I don't think I'd ever seen so many Chinese in my life before this" (Child, 26). The passage continues, speaking to the notion of stereotypes: "Some were a rich, dark tan while others were as pale as Caucasians. Some were short with round faces and wide, full-lipped mouths and noses squashed flat, and others were tall with thin faces and high cheekbones that made their eyes look like the slits in a mask. Some were dressed in regular American style while others wore padded silk jackets. All of them crowding into one tiny little patch of San Francisco" (26).

This passage is just as informative to readers as to Casey because it helps them to place Phil the Pill's family into some kind of context. His family is upper-middle-class and has an ambiguous relationship to Chinese culture. The oldest daughter, a student at the University of California at Berkeley, is "the president of the Chinese girls' sorority" (Child, 15). But because of their grandmother's Chinese lifestyle and worldview, this same young woman considers her grandmother "as superstitious and impossible to live with as anybody can be" (23). But the source of Casey's friction with this family is not culture, but economic status, which she feels is their overriding concern in life. Upon entering their home her first thought is that "the only thing in Phil's house without an expensive price tag was me, and they started to see what they could do about upping my value as soon as I got in the door" (13). But upon arriving in Chinatown, Casey realizes that there are many ways to look Chinese. The importance of this realization cannot be overemphasized, for Casey or for readers who know Chinese and Chinese-American people only through one-dimensional stereotypes, both physical and cultural. Casey realizes, too, that Chinese people can dress in many different ways and, by extension, that there are various ways to be Chinese:

Barney and me had never talked much about stuff like this. I knew more about race horses than I knew about myself—I mean myself as a Chinese. I looked at my hands again, thinking they couldn't be my hands, and then I closed my eyes and felt their outline, noticing the tiny fold of flesh at the corners. Maybe it was because I thought of myself as an American and all Americans were supposed to be white like on TV or in books or in movies, but now I felt like some mad scientist had switched bodies on me like in all those monster movies, so that I had woken up in the wrong one.

(Child, 27)

Thus begins Casey's struggle with her identity, which is also a struggle with her relationship with various family members. It is Casey's grandmother, Paw-Paw, who most understands Casey's feelings and helps her to work toward an understanding of herself. When Casey is most out of place in Chinatown, Paw-Paw interprets her feelings without her having to articulate them:

"Did you feel that you were all alone inside?" Paw-Paw asked.

I looked at her in amazement. "How did you know?"

"All of our family go through that. I did. Your mother did too. We're all children of the Owl Spirit, you see?"

(Child, 57)

What follows is a chapter-long segment of the story of the Owl, told to Casey by her grandmother. Though critic Marjorie Lewis thinks that the characters in Yep's novel are "strong and interesting" and that the book is "exciting and well-plotted," she asserts, too, that the legend of the owl is "strangely graceless and confusing."3 Though this evaluation is valid—the story requires more than one reading even from sophisticated readers—it does not invalidate the worth of the story itself.

The owl story is composed of many intricate details and turns of events. But it raises several significant issues. It takes place during a time of hardship for both animal life and human beings. There is drought and subsequently a shortage of food for all, pitting humans against animals. Eventually, one of the humans takes an owl in human form as his wife, against her will. But "it was because Jasmine had never been an ordinary owl that she was able to adapt to her new life upon the ground" (Child, 77). Though she raises a human family and is dutiful to them, she is always an owl in her soul. Casey takes away a very significant insight about herself from this story that her grandmother tells: "And if I pretended I was an owl, I suddenly had some way of talking about my feelings because I felt like someone who'd been trapped inside the wrong body and among the wrong people" (82). Clearly, she is still uncomfortable with having a Chinese face and with living in Chinatown.

Fortunately, the story offers some insights more complex than Casey's about the issue of identity. For example, the ways in which the owl/woman had never been an ordinary owl are important. Specifically, she had never been the owl of Chinese mythology as described by Paw-Paw, a creature who does not honor family ties, going so far sometimes as eating its parents when they have grown old and useless. Jasmine, in contrast, does not agree with her other siblings that their mother should be sacrificed in time of hardship. She demonstrates the same kind of regard for family when she inhabits a human body, feeling satisfaction in the opportunity to nurture her seven sons instead of pushing them out of the nest when they were able to fly and survive on their own, as owls do (Child, 78). So though Casey feels that her Chinese body is the wrong body, the story of Jasmine offers some hope that she can, in fact, learn to wear this face with ease and even relish. This is a process that has begun already when she hears the story; she feels guilty when she uses a knife and fork rather than chopsticks, and she is beginning to enjoy drinking tea as much as Coke and milk (81). Her grandmother's motherwit—"Your eyebrows are beautifully curved, like silkworms. That means you'll be clever" (31)—does not always sound strange. In short, she is beginning, little by little, to fit into the rhythm of life in Chinatown.

Laurence Yep is careful, however, not to romanticize Chinatown, just as he does not romanticize China in his historical novels. Child of the Owl makes it clear that Chinatown is not a monolithic community. In particular, there is definite tension between those born in China and those who consider themselves Chinese Americans (or simply American, as Casey does). Schools, both American and Chinese, are major sites of contention. At the American school, Casey thinks of other Chinese Americans as "those Chinese girls" (Child, 40) when they make her an easy target of teasing, knowing that she cannot understand their whispering in Chinese.

Language is also at the root of Casey's problems in Chinese school, an experience based closely on the experience of the young Laurence Yep: "Each week, we had a new lesson in the reader that we were expected to memorize, recite aloud, and then write out. So each week, I memorized a new pattern of sounds like a song and a new pattern of pictures like a cartoon. I wound up doing more work than anyone else in the class but I achieved my purpose: I passed without learning Chinese" (Lost Garden, 53). And like Yep's teacher, Casey's teacher thinks, "You 'Merican-born. Lazy. Lazy. Lazy" (Child, 41). Like Yep, Casey thinks of Chinese as "a foreign language" (43). But unlike Yep, Casey has no purpose, positive or negative, and finally "just gave up trying" (43).

Fortunately, critics have not given up on the classroom as a site of promise. Marla Dinchak contends that "while young people will enjoy [Yep's] books just for their stories, Yep's novels are also well suited for classroom reading." She goes on to explain that "Yep's skillful use of figurative language, symbolism, and other literary techniques make these books useful for teaching literary skills to junior high school students."4 Dinchak contends, too, that the surest test of the power of a book is whether or not young people will want to read it. And she is confident they will wish to peruse Yep's work. If this is so, then there is hope that those who read Casey's story will, through reading and discussion, begin to think about major issues confronting American society. Perhaps they will bring more understanding to issues related to ethnic diversity and multiculturalism—what it means to be an American. These are some of the concerns that Casey is dealing with.

They are not the only issues, however. She is dealing with issues, too, that are related to her family dynamics as well as her being of Chinese ancestry; what becomes more and more apparent is that ethnicity cannot be separated completely from any other sphere of identity and life. Yep, like Casey, is dealing with family issues, but through his writing. Just as Casey is concerned with communicating with her grandmother (who does speak English), Yep is concerned with communicating with his grandmother (who does not speak English). She is, tangibly almost, at the heart of many of his books. He notes in his autobiog- raphy that Cassia is an ancestor of Casey Young (Lost Garden, 54). Perhaps most telling is this admission of sorts: "As much as I tried to deny my ethnic background, I was unable to escape completely from being Chinese because of my grandmother, Marie Lee" (47). His grandmother, he often reminds his readers, is the inspiration for the character of Cassia. In addition to his grandmother, Yep bases so many of his characters on family members that his family has wondered aloud, good-naturedly, who Phil the Pill is based on.

What is apparent is that Phil the Pill has not so much to do with Yep's own family as he has to do with making the story of Jasmine, the owl/woman, multi-dimensional, with implications for the relationships between family members over the course of generations. Critic Sharon Wigutoff makes the observation that though parent-child conflict is a major problem for young people, writers seem to avoid it as material. When they do include adult antagonists, she asserts, "they are either invisible, shallow, lacking understanding, or preoccupied with their own lives. … We rarely gain insight into their thoughts and motivations."5 But she is very clear that Yep's writing is an exception to these general observations.

Wigutoff is thinking specifically about Barney, Casey's father. But Phil is important, too. Like the Chinese owls that Paw-Paw describes in her story, Phil has essentially eaten his own mother, or at least thrown her out of the family nest. When she has a hospital stay, Phil and his other siblings all refuse to take financial responsibility for her. The sense that the reader gets, however, is that were Jeanie, Casey's mother, alive, she would have been the daughter, like Jasmine, who would have taken care of her mother. Though Paw-Paw has a chosen family in her social club, her telling the owl story to Casey is an attempt on her part to reestablish a certain kind of family tie, with her granddaughter. In the course of this process—getting to know her grandmother and the consciousness represented by Chinatown—Casey comes to know her mother in a way that would not have been possible otherwise. Wigutoff's words are doubly true. Not only does Yep create full parental characters, but full grandparental figures and adult figures in general.

Casey's father, Barney, is a central figure whether he is part of the action or absent. He is always a presence, though usually a negative one. His defining personality trait is that he is a habitual gambler. His gambling activity dictates every move that he and his daughter make. For example, one reason they move around so much is that once he owes money to too many people in one town, he must simultaneously flee them and find new sources of income and loans. To him, taking regular employment is a means of last resort when it comes to generating income. And in the end, Barney sinks low enough to become a thief, stealing something precious from his own mother and jeopardizing his cherished relationship with Casey, whom he "raised … to be an American" (Child, 129).

His ideas about wanting her to feel and be American explain why she has to learn his life story, his history, initially from others. Barney's old friend Sheridan tries to describe to Casey the social climate in the United States following the Great Depression when Casey's parents were a young married couple, with new high school diplomas. Explaining why Jeanie could secure a job while Barney could not, he offers this analysis:

Most American bosses are men who'll hire a pretty Chinese girl just like that. … But to hell with some uppity Chinese boy. Let him stay a houseboy. … He took it for maybe ten years, but it was eating away at him inside. And then, oh, I guess about the time the war ended, he said, to hell with it. See, it was like there was this brick wall in front of us. Some guys like me knew we couldn't get past it so we never tried. And you got your other guys who just went on beating their heads against it for years and years, but it was like Barney gave up because he'd paid his dues and now somebody owed him something.

(Child, 108)

Sheridan and Casey then discuss who it was that Barney thought owed him something—God? The powers that be? What Barney found out for himself, no matter whom he expected something from, is that this society felt as if it owed him nothing past his high school education—not even an opportunity to put that education to good use.

It makes sense, then, that Barney would have some bitterness. What does not quite make sense is that this bitterness or anger is not against society, but against himself. He never reaches the point where he can admit that institutionalized racism has had a substantial impact on his life. Instead, he takes all the responsibility upon himself, internalizing the label of "loser." He is never able to reach a balance between understanding the societal roadblocks and yet taking personal responsibility for those aspects of his life that he can. He wants to believe in the promise of America so that his daughter can do the same. His reasoning is that no matter how bad things were for him, they "were still a helluva lot better than what men like my dad had to go through. Beatings. Lynchings. You know." His philosophy is to "worry about what happens today and not what happened yesterday" (Child, 128).

Ironically, it is part of Barney's philosophy, another part, that first provides Casey with a positive way of approaching her life in Chinatown. When necessary, she makes herself remember that he "had a knack for making me see the good side of things" and tries to convince herself that "there had to be something good to being Chinese" (Child, 44). In the end, though, daughter surpasses father in wisdom and understanding. He contends that the owl story is merely a story, while Casey draws meaning from it. She comes to the understanding that, like Jasmine, she can have several identities embodied in her various selves; that her identity is complex and multifaceted; that her Chineseness does not cancel out her Americanness. To be whole, she must acknowledge and embrace both her ethnic heritage and her nationality. Discovering her Chinese name, Cheun Meih, which means Taste of Spring, signals a corresponding period of rebirth in her life (143). Barney and Paw-Paw's children, on the other hand, in her estimation are miserable because they cannot reconcile the American and the Chinese images of the owl.

There is so much in The Child of Owl —mystery, parent-child conflict, identity crises, nostalgia, a bit of art history, American social history, and more. But at least one critic finds the afterword to the book just as intriguing as the story itself. It is instructive to consider this rather extended statement by the novelist Maxine Hong Kingston. She makes these observations:

Laurence Yep himself has at least two voices, and I was enchanted that he tells a story-within-a-story about the owl totem of the Young family. It disconcerted me, however, when he adds an afterword in which the "I" is no longer Casey Young as in the rest of the book but apparently the author. He tells us that he has not actually seen an owl charm nor heard the owl story but made them up himself. Now in that afterword I believe Laurence Yep to be anticipating those critics—both Caucasian and Chinese-American—who will question whether his work is "typical" of the rest of us Chinese-Americans. So to all those ethnocentric villagers, he in effect, says, "No, I'm not misrepresenting Chinese customs. This is fiction." Good art is always singular, always one-of-a-kind, and an artist certainly has the right to make things up to write fiction—but somehow we expect Chinese-American artists to represent all Chinese-Americans in a way we do not expect of Caucasian-American writers. I hope that when more of our works gets into print that this burden—" Speak for me! Speak for me!"—we lay on each of our writers who gets published will become lighter. Laurence Yep has written a lovely novel that needs no apologies.6

The significance of Kingston's words cannot be overstated. As a Chinese-American writer herself, she is in a perfect position to understand and to articulate the literary, social, and political context within which Laurence Yep writes. Child of the Owl was published in 1977. The most prolific Chinese-American writer of young adult books, Yep has forged a career that in itself constitutes a response to Kingston's concerns, whether or not he was aware of them, whether or not he agreed with them. His many books demonstrate, powerfully, that there are many Chinese Americans, many and different Chinese-American experiences. No one book bears the onus of representing all Chinese Americans. Dragonwings accomplishes this, within the bounds the early twentieth century. Child of the Owl and later books accomplish it in the context of late-twentieth-century American culture.

Sea Glass

Yep himself reminds us that regardless of the social context or notions of an artist's responsibility, he, as writer, is writing for himself as well as for a reading public. He says this in reference to Sea Glass : "Sea Glass is my most autobiographical novel, but I can't always write that close to home because it requires me to take a razor blade and cut through my defenses. I'm bleeding when I finish, and I have to take time off by writing fantasy or something only marginally related to my Chinese heritage such as The Mark Twain Murders. "7 This statement helps to answer questions, fair or unfair, about Yep's books with non-Chinese-American protagonists. And his words are so candid that the reader cannot help experiencing Sea Glass all the more deeply for having these insights.

The reader, too, experiences Sea Glass deeply because of the way in which Yep uses autobiographical material. He does not simply rewrite The Lost Garden. He reminds readers in the preface to The Star Fisher that he alters family stories in such a way that they are blended together, creating a new, communal bio-fiction.8 In his autobiography he talks about "soaking up things like a sponge so that years later" he was able to incorporate them into his books (Lost Garden, 49). These details are many and contribute to making the texture of the books rich and the characterizations strong and appealing to readers.

The main character in Sea Glass is Craig Chin, who has just moved to the town of Concepcion, away from his beloved San Francisco. While Casey Young had to discover her Chinese heritage, Craig Chin is quite comfortable with his Chinese identity. In Concepcion, there are "Italian kids. White kids. Black kids. Kids like Bradley. But the only other Chinese boy down here … was my cousin Stanley. … All the other boys were Americans and bigger than us, though Bradley was the biggest."9 The most notable thing about this passage is that Craig uses the terms Chinese and American as mutually exclusive. The term Chinese American is not yet part of his vocabulary. Neither is it a part of the vocabulary of the students at Craig's new junior high school, who, as is clear to him when they nickname him Buddha Man, view him as a foreigner (Glass, 44). After being scolded by Uncle Lester, the owner of the store that Craig's parents are running, for not speaking fluent Chinese, Craig concludes that "if the kids thought of me as a foreigner, the old Chinese here thought of me as an American" (44).

As interesting as Craig's self-perception is that of his cousins, Sheila and Stanley, students at the same school. They want nothing to do with him, going so far as to make fun of him along with the white students. He understands the "Western kids" (Glass, 41) behaving this way but reasons that because of their shared Chinese heritage, Sheila and Stanley should not join in the humor at his expense. Craig does not understand why Sheila and Stanley never visit him in Concepcion's small Chinatown, if only to buy Chinese vegetables. He does not understand why they will not even consider going with him to visit Uncle Quail, a living depository of Chinese history and knowledge. They cannot imagine learning to speak Chinese. Craig is right on target, more than he is aware of, when he thinks to himself, "It was as if [Sheila] had to go out of her way to prove to the others that she was different from me" (41).

An especially poignant scene unfolds when Craig asks Kenyon, a white female friend, why she thinks his cousins would pretend not to be Chinese. She gets right to the heart of the matter: "Because maybe they think the other kids would make fun of them. … Not everyone likes to be different. It's easier to be the same as other people. Safer too. Only you remind them that they're not as white as they'd like to be" (Glass, 201). Kenyon makes the sharp observation, too, that Craig seems "to like being Chinese." His answer is simply: "It's what I am" (200). But of course, the matter of identity is not quite so simple. Craig admits at another point, for instance, that though he assumes that he and his cousins should share something based on their common history, "I couldn't have told you much more about what it meant to be Chinese" (42). Reviewer Jack Forman is off target when he claims that "the first-person narrative is sensitive and perceptive—a bit too so for a character Craig's age."10 His comment is representative of an all-too-common tendency on the part of adults, whether writers, critics, teachers, or parents, to be condescending and to underestimate the capacity of young people to be reflective and intelligent readers. Reviewer Mary M. Burns is more accurate in noting that the narrative voice is "totally engaging … carefully but not self-consciously wrought."11 For even if Craig cannot articulate it, he does know, as Yep himself understands, and as Casey Young learns, that there is something intangible, yet very real, about that quality Yep sometimes refers to as "Chineseness."

What complicates Craig's experience even more than his cousins' antagonism is his father's hostility. On the face of it, the tension between him and his father has nothing to do with ethnic identity and has everything to do with a father wanting his son to emulate him in every way, in this case through excelling in sports. As critic Donald Kao asserts, "Sea Glass brings into question the whole concept of ‘achievement and success.’ Craig is not a star, yet he is a full human being who strives only for those things that make sense."12

His father's behavior does not make sense to him. The story is the same throughout most of the book—Mr. Chin drives his son to play basketball nearly every waking hour, though he is an abysmal player, and encourages him against his will to play with the boys at school as well. Even when Mr. Chin witnesses for himself the disaster it is, inevitably, when Craig plays basketball with his schoolmates, he sees only what he wants to see and deludes himself into thinking that Craig does have the potential to be a good player. It only puts more pressure on Craig to know that his mother won many medals in the Chinese Olympics that used to be held in Chinatown during her youth and that his father was nicknamed the Champ of Chinatown after becoming the first Chinese basketball player to make the All-City varsity team (Glass, 16). His wish for his son is that "with just a little work, we could make you an All-City player. … Maybe even an All-American" (26).

The word "American," it turns out, is all-important. For Craig's father, playing basketball is completely entangled with his notions of being an American. Playing the game well was his only means of gaining the respect of white boys. Acceptance followed respect. It was a point of pride to Craig's mother that though some Western people initially had no respect for the Chinese at all, "Your dad could play any Westerners' game and beat everyone" (Glass, 27). The question of whether or not the respect of the white peers was sincere or given grudgingly is not addressed; in a way, the respect of white people was not the only issue. What Craig discovers is that his father, like himself, had struggled with his own father over what, essentially, were questions of self, though couched in other terms.

Though many authors find it impossible to say which of their books are their favorites, Yep does not hesitate when identifying Sea Glass as his favorite: "It's about me and my father, and my uncle's in it, too." One aspect of the novel that reflects Yep's own family dynamics is the insecurity he felt because both of his parents were very good athletes while he was not at all athletic. In Sea Glass Craig finds out through Uncle Quail that sports are not and never were his father's first love. His first love, in fact, was plants. It had been his ambition "to know everything about plants" (Glass, 78). This was a goal that he shared with Uncle Quail as he sat drawing plant life. Uncle Quail was encouraging. His father—Craig's grandfather—was completely unsupportive, feeling pride in his son when he got attention from becoming an outstanding athlete. His reasoning, according to Craig's father, was that all the family's money had to be sent home to China. Thus, money spent on drawing was a luxury. Uncle Quail recounts sadly the result of this attitude: "And I watch what happen. Your father was a good boy. It was just like he close a door inside himself. No more books about plants. No more drawing. And … no more talk about knowing everything about plants. He even tell me he not care about that stuff. But I got eyes. I saw" (79).

This passage presages the capacity of Mr. Chin to change his attitude and behavior toward Craig. For no matter how different he and his son are in personality, it is clear that Mr. Chin knows how it feels to be pressured to give up something that one cares about. It is perfectly understandable to Craig, after learning this information, that his father's small garden is so important to him, though he claims that the garden is for the pleasure of his wife. This fictional garden, of course, is the garden in The Lost Garden —the garden of Laurence Yep's own father.

In this entire scenario, Uncle Quail's insight, his seeing, is unobstructed. It is useful to Craig. There are other instances, too, where his wisdom is instructive. For example, he is able to recount the history of Chinese people in California for Craig. When Craig tells him that he knows about the contribution that the Chinese made to building the railroads, he responds, "Hear me, boy. We Chinese did more, much more, for the demons. We built the levees that hold back the rivers in the spring, and we drained the marshes so the demons could farm lots of land. We worked their farms and their orchards and their factories. And you know how the demons repaid us?" (Glass, 137). What follows is more description and detail about interaction between European and Chinese Americans, consisting mostly of the struggle of the Chinese to earn a livelihood despite the ostracism and sometimes fatal violence of some white people. Uncle Quail remembers his father's conviction about the value of long memory, that if even one Chinese man "remembered what had happened, then we would have won a little" (139). Commenting on the value of longevity, his conversation with Craig continues:

"That's how I got my name. Because I keep my coats so long the tails get ragged. Like the quail. But quails, they may be poor and ragged, but they're one tough bird. They live on when all the pretty pheasants and nightingales have been killed. Somehow the quails go on living."

"And remembering?" I asked gently in American.

"Yes." Uncle lifted his head defiantly.

(Glass, 140)

What Craig is thinking in actuality is that perhaps Uncle Quail is too tough and that his long memory is not balanced, not tempered by the reality that there are good westerners as well as bad demons. And initially, because of his memories, he is unwilling to allow Craig to bring Kenyon to his cove to go swimming simply because she is female and not Chinese either.

Kenyon is not completely innocent herself—she, too, is guilty of defining people by stereotypes. For example, when describing the clothes her mother likes for her to wear, she complains that they make her look "like I just escaped from a carnival." When Craig replies that he likes some of the things she wears, her thoughtless retort is "if you're a gypsy" (Glass, 91). Craig does not challenge this statement, but perhaps the thrust of the novel will compel some young readers to question Kenyon's comment for themselves.

Though both of them may be thinking in narrow terms, one of the differences between Kenyon and Uncle Quail is that Uncle Quail is an adult and Kenyon is still a young person. Craig learns from everyone in his life, but because of the closeness he shares with Uncle Quail, he somehow expects something special from him. At the least, he expects him to follow his own advice: "Of all the people I knew, Uncle had the best reasons for staying away from others after all the bad things that had happened; but it was also a funny thing that Uncle was also the last person who should be doing that. I mean, Uncle had talked to me about being open to the world. But it seemed that he preferred applying his words to animals and to things, and not to people" (Glass, 142). Craig is open to the world. He has internalized more of Uncle's teaching than Uncle is aware of. He has opened his eyes to the world of Uncle's cove, learning about the water environment—the separate pools and how they are connected by narrow channels of water—and he now extends this model to the rest of his world. He realizes that though he is Chinese, he is still in some ways connected to everyone and everything is this world by various channels.

In a related statement, worth quoting at length, critic Marla Dinchak offers an insightful analysis of Laurence Yep's use of symbolism. She suggests that one of the most effective features of Yep's writing is his use of metaphor and figurative language. She then notes the way in which symbols are used in each book, generally being explained to younger characters by older, wiser ones. Dinchak continues:

As protagonists mature, they become more aware of the symbol and what it represents. Moon Shadow in Dragonwings sees the aeroplane his father builds as the symbol for the reach of humanity's imagination, the achievement of the impossible dream. In Child of the Owl, Casey comes to understand her own cultural heritage and dual identity through the little jade owl charm, symbol of her ancestor, the owl-woman. The ocean and a reef teeming with marine life become symbols to Craig which help him communicate with those he cares about in Sea Glass. As the young people become more aware of the symbols and their meanings, young readers also become more aware of symbolism and are introduced to an aspect of literature which may be new. Universal truths are presented to readers, and Yep tells them that it is not bad to be different, and they should be proud of who they are and where they come from. He shows readers the incredible scope of our imagination, and he shows that impossible dreams can come true. He reaffirms the importance of communication, and all of this is more understandable and believable because of the symbolism.

(Dinchak, 81-82)

Sea Glass is full of symbols, including, in the end, sea glass—broken glass, the edges of which are made round and smooth by water over the course of time. Likewise, Craig's rough edges are being smoothed out by living his life. At various times he dislikes himself because of his weight or because he does not measure up to others' expectations. Before he realizes that he can be both Chinese and American, he feels as if he is not anything at all (Glass, 46). When his father scolds him, he feels "all broken up inside, and all the little pieces were dissolving" (128). But by the end of the novel, Craig is comfortable with the many different parts of himself and understands that he is a special individual in the same way that no two pieces of sea glass are the same. What remains of sea glass, in Craig's estimation, is "the brightness and the clearness" (213). And in the end, Craig Chin, 12-year-old Chinese-American boy, is just as bright and clear as sea glass.

The Star Fisher

Laurence Yep is at his best as a writer when he is creating historical fiction. And though individual characters might be bright and clear, the same is rarely true of the historical eras that they inhabit, every period having its share of complex social forces. The Star Fisher combines interesting, engaging characters with the particular social circumstances of a Chinese family in small-town West Virginia in the spring of 1927. Published in 1991, it blends elements of many of his earlier books and his autobiography to make a new, successful story that was the winner of the Christopher Award. Winning this particular award is meaningful because nominated books are judged by both reading specialists and young people themselves. The award recognizes books that "have achieved artistic excellence, affirming the highest values of the human spirit."13 Indeed, as asserted in the Horn Book's review of The Star Fisher : "It is disturbing but never depressing, poignant but not melancholy, for the principal characters … are individuals with a strong sense of their own worth, facing difficulties with humor, determination, and pride."14 And the difficulties are many.

Yep reminds his readers in his preface that his family's migration to West Virginia was not a unique experience, noting that "Chinese families refused to be confined to the Chinatowns on the two coasts and were searching for a place in America for themselves back in the 1920s and earlier" (Fisher, viii). He goes on to inform the reader that he has met Chinese Americans besides his own family who grew up in such states as Arkansas, Mississippi, and Oklahoma; The Star Fisher is their story as well.

Fifteen-year-old Joan Lee is the narrator of the story, which begins when she moves from Ohio to West Virginia with her parents and her younger brother and sister. When she arrives at her new school, the following conversation ensues with Miss Blake. Note that English is represented in italics, while Chinese is the standard.

In a polite but brisk manner, she helped me fill out the form.

"Now, where in China were you born?"

"Actually," I said almost apologetically, "I was born in Lima," and added, "Ohio, not Peru."

(Fisher, 55)

Similar incidents occur over and over again because people assume, with no basis whatsoever, that she and her family are not American. (Yep might point out that this happens in the 1990s just as it did in the early part of the century.) Part of being American, as far as most white residents of the town of Clarksburg are concerned, is speaking English, and so this kind of interaction takes place:

Mister Snuff lowered his hand slowly. "She talks American."

"Of course we do," Emily [Joan's sister] snapped. "We were born here. We go to American schools."

Mister Snuff's jaw dropped open. "They both talk."

(Fisher, 8)

Not only is this man ignorant of the grammatical rules of the English language, but in his ignorance has the audacity to berate Chinese Americans who do speak English. Moreover, Mr. Snuff is surprised that these Chinese American even speak—any language. His referring to them as "darn monkeys" (Fisher, 7) is not simple name-calling but expresses his conviction that they are not human at all.

Much name-calling goes on in this novel. Besides "monkey," the other epithet, which has retained its impact over time, is "chink." Again, the name-caller is Mr. Snuff, this time jeering, "Hey, chinky-chinky" (Fisher, 133). He refers to them, too, as heathens (137). Name-calling does not occur only in verbal form. After the Lee family's new laundry is fully operational, a local merchant chooses to display in his store window a quite demeaning sign showing caricatures of Chinese people, pigtails and all, throwing irons at each other. In the middle of the sign is a new washing machine. The words underneath read: "All the Chinamen want one. Buy one and you'll never want to go to a laundry" (144). Joan and her family, however, are not the only targets of epithets and harassment. When Miss Lucy, their landlady and friend, defends them, she is characterized as a "chink lover" (138).

Miss Lucy, more than a bit reminiscent of Miss Whitlaw in Dragonwings, is the character who represents the "goodhearted white people." But looking further, Yep does a wonderful job of not placing characters or whole groups of characters into simple categories. For example, it is clear in the shop-window scene that those who are generally considered decent members of society are not so in all contexts. Yep relates this kind of question to the issue of socioeconomic class: middle-class status is not equivalent to decency. Respectability is a relative concept.

Bernice, a white, lower-class schoolmate of Joan's, values respectability. Ashamed of her own family background, Bernice expends a lot of energy and thought trying to be a part of middle-class society. As Joan puts it, "In terms of appearance, diction, and even their names, [Bernice and her sister] were more respectable than the respectable folks—as if that might change the town's mind" (Fisher, 93). But it does not change the minds of the townspeople to any appreciable degree, and it is significant that Yep demonstrates this in a scene set in a church. When a Christian woman at the big church social demands that Bernice get out because she does not "belong with respectable folk" (123), Yep's message is clear. Some of his more sophisticated readers might make connections between this scene and the scene in which Miss Lucy talks about playing her own small part, as a child, in the Civil War, wanting to contribute to ending "that pernicious trade" (76). Undoubtedly, this was a trade that was to a large degree justified in terms of religion. The common element between slavery and Yep's presentation of the church social scene is the theme of hypocrisy. Yep introduces the theme in a way that says, clearly, that no one segment of society is completely innocent of hypocrisy. No one is entirely "respectable."

Bernice is a very complicated character. On the one hand, she is very generous. For instance, her concern about befriending Joan is that Joan will be shunned by others when they see the two of them together (Fisher, 61). On the other hand, she wants to be a part of people who are capable of being this petty. However, this desire is quite natural for an adolescent; it is a theme that Laurence Yep returns to over and over again. Readers sympathize with Bernice, because Yep's characterization of her suggests that she will become more respectable as she learns to have respect for herself on her own terms.

Joan herself is working toward self-respect in an odd way. When she finds out that Bernice's family is made up of "theater people," she acknowledges that "theater people were … well … not very respectable either in China or America … and suddenly I could understand why the other poor girls shunned Bernice" (Fisher, 89). So the scenario involves not only middle-class people judging poor people, but all people, even within the same larger group making distinctions among themselves. This happens in every culture. Joan understands this. Furthermore, her tone comes close to suggesting that she accepts it; in her own culture, she would, in fact, have the social prerogative to look down on Bernice. At the same time, Joan is dealing also with her feelings about being (or not being) American. Thus, when she fears that her mother might embarrass her at the church social, she thinks of Bernice: "Even if she was theater people, she was still American. Would the disaster at the pie social make her think I was too foreign?" (116).

Joan learns several lessons from her relationship with Bernice. One of these is "not to let a lot of silly prejudices blindfold you. It was important to meet with the person and not the notion" (Fisher, 101). Another is that "it's funny how there are levels and levels of prejudice in the world. The red-faced man hated us for being Chinese; but he would hate someone like Bernice as well for being the child of theatrical folks—just as Mama would herself" (94).

At this point, Joan has the invaluable insight that these levels upon levels of prejudice are perpetuated endlessly in a vicious circle, which can be broken only with much work on the parts of the individuals who make up society. But ironically, Joan cannot be a part of this process until she has a clearer sense of who she is as an individual. While she defines Bernice as an American, her description of herself is not constant. She has reached the same point as Craig Chin, when he defines himself as Chinese American. Joan is still struggling. It is painful to her to admit to herself that she is incapable of telling Bernice about China because she knows as little about that country, that society, as Bernice does (Fisher, 64).

Joan, however, probably knows more than she thinks she does about Chinese culture, because like Laurence Yep himself, she has simply "soaked it up" in the course of being raised by Chinese parents; she is a child of the owl, like Casey Young, whether or not she realizes it fully. It registers somewhere in her mind when her mother explains how a given social transaction in Clarksburg might be handled in China (Fisher, 102). Though she is a bit skeptical, it makes an indelible impression when her father tells her that the washboard was a Chinese invention that was brought to America (36). Information such as this might be considered trivial to many, but a writer such as Yep understands that little details, like the fact that a given society was technologically oriented, makes a big difference to young people who are ashamed of or confused about their heritage. This small fact about the washboard will remain with Joan.

There are countless other details, facts, attitudes, and images that are Joan's inheritance from her parents. She will recall always the image of her mother, though not literate, busily working with the abacus to balance the family's financial records. She will remember always her father's "long, elegant fingers around her wrist—fingers that were better suited to painting and calligraphy than to being thrust into boiling-hot water" (Fisher, 10). The story within the novel, the story of the star fisher, is about a beautiful bird, temporarily transformed into a human woman, who is trapped into an earthly marriage that produces a daughter. The daughter, by blood therefore, belongs "to both the earth and sky" and "[sees] everything through a double pair of eyes" (72). Joan will take with her throughout her life an appreciation for how most people—herself, her mother, Bernice, readers—are all, in some way, star fishers: those who belong to two worlds, both of which are their birthright.

In his autobiography Laurence Yep characterizes himself as "a bunch of different pieces that had been dumped together in a box by sheer circumstance" (Lost Garden, 91). He is referring to the whole of his background: being a Chinese American growing up in an Africa-American neighborhood; being too Chinese for some white people; being too American for some Chinese; being the decidedly nonathletic child of athletes; being the descendant of Chinese people who in some measure considered West Virginia their home. He compares his experience to that of others: "Almost everyone I knew—whether white, yellow, or black—came from a single background. They were cut from one pattern of cloth" (91).

This is a surprising and in some ways disturbing comparison. For what the stories of the owl/woman and the star fisher are about is belonging to various worlds simultaneously while maintaining a stable sense of self. Writing so insightfully and sensitively about numerous characters who experience this kind of double identity, this dilemma of struggling both to belong and to be individuals, it is somewhat startling that Yep would not realize that those around him might be experiencing the same. The young people growing up around him are probably trying to figure out what it means to be African American or Italian American or Jewish American. Fortunately, Yep's characters question identity from many, diverse perspectives, and they discover that everyone has a story; that few people are cut from one pattern of cloth regardless of race, gender, religion, age, economic status, or ethnic heritage; that everyone feels in some way like a star fisher.

Notes

1. "The Selchey Kids," Worlds of If 18 (February 1968), 93; reprinted in World's Best Science Fiction of 1969, ed. by Donald A. Wolheim and Terry Carr (New York: Ace, 1969), not paginated; hereafter cited in text as "Selchey."

2.Child of the Owl (New York: Harper and Row, 1977; Dell, 1978), 8; hereafter cited in text as Child. Selections reprinted by permission of HarperCollins Publishers.

3. Marjorie Lewis, School Library Journal 23 (April 1977), 73.

4. Marla Dinchak, "Recommended: Laurence Yep," English Journal 7 (March 1982), 81-82; hereafter cited in text.

5. Sharon Wigutoff, "Junior Fiction: A Feminist Critique," The Lion and the Unicorn 5 (1981), 5.

6. Kingston, "Middle Kingdom to America" (see chap. 1, n. 11).

7. "Author's Commentary," in Children's Literature Review, vol. 17, ed. by Gerard J. Senick (Detroit: Gale Research, 1989), 202; reprinted from Literature for Young Adults, 2nd edition, ed. by Alleen Pace Nilsen and Kenneth L. Donelson (New York: Scott, Foresman, 1985).

8.The Star Fisher 