Spoilers in the last two paragraphs + mention of sexual assault in the third.

In a movie full of striking images, events, and passions, the one moment of The Story of Sinthat is hardest to shake is the closeup of Ewa's small, white hands, fiercely ripping the heads off of the roses secretly left for her by Lukasz and shoving them inside the front of her dress. She doesn't want her mother to see them (she holds herself just a little more stiff than usual during their routine exchange of kisses, so the flowers can't be felt), but she also wants them on her skin, touching her, both hoping and not hoping they'll satiate some of her hunger for Lukasz.…

“I’m not a slut, but I may become one.”

➡️ The Artistic Degradation of The Story of Sin ⬅️

“How proud I am that you will do anything to humiliate me! You degrade me as deep as a man can degrade a woman…”

—Lulu, Earth Spirit/Pandora’s Box

Bram Dijkstra’s Idols of Perversity brought to sumptuous life. You could write a thesis on the use of fin-de-siecle artwork used in The Story of Sin, Walerian Borowczyk's textured, decadent, erotic opus; or you could just read that painstakingly researched tome, which makes the case that much of that era’s art was part of a “cultural war on women,” a response to their progress and evolution in a new, modern world. Those beautiful…

Borowczyk #9 --- Two days ago Behind Convent Walls reminded me how unique Walerian Borowczyk's art is. Because of that, I decided to finally watch his two-hour arthouse-epic Dzieje grzechu from the mid-70s. Because this is a Polish production, it features very little nudity. It's not an erotic movie. It's a historical drama about a young woman who grows up in a conservative society and is exploited by several men. The cover, that is shown on letterboxd, doesn't do the movie justice. The original Polish art looks much better.

The filmmaking (including locations, sets, costumes, music, dialogue) is nothing less than brilliant. The movie showcases an uncountable amount of authentic art, articles of daily use, hand-written love letters, and postcards.…

Walerian Borowczyk's earlier features are so profoundly interesting from a purely visual perspective, it almost doesn't matter what the hell is going on in the movie. His background as a collagist is apparent in what he chooses to structure his frame with. This is cinema at its full potential. The fact he overlays themes of sexuality and desire over the top of that is really just the icing on the cake.

The Story of Sin reminded me a lot of Poor Things, as we follow a female protagonist who breaks the bonds of sexual subjugation in an epic traversal of Europe. It's a lot less life affirming though. Unlike Bella, she struggles mightily to ever truly rise above the horrors…

In Matthew Barney’s Hoist (one of the segments of the horribly variable anthology, Destricted [2006]), the congress of man and the manmade is manifested in an act of mechanophilia.

There the connection between fetish and object is made so explicit - man fucks machine - there’s little room for anything else, certainly not erotica even if greased pistons are your thing (Kustom Kar Kommandos anyone?) In Hoist the act is done, propriety superseded. All sealed with what looks like a hairy ballcock hanging out of the man’s backside. Where next to go? Nowhere except oblivion if you follow that credo.

With Borowcyck, operating some years earlier, the hinterland between man (more likely woman) and object is more expansive, suggestive, grounded…