IBM Rational Developer for System i, V7.1.0.3 Readme

©Copyright International Business Machines Corporation 2000, 2008. All rights reserved. US Government Users Restricted Rights - Use, duplication or disclosure restricted by GSA ADP Schedule Contract with IBM Corp.

Contents

1.0 About this fix pack

2.0 Installation information

2.1 Hardware requirements

2.2 Software requirements

2.3 Other requirements

2.4 Installation instructions

3.0 Fixes contained in this fix pack

4.0 Known limitations, problems, and workarounds

5.0 IBM Rational Software Support

5.1 Posting questions to a newsgroup

6.0 Notices and trademarks

1.0 About this fix pack

The IBM® Rational® Developer for System i™, Version 7.1.0.3 fix pack contains enhancements and fixes to versions 7.1, 7.1.0.1 and 7.1.0.2.

The latest version of this document (English only) is available at the following address:

http://download.boulder.ibm.com/ibmdl/pub/software/awdtools/rdi/v71/7103/documents/readme/readme.html

Version 7.1.0.2 of this readme file (English only) is available at the following address:

http://download.boulder.ibm.com/ibmdl/pub/software/awdtools/rdi/v71/7102/documents/readme/readme.html

Version 7.1.0.1 of this readme file (English only) is available at the following address:

http://download.boulder.ibm.com/ibmdl/pub/software/awdtools/rdi/v71/7101/documents/readme/readme.html

Version 7.1 of this readme file (English and translations) is available at the following address:

http://download.boulder.ibm.com/ibmdl/pub/software/awdtools/rdi/v71/71/documents/readme

2.0 Installation information

This section describes the installation requirements and specific installation instructions for this fix pack.

For information about installing IBM Rational Developer for System i, Version 7.1, including hardware and software requirements, see the Installation Guide. The English and translations of the Installation Guide are available at the following address:

http://download.boulder.ibm.com/ibmdl/pub/software/awdtools/rdi/v71/71/documents/install_instruction

2.1 Hardware requirements

There are no additional processor or memory requirements for installing this fix pack. However, there might be additional disk space requirements if you install the fix pack at the same time that you install IBM Rational Developer for System i, Version 7.1, or if you are installing the fix pack as an update:

If you install the fix pack at the same time that you install IBM Rational Developer for System i, Version 7.1, the disk space requirements are essentially the same as for Version 7.1.

If you are installing the fix pack as an update, you might need up to an additional 200 MB of disk space. Your actual disk space requirements depend on the features that you selected when you installed Version 7.1 of the product.

If you choose to download the update as a compressed file for local installation, approximately 300 MB is required to store and extract the compressed file.

2.2 Software requirements

This section describes the additional software requirements for installing IBM Rational Developer for System i, Version 7.1.0.3. For more information about the requirements for installing IBM Rational Developer for System i, Version 7.1, see the Installation Guide.

Before installing this fix pack, you must install IBM Installation Manager, Version 1.2.1.

For information about Installation Manager, Version 1.2.1 or to download the file for local installation, see the Version 1.2.1 download document.

For information about working with Installation Manager, see the Installation Manager information center.

2.3 Other requirements

Internet access is required unless you download the compressed file containing the IBM Rational Developer for System i, Version 7.1.0.3 fix pack. By default, the update is located and installed by Installation Manager directly from the IBM update repository for IBM Rational Developer for System i, Version 7.1.0.3.

Important: When IBM Rational Developer for System i is installed, the location of its update repository is automatically embedded in Installation Manager. For Installation Manager to search the default update repository, the preference Search the linked repositories during installation and updates must be selected on the Repositories preference page. This preference is selected by default.

To install the fix pack from a different repository location (for example, if the fix pack is available on a shared drive or HTTP or HTTPS server), you must add the repository location in Installation Manager. To add a repository location, perform the following steps:

Start Installation Manager.

On the Start page of Installation Manager, click File > Preferences, and then click Repositories. The Repositories page opens.

On the Repositories page, click Add Repository.

In the Add repository window, type the URL of the repository location, or browse to it and select a file path, and then click OK.

Click OK to close the Preference page.

2.4 Installation instructions

The two common ways to install this update are as follows:

If IBM Rational Developer for System i, Version 7.1 is already installed on your system, you can install this update by using the Update Packages wizard in IBM Installation Manager. For general instructions on installing an update, see the Installation Guide. For detailed instructions, see the Installing IBM Rational Developer for System i, Version 7.1.0.3 as an update section of this document.

If you are installing IBM Rational Developer for System i, Version 7.1 for the first time or if you are installing an additional instance of it, you can install this update at the same time that you install IBM Rational Developer for System i, Version 7.1. Click Check for Other Versions and Extensions on the Install page of the Install Packages wizard in IBM Installation Manager. For general instructions on installing an update, see the Installation Guide.

By default, the update is installed directly from the IBM update repository; however, it is also available for download. For details, see the specific installation instructions noted below for IBM Rational Developer for System i, Version 7.1.0.3.

2.4.1 Installing IBM Rational Developer for System i, Version 7.1.0.3 as an update

Install the fix pack with the same user account that installed the product.

Restrictions:

IBM Rational Developer for System i, Version 7.1 must be installed.

The product must be closed when you install this fix pack. Ensure that all browsers and other applications opened by IBM Rational Developer for System i are also closed.

To find and install IBM Rational Developer for System i, Version 7.1.0.3 as an update:

Start IBM Installation Manager.

On the Start page of Installation Manager, click Update.

If a new version of Installation Manager is found, you are prompted to confirm that you want to install it before you can continue. Click OK to proceed. Installation Manager automatically installs the new version, stops, restarts, and then resumes.

In the Update packages wizard, select the Installed Location for IBM Rational Developer for System i, and then click Next. Installation Manager searches for updates in the IBM Rational Developer for System i repository on the Web as well as in any repository locations that you entered. A progress indicator shows that the search is taking place.

By default, recommended updates are displayed and selected on the Update Packages page. Ensure that you select Version 7.1.0.3 for IBM Rational Developer for System i, and then click Next.

On the Licenses page, read the license agreements for the update. On the left side of the License page, click each item to display the license agreement text.

If you agree to the terms for all of the license agreements, click I accept the terms of the license agreements.

Click Next to continue.

On the Summary page, review the displayed information, and then click Update. A progress indicator shows the percentage of the installation completed.

When the update process is completed, a message confirming the success of the process is displayed near the top of the page. Click View log file to open the log file for the current session in a new window. Before continuing, you must close the Installation Log window.

2.4.2 Downloading the fix pack for local installations

You can download the compressed file containing the IBM Rational Developer for System i, Version 7.1.0.3 fix pack. The extracted files form a repository for the fix pack. You can install the fix pack from the repository on your own computer, or you can copy the repository to a shared drive or an HTTP or HTTPS server.

To download and install the fix pack, complete the following steps:

Download the fix pack from the following address:

http://download.boulder.ibm.com/ibmdl/pub/software/awdtools/rdi/v71/7103/zips/rdi-7.1.0.3.zip

Extract the compressed file into an appropriate directory. For example, extract the file to C:\temp. After you extract the file, the directory contents are as follows: C:\temp\rdi\updates\<extracted-files>

Add the fix-pack repository location in IBM Installation Manager:

Start IBM Installation Manager.

On the Start page of Installation Manager, click File > Preferences, and then click Repositories. The Repositories page opens.

On the Repositories page, click Add Repository.

On the Add repository window, browse to, and then enter the file path to the rdi\updates directory. For example, enter C:\temp\rdi\updates\repository.config, and then click OK.

Click OK to close the Preference page.

Install the fix pack as described previously in this document.

Note: During the process of updating from a local repository, Installation Manager might prompt you for the location of the repository for IBM Rational Developer for System i, Version 7.1. If you installed the product from CDs or other media, this media must be available when you use the update feature.

3.0 Fixes contained in this fix pack

For all IBM Rational Developer for System i, V7.1.0.3 APARs, go to the IBM Rational Developer for System i Support Search page at the following address:

http://www.ibm.com/software/awdtools/rdi/support/search.html

Select the APARs option and enter the desired search terms (such as 7.1.0.3 for APARs related to this fix pack). You can also create a custom search of the Support database.

The following corrections have been included in this fix pack.

SE34362: When a connection is initially offline, and syntax checking is called on a CLLE member, after being prompted to connect, the syntax checking doesn't work (i.e. doesn't display any errors).

SE29469: The cursor is not being positioned where it is expected when the Signature function is turned on.

SE33608: The Show Indent view for RPGLE source does not correctly present the indentation levels when continuation lines of statements start with certain indentation-changing keywords (e.g. a SELECT keywork within an EXEC SQL statement).

SE33925: When editing CLLE source, the cursor misbehaves when moved from a line containing an "END" token (e.g. ENDDO, ENDSELECT) to a different line, using the keyboard arrows or the mouse.

SE33976: If the Source -> Verify function is performed on a DDS source member that references fields from a DDM file which links to a remote file, the function returns with errors.

SE34379: The Java Method Call Wizard fails to generate source code when any source line in the file from the start of the file to the current line the wizard was invoked at is a line which ends at column 10 or 14.

SE34300: If a connection is initially offline, and the command ADDJOBSCDE is prompted in a CLP source member, entering a valid time with a separator (e.g. 11:00) causes an error to be displayed at the bottom of the prompt screen.

SE34539: After the customer adds a compile command extension into the plugin.xml using the extension point "com.ibm.etools.systems.core.compile", the custom compile command can be shown in RSE but not in iSeries Projects.

SE34205: Remote System Explorer won't work with job CCSID 65535.

SE34837: The EVFEVENT file is created with maximum 1 member when FNDSTRPDM is called from RDi, which prevents RDi from compiling because it is unable to add the source member to the EVFEVENT file.

SE32079: When using CCSID 5026, batch compilation of members in the RSE view does not result in a program (or module) being created. Commands Log shows the command as normally completed, and there are no error messages.

SE35686: When a web service wizard is called on RPGLE source that contains data structures with packed decimals (p), the generated java code (using direct program call) uses the class java.math.BigDecimal without the corresponding import statement.

SE35497: OutLine View shows EXTFLD instead of field names in Data Structure with externally defined fields.

SE34090: RDi can not start with the argument -nl de_DE (German) with ORG.OSGI.FRAMEWORK.BUNDLE EXCEPTION

If the Program Call Wizard is launched without selecting a Java project first, and then a program or a pcml file is imported, the OK button and the Next button in the Program call "definitions" page will be disabled.

4.0 Known limitations, problems, and workarounds

This section describes known limitations and problems specific to this fix pack and any workarounds that are available.

Updates, limitations, and known problems about IBM Rational Developer for System i, Version 7.1.0.3 are documented in the library on the product Web site.

As limitations and problems are discovered and resolved, the IBM Software Support team updates the knowledge base. By searching the knowledge base, you can quickly find workarounds or solutions to problems that you experience. The Support section of the IBM Rational Developer for System i Web site enables you to create a customized search of the live Support knowledge base. To narrow your search, specify 7.1.0.3 as the search term.

5.0 IBM Rational Software Support

IBM Software Support provides you with technical assistance.

For contact information and guidelines or reference materials that you will need when you require support, read the IBM Software Support Handbook.

For more information about product news, events, support, FAQs, lists of known problems and fixes, and other support information, visit the IBM Rational Developer for System i product Web site.

Before you contact IBM Software Support, gather the background information that you will need to describe your problem. When describing a problem to an IBM software support specialist, be as specific as possible. Include all relevant background information so that the specialist can help you solve the problem efficiently. To save time, know the answers to the following questions:

What software versions were you running when the problem occurred?

Do you have logs, traces, or messages that are related to the problem?

Can you reproduce the problem? If so, what steps do you take to reproduce it?

Is there a workaround for the problem? If so, be prepared to describe the workaround.

5.1 Posting questions to a newsgroup

To post your questions on a newsgroup, use the following resources:

IBM News Server: news.software.ibm.com

Suggested newsgroup: ibm.software.websphere.studio400

Other suggested forum: lists.midrange.com/mailman/listinfo/wdsci-l

6.0 Notices and trademarks

This information was developed for products and services offered in the U.S.A. IBM may not offer the products, services, or features discussed in this documentation in other countries. Consult your local IBM representative for information on the products and services currently available in your area. Any reference to an IBM product, program, or service is not intended to state or imply that only that IBM product, program, or service may be used. Any functionally equivalent product, program, or service that does not infringe any IBM intellectual property right may be used instead. However, it is the user's responsibility to evaluate and verify the operation of any non-IBM product, program, or service.

IBM may have patents or pending patent applications covering subject matter described in this documentation. The furnishing of this documentation does not give you any license to these patents. You can send license inquiries, in writing, to:

IBM Director of Licensing

IBM Corporation

North Castle Drive

Armonk, NY 10504-1785

U.S.A.

For license inquiries regarding double-byte (DBCS) information, contact the IBM Intellectual Property Department in your country or send inquiries, in writing, to:

IBM World Trade Asia Corporation

Licensing

2-31 Roppongi 3-chome, Minato-ku

Tokyo 106, Japan

The following paragraph does not apply to the United Kingdom or any other country where such provisions are inconsistent with local law: INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION PROVIDES THIS PUBLICATION "AS IS" WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EITHER EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF NON-INFRINGEMENT, MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. Some states do not allow disclaimer of express or implied warranties in certain transactions, therefore, this statement may not apply to you.

This information could include technical inaccuracies or typographical errors. Changes are periodically made to the information herein; these changes will be incorporated in new editions of the publication. IBM may make improvements and/or changes in the product(s) and/or the program(s) described in this publication at any time without notice.

Any references in this information to non-IBM Web sites are provided for convenience only and do not in any manner serve as an endorsement of those Web sites. The materials at those Web sites are not part of the materials for this IBM product and use of those Web sites is at your own risk.

Licensees of this program who wish to have information about it for the purpose of enabling: (i) the exchange of information between independently created programs and other programs (including this one) and (ii) the mutual use of the information which has been exchanged, should contact:

Intellectual Property Dept. for Rational Software

IBM Corporation

3600 Steeles Avenue East

Markham, Ontario

Canada L3R 9Z7

Such information may be available, subject to appropriate terms and conditions, including in some cases, payment of a fee.

The licensed program described in this documentation and all licensed material available for it are provided by IBM under terms of the IBM Customer Agreement, IBM International Program License Agreement or any equivalent agreement between us.

Any performance data contained herein was determined in a controlled environment. Therefore, the results obtained in other operating environments may vary significantly. Some measurements may have been made on -level systems and there is no guarantee that these measurements will be the same on generally available systems. Furthermore, some measurements may have been estimated through extrapolation. Actual results may vary. Users of this document should verify the applicable data for their specific environment.

Information concerning non-IBM products was obtained from the suppliers of those products, their published announcements or other publicly available sources. IBM has not tested those products and cannot confirm the accuracy of performance, compatibility or any other claims related to non-IBM products. Questions on the capabilities of non-IBM products should be addressed to the suppliers of those products.

All statements regarding IBM's future direction or intent are subject to change or withdrawal without notice, and represent goals and objectives only.

This information contains examples of data and reports used in daily business operations. To illustrate them as completely as possible, the examples may include the names of individuals, companies, brands, and products. All of these names are fictitious and any similarity to the names and addresses used by an actual business enterprise is entirely coincidental.

Trademarks and service marks

The following terms are trademarks of the IBM Corporation in the United States or other countries or both:

IBM

Rational

System i

WebSphere

Java and all Java-based trademarks are trademarks of Sun Microsystems, Inc. in the United States, other countries, or both.

Microsoft and Windows are trademarks of Microsoft Corporation in the United States, other countries, or both.

Intel, Intel logo, Intel Inside, Intel Inside logo, Intel Centrino, Intel Centrino logo, Celeron, Intel Xeon, Intel SpeedStep, Itanium, and Pentium are trademarks or registered trademarks of Intel Corporation or its subsidiaries in the United States and other countries.

Linux is a registered trademark of Linus Torvalds in the United States, other countries, or both.

Other company, product, or service names may be trademarks or service marks of others.