Tom Cruise and Katie Holmes shocked the world when they revealed they were separating, with t he actress filing for divorce over Scientology fears.

The couple married in a Scientologist ceremony in 2006 just months after welcoming their daughter Suri Cruise, but things slowly took a turn for the worse. Sources claimed Katie felt intimidated by the Church of Scientology and feared they would turn her daughter against her.

Katie was granted sole custody of their daughter as part of their divorce agreement and Tom has become estranged from Suri over the years. Here, we've taken a look inside Tom and Katie's divorce settlement and the reason for their split.

Tom Cruise's daughter Suri, 18, ditches her dad's name after years of no contact

Tom Cruise, 61, goes topless and shows off his ripped physique as he takes a dip in Mallorca

Bitter split and Scientology fears

Cracks started to appear in Tom and Katie's marriage when members of the Church of Scientology moved into their Los Angeles home, according to Ron Miscavige, the father of church leader David Miscavige. Ron claimed the church's staff moved in with Tom and Katie to make sure the Mission Impossible star was properly taken care of.

Speaking to the Daily Mail, he said: "That didn’t sit so well with Katie, of course, and it hurt the marriage." Ron said Katie feared her daughter might end up cutting all contact with her under Scientology’s "disconnection" policy. Under the policy, members stop contact with any family member who leaves Scientology.

On June 29 2012, Tom and Katie announced their divorce. Tom said he was "deeply saddened" by Katie's decision to break up with him. A spokesperson for the actor said at the time: "Kate has filed for divorce and Tom is deeply saddened and is concentrating on his three children."

Tom is believed to have "not seen" the divorce coming. Katie filed documents in New York and cited the reason for the divorce as "irreconcilable differences".

Divorce settlement

Click here to follow the Mirror US on Google News to stay up to date with all the latest news, sport and entertainment stories.

Katie filed for divorce from Tom in June 2012. She asked for legal custody, primary residential custody and a "suitable amount" of child support from her husband as part of the settlement.

The actress also asked for a division of property in the divorce documents. On July 9 2012, Katie's lawyer confirmed her divorce with Tom had been settled.

Katie was granted "sole custody" of Suri and Tom agreed as part of their settlement to pay $400,000 per year in child support. The agreement lasted until Suri turned 18 last month. Tom also agreed to pay all of Suri's expenses, including medical, dental, insurance, education, college and other extracurricular costs.

Katie and Tom settled their divorce out of court. At the time, they released a statement which read: "We are committed to working together as parents to accomplish what is in our daughter Suri's best interests. We want to keep matters affecting our family private and express our respect for each other's commitment to each of our respective beliefs and support each other's roles as parents."

Suri Cruise estrangement

Tom has not seen his daughter in more than 10 years. When Suri turned 18 last month, she enjoyed a quiet celebration with her mom in New York, while Tom was busy filming for the upcoming Mission Impossible in London.

It's also been reported that Suri has dropped Tom's name and is instead going by a new moniker. According to Hello! Magazine, Suri's new title is simply Suri Noelle. The new name sees Suri taking on the middle name of her mom.

Tom is believed to be feeling "guilty" after missing Suri's 18th birthday celebrations. A source told Heat magazine: "Tom is feeling guilty about missing so much of her life, but insists that he hasn’t completely shut Suri out of his life, and does get updates from time to time."