When it was announced that Katie Holmes had filed for divorce from Tom Cruise on Friday, a single question loomed at the forefront of the American psyche: “But what does Rupert Murdoch think of the TomKat split?” On Sunday, taking a breather from slagging The New York Timesand Mitt Romney on Twitter, Murdoch provided his hotly anticipated answer: “Scientology back in news. Very weird cult, but big, big money involved with Tom Cruise either number two or three in hiearchy [sic].”

Disappointingly, the reaction was centered more on religion, which, some say, is the primary irreconcilable difference between the Hollywood couple, than the divorce itself. In a prophetic flourish, Murdoch added, “Watch Katie Holmes and Scientology story develop. Something creepy, maybe even evil, about these people.” Perhaps an ironic observation for a person whom some might call “creepy, maybe even evil” himself, considering how his News Corp. subsidiary, News of the World, reportedly hacked the phones of celebrities, politicians, members of the British royal family, relatives of deceased British soldiers, victims of the 7/7 London bombings, and murdered English school girl Milly Dowler? Noting this irony, several Twitter users quickly retorted, “you make scientology seem sane” and “cm’on like you don’t helm the biggest and most influential cult ever.”

Murdoch later acknowledged this backlash, tweeting, “Since Scientology tweet hundreds of attacks. Expect they will increase and get worse and maybe threatening. Still stick to my story.”

And then everyone waited for Murdoch to weigh in on Adele’s pregnancy and Alec Baldwin’s second marriage.

Business

“I’m Not Naive”: Inside Emma Tucker’s Rocky Wall Street Journal Reboot

The British-born editor has injected America’s business paper of record with ambition and verve, while unnerving the newsroom with unapologetic cuts. The restructuring “may look callous,” she says. “But it’s so that we get it right, so I don’t have to do it over again.”

Politics

Jordan Klepper, MAGA “Anthropologist,” on the 2024 Republican National Convention

The Daily Show correspondent talks to Vanity Fair about what he’s learned chronicling the MAGA faithful and how these quadrennial spectacles provide “such a surreal look at American politics.”

Politics

RFK Jr.’s Family Doesn’t Want Him to Run. Even They May Not Know His Darkest Secrets.

A shocking photograph. Blowback from a Trump meeting. Alleged sexual assault. The Kennedys have voiced support for Joe Biden, but certain aspects of Robert F. Kennedy Jr.’s character are only just now coming to light.

Politics

“Don’t F-cking Leave”: How Neo-Nazis and White Supremacists Trap Their Followers in the Movement Forever

In an excerpt of her new book Black Pill, CNN correspondent Elle Reeve wades through the organizational muck of the far right—which consists of the “suits” and “boots”—and reveals the personal pitfalls of being famous among all the worst people.

News

The 1992 Republican Convention Jump-Started the Culture Wars—and the GOP’s Prime-Time Extremism

In an excerpt of his book The Naughty Nineties, David Friend recounts the partisan political battle America has been fighting for three decades, beginning with Pat Buchanan and George H.W. Bush in Houston.

Royals

After Splitting From Charles, Princess Diana Wanted to Celebrate Her Independence. The Summer of 1994 Was When Her New Life Began

It’s been three decades since a crop of new friends, a designer wardrobe, and an enormous amount of good press helped the late Princess of Wales blossom into the woman she wanted to be.

Royals

With Princess Kate and King Charles Battling Cancer, the Monarchy Has Never Felt More Fragile

Trooping the Colour brought a hugely welcome appearance, but does the royal family need a deeper bench?

Hollywood

Here: Robert Zemeckis’s New Movie Spans a Century, but the Camera Never Moves

Tom Hanks and Robin Wright reunite the Forrest Gump team for a drama set entirely in one household’s living room.

Television

House of the Dragon’s Tom Glynn-Carney Thinks King Aegon Is a “Tragic Case”

In episode five of House of the Dragon’s second season, Team Black mourns the loss of a matriarch, while Team Green decides who will temporarily rule King’s Landing. Tom Glynn-Carney drops by Still Watching to chat about Aegon’s “boyish vulnerability” and the joy of dragon riding.

Style

As Tensions Continue to Flare Over the War in Gaza, the Upper East Side Is Divided

Talking about the war in Gaza is complicated for Jewish Americans, and in Manhattan’s wealthiest circles, disagreement has created social cloisters.