Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

Who are Katie Holmes’ parents, and did they ever like Tom Cruise? The Dawson’s Creek star’s mum Kathleen is a philanthropist, while her dad Martin is a lawyer who helped her through the divorce

STORYFaye Bradley

May 23 , 2024

Katie Holmes just made a rare public appearance with her parents, Martin and Kathleen Holmes.

Per People, the Dawson’s Creek actress attended the American Ballet Theatre Spring Gala in New York City on May 14 with her supportive mother and father, and they even stopped to take pics on the red carpet and inside the gala.

So, who are they exactly – and did they ever hang out with Tom Cruise, their daughter’s ex-husband who practises Scientology?

What do Katie Holmes’ parents do for work?

According to Katie Holmes’ IMDB profile, her mum Kathleen is a homemaker and philanthropist, while her father Martin works as a lawyer. People reports that Martin, who’s a University of Toledo law school graduate and member of the Ohio Bar since 1971, was involved in orchestrating his daughter’s divorce from Top Gun: Maverick actor Tom Cruise in 2012.

They have five children

Katie Holmes is the youngest of five siblings: Holly, Nancy, Tamera and Martin Jr, per Closer Weekly. “I don’t know how my mom did it, raising all five of us,” Katie previously told Glamour. “I have three sisters and three sisters-in-law; I have learned from them. I’m inspired by them.”

They hang with granddaughter Suri Cruise

Kathleen and Martin seem to be very close with their granddaughter Suri – who celebrated her 18th birthday in April. From going backstage to meet the cast behind hit musical Finding Neverland on Broadway, to watching NBA games and enjoying the high life in Beverly Hills, the family appear to be tight-knit.

Did Katie Holmes’ parents ever meet Tom Cruise?

Yes, considering they were linked from 2005 until their divorce in 2012, Holmes’ parents have met Tom Cruise, and unsurprisingly, they were at the wedding.

It’s unclear how they feel about Cruise now, but Martin appeared to support his daughter’s marriage at the time.

Per People, Martin shared an emotional speech at Cruise and Holmes’ wedding: “It didn’t take much time before I realised this Tom guy was a special guy – that he loved Katie, that he cared for her and supported her. Tom expressed his love many different ways – I like that. I respect men who are not afraid to show their feelings. I respect Tom for the commitment he has made to provide happiness and love to Katie.”

Katie Holmes just made a public appearance with her parents, Martin and Kathleen Holmes, as they all attended the American Ballet Theatre Spring Gala in New York City together

Martin, who’s a University of Toledo law school graduate and member of the Ohio Bar since 1971, was involved in orchestrating his daughter’s divorce from Top Gun: Maverick star Cruise in 2012