After a brief jaunt to the Cannes Film Festival, Katie Holmes was spotted dashing around New York City this Tuesday.

Although the string of glittering events is still underway in the South Of France, Katie, 44, has wrapped up her engagements and returned home to America.

For her latest outing she slipped into a summery denim blouse with an intricate lattice print, tucking it in to play up her trim waistline.

Katie, who has a 17-year-old daughter called Suri by her ex-husband Tom Cruise, went matchy-matchy in a pair of jeans.

Sweeping her silky dark locks back into a ponytail, she warded off the rays in a pair of bronze-tinted sunglasses and popped on a casual pair of sneakers.

While doing the rounds at the Cannes Film Festival, she took the stage for a talk at an event called Women In Motion thrown by the French luxury goods firm Kering.

Chaired by Salma Hayek's husband François-Henri Pinault, Kering boasts a glamorous list of subsidiaries including Balenciaga, Gucci and Yves Saint Laurent.

During her Women In Motion interview, Katie talked about how her experience as an actress influenced her work as a director.

To date, she has directed three feature films - All We Had, Alone Together and the new release Rare Objects starring her alongside Alan Cumming.

She theorized onstage at Cannes that 'working with actors, having, you know, being an actor, there's also, I know what they're feeling. I think I know what they're feeling and I hope that they feel more comfortable because they know I'm them.'

As for her acting career, the Batman Begins actor shared that she 'would love to do a comedy actually. I think that people need to laugh right now. Also, I love musicals. I can't really sing that well, though,' she confessed with a giggle.

Katie's Cannes trip also included the Women's Stories Gala held by Vanity Fair in conjunction with Saudi Arabia's controversial Red Sea International Film Festival.

The Red Sea International Film Festival, which has an emphasis on highlighting Third World talent, was thrown for the second time in Jeddah this past October.

In 2021 the inaugural festival opened with Cyrano starring Peter Dinklage and the best film prize went to a Georgian picture called Brighton 4th.

From the off, the film festival was slammed abroad by those who regarded it as an propaganda drive to sanitize the public image of the Saudi state.

At the opening ceremony of the latest edition, JFK director Oliver Stone strikingly gave a speech defending the local regime.