Related Links

The Currency System family of software and services is licensed to use official ISO 4217 currency codes, published by the International Organization for Standardization. The codes covered by this standard, as well as the registered trademark "ISO", are the property of the International Organization for Standardization (ISO), and are used under license. These codes are sometimes also referred to as "SWIFT currency codes".

The official ISO 4217 standard specifies three-letter ("Alpha-3") codes for currencies worldwide. The first two letters of these codes are usually identical with the two-letter ISO 3166-1 Alpha-2 country codes, which are well-known by internet users, as they are used for country domain suffixes. The third letter is usually the initial of the currency name (but not always, as in the case of EUR, RUB and a handful of other currencies). For example, USD stands for "United States dollar" (note that currency names are written in lower case, unless required otherwise by language rules, as in German, or by the local context, such as titles in English). Codes beginning with "X", among others, are reserved for special purposes such as non-currency commodities.

Currency Server uses ISO 4217 currency codes for internal storage, in the COM and Web service interfaces, and when collecting information from certain exchange rate data sources.

Reference

The following table includes a selection of currency names and abbreviations maintained by Cloanto as part of its Currency World Monitor service. This is not the official table of ISO 4217 currency codes as licensed and implemented in Currency Server, which is published by ISO and which includes additional information and codes. Specifically, the following list does not include currencies which ceased to be legal tender, and it includes codes which are not part of ISO 4217. Currency Server uses a more complete list which also includes the full ISO 4217 data.

For additional and official information, please refer to the standards organizations listed at the end of this document.

Related

The following sites provide additional information: