Centra Technologies, a subsidiary company of Focus Softnet, announced it is making its debut at Gitex Technology Week 2016 to be held from October 16-20, 2016 in Dubai. The company plans to promote its Customer Relationship Management and Human Capital Management solutions at the Middle East’s largest technology exhibition.

Senior executives, developers and experts from the company will be available to meet with customers and partners and demonstrate the strength of its solutions with them.

“Centra believes in delivering cutting-edge solutions that bring together people and processes through effective, easy-to-use and integration-ready CRM and HCM systems. Through our solutions, we are helping organisations adopt digitisation and are empowering them to streamline their processes for better customer and people support,” said Nisith Naik, CEO of Centra Technologies.

“We are excited about our participation at Gitex, which is the single largest regional ICT platform, to introduce our best-in-class CRM, HCM and vertical solutions to a focused audience. Through our participation, we hope to increase Centra’s brand visibility and reach, meet with our existing partners and customers and sign on new reputed partners across global markets,” Naik added.

Established in 2015, Centra’s philosophy is to innovate, enhance and simplify people and process management through scalable solutions for end customers and empower its ecosystems of channel partners. With a strong emphasis on R&D, Centra’s development team has been designing software solutions, mobile applications and cloud solutions, which has been appreciated by customers, implementation partners and system integrators alike.

As part of their Gitex plans, Centra will be showcasing its CRM and HCM solutions including CRM as a platform with enhanced APIs, mobile version of Centra CRM and CRM solutions specifically designed for the aviation, real estate and academic verticals. Experts from the company will be holding product demonstrations for visitors and sharing their global successes with them.

Click below to share this article