For the past few years, Hezbollah has accumulated a wide range of power and influence in many regions of the Middle East, particularly in Lebanon, the country of its origin. The “Party of God” has the ultimate domination over the Lebanese Shiite community and is currently the sole “legitimate” defender of Lebanon against Israel’s aggression. Hezbollah’s position today is the result of a series of changes within the Lebanese Shiite community, and to the many wars and “revolutions” that began with the activities of Imam Musa Al-Sadr between the 1950s and 1970s, to the creation of AMAL movement that led to the establishment of Hezbollah in 1982, and to the control it possessed over a large part of lands and population during the last years of the Lebanese civil war. Understanding the circumstances of Hezbollah’s emergence and the changes within the Lebanese Shiite community is key to understand the essence of Hezbollah’s power today.

This paper is an effort to understand the sources of societal rage and the circumstances that make the disenfranchised resort to the use of extreme force. The Lebanese civil war is one of the most vicious in modern history and its onset can be seen as a key factor in driving the Lebanese Shi’a towards movements which advocated the use of violence, having initially attempted political participation. This paper argues that their path to violence developed from a voicelessness that had existed prior to the beginning of Lebanon’s internecine hostilities. The creation of Lebanese Shi’i political bodies and their subsequent failure to address the socio-economic and security concerns of the whole community pushed them towards despair. Syria and Iran channelled this dissatisfaction to meet their own agendas. The Lebanese civil war saw countless state and non-state actors take part and can be used as an example of the unpredictability that results from foreign military intervention. In Lebanon’s case, it was the collapse of the political institutions that exacerbated the already harsh conditions of the Lebanese Shi’a, in turn leaving no option but violence to voice their discontent.

This article examines the development of the position of Shaykh Muhammad Mahdi Shams al-Din (d.2001), who headed Lebanon’s Islamic Shi'i Supreme Council, ISSC, from 1978 to 2001, on the Lebanese sectarian system. I trace the progression of his positions which underwent three phases: first, accommodation with sectarianism, albeit with reforms proposals, during the phase of collaboration with Sayyid Musa al-Sadr in the 1970s; second, a more radicalized position that rebutted the sectarian system in the midst of the civil war and the Israeli invasion of Lebanon in 1982; and finally, a de facto acceptance of the war-ending Ta’if Agreement of 1989 that consolidated sectarianism. I argue that the changing political context of post-war Lebanon and the rise of Hezbollah as a contending force on the Shi'i Lebanese scene have propelled Shams al-Din to seek rapprochement with the Lebanese state, in line with the legacy that Musa al-Sadr had initiated in Lebanon when he founded the ISSC.