Richard Donner passed away on Monday at the age of 91, according to his wife, the producer Lauren Schuler Donner, and his business manager. No cause of death has been revealed. The director helmed such films as 'Superman', 'The Goonies', 'The Omen' and all four 'Lethal Weapon' movies.

Other credits of Richard Donner include 'Ladyhawke', 'Assassins', 'Maverick' and 'Scrooged'. He also worked on 'Superman II'.

He worked with a tonne of Hollywood talent across his career, who have paid tribute to the director in the wake of his death.

Mel Gibson found fame in the 'Lethal Weapon' series, and worked with Richard Donner in 'Conspiracy Theory' and 'Maverick'.

He described the late director to Variety as "my friend, my mentor".

The actor added: "Oh, the things I learned from him! He undercut his own talent and greatness with a huge chunk of humility referring to himself as ‘merely a traffic cop.’

"He left his ego at the door and required that of others. He was magnanimous of heart and soul, which he liberally gave to all who knew him.

"If we piled up all the good deeds he did, it would stretch to some uncharted place in the firmament. I will sorely miss him, with all his mischievous wit and wisdom."

His 'Lethal Weapon' co-star Danny Glover said "My heart is broken"'

He continued: "Working with Dick Donner, Mel Gibson and the Lethal Weapon Team was one of the proudest moments of my career.

"I will forever be grateful to him for that. Dick genuinely cared about me, my life and my family. We were friends and loved each other far beyond collaborating for the screen and the success that the Lethal Weapon franchise brought us. I will so greatly miss him."

Steven Spielberg also released a statement in tribute to Richard Donner.

It reads: "Dick had such a powerful command of his movies, and was so gifted across so many genres. Being in his circle was akin to hanging out with your favourite coach, smartest professor, fiercest motivator, most endearing friend, staunchest ally, and – of course – the greatest Goonie of all.

"He was all kid. All heart. All the time. I can’t believe he’s gone, but his husky, hearty laugh will stay with me always."

Read his tribute and more below.