http://www.appdeploy.com

Web's Largest Community for IT Administrators Acknowledged by Industry Experts for Innovation and Accessibility

RESTON, Va. - February 26, 2008 - AppDeploy, the Internet's largest free online community of application and computer administrators, announced that it has been named a finalist for "Best Online Science or Technology Service" by Software & Information Industry Association (SIIA) for its 23rd Annual CODiE Awards. Winners will be announced on May 20 at the SIIA NetGain Conference to be held in San Francisco.

The CODiE Awards celebrate outstanding achievement and vision in the software, digital content, and education technology industries. Through a unique combination of journalist and peer review, the CODiE Awards recognize outstanding products and services, as well as corporate excellence and philanthropy. More than 250 judges from the trade press, consulting, educators, IT specialists, and other knowledgeable, but neutral, experts have reviewed all products entered. Finalists were chosen from more than 1,000 nominations submitted by more than 600 companies.

"AppDeploy is truly honored to be named an SIIA CODiE award finalist," stated Bob Kelly, founder of AppDeploy and senior product manager at KACE. "The recognition by such an esteemed organization further acknowledges our site as a proven and respected information resource for over a quarter of a million monthly visitors."

This year's finalists represent a wide and impressive array of technology, business excellence, passion, and success. SIIA president Ken Walsh stated, "Competition is tough this year and that makes selection as a CODiE finalist a real achievement. All the companies on this year's list should feel justifiably proud of their recognition."

AppDeploy.com was acquired by KACE, the leading systems management appliance company, in 2007. This relationship has sparked the continuous development of AppDeploy's online community, while integrating its extensive deployment knowledge base directly into the KBOX family of appliances in the form of an exclusive feature called "AppDeploy Live".

About AppDeploy

AppDeploy is the leading destination for systems management professionals and the Internet's largest community of application and computer administrators.

AppDeploy is headquartered in Reston, Virginia. To learn more about AppDeploy, please visit http://www.appdeploy.com.

About KACE(tm)

KACE(tm) is the leading systems management appliance company. The award-winning KBOX(tm) family of appliances delivers easy-to-use, comprehensive systems management capabilities. KACE customers usually install in one day at one third the cost of software alternatives.

KACE is headquartered in Mountain View, California. To learn more about KACE and its product offerings, please visit http://www.kace.com or call 1-877-MGMT-DONE.

Editorial contact:

Erica Fenik

Kulesa Public Relations

(650) 340-1977

erica@kulesapr.com