http://www.kace.com/about/releases/systems-management-appliance/computer-management-software-alternative/03_03_09.php

Recognition by Industry Experts for Innovation and Accessibility Adds to Monster Online Community Growth

RESTON, Va. - March 3, 2009 - AppDeploy(sm), the Internet's largest, free online community of application and computer administrators, today announced it has been named a finalist for "Best Online Science or Technology Service" by Software & Information Industry Association (SIIA) for its 24th Annual CODiE Awards. The finalist announcement rounds out the tremendous growth and momentum AppDeploy has experienced over the past year, which includes a 100 percent increase of traffic, up to 1 million page views per month, and an ever-growing wealth of valuable content.

The AppDeploy community maintains a broad knowledge base, contributed to by more than 33,000 contributing IT professionals from around the world. The site provides computer administrators safe, reliable access to best practices and data on hundreds of thousands of applications. Members also reap the advantages of community technology innovations, such as AppDeploy Repackager. Launched last October, the tool is the industry's first free technology dedicated to the complex task of Windows Installer repackaging. Today, AppDeploy is visited by more than 350,000 individuals monthly.

"As the Web's largest community dedicated to IT administrators, we continue to gain traction and grow our visitor and contributor base daily, making AppDeploy the most sought after resource available to this unique group anywhere," said Bob Kelly, founder of AppDeploy and senior product manager at KACE. "Being named an SIIA CODiE Award finalist further validates AppDeploy as a proven and respected information resource."

The CODiE Awards celebrate outstanding achievement and vision in the software, digital content, and education technology industries. Through a unique combination of journalist and peer review, the CODiE Awards recognize outstanding products and services, as well as corporate excellence and philanthropy. Nearly 200 judges from the trade press, consulting, educators, IT specialists, and other knowledgeable, but neutral, experts have reviewed all products entered. Finalists were chosen from more than 800 entries.

According to SIIA President Ken Wasch, this year's finalists represent a wide and impressive array of technology, business excellence, passion, and success. "The competition is particularly steep this year during the 24th Annual SIIA CODiE Awards, making selection as a CODiE Finalist a true achievement. All the companies on this year's list should feel justifiably proud of their accomplishment in making it to this stage, and have much excitement to look forward to regarding the upcoming CODiE Awards voting," said Wasch.

AppDeploy.com was acquired by KACE, the leading systems management appliance company, in 2007. This relationship has sparked the continuous development of AppDeploy's online community, while integrating its extensive deployment knowledge base directly into the KBOX family of appliances in the form of an exclusive feature called "AppDeploy Live".

About AppDeploy

AppDeploy is the leading destination for systems management professionals and the Internet's largest community of application and computer administrators.

AppDeploy is headquartered in Reston, Virginia. To learn more about AppDeploy, please visit http://www.appdeploy.com.

About KACE(tm)

KACE(tm) is the leading systems management appliance company. The award-winning KBOX(tm) family of appliances delivers easy-to-use, comprehensive systems management capabilities. KACE customers usually install in one day at one third the cost of software alternatives.

KACE is headquartered in Mountain View, California. To learn more about KACE and its product offerings, please visit http://www.kace.com or call 1-877-MGMT-DONE.

Editorial contact:

Danielle Salvato

Kulesa Public Relations

(650) 340-1982

danielle@kulesapr.com