Our new customer gallery features Maria García, a local photographer who captures Miami in bold contrast and deep colors using her Leica D-Lux 6. Maria has been part of the Leica Store Miami community from the beginning, and we've watched as her photography has developed into a dramatic and distinctive style.

Join us on Saturday, May 10th for an opening reception for Maria's work. The reception will be held from 4-6 PM. RSVP by emailing info@leicastoremiami.com or calling (305) 921-4433.

We had a chance to pick Maria's brain a little bit concerning her photographic process.

Q: When did you first become interested in photography as a mode of expression?

A: Since I was a kid, I always was interested and fascinated with the possibility of being an active player in capturing a moment in time with a "small box and film." In the early 80's, I had the opportunity to learn how to work in a dark room to develop B&W film and print. I will never forget the process of seeing the picture slowly appearing on the photo paper still submerged on a tray and realizing that was exactly what I was trying to express.

Q: How would you describe your photography?

A: Mostly spontaneous, without much planning, trying to capture the unusual in the everyday environment. My interests vary, some days I look for subjects in nature, other days for subjects around the city, but not necessary fitting the "street photography" concept.

Q: You use a lot of shadows, silhouettes and bright colors in your photography, is that something that you specifically look for when photographing?

A: Not intentionally in the past. After I attended two workshops hosted by Leica Store Miami, one with Alex Beker, and the other with Chip Litherland, a new "window" opened that allowed me to deliberately look for the light, the colors, the shadows, the silhouettes, the details, and the composition... Since then, I focus on those aspects and sometimes I can incorporate, successfully, several in one photo.

Q: In a few of your images you have silhouettes of people passing by – do you find a scene that you like and wait for the right person to pass by or do you capture the moment as you come across it?

A: Usually, I find a scene I like and try to see how the additional elements (people, birds, wind, clouds, cars, etc) alter and/or add something to the space making it more interesting.

Q: What initially sparked your interest about the Leica D-Lux 6?

A: I had the opportunity to try it during Alex's workshop. After that experience, it became my favorite camera.

Q: How does shooting with the D-Lux 6 complement your shooting style?

A: Perfect size, weight, and even though it is a "compact" camera, it has many features that makes it versatile and unique for my shooting style. All I need in one!

Q: Are you working on any new projects or series now?

A: Yes, working on a close-up series of ordinary objects capturing un-ordinary point of view. Wish me luck!