By APA Staff

Lydia Shum, legend of Cantonese comedy, dies at 62

Chinese film actress, comedienne and variety star Lydia Shum passed away recently from liver cancer. Known as Fei Fei and Happy Fruit, Shum's signature look was her comical bouffant hairdo and funky retro glasses. She appeared in over seventy films (including the 1973 classic House of 72 Tenants) and her career spanned forty years, debuting on Enjoy Yourself Tonight as a teenager. Shum played a wide variety of roles and shined as a television hostess because of her personal charm and comedic skills. She also was popular on the 2001-2005 Singapore sitcom Living with Lydia, for which she won the Asian Television Award for best actress. Shum was briefly married to fellow actor Adam Cheng Siu-chow, and their daughter Joyce Cheng Yan-yee is also in the entertainment business as a singer. Shum was widely popular and a loveable, familiar face to all her fans. --Lisa Leong

Chinese film In Love We Trust wins Silver Bear at Berlinale

Wang Xiaoshuai's film, In Love We Trust, won a Silver Bear for best screenplay at the Berlin Film Festival. The film was the only one from mainland China that was screened and will be the second Silver Bear for Wang, who won in 2001 with his film Beijing Bicycle. In Love We Trust is about a divorced couple that has both remarried separately trying to save the life of their daughter who has been diagnosed with leukemia. The two decide to have another child together to produce the bone marrow they need. Centered on the Chinese middle class, this film promises a story about love and loyalty. Wang believes this honor will motivate all the people like himself trying to make independent films in China. In Love We Trust will be out in Chinese theaters in the spring. --My Thanh Mac

Japanese film director Kon Ichikawa Dies at 92

One of Japan's most celebrated artistic directors has laid to rest at the age of 92. Director Kon Ichikawa died from pneumonia on February 13, after being hospitalized since late January this year. Ichikawa's film career spanned over seven decades, with Oscar-nominated films such as The Burmese Harp, and his documentary on the 1964 Tokyo Summer Olympics, Tokyo Olympiad. His films depicted crushing humanistic yearnings. His adaptations of novels (often collaborations with screenwriter and co-wife Natto Wada) are the stuff of legend and inspire audiences to this day. --LiAnn Ishizuka

Aishwarya and Hrithik headline record release

The numbers are still coming in, but it looks like the opening weekend box office for Jodhaa Akbar, Bollywood's latest big-budget spectacle, hit about $10 million worldwide, with $6.3 million coming from India, $1.6 million from the U.S., and $700,000 from the U.K. The magnitude of its success is shocking, but its attractiveness isn't. Starring Bollywood heavyweights Hrithik Roshan and Aishwarya Rai, directed by Ashutosh Gowariker of Lagaan fame, and featuring one of the most lavish production values in industry history, Jodhaa Akbar was designed to achieve. In the U.S., its $16,400 per-screen gross was one of the highest ever for an Indian movie -- second only to last year's blockbuster Om Shanti Om. --Brian Hu