Neil Young and Lucinda Williams

At Air Canada Centre

in Toronto on Monday

Neil Young's fictional town of Greendale is home to 20,000 people, about the same number that filled the Air Canada Centre on Monday to hear him sing and tell stories about a place where old rural habits smack into the new media culture. Greendale, which is also the name of Young's forthcoming album, is Mayberry in crisis. Grandpa's on the porch affirming evergreen-country values, while his granddaughter is beginning to dream of eco-revolution. You could see it all happening, thanks to the extensive stage business of this show, which featured two- and three-dimensional sets, illustrative videos and actors who mimed their parts while lip-synching to Young's songs.

It's probably Young's most elaborate stage tour since the Rust Never Sleeps shows with Crazy Horse of two decades ago. He was eager to make the link, via a clip from the film of that pivotal tour, and by the more direct means of making Crazy Horse the Greendale house band.

The tale of Greendale, and of the Green family at the heart of Young's narrative, is a tragic parable about the communication gap (to use the parlance of Young's generation) between venerable home-fire conservatives like Grandpa Green and the incorporated kleptocrats of the new world order. Actually, Grandpa doesn't want to communicate outside his family circle, and eventually dies of a heart attack while trying to defend his porch against a mob of smarmy media types.

A media-savvy campaign by granddaughter Sun Green against the rape of Alaska's wild-lands is grandpa's revenge. It also marks the rebirth of the Sixties-style activism that was burned out of Sun's father, Earl, by his Vietnam service, and betrayed by her uncle Jed, who goes to jail for the demeaning offence of shooting a highway cop over a trunkful of weed.

That's a load of story to pack into a few songs, and we haven't even touched on the secret life of the dead policeman. Young had a lot of explaining to do between tunes, and his folksy anecdotes sometimes took longer than the song he was introducing.

With a tragic tale in hand, and Crazy Horse in harness, Young naturally gravitated toward a heavy blues-rock idiom, swaggering hard through a song about Sun's sexual awakening (while she danced in her bedroom) and blaring fatefully in a tune about the devil and a seagoing Green, while the captain mimed with his crew in back, and a wicked figure in red shoes capered across the stage. Another bluesy grind ensued while Sun padlocked herself to a power-company emblem, and Young invoked the name of Julia Butterfly Hill, the real-life eco-activist who lived for two years in an old-growth tree.

Young has always had a talent for making compelling songs out of two notes and a cliché. "Change comes slow in the country," he sang -- a banal observation, but loaded with pathos when he made it. The song in which Jed shot a cop known by everybody in Greendale literally paced between two notes, somehow making their familiar yet uneasy exchange a mirror of that between the perp and his victim. Too bad Young felt the need to burden the song with a pointed verse of protest (with supporting video) against the Patriot Act, although the wide enhancement of police power in the United States doesn't have much to do with a cop stopping someone for speeding.

When it came time to sing of the dreams of Greendale, and the crippled imaginings of Earl Green (who paints out his Vietnam trauma), Young took a solo turn on acoustic guitar -- not an easy thing to pull off in a stadium. "Someday you'll find everything you're looking for," he sang, again converting a parent's bromide into something meaningful.

The Greendale part of the show ended with dozens of young protesters dancing on stage. If the opening skit with Granddad on the porch seemed hokey, this was downright embarrassing, like the counterculture simulations Hollywood tried to choreograph as the tide turned on Vietnam. Then the kids left, and Young and band got down to what most of the crowd obviously came for: a brief set of old favourites, beginning with a long, kaleidoscopic version of Hey Hey, My My (Out of the Blue).

Lucinda Williams opened the evening with a clutch of songs from her latest album, World Without Tears. Ventura was a must-do tune from that disc, containing as it does a lyric reference to Neil Young, as well as summarizing the weathered disappointment characteristic of her latest work. The ACC wasn't the friendliest venue for her talent, but she rocked the building with Change the Locks and Those Three Days, a great new fury song.

Neil Young and Lucinda Williams return to Toronto's Air Canada Centre on Sept. 4.