Neil Young is a Canadian-born musician, singer and activist. A two-time Rock and Roll Hall of Fame inductee, Young is a musical legend who has dedicated his time to helping children with physical and medical needs, much like himself growing up with various health conditions including diabetes.

Young was born on November 12th, 1945 in Toronto, Ontario. As a child, he was diagnosed with polio and epilepsy, as well as Type 1 diabetes. Type 1 diabetes occurs when the body produces too little or no insulin, leading to inefficient glucose (sugar) metabolism. By the age of six, his health had deteriorated so far that he was unable to walk. His interest in music led him to begin playing the ukulele and banjo, which helped him tremendously in overcoming his ailments.

Young attended Lawrence Park Collegiate as a freshman, but left shortly in pursuit of his musical career. He played in various rock bands before embarking on a solo career, eventually being inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1995. Later in 1996, Young moved to Los Angeles and joined the band Buffalo Springfield, with whom he was once again inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. He has also received various awards including multiple Grammys and Juno Awards throughout his career.

His struggles as a child led him to found the Bridge School, a not-for-profit organization in Hillsborough, California. The school specializes in Augmentative and Alternative Communication (AAC) and Assistive Technologies (AT) to help kids with severe physical and speech impairment fully participate in communities. AAC allows individuals to use multiple modes of communication, such as visualization, gestures, manual signs and aided communication, to overcome verbal challenges. AT include software, equipment, products or items that improve the capabilities of people living with disabilities. Through these innovative methods, the Bridge School creates an environment to help these children flourish and provide support to their families and communities.

Today, Neil Young continues to make music alongside his activism and philanthropy. In particular, he organizes an annual charity concert held every October in Mountain View, California where partial proceeds go towards benefitting the Bridge School.

— Written by Nargol Ghazian