http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lord_Herbert_Montagu_Douglas_Scott

Lord Herbert Montagu Douglas Scott

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Lieutenant Colonel Sir Herbert Andrew Montagu Douglas Scott, DSO, CMG (30 November 1872 - 17 June 1944), was the fifth child born to Sir William Henry Walter Montagu Douglas Scott, 6th Duke of Buccleuch & 8th Duke of Queensberry and Lady Louisa Jane Hamilton.

Lieutenant Colonel Sir Herbert Andrew Montagu Douglas Scott was a paternal Uncle to HRH The Lady Alice, The Duchess of Gloucester, later known as HRH Princess Alice, Duchess of Gloucester, and thereby a maternal granduncle to HRH Prince William of Gloucester and HRH Prince Richard, The Duke of Gloucester. He was also the paternal great-grandfather to Sarah, Duchess of York, and a maternal second great-grandfather to HRH Princess Beatrice of York and HRH Princess Eugenie of York.

Early Life, Marriage, & Family

Herbert Andrew Montagu Douglas Scott was born at Montagu House, Whitehall, London, Middlesex, England, on Saturday 30 November 1872. Commonly known by his middle name, Andrew, he was the fifth child born in a family of six boys and two girls.

On Wednesday 26 April 1905, at the age of thirty-two, he married Marie Josephine Agnes Edwards, daughter of James Andrew Edwards and Kate Marion Agnes MacNamara, at St. George's, Hanover Square. They had three children:

Colonel Claud Andrew Montagu Douglas Scott (13 July 1906 - 24 January 1971)

Marian Louisa Montagu Douglas Scott (16 June 1908 - 11 December 1996)

Patricia Katherine Montagu Douglas Scott (9 October 1910)

[edit]Military Career

Herbert Andrew Montagu Douglas Scott was promoted to Captain while in the service of the 3rd Battalion of the Royal Scots Lothian Regiment. He fought in the Second Boer War, and was promoted to Lieutenant Colonel while enlisted in the service of the Irish Guards. Lieutenant Colonel Scott fought in the First World War and was commander of the 1st/23rd London Regiment in France.[1]

[edit]Civilian Career

After his retirement from military service, he accepted a position as Chairman of Rolls-Royce.[1]

[edit]Death

Lieutenant Colonel Lord Herbert Andrew Montagu Douglas Scott died on Saturday, June 17, 1944, at Chelsea, London, England. He was seventy-one years old. At the time of his death, he was predeceased by one grandson and survived by his wife, Marie Josephine, his three children,Claud Andrew, Marian Louisa and Patricia Katherine and seven grandchildren. Colonel Claud Andrew Montagu Douglas Scott married Lady Victoria Haig daughter of Field Marshall Douglas Haig,1st Earl Haig.They divorced and he married secondly Zalia Snagge daughter of Sir Harold Snagge. Marian Louisa Montagu Douglas Scott married Colonel Andrew Henry Ferguson.Their son was Major Ronald Ivor Ferguson (10 October 1931 - 16 March 2003).Their granddaughter Sarah Margaret Ferguson married Prince Andrew Duke of York.Marian married secondly Marshal of the RAF Sir Thomas Walter Elmhirst. Patricia Katherine Montagu Douglas Scott married firstly Lt-Col Walter Douglas Faulkner. She married secondly Lt-Col David Scrymgeour-Wedderburn. She married thirdly Henry James Scrymgeour,11th Earl of Dundee.Their son Alexander Henry Scrymgeour is the 12th Earl of Dundee.

[edit]Honours and Awards

1901: Companion (D.S.O.), Distinguished Service Order[1]

1916: Companion (C.M.G) of the Order of St Michael and St George[1]

Mention in Despatches [1]

Officer, Legion of Honour[1]

Deputy Lieutenant (D.L.) of London[1]

1922: His Majesty's Bodyguard of the Honourable Corps of Gentlemen at Arms[1]

Royal Company of Archers[1]

Knight of Justice, Order of St. John of Jerusalem (K.St.J.)[1]

[edit]References

^ a b c d e f g h i j k Charles Mosley, Ed, Burke's Peerage, Baronetage & Knightage, 107th edition. Wilmington, Delaware, U.S.A.: Burke's Peerage (Genealogical Books) Ltd, 2003, volume 1, page 562.

Lieutenant-Colonel Lord Herbert Andrew Montagu Douglas Scott, CMG, DSO (30 November 1872 – 17 June 1944), was the fifth child born to William Henry Walter Montagu Douglas Scott, 6th Duke of Buccleuch & 8th Duke of Queensberry and Lady Louisa Jane Hamilton.

Lord Herbert Andrew was a great-grandfather to Sarah, Duchess of York, and a maternal second great-grandfather (great-great-grandfather) to HRH Princess Beatrice of York and HRH Princess Eugenie of York. He was also a paternal uncle of HRH Princess Alice, Duchess of Gloucester, previously Lady Alice Montagu Douglas Scott, and thereby a maternal granduncle to HRH Prince William of Gloucester and HRH Prince Richard, The Duke of Gloucester.

Herbert Andrew Montagu Douglas Scott was born at Montagu House, Whitehall, London, Middlesex, England, on Saturday 30 November 1872. Commonly known by his middle name, Andrew, he was the fifth child born in a family of six boys and two girls.

On Wednesday 26 April 1905, at the age of thirty-two, he married Marie Josephine Agnes Edwards, daughter of James Andrew Edwards and Kate Marion Agnes MacNamara, at St. George's, Hanover Square. They had three children:

Colonel Claud Andrew Montagu Douglas Scott (13 July 1906 – 24 January 1971) Marian Montagu Douglas Scott (16 June 1908 – 11 December 1996) Patricia Katherine Montagu Douglas Scott (9 October 1910 – 3 December 2012)

Montagu Douglas Scott was promoted to Captain while in the service of the 3rd Battalion of the Royal Scots Lothian Regiment. In December 1899 he was appointed a staff officer as an extra Aide-de-camp to Lord Roberts, Commander-in-Chief of the forces in South Africa during the early part of the Second Boer War.[2] He was transferred to the Guards Mounted Infantry in 1901, and for his war effort was mentioned in despatches, appointed a Companion of the Distinguished Service Order (DSO), and received the Queen's South Africa Medal with six clasps and the King's South Africa Medal with two clasps. Following his return to the United Kingdom, he transferred to the Irish Guards, where he was promoted to captain 22 January 1902.[3] He was later promoted to lieutenant colonel while enlisted in the service of the Irish Guards.

Lieutenant Colonel Scott fought in the First World War and was commander of the 1st/23rd London Regiment in France.[1]

Lieutenant-Colonel Lord Herbert Andrew Montagu Douglas Scott died on Saturday, 17 June 1944, at Chelsea, London, England. He was seventy-one years old. At the time of his death, he was predeceased by one grandson, John Andrew Ferguson; he was survived by his wife, Marie Josephine, his three children, Claud Andrew, Marian Louisa, and Patricia Katherine, and seven grandchildren.