George Herbert Davis was born in Wandsworth in 1864. He qualified as a solicitor in 1888 and practiced for a number of years. Whilst working in London he lodged with the Scott family in Penge, and married Ethel Scott in 1891. George subsequently became a vicar, gaining his BA at Oxford University in 1902, and his MA in 1904 at St Stephen’s House, Oxford. He worked in various parishes, including in Rochester, St Paul Newington, St Saviour Saltley, and became a Minor Canon and Assistant Vicar Choral at Hereford Cathedral in 1911. He completed the 1911 Census and was described as a boarder at 7 Castle Street in Hereford. His wife (see) Ethel is absent and likely evading. The family soon moved to 7 The Cloisters, a set of 15th century buildings where the Vicars Choral all lodged. Reverend Davis was a prominent member of the Church League for Women's Suffrage, campaigning across the country. He also shared a platform with speakers at WSPU meetings including Mrs Pankhurst and Annie Kenney. He was listed as one of the clergy members in the January 1912 CLWS newspaper. He wrote many articles and letters for the CLWS, and continued his involvement with the publication into the 1920s when it became the Church Militant. In August 1913 he was part of the clergy deputation to Downing Street and was turned away from seeing Prime Minister about the Cat and Mouse Act, describing the Act as “a dastardly caricature of justice”. He also campaigned to protect the rights of women from sexual abuse, and wrote extensively on this, including a review of Christabel Pankhurst’s book, “The Great Scourge” in The Suffragette newspaper on 16 January 1914. He was made vicar of St Weonards in Herefordshire in 1917, and he and Ethel remained there until 1931. Subsequently he held various office posts in diocesan offices in London and Salisbury, finally retiring to Sherborne in 1939. He predeceased Ethel by just over eighteen months, dying in April 1947. Contributed by Herefordshire community fundraiser Clare Wichbold, MBE.