What is your naming preference: symphony, philharmonic, orchestra, or something else?

If you look at a list of orchestra names, they tend to fall into several different categories: symphony, philharmonic and orchestra. I thought it would be fun to talk about the different names that various orchestras carry and what they mean. Also, I'd invite you to share any history you know about various orchestras and how they came by their names. And by the way, they do tend to carry over to other languages, ie. "philharmonikier," "orchester" etc.

First a word about these words: as a name for an orchestra, "Symphony" is very often used in combination with "Orchestra" - as in "Symphony Orchestra." I suspect that this is because the dictionary definition of the word "symphony" by itself refers to "an elaborate musical composition for full orchestra." My old-fashioned Merriam-Webster English dictionary carries six definitions of the word, and "a symphony orchestra" or "orchestra concert" is low on the list, it's the fourth meaning. The fifth meaning interests me, it speaks to a harmonious combination of elements, musical or not.

So you could make the sanctimonious argument that a "Utah Symphony" would really actually be a composition for orchestra about the topic of Utah.

But come on. We talk about the "symphony" all the time, as being the orchestra in town, whatever its name. Even when I go to the LA Phil, I say, "I'm going to the symphony tonight." So while there are plenty of "Symphony Orchestras," (Chicago Symphony Orchestra, Boston Symphony Orchestra, London Symphony Orchestra, National Symphony Orchestra, Cincinnati Symphony Orchestra, Atlanta Symphony Orchestra....) there are also plenty who leave it at "symphony" for the official name: the Colorado Symphony, the Utah Symphony, the Omaha Symphony or the Houston Symphony.

The word "philharmonic" has a wonderful derivation: it comes from the Italian "filarmonico" or "loving harmony" and the French "philharmonique," which means the same thing. Love and harmony, what could be better? And the "philharmonics" include some of the biggies: the Los Angeles Philharmonic, New York Philharmonic, Berlin Philharmonic, etc..

Alternatively, some famously are simply "orchestra," like the Cleveland Orchestra, the Philadelphia Orchestra, the Minnesota Orchestra, the Gewandhaus Orchestra. To me, this is pretty bold, like saying, "Look, cut the fuss, we're simply THE orchestra."

And we can't forget to mention the London-based "Philharmonia Orchestra" - it combines "philharmonic" and "orchestra" but somewhat confusingly leaves off its geographic location!

And then there are some orchestras that don't use any of the names I've mentioned - the big one that comes to my mind is "The Knights" in New York City.

What are your thoughts about these various names for orchestras? Which naming device do you like best? Or does it matter to you? What do you know about the history of how your local orchestra, or other orchestras, got their names? Please participate in the vote and then share your thoughts on the subject!

* * *

Enjoying Violinist.com? Click here to sign up for our free, bi-weekly email newsletter. And if you've already signed up, please invite your friends! Thank you.

Tweet

Replies