LONGUEUIL, QC, June 21, 2017 /CNW Telbec/ - Mediagrif Interactive Technologies Inc. (TSX: MDF), a Canadian leader in information technology announced today that it has entered into an agreement for the acquisition of substantially all of the assets of Orckestra Inc. ("Orckestra"), a leading Canadian-based provider of digital unified and omnichannel commerce solutions for the retail and manufacturing industry. The closing of the transaction is subject to certain conditions, including the approval of competent authorities. Closing of the transaction is expected to take place on or about June 23, 2017.

"We are happy to welcome and unite the Orckestra team within Mediagrif. This acquisition represents a unique opportunity for Mediagrif to gain footprint in the rapidly growing digital retail sector." said Mr. Claude Roy, President and CEO of Mediagrif.

"We are particularly happy to see our company join forces with a well-established Canadian public company. Our unique technology serves some of the largest and most innovative retailers and this acquisition will allow us to expand our footprint and pave the road for the years ahead for our customers and partners. This deal will also keep jobs and management here in Quebec, which is a testimonial to the vibrant technology ecosystem we are evolving in," said Mr. Louis Fournier, president of Orckestra.

About Orckestra

Orckestra is a leading provider of digital unified commerce and omnichannel retail solutions. The company offers a single commerce platform to create and manage the most engaging shopping experiences across the web, mobile and in-store. The Commerce OrchestrationTM platform establishes a unique central, cloud-based, commerce layer that unifies all retail systems and customer touchpoints, through open APIs and modern applications, and helps enterprise organizations grow their business successfully in the global marketplace. Orckestra fuels digital innovation for leading retailers and branded manufacturers, enabling them to deliver differentiated commerce experiences faster with lower IT burden and operating costs, and maximum revenue growth.

About Mediagrif Interactive Technologies Inc.

Mediagrif Interactive Technologies Inc. (TSX: MDF) is a Canadian leader in information technology, owner of several recognized web and mobile platforms including MERX, BidNet, ASC, InterTrade, Jobboom, LesPAC, Réseau Contact and Carrus. Mediagrif's e-commerce solutions are used by millions of consumers and businesses in North America and around the world. The Company has offices in Canada, the United States and China. For more information, please visit us at www.mediagrif.com or call 1 877 677-9088.

Forward Looking Statement

This press release contains certain forward-looking statements with respect to the Company. These forward-looking statements, by their nature, necessarily involve risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those expected by these forward-looking statements. We consider the assumptions on which these forward-looking statements are based to be reasonable, but caution the reader that these assumptions regarding future events, many of which are beyond our control, may ultimately prove to be incorrect since they are subject to risks and uncertainties that affect us. We disclaim any intention or obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise, except as required by applicable securities legislation. Unless otherwise indicated, all amounts are in Canadian dollars.

SOURCE Mediagrif Interactive Technologies Inc.

Mediagrif Interactive Technologies Inc., Claude Roy, President and Chief Executive Officer, Tel.: 450 449-0102 ext. 2004, Toll Free: 1-877-677-9088 ext. 2004, Email: [email protected]; Paul Bourque, Chief Financial Officer, Tel.: 450 449-0102, ext: 2135, Toll Free: 1-877 677-9088 ext. 2135, Email: [email protected]

Related Links