A group of young El Paso musicians are touring Southern California this week, hoping to spread the word about caring and understanding through their performances.

The El Paso Youth Symphony's Elecktrick Rock Orckestra, or ERO, is nearing the end of their "Band for Peace" tour after a whirlwind week of activity.

The ERO's musical program for the tour is a tribute to the Irish band U2.

Maestro Garcia picked the music of U2 in part to pay homage to the band's social activism.

By emulating the band, Garcia hopes to empower his students to behave similarly.

According to Garcia, "It isn't just a catchy phrase, our students live it! We are using the power of music to teach our students how to be good people who live well and care about people and our planet. This "Band for Peace" tour is all about love and compassion for humans and Mother Earth."

The group performed Tuesday at the Santa Monica Pier. They shared the concert with their opening act Minor Strut, a rock band comprised of four 9- to 11-year-olds who specialize in classic rock covers.

On Wednesday, the musicians entertained park patrons at Disney's California Adventure in the morning, and then performed again at the Anaheim House of Blues in the evening.

In addition to the ERO, the evening performance also featured Britain's Finest, a Beatles tribute band, as well as another appearance by Minor Strut.

The performance at House of Blues also featured an appearance by El Pasoan Tommy Mora, a recording engineer and a musician in his own right.

After being treated like rock stars on Wednesday night, the group participated in a Disney music workshop in the backstage area at Disneyland on Thursday before spending the remainder of the day enjoying the parks.

The group is scheduled to travel down to San Diego today. On Sunday, the group is scheduled to perform for the final time at SeaWorld in San Diego before heading back to El Paso.

The young musicians have had a chance to enjoy the Disney parks as well as Knott's Berry Farm, Universal Studios City Walk, the San Diego Zoo and Sea World.

They have visited a few beaches and taken several adventure cruises as well, and are scheduled for a formal dinner sailing and experience for Saturday evening, July Fourth, on San Diego Bay.

The group expects to depart San Diego Sunday evening after their concert at SeaWorld, and should arrive back in El Paso on Monday morning.

Lorraine Kubala, a retired band director, may be reached at bands@elpasotimes.com.