This article is about the episode. For the novel, see Stargate SG-1: Kinder der Götter.

"Children of the Gods" is the first and second episodes of the first season and also the series premiere of Stargate SG-1.

Synopsis[]

One year after the original mission to Abydos, Earth's Stargate activates unexpectedly. Apophis and his loyal Jaffa emerge, attacking the security force and abducting Senior Airman Carol Weterings. A team led by Colonel Jack O'Neill travels to Abydos to investigate and reunites with Dr. Daniel Jackson. Tragedy soon strikes however, as Apophis' Jaffa soon arrive and abducts Jackson's wife, Sha're, and her brother Skaara. After returning to Earth, the newly established Stargate Command mounts a rescue mission, sending units SG-1 and SG-2 to Chulak to recover Airman Weterings, Sha're, and Skaara. SG-1, consisting of O'Neill, Jackson, and Captain Samantha Carter, is captured, but Apophis' First Prime Teal'c could prove to be a blessing in disguise from the team.

Plot[]

One year previously, Colonel Jack O'Neill led a team through the Stargate to the planet Abydos. After killing the System Lord Ra by ringing a nuclear warhead onto his ship as it left Abydos, O'Neill returned to Earth with two survivors of his team, leaving behind Dr. Daniel Jackson, who remained with his new love Sha're and her brother Skaara.

In the present day, with the Stargate Program no longer active, having been shut down altogether in the aftermath of the Abydos Mission, Stargate Command itself is empty and almost completely deserted.

Also, all the equipment in the Control Room or Stargate Operations room has been covered over with sheets, having been mothballed.

In the Embarkation room, which is relatively empty, a group of five Airmen, including Senior Airman Carol Weterings, are busy at a makeshift table, playing a game of poker while also eating some potato chips.

In spite of the relaxed atmosphere, Weterings can't shake off her uneasy feeling despite her colleagues telling her that they're the only ones who went down there and that the people in charge of the SGC have been shipping personnel out of here for months.

A short time later, Weterings' uneasy feeling comes true when a loud rumble echoes through the building, forcing the guards to abandon their game.

As they look on, the Stargate activates, leaving everyone stunned which also prompts the soldiers to begin arming themselves in preparation for an attack.

However, a mysterious object comes through the Stargate and starts to examine Weterings before cutting off altogether.

As she grabs it despite her colleagues telling her not to touch it, a being dressed in armor resembling a serpent suddenly arrives through the Stargate and grabs Weterings with the other guards aiming their weapons.

One guard, presumably the leader, tells his companions to hold their fire.

As this happens, six more serpent-armor wearing beings emerge through the open Stargate followed by one being who's wearing gold armor.

With the Stargate now shut, the being whose armor slips aside, revealing his face then orders his troops to "kree" before ordering his main guard who is called Teal'c to "kree".

The being in the gold armor then grabs Weterings and examines her with a mysterious device with one of the guards telling the being to let Weterings go.

As such, a huge battle begins with the serpent-armored beings having a huge advantage over the poorly equipped guards and although the guards themselves kill two Serpent Guards, it isn't long before the four men are all killed although one guard manages to get the call for reinforcements before he's struck down.

Seconds, as silence descends on the room once again, the previously clean and empty Embarkation Room has been left a mess stained with nothing but destruction as well as the lifeless bodies of the four guards.

Meanwhile, as an alarm echoes through the building, numerous other guards begin racing for the room, having gotten the call for help.

They then reach the room with Major General George S. Hammond in the lead although Hammond orders the troops to hold their fire after seeing an unconscious Wetherings which ultimately gives the enemy enough time to go through the Stargate with the main being's eyes glowing which leaves Hammond stunned.

This gives the beings enough time to go through the Stargate before it shuts down altogether.

As silence descends, Hammond stands on the ramp among all the carnage trying to make sense of what has happened while the soldiers remain behind him, silently awaiting their next orders.

A few hours after the attack, Hammond sends Major Bert Samuels to talk to retired Colonel Jack O'Neill who's on the roof of his house, looking through a telescope.

Despite Jack's misgivings and telling Samuels that the Major should get himself reassigned to NASA because that's when all the action's going to be, Jack eventually relents after hearing that Samuels' visit is concerning the Stargate.

Under guard, Jack arrives at Cheyenne Mountain on Hammond's orders. He is eventually escorted to the Mountain and then questioned, along with his former teammates Major Louis Ferretti and Major Charles Kawalsky about the events leading up to their return to Earth from Abydos.

When they refuse to reveal anything other than what is in their reports, Hammond chooses to send a nuclear bomb through the Stargate to Abydos, believing that the aliens could only have come from Abydos and hoping to destroy whoever came through so that what happened at Stargate Command will never be repeated.

With this threat hanging over his head, O'Neill reveals that he had in fact lied about using the bomb to destroy Abydos. He admits that while the alien Ra was destroyed, the Abydonians are still alive and living in freedom, with Dr. Daniel Jackson living among them with Hammond furious over the fact that Jack disobeyed a director order.

After talking to his superiors, Hammond allows O'Neill to send a message through the Stargate.

Once the Stargate's been dialed, Jack throws a tissue box through the wormhole and seconds later, the wormhole closes with the Stargate shutting down as well.

A while later, the box returns to the SGC with the message, "Thanks. Send More," scribbled on it and as such, O'Neill is recalled to active duty and regains his rank of Colonel.

A while later, a briefing is summoned with everyone in attendance and during the meeting, the astrophysicist Captain Samantha Carter arrives, having been transferred to the SGC from the Pentagon.

Despite everyone's positive feelings on the Stargate, Samuels voices his belief that they should bury with the Stargate but Jack disagrees, stating that the beings who attacked them now know that what kind of a threat they are and that the aliens could come by ship instead of using the Stargate.

Hammond soon agrees and gives the team 24 hours to head through the Stargate to Abydos.

A while later, with the Stargate having been brought online, the team composed of Jack, Kawalsky, Ferretti and Carter get ready to leave.

Just before they go through the Stargate, Hammond tells Jack to follow orders and to make sure that Jack brings Daniel back this time with Jack agreeing as both Hammond and Samuels salute Jack with Jack saluting back.

On Jack's orders, the team head through the wormhole with Carter staying behind for a few seconds to assure Jack that she won't let him down.

Jack remarks that it's good and believes that ladies should go first.

Carter assures him that he'll like her when he gets to know her.

"Oh, I adore you already, Captain", Jack replies.

Carter then gets distracted by the wormhole, obviously stunned at what she's seeing. Jack eventually loses patience with her ramblings and gives her a push which sends her through the wormhole.

Seconds later, Jack himself walks through the wormhole.

When he arrives on Abydos with the Stargate shutting down behind him, Jack watches as the Stargate and he then takes stock of the situation and as the other survey their surroundings, bracing for a possible attack, Sam complains that she's going to be sick with Jack telling her that she shouldn't have had that big lunch.

As everyone gets to grip with things, they soon find a group of Earth weaponry-armed Abydonians waiting for them.

It looks like it's going to be a tense stand-off with neither side giving in until Daniel arrives, telling everyone to lower their guns.

As everyone greets each other, Jack tells Daniel what happened on Earth with Daniel stating that the beings didn't come through this Stargate.

As they wait for a raging sandstorm to pass, the group settle down for an evening meal.

During that time, Sam meets Daniel for the first time with the two quickly forming a strong friendship.

Daniel leads O'Neill, Kawalsky and Carter to a large cavernous room that has innumerable hieroglyphs on the walls. The archaeologist reveals that he believes that the hieroglyphs of the cartouche match the various symbols on the Stargate, leading him to believe that the walls are actually a map of the coordinates of a vast network of Stargates across the Milky Way with Jack realizing that the Stargate can go to other places in the galaxy.

While O'Neill and the others are gone, everyone continues celebrating with Ferretti remarking to one soldier that they've got to give Daniel credit because Sha're is one beautiful woman.

Suddenly, the Abydos Stargate opens, causing everyone to run for cover and hide while a few of the Abydonians along with some members of the SGC teams prepare themselves for battle.

As the wormhole appears, Jaffa Serpent Guards emerge, firing staff weapon blasts which kill numerous Abydonians.

Skaara joins in the gunfight but is captured and subdued but not before Apophis' First Prime asks him where he got the weapon from with an angry Skaara spitting in the First Prime's face.

Sha're attempts to run but is knocked unconscious and eventually kidnapped as well.

Once the Serpent Guards have gotten what they came for, they depart, leaving behind an area full of blood, destruction and dead bodies.

Seconds later, Jack, Sam, Carter and Kawalsky return with Daniel calling for Sha're as everyone attempts to grasp what has happened.

One Abydonian, Bolaa manages to weakly tell Daniel that the being who looked like Ra took Sha're and Skaara before Bolaa dies from his wounds.

As everyone tries to get a grasp on things, Carter tells Jack that Ferretti needs medical treatment now.

Daniel tells them to go back and that he can send them back but Jack tells Daniel that Daniel is coming with them because Jack has orders.

With no other options left, Daniel, clearly emotional over leaving his adopted family instructs Tobay to bury the Abydos Stargate after SG-1 leaves and tell Kasuf to reopen it exactly one year later.

All the Abydonians there then give Daniel one big group hug as Jack silently watches from a distance.

Once the goodbye hug has ended, Daniel heads over to the DHD and begins dialing.

Back on Earth, the now occupied Embarkation Room is full of numerous soldiers when the Stargate comes online.

A wormhole is established and the SGC teams return from Abydos, bringing with them the injured members of their respective teams who survived the attack on Abydos.

As Jack approaches Hammond, Jack learns that they've got an Iris to shield them from any other unwelcome surprises. Jack gives Hammond the grim news that the Abydos settlement was attacked by the same group that attacked Stargate Command and that Daniel Jackson's wife and brother-in-law were both kidnapped.

Daniel meets Hammond who is extremely hostile towards Daniel with Hammond stating that Daniel isn't in a position to make any demands.

In an area, the Jaffa, Teal'c and some guards enter a room which is full a group of scared humans, presumably the ones from Abyos. Teal'c then points out Sha're with Sha're being taken away despite her protests. Skaara tries to intervene but finds himself being stopped by staff weapons that are held to his head. He can only watch helplessly at Sha're is removed from the room as Teal'c tells Skaara his death will not help her.

Skaara replies he's not afraid of them.

Once the guards have left, closing the door behind then, Skaara runs towards the doors, throwing himself against them.

In the Infirmary, Jack meets Kawalsky who's sitting by Ferretti's bedside with Jack telling Kawalsky that the Doctors said Ferretti was going to make it with Kawalsky agreeing.

"You going to stay here all night?", Jack wonders.

"Yes, sir", Kawalsky replies.

Upon leaving the Infirmary, Jack sees Daniel leaning against a wall and it's shown that Daniel has exchanged his robes for an Air Force jump suit of some kind.

When Daniel tells him they don't know what to do with him and that he doesn't know what to do with himself, Jack says, "C'mon, let's get out of here".

At Jack's house, he takes out two beers from his fridge and heads for the living room where Daniel is waiting for him. As that happens, Daniel sneezes but manages to use his handkerchief in time.

"Nice catch", Jack remarks.

Daniel thanks him before apologizing and saying Gate travel always seems to make his allergies...

He then pauses, blowing his nose.

Once that's done, Daniel accepts a beer from Jack.

He informs Jack that after they returned to Earth, the Abydonians realized they were not only free but the world was theirs for the taking. They held a big party for Daniel, treating him as their savior even though Daniel was embarrassed by that.

"It's amazing you turned out so normal", Jack replies.

Daniel then remarks that if it wasn't for Sha're, he'd probably...

He suddenly pauses at her memory before telling Jack she was the complete opposite of everyone else.

As he sits down, Daniel tells Jack Sha're practically fell on the floor, laughing every time he tried to do some chore they all took for granted, like grinding yaphetta flour with Daniel wondering if Jack's ever tried to grind his own flour?

"I'm trying to kick the flour thing", Jack replies.

Daniel laughs.

He remarks it's going straight to his head before taking another sip of beer.

Once he's finished doing that, he wonders what time it is and that he must have gate lag or something.

"For cryin' out loud, Daniel", Jack says. "You've had one beer. You're a cheaper date than my wife was".

Daniel wonders when he's going to meet Jack's wife.

Jack tells him it's probably going to be never and that after he came from Abydos the first time, she'd already left.

Daniel apologizes, telling Jack he's sorry.

Jack agrees, stating he thinks in her heart, she forgave him for what happened to their kid but she just couldn't forget.

"What are you?", Daniel wonders.

"I'm the opposite", Jack replies. "I'll never forgive myself but sometimes I can forget. Sometimes".

He then takes another sip of beer and the two sit there in silence.

At a palace and under the command of Apophis' First Prime, turbaned guards drag away one of a dozen gaudily dressed young women, the woman in question being Weterings.

Protesting that she's a US Air Force Sergeant and demanding answers, Weterings is later stripped naked and inspected with the Jaffa Priestess holding Apophis' Queen emerges.

The Goa'uld inside the Priestess' belly takes one look at Weterings with Apophis asking, "Does she please you, my love?".

The Goa'uld on the other hand simply retreats back inside the Priestess' belly, suggesting that it does not consider Weterings a suitable candidate for possession.

"Shame", Apophis remarks, disappointed before he uses his Kara kesh to give Weterings' brain an electric shock. This ultimately causes Weterings to start bleeding from her nose and mouth before she finally stops breathing altogether with Weterings later lying on the table, dead.

Apophis then examines Weterings' body in disgust before ordering that another woman be chosen. As Apophis heads off, his First Prime looks on.

Back at the SGC, another meeting is held, this time with Daniel in attendance with Daniel revealing that the story behind Ra and Hammond announces that he's been given permission by the President to form nine teams who will use the Stargate to gather information about any and all possible threats to Earth and to make peaceful contact with the various worlds they visit.

O'Neill is given command of SG-1, with Carter as his second-in-command and Daniel accompanying him, due to his determination to find his kidnapped wife despite Hammond insisting that Daniel needs to be a consultant for the SGC while Kawalsky is given command of SG-2.

When the injured Ferretti who's regained consciousness is able to reveal the symbols that the invaders used to leave Abydos, a mission to the planet is authorized with Daniel accompanying them this time.

As before, Hammond gives them 24 hours and reveals that their iris codes will be locked out with the Stargate being buried. As such, they will be left stranded on the planet forever with no means of ever returning home.

They eventually head through the Stargate and arrive at their destination to discover that it's freezing cold which leaves everyone stunned. Jack soon recovers and orders them to move before stating that they should get the gear out too.

Back in the palace and at the First Prime's request, the guards return and grab Sha're despite her protesting and screaming.

In the main area near the Stargate, the SGC team makes preparations in case they come under attack from the enemy while retreating to the Stargate while Daniel confirms that he has the code figured out.

The guards take Sha're to Apophis and as she continues struggling, Apophis is amused, remarking that Sha're has spirit.

Apophis subdues Sha're with his hand device and as this happen, Sha're is stripped naked before she is laid on the table.

As before, a Jaffa priestess carrying Amaunet, Apophis' Queen appears with the symbiote emerging and as it begins inspecting Sha're, with Sha're greatly terrified, Apophis wonders if Sha're is suitable for his Queen.

Having passed the test, Amaunet takes control of Sha're's body almost immediately which the symbiote does by burying itself deep into Sha're's neck.

This causes Sha're to scream with horror as she feels the Goa'uld entering her body, while Apophis' First Prime watches, obviously displeased and disgusted with what is happening.

As SG-1 and SG-2 forge ahead, they plan to set up camp. Jack tells Kawalsky that if they're not back in 20 hours, they'll go back through the Stargate before the iris is locked.

As Jack, Sam and Daniel push on, they meet a group of monks who escort them to the nearby town of Chulak (a name which, incidentally, soon begins to apply to the entire planet). During a meal they find out that Sha're has been taken, and when Daniel runs to her they are taken prisoner.

In the dungeon, the team discover Skaara and Daniel explains to Sam that it was not Ra who kidnapped Skaara and Sha're, but Apophis, named for the Egyptian serpent god of night.

Before Skaara and the team can escape, the First Prime enters with Serpent Guards and yells something in Goa'uld with Skaara revealing that they're planning on choosing who will be the children of the gods.

As everyone looks on, Apophis soon arrives in and introduces his Queen who is none other than Sha're/Amaunet which leaves Daniel greatly shocked.

Daniel attempts to approach Sha're but Jack and Sam restrain him.

Several other Goa'uld come forth and begin to pick people out of the crowd of prisoners who will become hosts to the children of the Goa'uld.

Skaara is among the few to be chosen and is dragged away, screaming frantically for Jack who attempts to intervene, only for Jack to knocked down.

Daniel wants to be picked to be with his wife but he isn't chosen.

As the hosts are being dragged away. Apophis glances around the room and then orders that the rest of the prisoners be killed and as he departs with Sha're, the prisoners all flee to the other side of the cell, screaming in fear as the Serpent Guards close in, creating a sense of chaos and despair as Jack, Sam and Daniel look on.

As the guards charge their weapons, ready to execute the prisoners, Jack calls to the First Prime, stating that he can save these people before insisting that the other being in question help him.

The First Prime hesitates for a few moments, grimly noting that many have made that promise, before turning on a fellow Serpent Guard and firing on them, killing one.

As he does that, he adds that Jack is the first person he has met who he believes can achieve what he claims.

The now former First Prime then hands Jack a staff weapon and they team up together and turn on the Serpent Guards, killing every single one of them although the guards manage to kill a few of the prisoners first.

Once the remaining guards have been chased away, Jack uses his staff weapon to blast a hole in the wall of the cell and as he examines the scene, Carter and Daniel help the prisoners escape.

Meanwhile, Apophis' First Prime, still stunned over what he has done wanders around the cell with Jack calling for the First Prime.

Still struggling to come to terms with what he has done, the former First Prime remarks that he has nowhere to go. Jack tells him that he can stay at his place before telling the former First Prime, "Let's go".

As they both leave the cell, Jack asks the First Prime what his name is with the being replying that his name is "Teal'c".

O'Neill, Carter, Daniel, and Teal'c lead the prisoners away from the palace back towards the Stargate with serpent guards pursuing, having been given the task of killing them.

While escaping the town, Teal'c shows O'Neill that he has a Goa'uld in his stomach, much to the shock of the others. Teal'c then reveals that he is a Jaffa, a servant of the Gods and in exchange for the larva he has, it gives him long life and perfect health before stating that if he were to remove it, he would eventually die.

Near the gate, SG-1 is pinned down by a Death Glider. Kawalsky and SG-2 rescue them by bringing the ship down with an FIM-92 Stinger missile.

At the gate they find Apophis leaving with his wife and the other Goa'uld families - Skaara is among them. O'Neill calls out to him, causing him to hesitate and wait for O'Neill to come closer. However, a Goa'uld has already possessed him. Skaara uses a Kara kesh to throw O'Neill back and then leaves through the gate.

Meanwhile, more Jaffa Serpent Guards arrive.

While O'Neill, Teal'c, Kawalsky, and the rest of SG-2 provide cover, Carter and Daniel lead the prisoners through the Stargate and back to Earth.

Carter is the first back to Earth and tells the SGC guards to hold their fire because they've got refugees.

Hammond tells her that he hopes she knows what she's doing.

Back on Chulak, as Jack and the others fend off the approaching Jaffa guards, Daniel helps the refugees gain safe passage and head through the wormhole to Earth although a single staff blast kills one of the refugees.

As the evacuation continues, more refugees continue arriving on Earth while Daniel arrives with a small group, joining Sam who's already at the ramp.

Teal'c eventually arrives in the SGC Embarkation Room, prompting the guards to raise their weapons at him. Sam and Daniel intervene, ordering the guards to lower their guns and telling them that Teal'c is with them.

As Hammond looks on, obviously stunned at what's going on, Teal'c hands over his staff weapon to Sam who accepts it without any arguments.

Just before Kawalsky goes back through the Gate, one of the refugees strangles a Jaffa Serpent Guard to death while one member of the SGC team lies on the ground, injured after being shot by a staff weapon blast.

Seconds later, the Goa'uld inside the now dead Serpent Guard emerges.

As Kawalsky attends to the injured member of his team, the symbiote uses that opportunity to slip into Kawalsky's body via Kawalsky's neck which leaves Kawalsky stunned.

After everyone has made it safely through the Gate, Carter orders that the iris be locked which happens and as that happens, thuds are heard, suggesting that the Jaffa that pursued them are now dead.

Once the wormhole has been disengaged and the iris unsealed as well as the gate shut down, everyone tries to come to terms with what has happened.

As SG-1 walk down the ramp, the refugees thank the team for their efforts.

Hammond asks Jack what's going on and Carter tells the General that they can use the Stargate to send the refugees home.

Hammond isn't too thrilled about seeing Teal'c but Jack defending Teal'c, stating that Teal'c is the man who saved their lives and that Hammond will accept Jack's proposal, then Teal'c will join SG-1.

Hammond states that the decision might not up to Jack himself.

As he takes everything in, Hammond tells Jack and Kawalsky that this is sure to be an interesting debriefing and that it will take place at 0730.

As everyone leaves the gate room to be accessed and for further medical treatment to be given to the injured members of the large group, Daniel looks back at the Stargate and remarks that Sha're is still out there.

Jack tells him that so is Skaara.

"What do we do?", Daniel wonders.

"We find them", Jack states.

With that, the future members of SG-1 all head off.

Meanwhile, Kawalsky who was in the background stares at the Stargate for a second before he walks down the ramp. As Kawalsky approaches the end of the ramp, his eyes begin glowing, implying that the Goa'uld has now taken complete control of his body.

Appearances[]

Appearances for Children of the Gods

Characters

Airman

Amaunet

Apophis

Bolaa

Captain Samantha Carter

Casey

President William Jefferson Clinton (Mentioned)

Curren

Female Serpent Guard

Major Louis Ferretti

Airman Fryatt

Goa'uld 1

Goa'uld 2

Major General George S. Hammond

MSgt. Walter Harriman

Dr. Daniel Jackson

Jaffa Monk

Junior (Mentioned)

Kasuf (Mentioned)

Major Charles Kawalsky

Charles Kawalsky's Goa'uld

Klorel

Dr. James MacKenzie

SSgt. McAtee

Medic

Charlie O'Neill (Mentioned)

Colonel Jack O'Neill

Sara O'Neill (Mentioned)

Primitive

Supreme System Lord Ra (Mentioned)

Major Bert Samuels

Sergeant

Sergeant

Sha're

Skaara

Swope

Teal'c

Technician

Tobay

Major Carl Warren

Major General W. O. West (Mentioned)

Senior Airman Carol Weterings

Yametha

TSgt. Ziplinski

Locations

Milky Way

Abydos

Temple of Ra

Map Room

Chulak

City of Chulak

Chulak Prison

Temple of the Gods

Earth

Chicago, Illinois (Mentioned)

Colorado Springs, Colorado

Stargate Command

Briefing Room

Embarkation room

General's Office

Stargate Command guest quarters

Stargate Command infirmary

Stargate Operations room

Jonathan J. O'Neill's house

Giza, Egypt (Mentioned)

Great Pyramids (Mentioned)

The Pentagon (Mentioned)

Rome, Italy (Mentioned)

Events

Tau'ri-Goa'uld War

Abydos Mission (Mentioned)

Apophis' attack on Stargate Command

Skirmish on Abydos

Chulak mission

Charles Kawalsky's infestation by a Goa'uld

Gulf War (Mentioned)

Wedding of Daniel Jackson and Sha're (Mentioned)

Weapons, equipment and technology

A-M18A1 Claymore mine

Battle Dress Uniform

Binoculars

Camcorder

Colt M16A3 rifle

Daniel Jackson's notebook

Death Glider propulsion system

Desert Camouflage Uniform

Dial Home Device

Dialing computer

Dog tag

Event horizon

Field Remote Expeditionary Device

FIM-92 Stinger missile

Flashlight

Garage Door Opener

Goa'uld scanning device

H&K MP5A3 submachine gun

Iris

Iris Deactivation Code

Jaffa armor

Jaffa helmet

Kara kesh

Laptop

Lighter

M249 Squad Automatic Weapon

M2 Browning

Mobile Analytic Laboratory Probe (Mentioned)

Naquadah (Mentioned)

Nuclear warhead

BFMB Mark V bomb

Mark III (Mentioned)

Radio

Service Dress Uniform

Staff weapon

Staff cannon

Stargate

Abydos' Stargate

Alpha Gate

Tactical vest

Taurus PT92

Telescope

Tent

Transporter

Transportation rings

USAS-12 automatic shotgun

Wristwatch

Science and biology

Allergy

Autopsy (Mentioned)

Blending

Doppler's Shift (Mentioned)

Sandstorm

Stellar drift (Mentioned)

Symbiote pouch

Titanium (Mentioned)

Wormhole

Vehicles

Automobile

Cheops class warship (Mentioned)

Ra's Cheops class warship (Mentioned)

Death Glider

F-16 Fighting Falcon (Mentioned)

Humvee

Transport Glider

Sentient Species

Goa'uld

Human

Abydonian

Tau'ri

Jaffa

Chulakian

Languages

Abydonian language

Ancient Egyptian (Mentioned)

Arabic (Mentioned)

English

Goa'uld language

Hieroglyphs (Mentioned)

Creatures

Kangaroo (Mentioned)

Organizations and titles

First Prime

Jaffa Priests

Joint Chiefs of Staff (Mentioned)

Massachusetts Institute of Technology (Mentioned)

National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Mentioned)

Serpent Guard

Stargate Program

SG-1

SG-2

System Lord

United States Air Force

Miscellanea

Beer

Book of the Dead (Mentioned)

Cigar

Divorce (Mentioned)

Gambling

GI Joe (Mentioned)

Kleenex

MacGyver

Major Matt Mason (Mentioned)

Moonshine

Mythology (Mentioned)

Playing card

Poker

Potato chip

Star Trek

Yaphetta flour (Mentioned)

Notable quotes[]

(O'Neill has tossed a Kleenex box through the Stargate to Abydos as a message to Jackson)

Samuels: What if the aliens get it?

O'Neill: Well, they could be blowing their noses right about now.

O'Neill: Oh, here we go. Another scientist. General, please.

Carter: Theoretical astrophysicist.

O'Neill: Which means?

Hammond: Which means she's smarter than you are, Colonel.

Carter: I'm an Air Force officer just like you are, Colonel. And just because my reproductive organs are on the inside instead of the outside, doesn't mean I can't handle whatever you can handle.

O'Neill: Oh, my problem is not with you being a woman. I like women. I just have a little problem with scientists.

Carter: So you're saying... Ra's not the last of his race after all?

Kawalsky: Maybe he's got a brother Ray.

(officers at the table chuckle)

Carter: Amazing! This is what was missing from the dig in Giza. (laughs) This is how they'd control it ! It took us fifteen years and three super-computers to Macgyver a system for the gate on Earth.

(O'Neill lifts his eyebrows when Carter says the word Macgyver.)

Jackson: I don't pretend to know anything about astrophysics, but couldn't the planets change, I mean uh, drift apart or something like that to throw this map off.

Carter: I knew I'd like you.

Jackson: You mean I'm right?

O'Neill: I can save these people!! Help me! Help me.

Teal'c: Many have said that. (He turns and shoots another Jaffa, then tosses O'Neill his staff weapon) But you are the first I believe could do it!

O'Neill: Hey, come on!

Teal'c: I have nowhere to go.

O'Neill: For this you can stay at my place, let's go!

Carter: Hold your fire, they are refugees!

Hammond: I hope you know what you're doing, Captain.

Cast[]

Main Characters

Richard Dean Anderson as Colonel Jack O'Neill

Michael Shanks as Dr. Daniel Jackson

Amanda Tapping as Captain Samantha Carter

Christopher Judge as Teal'c

Don S. Davis as Major General George S. Hammond

Guest Stars

Jay Acovone as Major Charles Kawalsky/Charles Kawalsky's Goa'uld

Vaitiare Bandera as Sha're/Amaunet

Robert Wisden as Major Bert Samuels

Peter Williams as Apophis

Brent Stait as Major Louis Ferretti

Gary Jones as MSgt. Walter Harriman

Alexis Cruz as Skaara/Klorel

Rachel Hayward as Senior Airman Carol Weterings

Rick Ravanello as Airman Fryatt

J.B. Bivens as SSgt. McAtee

Stephen Sumner as Goa'uld 1

Adam Harrington as Goa'uld 2

John Bear Curtis as Primitive

John Tierney as Jaffa Monk

Colin Lawrence as Major Carl Warren

Garvin Cross as Casey

Anthony Ashbee as Sergeant

Eric Schneider as Dr. James MacKenzie

Andrew McIlwaine as Medic

Santo Lombardo as Bolaa

Sean Amsing as Tobay

Monique Rusu as Yametha

Janette de Vries as Female Serpent Guard

T.M. Sandulak as TSgt. Ziplinski (Uncredited)

Darryl Scheelar as Curren (Uncredited)

Gaston Morrison as Swope (Uncredited)

Sylvain Cameron as Sergeant (Uncredited)

Rick Pearce as Airman (Uncredited)

Dean Hinchey as Technician (Uncredited)

Marilyn Chin as Goa'uld in Female host (Uncredited)

Giorgio Miyashita as Goa'uld in Male host (Uncredited)

Sean Millington as Slave in Turban (Uncredited)

Lance Gibson as Harem Guard 1 (Uncredited)

Everick Golding as Harem Guard 2 (Uncredited)

Children of the Gods – Final Cut[]

Main article: Stargate SG-1: Children of the Gods - Final Cut

A new version of the episode (Stargate SG-1: Children of the Gods - Final Cut) was released on DVD (July 21, 2009), re-edited using footage shot in 1997 as well as updated visual effects. The beginning has been slightly altered, a new scene has been added, and the nude scenes in the original Director's Cut have been cut out. The final cut is roughly 7 minutes shorter than the original episode. Joel Goldsmith has re-scored the music. It has been released on DVD in 16:9 widescreen format, and may also be aired on television. In addition, many of the actors were asked to re-record their dialog. Michael Shanks' character, Dr. Daniel Jackson, voice and dialog was completely redone to allow some character continuity with the character's growth throughout the series (i.e., seasons 4-10); this was done to attempt to move away from the original persona that Daniel Jackson was depicted in from the original film, when he was portrayed by James Spader (the director and the actor wanted to steer away from Michael Shanks imitating Spader's version). Amanda Tapping re-recorded most of her dialog as well for the recut. Christopher Judge re-filmed all of his scenes.

Notes[]

In the episode "Politics", the Chulak mission is stated to have taken place in "the tenth of February of this year".

This episode establishes that the Stargate's inner ring doesn't have to spin to dial an address like the Stargate Command gate does.

In Part 1 of this episode, Captain Samantha Carter mentions playing with a Major Matt Mason doll when she was a child. Later, in the season three episode "The Devil You Know", the Major Matt Mason doll is clearly visible on her bed stand during a flashback.

The episode was novelized by Ashley McConnell in Stargate SG-1.

When observing the Dial Home Device on Abydos, Carter mentions that since the Earth gate was missing the device, they had to "MacGyver" a dialing device for the Earth Stargate, making reference to the show MacGyver, which starred Richard Dean Anderson as the title character. This was later edited to be "jury rig" instead of "MacGyver" in the Final Cut.

The episode's original airing on Showtime featured full frontal nudity during the scene showing Sha're (Vaitiare Bandera) being possessed by Amaunet. This scene has never been repeated and future airings as well as this episode available on most streaming platforms have had the nudity cut out for syndication. The DVD, iTunes and Netflix versions of this episode, however, retains this scene. The syndication version also omits a sequence, following on from Colonel Jack O'Neill leaving Major Charles Kawalsky with Major Louis Ferretti in the infirmary, where O'Neill and Dr. Daniel Jackson go back to O'Neill's house for the night and O'Neill reveals that he and Sara O'Neill have separated (information Jackson is aware of in "Cold Lazarus"). Notably, likely because of the nudity, this episode along with episodes two and three of the first season are the only ones in the series to be rated R by the MPAA for a scene of nudity, while in the UK the episode is rated 18 by the BBFC (all other episodes have generally been rated PG, 12, or 15, at most). However, the Final Cut edition of "Children of the Gods" removes the nudity. The Region 2 version of Stargate SG-1 Season 1 is given an 18 rating, presumably due to the nudity featured in this episode.

Jackson reveals that when he attempted to dial the many Stargate addresses found within the Abydos temple, they were ineffectual due to stellar drift. However, in "Avenger 2.0", it is revealed that the Dial Home Devices make automatic updates to compensate for changing star positions. This does not, however, automatically correct addresses that are no longer valid. It is possible that when Ra repaired the damage to the Abydos DHD he made it so it wouldn't update the coordinates until the connection to Chulak was made and reconnected it to the Gate network. The distance between Earth and Abydos not needing an update to connect.

Certain 'signature' elements of Joel Goldsmith's score to "Children of the Gods" (perhaps influenced by the score of the theatrical movie, Stargate) are not heard again until season eight's "Moebius, Part 1", musically suggesting that while "Children of the Gods" constituted a beginning to Stargate SG-1, "Moebius" constituted an ending of sorts.

The Season 5 episode "Threshold" revealed that Bra'tac was present in the Chulak prison when Teal'c broke SG-1 out and betrayed Apophis.

On the Region 2 DVD, this episode is edited into one whole episode, simply titled "Children of the Gods" with the episode itself clocking at 1 hour, 33 minutes and 7 seconds.

This is the first of only three episodes in which Don S. Davis (Major General George S. Hammond) and Peter Williams (Apophis) share a scene, the others being "Serpent's Song" and "Point of View" (although "Point of View" only depicts alternate versions of the two characters).

The scenes taking place around the Stargate on the Chulak were shot at the Reclaimed Gravel Pit of the Lower Seymour Conservation Reserve.

This is the first of thirteen episodes of Stargate SG-1 written by Jonathan Glassner.

This is the first of fifty-four episodes of Stargate SG-1, Stargate: Atlantis and Stargate Universe written by Brad Wright.

This is the first of nine episodes of Stargate SG-1 and Stargate: Atlantis directed by Mario Azzopardi.

Michael Shanks (Daniel Jackson), Amanda Tapping (Samantha Carter), Christopher Judge (Teal'c) and Gary Jones (Walter Harriman) are the only actors to appear in both this episode and also the Season 10 series finale episode, "Unending".

Colin Lawrence (Major Carl Warren) is best known for playing Lt. Hamish "Skulls" McCall in Battlestar Galactica.

Brent Stait (Major Louis Ferretti) is best known for playing Rev Bem on Andromeda. Strait would go to appear alongside Michael Shanks in the American series, "Smallville".

Alexis Cruz, who plays Skaara, is credited as a Special Guest Star.

Goofs[]

Teal'c's Jaffa mark is upside-down in a scene where he is talking with Colonel Jack O'Neill. There are also some episodes where it is slightly crooked.

When Major General George S. Hammond and related staff reveal the body of the dead Jaffa to Colonel Jack O'Neill, a golden serpent mark can be seen on the forehead of the corpse. These marks are only present on the foreheads of First Primes, yet Teal'c survived the fight in the gate room. This was probably an early production shot before the significance and lore of the forehead markings was fully established.

In early firefights the more powerful Colt M16A3 rifle (firing a medium-powered 5.56×45mm NATO rifle round) is barely effective against Jaffa armor (possibly requiring to hit a gap in the armor). In later episodes when H&K MP5A3 submachine guns are used, their low powered 9mm pistol round somehow manages to have no problem penetrating armor. Even an ammunition change does not explain this.

When Hammond explains how the Iris works, the incoming team is not there. It reappears several shots later.

When Dr. Daniel Jackson bumps into the Dial Home Device the first time SG-1 arrives on Chulak, it wobbles.

The scenes looking down at the descending lift are actually shots looking up at an ascending lift. There is a looping cable visibly defying gravity 'above' the lift.

When SG-1 is fleeing the prison, Teal'c uses the word "Stargate" in place of "Chappa'ai".

On the first time he appears, Hammond in his Service Dress Uniform is wearing his Service Cap inside the facility. All personnel who are not "Under Arms", or otherwise serving in a special ceremonial function, would be "uncovered" (not wearing their uniform's hats) while indoors. The fact that he's ostensibly leading the armed Security Forces teams does not also make him Under Arms.

The Major who escorts O'Neill to the lower levels of Cheyenne Mountain is also wearing Staff Sergeant's stripes on the sleeves of his dress uniform. This does not appear to be a new character (the same man who picked up O'Neill at his home) and one can see that he is clearly wearing officer's rank on his shoulder epaulets. Enlisted airmen's Service Uniforms from the time do not even have shoulder epaulets.

The initial Mission Briefing includes a Staff Sergeant (E-5) among the Field-Grade Officers around the table. This is entirely inappropriate since such enlisted airmen are first-line supervisors, and therefore not privy to the proceedings of strategic or senior-level meetings. At the very least, it should have been a Senior Non-Commissioned Officer serving as the Senior Enlisted Advisor between the General and the nascent Mission Teams.

In both parts of this episode, Charles Kawalsky is referred to as Major, but he is wearing the rank insignia of a Captain, which was used for the character's credit in the Final Cut of the episode.

This could be seen as a nod to the Movie as Kawalsky in the film was show with the rank insignia of a Lieutenant Colonel, but O'Neil addresses him as Lieutenant.

As the Mission Briefing is convened, Kawalsky (now wearing the correct rank insignia) has his feet apart while rendering a salute to Hammond. Even without that mistake, everyone's salutes were nevertheless unnecessary as they were neither individually or collectively reporting to the General's office. They were all both indoors and not in formation, and so the room should have been called to "Attention!" as the General entered.

When Captain Samantha Carter first reports for duty, she salutes and reports to O'Neill, who then returns her salute. Although she would be serving under the Colonel's command, she would have been doing so under Hammond's orders and so should have reported to him.

During the mission briefing the set lighting on the ceiling of the Embarkation room can be clearly seen through the window behind Carter.

When O'Neill is telling Jackson about the encounter with Apophis, he mentions that six hostile aliens came through the gate, but in reality there were eight: Teal'c, Apophis, and six Serpent Guards. Though since two were killed this could be referring to the six remaining hostiles.

When showing O'Neill and Carter the chamber full of gate addresses, Jackson mentions that they are separated into groups of 7 glyphs. This seems unlikely as the seventh symbol is the point of origin, and it would be redundant to add Abydos' point of origin into every single gate address. (It is also possible, however, that the seventh symbol in the addresses is not necessarily for Abydos, but an assortment of different points of origin from many different planets.)

Further, the glyphs shown on the chamber wall appear to be Egyptian hieroglyphs rather than the constellation-based Stargate symbols. It is possible that Jackson was theorizing that the hieroglyphs corresponded to gate address symbols, but the conversation between him and Carter seems to suggest these are simply the actual gate symbols. Oddly enough, this error seems to extend to all of the SG-1 "complete # season" DVD box set designs, which show pictures of the Stargate itself bearing these hieroglyph symbols, never seen on any gate in the series.

On Abydos, the inner ring of the gate does not spin when Apophis comes and goes, but the only way to dial the gate, unless you are ascended, is for the inner ring to spin and the chevrons to lock.

Awards[]

Nominated Golden Reel Award for "Best Sound Editing - Television Movies of the Week - Music"

Nominated Primetime Emmy for "Outstanding Special Visual Effects for a Series" (Robert Habros, Ted Rae, John Gajdecki, Michelle Comens, Pete Mastalyr and David Alexander)

Other languages[]

Catalan: Els fills dels déus

Czech: Děti bohů (Children of the Gods)

Hungarian: Istenek gyermekei

Italian: I figli degli dei

German: Das Tor zum Universum (The Gate to the Universe)

Finnish: Jumalten Lapset

French: Enfants des dieux

Spanish: Los Hijos de Los Dioses

Portuguese: Os Filhos Dos Deuses

Russian: Дети Богов (Deti Bogov)

Slovene: Otroci bogov (Children of the Gods)

Romanian: Copiii Zeilor

Polish: Dzieci bogów (Children of the Gods)

Hebrew: ילדי האלים

Dutch: Kinderen van De Goden

Slovak: Deti bohov (Children of the Gods)

[]

Children of the Gods on Wikipedia

Children of the Gods original edit vs Final Cut on The Companion

Children of the Gods Oral History on The Companion