purple

Listen:

UK:*UK and possibly other pronunciationsUK and possibly other pronunciations/ˈpɜːrpəl/US:USA pronunciation: IPA and respellingUSA pronunciation: IPA/ˈpɝpəl/ ,USA pronunciation: respelling(pûr′pəl)

Inflections of 'purple' (v): (⇒ conjugate)

purples

v 3rd person singular

purpling

v pres p

purpled

v past

purpled

v past p

WordReference Random House Learner's Dictionary of American English © 2024

pur•ple /ˈpɜrpəl/USA pronunciation n., adj., -pler, -plest.

n.

any color having both red and blue, esp. one deep in tone: [uncountable]colored rich, dark purple.[countable]a rich, dark purple.

adj.

of the color purple.

Rhetoricexaggerated and too ornate:purple prose.

profane or shocking, as language.

Idioms

Idioms born to the purple, of royal birth.

pur•plish, adj.

WordReference Random House Unabridged Dictionary of American English © 2024

pur•ple (pûr′pəl),USA pronunciation n., -pler, -plest, adj., v., -pled, -pling.

n.

any color having components of both red and blue, such as lavender, esp. one deep in tone.

cloth or clothing of this hue, esp. as formerly worn distinctively by persons of imperial, royal, or other high rank.

Religionthe rank or office of a cardinal.

the office of a bishop.

imperial, regal, or princely rank or position.

deep red;

crimson.

Insectsany of several nymphalid butterflies, as Basilarchia astyanax (red-spotted purple,) having blackish wings spotted with red, or Basilarchia arthemis (banded purple or white admiral,) having brown wings banded with white.

Idioms born in or to the purple, of royal or exalted birth:Those born to the purple are destined to live in the public eye.

adj.

of the color purple.

imperial, regal, or princely.

brilliant or showy.

Rhetoricfull of exaggerated literary devices and effects;

marked by excessively ornate rhetoric:a purple passage in a novel.

profane or shocking, as language.

v.t., v.i.

to make or become purple.

Greek porphýra; compare purpure, porphyry

Latin purpura kind of shellfish yielding purple dye, the dye, cloth so dyed

Middle English purpel (noun, nominal and adjective, adjectival), Old English purple (adjective, adjectival), variant of purpure bef. 1000

pur′ple•ness, n.

Collins Concise English Dictionary © HarperCollins Publishers::

purple /ˈpɜːpəl/ n

a dye or pigment producing such a colour

cloth of this colour, often used to symbolize royalty or nobility

the purple ⇒ high rank; nobility

the official robe of a cardinal

the rank, office, or authority of a cardinal as signified by this

adj

of the colour purple

(of writing) excessively elaborate or full of imagery: purple prose

Etymology: Old English, from Latin purpura purple dye, from Greek porphura the purple fish (Murex)

ˈpurpleness n ˈpurplish adj ˈpurply adj

'purple' also found in these entries (note: many are not synonyms or translations):