Before 1990, not too many girls from my block in Washington, D.C., were familiar with Black women gracing the national broadcasts of the pageant stage. There was Vanessa Williams, who won the Miss America title in 1984 (though she unceremoniously had to give her title back after an overblown controversy. During the Miss America pageant in 2016, she was given a public apology), and Carole Gist, who won Miss USA in 1990, but other than that, it was often a sea of white faces.

Nevertheless, at the age of 8, I started to envision myself donning the crown one day. Images of women like Jayne Kennedy, the first Black woman to host a network sports broadcast, who was crowned as Miss Ohio in 1970, started to appear on my junior high school classroom walls. And it was in those intervening years that brochures for the Miss District of Columbia Teen USA pageant would show up in my mailbox, but discouraged by the fees, I would just throw them in the trash.

Carole Gist in 1990.

I would still secretly prepare, posturing and posing myself for an opportunity that might never come. And remarkably, my confidence grew: I went from bursting into tears from stage fright to camouflaging my awkwardness with a graceful walk. As junior high came to an end and high school rolled around, I watched as two contestants from my school were crowned Miss District of Columbia Teen USA on national television. Inspired, I decided to really focus on gracing the stage, but I knew I would approach this differently — because I had a larger scheme in mind. For me, the competition could be a way to exercise a positive influence in my community, like in the small ways I protected my young neighbors Wakina and Kim from the bad influences that surrounded us. I watched as my neighborhood became riddled with gun violence and the effects of the crack epidemic, and I so badly wished to be the person who could offer anyone a safe haven.

Vanessa Williams in 1984.

Once I began senior year, though, the costs were still too high, and I wanted to save up for college. Still, when graduation day approached, I ascended the stage to accept my diploma, embodying the pageant queen I had always dreamed of with a regal walk and a wave. As I was leaving, a teacher who had taken an interest in me told me that there was a pageant scout in the audience, and they wanted me to participate in the Miss District of Columbia Teen USA the very next day. She said it was free, and all I had to do was bring my prom dress. While I was a little hesitant, something told me to just go.

That day, surprisingly, I wasn’t nervous or shy. Everything just fell into place. I even felt confident enough to answer questions in the interview portion. An experience I had imagined 10 years prior had finally manifested the day after I graduated high school. I was crowned Miss District of Columbia Teen USA and was able to move on to the next phase of the competition — nationals.

We arrived in Biloxi, Mississippi, where I was to compete with girls who had professionally trained for this their whole lives. I was excited and ready to be on the stage, but the stares and lingering racism I had always experienced traveling throughout the United States instantly made me feel on edge. The pressure was immense, and I felt the weight of making sure I represented my hometown with poise and grace.

Each time I got onstage, I envisioned Carole Gist, Vanessa Williams, Jayne Kennedy, and all the other Black women who came before me, and I felt it in my bones that one day I could be the same inspiration for some young girl in Washington, D.C.

The preparation that goes into getting onstage is, needless to say, intense. Your makeup has to look flawless, and at the time there was no Fenty or MAC with their massive shade ranges. Instead, a makeup artist applied a matted pink lipstick that looked so egregious with my dark complexion, I immediately wiped it off. I tried my best with my hair, but back then Black women were certainly not encouraged to wear their natural hair during a pageant. There was no CROWN Act legislation, which protects Black women by prohibiting discrimination based on our natural hair. Participants had to fry their own hair or put on a wig in an effort to adhere to this unspoken rule — to try to assimilate to our white competitors. So, while stylists busied themselves with the white girls around me, no one knew what to do with my hair. But despite these hurdles, I made it on the stage, and I was that shy girl who braved the spotlight while a majority white panel of judges barely looked at me. Robin Roberts, now a Good Morning America anchor, gave the only gracious smile I can remember. Even still, I was the Miss District of Columbia Teen USA, and being introduced as such to this crowd in particular was electrifying.

Cherrelle éLan as Miss Teen District of Columbia.

I didn’t even make it to the semifinals that day. But I continued competing throughout college, placing second runner-up in Howard University’s Miss School of Communications and making it to semifinals in the Miss District of Columbia USA pageant. Each time I got onstage, I envisioned Carole Gist, Vanessa Williams, Jayne Kennedy, and all the other Black women who came before me, and I felt it in my bones that one day I could be the same inspiration for some young girl in Washington, D.C.

Pageantry instilled within me a sense of confidence that I yearned to pass along, so I dedicated time toward giving back, incorporating my self-improvement exercises from the days of preparing for the pageant into workshops for young girls at the community center while in college. And now, with more than 20 years in a risky business, I continue the journey to empower the girls and young women of my community with my companies, Lady éLan Films and éLan Statistics, a 501c3 nonprofit organization. With projects like DreamTicket, a film inspired by Rochelle Ballantyne, the 27-year-old chess superstar who is the first Black woman to pursue the prestigious status of chess master, we help at-risk youth through the power of filmmaking.

I was even able to experience the effects of what I worked to bring to my community when, 25 years later, I was at the Upright Citizens Brigade, and I was stopped by my old mentee Kim "Kaycee" Campbell. She explained to me that my guidance inspired her to pursue her dreams of being an actress. To know that I impacted even one person fills my heart. Even though it’s been quite a while since I’ve been onstage, it still makes me happy knowing that simply adjusting a young person’s posture or altering their walk ever so slightly can increase someone’s confidence, build their self-esteem, and set them on a path for success.

Cherrelle éLan has appeared in the film Knight of Cups, Beyond The Lights as well as Primetime Television shows like CBS's Criminal Minds and HBO's Enlightened. She also performed as "Ms. Muller" in the play Doubt on The Rep East Stage, and starred as "Ms. Blond" in the stage play Reservoir Bitches — the adaptation of Quentin Tarantino's Reservoir Dogs. She's currently training with the British American Drama Academy in Oxford, England.