On Dec. 8 Zozibini Tunzi of South Africa was crowned Miss Universe 2019.

This means that for the first time in history, four black women have been crowned as Miss USA, Miss Teen USA, Miss America and Miss Universe.

In April Kaliegh Garris was crowned Miss Teen USA and Nia Franklin was crowned Miss America. Cheslie Kryst was crowned Miss USA in May.

As someone who grew up watching beauty pageants and never really saw women who looked like me winning frequently — this is awesome.

I know people who grew up having representation of themselves all around in movies, TV, magazines, billboards, dolls, etc may not really understand why it's actually a big deal.

Beauty pageants can be considered trivial; but they represent one of many areas where diversity and inclusion has been slow coming.

The Miss America pageant began in 1921 but its first black participant wasn’t until 1970 when Cheryl Browne entered the pageant. Actress Vanessa Williams was the first black woman to win Miss America back in 1983.

The Miss USA contest was created in 1952 and crowned the first African American winner, Carole Anne-Marie Gist, in 1990. Miss Teen USA began in 1983. Its first black winner was Janel Bishop in 1991.

People can tell you that you're pretty or beautiful all they want but when there's hardly anyone who looks like you in places that display the standard of beauty, you tend to not really believe what they're saying.

Or, you hear it with an underlying message of "you're pretty for a ___" (insert race or size or whatever makes someone different than the "normal" standard of beauty).

Ruth Briggs King: Dems are blocking effort to track candidate finances

Ted Kaufmann: I was wrong about Trump's tax cut

So moments like the crowning of four African American women at once show the shift in what normal is and demonstrate how our framing of normality is becoming more inclusive.

There’s nothing wrong with being a trailblazer but there’s something innately comforting in seeing someone who looks like you do it first. It’s the difference between driving through thick fog alone vs. driving through it while following the headlights of the car ahead of you.

This need for representation doesn’t only apply to the beauty industry. It also applies to examples of intelligence, talent or any of the other places and ways minority women have been underrepresented in the past.

According to the US Census Bureau's, the estimated 2018 United States population (February 2018) is 327.16 million. Of that, 76.6% is Caucasian, 13.4% African American, 18.1% Hispanic or Latino, 5.8% Asian, 1.3% American Indian, and 2.7% two or more races.

That breakdown holds true here in Delaware also. According to World Population Review the estimated population of Delaware is 980,421. The racial diversity in Delaware stands at 69.2% Caucasian, 21.7% African American, 3.7% Asian, 2.8% two or more races, 2.2% other race, and 0.4% native of America/Alaska.

Sure, it’s great having one shining example to look up to in a field – we all know who Oprah is. However, considering the percentage of the population that minorities make up shouldn’t we be reflected in more than one or two individuals per industry?

After her win Miss America 2019 Nia Franklin said, "It sends a message across the world really that you can be anything you want to be, and there doesn't have to be just one of us at a time up here."

Without representation of all genders, races, sexuality and body types, people feel like they aren't heard or seen. It feels like their dreams are far-fetched.

With the recent crowning of four black women as Miss America, Miss USA, Miss Teen USA and Miss Universe, I love thinking about little girls at home watching moments like these knowing that anything is possible for them.

Zozibini summed it up nicely in her tweet after her win Sunday: "Today a door was opened and I could not be more grateful to have been the one to have walked through it. May every little girl who witnessed this moment forever believe in the power of her dreams and may they see their faces reflected in mine."

Nyemade Boiwu of Newark recently was the emcee for the 2019 Ms. BBW Pageant at the Chase Center at the Riverfront.