MAIN Pop Culture Miss USA 2024

also see -> Miss America

Miss USA 2024 Alma Cooper

WHEN: Sunday, August 4. 2024 at 8PM ET

WHERE: Televised on the CW live from the Peacock Theater in Los Angeles

In 2024, 53 new contestants competed for the title of Miss USA when the pageant was televised live from Los Angeles on Sunday, August 4th.

And the winner is ..

Miss Michigan Alma Cooper was announced as the winner of the annual pageant, winning out over Miss Kentucky Connor Perry and Miss Oklahoma Danika Christopherson for the top prize.

Cooper will go on to represent the United States in the 2024 Miss Universe Pageant, which will take place in November.

The ceremony aired on the CW beginning at 8PM ET / 5PM PT. Garcelle Beauvais of “The Real Housewives of Beverly Hills” will be joined by E! News‘ Keltie Knight as co-hosts of this year's pageant.

A wide variety of celebrities and notables made up the 2024 judging panel including Vanderpump Rules star Scheana Shay and Anastasia Beverly Hills CEO Anastasia Soare. Singer Gavin DeGraw, Miss USA 1990 Carole Gist, motivational speaker Natasha Graziano, and Miss USA 1994 Lu Parker

How Miss USA Is Chosen .

Contestants are required to be at least 18 and, with new recent rule changes, there is no longer any age limit to enter the cmpetition. Each contestant from all 50 states and the District of Columbia are judged in three categories: swimsuit, evening gown and interview, Equally important judging critiera includes character, poise, confidence and personality. There is no talent portion of the competition.

Halle Berry (Miss Ohio) competed

in the 1986 Miss USA pageant.

Miss USA Fun Facts

• The Miss USA pageant was conceived in 1950 when Yolande Betbeze, winner of the rival Miss America pageant, refused to pose for publicity pictures while wearing a swimsuit. Pageant sponsor Catalina decided to pull their sponsorship, and create their own competition.

• The first Asian American woman to win Miss USA was Macel Wilson in 1962; the first Hispanic was Laura Martinez-Herring in 1985; the first African-American was Carole Gist in 1990; and the first Miss USA of Middle-Eastern descent was Rima Fakih in 2010.

• Hollywood actress Halle Berry was introduced to the world as Miss Ohio, who was the first runner-up in the Miss USA contest in 1986 (Miss Texas, Christy Fichtner, was crowned that year). However, Berry's movie career was launched by the publicity she received as a Miss USA contestant.

Miss USA Controversies

Kataluna Enriquez, Miss USA's

first transgender contestant.

Tara Elizabeth Conner captured the Miss USA title in 2006. Months later, however, she was under threat of losing her crown due to "inappropriate behavior" amid reports she had visited New York City bars when she was not yet 21.

Days of speculation about her fate ended in a much-publicized Donald Trump press conference on December 19, 2006 when he announced that Conner would be allowed a second chance to keep her crown.

A year later, Miss Nevada Katie Rees was offered no second chance at keeping her crown after compromising photos of her in various states of undress which instantly went viral around the Web. She was officially dethroned in January 2007

Miss USA 2009 was also not without controversy when Miss California, Carrie Prejean, was asked a question on gay marriage. Fumbling for words, the beauty queen stated that she was in favor of the "opposite" of same sex unions, resulting in a mixed audience response of cheers and catcalls. Prejean, later admitted that the response may have cost her the Miss USA crown.

Most recently, pageant traditionalists were sent into a tailspin when it was revealed that Miss Nevada, Kataluna Enriquez, would become the first transgender MIss USA contestant ever in 2021. The announcement came in June, Gay Pride Month, when Enriquez messaged her Intagram following: "My win is our win. We just made history. Happy Pride.”

also see -> Miss America

More about Miss USA around the Web:

Miss USA 2024 - The place to be for everything you always wanted to know, featuring behind-the-scenes at the Miss USA Pageant, related trivia, history, info on past shows, a past-winners' photo gallery and media contact and registration info.

Miss USA - Brief history, a list of winners dating back to 1952 and related pictures, links to current pageant contestants & bios, a comprehensive schedule of events leading up to the pageant, interesting trivia, links to further information from Wikipedia.