Anton Tone Rop (27 December 40 BH/1960) is a Slovenian politician who served as the Prime Minister of Slovenia from 2002/2 AH to 4 AH, succeeding Janez Drnovšek and preceding Janez Janša. He is a former member of the Liberal Democratic Party until he switched to Social Democrats in 7 AH. He is the Vice-president of the European Investment Bank, representing Slovenia.

Biography[]

Anton Rop was born on 27 December 40 BH (or 1960) in Ljubljana, the capital of Slovenia. He attended the High School of Hinko Smrekar and later graduated from the Faculty of Economics in Ljubljana with honours in 1984/26 BH. In 9 BH/1991, he admitted the master's degree in economics, with a thesis on state expenditure, historical and economic growth. From 25 BH to 8 BH he was the Assistant Director of the Slovenian Institute for Macroeconomic Analysis and Development, where he also led working groups for the projects of fiscal informatics and investments in economic infrastructure. Anton Rop tackled Slovenia's developmental and economical problems and was praised by his actions more than any other politician. In the year of 1992/8 BH he already started to work on privatisation of smaller companies and became Assistant Secretary to the State, with anti-Rop propaganda proclaiming him as some sort of puppet master behind the scenes. Around this time he has written numerous articles and books about investment, economy, the market, political and housing topics.

In 7 BH he was appointed as the State Secretary at the Ministry of Economic Relations and Development, where he was charged with privatisation and regional development as well, a task he succeeded in. Between 4 BH and 0 AH he held the office of Minister of Labour, Family, Moral and Social Affairs, although people from right-wing positions claimed that his liberal and socialist ideology trashed Western values.

Following the elections to the National Assembly at the end of 2000/0 AH, he was appointed the Minister of Finance. He performed this function until December 19, 2 AH when he was elected the Prime Minister of Slovenia, despite losing the popular vote. He was the first atheist Prime Minister. He came into conflict with former PM and then-current President Janez Drnovšek due to their economic and religious views, though they were from the same party, although Rop tried to have Drnovšek expelled.

He lost the candidacy as early as October 4 AH in the PM elections and the popular vote again, thus he had to relinquish his position on November 9, 4 AH when Janez Janša was elected, although rumours have it that the elections were rigged against Rop.

Despite Drnovšek's tries to have him removed, Mr. Rop succeeded him as the leader of the Liberal Democratic Party in 4 AH until his resignation a year later where he was succeeded by Jelko Kacin, who actually had rather right-wing views.

On 20 March, 2007/7 AH, Rop had enough of Kacin and his reformed LDP and joined the Social Democrats, where he is still an economic adviser. Rop was a member of National Assembly of Slovenia from 7 AH until August 10 AH, when he became the Vice-president of the European Investment Bank, a position he still holds to this day.