Voters in Slovenia went to the polls to elect the 90 members of the National Assembly in the first elections since the country joined the European Union in May 2004.

Public opinion polls had suggested that the ruling coalition led by Prime Minister Anton Rop's Liberal Democrat Party (LDS) would retain leadership although polls also indicated that half the electorate was dissatisfied with the work of the Government and the Parliament. The LDS which had been in power for most of the past 12 years had suffered a setback on 13 June 2004 during the first elections to the European Parliament (EP) held in the country. On this occasion the ruling party had been beaten by the two main centre right opposition parties Democrat Party (SDS) of Mr. Janez Jansa and the New Slovenia (Nsi) which together won 41.5 per cent of the vote and four of the seven seats that Slovenia holds in the European Parliament.

In December 2002 Mr. Anton Rop former Finance Minister had taken over from Mr. Janez Drnovsek as Prime Minister and leader of the LDS the latter replacing Milan Kucan as President of the Republic.

During the electoral campaign Prime Minister Anton Rop vaunted the results he had achieved as head of government including on the economic front. Slovenia's GDP per inhabitant is 72% of the European average i.e. a level equal to that of Greece and Portugal. Mr. Rop promised that if elected his mandate would focus mainly on education and research while Mr. Jansa promised to improve access to healthcare and education to develop environmental policy and to ensure a decent income for all.

Voter participation stood at 60.27 per cent nearly 10 percentage points down from the previous elections in 2000. It was nevertheless much higher than the low 28.24 per cent at the European elections in June 2004.

The elections resulted in a surprise victory by the conservative Slovenian Democratic Party (SDS) over the ruling Liberal Democracy of Slovenia (LDS) by a narrow margin. The SDS won 29.1 per cent of the vote i.e. 13.3 points more than during the 2000 general elections. This party obtained 29 seats while its coalition partner the Nsi won 8.9 per cent of the vote and nine seats. Together both parties obtained one seat more than the three parties of the outgoing coalition together. The Liberal Democrat Party (LDS) won 22.82 per cent of the vote (23 seats) while the United List of Social Democrats (ZLSD) won 10.20 per cent (10 seats) and the Democratic Pensioners' Party (DeSUS) obtained 4.04 (4 seats) just enough for the 4 per cent threshold necessary to be represented in the National Assembly. The centre-right People's Party which was seen as a probable coalition partner for the SDS and Nsi won another seven seats.

The new National Assembly held its first session on 22 October 2004. Mr. France Cukjati (SDS) was elected as the new Speaker.