Tavares played sold-out shows all over the world, performed for millions on television, and won the highest award in the music industry.

But, from concerts at Buttonwood Park and the Zeiterion, to supporting local causes and shining a light on Cape Verdean culture, the Tavares Brothers – Arthur “Pooch” Tavares, Ralph Tavares, Antone “Chubby” Tavares, Feliciano “Butch” Tavares, Victor Tavares, and Perry “Tiny” Tavares – never forgot their hometown of New Bedford.

The City honored the iconic musical group Saturday morning when Mayor Jon Mitchell joined elected officials and members of the Tavares family to unveil Tavares Brothers’ Way, the new name of a street in a historic Cape Verdean neighborhood.

“The Tavares Brothers gained worldwide fame through their timeless hit songs, but we in New Bedford know them for their many contributions to the city, especially its Cape Verdean community,” Mayor Mitchell said. “We’re proud to honor their enduring achievements with the renaming of a street in the country’s first Cape Verdean neighborhood.”

“The Tavares Brothers and the entire Tavares family have made New Bedford very proud,” City Council President Naomi Carney said. “They climbed to the very top of the mountain in the music business, winning a Grammy and touring the world with the Jackson 5 and others, yet their heart always remained in New Bedford with their Cape Verdean community.”

Tavares Brothers’ Way runs from John F. Kennedy Boulevard (Route 18) to S. 2nd Street just south of Downtown, renaming a portion of the former Griffin Street. Mayor Mitchell joined Chubby, Victor, Tiny, and a huge crowd of family, friends, fans and supporters Saturday to unveil the new sign that officially dedicates the street in their honor.

Tavares won a Grammy award in 1978 for their performance of “More Than a Woman” from the soundtrack to Saturday Night Fever. They placed eight singles on the Billboard Top 40, and 12 on the R&B Top 10 chart while touring with some of the biggest names in the music business, including the Jackson 5, KC and The Sunshine Band, the Bee Gees, and Marvin Gaye. They received the Lifetime Achievement Award from The National R&B Music Society in 2013 and were inducted into the Cape Verdean Music Hall of Fame in 2006. They performed two shows at the Zeiterion last year to benefit the Cape Verdean Recognition Committee.

Their music also stands the test of time as their songs “Heaven Must be Missing an Angel” and “More than a Woman” have been played more than 112 million times on Spotify.