On Sunday John Tavares, gave Torontonians an added spark to their Canada Day celebrations when he signed a 7-year $77 million contract to play for his hometown Maple Leafs.

Some pundits say he gave Toronto a hometown discount, but his savvy contract is a tax and financial planner’s dream. Of the $77 million, $70,890,000 comes in the form of signing bonuses to be paid throughout the seven-year term. He then makes the league minimum salary of $650,000 in year one and $910,000 in years two through seven.

With the right planning, Tavares can save millions in taxes through the life of this contract. But it is not a one-plan-or-no-plan situation. There are multiple savings opportunities.

Residency

Most of the time, when a player is on a good NHL team (i.e., one that goes deep into the playoffs) he is forced to become a resident of his team's town/state/country due to his extended presence there. But because so many of Tavares’ road games will be in the US, with careful planning, Tavares avoid Ontario’s combined federal/provincial 53.53% tax rate by remaining a US resident.

Article XVI of the US-Canada tax treaty states that signing bonuses paid to a resident of the US by a Canadian team are taxed at 15% in Canada, and vice versa for US teams paying bonuses to Canadian residents.

Having his signing bonus taxed at the low rate of 15% in Canada ensures that Tavares would receive a full foreign tax credit on his US return for all taxes paid in Canada on both is signing bonus and his salary each season. If he plans properly, he could save over $11.7 million over the life of his contract.

Tavares is almost certainly a US tax resident and likely has been since he came to New York in 2009. In order to enjoy the full $11.7 million in tax savings he would need to maintain his residency in the US but would need to move to a tax-free state, such as Florida. This means selling his New York home and buying one in Florida.

Buying a home in Florida is not enough to become a Florida resident, especially if he is on a seven-year contract in Canada. He would need most treaty tie-breakers for residency to go to the US/Florida. Thus, he would need to avoid having a permanent abode in Canada. Simply put, he should not own real estate nor get a twelve-month lease in Toronto. Go with a nine-month lease each season. Then he would have to spend his offseason in Florida. This would ensure that he would pay the 37% US federal rate on his signing bonus instead of Ontario’s 53.53%.

Even if he decides to remain a New York resident, he would save nearly $5.5 million in taxes over being a Canadian resident.

Canadian Resident Planning

Tavares may decide he does not want to deal with the hassle of going back and forth to the US in the offseason. He can still save nearly $8.8 million by setting up Retirement Compensation Account (RCA) upon his return to Canada. These uniquely Canadian plans allow a business’ key employees to set aside large chunks of their salary into tax-deferred plans from which they can withdraw after leaving their job no matter how old they are.

As an example, Tavares could contribute 40% of his income each season (signing bonus and salary) to the RCA. He then pays Ontario’s combined 53.53% rate on the remaining 60% of his income. If he leaves Toronto after this contract and re-establishes himself as a US resident, he could collapse the RCA, take all the money from the plan and pay a flat 25% tax in Canada on his withdrawal. Overall, he would end up paying 42.12% tax on the $77 million, which is less than he would pay if he remains a New York resident.

If Tavares does not wish to open an RCA in year one, he could still save some cash by waiting to establish residency in Canada until after he receives his $15,250,000 signing bonus. Paying US/New York taxes instead of Canada/Ontario would save him almost $1.2 million in taxes.

Other Contract Highlights

The NHL’s Collective Bargaining Agreement (CBA) expires prior to the 2020-2021 season. Gary Bettman has locked players out three times in his 25 years as commissioner, including canceling the entire 2004-05 season, and many believe he is laying the groundwork for another lockout. When players are locked out, they do not receive their salary. However, they are still guaranteed their signing bonuses. Tavares is due a bonus of $11,090,000 that season, even if the Leafs do not play a single game or hold a single practice.

John Tavares may have given the Maple Leafs a hometown discount, but made up much of it with contract structure and can save millions more with careful tax planning.