Meaghan Martin Performs Her Disney Hits!

Camp Rock 2 actress, Meaghan Martin performed at the Festival of Ballooning this past Saturday afternoon, and sang her Disney hits of ‘Too Cool’, ‘When You Wish Upon A Star’ and other fan favorites.

Outside of singing and her upcoming returning role on the Disney film, Camp Rock 2, Meaghan is currently working on an ABC Family project, ’10 Things I Hate About You’. As far as 10 Things goes, Meaghan admits it’s very different from anything she’s done thus far:

“It’s very different because I’m working with adults now, like almost all adults, even most of the people on the show with me. I’m the only one in the lead cast under 20. So it’s very different, but at the same time it’s exactly the same. We still have so much fun. I love coming to work every day, and I cannot emphasize how much I love it. I mean, it’s only when we’re working till three in the morning that I’m like, “Oh, my God, I can’t do this.” No, but it’s so—it makes it worth it.”

Meaghan Jette Martin Is College Bound

May 29, 2009, 2:57 am

Filed under: Meaghan Martin | Tags: 10 things, graduates, high school, Meaghan Martin

Meaghan Jette Martin updated her MySpace today to inform everyone the good news that she finished high school yesterday!

“So today I finished high school. DONE. completely and utterly finished. I walked into my school at 9:20 am and turned in my last packet of school work.”

Meaghan says it was a big moment, but she doesn’t know if she’s realized yet how huge of a change it is! “I always knew the day would come and I knew that it was coming soon… but it just seems so crazy to actually be there. I’m going to start college in January and I can easily say that I’m pretty scared out of my mind, but everyone around me has been very supportive and I think I’ll be able to manage.”

The good news continues as Meaghan gave news about her upcoming T.V. show, 10 Things:

“It’s the first day of shooting the new ABC Family TV series I am on “10 Things I Hate About You”. I have been waiting for this day since January 31st when my phone rang and the writer/executive producer told me that the show was going to be turned into a series. Actually, I take that back, I have been waiting for this day since the moment I decided I wanted to be an actress. I am so pumped to be working with a cast that I adore on a show that I truly love. I am beyond excited to get started and even more stoked for you guys to get to be involved when the show airs July 7th at 8 pm (be sure to watch every Tuesday at 8 after that hehehehe).”

Congrats Meaghan!