Benjamin Franklin was born in Boston on January 17, 1706. He started reading at a young age. But when he was 10 years old, Josiah Franklin, his father, took him out of school. Ben was sent to work in the family-owned candle and soap store. He became agitated while working. He was well-versed with the newspaper industry. On a printing press, the printer set up the page letter by letter. Ben gained the ability to carefully construct sentences. He also picked up writing. He authored essays about politics. Ben fled to Philadelphia at the age of 16. For the rest of his life, he resided in the city.

Biography of Benjamin Franklin

As a publisher, scientist, writer, and inventor, Benjamin Franklin achieved recognition. However, his leadership in the early United States and the American colonies is what people most often recall about him. Benjamin Franklin was a physicist, inventor, writer, and statesman who lived from January 17, 1706, to April 17, 1790. He contributed to the creation of the American Constitution and the Declaration of Independence.

Benjamin Franklin

Contributions and Discoveries

Benjamin made some truly amazing contributions and discoveries in the field of science. His interest in science led him to become a successful scientist. He was granted the title of "First American" in recognition of his contribution to the creation of the country.

Static Electricity

Thunderbolts are caused by the abrupt release of static electricity, as Benjamin was the first to recognise. In addition, he experimented by flying a kite to demonstrate the existence of static electricity in clouds. In addition, he developed the lightning rod.

Gulf Stream

He researched the Gulf Stream, an oceanic wind current that permitted ships to travel farther distances.

Demography

Benjamin attentively studied demographics. He claimed that the availability of food has a major role in the expansion of the human population.

Music Instruments

Benjamin created the glass harmonica and the string quartet, a quartet of four people who play the violin and guitar to make music.

The Inventions of Benjamin Franklin

During his lifetime, Benjamin Franklin had a variety of positions, including printer, postmaster, diplomat, author, scientist, and founding father. Above all else, he was an inventor who came up with answers to everyday issues, developed new technology, and even made life a little more musical.

Franklin never filed for a patent despite coming up with some of the most well-known and successful inventions of the modern era. He did this because he felt that inventions should be freely shared and "that as we enjoy great advantages from the inventions of others, we should be glad of an opportunity to serve others by any Invention; and this we should do freely and generously." The following are a few of Benjamin Franklin's most notable inventions:

Lightning Rod

Franklin is renowned for his electrical experiments, perhaps best known for the kite experiment. His fascination with electricity started in earnest after he unintentionally shocked himself in 1746.

Lightning Rod

Bifocals

Like most of us, Franklin noticed that as he aged, his eyesight deteriorated and that he became both near-sighted and far-sighted. He created "double spectacles," or what we now refer to as bifocals since he was tired of switching between two sets of eyeglasses. The list of the inventions of Benjamin Franklin goes on.

Famous Quotes of Benjamin Franklin

1. “Love your enemies, for they tell you your faults.”

- Poor Richard’s Almanack, 1756

2. “He that falls in love with himself will have no rivals.”

- Poor Richard’s Almanack, 1739

Summary

Benjamin achieved great success in politics and was appointed as the first ambassador to France. Because of his cunning nature, France became an enduring ally of the United States and even sent weapons to the country. In addition, Benjamin served as Pennsylvania's governor from 1785 until 1788. The important role Benjamin had in science is likewise quite amazing. He is renowned for his contributions to the electrical industry. In addition, he studied a variety of topics, including population, weather, and sea tides. In conclusion, we can say that he serves as one of the best examples of contemporary leadership. Benjamin passed away in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA, in the year 1790.