A peasant culture and livestock farming are the common characteristics of Boaco, a department located in the center of Nicaragua. The territory features landscapes of valleys that contrast with small mountains and hills. Despite the fact that the area is not usually known for tourism development, it offers natural attractions such as natural reserves, waterfalls, rivers and hot springs, as well as cultural ones like archaeological sites, a strong handmade craft production and traditional old dances.

The administrative center of the area is the city of Boaco, where an urban center lies on a sinuous territory with a unique personality. There are many viewpoints in the city, as well as hotels, restaurants, bars and a dynamic agricultural trade. Furthermore, the local religious festivities - which are celebrated by the end of July - represent a colorful season for this department. Actually, this is the ideal time to observe the antique, picturesque dance of "Los bailantes", and many bullfights.

Several natural attractions can be found in the Eastern side of Boaco. The 'Embalse de las Canoas', a medium size artificial lake with nice panoramic views and lots of fish, is located here. Also, there is an establishment with natural hot springs and other tourist services. In addition, the small town of Teustepe features some pre-Columbian petroglyphs.

The Northern region of Boaco features high mountains and rarely visited destinations. The Cerro Alegre Natural Reserve is situated between the cities of Santa Lucia and San Jose de los Remates, and extends its territory to the neighboring department of Matagalpa. There are other peaks like the Cerro Santa Ana and the 'Peñón de Santo Domingo', and interesting places along the Malacatoya River, where visitors will find many waterfalls and canyons. Other places have petroglyphs and caves.

The city of Camoapa is one of the many interesting destinations in Southern Boaco. The area is famous for its handicrafts made of a fiber called 'pita', and its neighboring hills (i.e the 'Cerro Mombachito'). Also, Camoapa is known for caves, waterfalls, petroglyphs and the ruins of its old city. The coasts of the department on Lake Cocibolca (also Lake Nicaragua) are reached further South. Despite not being elongated, these coasts are a natural place of great beauty.

The department of Boaco is constituted by six municipalities. Its territory is crossed by many important rivers, as well as the 'Serranía de Amerrisque' and the 'Cordillera Chontaleña'. Also, there are rarely known places here, such as the Fila Masigüe Natural Reserve on the East, and many other destinations that are yet to be discovered.