BOSTON — It’s been a few days since a Red Line MBTA train derailed in Boston, spurring a nightmare of shattered windows, plumes of smoke and jam-packed shuttle buses between Dorchester and South Boston. The derailment has lawmakers thinking about the state’s transportation system and how to make it safer, or at least avoid chaos akin to Wednesday’s situation.

On the commuter rail however, Greater Lowell riders have little to worry about. Lisa Battiston, an MBTA spokeswoman, said the Red Line derailment had “no impact” on commuter rail service.

Since Keolis became MBTA’s commuter rail partner in 2014, there has been not a single derailment on either the Fitchburg or Lowell lines, the French company told the Sun. Keolis spokesman Justin Thompson said they avoid such accidents by regularly inspecting and replacing tracks, ties and trimming vegetation.

Since 2014, Keolis has replaced 150,000 feet of rail ties — enough to cover the length of the Boston Marathon. The company has also replaced 57,000 feet of rail in the past year, regularly runs a car over the tracks to inspect rail shape and “de-stresses” rails in hot weather to reduce damage. For the month of February the Fitchburg and Lowell lines have been on time 91.7 and 92.2 percent respectively.

The last time a commuter train derailed in Fitchburg was at the Intermodal Station in December 2013. There were no injuries.

A PanAm freight train derailed on the Fitchburg line Friday, causing commuter rail delays.

Despite the Red Line’s nonexistent effect on the commuter rail, the fiasco still got local lawmakers thinking about the state’s transportation needs.

“The subway derailment raises serious concerns about the state of the commonwealth’s infrastructure,” said Sen. Eileen Donoghue, a Lowell Democrat. “The commonwealth must continue to make the necessary investments in maintenance to ensure that our existing transport system serves commuters as safely and as efficiently as possible.”

Transportation has been a longstanding issue in the state, however, Sen. Barbara L’Italien noted. Funding is “the big issue,” she said.

“One of the issues that we have in Massachusetts is that we have not fully invested in maintaining our trains and our subways,” said the Andover Democrat. “We have underfunded our commuter rail and subway system for many, many years. You have issues with malfunctioning, damaged equipment because it hasn’t been maintained.”

Rep. Tom Golden said Lowell and Fitchburg commuters are lucky that there haven’t been derailments, but that it “doesn’t mean we shouldn’t be asking questions.”

“If you’re on the Lowell to Boston line, you’re looking at it every day to make sure it’s safe,” the Lowell Democrat said. “People need to feel confident. It’s one thing to have delays that are inconveniences, but safety is of the utmost importance.”

Sen. Cindy Friedman said commuters should feel safe knowing that commuter rail tracks and MBTA subway trains are very different.

“(Red Line) trains are 30 years beyond their normal life. Those tracks are old, old, old,” the Arlington Democrat said. “They are really two different beasts. Commuter rail, I think of, as much more up-to-date system.”

Gov. Charlie Baker even said that although the Red Line situation was handled well by officials, there’s more work to be done.

“(The MBTA) needs to do some homework on why this happened and figure out if there is some issue that needs to be considered along the rest of the lines and the rest of the tracks to make sure that we don’t have some terrible situation like this lurking somewhere else on the tracks,” he told the State House News Service after a Washington Post Live event Wednesday.

The MBTA’s operating budget for fiscal year 2018 was $1.989 billion.

A proposed ballet question– alternately known as Fair Share, Proposition 80 or the “Millionaire Tax”– that would amend Chapter 44 of the Massachusetts Constitution would change a 1917 law that requires a flat income tax for everyone, currently 5.1 percent. That additional tax revenue will earmark funds for transportation among other things, according to the proposal.

The Tax Foundation, an independent tax policy nonprofit, filed a brief with the Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts in January, arguing that the question should not appear on the ballot for violating state constitutional prohibitions, including a “specific appropriation” or taking revenue and using it to pay a particular demand, like transportation.

In an interview about this proposal, Donoghue said regardless of the ultimate fate of the ballot question, she “intends to work through the budget process to fight for sufficient funding to address the real education and transportation needs of the commonwealth’s residents.”

Friedman, a support of the proposal, said it makes sense, since “education and transportation are critical” to the growth of the commonwealth.

L’Italien also noted the funding from the proposal as a way to “modernize” the current system.

“The Fair Share Tax would earmark funding for education and transportation,” she said. “If it’s successful, it would be a source of funds to help the capital improvement of the damaged, non-maintained equipment.”

Sen. Dean Tran said to avoid derailment, a maintenance plan and schedule must be reviewed and brought up to date regularly. The Fitchburg Republican also noted that funding cannot come from proposal.

“We cannot rely on money from the Fair Share Amendment as it is unconstitutional to earmark money from an amendment,” he said. “We need to have a reliable source of funding. The people deserve to feel safe on public transportation.”

Raymond Jamieson, of Chelmsford, feels the trains are pretty safe, “it’s just the cost that’s a problem,” he said Saturday afternoon before boarding a commuter rail train in Lowell. He, his grandchildren and other family members were headed into Boston to see Disney on Ice.

Jamieson said he drives to Sullivan Square and takes the T to work everyday. He said it costs too much — $8 for parking and $10 for each train trip — to use the commuter rail daily.

Tammy Williamson, of Hudson, N.H., said she only uses the commuter rail every now and then, but has never had a problem and generally finds the trains to be safe and clean.

“The cost could be better, but I think everyone thinks that,” she said before getting on a train to Boston Saturday.

Lovely Casimir, of Boston, uses the commuter rail when visiting friends in Fitchburg.

“The commuter line works. The others? No. There is always uncertainty,” Casimir said. “They lack communication. … I had to go to work this week and the red line stopped. They made us sit in the train for 20 minutes straight and then told us to wait for a shuttle bus which didn’t show up.”

Aleesa Byrne, of Fitchburg, said she uses the train infrequently, but has few complaints.

Sun reporter Alana Melanson and Sentinel & Enterprise reporter Peter Jasinski contributed to this story.