The Clarks will play Thursday's on Friday, and maybe they'll perform "On Saturday."

Let's break that down.

We're talking about Pittsburgh's beloved rock band, the Clarks, which this Friday night will play their annual show at the Bridgewater restaurant Thursday's, not far from guitarist Rob James' home. The Clarks will christen Thursday's new outdoor stage for a show certain to feature tracks off the group's fine new album, "Madly in Love at the End of the World," which has been earning spins on 102.5-WDVE. Of course, it wouldn't be a Clarks show without some oldie-but-goodie songs, too, such as "Cigarette," "Better Off Without You," "Caroline" and maybe "On Saturday."

Tickets are $20, and the opening act will be Beaver County's Ill Willis hitting the stage around 8 p.m.

• • •

The Smashing Pumpkins, with founding members Billy Corgan, James Iha and Jimmy Chamberlin, and longtime guitarist Jeff Schroeder, headline PPG Paints Arena on Saturday.

The alternative-rock group recently released "Solara," their first new song in 18 years that features those three original members.

Expect the setlist to feature '90s radio hits including "Tonight, Tonight," "Bullet With Butterfly Wings," "1979" and "Zero," which the Pumpkins played June 11 on Jimmy Fallon's talk show.

Canadian rocker Metric will open at 7 p.m. Its new song is "Dressed to Suppress."

Tickets cost $29 to $126.

• • •

Father John Misty, one of music's most provocative songwriters, headlines Stage AE on Friday.

Joining the highly praised indie-folk/rock artist will be Nashville punk-rock trio Bully, which sounds rather promising on Spotify.

Tickets cost $35, and showtime is 8 p.m.

• • •

Though he moved to Maryland in March, locals always will consider Billy Price to be a Pittsburgh guy.

Enshrined a few years ago into the Pittsburgh Rock N' Roll Legends, Price isn't resting on his laurels.

He's got a solid new soul and rock album, "Reckoning," which he will promote with a Thursday co-headlining performance at Jergel's Rhythm Grille in Marshall Township.

The Nighthawks, a roots and blues band from Washington, D.C., also will entertain.

Tickets are $20 for the 8 p.m. show, with $30 getting you early admission at 5 p.m.