Fireboy DML

With his contemporary spin on Afropop, R&B, dancehall and reggae to name a few, Fireboy DML is one of the leading Afrobeats artists of his generation. His 2021 single, Peru, featuring Ed Sheeran, Blxst and 21 Savage was a viral hit, securing the top spot on the Billboard U.S. Afrobeats Songs Chart and the UK Afrobeats Singles Chart. The release of his third album, Playboy, kept the momentum going, helping Fireboy take Afrobeats into the mainstream. He feels passionately about doing justice to this music genre to pass it down the generations.

For the campaign, Fireboy wore Wallabees from the Clarks Originals Jacquard Collection. Fusing colourful ‘60s-inspired florals with heritage construction, the Grey Floral Wallabee features soft, breathable jacquard uppers, natural rubber crepe soles and signature tonal fobs.

"Partnering with an iconic global brand with such a rich history that I admire is a beautiful thing. Clarks take pride in being innovative and creative and it was fun being able to create alongside them. It was an honour to partner with Clarks for their upcoming Spring 2023 Brand Campaign that will further reach and connect with my fans around the world."

June Freedom

Embracing his African roots and transatlantic upbringing, Cape Verdean American singer-songwriter and multi-instrumentalist June Freedom is known for producing genre-bending music that fuses together unique sounds from alt-pop, worldbeat, zouk, hip-hop, kizomba and Afrosoul. June’s debut album, Anchor Baby, was widely praised for showcasing his rich heritage, and spent 10 weeks at #1 on Apple’s Top 100: Cape Verde Chart. With an innate fire that burns to shine a spotlight on his Cape Verdean culture, June authentically expresses his artistry in English, Spanish, Portuguese and Kriolu. Reimagined to target new demographics, the emerging artist is positioned to capitalise on the exponentially rising Afro/Latin movement and bring Cape Verdean music forms to a global, mainstream audience.

Nissi

Hailing from a successful musical family, Nissi Ogulu has been honing her talents since she was a child, learning to play the piano at a young age and performing at parties with friends. Nissi released her first official track, Pay Attention, in 2016. Nissi describes her work as a perfect mélange of all the components of her life – one that merges her passion for music, product design, and art. The UK-based artist is keen to keep pushing boundaries, creating music that blends African and European influences in an homage to her cross-cultural experiences.