The NBA playoffs are in full swing, and so is Shaun Livingston's game, evidently.

His off-court game in his hometown of Peoria hasn't been too shabby recently, either.

The team for which Livingston toils, the Golden State Warriors, beat the New Orleans Pelicans 121-116 on Tuesday night to take a 2-0 lead in a second-round series. In his usual reserve role, Livingston had four points and three assists.

Before Tuesday, Livingston had been averaging 20 minutes, 7 shots, 9½ points and 51.2 percent field shooting. Those numbers were up significantly from his regular-season statistics (16, 5, 5½ and 50.1, respectively).

Much of that sprouted from necessity. Warriors starting guard Stephen Curry had been out for a month because of a left-knee sprain. Springfield native Andre Iguodala had been starting in the postseason in Curry's place.

Livingston's duties increased in Golden State's first-round series against San Antonio, as well as the opening game against New Orleans. Tuesday night, Curry returned and had 28 points in 27 minutes, although Iguodala started again.

"Shaun's been fantastic in these playoffs," Warriors coach Steve Kerr told the San Francisco Chronicle earlier this week. "We've divided the point-guard duties between Andre and Shaun, and it's so great to have one or the other on the floor all the time."

This is a switch from the regular season. Then, Kerr used the 32-year-old Livingston judiciously, in an effort to keep him fresh for an NBA title defense.

"It's a marathon, right?" Livingston told the San Jose (Calif.) Mercury News. "The season is such a grind, and every year it seems like it gets harder and harder. But that's just Father Time. I'm really fortunate to be part of a really smart, intelligent organization."

The human side of Shaun is receiving plenty of praise, too. Kerr called him "an unbelievable teammate, human being, leader. Just a phenomenal person."

More evidence of that on a local level became apparent this week.

Livingston and his wife, Joanna, have joined with his grade-school alma mater to create a scholarship to be awarded to a minority student.

Concordia Lutheran School is to offer the Livingston Legacy Scholarship. Details are to be forthcoming during a news conference Friday at Concordia, 2000 W. Glen Ave.

"Shaun is an alumnus of Concordia and wishes to share a Christ-centered education with a child, just as he experienced," a Concordia news release stated.

Annual tuition is $5,750 for children whose families aren't members of any of the three Peoria Lutheran churches that support Concordia — Mount Calvary, Redeemer and Trinity.

Previously, Livingston donated $1 million to Concordia.

“That’s huge. That just shows the type of person he is,” Warriors teammate Kevin Durant told Nick in the Morning earlier this year in Milwaukee for this story.

Livingston's donation helped build a gymnasium named after retired Concordia educators Tom and Ruth Ruppert. That is where the news conference Friday is to be held.