Being a bad team has its perks. You get a lot of national attention from members of the media plus helpful advice from fans. And if you are really bad, you could win a high pick in the upcoming NBA draft lottery. Just like the New Orleans Pelicans.

After a 21-win campaign during the 2011-12 season, the Pelicans — who were the Hornets at the time — selected highly touted Anthony Davis with the No. 1 overall pick in the 2012 NBA draft. And so far, Davis has been everything New Orleans has expected him to be, but the team has yet to hold up its end of the bargain and improve enough to make the most of his talent.

The 23-year-old former Kentucky star is averaging 31.3 points, 10.8 rebounds, a league-leading three blocks per game, and, according to Synergy’s player-tracking data, is one of the game’s most-efficient players whether he is working out of the pick and roll (1.13 points per possession), in the post (0.98 PPP), or going one-on-one against a defender (1.03 PPP).

Davis has been so good this season the Golden State Warriors recently quadruple-teamed him — with Shaun Livingston’s attention completely fixated on the young big man — as soon as he got his hands on the ball in their game on Nov. 7. They still couldn’t stop him from scoring.

Overall, Davis has produced a game score of 26.1 in the first 10 games of the season, tying Houston Rockets’ guard James Harden for highest average game score this year. Since 1983, the first year game score data is available, only Michael Jordan, Stephen Curry, Shaquille O’Neal and David Robinson have produced higher game scores at this point of the season. According to research by FiveThirtyEight, if Davis finishes the season at his current level, he would surpass all but one MVP season over the past 30 years: Michael Jordan’s 1987-88 campaign.

Unfortunately, the reason teams can focus all their defensive efforts on the athletic, versatile big man is because there is little else on the team that can do much harm on the scoreboard.

The 1-9 Pelicans have the fourth-lowest offensive rating in the league, scoring 98.6 points per 100 possessions, coupled with the third-worst effective field goal percentage (47.3 percent). Since the adoption of the three-point line (1979-80), only 27 teams have been this bad (or worse) at shooting while providing at least as few points per 100 possessions. Just two — the 2011-12 Charlotte Bobcats and 2014-15 Philadelphia 76ers — occurred in the past decade.

That makes Davis a historically good player on a historically bad team.

Advertisement

Since 2003-04, when a young LeBron James changed the fortunes of a hapless Cleveland Cavaliers squad, there have been five players to rank in the top 100 for season-long game score for a team that was among the worst 100 teams in terms of adjusted scoring margin: Tracy McGrady, Kevin Garnett, Davis, Kevin Love and DeMarcus Cousins.

McGrady produced an average game score of 19.6 for the 2003-04 Orlando Magic, a team that won just 21 games while being outscored by an adjusted scoring margin of 7.3 points per game. Garnett had a 19,4 game score for the 2006-07 Minnesota Timberwolves, who were outscored by more than three points per game after adjusting for opponents. Love’s game score of 18.7 did little for the Timberwolves in 2010-11, a year in which they won only 17 games with a minus-5.97 SRS. And Cousins’s 18.4 game score in 2014-15 was for the 29-35 Sacramento Kings, who had the third-worst SRS (minus-3.07) in the Western Conference that year.

Last season, Davis produced a 19.3 average game score for a Pelicans team that was almost four points per game worse than average (minus-3.56 SRS), which pales in comparison to this year’s squad. New Orleans is now being outscored by more than eight points per game after you adjust for strength of schedule (minus-8.4 SRS), which, if sustained, would be among the worst 50 teams in NBA history since the addition of the three-point line. It’s already the worst in the Western Conference this season. And Davis is producing better than ever.

Advertisement

“I’m frustrated, but I’ve got to find a solution,” Pelicans Coach Alvin Gentry told ESPN’s Justin Verrier after the team’s 0-4 start. “I can’t be frustrated to the point of where I throw up my hands and not anything’s going on. It’s my job. That’s why they hired me here. I’ve got to find a solution to our problems. I’ve got to find a solution to why we’re turning the ball over. I’ve got to find a solution as to why we can’t go into the game with a defensive plan and stick to it. It’s very frustrating, yeah. But there have got to be solutions.”

One solution will create itself when New Orleans gets Jrue Holiday back in the lineup. The Pelicans starting point guard has missed all of training camp, preseason and the Pelicans’ first 10 games to tend to his wife as she recovers from the birth of their child and surgery to remove a benign brain tumor, but is expected to return late November.

Holiday had a breakthrough season last year, averaging 16.8 points and six assists while ranking 13th among point guards in ESPN’s Real Plus minus metric. He’s also a career 36.8 percent shooter beyond the three-point line, giving Davis a reliable shooter to pass to, especially out of the double team.

Even with Holiday back, this won’t be a pretty season for New Orleans. The latest forecast from FiveThirtyEight has the Pelicans winning 26 games this season, their lowest total since 2011-12. Poor enough to limit any support Davis has for the league’s most valuable player award.