Shaun Livingston has mastered controlling, and accepting, an ever-changing role.

It’s the main reason he’s on the NBA Finals stage, taking his place as a significant part of a Golden State team looking for a second consecutive championship. On the surface, that isn’t too far from what he originally was projected to be. Livingston scoring 20 points to lead his team in a playoff victory sounds about right.

Yet, that’s where the story takes its sharpest turn.

And for those who have followed his career, one filled with heartbreak and disappointment and perseverance and triumph, it also makes him maybe the most heartwarming story in the Finals.

Next year will be the 10th anniversary of some of the most horrific injuries in sports — the night when, during a regular-season game, Livingston broke his left kneecap and left leg, tore his anterior cruciate ligament, his posterior cruciate ligament and lateral meniscus. And sprained his medial collateral ligament.

Until that moment — Feb. 26, 2007 — the 6-foot-7 Livingston was a bouncy, explosive athlete. He was a tall point guard, fresh from high school, who reminded many of a young Penny Hardaway. He was the fourth pick in the 2004 draft by the Clippers, who hoped he would be the player to lead them back to relevance.

All of that ended on that night.

Livingston’s outlook had to change.

Playing basketball? He might never walk again. He eventually got back to the court, after several surgeries, excruciating pain, learning to walk, and accepting the fact that, in an instant, all of the athletic advantages of youth were gone.

Before those injuries, Livingston was a phenom on the court. His worth as a man was about to be put on display.

Now he is one of the most thoughtful, level-headed, thankful players in the NBA. Much more substance than show. He’s the kind of guy you want in your corner, especially when times get tough.

He thought so too.

Which is why he has spent every year since the injuries being a guide to those wondering how they will get through tough moments. His story, Livingston figured, can be a useful tale beyond just a satisfying story for himself to reflect on. If his adversity can help someone else, that mattered.

Yet his story needed stability. Good enough to get a chance but not seen as good enough to stick, Livingston played for seven teams from 2008-14.

Signing with Golden State in 2014 changed everything for him. Now he has played two seasons with the Warriors, the first time in his career he has played consecutive full seasons for one team since the first three years of his career with the Clippers.

And now, this.

Livingston’s 20 points Thursday night set a career postseason high for him. He is back to being praised for his length at point guard, his ability to penetrate and score over smaller defenders. He gives Golden State the ability to play Stephen Curry off the ball, which is huge in getting the two-time league MVP on the move to receive passes in spots where he can be dangerous.

After years of adjusting to what life threw at him, Livingston is demanding someone adjust to him.

The view through that lens is mighty nice.