Hey everyone,

I’m curious how many people here are aware of the TWiT Wiki and actually use it. Judging from the number of edits made by people who aren’t me, I’m guessing it’s not many.

In the next few months, we’ll be migrating some stuff to a new server and the TWiT Wiki is among those to be migrated. The MediaWiki software is in desperate need of an update, so we’d likely do that around the same time. However, my question to you folks is… Is it worth it?

A decade ago, the wiki was edited by TWiT staff AND fans alike with additional details on show notes, information on shows, and a lot of other info. These days, I’ve been keeping the show info from getting too severely outdated, but there’s less than a handful of users who make any updates on a regular basis. The list of guests on This Week in Tech, All About Android arena results, and Ham Nation episode info, seem to be the only articles regularly updated by users. Lately, there have been more edits done by spammers than actual users!

So, before I spend a lot of time upgrading it and moving it to a new server, do any other people want to aid in maintaining this? Is there no interest anymore? Should we migrate essential info elsewhere and put it out to pasture? I’d like to hear what TWiT fans think about the wiki.

I doubt that many listeners even know it exists, because there’s nothing about it that I can see in the obvious places on the TWiT.tv site, which is where I’d look for information. I think it ought to be under the About entry on the menu, and also a link at the bottom of the home page and the Podcasts page that says something like “Visit the TWiT Wiki for show notes and information about all our podcasts, past and present”. Then leave it maybe six months to see if the level of activity picks up.

That might get some more activity happening. I’ve certainly used it to look up information about old shows, but I could do with reminding that it has value for newer ones too. Not everyone who gains value from reading a Wiki necessarily wants to edit it too - I’ve only been motivated to do that when I’ve seen something incomplete on a subject where I actually have quite a lot of information.

I use the wiki occasionally, but mainly to see what formats are available in the various feeds.

The list of twit apps has never been much use for me, as anything that may work on my setup is abandoned and no longer works.

Depending on the nature of the site and wiki, it isn’t something you visit unless you need to. Meh it is a resource, not your daily read. As long as it contains useful info it is there for when needed.

It should be mentioned more often in the shows, same as is done for this forum.

As for visibility, well it is clearly there at the top of https://live.twit.tv/ on the right.

However it is not visible on the main domain or even in the “more” collection of extras.

I didn’t realize it existed. I had some hope when I saw this post, but was disappointed when I found it isn’t very well maintained. My specific case is that I binge listen in the car when traveling the state every couple weeks or so. When I get back to the office, I inevitably forget that thing that I heard about in one of those podcast that I was really excited to dig into. I’m old, what can I say? It would be super nice to have show notes for reference. Like someone else mentioned, I search the Security Now! show notes regularly.