The Last Legion – A Weinstein Co. release. Directed by Doug Lefler. Starring Colin Firth, Ben Kingsley, Aishwarya Rai, Peter Mullan, Kevin McKidd, John Hannah, Rupert Friend and Thomas Sang. Rated PG-13.

A minor league Roman adventure, The Last Legion is certainly not in the class of Gladiator or the recent 300. Owing more to those international productions of the 1960s, the film has charm to it, with its screenplay based, in part, on the historical novel by writer Valerio Manfredi.

Twelve-year-old Romulus Augustus (Sangster) is the new “Caesar” of a Roman Empire that’s full of corruption and on the brink of failing. His parents are murdered, and he barely escapes with his life, though he and his guardian and tutor, Ambrosinus (Kingsley), are imprisoned in a fortress on the Isle of Capri. It is left to the soldier Aurenus (Firth) and his men, along with the fighting woman named Mira (Rai), to rescue them.

Though not without obstacles, the rescue is a success, but later they find themselves on the run again. Britannia is their new destination, where allies may help them make one final stand.

Some would say that The Last Legion is a mess, and it is, but it’s a fun mess that never establishes one tone. It’s all over the place, some of it played straight, while there are moments of tongue-in-cheek humor. The way it blends together the Roman period and connects it with the Excalibur legend has an old-fashioned feel to it. There are plenty of battles and the action sequences staged by director Lefler are entertaining with little gore.

The cast members, led by Firth, who, to be quite honest isn’t the first actor one would pick for this type of film, go through their paces with ease. Kingsley actually seems to be having a good time. Bollywood star Rai is a stunner and can handle a sword just as well as, or even better than, the men. Young Sangster brings a little attitude to Romulus.

The production, filmed in Slovakia and Tunisia, was done on a pretty tight budget, though director Lefler gets the most out of it. It should also be noted that the film was produced by Dino De Laurentiis’ Production. De Laurentiis, one of the most famous producers, is, at the age of 88, still at it. He’s had some huge hits as well as failures, but keeps going.

The Last Legion will never leave a lasting impression, but is a good harmless way to pass the time.