PASSING THROUGH was selected to The National Film Registry of the United States National Film Preservation Board‘s collection of films for its historical, cultural, and aesthetic contribution in 2023.

PASSING THROUGH, 1977

“One of the Greatest Movies About Jazz” – The New Yorker, Richard Brody – March, 2022

“….Considered part of the “L.A. Rebellion,” i.e. the independent cinema made at UCLA by students of color in the ’70s, ’80s and ’90s, Passing Through follows a jazz musician’s struggle against the recording industry while in search of a “sound” that would reconcile his personal artistic vision with the sensibility of his community and the political urgencies of his highly repressive historical moment. It is a film that reflects on the political potential of the forms of sociality that coalesce around the jazz ensemble and on free jazz as a form of political praxis.” -March 11, 2022

– read more on liquidblackness.com – read more on Listening to images; regarding the screening on March 25~28, 2021

CUTTING HORSE, 2000

In the old west range wars raged between cattlemen and sheep herders, between ranchers and homesteaders.

CUTTING HORSE, is a modern day western about a legendary horseman named, Tyler who returns home after ten years of drifting only to find his uncle, Doc Pete, and his old friend Sanchez besieged with a host of problems having to do with greed and desire, as they struggle against the obsessions of a powerful California horse breeding family. Tyler sets out to help Sanchez and Doc Pete save their land and realize their dreams of raising a champion Cutting Horse.

– read more on cuttinghorsethemovie.com

AS ABOVE, SO BELOW, 1973

“A rediscovered masterpiece, director Larry Clark’s As Above, So Below comprises a powerful political and social critique in its portrayal of Black insurgency. The film opens in 1945 with a young boy playing in his Chicago neighborhood and then follows the adult Jita-Hadi as a returning Marine with heightened political consciousness. Like The Spook Who Sat By the Door and Gordon’s War, As Above, So Below imagines a post-Watts rebellion state of siege and an organized Black underground plotting revolution. With sound excerpts from the 1968 HUAC report “Guerrilla Warfare Advocates in the United States,” As Above, So Below is one of the more politically radical films of the L.A. Rebellion. ” —Allyson Nadia Field

– read more on LA Film and Television Archive

– Watch Larry Clark interviewed by Ernst Hardy – UCLA presentation

REVIEWS

The Guardian (London)

Museum Screening (partial list)

Tate Modern, London

Pompidou center, Paris France

Museum of Modern Art, New York City

The Whitney Museum of American Art, New York City

Galeries Contemporaines des Musees de Marseille, France

Newark Museum, New Jersey

San Francisco Museum of Modern Art

Los Angeles County Art Museum

St. Louis Art Museum

Los Angeles Museum of Contemporary Art

Hammer Museum, Los Angeles

New York Museum of Art and Design

National Gallery of Art, Washington DC

The Vienna Austria Film Museum, Austria

Museo Reina Sofia, Spain

Filmoteca, Spain

Paris Cinema Tech, France

Eye Film Museum, Holland