Delta Air Lines today announced that the New York operations of its Delta Shuttle flights to Boston Logan will move from LaGuardia’s Marine Air Terminal to Terminal C beginning November 2. The move will coincide with an aircraft upgrade from the E-175s currently used on the route to Boeing 717s.

Terminal C underwent a $160 million dollar renovation, following the slot swap between US Airways and Delta, which was completed in 2012 and included a new SkyClub as well as a connecting bridge to Delta’s gates in Terminal D. The Boston Shuttle flights will have dedicated gates adjacent to the SkyClub with hourly departures between 6:00 am and 8:00 pm on weekdays.

The move comes as part of a shift in Delta fleet strategy employing larger aircraft on key routes. The Shuttle, which Delta acquired from Pan Am in 1991, has been utilizing the 75 seat E-175 over the past few years. The competing US Airways Shuttle, on the other hand, utilizes 124 seat A319 and 100 seat E-190 aircraft. The 717s, which are gradually entering the Delta fleet as part of a lease agreement with Southwest Airlines, accommodate 110 passengers – 12 in First Class, 15 in Economy Comfort, and 83 in Economy – and will be equipped with in-flight WiFi and power outlets at every seat.

“Delta Shuttle customers between Boston and New York will fly on larger mainline jets as we shift operations to Terminal C,” said Gail Grimmett, a Delta senior vice president based in New York. “Customers will enjoy a great Delta Shuttle product with the frequency and amenities they’ve come to expect as well as being able to experience our most updated space at LaGuardia.”

Flights will have all the amenities customers have come to expect from the northeast Shuttle operation, including dedicated check-in facilities, expedited security screening, complimentary snacks and beverages including craft beer and wine. This is in addition to easy access to the new Terminal C SkyClub and all the new celebrity chef-driven restaurants, expanded food hall and fresh markets in Delta’s revamped LGA terminals.

For the time being the other Shuttle flights from LGA to Washington Reagan-National and Chicago O’Hare will continue to be operated by the E-175s out of the Marine Air Terminal. However it is reasonable to expect that these routes may also see an upgrade to the 717 and a move over to Terminal C in the not too distant future.