The New York Knicks have officially waived forward Metta World Peace and guard Beno Udrih, the team announced.

“We are disappointed that it did not work out for Beno and Metta here in New York,” said Knicks general manager Steve Mills. “We thank them for their contributions this season and wish them well.”

World Peace and Udrih expressed displeasure with their standing in New York prior to being bought out of their contracts. In separate instances, each player asked out of New York, as World Peace wanted to negotiate a buyout and Udrih sought a trade.

Udrih joined the Knicks this season, after stays with the Magic, Bucks, Kings and Spurs. He played in 31 games and averaged 5.6 points and 3.5 assists.

As is expected, World Peace was more of an open book during his stay with the Knicks. World Peace went public with the news that he was negotiating a buyout on his personal Twitter account before it became official, and his brother Daniel Artest criticized the team through a series of tweets.

World Peace's stay with the Knicks was short. The Lakers used their amnesty clause to waive World Peace this past offseason, and he landed with his hometown Knicks. In the end, World Peace only played in 29 games, averaging 4.0 points and 2.8 rebounds in 13.4 minutes.

World Peace tweeted this 'Thank You' highlight reel after his buyout became official.

NENE INJURY

Wizards forward Nene has a sprained MCL in his left knee and is expected to be sidelined for six weeks.

Nene was injured in the third quarter of Sunday night's win at Cleveland. The Wizards said Monday that an MRI revealed the extent of the injury.

The loss of Nene is a severe blow to Washington's hopes of making the playoffs for the first time since 2008. He has been the barometer of success when healthy since the Wizards acquired him in 2012. They are 60-61 when he plays, 8-34 when he doesn't.

A six-week absence would keep him sidelined until the final week or so of the regular season.

Nene is averaging 14.2 points and 5.8 rebounds.

The Wizards are 28-28, in fifth place in the Eastern Conference.

'BIG BABY' SIGNS

Glen "Big Baby" Davis, who cleared waivers after negotiating a buyout with the Orlando Magic, has officially signed a contract with the Los Angeles Clippers, the team announced.

He will be available to play for the Clippers in their Monday game in his home state against the New Orleans Pelicans. Davis will wear No. 12 in his first game for the Clippers, but is expected switch over to No. 0, which is the number he wore at LSU.

“It really hasn’t hit me yet,” Davis said. “It really hasn’t dawned on me. Everything’s happened so fast. Today was my first day of just really eating breakfast with the guys. It’s my first experience of bringing back old memories, especially with Doc (Rivers) and Armond Hill and (Tyronn Lue) and Kevin Eastman. They’re a great group of guys and I won a championship with them, so we have a bond.”

Davis was drafted by the Boston Celtics in 2007, spending four years there before joining the Orlando Magic. He won a title with the 2008 Celtics as a rookie, and this move to the Clippers will place him on another team with title aspirations. He leaves a Magic team in the middle of a rebuild.

“I’ve always made the Playoffs in my career and not playing for something was crazy,” Davis said. “Being on this team is some fresh energy, knowing that you can help a team win a championship is important. It feels good.”

CRAWFORD'S COACHES

Jamal Crawford is in the midst of his best NBA season. The path to this year, however, is a rotating cast of teams and coach, as Crawford has played for seven teams and 17 coaches. Yes, that is 17 coaches.

Crawford hasn't forgotten that path, or any of his former coaches. In fact, when put on the spot at halftime of the Clippers' 125-117 win over the Oklahoma City Thunder, Crawford named all 17 coaches, in the order in which he played for them.

It was an impressive feat, no doubt. Almost as impressive as the 36 points on 13-of-20 shooting.

Contributors: DeAntae Prince, The Associated Press