Metta World Peace is coming home to play for the New York Knicks.

The Knicks said the contract has not been signed but an agreement has been reached.

"The team is amazing, the players. I'm excited to play and hustle," World Peace said Monday while attending the NBA summer league in Las Vegas.

"Yes, this is going to happen," World Peace's agent, Marc Cornstein, said. "He's really excited to be joining his hometown team. That's obviously been something that's been a dream of his since growing up in Queensbridge.

"He's just thrilled to be joining the New York Knicks."

World Peace was waived Thursday by the Los Angeles Lakers, who used the amnesty clause to create salary cap space. The 6-foot-7 forward will still be paid the $7.7 million that was owed to him by the Lakers.

World Peace attended St. John's in New York, when he was known as Ron Artest.

In 14 NBA seasons with five teams, he has averaged 14.1 points and 4.7 rebounds per game.

Atlanta signs Brand

The new-look Atlanta Hawks signed two-time All-Star Elton Brand, picking up a player who can bolster their depth in the frontcourt and provide veteran leadership in the locker room.

The 34-year-old Brand averaged 7.2 points and 6.0 rebounds per game last season with the Dallas Mavericks. He played in 72 games, with 18 starts.

While clearly not the player he once was, the Hawks intend to use the 6-foot-9 Brand in a backup role behind center Al Horford and power forward Paul Millsap.

"Elton brings a veteran presence both on and off the court and is a welcomed addition to our locker room," general manager Danny Ferry said. "His ability to play center or power forward will give our frontcourt a great deal of versatility and we think he will be an outstanding fit to our program."

Contract terms weren't disclosed.

Brand was the No. 1 overall pick by the Chicago Bulls in the 1999 NBA Draft. He also has played with the Los Angeles Clippers and Philadelphia during his 14-year career, with averages of 17.4 points, 9.1 rebounds, 2.2 assists and 1.8 blocks.

The Hawks have undergone a massive makeover heading into Ferry's second full season as GM. Last summer, he dealt away starters Joe Johnson and Marvin Williams.

Pistons add top Italian player

The Detroit Pistons announced the signings of Italian forward Luigi Datome and guard Will Bynum.

The Pistons agreed to a $3.5 million, two-year contract with Datome, who has played professionally in Italy since 2003. The 25-year-old Datome is 6-foot-8 and has been a member of the Italian national team since 2007.

Datome was named Italian League MVP with Roma in 2013, averaging 16.7 points and 5.7 rebounds per game. He shot 41.5 percent from 3-point range.

Bynum appeared in a career-high 65 games for Detroit last season.

Rose 'ready to play'

Chicago Bulls guard Derrick Rose tried to erase any lingering doubts about his readiness to play when he told reporters in Madrid that he will "definitely" play in the preseason opener.

"I should be able to play in the first game of the season," Rose told reporters at an Adidas event in Spain, according to HoopsHype.com. "I know I'm anxious right now to play. My health is everything right now, it's 100 percent. But right now, the first game ... I will definitely be playing it."

Rose was criticized both locally and by national broadcasters, during the playoffs for not suiting up at all last season following offseason surgery to repair a torn anterior cruciate ligament in his left knee.

Oden has suitors

Free-agent center Greg Oden will be in Las Vegas this week for face-to-face meetings with officials from the Dallas Mavericks, Sacramento Kings and New Orleans Pelicans, according to several reports.

Oden, 25, has battled numerous knee injuries and hasn't played in an NBA game since Dec. 5, 2009. He is coming off his third microfracture knee surgery in February 2012.

He was the top overall pick in the 2007 NBA draft out of Ohio State, chosen by the Portland Trail Blazers one spot ahead of Kevin Durant.

Elsewhere