I'd say the differences involve how sudden it is, how foreshadowed it is, and how consistent it is with the story so far. A deus ex machina may be very abrupt and completely unforeshadowed without actually being surprising: for example, the tendency for the cavalry to arrive and save the day just as things look hopeless in old westerns, or the Millennium Falcon swooping down to pull Luke's fat out of the fire just before he gets toasted.

On the other hand, a twist may explicitly contradict earlier story elements, and require a further explanation- for example, Commissioner Gordon saving Batman's hide in The Dark Knight when he's supposed to be dead. A twist must be surprising to be good.

Also, a deus ex machina usually resolves or reduces conflict- a twist usually increases conflict.

Hi PTeppic,

The difference is really one of degree - the point at which a plot twist becomes an enormous contrivance in which a powerful but hitherto unknown third party is introduced to shoehorn in a particular outcome (or to achieve something which the characters can't achieve themselves because the writer has carelessly painted them into a corner) is the point at which you have crossed the line into deus ex machina.

"Deus ex machina" as a phrase comes from the ancient Greek playwrights, who every now and again would physically lower a character suitably doled up as Zeus or whoever onto the stage. As gods had to come down from Mount Olympus, the character might be lowered onto the stage by a crane (one possible translation of the word "machina").

Once in situ, the god would then use his or her divine powers to direct the outcome of the plot, effectively riding roughshod over the previous twists and turns of the action. By way of a modern(ish) example, the "Sinbad" and "Jason of the Argonauts" films of the 1970's used a lot of deus ex machina as the gods played out the human action like a game of chess. But it works in that context, as divine intervention is actually all part of the mythos and the backdrop.

A 21st century equivalent might be the old schoolboy cop out of "a big black dog came and ate them all up", but more subtle versions might include The Sudden Discovery Of A Phenomenally Powerful Artifact Which Gets Us Out of That Scrape But Is Then Forgotten About or the Sudden Arrival Of A Mysterious Patron Who Gets Us Out of That Scrape And Then Goes Home Again.

Basically, if your characters remain in control of their own destinies and stand or fall by their own actions and decisions, then whatever the plot twists, you are unlikely to stray into deus ex machina.

Regards,

Peter

I'd say your question stems from a bad definition. What deus ex machina is about is not "surprising" so much as "unwarranted by the story". It's an intrusion into the plot, the characterization, etc.

It's seen as a copout.

Whereas a twist is generally an organic outgrowth of the story. Generally, the twist is the generating idea behind the story.

And while it may surprise the reader, it is usually positioned of fore-shadowed. It's a natural twist, so to speak.

Readers can tell the difference between these. A woman suddenly turns out to be a vampire is often what the story has been setting up, or turns the story into another street, so to speak.

A guy hopeless trapped in a hole who suddenly turns out to be an android so he can jump out is a different matter and read as a copout.

A woman suddenly turns out to be a vampire is often what the story has been setting up, or turns the story into another street, so to speak.

A guy hopeless trapped in a hole who suddenly turns out to be an android so he can jump out is a different matter and read as a copout.

These are both twist endings, in that a character already part of the story turns out to be something you weren't supposed to expect. Unfortunately, a lot of twist endings are unintentionally telegraphed (the turns-out-to-be-a-vampire story has become such a cliché that it telegraphs itself), or make no sense, or are tacked on at the end of otherwise pointless stories. It's actually very difficult to pull off a twist ending that doesn't fall into any one of those categories.

With a deus ex machina, someone or something enters the story -- presto! -- just in time to provide the resolution.

On the one hand (the twist), the character was a vampire all along, the reader just didn't know it. On the other (the deus,) the main character's hitherto unknown fairy vampire-mother appears and waves a wand.

Hi CTG,

How goes it?

Maybe I could put Deus Ex Machina in different way. As if to say that the characters are given a quest, like cast the one ring in the fiery depths of Mount Doom. Readers know that and they ultimate want to see it happening, but they don't see the twist. Golum gets the ring and takes it with him to the end. In there both accounts has been fulfilled. One was known from the beginning and one couldn't be seen happening.

This isn't deus ex machina, though. The fact that the plot had been carefully set up and that no-one but a post modern numpty would seriously doubt for more than one second that the ring would be destroyed is not the same thing. Frodo and Sam stood or fell by their choices. At the crucial moment, Frodo had a wobbler and Gollum had to finish the job, but by that time Gollum was an intrinsic part of the plot and the resolution - he hadn't just been wheeled on at that moment to interfere with, and direct, the all-important final resolution.

By way of contrast, the following outcomes would have been deus ex machina:-

1. The LOTR Pedant Universal Whinge Resolution. As Frodo keels over on Mount Doom, Gwaihir the Windlord appears out of the mists, picks the ring up, drops it into the mountain and then goes home to eat some more rabbits.

2. The Older Forces are at Work Resolution. Right at the point that Frodo keels over, blue-hatted snake-oil vendor Tom Bombadil suddenly bounces up the mountain with a "hey derry whack fol diddle in the merry merry month of May, me hearties!" Confuscating the Nazgul with a series of tawdry card tricks and by magically producing toffees from behind his ear, Tom flicks the ring into the fire and then prances back down the slope like a superannuated fairy, no doubt twittering all the while about how "Goldberry is a-waiting."

3. The Hollywood Blockbuster Resolution. As Frodo keels over, a Great Hero with a Massive Gun (choose from an ageing actor in a vest, Will Smith with an enormous cigar or a detachment of US Marines) drops out of a Chinook, blasting the Nazgul with HE rounds and sassy one-liners. The Great Hero picks up the ring and, remembering some past agony (choose from the orcs killing his Dad, the Nazgul killing his son or Sauron furtling his goldfish), wipes away a tear and drop kicks the ring into the fire, whilst a hastily assembled cast of oppressed villagers whoop like a bunch of retarded baboons.

Regards,

Peter

Hi H-B,

That's a jolly interesting question. Whilst not pretending to be an expert on these matters, I'm going to say that it isn't a deus ex machina, but only just!

Points in favour of it being a DEM are that without the eagles, Frodo and Sam would have been dead meat. Their rescue is highly convenient, if nothing else. In addition, the eagles have (as you say) only made the briefest of appearances to that point and, when they did appear, they did so unexpectedly in order to save the day at the Black Gate, which was also rather convenient. That said, Gandalf's rescue from Orthanc worked well and wasn't at all contrived in my view, thanks to Radagast the Worm Tamer.

But the whole point of the quest was to destroy the ring. Frodo and Sam surviving would have been nice, but getting them out of Mordor alive was no part of the plan. So, because the eagles acted to save Frodo and Sam rather than acting to achieve the actual aim of the quest, I think it falls short of DEM and instead just becomes a workable (albeit somewhat contrived) way of tying up a loose end.

What do you think?

Best regards,

Peter