This paper addresses the problem of the real-time automatic tran- scription of a live music performance into a symbolic format based on XML. The source data are given by any music instrument or other device able to communicate with Pure Data by MIDI. Pure Data is a free, multi-platform, real-time programming environment for graphical, audio, and video processing. During a performance, music events are parsed and their parameters are evaluated thanks to rhythm and pitch detection algorithms. The final step is the creation of a well-formed XML document, validated against the new international standard known as IEEE 1599. This work will shortly describe both the software environment and the XML format, but the main analysis will involve the real- time recognition of music events. Finally, a case study will be presented: PureMX, an applica- tion able to perform such an automatic transcription.

The development of music software is one of the most dynamic fields in the history of musical instruments and music technology. Since the 1950s, music software did not only embrace more and more aspects of music creation and performance, it also spread socially as well as spatially. While music software companies and open source software projects started to work and distribute their applications globally, these applications not only facilitated the democratisation of the means of musical production, they also enabled and constrained new ways of creating and performing music. In this interdisciplinary field of research, it is necessary to understand how music software applications work and which ideas of music making they incorporate. What are the main lines of development in the history of music software? So far, historical accounts of music software development only concentrated on the history of particular applications, companies or communities. On the way to an integrative and comparative history of music software, this paper describes the change and integration of the main paradigms of music software development drawing on journal articles, manuals and tutorials, the analysis of the respective interface design and on interviews with developers. From the score paradigm of the early Computer Music Programming Systems to the contemporary interactive performance systems, music software appears as a dynamic field of knowledge formation, conflicting interests and the result of diverse processes of translation, appropriation and (re-)invention.

The first Music Informatics Laboratory at a Computer Science Department in Scandinavia has been formed and is active with research and education of Master Thesis students, Ph.D. Students and post Doc&#39;s. Our laboratory runs a European Network among 13 universities, the MOSART project (Music Orchestration Systems in Algorithmic Research and Technology). The network is coordinated by Jens Arnspang for Brussels, and includes a 1.300.000 Euro grant. The Music Informatics Laboratory is in close contact with industry in Denmark, in particular in effects and music representation, in score handling and score scanning tools, and in audio based games. The laboratory has a growing contact net within culture and performing art as well.