All about Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Television Series Musical or Comedy.

All about the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Television Series Drama.

Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – miniseries or television film honors artists and professionals for their distinguished work in the field of television and films.

All about the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor in a Motion Picture – Drama.

All about the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor in a Motion Picture – Musical or Comedy.

The Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Television Series Musical or Comedy is presented to an actress for best performance in a lead role of a musical or comedy television series.

Here is the list of winners for Best Actress in a Mini-Series or Motion Picture made for television at the Golden Globes since 1981.

All about the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress in a Motion Picture – Drama.

All about the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress in a Motion Picture – Comedy or Musical.

Here is a list of winners for Best Actress television Series Drama at the Golden Globes since 1969.

All about the Golden Globe award for best animated feature film.

All about the Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture – Drama.

All about the Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture – Musical or Comedy.

All about the Golden Globe award for best screenplay – Motion Picture.

All about the Golden Globe award for best supporting actor – series, miniseries, or television film.

The Golden Globe Award for Best Television Series – Drama is an award bestowed every year to honor the best drama television series.

The Golden Globe Award for Best Television Series – Musical or Comedy is presented to the best musical or comedy television series.

The Cecil B. DeMille Award is an honorary Golden Globe award given to film personalities for making remarkable contributions to the film industry.

The Golden Globe Award for Best Director – Motion Picture is bestowed to recognize and honor excellence of a film director in directing a motion picture

The Golden Globe Award for Best Limited or Anthology Series or Television Film is presented to the most remarkable miniseries or movie made for television.

The Golden Globe Award for Best Original Score is presented annually during the Golden Globe Awards ceremony by the Hollywood Foreign Press Association (HFPA).

The Golden Globe award for best original song is an honor bestowed upon an artist who has writing or co-writing credit for a song that is particularly written for a film.

All about the Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actor – Motion Picture.

All about the Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actress – Motion Picture.

All about the Golden Globe award for the best foreign language film.

All about the Golden Globe award for best supporting actress – series, miniseries, or television film.