On Dec. 24, 1968, Disney's "The Love Bug" made its film debut. The movie about a Volkswagen Beetle with a mind of its own became one of Disney's most beloved films. It starred Dean Jones, a popular Disney star and native of Decatur, Ala.

Dean portrayed Jim Douglas, a race car driver who discovered Herbie's special talents. Douglas' sidekick, Tennessee Steinmetz, was played by Buddy Hackett, and his love interest was portrayed by Michelle Lee.

AL.com File | Disney Studios

Jones, who died in Decatur in 2015, appeared in 13 Disney movies, including three that were 1990s remakes of the originals: "The Love Bug," "The Computer Wore Tennis Shoes" and "That Darn Cat!"

Here are some fun facts about the movie:

Other titles considered for "The Love Bug" were: "The Magic Volksy," "The Runaway Wagen," "Beetlebomb," "Wonderbeetle," "Bugboom" and "Thunderbug."

Courtesy Everett Collection

At the time, "The Love Bug" was second only to "Mary Poppins" as the highest-grossing Disney film, according to MeTV.

Metro-Goldwin-Mayer | AL.com File

Dean Jones' first film roles were: 1956's "Somebody Up There Likes Me" with Paul Newman and 1957's "Jailhouse Rock" starring Elvis Presley. His first Disney role was as an FBI agent in "That Darn Cat!"

Buena Vista Walt Disney Pictures | Wikimedia Commons

MeTV reported that "The Love Bug" "was the fourth biggest grosser of 1969. "After a limited run during the Christmas season of 1968, the Disney film went to wide release in the spring and raked in $51,264,000. Only three films earned more over those two years - "Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid," "Funny Girl" and "2001: A Space Odyssey."

Brian Leadingham | Wikimedia Commons

"The Love Bug" was based on the book "Car, Boy, Girl" by Gordon Buford. Above, a Herbie replica displayed at a car show.

AL.com File Photo

Jones, shown above, played a second role in the original film. He is the bearded hippie in the drive-in scene near the beginning of the movie.

Loadmaster | Wikimedia Commons

The word "Volkswagen" is never mentioned in the film because VW did not give Disney the rights to use it. VWoftheWoodlands says: "Herbie is always referred to as 'the Douglas Special,' 'the little car' or 'the compact car.'" Above, the car from 2005's "Herbie Fully Loaded."

Everett Collection/AL.com

Jones owned a replica of a Herbie car. It is now owned by Hugh Chitwood.

PopCultureGeek | Wikimedia Commons

Disney held a casting call for cars in an effort to determine which model might be more "lovable." "When the crew saw the Toyotas, Volvos, etc., they just kicked the tires and grabbed the steering wheels. But when they saw the Beetle, they began to pet it. That's how it got the job," according to VWoftheWoodlands. Above, a Herbie car displayed at the 2011 Wizard World Anaheim Show.

Wikimedia Commons

Herbie's number, 53, was chosen because it was Don Drysdale's number on the Los Angeles Dodgers. the rusted car above was used in "Herbie Goes Bananas."

Everett Collection/AL.com