Michael Dell might be the most famous business owner to come out of the Lone Star State, next to investor Mark Cuban and Dallas Cowboys owner Jerry Jones. With Dell Technologies’ record first quarter—boasting revenue of $26.1 billion— Austonia published a list of the billionaire’s personal properties including the native Texan’s mainstays in the Austin area.

The University of Texas alum has a sprawling Austin area mansion, a 20-mile drive from Round Rock, where Dell Technologies is based. Known by locals as “the Castle” because of its hilltop perch and heavy security presence, the property also includes 13 bathrooms, a tennis court, indoor and outdoor pools, and views of Lake Austin. Dell and his wife Susan own a total of 119 acres surrounding the eight-bedroom, 33,000-square-foot home, Austonia said. Susan Dell, a fashion designer, is well-known on the Austin social scene. A native Texan herself, she designed the inaugural ball gowns for Jenna and Barbara Bush in 2001, according to Business Insider.

A few miles away, the billionaire has another property dubbed the 6D Ranch, for the six members of his family. The ranch has been the subject of controversy over a $1 million agricultural tax break that he qualified for because his friends and family use it for recreational hunting.

In Manhattan, the Dells own a $100.47 million condo on Billionaire’s Row. It’s a six-bedroom unit in One57, a 1,100-square-foot tower on West 57th Street. With 11,000 square feet, the tech billionaire made room for multiple smart kitchens. And since it’s on top of the Park Hyatt New York, there are in-residence dining and catering services that can be arranged at a moment’s notice. When Dell purchased the property in 2014, the sale set a record for the city’s priciest home purchase, Business Insider reported in 2018.

Sign Up for the undefined Newsletter

Just an Amtrak ride away, or in Dell’s case a little over an hour on his Gulfstream V, is the Boston Four Seasons penthouse. In 2017, Dell bought the 7,200 square-foot unit in the Four Seasons Private Residences One Dalton Street for $40 million. The skyscraper is the third tallest building in Boston and the tallest residential building in New England.

Read more

Residential

Texas

Legendary ranch from “Yellowstone” sold for the first time in 150 years

Commercial

Dallas

The lives and deaths of the Belmont Hotel

Far from the East Coast is the Dell family’s Hawaii compound, nicknamed the “Raptor Residence.” The oceanfront property spans 4.3 acres in the gated community of Kukio, known for being Hawaii’s most exclusive neighborhood, which checks out as Dell’s next door neighbor is Paul Hazen, the CEO of Wells Fargo. In Dell’s hometown of Houston, some 40 percent of existing homes sold went to investors in 2021. One of the biggest investors still buying up single-family inventory was Wells Fargo-backed Mynd Management. With a reported net worth of $27.5 billion in 2018, billionaire

Michael Dell has since doubled his wealth over the course of the pandemic. Today, Forbes lists the Dell Technologies CEO’s net worth at around $55 billion. A recent study by software company Tipalti Approve predicted Dell could become a trillionaire by 2033 when he’s 67 years old.