Harry Harrison (1925-2012) was an American novelist of science fiction, best known for his Stainless Steel Rat character. His novel Make Room! Make Room! was loosely adapted into the film Soylent Green, starring Charlton Heston. Before he starting writing, Harrison was an artist for EC Comics series Weird Fantasy and Weird Science. He also wrote syndicated comic strips. His science fiction was usually full of satire and adventure, although he also used serious themes (like in the case of Make Room! Make Room!).

Harry Harrison’s debut novel was Deathworld, published in 1960, although he had already made significant contributions to the genre beforehand. Below is a list of Harry Harrison’s books in order of when they were originally published (and in chronological order when necessary):

Publication Order of Stainless Steel Rat Books

Chronological Order of Stainless Steel Rat Books

Publication Order of Stainless Steel Rat (Game Books) Books

Publication Order of Brion Brandd Books

Publication Order of Deathworld Books

Publication Order of Eden Books

Publication Order of Hammer and The Cross Books

(with John Holm)

Publication Order of Nova Books

Publication Order of Stars and Stripes Books

Publication Order of Tony Hawkin Books

Publication Order of To The Stars Books

Publication Order of Harry Harriston Standalone Novels

Publication Order of Short Stories/Novellas

Publication Order of Short Story Collections

Publication Order of Non-Fiction Books

Publication Order of Best SF Anthologies

(with Brian W. Aldiss, Robert Sheckley)

Publication Order of Bill, The Galactic Hero Books

(with Robert Sheckley, Jack C. Haldeman II, David Bischoff, David Harris)

Publication Order of The EC Archives Books

Publication Order of The Golden Age of Science Fiction Books

(with James Blish, Poul Anderson, Clifford D. Simak, Fritz Leiber, Robert Sheckley, Roger Dee, Anthony Gilmore, Robert Hoskins, Richard Rein Smith)

Publication Order of Anthologies

Notes: The Saint/Simon Templar series was co-authored with Leslie Charteris. King and Emperor was co-authored by John Holm. Stonehenge: Where Atlantis Died was co-authored with Leon E. Stover. The California Iceberg was co-authored by James E. Barry. The Lifeship was co-authored with Gordon R. Dickson. Science Fiction Collection 001 was co-authored by Fritz Leiber. The Planet of the Bottled Brains was co-authored with Robert Sheckley. The Planet of Tasteless Pleasure and The Planet of the Hippies from Hell were co-authored with David Bischoff. The Planet of the Zombie Vampires was co-authored by Jack C. Haldeman II. The Final Incoherent Adventure was co-authored with David Harris.

Planet of the Damned was also known as A Sense of Obligation. In Our Hands, the Stars was also known as The Daleth Effect. Tunnel Through the Deep was also published as A Transatlantic Tunnel, Hurrah!. The Lifeship was also published under the title Lifeboat. The Planet of the Hippies from Hell was also titled The Planet of Ten Thousand Bars.

If You Like Harry Harrison Books, You’ll Love…

Larry Niven

Terry Pratchett

Harry Turtledove