‘Make room! Make room!’, a book by Harry Harrison, was first published in 1966. It happened when on the wave of the “hippie” movement, the topic of ecological problems and the potential depletion of resources was raised for the first time. Suddenly, many people came up with the idea that perhaps endless population growth combined with booming consummation maybe not be such a successful strategy for the survival of civilization homo sapiens.

The science fiction writers naturally established on the frontier of this movement. Philip K. Dick, Clifford Simak, and many others used their talent to draw pictures of the bleak future that will await us if nothing gonna change. Harry Harrison joined in the process.

But he did not set out on apocalyptic visions of global proportions. His dystopia is different: a lingering, dreary nightmare of everyday routine hopelessness and despair. All action in the novel is set in New York City in 1999, crowded with 35 million inhabitants trapped in it.

Interestingly, the book is clearly influenced by the noir crime stories of the thirties by Cornell Woolrich and Raymond Chandler. It has the same feeling of suffocating coldness and indifference, the corruption of authorities, and the desperation of the people in the face of cruel circumstances. I think it’s not a coincidence that the novel’s protagonist is a tired policeman trying to serve and protect the unserviceable and unprotectable.

Somehow the world survived past 1999 in a slightly more reasonable state than the one described in the book. In 1973 the novel’s movie adaptation was released, ‘Soylent Green.’ And it’s plot set… these days. Yes, in the year 2022. So I guess it’s more than appropriate to talk about it a little right now.

The movie is quite capable of sustaining the grim mood set by the novel. The same tired cop in an outrageously overpopulated New York City. The heat, lack of water. Margarine, soy, and seaweed crackers as the primary diet. It’s almost impossible to cram a big novel into ninety minutes, so the romantic line was essentially cut. The valve of despair and dehumanization, on the other side, was turned on full blast; and on top of it was added radical recycling of any waste (no big spoilers in case you have not seen this classic dystopia). I want separately mention the “scoop units” of the riot-control units, shoveling people into the back of the truck. Its symbolism is evident for those who have seen old black-and-white war documentaries of the middle of the 20th century…

Usually, when you read a book, you co-emote with the protagonist. It is a fundamental principle of literature, and it is typically the author’s way of leading the reader to catharsis. But in this case (am I getting old?) I empathized much more with old Saul, played by the great late Edward G. Robinson (it was his final role).

So what is the final line? So far, things haven’t been that bad — for us. But if you have ever been to the outskirts of Mumbai, Bangladesh, or Haiti, you know that the time of ‘Soylent Green’ is almost at hand.