YB DATO' HAJI MOHD RAWI BIN HAJI ABD HAMID

KEDAH STATE EXECUTIVE COUNCILLOR

Assalamualaikum Warahmatullah Hita’ala Wabarokatuh & Greetings to All .

The State of Kedah is recognized in history as one of the oldest Malay civilization in this region that is estimated to be older than 2500 years which stores tremendous amount of treasures on human civilization and history. We are extremely proud of this old Malay civilization and effort should be made to promote the treasures and history for the good of many. It should also be said that the focus on the effort from the Government under the administration of Dato' Seri Haji Mukhriz bin Tun Mahathir to promote tourism-based economy in the state of Kedah by transforming all areas related to the industry to be more relevant and in line with today’s demand is very timely and insightful.

Based on the available records and archaeology findings, the Lembah Bujang in Kedah old civilization is also one of the oldest civilizations which precede the Borobudur in Indonesia and Angkor Wat in Cambodia. The arrival of Islam in the Malay Archipelago is universally acknowledged and the State of Kedah was recorded as the first state to receive Islam in history when Sultan Muzaffar Shah (1136 AD) who ruled Kedah converted to Islam at the time of his reign. The Langkawi Island is also a world class tourist destination captivating visitors with its rich marine heritage, flora and fauna, as well as the stories of Mahsuri which are packed with history, myth and distinctive mystery. The latest findings on the Stone Dropping which is estimated to be 550 million years old in the vicinity of Banjaran Mat Chingcan is another prove that the State of Kedah has various archaeological layers which should be visited by tourists.

Consistent with the location of Kedah and Langkawi Island together with its surrounding islands which are strategically located, it is not a surprise that it has been the preferred destinations for many to visit.Recognizing the potential of these locations, it is also the Government intention to strengthen and boost the tourism sector in the State by improving existing infrastructures and enhance services to a world-class standard for all visitors.

In conjunction with the Visit Malaysia Year 2014 promotion, support from all parties is paramount to realize the successful transformation of the tourism industry in the state of Kedah which is led by YAB Dato’ Seri Menteri Besar. All the available support under my administration and I will put in our very best effort to ensure the aspirations of this Government can be materialized. In-sya-Allah.

Welcome to the State of Kedah Darul Aman.

Thank you. Dare to Change Towards Transformation, In-sya-Allah.

WELCOME TO KEDAH MALAYSIA

The state of Kedah spans approximately 9, 425 sq. km in the northern part of the Peninsular and together with Perlis, Perak and Kelantan, shares a common border with neighbouring Thailand. It is a fairly small state. Its population is about one million primarily Malay, though significant Chinese and Indian minorities can be seen. It is known as the “Rice Bowl of Malaysia” where its rice plains together with Perlis produce more than half of the country’s home grown rice supply. Its state capital is Alor Setar.

Kedah’s early history can be traced from the prehistoric period to the archeological site of Bujang Valley, the early Maritime trade of India, Persia, Arabs to the written works of the early Chinese pilgrims and early Chinese records, the Hikayat Merong Mahawangsa or known as the Kedah Annals to the Al-Tarikh Salasilah Negeri Kedah. Kedah was also known as Kedaram, Kidaram, Kalagam and Kataha by the Tamils. It was known as Kalah or Kalaha by the Persians.

READ MORE: ABOUT KEDAH