I was reminded about the great song “Don’t Wanna Fall In Love” by Canadian singer-songwriter Jane Child the other day when my friend Dale tagged me in a tweet about it. The song was released in January 1990 as the second single from Child’s self-titled debut album Jane Child, and was a huge hit, spending three weeks at #2 on the Billboard Hot 100 that April (it was kept from the top spot by Tommy Page’s “I’ll Be Your Everything” and Sinead O’Connor’s “Nothing Compares 2 U”). I’ve always loved the song, which is one of my top 10 favorite tracks of 1990.

Child’s rather quirky fashion style back then, which included a hairstyle that was spiked on top with ankle-length braids, along with a rather imposing nose chain piercing, was inspired by her love for African and East Indian cultures, as well as the punk movement. Child wrote “Don’t Wanna Fall In Love” shortly after having relocated from New York City to Los Angeles. The song, along with all the tracks on Jane Child, was solely written and produced by Child, who also sang all the vocals and played all the instruments, except for the guitar parts. Well, she does a superb job, crafting an exuberant synth-driven soundscape built around an irresistible head-bopping groove. Her powerful, emphatic vocals are fantastic, adding more fuel to the song’s exhilarating combustible vibe.

Child has stated that this was not intended to be a happy love song, but more a reflection on the Freudian concept of the pleasure vs. pain principle, generally defined as the instinctive seeking of pleasure and avoiding of pain to satisfy biological and psychological needs. (Wikepedia) In the lyrics, she sings to a man who drives her wild with sexual and romantic desires, while insisting that she’s going to resist his powerful charms to protect her own well-being.

Ain't no personal thing, boy But you have got to stay away Far, far away from my heart, my heart Don't you know what your kiss is doing Let me tell it to you from the start, boy I don't wanna fall in love, no, no Love cuts just like a knife You make the knife feel good, baby I'll fight you to the end, baby You've been hanging around boy And you have started sinking in Ooh baby, you're way out of line now Unaware how this all got started Let me tell it to you one more time, boy I don't wanna fall in love no, no Love cuts just like a knife You make the knife feel good, baby I'll fight you to the end I don't wanna fall in love no, no Love cuts just like a knife You make the knife feel good, baby I'll fight you to the end I learned something about myself Last night with you I knew I didn't want nobody else And your scaring me to death now, baby I don't wanna fall in love no, no Love cuts just like a knife You make the knife feel good, baby I'll fight you to the end