NTB-500 BMI to be on display in Booth A32, Hall 6

NEW YORK, April 20, 2023 – Mitsubishi Gas Chemical America announced Wednesday, its advanced materials business unit, NEXX Technologies, will be launching their NTB-500 BMI resin system during JEC World 2023, April 25 – 27 in Paris, France.

NTB-500 BMI is a prepreg system devised to be used in a wide range of high temperature composite applications and is available on all fabrics and unidirectional tapes. It is designed to provide excellent out-of-autoclave processing utilizing NEXX Technologies’ unique engineered air release channels that provide z-directional breathing along with a very low volatile resin chemistry.

“NTB-500 BMI prepreg is a definite leap forward for NEXX Technologies’ advanced materials,” said Joseph Kidd, General Manager of NEXX Technologies. “For years, there have been limited offerings for high temp prepreg materials. With NTB-500 BMI, as with all of our prepreg products, we can expedite short lead times ranging from a few days to a few weeks. We are excited to expand our offerings to the market.”

In addition to showcasing NTB-500 BMI, NEXX will be exhibiting their unique line of modified epoxy and cyanate ester prepreg materials. NEXX Technologies’ prepregs all boast finished parts that demonstrate minimal through thickness void content (often <1%) and pin-hole free surfaces.

The advanced composites division of MGCA is in southern California with distribution worldwide. For more information, contact Joseph Kidd at jkidd@nexx-technologies.com or stop by Booth A32, Hall 6 at the JEC World Show in Paris.

NEW YORK, April 13, 2023 – Mitsubishi Gas Chemical America announced Wednesday, its advanced materials business unit, NEXX Technologies, will have its prepreg materials used during demonstrations in Eastman Machine Company’s booth at JEC World in Paris this month.

“The opportunity to assist the Eastman team came to fruition this past quarter,” said NEXX Technologies General Manager Joseph Kidd. “Eastman representatives reached out inquiring about our modified epoxy prepreg solutions to demonstrate Eastman’s Eagle C135 system at JEC World. We determined NT-350HT would be a perfect material solution as no refrigeration is needed and the prepreg is exceptionally pliable.”

NEXX Technologies’ unique line of prepregs include modified epoxy, cyanate ester and bismaleimide platforms. “Our portfolio of modified epoxy prepregs don’t require refrigeration or a freezer,” expressed Mr. Kidd. “Not needing refrigeration for transit and freezer storage results in an immediate and significant cost savings.”

Eastman will be holding demonstrations of its Eagle C135 from 10 a.m. to 3 p.m. throughout the three-day show with NT350-HT. All are welcome to see the demonstrations at Eastman’s booth in hall 6, booth D59 and stop by and see NEXX Technologies’ prepregs in booth A32, also in hall 6. For more information, contact Joseph Kidd at kidd@mgc-a.com.

All Attendees Are Encouraged to Visit MGC in Hall 6, Booth A32

NEW YORK, April 4, 2023 – Representing Mitsubishi Gas Chemical Group, Mitsubishi Gas Chemical America (MGCA) announced Monday that its consortium of businesses will be exhibiting at the JEC Composites Show in Paris, France, April 25-27.

"We took this opportunity to gather our advanced materials businesses and unify them under one roof, where thousands of potential customers can come and see synergistic MGC offerings," said MGCA's President Susumu Kagiwada. "Three years ago, we expanded our business into the advanced materials arena while keeping focus on the mobility and transportation sectors. The MGC advanced materials business segments will showcase their offerings aligned with these sectors."

The Thermoset Agents business unit focuses on epoxy resins and hardeners. It will be displaying a three-part process in the production of an automotive part. MGC's Thermoplastics division will be bringing unidirectional tapes and small parts to showcase Therplim, an excellent alternative to PEEK with its high Tg and low melting point. Global Polyacetal Co. Ltd will be in the booth with parts from both Lexter and Reny.

NEXX Technologies, the advanced composites business unit of MGCA, will be exhibiting panels and parts manufactured with its Modified Epoxy and pure Cyanate Epoxy platforms. These resin systems provide prepreg solutions for primary and secondary structures for aerospace such as commercial, military, and regional aircraft as well as spacecraft, unmanned aviation vehicles, high-performance vehicles and Radomes.

Fudow will be displaying parts created with Fudow's Thermoset and Thermoplastic filaments through a 3D printing process. These filaments can be stored at room temperature and are high-heat resistant.

"JEC World is an exciting time for our industry," expressed Joseph Kidd, NEXX Technologies General Manager. "We are looking forward to a very successful show." For more information or to schedule a meeting at JEC, please email kidd@mgc-a.com.

Low-cost, vertically integrated cyanate ester system from Nexx Technologies has an extended out-time and is capable of parts production in and out of the autoclave.

NEW YORK, January 20, 2023 – The Enduredge NTC-425 cyanate ester system is the latest high-performance product released by Nexx Technologies, manufacturer and supplier of prepreg materials and an affiliate of Mitsubishi Gas Chemical America (MGCA, New York, N.Y., U.S.).

The low-cost novel prepreg resin system is said to be unique within the composites industry because it is vertically integrated, with a shop temperature out-time of 90-100 days (<75ºF). Extended out-time enables companies to construct and assemble large-scale structures before the prepreg reaches the end of its processing shelf life. The NTC-425 architecture is also capable of parts production via out of autoclave (OOA) without the need for complicated debulks or curing processes; its flexible processing also enables autoclave and vacuum bagging production methods.

According to Nexx Technologies, Enduredge NTC-425 prepreg creates Z-directional engineered air release channels that offer optimized vacuum bag-only (VBO)/OOA capabilities. Additionally, NTC-425 initially cures at a lower temperature (121ºC), ensuring dimensional stability for parts that will then be post-cured off the tool (freestanding). As a result, the fabricator can then use lower temperature capable tooling. After post-cure, the material reaches a final Tg of 200°C.

“NTC-425 provides excellent mechanical properties along with low moisture absorption and outgassing,” Joseph Kidd, general manager at Nexx Technologies, says. “For projects that may require an extended time to layup, NTC-425 is the ideal choice for its unbeatable out-time. Our vertical integration of cyanate ester resin production will allow us to provide a definite advantage to our customers in both availability and costing.”

Enduredge NTC-425 Cyanate Ester System is available in numerous carbon fiber fabrics, fiberglass and quartz, as well as unidirectional tapes (UD). Ideal applications range from larger structures, high service temperatures and radomes.

NEXX Technologies, manufacturer and supplier of innovative prepreg composite materials, has earned AS9100 certification by meeting the requirements with its comprehensive quality management system (QMS), a standard of quality required within the industries of aviation, space, and defense.

NEW YORK, October 17, 2022 (Newswire.com) – NEXX Technologies passed a stringent audit set by the American Systems Registrar (ASR) that evaluated the company’s research, development, manufacture, and testing of its prepreg materials. The assessment benefits aerospace manufacturers and suppliers with validation of product quality and assurance, with the standard ensuring exposure for growth and expansion across the advanced engineering market.

With AS9100 certification, NEXX Technologies customers can rest assured their product orders will be met to the highest of safety standards, with unbeatable quality performance for modified epoxy and Cyanate Ester thermoset prepreg materials.

“Certified AS9100 exemplifies NEXX Technologies’ commitment to its products and to its customers,” said Joseph Kidd, General Manager at NEXX Technologies. “We continue to demonstrate world class service in next generation prepreg technology. With this latest certification, NEXX Technologies will build on the foundations of unprecedented quality within products and support.”

Enduredge Max Modified Epoxy Prepreg Fabrics and Tapes will be offered through Airtech International

NEW YORK, March 25, 2022 (Newswire.com) – Mitsubishi Gas Chemical (MGC) announced Airtech International Inc. as its global distribution partner for its NEXX Technologies business division. Airtech will be distributing NEXX Technologies’ Enduredge Max lines of modified epoxy prepreg fabrics and unidirectional tapes in the USA, China, Europe and the UK.

“When devising our materials growth strategy, Airtech was at the forefront for global distribution,” said Joe Kidd, General Manager – NEXX Technologies. “Airtech’s position in the composites market with their composites’ fabrication focus makes them the ultimate distribution partner for NEXX Technologies’ Enduredge Max prepreg fabrics.”

Airtech boasts six manufacturing/distribution centers worldwide, making quick and reliable delivery of materials possible. Domestic distribution centers are in California and Tennessee. International locations include Luxembourg, England and China, with additional expansion underway.

The Enduredge Max portfolio of modified epoxy prepregs offers performance and processing characteristics suitable for aerospace, space, Radomes and defense. These advanced materials deliver extended out time and excellent vacuum bag-only processing. They do not require freezer storage and can be stored at room temperature for up to a year without any changes in rheology or processing conditions. “Due to the unique stability of the Enduredge Max products, Airtech will be able to fulfill and deliver at dramatically shorter lead times than legacy prepreg products,” concluded Mr. Kidd.

Enduredge Modified Epoxy Product lines include NT-300, which provides excellent strength and toughness while providing an outstanding surface finish, making it ideal for any parts requiring high cosmetically appealing appearance; NT-350, designed for aerospace secondary and primary structures, space and satellite structures and Radomes; and NT-350HT, which offers high strength and high impact resistance, perfect for Radomes applications.

“As a technical partner to our customers, we recognize NEXX prepregs deliver unique enabling features for multiple applications and processes. Their products display excellent mechanical property laminates with high-quality surface finish, no freezer storage, enabling flexible workflows, reduced waste and lower energy usage, and thicker laminate capability,” expressed AirTech President/CEO Jeff Dahlgren. “As a global supplier to the composite industry, we are convinced this industry-advancing partnership will drive innovation and development, bringing game-changing advantages to our customers.”

NEXX Technologies will be showcasing the Enduredge Max products in the Airtech booth, as well as their own, in the upcoming Paris, France, JEC Show in early May. NEXX Technologies is located in southern California with administrative headquarters within Mitsubishi Gas Chemical America located in New York City. For more information, contact Joe Kidd at jkidd@nexx-technologies.com.

About Airtech

Established in 1973, Airtech Advanced Materials Group is the largest privately owned manufacturer of vacuum bagging and composite tooling materials for prepreg/autoclave, resin infusion, and wet lay-up processes up to 799°F (426°C). Our product line consists of vacuum bagging films, release films, pressure-sensitive tapes, mold releases (non-liquid), peel plies, breathers and bleeders, sealant tapes, vacuum bag connectors and hoses, rubber, pressure pads, cutting tools, vacuum leak detectors, shrink tape, PTFE coated fiberglass, tooling prepregs and resins, and carbon and glass reinforcements. Business focus areas include aerospace, wind energy, marine, automotive, printed circuit board, solar energy and general FRP composites. With nearly 50 years of extrusion experience, Airtech has taken the next step into additive manufacturing with Print-Tech® large-scale additive manufacturing tooling service for composites and the new line of Dahltram® tooling and Dahlpram® purging resins.

We have six locations strategically placed worldwide, all of which offer technical assistance and are ready to meet composite production challenges.

June 4, 2021 (Tokyo, Japan) – Mitsubishi Gas Chemical (MGC) announced its entry into the advanced composites market with the formation of its NEXX Technologies (NEXX) Advanced Materials Business Unit. NEXX operates within Mitsubishi Gas Chemical America (MGCA), a subsidiary in the United States. With over 100 years experience in producing a wide range of chemical and functional material solutions, MGC has now developed a unique portfolio of advanced composite materials for customers of all sizes and market segments.

“This is a very exciting time for us,” expressed MGCA Vice President Shoji Matsukawa. “For many years we have wanted to participate in the advanced composites marketspace. In mid-2019, we realized this goal with the opportunity to move our business into the advanced composites arena while staying in line with our strategy focused on the mobility and transportation market sectors.” NEXX Technologies will also be introducing a range of thermoset and thermoplastic platforms covering the majority of the performance range. “The focus will be on high performance segments covering many aerospace, space and urban air mobility applications for both structural and Radome performance,” Matsukawa continued.

MGC’s new line of composite materials includes modified epoxy platforms that don’t require frozen storage. Customers will see immediate cost savings by not needing refrigerated transit, freezer storage, and onerous out-time tracking. “In addition to eliminating out time restrictions and frozen storage requirements, our prepreg materials utilize a unique architecture allowing for Z-directional breathing, dramatically reducing the need for complicated debulk steps and, in many cases, autoclave processing” shared Joseph Kidd, GM – NEXX Technologies. “As we’ve entered the market with NT-350, customer feedback has been very positive. We’ve seen examples of very thick laminates being produced with as many as 34 plies, and achieving less than 1% void content without complicated debulk or autoclave processing. It’s an exciting time and we look forward to the future and the success of our customers.”

NEXX Technologies Advanced Materials is located in southern California with administrative headquarters within Mitsubishi Gas Chemical America located in NYC. For more information, contact Joe Kidd at jkidd@nexx-technologies.com.