No compromises – this was the motto to develop the new NEXX X.WED3 – to achieve a modern design, flawless fit, durability, exceptional functionality and technical innovation.

Tested to the extreme having done around 200.000 km and more than 60 adventure riders testing in the most remote locations in the world, from Alaska, Croatia, Baja California, Ha Giang to Merzouga desert in Morocco – all to ensure that every small detail is perfectly designed for any adventure.

Thorax injuries are among the most common injuries of off road motorcycling.

For this reason, X.WED3’s shell design presents an unique shape with a softer and rounder base edge in the chin area to reduce chest injury risk from frontal impacts.

Along, the new X Foam crash bumpers made in very lightweight EPP foam, are designed to fit both sides of the helmet and chin area to absorb crash energy, softening the crash pulse and decreasing the risk of broken collarbone.

X.WED3’s shell is made in ultralight, highly impact-resistant X-PRO Carbon fiber, a next generation technology that uses aerospace knowledge together with 3K carbon to obtain a composite construction that makes the shell lighter, stronger, and even more comfortable – in 3 shell sizes.

An entry-level version in NEXX’s X-Matrix 2 special formula (multi-composite fiber) will be also available.

Featuring seven (7) closable air intakes and four (4) exhaust outlets the complex X.WED3’s ventilation system is ready to adapt to all preferences and weather conditions.

Innovation has been the prime focus of the X.WED3 with the new Mid Airflow Chamber. This new patent pending system is created to keep a gap storage all around between the inner EPS and the out EPS, providing immediate circulation of fresh air around the head while exiting the hot air from the shell through the rear holes.

The new visor design includes NEXX’s proven Recoil Visor System with its spring-loaded base side plates that auto-adjust and pull the visor back against the dual-lip window beading for a perfect airtight seal – working independently from the peak fitting system.

Pinlock 120 XLT Max Vision (in X-PRO Carbon fiber models) and Pinlock 70 (in X-Matrix 2 fiber models) are included in the box.

Combining sleek and stable aerodynamics, the strategic peak design ensures both airstreams to pass through and improved performance at higher speeds. The peak’s 3-level adjustment and removal are easy-to-operate through the new anti-rotation mounting screws, made in a fusion of metal and plastic by injection molding. A screwless peak extensor is still included, perfect for riding in low sun.

The new anti-vibration EPS system includes a special rubber trim settled between inner EPS and Outer EPS, allowing micromovements from the inner EPS that is in

contact with the user’s head. This helps to reduce the vibrations in the helmet caused by the air turbulence at higher speeds. The result is a safer helmet, with extra stability in the head and smoother and more comfortable sensation while riding.

Contemporary comfort and carefully selected materials characterize every detail of the X.WED3’s interior. The combination of synthetic leather with large ventilation mesh panels and detailed stitching immediately catches the eye at the front and form a quality material mix for greater ventilation and best insulation.

In addition, the innovative Air cumbs offer unparalleled levels of interior ventilation and comfort. X.WED3’s crown pad is sewn with a special alveolar mesh that creates a fresh air chamber between the EPS liner and the padding.

The interior tissues are made from soft-touch X-Mart Dry fabrics that keep the interior cool and dry.

The new lining F.R.S (Fast Release System) is distinguished by the simplicity with which it allows to remove simultaneously both cheek pads in just a few simple steps and without any tools.

Easy to reach and even easier to operate – Patent pending F.R.S® is the perfect solution for interior cleaning but most importantly allowing rescue personnel to easily remove the helmet with minimum friction in an injured rider’s head, in case of an emergency.

Subtle yet packed with powerful capabilities, the new X-COM3 series can be fully integrated into the helmet, with built-in earphones, battery, cable slots, microphone, and Bluetooth 5.2 technology, available in two variants: the X-COM3 standard, a mid-range version with capable features and the X-COM3 PRO that brings 2.0 Mesh Technology alongside other extra features and world-class sound by Harman Kardon.

Designed to keep your action-camera securely and firmly in place during adventure riding, the new POV Kit includes a top camera mount, that can be used with and without the peak; a removable side mount and a 4-reversible position chin mount, to capture all the action up close!