The United States District Court for the Southern District of California is accepting applications for the position of CJA Voucher Review Clerk. This position is located in the Clerk’s Office and reports to the CJA Supervising Attorney. The incumbent receives and reviews CJA vouchers for payment. This position will remain open until filled. Please visit CASD's Career Opportunities page for more information and how to apply: www.casd.uscourts.gov hashtag hashtag #uscourts hashtag hashtag #sandiegojobs hashtag hashtag #federaljudiciary

The United States District Court for the Southern District of California is accepting applications for the position of Financial Deputy. This position is located in the Clerk’s Office and reports to the Financial Supervisor. Financial Deputies assist in performing and coordinating administrative, technical, and professional work related to financial and accounting activities of the Court, including ensuring compliance with the appropriate guidelines, policies, and internal controls. Financial Deputies perform financial transactions and maintain required records, in accordance with the Court policies and approved internal controls. This position will remain open until filled. Please visit CASD's Career Opportunities page for more information and how to apply: www.casd.uscourts.gov hashtag hashtag #uscourts hashtag hashtag #sandiegojobs hashtag hashtag #federaljudiciary

The United States District Court for the Southern District of California is accepting applications for the position of Temporary Law Clerk. This position is in the Clerk’s Office of the U.S. District Court and reports to U.S. District Judge Battaglia. This position will remain open until filled. Please visit CASD's Career Opportunities page for more information and how to apply: www.casd.uscourts.gov hashtag #uscourts hashtag #sandiegojobs hashtag #federaljudiciary

The United States District Court for the Southern District of California is accepting applications for the position of Procurement and Facilities Specialist. This position is in the Clerk’s Office of the U.S. District Court and reports to the Procurement and Facilities Supervisor. The Specialist performs duties which ensure the court is supplied with the materials, equipment, and services to function optimally. The Specialist assists in performing administrative and technical work related to procurement, day-to-day building management issues, and space and facilities projects. The Specialist ensures compliance with the Guide to Judiciary Policy, established federal procurement practices and Court internal control processes. This position will remain open until filled. Please visit CASD's Career Opportunities page for more information and how to apply: www.casd.uscourts.gov #uscourts #sandiegojobs #federaljudiciary

The United States District Court for the Southern District of California is accepting applications for the position of Financial Deputy. This position is located in the Clerk’s Office and reports to the Financial Supervisor. Financial Deputies assist in performing and coordinating administrative, technical, and professional work related to financial and accounting activities of the Court, including ensuring compliance with the appropriate guidelines, policies, and internal controls. Financial Deputies perform financial transactions and maintain required records, in accordance with the Court policies and approved internal controls. This position will remain open until filled. Please visit CASD's Career Opportunities page for more information and how to apply: www.casd.uscourts.gov #uscourts #sandiegojobs #federaljudiciary

The United States District Court for the Southern District of California is seeking qualified candidates for the position of Procurement and Facilities Specialist. The Specialist performs duties which ensure the Court is supplied with the materials, equipment, and services to function optimally. The Specialist also assists in performing administrative and technical work related to procurement, day-today building management issues, and space and facilities projects. This position will remain open until filled. Please visit CASD's Career Opportunities page for more information and how to apply: https://lnkd.in/e_PRhz4e #uscourts #sandiegojobs #federaljudiciary

The United States District Court for the Southern District of California is currently accepting applications for the position of Calendar Clerk. Preference will be given to applications received by Friday, January 5, 2024. Please visit CASD’s Career Opportunities Page for more information and how to apply: https://lnkd.in/e_PRhz4e #uscourts #sandiegojobs #federaljudiciary

The United States District Court for the Southern District of California is currently accepting applications for the position of Case Administrator. Preference will be given to applications received by Friday, January 5, 2024. Please visit CASD’s Career Opportunities Page for more information and how to apply: https://lnkd.in/e_PRhz4e #uscourts #sandiegojobs #federaljudiciary

The United States District Court for the Southern District of California is seeking qualified candidates for the position of Procurement and Facilities Specialist. The Specialist performs duties which ensure the Court is supplied with the materials, equipment, and services to function optimally. The Specialist also assists in performing administrative and technical work related to procurement, day-today building management issues, and space and facilities projects. This position will remain open until filled. Preference will be given to applications received by December 18, 2023. Please visit CASD's Career Opportunities page for more information and how to apply: https://lnkd.in/e_PRhz4e #uscourts #sandiegojobs #federaljudiciary