PROVINCETOWN — Jimmy McNulty and his husband, Raife Menold, are intuitive by nature. When their sights are set on a goal — in love, in business, or in dealing with HIV over the years — they follow their instincts and go for it, and the numerology is there to prove it. It’s all about the lucky number 11, which was first pointed out by Menold’s ex-wife, Vanessa, a New Zealander.

“We planned a trip to visit Vanessa in New Zealand and go camping for 10 days,” McNulty says, sitting on the couch of his North Truro home, while the coughs of Menold, bedridden with the flu, echo from the next room. Meeting up with Vanessa, McNulty points out, was not all that awkward. “Raife was bisexual, and they were always very honest with each other. We had a great time and hit it off, but it was funny, because anytime we’d go out the number 11 kept popping up. Whether it was on a check or if we looked at the clock. Finally, Vanessa was the one who said, ‘Do you notice how the number 11 keeps coming up? It’s something in the universe. You have to look out for this number and something will present itself.’ She was very spiritual.”

And she was right: the number continued to show up in key ways, such as the parcel and lot number, 11-1-11, of Jimmy’s HideAway, the restaurant at 179 Commercial St. that they opened together in 2007, or even its phone number: (508) 487-1011.

“I remember one time after we had our first meeting with our lawyer to purchase the restaurant, my sister and I went grocery shopping,” McNulty says. “I was nervous about how the meeting went. When we were checking out, our grocery bill total was $111.11. And every time I’d randomly look at the clock it would be 10:11. So when all this kept happening, we considered it an affirmation that we were doing the right thing.”

Not surprisingly, McNulty and Menold exchanged vows on Nov. 11, 2011 — 11/11/11.

“It was at the Red Inn and it was a beautiful wedding,” McNulty says.

The way the two originally met, however, had nothing to do with numerology. “I met Raife one day when he was out delivering mail for the AIDS Support Group of Cape Cod and I was out walking my dog,” McNulty says. “He was looking for a client’s house, so I showed him where it was, and that was how we first connected. It all started from there.”

They started dating after attending the memorial for their friend David Gallerani, the owner of Gallerani’s, a popular Provincetown restaurant that was located where Joon Bar is now. The two were also volunteers at ASGCC, which helped nourish their relationship.

They were also both HIV-positive. McNulty was diagnosed in 1983 and Menold a year later. McNulty moved to Provincetown in 1991. “I came here to die,” he says. “I’m a long-time survivor of 35 years and I’m proud of that — I’m proud to have survived this long. We both just keep a positive outlook, and for whatever reason it’s just not our time to go. I’m here for a reason, which is still revealing itself.”

He was born and raised in North Quincy, moved to Manhattan when he was 21, and got a job as bartender at the gay hotspot Uncle Charlie’s. Despite having day-tripped to the Cape with his family in the ’60s, it was one special summer with a co-worker from Uncle Charlie’s that persuaded him to make the move here.

“The AIDS crisis was happening, and I was losing all of my friends in Manhattan,” McNulty says. “Lots of people were dying around us and it was scary.”

He ended up bartending at the A-House for a year and half and then at the Lobster Pot for 13 years. “I guess it’s a career at this point,” McNulty says. “Honestly, I never knew I was going to open a restaurant, but I’ve been in the business for all this time.”

Menold, who grew up in Morton, Ill. and spent time waiting tables in Laguna Beach, Calif., also knew a thing or two about restaurants. Thanks to a gig Menold had with local real-estate agent Maryann Powers, the two men took a leap of faith and opened Jimmy’s HideAway.

“Raife was helping her with condos sitting on the market, going in and doing some interior design work to get them ready to sell,” McNulty says. “And at the time, we also had a bunch of friends who had opened up their own businesses — Jim Farley and Tom Boland opened Farland and Ken Ross started Ross’ Grill. So we thought, why don’t we take a chance? Raife talked to Maryann Powers, and she had a restaurant that had been on the market for quite a while. We got it for the right price.”

Before the couple took over the property, it was a Vietnamese restaurant. The old yellow sign for that place still hangs on the wall entering the kitchen at their home.

Jimmy’s HideAway is open for dinner Friday through Sunday during the off-season, and also holidays, such as Valentine’s Day, which falls on a Wednesday this year. The restaurant will close after Feb. 18 for six weeks and reopen April 5.

When it comes to being open year-round, McNulty says. “There’s this whole argument that if there were more places open, more people would come, but I don’t see that happening: it’s more places staying open with the same small amount of people coming. If everyone was open this time of year we’d all be suffering.”

That said, their April 5 reopening date is earlier than in years past. “It seems like April is a time when people are coming back to open up their houses,” McNulty says. “A lot of people who have these homes rent them out in the summertime, so they get to enjoy them a little in April and May.”

During the hiatus at Jimmy’s, McNulty and Menold will get some much needed time off. The two are planning to join Vanessa in New Zealand for 10 days, followed by an Atlantis cruise.

“It’s our first gay cruise — how I talked Raife into going on a gay cruise beats me,” McNulty says, laughing. “He said, ‘I host gay P’town — the last thing I want to do is go on a boat with a bunch of gay people.’ But he’s excited now.”