Denton is a city located in Denton County, Texas and the seat of Denton County. With a population of 139,869 as of 2020, it is the 20th-most populous city in Texas, the 177th-most populous city in the United States, and the 12th-most populous city in the Dallas–Fort Worth metroplex. Denton is located approximately 40 miles northwest from Dallas, 280 miles northwest from Houston, 300 miles northeast of San Antonio, 400 miles southwest of Branson, 415 miles north of Port Aransas, 525 miles northeast from Marfa. Denton is mentioned between Season 6 and Season 9 of the series and makes its debut on-screen appearance in the Season 7 episode "I Never Promised You an Organic Garden".

Places in Denton[]

Denton Flea Market

Denton Middle School (the Quiz Bowl's Denton Dendrites team)

Denton High School (football team)

History[]

Season 6[]

In the episode "Returning Japanese", Peggy at the Arlen Bystander tries to trick the editor into giving her a free trip to Hawaii to avoid a traditional (but dreadful to Peggy) Hill family vacation trip to Denton, but it fails when the editor sees right through the trick.

Season 7[]

In the episode "I Never Promised You an Organic Garden", Dale Gribble purchases a bat from the Denton Flea Market in hopes of getting bat guano straight from the source. However, after feeding the bat bugs and prunes, and massaging its colon for two days, the bat yields only a minuscule amount of guano. Realizing that they'll need more bats, Dale, Bill and Boomhauer enter the East Bridge Service Entrance at Bat Bridge and begin collecting bat guano before they are suddenly swarmed by bats and forced to flee in a panic. Dale, Bill and Boomhauer are later seen at the Denton Flea Market as a vendor, attempting to sell their bat guano which they've scooped into jars. Those nearby are repulsed and uninterested.

Season 8[]

In the episode "Stressed for Success", at the first Quiz Bowl match, the Quizmaster hosted the game between Tom Landry Middle School's quiz team and the Denton Middle School Dendrites' team. Jeremy, a member of the quiz team, was drinking coffee and trying to memorize the quadratic equation when he was interrupted by Bobby, who enthusiastically asked him if he was ready to defeat the Denton Middle School team.

Season 9[]

In the episode "Care-Takin' Care of Business", it is mentioned that Arlen High School will play Denton High School in an upcoming football game. Hank Hill and his friends are fixing the field for the upcoming game against Denton behind Groundskeeper Smitty's back, as he has been poorly maintained the field. Luanne Platter tells Lucky Kleinschmidt that Arlen defeated Denton to advance to state.

Episode Appearances[]

Season 6

"Returning Japanese" (mentioned)

Season 7

"I Never Promised You an Organic Garden" (featuring Denton Flea Market)

Season 8

"Stressed for Success" (Quiz Bowl's Denton Dendrites team)

Season 9

"Care-Takin' Care of Business" (mentioned)