Denton County, which is the ninth most populous county in the state of Texas, comprises 27 cities and 18 towns in the Dallas-Forth Worth area. This area offers an attractive and thriving real estate market to investors interested in Denton County property management. The diversity of the area, including both suburban and rural areas, excellent school systems, a bustling economy, and the proximity to Dallas-Fort Worth attract more and more people to Denton County each year. In 2007, Denton County was named one of the fastest-growing counties in the United States, and it continues to enjoy a healthy population growth.

History of Denton County, TX

Prior to the 1840s, Denton County was sparsely inhabited. Native American tribes, including the Kichai and the Lenape, infrequently populated the county, but it wasn’t until Peters Colony landowners settled there in the early 1840s that Denton County grew in population.

Prior to the annexation of Texas, Denton County was considered part of Fannin County. It was established as Denton County in April 1846 by the First Texas Legislature.

Both Denton County and the city of Denton, which is the county seat, were named after John B. Denton, a local lawyer and preacher that was killed while raiding a nearby Native American village in 1841.

By 1860, the population had grown considerably in size to over 5,000 residents. The Denton County Courthouse-on-the-square, which was built in 1896, still stands today and houses numerous government offices and a museum dedicated to Denton County history.

Population

As of 2015, Denton County, TX has a population of 780,612, which is up considerably from its population of 662,615 in 2010. The population is split evenly between the genders, with 50.8% of the population female and 49.2% male.

Denton County lacks a bit in diversity; 79.3% of people living in Denton County, TX are white. However, there is a sizeable Hispanic population at 19%. The rest of the population identifies as African American (9.6%), Asian (7.7%), Multiracial (2.5%), or American Indian or Alaska Native (0.9%).

The median age in Denton County is 34.8 years old, which is just slightly higher than the median age of 33.9 in the state of Texas. Because Denton County is such a popular place for families, there’s also a large number of children; over 25% of the population of Denton County is under the age of 17.

The median household income in Denton County is $50,112, which is just slightly lower than the median household income of $51,704 for Texas.

Geography

Denton County comprises 953 square miles, 878.4 of which are land area and 74.6 of which are water area. Denton County is located in the northern part of the Dallas-Fort Worth area and lies approximately 35 miles from the border between Oklahoma and Texas. The county is on the western side of the Eastern Cross Timbers and also encompasses parts of the Texas blackland prairies, particularly the Grand Prairie Portion. In addition, parts of Denton County lie on top of the Barnett Shale, a geological formation widely believed to be the home of large amounts of natural gas.

Denton County also is the home of Lewisville Lake, a body of water formed in the mid-1950s, when Lake Dallas was merged with a local reservoir, the Garza-Little Elm reservoir.

Denton County is surrounded by the adjacent counties of Cooke, Grayson, Collin, Dallas, Tarrant, and Wise.

:

Education

Denton County is renowned for its highly respected education system, which makes it an attractive opportunity for investors interested in real estate and property management in Denton County, TX.

Denton County is home to three prominent universities: the University of North Texas, Texas Woman’s University (which are both in the city of Denton), and North Central Texas College, a junior college with campuses in Corinth and Flower Mound.

The University of North Texas is the state’s fourth largest university, with over 36,000 students enrolled across the university’s two schools and ten colleges. One of the school’s most notable programs is the Texas Academy of Mathematics and Science, its early admission math and science academy. The academy, which launched in the late ’80s, was the first of its kind in the country and accepts highly promising students from all over Texas in their third and fourth year of high school, housing them on campus. The Texas Academy of Mathematics and Science is only one of five such programs catering exclusively to high school students in the country.

Texas Woman’s University is a popular choice for students studying nursing, having the largest doctoral nursing program in the US. While the school accepts students of both genders, with over 14,000 students Texas Woman’s University is the largest state-supported women’s university in the country.

North Central Texas College, or NCTC, is the oldest continuously operating community college in the state of Texas. While the main campus is in the city of Gainesville in Cooke County, Denton County is home to two campuses. Many Texas students attend NCTC to obtain their Associate Degree before moving on to a four-year university.

The high enrollment rate and continual student turnover at these universities have led to hot rental marketing in Denton County, making Denton County, TX property management a safe and lucrative choice for real estate investors.

Denton County Real Estate

Denton County, TX boasts a healthy real estate market. In fact, the City of Denton, which is the county seat, was named one of the healthiest housing markets in the country in 2015.

The estimated median home price in Denton County, TX was $197,600 as of 2015. That’s quite a bit higher than the median home price in Texas, which comes in at $132,000. Denton County also has a healthy rental market, with approximately 35% of people renting and a median gross rental price of $991 as of 2015.

Investing in property in Denton County, TX is attractive to investors for a number of reasons. The relatively high median income and healthy number of renters offer plenty of opportunities to fill units with reliable tenants. The county is also home to some extremely attractive destinations, including Denton, which was recently named the #1 small town in the US and the most livable city in Texas. It also includes Flower Mound, which was recently named one of the best suburbs in Texas and claimed the #2 spot on Time Money’s “Best Place to Find a New Job” list in 2014.

Looking for Property Management in Denton County, TX?

If you’re on the market to invest in real estate, Denton County is a fantastic choice. The county boasts a high median income, contains numerous cities that are a destination for families and young professionals, and offers a steady stream of renters in the form of students from the area’s multiple universities and college campuses.

Before you decide to buy, it’s imperative that you research the different options available to you in Denton County. With the wide variety of urban, suburban, and rural areas, all offering a unique living experience, it’s important to understand where you should invest to hit your long-term goals. Do you want to attract young families who are likely to live in your property for years to come? Or are you more interested in high turnover student rentals? Knowing your long-term goals (and who your ideal renter is) will help you make the best decision when it comes to buying property.

When you do find the perfect area and purchase a property, you’ll want to reach out to the right Denton County, TX property management company. Property management is a 24/7 job. Having a professional partner to handle the process can make investing in real estate a much less stressful experience for both you and your tenants.

:

We manage multiple properties within the Denton County lines, and our location in Lake Dallas provides us with easy access to the rest of the county, which allows for swift property visits whenever they are needed.