ON 1 July 2013 theRoyal Netherlands Air Force (RNethAF) will celebrated its 100 th anniversary. From one (borrowed) aeroplane in 1913, the Dutch air force has developed into a modern and versatile air arm, with the General Dynamics F-16 as its principal weapon system. In NATO, the RNethAF forms part of the Second Allied Tactical Air Force, and Dutch air force personnel hold important positions in the integrated organization

The crest of the Royal Netherlands Air Force bears the words Parvus Numero––Magnus Merito ("small in number but great in merit").

Operational units during these postwar years consisted of the 322d Dutch Spitfire Squadron, deactivated by Great Britain's Royal Air Force but now reactivated as a national squadron; No. 6 Auster Squadron (light aircraft); and a transport squadron, the TRANSVA, later numbered as the 334th Squadron. In 1948, international developments led first to the Brussels Treaty and, one year later, to the founding of NATO. The Netherlands accepted a Medium Term Defence Plan, whereby Belgian and Dutch air spaces were combined to one air defense area to be defended by No. 69 Group. The Royal Air Force was to take care of German airspace with two groups. This plan marked the beginning of international cooperation in the air defense field in what later would become the 2d Allied Tactical Air Force. It also was determined that tactical fighter bomber squadrons to support offensive and defensive ground operations needed to be established.

In the meantime, the U.S. government had agreed to the Mutual Defense Aid Program (MDAP). It was under the terms of this program that the tactical squadrons were to be equipped. In 1951, the first F-84E Republic Thunder jets arrived; and by 1953, with the support of U.S. MDAP teams, four tactical squadrons had obtained operational status. The buildup was accompanied by organizational changes. Army Air Command Netherlands was split up, forming an Air Defense Command, a Tactical Air Command, a Logistics Command, a Training Command, and an Air Field Defense Command. Two more air defense squadrons were added to the Dutch strength, as well as one more tactical fighter-bomber squadron and a photorecce squadron. In 1956, three night fighter squadrons, equipped with F-86K Sabre jets, completed the buildup.

The history of the Royal Netherlands Air Force during the years 1950 to 2000 is very much a history of NATO, of changes in strategy (from massive retaliation to flexible response), of modernization of aircraft and other equipment. With the fall of the Warsaw pact and the changed world order, new doctrines were needed necessitating different aircraft like long-range transport aircraft and tankers. But also of increasing costs,as a result, the Dutch air force today is smaller bud more suted for the task of today and rady for moost peace keeping operations and NATO deployments