Hi every body

I’ve had a question regarding the whereabouts of the remaining, (if any) Chassis of the Shadow DN 5 later 5B. The DN5 last race in Formula 1 was at the South Africa circuit Kyalami in 1977, the same race that claimed the life of Tom Pryce, who was killed in a freak accident while racing the DN8.

The DN5 had its first race in Argentina back in 1975, or at least it should have had, Jean-Pierre Jarier put the new car on Pole Position, but a broken crown wheel, which accrued on the warm-up lap, prevented the car from taken part in the race. I Brazil some weeks later Jarier hold the lead for a long time, but was once more let down by a mechanical problem. Tom Pryce later won Race of Champion at Brands Hatch in the DN5-2A

The question is now, where are these remaining DN5 chassis today, Jarier crashed the DN5-1A in Monaco and in 1976 he wrote off the DN5-6A

But chassis DN5-4A and 5A the latest raced by Renzo Zorzi in 1977

And what about Shadow’s french connection the ill-fated Shadow Matra DN7-1A. By my best judgements this car was probably taken apart by the end of 1975 and the parts used on the remaining DN5’s in 1976 due to a cut in the budget after UOP withdrew their support. But that’s a gees I don’t know for sure. On the other hand should the car still be around somewhere would someone kindly tell me it present location.

Kind regards

I thought Allen Brown would have responded before now....

A DN5 raced at Laguna Seca last year, Chris Cord’s #2A. Another DN5, #8B, was being offered for sale elsewhere in the USA a couple of years before that. The Matra-powered DN7 (#1A) was in the Donington Collection in 1992, and may still be there. (I really must go back and take another inventory!)

The other Shadows seen at Laguna Seca in the last couple of years are either earlier models (Juan Gonzalez’s DN1) or later (Tom Claridge’s DN8, the DN9s of Rick Rawlins and Phil Schmidt, Peter Stoneberg’s DN11). A couple of DN9s have also been seen in the TGP series in Europe in recent years.

Let's try this again, apparently my posting yesterday didn't go

through. Mel Spillman, my racing partner bought a DN-5 from George Follmer. That car is currently being restored by Marc

Bahner in Ojaj, California. Marc also has DN-5 of his own. Marc

is an ace tub builder with over 30-years experience. He also is currently rebuilding a March 741 for me.

You are right about Don Nichols, he has a massive and pristine

facility in Salinas, I believe where he has at least one of everything he ever built. I have been told by Mel that it is quite impressive.

DMK (from D McK)

I had the same worry yesterday. The secret is there are, for some reason, two current DN5/DN7 threads....

Yes there is

My mistake sorry

here is my reply

Hi again every body

Thank you very very much. To bosari, Gary C and not least David M Kane and David McKinney

To bosari: I will try to locate Tom Claridge, if you have anything closer as country, state or so. I’ve appreciated it very much

To Gary C. Yes I found it my self by coincident, it was the DN3-4A, which has been sold in Canada recently. The car, has actually not race a Grand Prix. instead it serve as spare car in quit some Grand Prix in 1974. As you pointed out it have been sold recently and I will contact www.race-cars.com for details, so thank you Gary C.

To David M Kane

Bullseye: It was just such information I’ve hope for, very nice indeed. I hope you will fax me all your details on phone and Fax No e-mail add and so on to my fax +45 65 94 43 63 and I will return to you as soon as possible, because I really think we can help each other a lot. Could you please inform me which DN5 chassis # your teammate owns. That lucky guy.

Your own project sounds very interesting too, which 741 are we talking about and in which colours do you intend to race.

I’m looking forward to your replay.

My e-mail: c.s.gpr@dadlnet.dk

To David McKinney

I’m very glad that you know something the whereabouts of the DN7 I was close to 100% that the car was taken apart. But lucky it was not, I will Contact the Donning collection Tuesday and I hope they still got it.

Regarding Juan Gonzalez’s DN1, do you have any other informations such as Phone / Fax No. if so please let me know

My e-mail: c.s.gpr@dadlnet.dk

Once more Thank you very much to all of you

Kind regards

Nag, nag, nag. I take one evening off from TNF and David McKinney's on my case straight away.

Actually, I'm so late on this one I'm not sure how much I can add. The race histories of the cars are on ORC (for the DN5s and the DN7) but I guess you already know those.

1A was written off Monaco 1975

2A was sold by Nichols to Warren Sankey in 1987. Sankey crashed it at Sears Point in 1996 and Marc Bahner reskinned it. Not sure if Chris Cord got it direct from Sankey.

3A is a puzzle. May have stayed with Nichols or could be the Jarier/Katz car (see below).

4A/B appears to be the car sold by Nichols to George Follmer in 1992. So I guess that's the Mel Spillman car.

5B appears to have stayed with Nichols.

6B was wrecked in Brazil 1976 and the tub used to rebuild 4A to 'B' spec.

So I don't know which car Bahner has. There is one more DN5 around, a show car acquired by Jean-Pierre Jarier in the late 1970's which has continuous history then up to Howard Katz, of New York in 1993. I've lost track of that one since.

The DN7 is in Donington. Tom Wheatcroft told me he owns it and Don Nichols told me he owns it. That should prove interesting!

I have vistied Nichols' place in Salinas. It is impressive in terms of what it contains but it's basically an old warehouse. Don't expect Aladdin's Cave!

Allen

Thank you Allan

kind regards

Christian Sædder

Sorry Allen

I got your name wrong.

Bullseye2 Dear Allen I hope you wil look on this thread in the weeks to come. Please confirm

Kind regards

Christian

Christian

I am never away for long.

Allen

Slightly OT, but what number was the Embassy / Hill car, and what happened to that?

Originally posted by CSGPR

Yes there is

To bosari: I will try to locate Tom Claridge, if you have anything closer as country, state or so. I’ve appreciated it very much

Kind regards

Dude,

Reach Tom Claridge at TCLAR18@AOL.COM

all the best

Mark Valsi = Borsari

HI Huw Jenj

Graham Hill's car was a Shadow DN1-3A which he reced i 1973 the cars first race was spain that year, it's whereabouts? well I don't know. Maybe Allen Brown could assist here.

Kind regards

Christian

Hi

Could anyone help me with the address on Don Nichols and his place in Salinas and maybe a phone number or a fax No. a Company address or something that can bring me closer to the man behind it all.

Kind regards

Christian

Dear all

David M Kane have notice, that there should be a DN5/8, which only have served as a Show car, The car is located in California, but the car do not have any register anywhere, is there anybody who knows, whether we are talking about F5000 cassis converted to a F1 car with a Cosworth DFV engine. Or in fact it’s really a ordinary showcar

Kind regards

Christian