Check the Nassau BOCES website

In case of any emergency, please check the homepage, www.nassauboces.org.

Call our emergency announcement number

Dial 516-396-INFO (4636). This phone line is dedicated to providing up-to-date information about any emergency situation.

Sign up for emergency closing emails

Nassau BOCES has an electronic mailing list for emergency announcements. To sign up, enter your email address using the form at nassauboces.org/closings.

Connect with us on social media

Visit www.facebook.com/NassauBOCES or follow @NassauBOCES on X.

Tune in to the media

The following radio stations provide information regarding school and/or program closings: WWSK (94.3 FM), WALK (97.5 FM), WKJY (98.3), WBAB (102.3 FM), WBZO (103.1 FM), WBLI (106.1 FM) and WCBS Radio (880 AM). You can also tune in to the following television stations: News 12 Long Island, Fox 5 and Newsday.com.

Refund requests must be in writing at least five business days prior to the first class meeting - – The date of withdrawal is the date/time your written request is received at the Adult Evening Office. It can be emailed to adulted@nasboces.org. or faxed directly to us at (516) 832-2853.

Requests received at least five business days prior to the first class meeting - $75 withdrawal fee.

Requests received less than five days before the first class meeting - – 80% of paid tuition refunded, less a $75 processing fee.

Requests received after the first class meeting – 50% of paid tuition refunded, less a $75 processing fee.

No refunds will be made after the second class meeting.

A request for transfer between classes, semesters, or individuals received after the first class will not be honored and will be subject to the terms of the refund policy.

Additional information to note:

Cost of books is non-refundable.

All refunds take up to 6-8 weeks to process.

In the event a student is terminated from the program there will be no refund.

No personal checks.

No company checks unless a registered vendor.