Last Action Hero is a 1993 action fantasy starring Arnold Schwarzenegger as Jack Slater, an action movie hero whose movie world is invaded by real-life teenager Danny Madigan (Austin O'Brien) through the use of a magical ticket. Despite being directed by John McTiernan (Die Hard), the film was a disappointment at the box office (mainly due to bad reviews and the fact that Last Action Hero was released around the same time of the premiere of Jurassic Park). However, in keeping with the over-the-topness of Slater's world and in addition to the numerous action film tropes and cliches as well as a number of celebrity cameos, there are a near ridiculous amount of firearms also featured in the film.

The following weapons were used in the film Last Action Hero:

WARNING! THIS PAGE CONTAINS SPOILERS!

Pistols

IMI Desert Eagle Mark VII

Jack Slater (Arnold Schwarzenegger) uses a Desert Eagle Mark VII chambered in .357 Magnum throughout the film as his weapon of choice. It is not a .50AE model as previously believed; the weapon was sold by Heritage Auction in 2019, and it was confirmed as the .357 Magnum version.

Bren Ten "Peregrine Falcon"

John Practice (F. Murray Abraham)'s sidearm of choice is a two-tone Bren Ten "Peregrine Falcon", which he uses to hold up Slater.

SIG-Sauer P230

Danny decides to apparently take a SIG-Sauer P230 out of the glove compartment, and uses it to hold up John Practice (F. Murray Abraham) before he pulls it from his hands. Practice takes it from Danny and later tries to kill him and Slater with it. In his audio commentary for Terminator 2, director James Cameron did not agree with having such a young individual brandish and fire a weapon in a film.

Walther PPK

Tony Vivaldi's (Anthony Quinn) weapon of choice is a golden engraved Walther PPK which he uses to stop Danny for the second time from holding up Practice. A similarly engraved Walther appears in the 1990 film Darkman.

Beretta 92FS

Officers in the opening sequence are armed with Beretta 92FS handguns. The officer to the left outside cousin Frank's house is also armed with a Beretta 92FS.

Beretta 92FS Inox

A stainless Beretta 92FS Inox is seen in Slater's glove compartment.

Smith & Wesson 5906

A Smith & Wesson 5906 with adjustable sights falls out of Slater's glove compartment.

Beretta Cheetah

When Slater arrives at his apartment, he fires into his closet with what appears to be a nickel Beretta Cheetah handgun.

Smith & Wesson 645

A Smith & Wesson 645 is seen sitting in Slater's glove compartment.

M1911A1

Slater tosses an M1911A1 off of his personal portable arsenal called "himself" in the opening scene with The Ripper.

Smith & Wesson 669

Slater tosses what appears to be a Smith & Wesson 669 to the ground when facing the Ripper.

Colt Mustang

Slater pulls a Colt Mustang off his ankle holster in the opening scene with The Ripper.

Revolvers

Custom Dan Wesson target revolver

Benidict (Charles Dance) uses a custom .357 Dan Wesson Revolver. It features a muzzle brake compensator on the end of the barrel to dissipate recoil and improve accuracy. It also has large, hand-hugging target grips, and adjustable target sights. Benedict says that caliber of this revolver is 11 mm, but .357 is in fact ca. 9 mm.

Colt Python

A snub-nose, nickel plated Colt Python is carried by one of Benedict's thugs and is taken by Whitney (Bridgette Wilson) after she kills him. Another thug knocks it from her hands to the thug who can't catch, who not surprisingly, doesn't catch it, letting it roll into the kitchen. When Slater is shot with a shotgun in the vest, he falls and picks this gun up to shoot the man back.

Smith & Wesson Snubnose

Slater pulls a Smith & Wesson revolver off his person as he reveals what a walking arsenal he is in the opening scene with The Ripper.

Submachine Guns

Intratec TEC-9

Some of Benedict's thugs in Slater's house are armed with Intratec TEC-9s. The rest are described in "The Funeral" section. They are noted as TEC-9s and not the full-auto TEC-DC9s because of the shroud-mounted sling loop, not featured on the TEC-DC9. They were most likely converted to full-auto for the film.

Kimel AP-9

The closet assassin also holds a Kimel AP-9, a 9x19mm 'assault style' pistol that closely resembles the TEC-9 series of guns.

M3A1 "Grease Gun"

An "uncredited" thug (Al Leong) in the Red Ford F-100 chasing Slater uses a M3A1 "Grease Gun" when Danny Madigan (Austin O'Brien) enters the movie (literally).

MAC-11

When Danny day dreams about Jack Slater (Arnold Schwarzenegger) as Hamlet, he is seen firing a MAC-11 briefly before it switches to a MP5K. A thug in the red Ford pickup is also seen firing a MAC-11 from the right side window. They are noted as .380 MAC-11s based on their size, but then again, Arny and this thug are pretty big dudes.

Heckler & Koch MP5K

Slater is seen using a Heckler & Koch MP5K in Danny's daydream of Hamlet.

Heckler & Koch SP89 (mocked up as MP5K)

One of the thugs on the pickup chasing Slater is seen using an Heckler & Koch SP89 mocked up as a MP5K. One of Benedict's thugs is also seen using an SP89 as well.

Heckler & Koch MP5A3

A SWAT team member in the opening scene is seen armed with a Heckler & Koch MP5A3 fitted with a Surefire-dedicated foreend weaponlight. Another MP5 is seen in "The Funeral Scene".

Rifles

Heckler & Koch HK33A3

The assassin in Slater's closet has an Heckler & Koch HK33A3 slung over his back.

Colt Commando with M203 Grenade Launcher

At the opening sequence, SWAT officers are seen armed with what appears to be Colt Commando rifles, one of which is fitted with an M203 grenade launcher. The Ripper throws one off the roof along with its user after emptying it into the police vehicles below. The weapons' muzzles aren't seen so a 100% positive ID is not possible.

M16A1

A number of LAPD SWAT officers are seen with M16A1 rifles at the beginning of the film.

Ruger Mini-14

The SWAT officer who gets kicked by Slater is seen with a Ruger Mini-14 with black furniture and a Laser Products Corporation (later Surefire) laser sight. This laser sight is easily distinguished by the proprietary LPC "clamp" as well as the actual sight's "bell-shaped" end. This particular Ruger appears to be the same rifle briefly seen in Beverly Hills Cop II. The officer is portrayed by Billy Lucas, a friend and stunt-double to Arnold Schwarzenegger.

Steyr AUG A1

One of the SWAT officers at the beginning of the film is seen armed with a Steyr AUG A1.

Shotguns

Remington 870

One of the police officers outside Slater's second cousin Frank's house is armed with a Remington 870. A man in the back of the Ford Pickup is also armed with a Remington 870.

Smith & Wesson 3000

The thug who is later seen with a Winchester 1300 is first seen with a Smith & Wesson 3000 Shotgun when they confront them at the house.

Winchester 1300

One of Benedict's thugs is armed with a Winchester 1300 shotgun. A female LAPD undercover officer at Slater's station is also seen with one.

Sawed-off Stoeger Uplander

The other thug who aims the gun at Skeezy at the front door is armed with a Sawed off Stoeger Uplander shotgun. The same guy shoots Slater in the vest with this shotgun, before being blasted with the Colt Python snub-nose.

Franchi SPAS-12

Although hardly seen, one of Benedict's thugs is seen carrying a Franchi SPAS-12 when they confront them at the house. The thug is then seen using a TEC-9 when he's taken out by Slater.

Mossberg 500 Bullpup

One of Benedict's thugs is seen holding a Mossberg 500 Bullpup.

Mossberg 590

Several SWAT officers at the beginning are seen holding Mossberg 590 shotguns.

Winchester 1887

In Slater's world, Terminator 2: Judgment Day stars Sylvester Stallone, who is seen on a movie standee armed with the iconic Winchester Model 1887 shotgun.

Machine Guns

M60

Slater is seen riding a horse while carrying an M60 machine gun slung over his shoulder in Danny's daydream of the Shakespearean play Hamlet.

Browning M1919

The helicopter that fires at Slater in the elevator is armed on one side with two Browning M1919 machine gun mock ups.

Short barreled M134 Minigun

A short-barreled GE M134 Minigun can be seen mounted on the side door of the black Toyota Previa Van for a few seconds. Another short-barreled M134 is seen mounted on a helicopter in a continuity error.

Other Weapons

Mk II Handgrenade/knife

Slater pulls out a Mk 2 hand grenade to threaten The Ripper but he calls his bluff and orders Jack's son to pick up the grenade. A hidden blade pops out of the grenade conveniently (because everyone has a grenade knife right?), and stabs the Ripper in the leg. Fact: The grenade prop was composed of three basic designs. A regular dummy grenade, a grenade with a pop-out knife (noted by the obvious knife tip sticking out of the grenade in one shot), and a leg harness for the actor to wear to make it look like the knife was stuck in his leg.

The Funeral Scene

One scene in the film that requires its own section is the funeral scene, where an entire mob family is attending the memorial service of Leo "The Fart". Everyone in the family pulls out a gun when Slater tries to take Leo from the funeral, unaware his body is loaded with a nerve gas bomb. Guns already on the page are list here again to save space.

Smith & Wesson M76

MP5A3

C96 "Broomhandle Mauser"

Beretta 92FS Inox

Intratec TEC-9

Walther MP-L

LAR Grizzly Mk1

The big mobster in front (Sven-Ole Thorsen) carries a LAR Grizzly Pistol longslide.

Beretta 93R

Ithaca 37 "Stakeout"

Heckler & Koch MP5K-PDW

Benedict's Gun Room

Benedict is seen going into a recreation room filled with several rifles and handguns when he removes one of his false eyes.