George receives National Medal of Arts

November 12, 2003 ~ President George W. Bush announced the National Medal of Arts Recipients for the year 2003. The awards were presented by the President in an Oval Office Ceremony. The National Medal of Arts, considered the nation's highest honor for artistic excellence, recognizes "decades of significant artistic achievements," said Dana Gioia, chairman of the National Endowment for the Arts. "Whether they embodied the grace and drama of great choreography, fired the imaginations of children, created unforgettable movies or moved us with the passion of many voices, these inspiring people and institutions have made special contributions to the richness of our nation's cultural life."

The award should be extra special for Mr. Strait, who after 22 years of hit albums and classic country songs has never won a Grammy. But since his 1981 debut, Strait Country, the singer, born in Poteet, Texas, and based in San Antonio, has distinguished himself as a traditionalist in a genre known for frequently courting pop-crossover success. The usually media-shy singer is currently in the Top 10 of Billboard's country singles chart with "Cowboys Like Us" from "Honkytonkville."

"I'm deeply honored to be named as a recipient of the President's National Medal of Arts," said Strait. "To think that my career has taken me from the honkytonks of South Texas to the White House is really remarkable. I'm also extremely flattered to be named alongside the other honorees."

Click on each picture below for a link to the full article(s), and as always go to George's website for the latest Strait News.

GEORGE STRAIT RECEIVES ARTS MEDAL

President Bush and First Lady Laura Bush Present the Honor to Strait in the Oval Office

Washington, D.C. (November 12, 2003) - President George W. Bush has announced that George Strait is one of ten recipients of the 2003 National Medal of Arts. The National Medal of Arts is the nation's highest honor for artistic excellence and is given to those who have made extraordinary contributions to the creation, growth and support of the arts in the United States. The President and First Lady Laura Bush presented the awards in an Oval Office ceremony at the White House on November 12th.

"I'm deeply honored to be named as a recipient of the President's National Medal of Arts," said Strait. "To think that my career has taken me from the honkytonks of South Texas to the White House is really remarkable. I'm also extremely flattered to be named alongside the other honorees."

Each year, the National Endowment for the Arts seeks nominations from individuals and organizations across the country. The National Council on the Arts, the Endowment's Presidentially appointed advisory body, reviews the nominations and provides recommendations to the President, who selects the recipients. The other honorees are Austin City Limits, PBS television program; Beverly Cleary, children's book author; Rafe Esquith, arts educator; Suzanne Farrell, dancer/choreographer/company director/educator; Buddy Guy, blues musician; Ron Howard, actor/director/writer/producer; Mormon Tabernacle Choir, choral group; Leonard Slatkin, symphony orchestra conductor and Tommy Tune, dancer/actor/choreographer/director.