Kirarin☆Revolution (きらりん☆レボリューション, Kirarin☆Reboryūshon?) (lit. "Sparkling☆Revolution") is a Romantic-Comedy Idol anime and manga series. The shoujo manga by An Nakahara was part of the shoujo magazine Ciao, published by Shogakukan.

An anime adaption was co-produced by Japan and South Korea, and the first episode premiered on TV Tokyo on April 7, 2006. The show ran from then to March 27, 2009, consisting of 153 episodes total.

Plot

Tsukishima Kirari, a gluttonous 14 year-old junior high student, does not care about idols or the entertainment world, and only has her mind set on food along with her cat Na-san. One day, after saving a turtle stuck in a tree, she meets Hiwatari Seiji, a handsome and kind person who thanks her by giving her a ticket to a SHIPS concert, a popular idol band.

However, when Kirari shows up to the concert, she finds that the entrance is full of people, so she finds a door for the staff, under the assumption Seiji is a staff member. Before she could get to the door, however, a boy lands on her after jumping out a window. Na-san attacks the boy, until Kirari notices he's wearing a 'STAFF' band around his arm. So Kirari shows him the ticket Seiji gave to her and how she's going to meet him. The boy grabs the ticket out of her hands and rips it, telling her that she and Seiji live in two different worlds.

Even without a ticket, Kirari finds a way to sneak into the concert hall by going through a vent. She then discovers that Seiji and the boy from earlier whose name is Kazama Hiroto are members of SHIPS. Despite understanding what Hiroto meant by "two different worlds," Kirari refuses to stop pursuing Seiji, and she decides to become an idol herself to get closer to Seiji, but also discovers that she truly does enjoy being idol.

Production

There are three seasons total in the anime; the second is called "2nd Tour" and the third "3rd Tour". Each DVD is categorized by stages, thirteen stages to each season, thus totaling up to 39 stages in the anime. There are about three episodes per DVD. There are 51 episodes per season, therefore totaling up to 153 episodes in the anime.

For the first two seasons, the animation was in 2D, otherwise known as traditional or hand-drawn animation. Traditional animation is a technique in which a person draws a frame by hand to create animation (although, in some cases, it is drawn on a computer). In the third and final season, the animation is changed to 3D, or CGI. CGI is another technique in which a person creates a frame using computers to make it look three-dimensional.

Production Staff

Director: Masaharu Okuwaki

Series Composition: Michihiro Tsuchiya

Script: Michihiro Tsuchiya

Storyboard: Masaharu Okuwaki

Episode Director: Yoshinori Odaka

Music: Bice

Original Manga: An Nakahara

Character Design: Yoshihiro Nagamori

Animation Director: Hiroshi Wagatsuma

Sound Director: Shigeru Chiba

Photographer Director: Eun Hee Kim

Producers:

​Hiroshi Tsuzuki

Yasuyuki Uchida

Yukio Kawasaki

Yutaka Saito

Animation Producers:

DU YEOL JUNG

Yasuhiro Higuchi

Background Art: SUN GEUN HAN

Editor: Hiromi Komine

Planning:

​Nobumasa Sawabe

Toshihiro Nakazawa

Publicity:

​Kenji Takahashi

Machiko Ishii

Theme Song Arrangers:

​Masaki Iehara

Yasuji Goto

Yoichiro Yasuoka

Theme Song Composition:

​Tetsuro Oda

Tsunku

Theme Song Lyric Writers:

​Makoto Furuya

Michito

Tsunku

Theme Song Performers:

Theme Song Performers:

Airi Suzuki

C-ute

Chisato Okai

Erika Umeda

Kanna Arihara

Koharu Kusumi

Mai Hagiwara

Maimi Yajima

Megumi Murakami

Sayaka Kitahara

Yuu Kikkawa​

Cast

Main Characters

Koharu Kusumi as Tsukishima Kirari

Akio Suyama (eps. 1-102) and Takuya Ide (eps. 103-153) as Kazama Hiroto

Souichiro Hoshi (eps. 1-102) and Shikou Kanai (eps. 103-153) as Hiwatari Seiji

Chigusa Ikeda as Na-san

Supporting Characters

Aika Mitsui as Gurossan

Kaya Miyake as Sayaka

Koichi Sakaguchi as TanTan

Kumiko Itou as Miku

Masako Joh as Ogura Erina

Masako Nozawa as Obaa-chan

Michiko Neya as Kumoi Kasumi

Miwa Kouzuki as Na-yan

Susumu Chiba as Producer Muranishi

Takafumi Kawakami as Amamiya Arashi

Ayumi Tsunematsu as Tina Garland

Azumi Asakura as Tomo

Chiwa Saito as Kirisawa Aoi

Chomenori Yamawaki as Tsukishima Takashi

Hisayo Mochizuki as Mya-san

Hisayoshi Izaki as Manager Shakujii

Hitomi Yoshizawa as Hitomi

Ito Sakata as Girl

Junpei Takiguchi as Mr. Dancho

Juurouta Kosugi as Tanba Suzutarou

Mai Hagiwara as Mizuki Hikaru

Masako Katsuki as Mizora Seiko

Megumi Shinkawa as Mr. Na

Motoko Kumai as Higuchi Yasuhiro

Naoko Matsui as Chairwoman Higashiyama

Noriko Shitaya as

Todou Fubuki

Mii-tyan