Kirarin Revolution, episodes 27 & 28

(きらりん☆レボリューション) 2006

Kirari (voiced by Koharu Kusumi of Morning Musume!) is a middle schooler who LOVES her food. So much so that it's scary! While girls her age swoon over idols, Kirari swoons over her dad's cooking, and couldn't care less about the life of a celebrity. But when she saves the pet turtle of Seiji of pop group SHIPS and falls in love, she decides to become an idol herself so that they can be together (or so she hopes).

Episode 27:

Because Kirari won the Hot award, she has been bombarded with phonecalls, faxes and emails from people who want to do business with her. The chairman relies on the director (who, you may remember, is a mouse) to make the decision on what to pick out first. After a strange message is left on a piece of toast (since, you know, mice can't talk), it is decided that Kirari will now appear on the talk show, Y Star. But one particular regular on the show, Haruno, is a blabbering chatterbox who won't let guests get in more than two words at a time. This is bad, since they air only the most interesting parts of the recording. An idol is expected to tell jokes and be entertaining, so if Kirari can't capture the attention of the audience, there will be trouble (as Kumoi-san says, "Variety shows are a competition between idols"). It certainly doesn't help that Haruno hails from the same company as Fubuki, and is set on ruining Kirari's publicity attempt. What will Kirari do?

Episode 28:

Mya-san has appeared in the local cat newspaper as a result of auditioning for an animal show. Jealous and yearning for stardom of his own, Naa-san decides he will be a famous somebody, too. When he hears about an audition that guarantees an instant debut (and doesn't have strict requirements - they say even cats and aliens can come!), he's very eager to try. Kirari is working on her first concert at the same time, and so doesn't have time herself to help, but wishes him luck. When Naa-san is more than a little crushed after his attempt fails (he's laughed out of the building before he can even do anything), Kirari has to show him just how much he means to her, and give him a risk-free moment to shine.

Haruno really wasn't very funny. Could be a Japanese thing, could be a Kirarin Revolution thing - it could even be the lousy subtitles. But she was more irritating than anything else. And the Naa-san episode was very sweet :3

Kirarin Revolution, episodes 25 & 26

From now on I will be doing episodes (for this show) two at a time, with a brief idea on what happened, along with my thoughts. In Japan they recently aired episode 97, and the fansubbers are ahead of me by over 25 episodes, so I can't take it slow anymore. I need to catch up!

(きらりん☆レボリューション) 2006

Kirari (voiced by Koharu Kusumi of Morning Musume!) is a middle schooler who LOVES her food. So much so that it's scary! While girls her age swoon over idols, Kirari swoons over her dad's cooking, and couldn't care less about the life of a celebrity. But when she saves the pet turtle of Seiji of pop group SHIPS and falls in love, she decides to become an idol herself so that they can be together (or so she hopes).

Episode 25:

Kirari has Hiroto's shirt from the other day, and comes to his home to return it. She runs into Hiroto, Seiji, and Hiroto's shrill brother as she reaches the door, so they get her to come inside. While Kirari half-heartedly listens to everyone talk about the latest kids collectable card fad involving fish, they hear about the newest and hottest male idol group, RHINOCEROS, on TV. Without thinking, Kirari blurts out that Hiroto is 100 times cooler than they are (and immediately tries to cover up the blunder). Very embarrassed (especially after Hiroto whispers to her that with talk like that, she'll never win Seiji over), she runs home practically in tears, believing she doesn't mean much to Hiroto, either. The day of the final round, Kirari still isn't done, so Seiji goes to buy pancakes to calm her nerves. Hiroto reminds her again to write about Seiji. He says that it may not be tomorrow or next week, but someday Seiji will like her. On the performance front, Fubuki is first, and she has RHINOCEROS as backup dancers. Hiroto is angered by this trick and tells Seiji (who has just arrived with the pancakes) they will go on with Kirari and even the odds. Kirari insists on doing it alone, however, and stops the idea. Still wanting to help, Hiroto pulls in a favor and has fireworks go off during her song. He seems upset that Kirari will probably like his partner even more now (he doesn't say it out loud - it's a thought). At the end, the winner is about to be announced.

Episode 26:

It will be a half hour before voting is cut off, so everyone goes to do their own thing, and come back when the results are ready. Fubuki chases away the time at a window, thinking about her past as a model - she just can't lose to a brat like Kirari. Kirari, meanwhile, is near SHIPS, watching the TV, but can't bear to see the colored bar chart counting the votes, and leaves. She spots Fubuki, and is about to talk to her (she thinks, since they are both idols, they should get along and be friends) SHIPS comes up and tells her that they put in their votes. Fubuki shows them that both of her pets have been helping, too - but so has Naa-san, so she can't brag about how smart they are. "Nojo's Hot Idol Award" of that year goes to Kirari, and Fubuki seems hurt and confused. She's always been #1 at everything she does, so this is quite an ego blow. Kirari gives Fubuki the "royal robe," saying that she loses to Fubuki in a lot of ways, but has her own good qualities - so they are both #1 idols. After the show, Kirari is quickly bombarded with reporters. But Hiroto saves the day, runs off with her, and slips her a work memo for the next day - without so much as a congratulations on her hard-earned accomplishment. The work memo turns out to be a surprise celebration party, and even Fubuki is there, though she's only minimally friendly. While there they also find out that Mya-san is related to Nayan and Naa-san (and that Fubuki and Kirari met the day they were all adopted). Oh, and Kirari and Hiroto get a few moments alone outside, but things quickly get awkward when Kirari falls on top of him, and Arashi makes an appearance, accusing Hiroto of trying to make a move.

Because I'm an idiot, I keep calling that RHINOCEROS group, the HIPPOS XD I guess it's better that way - it's funnier, at least. Lots more Hiroto/Kirari fluff.

Jim Henson's Return to Labyrinth, volume 1

This is the official "sequel" series to the beloved cult classic, The Labyrinth.

Toby is now a teenager, but he's hardly normal. His whole life, unusual things have been happening to him - whatever he wishes for, he gets, but the results do him no favors (and can even make things worse). When Toby finds out that the eccentric Jareth is behind it, he isn't happy, and so the irritated Goblin King seems to back off, leaving Toby to handle life on his own. But things don't stay chaos-free for long, because a goblin steals Toby's homework, and the angry teen decides to follow him through a hole in his closet, leading to the Labyrinth. What he finds there is nothing he could've predicted (or ever understood). And since Jareth has claimed him as a successor to the throne, things can only become less ordinary and more dangerous.

-I really should not have come into this with high expectations - after all, nothing can match up to the wonderful film. I was disappointed, to put it lightly. I never expected perfection, I just wanted it to be handled better.

-Sarah is almost not even in the book - she's barely a background character. And considering the imaginative young beauty became such a bland and depressing schoolteacher, she really should've taken Jareth up on that offer so many years ago.

-The artwork is awkward, blocky and ill-suiting (don't let the cover fool you!), so distracting at times I couldn't pay attention to the story. Like they gave someone a "How to Draw Manga" book and ran with it.

-There are too many characters to digest, on top of a lot of cameo appearances from the movie's original characters. I couldn't keep track. It seems we also have a Cinderella-like character named Moppet, whom Toby will no doubt rescue from the evil clutches of Mayor Spittledrum. I think she's pretty much a human wearing a goblin mask. We'll see.

-The way Jareth talks to and interacts with Toby creeps me out. He's more like a low level pedophile now, as compared to his father-like tendencies from when Toby was a toddler. And he doesn't mention or in any way acknowledge Sarah's very existence! Considering the man was in LOVE with her, I just don't see how he could so casually forget, especially since he's been interacting with her little brother.

If the next volume is better, I can forgive them for this dismal beginning. Any hardcore fans should probably stay away, unless you're the type that simply has to have anything related to The Labyrinth. Or, if you don't really care one way or another, and need some light reading - by all means, check it out.

Kirarin Revolution, episode 24

(きらりん☆レボリューション) 2006

Kirari (voiced by Koharu Kusumi of Morning Musume!) is a middle schooler who LOVES her food. So much so that it's scary! While girls her age swoon over idols, Kirari swoons over her dad's cooking, and couldn't care less about the life of a celebrity. But when she saves the pet turtle of Seiji of pop group SHIPS and falls in love, she decides to become an idol herself so that they can be together (or so she hopes).

All that's left now is the third round, and it might be the most difficult of all. Kabata-san (that blonde, pink wearing weirdo) has composed music, and the girls must each write lyrics to go with it, then perform their work for the final judgement. Fubuki cleverly asked if there was anything else they could do besides what was already required, which you know is a set-up for some kind of unfair "fluff" to make her look more flashy. When the wordless melody is sent to Kirari's company, there is little time to celebrate her second round victory (though she did get in eating some sweets). Upon hearing it for the first time, the only kind of thing Kirari can come up with involves ice cream flavors. And if she's serious about winning, that won't do at all. Kumoi-san and the others tell her that she has to pick a subject that everyone can relate to - and that's love. With that in mind, that night she sits at the little table in her room, and tries to think of something, anything, that involves that emotion. Of course, referring to Seiji for inspiration causes her to squee and blush. She thinks about when she first met him and Hiroto, but it soon becomes all about Hiroto, how he's helped her along and how gentle and kind he is. When Kirari realizes what she's doing, she freaks out.

The next day, Kirari relaxes on a bench in public. She seems to think a small pink visor will disguise her from being recognized, and it backfires at rocket-like speed. Trying to get away from the fan mob, she stops to rest for a few seconds and is grabbed by a mysterious hand. This hand belongs to Hiroto, and like usual he calls her an idiot. They make a getaway on a bus going who knows where, and after taking a breather realize they are still holding hands. Shortly after, Kirari spots the sea, and they decide to get off and really look. Because of where they are, it's decided that it's safe to take off their coverups. Hiroto asks how the lyric writing is going, and she says she's having difficulty because she doesn't really get romance (how quickly she forgets the TWO OTHER TIMES she learned what love was!). But doesn't she like Seiji? She should use those feelings to write the song. Kirari doesn't know how to answer that, and is so distracted they both don't notice when her visor flies away. So when a group of girls come walking towards them, Kirari will be spotted for sure, and that will cause big trouble (especially if Hiroto and Kirari are spotted ALONE, and in a romantic setting, to boot!). Thinking fast, Hiroto pulls Kirari to him in an rather intimate embrace, telling her to stay still until the girls leave. She knows it was meant to shield her face, but the idol can't stop her heart from beating so fast, and tries to reason that anyone's heart would beat this way under such a circumstance. Anyway, she likes Seiji (so stubborn). Then she has one of her freakouts, spins away from Hiroto and lands in the ocean.

Now soaking wet, Hiroto takes her to a nearby house so she can wash off the sticky ocean water. She's angry about it, and reasons that she also can't like Hiroto because of all the trouble he causes for her. But then Hiroto does something super sweet and gets himself all wet too, so she won't be alone. They can't very well walk around like that or get home that way, though, so Hiroto takes them into town into a clothing store. Hiroto buys something for himself, and Kirari tries on various outfits until they find the "right" one. When they DO find the right one, a green and blue dress, Hiroto blushes and says it's fitting (and he also pays for it, along with something for Naa-san). With all of this going on, Kirari just can't lie to herself anymore. She has feelings for Hiroto, and there's not much she can do about it. But the SHIPS member thinks it's high time she confessed to Seiji - after all, he's why she became an idol. And since she's worked so hard to get where she is, Hiroto himself confesses that he's getting very close to accepting her. Kirari just responds with the excuse that she's still not very good, and doesn't think Seiji cares much. Well then, he'll just have to help her - don't know what Seiji is thinking. Kirari decides to hide her new feelings deep in her heart - she'll probably never reveal this to Hiroto, but maybe someday.

At the end of the episode, Kirari is still trying to start her lyrics. She thought love was supposed to be wonderful - instead, it's hard and it's painful. Perhaps she can use the song as a way to confess to Hiroto, without any danger of either boys finding out. We also see Fubuki and her manager. The creepy woman tells Fubuki she can't lose to Kirari and then reveals two mysterious male figures. Who are they and how are they a benefit and sure win?

This whole episode had me going "D'awwww!" - the Kirari/Hiroto pairing is just so cute. Even though I just KNOW they will get together (how could you not? It's following the standard formula pretty closely), I wish they'd hurry up already.

Kirarin Revolution, episode 23

(きらりん☆レボリューション) 2006

Kirari (voiced by Koharu Kusumi of Morning Musume!) is a middle schooler who LOVES her food. So much so that it's scary! While girls her age swoon over idols, Kirari swoons over her dad's cooking, and couldn't care less about the life of a celebrity. But when she saves the pet turtle of Seiji of pop group SHIPS and falls in love, she decides to become an idol herself so that they can be together (or so she hopes).

Round two of three is a fashion competition. A true idol must have good fashion sense, so each participant must design and sew their own special outfit. But it looks like Kirari still doesn't have any sort of upper hand. Fubuki shows up for a "visit," bragging that she sews her own clothes. This contrasts to Kirari, who got a -5 in home economics, and a strange phantom mushroom shows up on whatever she tries to make. After Fubuki leaves, a shrill-voiced (and I do mean shrill) little boy bounds up to them, along with another little boy, and an older boy holding a baby. They turn out to be Hiroto's brothers, who've come to see him because somebody has torn their school uniform, and only Hiroto can fix it. We learn that Hiroto is quite skilled at sewing and household chores, and Kirari is greatly impressed. She wants the great SHIPS member to teach her the ways of sewing. Without Hiroto's real consent, his brothers invite Kirari to their home to practice.

Once they get there, the shrill kid drags Kirari and Hiroto to Hiroto's room (as, according to the male siblings, it was the best place). Kirari is a little shy, as she's never been in a boy's room before, and Hiroto is just embarrassed that a guy like him could be so good in domestics. Kirari assures him that it's actually a cool thing - she herself can't do any chores. But just because a friend is the teacher, that doesn't mean there is room to relax. The first thing they try to make is a pair of pajamas. It takes awhile, and it's rather poorly constructed by the end, but it's passing and doesn't have any mushrooms. Mya-san, Fubuki's cat, mysteriously shows up and turns the TV on. It's Fubuki on a show, and she's revealed a sneak peak of her already completed outfit (it's very shiny and covered in gems). What could possibly win over a dress of gems? Just then, one of Hiroto's brothers presents Kirari with a gift from one of his classmates. It's a shiny strawberry, and a lot of time was put into it. Kirari is moved by this small act of kindness, and decides she now has a design for the contest. After all, though the little strawberry was nothing special, it shined brighter than Fubuki's work by far.

Kirari has not revealed to anyone the overall theme of her costume, except for perhaps Naa-san and Nayan, who were sent on an errand to get some items. They don't even see her until very shortly before she appears on stage. Compared to Fubuki's glitter fabulous little number, Kirari is a bundle of yellow balloons. The audience is confused. Is she lazy? What was she thinking? But then Naa-san appears with a needle, popping the balloons away to reveal a VERY sparkly pink and purple dress. But looks aren't always the truth - the shine is actually from rainbow colored chocolate candy wrappers, which Kirari tosses into the audience. This creative venture causes her to win round two. But will Fubuki allow her to gain anymore ground? Of course not!

Kirari's voice is starting to grow on me, although she still needs to work on laughter, as it sounds really awkward. This Fubuki Idol Challenge series is certainly showing us the pairing the show is going for ;) I mean, hello! They even take us to Hiroto's house where we learn more about him and who he is. We've been told ZILCH about Seiji and his family thus far - maybe that's for a later episode.

Heidi of the Alps, episode 2

(アルプスの少女ハイジ) 1974

Aunt Dete honestly regrets her decision, but else was she to do? She couldn't very well drag a 5-year-old to her job. The pay is good, and without a kid around life is a little more flexible. She leaves the area frustrated and in tears. Whether we will hear from Dete again is unknown.

Heidi is now in a new, strange environment, though she deals with it like many children would. She's fascinated by the smell of cheese coming from her grandfather's cooking pot, and wants to learn how to make some. The old hay storage room at the top of the house is like a special wonderland, a small window giving a view to the beautiful Swiss hillsides. So, Heidi decides that is where her room shall be - caught up in her enthusiasm, "Uncle Alm" helps her make a bed, which they both find to be fit for a king. This young child even manages to make the normally "unsociable" and grumpy old man laugh and feel joy. Afterwards, they enjoy a meal of sausage and cheese.

Heidi also interacts with his dog, Joseph (with amusing results), plays with butterflies, and helps feed the goats. Her grandfather even makes a custom chair, just for Heidi, so she can reach the top of the kitchen table. With such a fun day experienced, the orphan is content, and isn't even awoken during her first night by a violent wind storm.

This just goes to show you that "old" anime does not necessarily mean "stupid" and unwatchable for today's anime fan. It breaks my heart that many people think anything made more than 5 or 10 years ago isn't worth a second's time. Heidi of the Alps has something for everyone to enjoy - even cynical adults will smile at Heidi's antics. I thought this episode was quite adorable, and you learn that she isn't in any danger, nor was her grandfather going to treat her too harshly. Actually, "Uncle Alm" finds Heidi quite smart, and says so. So it's basically just going to be simple day-to-day adventuring. I look forward to it! But, personally? You couldn't pay me to sleep on hay!

Wedding Peach - the one shoujo I just can't like!

Many years ago (I want to say 8 or more) I discovered the world of Wedding Peach. Before watching a single minute of the show, all I'd known were a few random pictures of a perky looking, pink-haired girl and her friends in wedding dresses. Because I am a sucker for cutesy stuff like this, especially in the shoujo genre, I was very happy when I finally got ahold of some episodes.

I guess I'm just a bitter single woman, or a prude. Because, boy, was I disappointed.

The obsession with getting married and getting a boyfriend got on my nerves real fast. In one episode a girl is trying to lose weight and change herself just so she can nab a love. Yes, I know the theme is all about the ROMANCE and MARRIAGE (how can it not be when Aphrodite makes an appearance?), but really ladies, there is more to life than dating and "finally" wearing a flowing dress of romance. If your biggest aspiration is to be a "beautiful bride" someday (nevermind a career or something), all I can do is shake my head. The flowery mush was thrown at me so many times I got sick of it. In other series I've watched, while the desire to have a first kiss, find true love, etc. is usually there (which I can't say I mind), I guess there was so much of it here it was overwhelming for me.

I must've tried watching up to episode 20 six times, so it's not as if I didn't give it a chance. I had a friend watch it with me, and even she thought it was all too much. There is a fandom for this show, though, and most of the reviews I come across are positive. I guess I'm in the minority here. And I really want to like this show, because I adore shoujo and I'm willing to give whatever I find a whirl. This, however, has not made the grade so far.

This post was inspired by an old promotion video for the music group, FURIL. FURIL basically consisted of the voice actresses for Momoko, Yuri and Hinagiku. They released a special album and I guess they did a concert or two as well. I saw this on one of my old fansub tapes a long time ago, so finding it on Youtube today made me feel nostalgic.

Kirarin Revolution, episode 22

(きらりん☆レボリューション) 2006

Kirari (voiced by Koharu Kusumi of Morning Musume!) is a middle schooler who LOVES her food. So much so that it's scary! While girls her age swoon over idols, Kirari swoons over her dad's cooking, and couldn't care less about the life of a celebrity. But when she saves the pet turtle of Seiji of pop group SHIPS and falls in love, she decides to become an idol herself so that they can be together (or so she hopes).

The contest that Kirari agreed to take part in will have 3 rounds (getting two of the three guarantees an overall win). The first of these rounds involves modeling, which everyone believes to be an unfair advantage for Fubuki. How can you pit an "ordinary" girl against a professional model in modeling? But it has to be done. Upon hearing the instructions as read by the chairman, Hiroto makes the comment that if Kirari's involved, there will always be a solution, and Seiji agrees. SHIPS has also been asked to come, the reasons for it unknown. The theme will be announced at the event.

Time passes and we are shown the boys getting ready, dressed in fancy tuxedos. Hiroto doesn't understand, but Seiji calmly explains that they are supposed to be grooms. Seconds later, Kirari shows up in a pink and white gown, unaware of what she's supposed to be until she spots the handsome lads. From the second he sees her, Hiroto simply cannot stop staring, blushing like crazy, and doesn't break out of it until Kirari talks to him (Seiji was blushing, too, but Hiroto definitely had things going through his mind). Obviously flustered and uncomfortable, the fake groom demands an explanation for all this. It's then that Fubuki walks into the room, expressing just how much she loves herself in her own wedding dress. Not surprisingly, the theme chosen is "A Girl's Dream Wedding Couple," and SHIPS must play the partners. It doesn't matter who goes with who to the people in charge. But the winner of the round will be determined by audience members, online, and through phonecalls, so they have to make it convincing. Fubuki decides to be "gracious" and allows Kirari first pick.

You'd think the decision would be easy, but you would be wrong. While at first the most sensible choice is Seiji, suddenly a picture of him in her mind dissolves, and Hiroto takes his place. She just can't bring herself to say Seiji's name, and this really befuddles her. Seeing Kirari's struggle, Hiroto takes it into his own hands and walks up to Fubuki, volunteering to be her partner. His excuse is so that things won't be awkward for Kirari, but it hurts her to see him paired off with the beauty. What's worse, Fubuki now thinks Hiroto has a thing for her fine self. Caught up on her emotions, Kirari can't think up with her and Seiji's "act" will be, even when it's time for them to go on the big stage. But Seiji is ready, and presents Kirari with a ring, which he slips onto her finger. The audience flips and says it's like a real wedding, which inspires the fake bride to throw her bouquet for a grand finale. The hardest part isn't over yet, however - at least not for Kirari. Now it's Hiroto and Fubuki's turn, and Fubuki doesn't believe in a innocent presentation. She has Hiroto pick her up bridal style, and locks lips with him behind the bouquet. Kirari nearly dies inside. While resting in the break room, she can't look at Hiroto, and makes the excuse that she's going to get drinks for everyone in order to leave. Seiji comments that Kirari acting strange, and Hiroto decides to follow.

Unable to defend herself now, Fubuki laughs and says that Kirari obviously admits losing to her and Hiroto's wonderful acting abilities - she ran away and can never hope to win. The ever-kind Seiji tells Fubuki that Kirari has survived many challenges as an idol, and this certainly won't be an exception. Meanwhile, Kirari has an angst fest by the soda machines, thinking about the kiss and wondering if Hiroto likes Fubuki. When Hiroto catches up with her, they compliment each other on their performances. Kirari, flustered and blushing, tells Hiroto he must have been happy to work with such a pretty girl - especially since they shared a convincing smooch. Before he can answer they are interrupted and told to hurry back, since the winner was going to be announced in a few minutes time. As they are about to follow the man who came to get them, Hiroto taps Kirari on the head with a juice can, and tells her they never kissed - they faked it from behind the prop. The reason unknown to her, Kirari feels relief.

Fubuki wins round one by about 100 votes, and fully expects Kirari to react with sorrow. Instead, she congratulates her and proclaims that she'll win next time. Fubuki is furious - how can that girl lose, and be happy about it? Kirari herself isn't sure.

This episode was just so... cute. This is the stuff that I love about shoujo. I'm a little confused, though, as I thought idols weren't allowed to date or socialize unsupervised with a male. I guess the fact that Kirari "kissed" Hiroto for the TV drama should answer my question.

Kirarin Revolution, episode 21

(きらりん☆レボリューション) 2006

Kirari (voiced by Koharu Kusumi of Morning Musume!) is a middle schooler who LOVES her food. So much so that it's scary! While girls her age swoon over idols, Kirari swoons over her dad's cooking, and couldn't care less about the life of a celebrity. But when she saves the pet turtle of Seiji of pop group SHIPS and falls in love, she decides to become an idol herself so that they can be together (or so she hopes).

It's almost time for "Nojo's Hot Idol Award." This honor is given to the best new artist of the year - and Kirari's agency wants her to win. SHIPS won themselves last year - naturally, this is motivation enough. But you can't expect an idol's career to be free of greed and manipulation (at least, behind the scenes). When Kirari and her manager go to do a photoshoot, they see the room is already being occupied - by none other than the famous model, Fubuki Todou. Fubuki has been modeling since she was a small child, and certainly doesn't have any self-esteem issues. To add insult to the fact that Fubuki is actually Kirari's age (yet looks so sophisticated and mature), HER manager, a shady looking woman who seems to have a history with Kumoi-san and the chairman, announces that Fubuki will be debuting as an idol the next week. This means she can take part in the Nojo award competition. And nobody who opposes the Higashiyama company has ever done well.

Keeping with the tradition of characters having a pet cat, Fubuki has one of her own. A cat named Mya-san, along with a bird named "Bird Year" (!?). Both are horrible little trouble makers who see no problem with throwing a banana at poor Naa-san and Nayan (who had followed them). Fubuki also doesn't think much of Kirari - is she really an idol? Are they really the same age? Her body doesn't have much to it, and her singing is bad. It annoys the black-haired beauty that someone like her could be a #1 idol. SHIPS, who was also there (they came to get someone's autograph), tells her that being so direct will hurt Kirari's feelings. This doesn't help at all.

Through her own photoshoot, which follows after, Kirari tries to show Fubuki what she believes an idol must be. Someone who wants to make people happy, someone who puts on a smile and makes people smile. It doesn't work - Fubuki finds her approach stupid. Anyone can smile. And it's rude to stuff your face (Kirari's photoshoot involved eating). She will destroy Kirari's career and teach her a lesson.

Finally, the time has come for "Nojo's Hot Idol Award." Everyone you expect is there - Erina, Arashi, Fubuki, Kirari, Mochida, and two unknown others. In the end, it is no surprise that it boils down to Kirari and Fubuki. But it is a surprise that while Fubuki did in fact win, Kirari also won. It's a double award! Stubborn and unwilling to "share" with an un-sexy chow hound, Fubuki challenges Kirari to see who's really the top new idol. Unable to back away, and not wanting to let down everyone, she accepts.

Hmm... could be interesting :)

Kirarin Revolution, episode 20

(きらりん☆レボリューション) 2006

Kirari (voiced by Koharu Kusumi of Morning Musume!) is a middle schooler who LOVES her food. So much so that it's scary! While girls her age swoon over idols, Kirari swoons over her dad's cooking, and couldn't care less about the life of a celebrity. But when she saves the pet turtle of Seiji of pop group SHIPS and falls in love, she decides to become an idol herself so that they can be together (or so she hopes).

Kirari and SHIPS have just wrapped up their special radio show, this time around featuring members of (real life) pop group C-ute. As Kirari enjoys a refreshing drink, she brings up the fact that her older brother will be home today. He's been in America for a year, studying to be an actor. Hiroto and Seiji are both shocked that she even had a sibling, and so she explains her family situation. It's just her, her dad, and Naa-san. Her grandma lives nearby, but her mom left when she was small. The reason wasn't given, but Kirari says that everything is fine, and excuses herself to go home.

When she gets to the gate in front of her home, a strange boy with blonde hair approaches her, dressed like a pizza delivery boy. He says it's just for her, but when she opens the box, a cat is inside, and there is no food to be found. Watching her confusion, he laughs and calls her a fool. Some random jerk? No - the pizza guy reveals himself to be her brother, Subaru (the car?). The cat is Subaru's pet, found in New York where he schools. His name is Mr. Na, which I can only assume is an American counterpart of Naa-san!

Absolutely thrilled to have his two children home, Kirari's dad prepares a feast of all their favorite dishes. While watching them eat, the adults (here meaning the dad and grandma) comment that Kirari and Subaru look identical when you put them next to each other. It's always been so - even in the way they eat and react. When the topic of life in America is brought up, Subaru brags (in a strained voice) that he was complimented by Steven Spielburg at an audition, which is met with great awe. Grandma interrupts to turn the TV on, revealing Kirari singing in one of her music videos. Subaru is absolutely struck with this. Since he wasn't in the country, he didn't know, and nobody had told him. Instead of feeling happy for his sister, he is frustrated and angry. How could his idiotic, pig-outing sister become an idol? That night he has Mr. Na steal her schedule book, and when he sees she's the real deal, he's furious. His dream was to debut in America, but he was kicked out of the school! And now SHE gets to be successful! How does that work? Recalling the dinner discussion about their near twin-ness, an idea is formed.

The next morning, Kirari wakes up and looks at her book. The hours of her planned activities are different, but she doesn't think much of it. Adding to this, her manager calls in sick, so if something was amiss, there won't be anyone to correct the changes and set her straight. With the supposed extra time, Kirari decides to do something for her brother. Meanwhile, Subaru has put on the finishing touches with his wig, makeup, and dress. Mr. Na has been dolled up to look like Naa-san. This impersonation thing should be a snap! The only little snaffu that occurs is Kirari turning the TV on. When she sees HERSELF on a LIVE broadcast, of course there is panic. Confronting her sibling at the studio leads to a high speed chase, ending with SHIPS spotting two Kiraris and a bucket of ice water.

The ice water that fell on the young idol makes her sick, and Subaru, SHIPS, and her dad are at her bedside. Subaru laments his guilt for being a lousy big brother and cries when they find what Kirari was making for him - a glittering crown, since he is her "Prince Subaru." Because she isn't well, unless she can really push herself, they'll have to cancel her Music Studio appearance. Subaru steps in and says he'll once again play the part - just leave it to him. They didn't count on the fact that Subaru had never heard any of her songs, and thus, couldn't sing. Pretending to be sick, he tries to get out of it, right onstage. The pain of possibly ruining his little sister's career causes him to cry, but the oblivious fans, believing the lie because of "her" deep voice, let things slide. Later, at the airport, Subaru puts on the little crown, and Kirari says she wants to perform with him someday.

How can a person get sick from a bucket of water falling on them?! I'm curious, because unless that water was SERIOUSLY cold, or it had some kind of weird thing in it, I don't see how that's possible. Anybody is free to correct me on this. At the very least, Subaru didn't come back dressed in a cowboy hat or Hawaiian shirt, saying random, strange English phrases. And Mr. Na didn't have a huge gaijin cat nose or something. So that's a step in the not typical direction ;D I don't know what I'm saying, sorry.