Kirarin Revolution, episodes 55 & 56

(きらりん☆レボリューション) 2006

Kirari (voiced by Koharu Kusumi of Morning Musume!) is a middle schooler who LOVES her food. So much so that it's scary! While girls her age swoon over idols, Kirari swoons over her dad's cooking, and couldn't care less about the life of a celebrity. But when she saves the pet turtle of Seiji of pop group SHIPS and falls in love, she decides to become an idol herself so that they can be together (or so she hopes).

Episode 55:

Infamous for her phantom mushrooms appearing in any homemade thing she tries, when a fashion magazine asks Kirari to do a monthly manga series, that's all she can draw. She can't possibly pull seasoned skill out of her butt in less than 2 days, so when she hears a famous mangaka lives not too far from her home, she decides to go there for help. The poor woman, however, is not as glamourous as she appears on TV. Overworked and ruffled in appearance, she mistakes Naa-san's work for Kirari's and hires her as an assistant. Big mistake. It seems Kirari can't do anything right! But the mangaka has a deadline, and it can't be missed.

Episode 56:

Kirari isn't new anymore, and sooner or later somebody will be following in her footsteps. Perhaps sooner than they think - a stubborn, pink-haired girl named Izumi Amakawa has been phoning agencies demanding to debut as an idol. Eventually she stumbles into the Higashiyama president's office, and the president admires her goal to one-up Kirari. But, as there was an agreement that the fight will be fairly played from now on, Big H won't let her in. However, if Izumi can indeed prove that she is better, they will seriously hire her. She doesn't waste time in literally bumping into Kirari at a job, AND instantly developing a crush on Hiroto when Kirari introduces them. Why do Izumi's plans involve winning over Kirari's almost-kinda crush with rumors and lies? What will Kirari do, now that she thinks Hiroto has a secret girlfriend?

Heh, episode 55 reminds me of Daa! Daa! Daa!, where there is also a mangaka running around - she was also tired, overworked, and a tad crazy. She appeared frequently though, not just a "one trick pony." They even gave her a brother. Funny, I don't think I've ever seen a MALE mangaka in an anime before. Wonder why that is?

Oooh, things are getting juicy now! But I have to say, the "We started showering together" line really threw me. Is this really something you say in a kids show?! Izumi is very... uh... unshy about romance compared to Kirari. I think she's much worse than Erina could ever be - Erina is an amateur in comparison. I was confused at first about how the heck this was supposed to prove that she's a better idol than Kirari, but then they said she's doing it to get her name in the papers, thus making it easier to debut. At least we got some really cute Kirari/Hiroto moments.