Name

Johnson, Kelly Gender: M

Birthname Clarence Leonard "Kelly" Johnson born on 27 February 1910 Place Ishpeming, Michigan, 46n29, 87w40 Timezone CST h6w (is standard time) Data source

Date w/o time

Rodden Rating X Collector: Starkman

Astrology data 08°17'

Biography

American aeronautical and systems engineer. He is recognized for his contributions to a series of important aircraft designs, most notably the Lockheed U-2 and SR-71 Blackbird. Besides the first production aircraft to exceed Mach 3, he also produced the first fighter capable of Mach 2, the United States' first operational jet fighter, as well as the first fighter to exceed 400 mph, and many other contributions to various aircraft. As a member and first team leader of the Lockheed Skunk Works, Johnson worked for more than four decades and is said to have been an "organizing genius". He played a leading role in the design of over forty aircraft, including several honored with the prestigious Collier Trophy, countless medals and honors including, the Medal of Freedom, National Medal of Science, and National Security Medal. He was acquiring a reputation as one of the most talented and prolific aircraft design engineers in the history of aviation. In 2003, as part of its commemoration of the 100th anniversary of the Wright Brothers' flight, Aviation Week & Space Technology ranked Johnson eighth on its list of the top 100 "most important, most interesting, and most influential people" in the first century of aerospace.

Johnson died on 21 December 1990 at the age of 80 at St. Joseph Medical Center in Burbank after physical deterioration and the advancement of senility, caused by the hardening of his arteries connecting to his brain.

Link to Wikipedia biography

Events

Death by Disease 21 December 1990

chart Placidus Equal_H.

Source Notes

Starkman quotes Michigan Church Records, birth time unknown. Starkman rectified to 00.08.16 CST Asc 22Sco29'

Categories

Vocation : Engineer : Aerospace

Vocation : Travel : Aviation field

Vocation : Travel : Pilot/ private

Notable : Extraordinary Talents : For Creativity

Notable : Awards : Medals