The Miami Book Fair at Miami Dade College, in collaboration with The National Poetry Series, offer the biennial award Paz Prize for Poetry.

Named in honor of the late Nobel Prize-winning poet, Octavio Paz, the award recognizes a previously unpublished poetry book written in Spanish by a poet residing in the U.S. The Prize recognizes book-length manuscripts of poetry written in Spanish. The winning work is translated into English and published in a bilingual edition by the prestigious independent publisher Akashic Books, and its author receives a $2,000 cash prize.

More than 500 poets from across the U.S. have entered the literary contest in the past. In addition to the cash prize, winners are invited to read at Miami Book Fair, and have the opportunity to present their books at other events throughout the country.

The next submission period will open on May 1st, 2024 and will end on June 15th, 2024.

Winner of the 2022 Paz Prize for Poetry

Miami Dade College’s (MDC) acclaimed Miami Book Fair, in collaboration with the National Poetry Series, is pleased to announce the 2022 Paz Prize for Poetry winner: Cuban poet Oneyda Gonzalez for her manuscript El lazo infinito. Gonzalez’s book, selected by judge Lourdes Vazquez, will be published in an English and Spanish bilingual edition by the prestigious independent publisher Akashic Books.

The biennial Paz Prize for Poetry, launched in 2012, is named in honor of the late Nobel Prize-winning poet Octavio Paz, and recognizes a previously unpublished poetry book written in Spanish by a poet residing in the U.S.

Oneyda Gonzalez the winning poet for the 2022 edition was born in Camagüey, Cuba, Gonzalez has previously published La ciudad promisoria and El camino de Bárbara (poetry). Her texts appear in the anthologies Mujer adentro and Catedral sumergida. In 2003 she published the book of narratives Las cinco y una noches, and coordinated the compilation Escrito sobre un rostro, about Severo Sarduy, to whom she returned in Seres en el borde (2007). Polvo de alas. El guión cinematográfico en Cuba (2009) brings together her interviews with critics, directors and screenwriters of Cuban cinema. In 2010, Cuentos claros is published, while she was working on the documentary project Severo Secreto, which was awarded the “Amigos de la Biblioteca de Princeton” Research Grant in 2015. Her most recent publication is Una biografía coral sobre Severo Sarduy, Ediciones Rialta, 2022. Gonzalez has a master’s degree in Latin American culture.

“I am very excited that the Miami Book Fair’s Paz Prize for Poetry has been awarded to my book El lazo infinito,” Gonzalez said when receiving the news. “Writing a book is a learning process, and it is very nice to see that it is received with affection. I feel that the Paz Prize seeks to expand links between the many cultures that coexist in this country by offering the opportunity for Latino writers’ texts to be read in both languages.”

“There was strong competition, but El lazo infinito stands out for its unique inner depth,” Vazquez said of the winning manuscript. “In a kind of introspective scenario —a movie theater— a poem begins the rite and as a voice, an ‘I’ (that personal identity) in continuous dialogue with her inner voice. That never-ending reflection creates a universe of revelations, desires, and knowledge, and its course diverge, intermingle, and grow like the stems of a plant.”

The finalists for the 2022 edition of the Paz Prize for Poetry were: Giancarlo Huapaya, Andrea Cote Botero, Edgar Galeano, Carlos Aguasaco, Elidio La Torre Lagares, Leon Felix Batista, Manuel Lopez, Claudia Noguera Penso, Ena Ruiz, Rosie Inguanzo, Melanie Márquez Adams, Lila Zemborain, Douglas Gómez Barrueta, Keila Vall de la Ville, Luis Correa-Díaz, Noraya Ccoyure, Mike Hernández y Lionel Valdivia.