Octavio Paz, a writer of vivid surrealistic verse and penetrating social essays, won the Nobel Prize in literature Thursday, becoming the first Mexican writer to win literature's highest award.

The Swedish Academy of Letters said in its formal announcement that Paz had won the award ``for impassioned writing with wide horizons, characterized by sensuous intelligence and humanistic integrity.'The academy said Paz's poetry consisted ``to a very great extent of writing both with and about words' and that in his ``surrealistically inspired thought, the words are endowed in this way with new, changeable and richer meanings.' The academy quoted a 1976 poem in which Paz was seen as articulating his literary stance:

Between what I see and what I say

Between what I say and what I keep silent

Between what I keep silent and what I dream

Between what I dream and what I forget:

Poetry

The 76-year-old Paz, an influential political commentator often attacked by Marxists and nationalists, is probably best known for his many essays. In one major work, ``The Labyrinth of Solitude,' published in 1950, he offered an analysis of modern Mexico and the Mexican personality in which he described his fellow countrymen as instinctive nihilists who hide behind masks of solitude and ceremoniousness.

Paz published his first collection of poetry while a teenager. Still active as a writer and critic, he has founded and edited several magazines and has been publishing a literary monthly called Vuelta, which means ``return,' since 1976.

He also served as Mexico's ambassador to France, Switzerland, Japan and India before resigning from the diplomatic service in 1968 after the Mexico City police fired at young demonstrators protesting government repression of student activists and spending on the Mexico Olympics.

Describing himself as a ``disillusioned leftist,' Paz has since the late 1970s led a personal crusade against what he perceives as a threat of Soviet and Cuban intervention in Latin America. He has also devoted himself to writing and lecturing, in particular at Harvard, where he received an honorary doctorate in 1980.

This year's Nobel Prize carries a cash award of about $700,000. The formal presentation for Nobel laureates from all fields is Dec. 10.

Paz, whose distinctive verse has broad appeal and has been well-received by critics internationally, has long been mentioned by Swedish publishers and cultural editors as a front-runner for the award.

Professor Sture Allen, who is the secretary of the Swedish Academy and who announced the selection of Paz, said that the poet had been a finalist for several years.

Be the first to know

Get local news delivered to your inbox!

* I understand and agree that registration on or use of this site constitutes agreement to its user agreement and privacy policy.