I’ve been giving this topic a lot of thought, typically at night trying to get myself to sleep. My conclusion is that the topic is best addressed by decade. So here’s my first offering:

1940s:

I began reading sf in 1949, so I’ll begin with the 1940s. Most of what I read I read in 1949 was Galaxy Magazine. However, I did manage to get some books from the school library and book stores. There wasn’t a lot in either venue. The three with most impact on my 8-year old mind were:

Animal Farm, George Orwell

Sixth Column, Robert A. Heinlein

The Adventures of Superman, George Lowther

The books are history making or landmarks in the evolution of sf for me because Orwell taught the use of sarcasm, Heinlein taught the use of religion, and Lowther gave me the most significant change in my thinking though it wasn’t his fault.

Let me explain that later point. My Catholic Elementary School invited us to donate books to the school library so I brought my copy of Superman. It was confiscated in that the book made man equivalent to god. Even my 8-year old mind knew that Kryptonite prevented any god-like behavior. But, their aversion to Friedrich Nietzsche probably drove their thinking.

I laughed through Sixth Column as the new religion did the bad guys in. But, it also fit my burgeoning psyche that religion was a legitimate topic for sf. An idea most recently confirmed by Mary Doria Russell in The Sparrow.

Orwell gets my bid for 1940s landmark sf. Animal Farm was and remains a brilliant and powerful examination of an alien culture and its politics. The comparison to our own world was, is, will be inevitable. Damn, that's well written.

1950s

The 1950s provided the framework for my understanding about the world and how to view it. The “if this goes on…” trope became a favorite. Too bad it’s no longer popular.

Flowers for Algernon, Daniel Keyes

Mission of Gravity, Hal Clement

On the Beach, Nevil Shute

The Rose, Charles L. Harness

Daniel Keyes presented empathy for a lab rat. Lab rats are supposed to be disposable. Why should it upset you when he dies? Juxtapose this with Gordon Allport’s The Nature of Prejudice and you never feel the same about The Other.

Mission of Gravity is the most compelling Hard SF I’ve read. The technical information never overwhelmed the story. I’ve never read better.

Nevil Shute presented a view of the apocalypse that resonated with hiding under desks at school. Living and dying continue to show up in my own writing.

The Rose started a very long dialogue with myself on what education means. Jerry Pournelle only heightened the debate with The California Sixth Grade Reader.

As far as a historical influencel, I’ll go with Flowers for Algernon.

1960s

I was beginning my time as a soldier which undoubtedly influenced my selections but here they are:

The Left Hand of Darkness, Ursula K. Leguin

Retief, Keith Laumer

Stranger in a Strange Land, Robert A. Heinlein

Dangerous Visions, Harlan Ellison

Nightfall and Other Stories, Isaac Asimov

With The Left Hand of Darkness I got my first exposure to gender and its impact on culture but I didn’t stop to think about it. It would take another 30 years to get the message.

The fondness with which I remember the Retief stories is epic. If you juxtapose Lederer’s A Nation of Sheep and Burdick’s The Ugly American you build a very unique view of the world that lingers long into the 21st Century.

By the time Stranger came around I was very far from my religious roots. The manipulation practiced by religious organizations was an established fact in my mindset. But, what I most remember from the book is the title of Chapter One. I LMAO for a long, long time.

"the most significant and controversial SF book published in 1967.", Dangerous Visions has a roll call that is unequaled. It’s a cornucopia of the greatest writers of the time and shows what can happen when you publish anthologies. The sequels didn’t match up.

Nightfall is a triumph of the imagination. It’s masterful display of the impact of new knowledge on a culture resonates in me to this day.

For the historical influence,, I go with The Left Hand of Darkness as it showed a different way forward writers like Moon, Atwood, Tepper, et al, built on.

1970s

Protector, Larry Niven

The Faded Sun, C.J. Cherryh

Callahan’s Cross Time Saloon, Spider Robinson

The Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy, Douglas Adams

The Forever War, Joe Haldeman

Protector is my favorite of the Known Space series as one of the major ideas of the tale is the distinct adult form ("protectors") that has immense strength and intelligence and cares only about younger Pak of their bloodline. That is a refreshing outlook on being adult.

The Faded Sun trilogy deals with understanding of an alien race. As mentioned earlier, it’s about the nature of prejudice and the difficulty in overcoming same. It is also a riveting adventure.

Callahan’s is a study in empathy as well as a humorous take on dealing with aliens. There are other bars in the sf universe but none captures the humanity displayed in this series.

The Hitchhikers Guide to the Galaxy is a one off. You shouldn’t attempt to repeat its formula; you should just appreciate its genius.

The Forever War was my generation’s war. I thought it great when I first read it, but a re-read in the 2010s didn’t generate the same feeling. Still, it needed to be said. A better treatment of a different but similar war is non-fiction Sean Naylor’s Not a Good Day to Die.

Despite what I said above or maybe because of it, The Hitchiker’s Guide to the Galaxy is the most unique influence of the 1970s.

1980s

The 1980s had little new and/or history making books. Jack Chalker arrived on scene and he had me hooked with everything he wrote but there was nothing new, startling, or thought provoking. Which leaves me with:

Tea with Black Dragon, R. A. MacAvoy

The Gate to Women’s Country, Sheri S. Tepper

What I remember most about Tea is the quality of the writing. That’s how I wish I would write. And then are the central questions of what it means to be human and what is truth. Questions worth asking.

The Gate to Women’s Country while published in the 80s, I didn’t get around to reading it until late 90s. The interesting thought for me is that the book supposes most men to be violent by nature. I still don’t know whether that is true.

But neither book deserves a spot in truly influential sf.

1990s

I spent the 1990s mostly reading series by Chalker, Cherryh, Laumer, Levigne, MacDonald, McAuley, Mccaffrey. Modesitt, Moon, Resnick, Robinson, Ryan, Silverberg, Simmons, and Williams. But here are three standalones that give me nominations:

The Sparrow, Mary Doria Russell

Pastwatch: The Redemption of Christopher Columbus, Orson Scott Card

The Notebooks of Lazarus Long, Robert A. Heinlein

The Sparrow is a marvelous exploration of how a mind-set unexamined constitutes bigotry and ends in disaster.

Pastwatch is the second best time travel story I’ve read with a framework similar to The Sparrow.

And the Notebooks is a not a novel but a series of quotes taken from Heinlein’s whole series starring Lazarus Long. There are some truly brilliant quotes in there.

The one that haunts me the most and continues to play out in mind is The Sparrow, a unique and profound examination of a First Contact.

2000s

These were very good years.

The Time Traveler’s Wife, Audrey Niffennegger

Perdido Street Station, China Mieville

Archform: Beauty, L.E. Modesitt, Jr.

The Andromeda Strain, Michael Crichton

Niffenegger gifted me with the finest time travel story ever. The lead characters are compelling and the story line was a genuine page turner.

Mievelle gave me an incomparable alien culture with the difficult societal problem of integration of the whole.

Archform: Beauty asks if the experience of beauty is necessary to a culture. It has provided me an architecture for an education system that I can believe in.

The Andromeda Strain presented an outstanding justification for the Center for Disease Control. It’s even more apt in today’s world.

Selecting just one as groundbreaking is an impossible task but my gut tells me Perdido Street Station edges the others.

2010s

Quicker (El Donsai series) Laurence Dahners

Kinsella (Kinsella Universe) Gena Marie Wylie

Firestar (The Families War) Bruce Bretthauer

April (The April Series) Mackey Chandler

In Quicker we get the first exposure to a young woman who has faster reflexes, quicker mind, and no stamina. In this and 15 following books, you start with a known scientific phenomenom and explore its future implementation. As good as hard science gets with all the real world obstacles that accompany her progress.

It gets a place as candidate because I have never read another author as consistently satisfying.

Kinsella gets a nod for the fantastic exploration of living and working in space. It also explores the drive and intelligence of one the most aggressive women I’ve read. The sequels in the series present the same combination with women of much different personalities than Kinsella herself. Pay particular attention to Hannah Sawyer.

With Firestar I was introduced to the most unique culture yet written. This is a matriarchal culture against a patriarchal galaxy. To engage the enemy the Families have two very distinct advanatages: they live in a Nebula hostile to human life and they have developed the biotechnology to deal with both the Nebula and the rest of the galaxy. This is groundbreaking.

April presents a very young heroine who gives us an education in what it means to be an adult. She has two very good and important friends who, between the three, turn their worlds and everybody else’s world into entirely new directions. All the April books are page turners. This, too, has many ground breaking episodes.

So given all that, I select Firestar. It’s just too unique and too good to pass over.

All those selections influenced my thinking and writing. I don't think I consciously imitated any of them but their ideas prompted mine.