Story or novel?

Personally, I preferred the short story to either the novel{or the film}. Its brevity enables Keyes to achieve a powerful emotional focus which is less effective in the novel. To some extent I think that the novel is more diffuse and less moving. There are other examples of a failure to expand an effective science fiction short story into a novel. A good example is Asimov's attempt to develop "Nightfall" into a longer format. IMO it just doesn't work very well and seems clearly padded. Now I would hasten to add that Flowers For Algernon is a much more effective effort at expansion than is the case with Nightfall. But, for me, the short story form of FFA is more effective and moving.

But I'm sure that there are many who feel differently about it.

Personally, I preferred the short story to either the novel{or the film}.

Well, that makes two of us then, symbol.

Flowers was in one of the first copies of The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction I ever bought: not the 1958 one (!) but the 30th anniversary edition where it was reprinted: October 1979. I still have it.

And the reason it worked for we was that brevity, as you say, which gave me a much more emotional reaction than the novel version.

I do wonder if I'd read the novel first which one I prefer. There's more detail, more depth in the novel, but for me the short story's better.

Anyone who's read the book want to chip in? Is it worth reading 40 years + after being published? Is it worthy of being in the 'Best of' lists on a regular basis?

And what do you like/dislike about it??

Mark

I haven't read either the short story or novel but always wondered why the novel is one of very few SF books to be included in school curriculum reading lists (at least in the UK). The only others that come to mind are Slaughterhouse 5 & 1984.

We never read it I remember reading Wilkie Collins' The Moonstone and a play about a man who wanted to die (The name of which I've sadly forgotten as it was quite interesting). 1984 is the de-facto sci-fi book, although as I've said before I prefer Zamyatin's We.

Back to the book, though. I've started it today and I'm about 20 pages in (That's roughly 10%), and I think it's quite good so far. It's a little hard to read initially, but once you start reading it phonetically it makes a lot more sense. Already I sympathise a lot with Charlie (The way people treat him feels so darned familiar) and he has made me laugh a couple of times with what he's said, but the changes to him are very subtle and you notice them very early on whereas he doesn't.

I wouldn't say I'm enthralled at this point, but it's certainly very interesting.

I haven't read either the short story or novel but always wondered why the novel is one of very few SF books to be included in school curriculum reading lists (at least in the UK). The only others that come to mind are Slaughterhouse 5 & 1984.

Sorry to quote this again, but I've been thinking about it as I read the book.

Those two novels and Flowers are science fiction, but they're not overly scientific like, say, Weber and Hamilton. They're literature wrapped up in a veil of science, and it allows the author to present ideas and situations that would not be possible in a non-science fiction setting. Let's take 1984 as an example. Without the science fiction elements, you wouldn't have that book. The advances (And also regression) of the technology is vital to the regime of Big Brother as it fuels the propaganda machine. You can have a totalitarian police regime lead by a dictator in alternate history or just literary works, but without a science fiction element it wouldn't be We, 1984 or I think Brave New World.

With Flowers for Algernon, I'm currently seeing it as a coming of age tale, at least for the first 25%. Whereas literary or even fantasy works tend to go from a young age, Flowers has a middle aged man with a serious mental deficiency. Unlike fantasy where you might have a prophecy or ritual, or literary fiction where a teacher might appear or even a practical solution (Such as the book My Left Foot, I think), Keyes uses a science fiction element in the form of the surgery to both correct and enhance Charlie.

I think "Literary Sci-Fi", as I'll call it from now on, is quite a rare thing. You've got the three we've mentioned above, We, Brave New World, potentially Do Androids...? and a host of others, all of which use science fiction to create a great literary tale. Could you have similar situations without sci-fi? Yes, and I've provided some above, but for these particular titles, they need that science fiction catalyst because it allows the author to create these situations and explorations without being constrained by what we know at the time of writing.

War of the Worlds is another good one, I reckon.

I haven't read either the short story or novel but always wondered why the novel is one of very few SF books to be included in school curriculum reading lists (at least in the UK).

I've also been told that its because Keyes was not a genre writer, as is Margaret 'Squids in Space' Atwood (and whose book The Handmaiden's Tale coincidentally is often on UK school reading lists.)

Once upon a time Poe, Bradbury, Aldiss, Wyndham and HG Wells were also there Ropie, though I doubt that's the case these days.

They're literature wrapped up in a veil of science, and it allows the author to present ideas and situations that would not be possible in a non-science fiction setting.

Good point, Loerwyn. Keyes' book was published in the 1960's at a time when a lot of the SF was moving into so called 'softer' sciences - less engineering, more sociology - and perhaps that is a great deal of the appeal of the book.

We can all recognise a bully, and those who pick on those less fortunate. The science part isn't too detailed or complex, but it is needed to tell the heart of the story: the consequences on Charley of the science.

What Keyes does is write a character that we can all recognise and indeed sympathise with and that may be the main appeal: it's SF but not SF too far from the realm of mundane writing.

My only thought these days is that the story is so well known that it may have lost some of its original impact through being seen as a classic. Rather like that ending in the film of Planet of the Apes.

And thanks for the link Susie.

Mark

They're literature wrapped up in a veil of science, and it allows the author to present ideas and situations that would not be possible in a non-science fiction setting.

I don't mean to steer away from the discussion of the book itself, but what do you mean by literature? I know of many SF books that are literary in that they are extremely well written in the classical sense but rely on their SF content to move anywhere.

Do you think there's a line where the fiction in the science goes too far and may distract from the ability of the book to demonstrate use of language? FFA is about an experiment based on Earth - what if it had been set in a future society based on Mars?

Interesting you mention Aldiss having been on the curriculum, Mark. I think he's one of the best SF writers the UK has produced, literary or otherwise, but would have put his ideas down as far too left-field for schools to be using in education (not that I think it's a bad thing myself).

I don't mean to steer away from the discussion of the book itself, but what do you mean by literature? I know of many SF books that are literary in that they are extremely well written in the classical sense but rely on their SF content to move anywhere.

What I mean, and I understand it's probably not the best term to use, by 'literature' is the set of classics that are influential in various terms. I would say War of the Worlds, 1984, Crime & Punishment, War & Peace, and other titles of such repute would be classed as 'literature'. They're not like your Webers, Miévilles or even your Wolfes, but they're generally stand alone books that transcend being a story and become something else. They're the must read, quintessential titles that crop up on Top 100 lists. I'm not sure how else to explain it.

Do you think there's a line where the fiction in the science goes too far and may distract from the ability of the book to demonstrate use of language? FFA is about an experiment based on Earth - what if it had been set in a future society based on Mars?

Yeah, I think there is a line. Your average reader isn't going to be a huge science nut, just like your average fantasy reader isn't going to be a sword expert of an economics superstar. If you set FFA on a Martian colony, it would - to the point I'm at now - work the same. A futuristic society might approach the problem of Charlie in another way. Perhaps they go the Spartan route and leave him to die, perhaps they would put him in a scientific colony and use him as a test subject against his will (Rather than the situation in Algernon) or something else. Those situations would all class as science fiction due to the setting, but they're not going to drown the reader in sci-fi.

Again, it's the same with works like 1984. The science fiction is there, but a lot of it is behind the curtains where you can't see it. You can hear it, perhaps it'll show an ankle from time to time, but it's just a part of the backdrop.

They're the must read, quintessential titles that crop up on Top 100 lists. I'm not sure how else to explain it.

That's what I thought - it's hard to put your finger on what makes a book 'important'. Is FFA such a book? I haven't read it yet (probably will do now!) but I imagine it must also have a timeless quality that makes it particularly relevant across generations and worth learning from.

Again, it's the same with works like 1984. The science fiction is there, but a lot of it is behind the curtains where you can't see it. You can hear it, perhaps it'll show an ankle from time to time, but it's just a part of the backdrop.

Heh heh

Some spoilers, Loerwyn.

I finished this one in a day, so even in long form it was a pretty painless, quick read. I somehow remained unspoiled on the eventual outcome of the experiment, so was braced for some really horrible end - madness, suicide, a killing spree (just going off of Algernon's behavior). In the end, I thought it was a good, solid book. It dealt with a lot of really interesting concepts of self-awareness and acceptance. It was nice to see Charlie actually gain something from all of it - a sense of family, a better grasp on friendship.

Short story/novel - I thought it worked really well as a novel, but that was my first experience with it. That said, even though I'd read it through very quickly, there were times I found myself wondering what impact a tighter version may have had. Maybe later this month after the initial long read has worn off I'll read through the short version and see what I think.

More later.

Well, that was a very quick read.

I think it was a fairly compelling tale, and I guess it's a perfectly good argument against 'fixing' those with disabilities. Those disabilities don't stop someone being human, and to treat them as otherwise is demeaning. I think that's the message I got from it. I suppose the other message is that intelligence requires emotional maturity as much as emotions require some intelligence.

As for the read itself, I think it's overall a fairly easy read, but it flows along with Charlie. It starts off a little hard as you get used to his way of speaking and spelling, then it gets easier as he develops, then it becomes much more complex, especially with regards to the spiritual experiences, and then it sharply drops off towards the end. I felt the changes with Charlie happened a little prematurely, as I thought he seemed to improve pre-operation, but otherwise it works well.

My only real gripe right now is that the ending is... Sad, but I felt little impact beyond that. It leaves you with questions about Charlie and the others involved. What happens to him? Does he return to 'normal', does he fight his way back, does he degenerate further and die? I wanted to know.

A much recommended read, but I can certainly fathom the short being a more emotional journey.

Certainly Keyes is able to tease out certain themes in more detail than in the short story, e.g. Charley's sexual feelings and desires, his emotional extremes, and his being seen as an "object" for the use of others--even {and perhaps especially} when he becomes intelligent. The fear and cruelty of people to those who are different is much darker and more carefully examined. Of course many of the characters are more developed and less stereotypical.

What is lost is the immediacy and enormously powerful emotional impact of the short story which, at the same time, is able to imply the same thematic material very effectively.

In the end, which of the two formats one prefers is a matter of taste. And certainly many will welcome having on hand both methods of story-telling.

In the sense of its "soft" science-fiction approach, I am reminded of Jack Finney's novel Time and Again which, while dealing with a totally different theme, uses a very soft time travel methodology to explore essentially psychological nostalgia.

Poul Anderson's Brain Wave comes to mind, too. The approach and plot methodology is more obviously generic to science fiction but he also treats the effects of a sudden increase {and loss} of intelligence.

Finished the novel last night, and I thought it was quite a compelling read. Like others have mentioned, it does make you think about some it's central themes - is intelligence as important as emotional happiness, and the stigma of being mentally disabled and how people treat them.

I thought it was a bit over the top with some of the reactions, but this could be just as it's dated quite a bit - especially the use of the word 'moronic' in scientific papers and newspaper headlines to describe a human being! But I guess the author gets his point across well.

I agree with Loerwyn that it dropped off quite a bit at the end; I guess the author has put across his themes and ideas by then, but I wanted to know more about what happened to Charlie too.

The story reminded me of a Stephen King short story, "The End of the Whole Mess", in which a child prodigy discovers a chemical that reduces aggressiveness in humans, adds it to the drinking supply and crime and aggression decreases. It ends up doing the job too well and gives the subject's dementia and eventually death. It's also written in the first person style and as the protagonists's intellect diminishes, it's reflected in the writing style (ie the spelling and grammar become childlike) - I wonder if King was influenced by 'Flowers for Algernon'?

**Edit - just looked up the King story on wiki and it does say it was influenced by Flowers for Algernon**.