In a global context of ever-growing needs and expectations for excellence in public transport, RATP Group’s international arm, RATP Dev, prides itself on being a trusted partner for 780 cities around the world.

RATP Dev boasts expertise in delivering, managing, operating, and maintaining complex mass transit networks.

Through tailor-made and high-quality solutions, the company also supports the cities in welcoming large-scale global events and in making them successful, ensuring seamless service.

Congestion, pollution, crowding, getting around quickly and easily are top challenges to tackle to improve the daily lives of millions of passengers.

With 68 per cent of the world’s population predicted to live in cities in 2050, compared to just 55 per cent in 2020, cutting-edge mobility solutions are needed now more than ever.

RATP Dev dedicates every day to better city living with highly efficient, safe, innovative, accessible, and sustainable mobility services.

Relying on more than 45 years of experience in rail mass transit of RATP Group, its international subsidiary has a rich history of innovation – instrumental in creating world-class engineering solutions, operating high-capacity fully automated metro lines, and transforming urban transportation across the globe.

An experienced long-term partner for Australia’s urban transit networks

Australia’s S$155 billion investment in rail infrastructure over the next decade aligns with RATP Dev’s own aspirations.

RATP Dev Australia managing director Denis Masure tells Rail Express that, with proven and reliable expertise in the operation of fully automated metro systems and complex rail projects with the highest performance service and commitment to sustainability, the company is ready to contribute to Australia’s urban development toward a more sustainable future.

“We do this notably by helping to increase the urban density around attractive new stations thanks to safe, reliable, comfortable and efficient services,” he said.

RATP Dev’s vision is clear: metro stations are going well beyond their primary function of passenger transport, they offer them a brand-new experience as they are becoming new poles of centrality around which denser and more sustainable housing is built, with less use of individual cars and the opportunity of easy access to daily-life amenities on foot.

“Sustainability is a core pillar of our vision,” Masure said.

“As cities strive to reduce their carbon footprint, we are committed to being a part of the solution and offer a reliable innovative approach acquired through thorough partnerships with major industrial players of the transportation sector.

“Thanks to our capacity to integrate, operate and maintain cutting-edge technologies like power-recycling train brakes, green materials, low-energy solutions into stations and more, we’re committed to contributing to sustainable transportation infrastructure into the urban fabric.”

RATP Dev’s Australian branch is set to embark on three groundbreaking mobility solutions – the operation and maintenance of the Sydney Metro-Western Sydney Airport line with the Parklife Metro Consortium, and the tenders for two city-changer projects: the Melbourne Suburban Rail Loop and Sydney Metro West line.

“Thanks to a very interesting combination of two key capabilities, delivering complex rail projects and managing operations and maintenance, RATP Dev brings to the Australian market a safe pair of hands that have proven they can deliver reliable operations, best-in-class customer service, and industry-leading asset management solutions for complex rail systems, especially fully automated metro lines,” Masure said.

Furthermore, each new metro line will create several hundreds of persistent jobs to manage train operations, help customer journey in stations and trains, and in maintenance for all the new assets (trains, signalling, communication systems, tracks, traction power, mechanical electrical and plumbing).

RATP Dev brings a proven experience in mobilising and training local workforce thanks to international expertise mobilisation.

Servicing large-scale events

RATP Group has accumulated an extensive experience and track record in providing exceptional service performance during intense periods with extremely high passenger volumes.

The most prominent illustration is the company’s careful preparation to help support cities in turning large-scale events into a success.

This expertise requires extreme technical investment and expert mobilisation to meet the highest requirements.

As RATP Dev Asia-Pacific chief executive officer Henri Pottier says, RATP Dev’s involvement in major global events has equipped it with the ability to handle complexity and scale in very demanding environment.

“We have the dynamic blend of expertise, innovation, and adaptability needed to ensure success in welcoming visitors and seamlessly and safely connecting them at these important global events,” he said.

Whether for the FIFA World Cups in Paris in 1998, in South Africa in 2010, in Qatar in 2022, the Rugby World Cup this October in Paris and of course the Olympic and Paralympic Games that will be held in Paris in July and August 2024, the group has proven its capabilities in hosting monumental events while ensuring to offer a continuous, seamless journey for all customers and visitors.

“These top-of-the-class events bring together very diverse and sometimes quite influential passengers requiring the best reception and transportation experience,” Pottier said.

“One top priority of RATP Dev is mobility for all. True accessibility is a must-have and goes well beyond mere compliance: it’s about creating an inclusive experience for every passenger.

“In that regard, the 15-year contract to operate and maintain the Sydney Metro-Western Sydney Airport Line is a perfect opportunity to showcase everyday excellence in operations and the latest customer innovations to maximise the satisfaction of international travellers exhausted after a long flight.”

Major events are also generally the opportunity to launch new strategic transportation projects.

RATP Group proved to be a reliable partner in delivering and operating new transport systems from the very early stages of operation, with an intense volume of highly demanding passengers.

The first example was the launch of the fully automated metro Line 14 in Paris, RATP Group’s historic network, ahead of the 1998 FIFA World Cup.

Today, the company is working to extend Line 14 South to fulfil the monumental task of connecting Stade de France (Saint-Denis Pleyel station) to Paris Orly international airport ahead of the forthcoming Paris Olympic and Paralympic Games in 2024, reaffirming its role as a trustworthy transportation supporter for global events.

And although Line 14 boasts a 99 per cent passenger satisfaction rate, the Group is still seeking innovation applications based on artificial intelligence (AI) to streamline traffic, which measures density on platforms and on-board trains, relaying this information to passengers who can base their movements on this data.

“During the 2010 FIFA World Cup in South Africa, RATP Dev not only catered to the daily commuting needs of residents, but also attracted tourists and supported seamless movement,” Pottier said.

“This contributed to the region’s economic growth, accessibility, and access to cultural hubs and business centres, thanks to the development of the high-speed Gautrain that is fully integrated into a network of buses and minibuses to address the pressing need for efficient, safe, and reliable public transportation in the South African province of Gauteng.”

RATP Dev’s involvement was paramount to the seamless and smooth movement of 18.2 million football fans in Qatar during the 2022 FIFA World Cup.

Through careful planning and advanced crisis mitigation strategies – including more than 5000 additional staff, 92,000 hours of training, 9000 of stress testing, and 450 hours of crisis exercise practice – 99.9 per cent regularity of services was achieved, with a 99.8 per cent punctuality rate, and a 99.8 per cent customer satisfaction rate, with no incidents, ensuring a seamless mobility experience.

“Drawing from our experience at the 2022 FIFA World Cup in Doha, where 70 out of 80 safety experts onsite were mobilised from RATP Group, we recognise the pivotal role of expertise in the execution of massive events,” Masure said.

“Our 24/7 activated crisis unit and dedicated event management plans, developed through years of experiences and managed by very experienced operational managers, demonstrates our ability to navigate complexities with precision.”

The 2023 Rugby World Cup that just ended in Paris showcased this operational achievement, where RATP Group served as the RWC’s Official Supporter, and seamlessly connected fans with Stade de France through Metro Line 12 and Line 13, Tram Line 8 and ensured also smooth interchange with Commuter Train RER B.

“Global large-scale events are enablers of high requirements and thoroughness, allowing RATP Group to export its excellence in mass transit,” Pottier said.

“As we take steps toward shaping the future of Sydney Metro–Western Sydney Airport with our delivery partners and position ourselves on Sydney Metro West and the Suburban Rail Loop, RATP Dev’s objective is to mobilise very high-level resources which have contributed first hand to the successful and globally visible delivery and performant commissioning of our own complex rail projects in Paris and overseas. This is our ambition for Australia.”