Welcome to the website of www.ratpdevtransitlondon.com.

By using this website you acknowledge that you have read the terms and condition of use of our website in the UK (this “Legal Notice”), and you undertake to comply with it.

These terms and conditions will not automatically apply to all websites of RATP Dev group companies worldwide that you may visit and you will need to satisfy yourself of their own terms for their use and how they will collect your data.

These terms and conditions of use of our website www.ratpdevtransitlondon.com in the United Kingdom are intended primarily to inform you of the intellectual property rights which must be obeyed along with the conditions for collecting and processing information about you as part of the implementation of this website.

1. Definitions

“RATP Dev Transit London” and “RATP Dev” are sometimes used in this website for convenience only.

“RATP Dev Transit London” or “RDTL” is the trading name of London United Busways Limited (CRN 02328561), London Sovereign Limited (CRN 02467207) and London Transit Limited (CRN 13557682). Each of them is a private limited company registered in England, with its registered office at Garrick House, Stamford Brook Garage, 74 Chiswick High Road, London W4 1SY (each “a RDTL Company” and together “RDTL Group” as appropriate).

The RDTL Companies and the RATP Dev Group companies have their own legal existence and independent legal status.

“RATP Dev” means RATP DEVELOPPEMENT SA, a joint stock company [société anonyme] with management and supervisory boards, incorporated and registered in France with a share capital of €517,301,072.70, at the Paris Trade and Companies Registry under No. 389 795 006 and whose registered office is at 54 quai de la Rapée, 75012 Paris, France; and its subsidiaries and affiliates. VAT number: EU VAT No. FR75389795006.

“RATP Dev Group” means RATP Dev, RDUK, and the RDTL Companies, and each of their relevant subsidiaries and affiliates.

“RDUK” means RATP Dev UK Ltd (CRN 07281350) is a private limited company registered in England, with its registered office at Garrick House, Stamford Brook Garage, 74 Chiswick High Road, London W4 1SY.

Each of the RDTL Companies publishing on this website ultimately belongs to RATP Dev.

The words “we”, “us” and “our” are used to refer to any company of the RDTL Companies and the RATP Dev Group companies in general or to those who work for them. It cannot be inferred from these expressions that RATP Dev or any of its subsidiaries or affiliates are involved in the business and management of any of the RDTL Companies or the other subsidiaries or affiliates of RATP Dev.

2. Information about our Activities

This website presents information concerning certain activities of RDTL Companies and RATP Dev Group generally. We may modify the information contained in this website at any time and without prior notice. The information and any commentary and generally the contents or any part of it as made available on this website from time to time (“Contents”) is provided in good faith, and free of charge and for information purpose only. Your attention is raised to paragraph 8 below.

3. Updates of terms and conditions of use of the website, applicable law and competent jurisdiction

We may update this Legal Notice at any time. You are invited to regularly refer to our latest conditions of use in effect. These are subject to the laws of England and Wales. Any dispute which may arise between the parties concerning the information contained within this website shall be determined by the English Courts and the parties hereby submit to the exclusive jurisdiction of the English Courts for such purposes.

4. Identity

4.1 Companies publishing the website:

RATP Dev Transit London (details in paragraph 1 above)

RATP Dev UK Ltd (details in paragraph 1 above)

RATP Dev (details in paragraph 1 above)

Email: communications@ratpdev.com

4.2 Technical design and development of the website:

Brainsonic SAS, a simplified stock company incorporated and registered in France with a share capital of €181,073.00, at the Paris Trade and Companies Registry with number 448 567 867, and whose registered office is located at 45 rue Sedaine 75011 Paris, TVA FR12448567867. Its director of publication is Guillaume MIKOWSKI, Managing Director.

4.3 Ownership of the website, Hosting and Photo credits

This website is owned by RATP Dev (details in paragraph 1 above)

4.4 Realisation and development of the Website.

Atixnet SAS, a simplified stock company incorporated and registered in France with a share capital of €239,400.00 at the Creteil Trade and Companies Registry under No. 443 452 503, and whose registered office is located at 7 rue Viteau, 94160 Saint Mandé, France. It is represented by Mr Guillaume TOTOT, Managing Director.

5. Intellectual Property

5.1 Group Property

5.1.1 All information or documents, commentary, articles or items or content of the website which including without limitation, text, animated or static images, video images, or animations, or illustrations, or graphic animations and audio-visual sequences or photographs, brands, logos, data, databases, and all audio items (voice, music, sounds, sound effects), colour, font, style guides and graphic guidelines, architectures, organisation of screens, know-how or cited products), specific software developments and downloadable programs stored in the website as well as all elements created for the website and its general structure (“Contents”) are either the property of RATP Dev Group including without limitation the RDTL Companies (as appropriate) or are subject to rights to use, duplicate or communicate to the public that have been granted to such companies.

5.1.2 The Contents are subject to laws protecting copyright insofar as they have been made available to the public via this website. The Contents is therefore protected by current legislation with regard to copyright, registered or unregistered trademarks and design and model rights and unfair or anti-competitive behaviours.

5.1.3 No licence or any right other than to view the website has been granted to any party with regard to intellectual property rights.

5.1.4 Duplication of website documents is authorised solely as information for personal and private usage. Save as otherwise provided, any and all reproduction, representation, broadcasting and/or usage of all or parts of the Contents by any means, in any format or for any purpose whatsoever is prohibited without our prior formal and written authorisation. In all events, subject to the measures above, the source (this website and RATP Dev Group including without limitation the RDTL Companies (as appropriate)) must be stipulated along with the name of the author where applicable. Any person failing to comply with the legal provisions in effect may be liable for counterfeiting charges and for criminal penalties stipulated by law, notwithstanding all other means of recourse available to RATP Dev Group including without limitation the RDTL Companies (as appropriate).

5.2 Marks, names, logotypes and brands

5.2.1 Unless otherwise stipulated, company names, logotypes and brands quoted on the website are the property of RATP Dev Group including without limitation the RDTL Companies (as appropriate), or are subject to rights to use, duplicate or represent/communicate to the public that have been granted to such. You may not use them without prior written authorisation from us.

5.2.2 Reference to links or trade names, names, services, domain names and names of other companies does not infer in any way any association between us and them or their products or services, trade names and company names in question.

5.3 Databases

RATP Dev and the RDTL Companies are joint controllers of any databases on the website and joint owners of any databases made available. You may not extract or reuse a substantial qualitative or quantitative portion of the databases, including for private purpose.

6. Your Undertakings

6.1 Right to Use your Information

Where a visitor of the website provides information to us, he or she grants to each company within RATP Dev Group including without limitation the RDTL Companies (as appropriate) all transferable rights concerning the information so provided (your “Information”). They also authorise each of the said companies within the Group to make use of your Information. Your Information shall not be deemed to be confidential. However, it may contain personal data as defined by applicable law, which means we undertake to process it in accordance with our Privacy Policy which applies to this website.

6.2 Compliance with Law

As a visitor of this website, you also certify that you comply with these measures and current laws and in particular:

you have ability right and means required to access the website and use it.

you have checked that the IT configuration used does not contain any virus and that it is in full working order.

you grant to RATP Dev Group, RDTL Companies, and partners where applicable, a right to use Your information as provided (other than data of a personal nature).

7. Hypertext Links

This site contains links that allow you to leave the site. The said links are provided for your ease only and do not infer any approval or endorsement of the said sites by RATP Dev Group and RDTL Companies. The target sites are not under any control of RATP Dev Group or RDTL Companies, and we are not in any way liable for the content of the said sites, the links they contain, the products or services they offer or any changes or updates made thereto. In particular, your attention is raised to the following:

7.1 Activation of links.

RATP Dev Group, and in particular without limitation, RDTL Companies formally decline any liability as to the content of websites to which they provide links. Those links are offered to users of this website as a service. Please consult the general terms and conditions and the personal data protection policy for the third party websites in order to understand their practice. The decision to use links is made solely by the website users. We may modify or delete a link on this website at any time.

7.2 Link authorisation.

If you wish to create a hypertext link to this website, you must obtain prior written authorisation from us in the UK, using the contact details provided at the end of this document.

8. Formal Notice regarding Content on this website

8.1.1 The Contents (as defined earlier) available on this www (World Wide Web) server is provided in good faith, and free of charge and for information purpose only. The Contents may contain inaccuracies or typographic errors and is provided as general information without any guarantees that it is fit for any specific purpose.

8.1.2 Whilst every reasonable effort has been made to ensure the Contents is complete, accurate and up to date, no responsibility for its completeness, accuracy and correctness, or for any consequences of relying on it, is assumed by RATP Dev Group including without limitation the RDTL Companies.

8.1.3 The Contents does not, and is not intended to, amount to advice to any person on a specific matter. Any reliance you may place on the Contents is entirely at your own risk and you agree that you have no right of recourse against RATP Dev Group including without limitation the RDTL Companies.

8.1.4 The Contents shall not be deemed a recommendation to use information, products, procedures, equipment or formulae contravening a patent, copyright or registered trade mark. We decline any explicit or implicit liability in the event that use of the Contents contravenes a patent, copyright or registered trade mark.

8.1.5 We categorically rejects any interpretation which may assimilate the content of its websites to purchase offers or incitements to acquire shares or other listed or unlisted interest in shares or other instruments.

8.1.6 Under no circumstances do we undertake to update or correct the Contents disseminated on the Internet or on its web servers. Similarly, we reserve the right to amend or correct the content of the website at any time without prior notification.

8.1.7 We shall not be liable in any way whatsoever for direct or indirect damage, accessory or incidental damage, loss of data or of earnings as a result of or arising from the use or operation of this website and the Contents.

8.1.8 We do not guarantee that the website will operate without interruption or that the servers ensuring access to it operate and/or the third party sites to which hypertext links refer do not contain viruses.

9. Data protection

You should satisfy yourself with the terms of our Cookies Policy, Privacy Policy and CCTV and Audio Privacy Notice which are all available on our website.

10. Contact Details

You may direct all questions concerning this Legal Notice by e-mail to legal_ratpdevuk@ratpdev.com or by post to the following address:

RATP Dev Transit London

Garrick House

Stamford Brook Garage

74 Chiswick High Road

London W4 1SY, England.

Attn: Legal Department.