Introduction

This site www.tootbus.com (herein after referred to as the “Site”) is the property of RATP DEVELOPPEMENT SA (hereinafter referred to as the " Company"), a public limited company with a share capital of of 369 300 834 Euros whose head office is located at 54, quai de la Rapée LAC LA 30, 75012 Paris, France and registered in the Paris Trade and Companies Register under number 389 795 006.

Object

These Terms of Use (hereinafter referred to as the "Terms") govern the use of the Site by any user. They include defining the availability of the Site and services available on the Site and the manner in which the user accesses the Site and uses its services.

By browsing the Site, you acknowledge having read and accept fully and without reservation the present Terms. The Company reserves the right to modify the Terms at any time. They will then be applicable as soon as they are posted online.

Access to the Site

The Company endeavors to allow access to the Site twenty-four (24) hours on twenty-four (24), seven (7) days out of seven (7), except in case of force majeure or an event outside control of the Company and subject to any breakdowns and maintenance operations necessary for the proper functioning of the Site and services.

The responsibility of the Company cannot be engaged in case of impossibility of access to this Site and use of the services. In addition, the Company may be required to interrupt the operation of the Site or part of the services (user account, sending a newsletter, traffic info ...) at any time without notice, all without right to compensation. The user acknowledges and accepts that the Company is not responsible for interruptions, and the consequences that may result for the user or any third party.

3. Intellectual property

This Site, its presentation and all elements including trademarks, logos and domain names, appearing on the Site, are protected by the laws in force regarding intellectual property, and belong to the Company.

4.1 Copyright

All information on this Site (documents contained in the Site, whatever its form, text, images, sounds, and all elements created for the Site) are the exclusive property of the Company. The reproduction and use of all documents published on this Site are exclusively authorized for strictly personal and private purposes, and with mention of the source.

With the exception of a strict use for the needs of the press and subject to the respect of intellectual property rights and any other property right mentioned, any reproduction, use, distribution, download, post, transmission or distribution of copies made for purposes other than strictly personal and private, is expressly prohibited and penalized.

The Company and / or its subsidiaries of the RATP Group reserve(s) all the rights to pursue any act of infringement of its intellectual property rights. No license or any right other than to view the Site is granted to any person with respect to intellectual property rights.

Any framing of this Site is strictly prohibited and consequently, no element appearing on a page of this Internet Site can be partially or totally diffused, transferred or inserted on another Internet site, nor used to create derivative products, except preliminary authorization express written form of the Company.

4.2 Distinctive signs

Unless otherwise stated, the corporate names, logos, products and brands mentioned on this Site are the property of the Company. They cannot not be used without the express prior written consent of the Company.

Personal data

Information regarding the processing of your personal data is available in the “Privacy Policy” published on the Site.

Responsibility

6.1 Responsibility of the editor of the Site

The information and the documents contained on this Site and accessible through this Site come from sources considered reliable. However, this information and documents may contain technical inaccuracies or typographical errors.

The Company reserves the right to correct them as soon as these errors are brought to its attention.

The information and documents available on this Site are subject to change at any time, and may have been updated. The use of this information and documents available on this Site is under the full and sole responsibility of the user, who assumes all the consequences that may result, without the Company can be sought as such, and without claim against the latter.

The Company cannot be held liable for any damage of any kind whatsoever resulting from the interpretation or use of the information and documents available on this Site.

6.2 Engagement of the user

When using the Site, the user agrees not to:

disseminate, publish or store on the Site content that is illegal or contrary to public order and morality;

impersonate another person or entity, falsify or conceal your identity, your age or create any false identity.

In the event of a breach of these obligations, the Company reserves the right to take any appropriate measure to stop the actions concerned. In particular, the Company reserves the right to delete or remove any content or information that it deems inappropriate. In addition, it may if necessary block access to the Site to the user.

Any user can contact the Company via the form at the bottom of the home page in the “Contact” tab. As such, the user agrees to:

post a message to help the Company's teams adapt the offer and improve the quality of services and services offered ;

deliver non-misleading and relevant information.

In addition, the content of the message of the user must not:

be contrary to the laws and regulations in force;

to be violent, hateful, insulting, denigrating, defamatory, vulgar;

infringe an intellectual property right, industrial property, personality right or any other right held by a third party;

include personal data, others than necessary and / or requested and / or sensitive data;

contain hypertext links;

have an advertising character or mention another company;

contain computer viruses, spyware, malicious software and others.

Hypertext links.

The hypertext links set up on this Site from other websites or other resources of the Internet network must be subject to the prior express written authorization of the Company. Any request for this purpose should be addressed to the Director of publication of the Site.

The existence of a link between the Site and a site from a third party does not in any way mean that the Company approves in any respect whatsoever the content of the third party site and all the more the use that could be made of it. Since these sites are not under the control of the Company, the Company declines all liability, including editorial responsibility, for the connection and content of these sites. The Company cannot under any circumstances be held responsible for any collection and transmission of personal data, installation of cookies or any other process carried out by these sites.

Governing Law