Hotel Colorado, historically known as the “Grande Dame” of Glenwood Springs, continues to reign as the queen of hearts among locals as their favorite hotel. A crowning achievement, the hotel claimed eight Locals’ Choice Awards in 2024.

Thanks to residents from Aspen to Rifle, Hotel Colorado in Glenwood Springs clinched “best” or “finalist” victories in eight categories in this year’s annual Locals’ Choice Awards sponsored by Glenwood Springs Post Independent.

From Best Bartender to Best Wedding Venue and more, the accolades underscore the enduring appeal of Hotel Colorado within the community.

Best Hotel

Best Bartender: Ashley Efraim

Best Outdoor Patio

Best Pet-Friendly Business

Best Wedding Venue

Best Winter Festival: Holiday Lighting Ceremony

Finalist for Best Bar: Hotel Colorado Restaurant & Bar

Finalist for Best Staycation Location

Lodging to Love. Hotel Colorado emerged as the top pick for best hotel. From the exterior, striking Italianate architecture continues to captivate and charm locals and visitors alike. Inside the hotel, premier lodging that includes beautifully appointed guest rooms is a testament to the hotel’s 130-year legacy of upscale accommodations. In addition to comfy rooms with a historic ambiance, the hotel also features extras that guests appreciate. Hotel Colorado Restaurant and Bar serves breakfast, lunch, and dinner daily, while Legends Coffee and Gift Shop offers flavorful coffee and mouthwatering pastries.

Mixology Perfected. Ashley Efraim has done it again. In a repeat performance, the esteemed bartender at Hotel Colorado Restaurant & Bar earned the title of Best Bartender. Hailing from Pretoria, South Africa, Efraim worked her way around the globe aboard cruise ships learning the ropes of outstanding customer service and hospitality. She landed at Hotel Colorado in 2020, where she has earned a reputation for her skillfully crafted cocktails and warm demeanor. Raise a glass to Ashley with some of her favorite Hotel Colorado drinks including the Train Station, Raspberry Cadillac Margarita, and the Hazelnut Chocolate Martini!

Summer Al Fresco. Hotel Colorado’s outdoor patio was another locals’ favorite. A sweet spot for warm-weather dining, drinks, and entertainment, the courtyard is enclosed on three sides by the hotel’s architecture which mimics the Villa di Medici in Florence, Italy. The central focal point is the outdoor seating for Hotel Colorado Restaurant and Bar. Tables are topped with umbrellas for comfortable dining for lunch or dinner. The Coppertop Bar is located beneath the covered veranda. In summer, cold craft beer and frozen cocktails quench the thirst. Local crooners play here every Friday and Saturday evening through fall, so pull up a chair, grab a drink, a bite to eat, and settle in for a spell.

The Pampered Pet. When it comes to making your canine companions feel at home, Hotel Colorado was voted Glenwood’s Best Pet-Friendly Business. Known for providing hospitality that has four-legged guests jumping for chew toys! The hotel’s Doggy Destination package is a clear winner for guests vacationing with pets. In addition to biscuits always available at the front desks, your pooch receives posh in-room amenities like a large comfy dog bed, sturdy pet bowls for use during visits, and a keepsake toy to play with and take home.

Big Day Perfection. Couples seeking a romantic backdrop for their special day know to go to Hotel Colorado, acclaimed as the Locals’ Choice for Best Wedding Venue. The hotel offers indoor and outdoor ceremony options, complemented by spacious ballrooms for reception festivities, and mouth-watering food and beverage catering services. With a focus on stellar service, the hotel ensures that your special day is nothing short of magical.

Winter Wonderland. The Hotel Colorado Lighting Ceremony is Glenwood’s hands-down winner for best winter event. Held annually post-Thanksgiving, it boasts a lineup of activities that range from ice sculpting to live music. The event culminates with a dazzling illumination of thousands of lights, a spectacular fireworks display, and the rooftop arrival of Santa Claus.