Lovespirals’ sophomore offering, Free & Easy, is actually band founder Ryan Lum’s 6th album, having released 4 other 10,000+ selling Projekt titles under the extended moniker, Love Spirals Downwards. Since 1991, multi-instrumentalist/producer Lum has been slowly but steadily perfecting his craft, mesmerizing listeners with a dreamy combination of ethereal rock, folk, and electronica, enhanced by female vocals ranging from the sensual to the sublime. 1998’s crossover electronica/rock breakthrough, Flux, possessed a more contemporary appeal than earlier efforts; the drum ‘n’ bass infused “Psyche” was even featured on the WB’s Dawson’s Creek. Enthused by the embrace of both his past fanbase and a newly growing listenership, Lum continued to evolve in a dance-oriented style, creating atmospheric jazz-step club tracks — including a remix of darkwave classic, “Bittersweet,” for Claire Voyant’s Time Again released through Metropolis Records.

By 1999, Lum was closely collaborating with new vocalist/songwriter, Anji Bee, under the condensed name Lovespirals. After a series of singles released on compilations such as Chill Out Lounge Vol. 2 and Chill Out in the City, Lovespirals changed gears and began seriously composing material for their first full-length album. Knowing that the album would be released on Projekt, who are known for darker ambient tinged offerings, Lum and Bee decided to hold back on their more upbeat compositions during song selection for their debut 2002 album, Windblown Kiss, focusing instead on darker, jazz-infused rock and folk tracks more in line with Robin Guthrie’s Violet Indiana and the Twin Peaks soundtracks by Angelo Badalamenti and Julie Cruise.

Fastforwarding to the present, Lovespirals are releasing their second album, Free & Easy, which includes lovingly completed versions of their previously unreleased dance songs, as well as a host of new tracks written between 2002 and 2004. With the freedom of launching their own label, Chillcuts, comes a celebration of high energy electronica tracks sprinkled amongst the moodier fare Lovespirals have come to be known for. From the bittersweet trip hop of the album single, “Love Survives” (featured in new webseries,The Strand), to the catchy deep house of “Trouble” (featured in E!’s Gastineau Girls), to the dark bluesy chill out of “Walk Away” (featured in the WB’s Popular DVD), Free & Easy, truly runs the gamut of downtempo sounds and styles. But Lovespirals could never be content writing only electronica; consider the mood masterpiece of the album, “Habitual,” with it’s soaring ethereal vocal harmonies and organic instrumentation.

Lovespirals’ first truly independent release is sure to surprise and delight their longtime fans, while attracting a new audience with it’s diverse range of genres graced by the smoothly sensual Lovespirals touch.