Courteney Cox has admitted that maintaining a long-distance relationship with her partner Johnny McDaid amid the Covid-19 pandemic has been 'hard', as she shared a snap from their first post-quarantine date on Wednesday following two and a half months apart.

The Friends star, 57, spent lockdown in California whilst the Snow Patrol rocker, 44, was in Europe, and Courteney revealed that she found it difficult to spend time away from her partner.

Courteney – who is currently in London at her boyfriend’s apartment – said on SiriusXM’s The Howard Stern Show: 'People from the UK, they still can't come to America. You're not allowed in still, which is crazy.

'He's been vaccinated and he can't come in. I don't understand it. People can go from Florida to Los Angeles, no quarantine. I don't get it. I don't know why they can't come to America and quarantine the way I did.

'I've been on this five-day test and release. I'm going out tonight, can't wait. I don't mean out, just to a restaurant. I just want to go out - literally, out of the apartment. I have not left [Johnny's apartment] except to get a nose swab at Heathrow [Airport].'

The couple were last seen together in Los Angeles at the start of April before reuniting in London this week.

The 57-year-old actress revealed that she and the musician never engaged in 'Zoom intimacy' whilst spending time in different countries as she prefers to engage in 'other' forms of intimacy.

She said: 'Zoom intimacy? We're very intimate, but I don't know how to do that [on Zoom]. There's other kinds of intimacy.'

Sharing a selfie with Johnny at Core By Clare Smyth in Notting Hill on Wednesday evening, the actress said: 'First night out of quarantine! Date night [heart emoji].

'What an amazing experience! Thank you... @corebyclaresmyth.'

Back in October, Courteney said she hadn’t seen her partner for 150 days, after he jetted back to his home in London just after the US began to implement lockdowns.

She explained at the time: 'Let's say it's been 150 days - I've cooked 145 of them. And I haven't seen John in that many days.

'He left the next day [after] the whole country shut down - or at least [when] California did.

'I think maybe New York was before us. I've had these two friends ... they were gonna quarantine with me - which is great, because if I can't be with John, I don't wanna be just by myself with [my daughter] Coco. I'm a little chicken.'

Courteney and Johnny first began dating in 2013 and became engaged nine months later, however they decided to call it off in 2015 and went their separate ways.

The pair reunited the following year but haven't resumed their engagement.

Courteney shares daughter Coco, 17, with her ex-husband David Arquette. Meanwhile Northen Ireland native Johnny has never been married and does not have any kids.