Courteney Cox is celebrating her longtime partner Johnny McDaid's birthday!

On Wednesday, July 25, the Friends alum, 60, shared a heartfelt post on Instagram in celebration of McDaid's 48th birthday, including photos of her singer-songwriter partner performing onstage, flying a plane and grinning alongside Cox with a fish he had caught.

"Happy birthday to the man who can do most anything," she captioned the post. "I love you always J ♥️♥️♥️."

Referencing the freshly caught fish photo, Cox jokingly added: "ps. He threw it back 🐟."

Cox and the Snow Patrol musician have been together since 2013 (although, they briefly split in 2015), and have often been candid about their relationship with fans.

Speaking with PEOPLE in January 2022 about the ups and downs of their decade-long relationship, Cox complimented the Irish star on his listening skills and patience.

The PEOPLE Puzzler crossword is here! How quickly can you solve it? Play now!

"[He's] a great listener. And I've never met someone more patient," Cox told PEOPLE at the time. "He's a great advice-giver. I love his heart, his intentions. His morals. He's extremely talented and obviously musical, but he's a poet and a writer. He's just so smart, and I find that really sexy.

"And then, he is gorgeous," she jokingly added.

Just last year, the pair also celebrated 10 years together, with Cox sharing another Instagram post to mark their relationship milestone. The post featured a hilarious video montage of the couple set to their mutual friend (who first introduced them at a party) Ed Sheeran's song "Shape of You."

In the video, Sheeran even made an appearance to alter some of the lyrics to his hit song to celebrate the couple's anniversary, singing the lyrics: "I know your heart is falling too. Johnny's in love with your body. And last night, you were in his room. And now his bedsheets smell like you. Every day discovering something brand new. Johnny's beard is the shape of you."

Cox has also been candid about the more serious moments of their relationship. During her appearance on the Minnie Questions with Minnie Driver podcast in April, Cox revealed that McDaid called off their engagement during the "first minute" of a couple's therapy session.

Never miss a story — sign up for PEOPLE's free daily newsletter to stay up-to-date on the best of what PEOPLE has to offer​​, from celebrity news to compelling human interest stories.

The actress shared at the time that they had decided to attend a therapy session together to work on their mutual "boundaries" but then, "he just broke up within the first minute. And I was like, 'What?' We were engaged and I was so shocked. I was in so much pain."