NEW YORK (AP) — Jazz great Dizzy Gillespie paid to raise an illegitimate daughter, continually warning her before his death seven years ago not to disclose it publicly, the woman says.

Jean Bryson Tomas, 40, of East Brunswick, N.J., made the disclosure in a lawsuit brought Tuesday against Gillespie's widow and her music company.

Tomas, a jazz singer, is seeking a share of the royalties from his music after settling with Lorraine Gillespie a month ago for a portion of his modest estate, according to Peter Herbert, a lawyer who filed the suit in U.S. District Court in Manhattan on behalf of Tomas.

Herbert said his client did not challenge Mrs. Gillespie sooner because she had been warned repeatedly by Gillespie never to disclose that she was his daughter.

He said she had been told that disclosure would "hurt Dizz she wouldn't have a relationship with him anymore."

She alleged she had been blocked from receiving the payouts she deserves as co-owner of the interest in copyrights to Gillespie's musical compositions.

The lawsuit alleged that Mrs. Gillespie has refused to recognize Tomas as Gillespie's child without a judicial determination to that effect. A lawyer for Mrs. Gillespie did not immediately return a telephone message for comment.

As a result, Mrs. Gillespie and her company, Dizlo Music Corp., have deprived Tomas of the rights and financial benefits to which she is entitled, the lawsuit alleged.

Gillespie died in 1993 in New Jersey, leaving his Englewood propert the rest of his assets to his widow.

Herbert said Ms. Tomas had been warned that disclosing her identity would jeopardize the success of the 1996 release of Gillespie's last recorded performances.

Easing the public announcement of her status as Gillespie's daughter was the acceptance by other members of the famil the willingness of musicians and business associates of Gillespie to acknowledge that he had mentioned her as his daughter, the lawsuit said.

The final piece seemed in place in 1998 when it was learned that Gillespie had formally acknowledged Tomas as his child in court papers filed under seal in 1965 in Family Court in New York, the lawsuit said.