Worksheets /People /Athletes /Venus Williams Facts & Worksheets

Not ready to purchase a subscription? Click to download the free sample version Download sample

Table of Contents

Venus Ebony Starr Williams or simply Venus Williams is an American professional tennis player who ranked number 1 in the world three times. She was recognized by Time magazine as one of the “30 Legends of Women’s Tennis: Past, Present, and Future.” She is the sister of another world-renowned tennis player, Serena Williams.

See the fact file below for more information on Venus Williams or alternatively, you can download our 22-page Venus Williams worksheet pack to utilise within the classroom or home environment.

Key Facts & Information

EARLY LIFE AND EDUCATION

Venus Williams was born in Lynwood, California, to Richard Williams and Oracene Price on June 17, 1980.

When she was 10 years old, she and her family moved to West Palm Beach, Florida in order for her and her sister to attend Rick Macci’s tennis academy.

When she was 11, she was stopped by her father from joining the national junior tennis tournaments so that she could focus on her studies.

In 1995, Venus Williams stopped attending Macci’s academy and her father coached her instead.

CAREER AND ACHIEVEMENTS

On October 31, 1994, she became a professional tennis player at 14.

She had her Grand Slam debut in 1997 and reached Rank no. 22 in the same year.

She won her first singles title against Joannette Kruger in 1998 during the IGA Tennis Classic in Oklahoma City.

In 1999, she started her Australian tour where she and her sister played together and won their first Grand Slam as a pair.

Her ranking went to rank no. 3 on August 30, 1999.

She defeated Hingis who was ranked no. 1 during that time at the Tier I event in Zurich.

She was not able to play during the first five months of 2002 due to tendinitis in both wrists but won 35 consecutive singles matches and six tournaments in the same year.

For the first time, she reached the semifinals of the Australian Open in 2001.

She made history in 2001 when she became the sixth woman to win both Wimbledon and the US Open singles title in consecutive years.

During the Tier I Tennis Masters Series tournament in Indian Wells, California, she had been suffering from knee tendinitis which stopped her from playing. She was booed the next day which made her and her sister not join the tournament for 14 years.

She broke the record for being the first African-American female to reach rank 1 during the Open Era on February 25th, 2002 when she defeated Capriati. Her rank lasted for 3 weeks.

In 2004, she went through tough losses and suffered injuries, and she was not able to qualify for the year-end WTA Tour Championships and landed in the 9th rank.

She won her third Wimbledon title against Pierce in 2005.

Her rank dropped to No. 46 in 2006 since she was not able to play well because she suffered from a wrist injury twice which required her to stop for three months each time.

She set a Grand Slam record for a 206 km/h serve which made her the second-fastest women’s serve ever recorded in 2007 and in the same year, she became the fourth woman to win Wimbledon four times.

Venus and her sister won a gold medal in women’s doubles during the Beijing Olympics in 2008.

2009 marked her 40th professional singles title.

In 2010, she ranked no. 2 in singles and no. 1 in doubles.

In 2012, Venus together with her sister won the most gold Olympic medals for both male and female tennis players.

She was recognized as the 10th most popular player of 2017 based on the website of WTA and she received the WTA Comeback Player of the Year award.

After 15 years, Venus returned to Indian Wells in 2016 and in the same year, she held the record for most Olympic Medals in tennis.

2018 marked her 1000th match and her 20th Fed Cup singles win.

Venus finished her associate degree in fashion design at the Art Institute of Fort Lauderdale on December 13, 2007.

She finished a Bachelor of Science degree in Business Administration in 2015 at Indiana University East.

She is a member of the Jehovah’s Witnesses.

She owns V Starr Interiors in Jupiter Florida. She is the CEO of the company.

She is also a co-owner of the Miami Dolphins.

Venus Kelly E. Carter co-authored a book titled “Come to Win; on How Sports Can Help You Top Your Profession”.

Venus Williams Worksheets

This is a fantastic bundle which includes everything you need to know about Venus Williams across 22 in-depth pages. These are ready-to-use Venus Williams worksheets that are perfect for teaching students about Venus Ebony Starr Williams or simply Venus Williams who is an American professional tennis player who ranked number 1 in the world three times. She was recognized by Time magazine as one of the “30 Legends of Women’s Tennis: Past, Present, and Future.” She is the sister of another world-renowned tennis player, Serena Williams.

Complete List Of Included Worksheets

Venus Williams Facts

All About Venus

Venus, the Star Player

Hit or Miss

Venus Word Hunt

Who’s Venus?

Venus Williams Says

The Life of Venus

The Sister of Venus

What’s Up Venus?

Much More than Tennis

Link/cite this page

If you reference any of the content on this page on your own website, please use the code below to cite this page as the original source.

Link will appear as Venus Williams Facts & Worksheets: https://kidskonnect.com - KidsKonnect, September 17, 2019

Use With Any Curriculum

These worksheets have been specifically designed for use with any international curriculum. You can use these worksheets as-is, or edit them using Google Slides to make them more specific to your own student ability levels and curriculum standards.