We invite you to celebrate the unique talent of Douglas Adams. Join us (and many other Douglas fans!) to commemorate the 42nd anniversary of his book, The Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy.

Douglas was a founder patron of our charity. He once joined us for a climb up Mount Kilimanjaro in a rhino costume and even writes about it in The Salmon of Doubt.

After Douglas’ death in 2001, his family began working with Save the Rhino to set up the Douglas Adams Memorial Lecture; an event with a number of speakers, each focusing on a topic that Douglas was interest in, such as science, exploration, conservation and comedy. The event is traditionally held in March around Douglas’ Birthday, which is 11th March.

The lecture brings Douglas’ fans together, shares an insight into many fascinating topics with brilliant speakers, and raises vital funds for rhino conservation. In recent years we’ve been privileged to hear lectures from Alice Roberts, Brian Cox and Neil Gaiman.

We’re excited to bring this event back in 2021 to celebrate such a significant year after a hiatus since 2016, and of course, opportunity could not be missed to bring a digital version of the event.

This year, the event includes: a fascinating lecture by Baroness Susan Greenfield (The Creative Mind: Insights from Neuroscience), and a presentation by Arvind Ethan David (On the Advisability of Writing Fan Mail), featuring the world premiere of “Socially Distanced Dirk” a new holistic short starring Samuel Barnett and Hannah Marks. Producer and Comedian Rachel Wheeley will be your host.

Details:

Date – Thursday 11th March 2021

Time – 1900 GMT

Cost – Suggested donation £10.00

Tickets for the show start at £4.20. The suggested donation is £10.00. We encourage everyone to donate what they can. Your donation will help us to continue our vital work to protect rhinos.

Your purchase includes access to view the show on demand from 12 am GMT on 12 March through 19 March.

About the speakers:

Baroness Susan Greenfield

Founder and CEO of Neuro-Bio Ltd, Baroness Greenfield is a neuroscientist, writer and broadcaster. She has published more than 200 papers in peer-reviewed journals, and is based mainly at Oxford University but has held research fellowships at the College de France Paris, NYU Medical Center New York and Melbourne University. Baroness Greenfield holds 32 honorary degrees from UK and foreign universities, has received numerous honours including the Legion d’Honneur from the French Government, an Honorary Fellowship from the Royal College of Physicians, The American Academy of Achievement Golden Plate Award, and The Australian Medical Research Society Medal. She is also a Fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh.

Learn more – Twitter | Instagram | Facebook

Arvind Ethan David

Arvind Ethan David is a writer, producer and cultural entrepreneur whose career started with Douglas Adams. David is a lead producer on Broadway’s 15-time Tony-Nominated Jagged Little Pill the musical, based on the seminal Alanis Morissette album. David has produced 9 feature films, including the Asian Academy Award-winning The Garden of Evening Mists, and works extensively in television, including producing Dirk Gently’s Holistic Detective Agency based on the Douglas Adams books for Netflix and BBC America, and is currently working with Neil Gaiman on the forthcoming Anansi Boys TV series.

David’s career began as a student when he adapted Dirk Gently’s Holistic Detective Agency as his school play – and Douglas Adams came to see the production and endorsed it as the official adaptation. That started a friendship with Adams and an association with his work that continues to this day.

Learn more – Twitter | Website | TedxBroadway

Samuel Barnett

Samuel Barnett is an English actor best known for his roles in Dirk Gently, Penny Dreadful and The History Boys, and is an Olivier Award and two-time Tony Award nominee for his stage work.

Learn more – Instagram

Hannah Marks

Hannah Marks’ is an actress and filmmaker. Rolling Stone named her one of their 25 Under 25 artists changing the world, and she was recently one of FORBES magazine’s 30 trailblazers under 30. Hannah plays Amanda in Dirk Gently.

Learn more – Instagram | Twitter

MC & Host – Rachel Wheeley

A comedian and Producer who is a serial Douglas Adams fan.