This article is about the race of demonic magical beings. For the people under control of Babidi's magic, see Organization of Babidi.

The Majin (魔ま人じん族ぞく, Majin-zoku , lit. "Magical People Race" or "Demon People Race") are a race of magical beings. In Dragon Ball Fusions, they are considered part of the Offworlder race.

The earliest Majin to appear first debut in Dragon Ball: Sleeping Princess in Devil's Castle, though they are not referred to as such. Majin have their first mention through Majin Ozotto on the cover of "Fathers", and a full debut via Majin Buu in "The Djinn Awakens?!", the 460th chapter of the Dragon Ball manga. They make their first anime appearance with the same character in "Buu is Hatched", the 232nd episode of Dragon Ball Z.

The most recognizable type of Majin are the Majin subspecies created by Mr. Buu and Miss Buu, though several other members of the Majin species who are not part of this subspecies appear throughout the series.

Biography[]

The first member of this race known is the original Majin Buu, who has existed since time immemorial, cycling between rampages and long hibernation,[2] and was summoned once again 5 million years before Age by the evil wizard Bibidi, who was mistakenly believed by Shin to have been the original Majin Buu's creator. The first Majin to appear was the Teapot Genie - who debuted in Dr. Slump - he defeated Arale but was defeated by the angered Tsukutsun Tsun. Additionally, another member of the race not known to be of relation to Buu named Majin Ozotto existed on the Green Planet until he was defeated by the Z Fighters in the lead up to the Cell Games.[3]

In Dragon Ball Xenoverse 2, one of the combatants inside Frieza's Spaceship will mention that he heard that the Majin Homeworld was destroyed a long time ago.

In Dragon Ball FighterZ, it is revealed that Dr. Gero's Supercomputer somehow acquired Majin Buu's cells (though Gohan suggests they likely did not come from Kid Buu himself), and incorporated it into Android 21, a Bio-Android created from Vomi's template. It is implied her Majin cells are dominant as she has primarily Majin traits in her True Form such as clothing, pink skin, mimicry, and ability to turn people into food. However, her Majin cells went out of control. She also created Clone Kid Buus.

In Dragon Ball Online, it is revealed that, in Age 790, Majin Buu created a female mate called Miss Buu for himself. This led them to start a family leading to the birth of their first child Baby Buu via the Love-Love Beam technique, and thus the dawn of the Majin race on Earth. Majin run the theme park Boo World, which was created by Mister Bii in honor of Majin Buu. The park is divided into "Tasty Zone" and "Fun Zone".

In the Xenoverse series, both male and female Majin are shown to be members of the Time Patrol with several living in Toki Toki/Conton City. The race is noted to possess a natural affinity towards Magic and utilize Magic techniques such as Transfiguration Beam. Interestingly, some of the Majin Time Patrollers do not seem to be fully aware of their race's history such as the creation of Miss Buu and development of the Love-Love Beam.

In Xenoverse 2, Lord Slug is shown to be aware of the existence of Majin and their demonic nature having heard about all the planets destroyed by Majin Buu. Cooler is also shown to be aware of the existence of Majin Buu as he had been warned about them by his father King Cold. Several comments made by various characters in the Xenoverse series implies that other Majin besides Kid Buu may have existed in the past. Additionally, Beerus asserts that he himself is far older than the Majin and apparently views the Majin Future Warrior and presumably all Majin in general to simply be incarnations of the original Majin Buu. One female Majin notes Mr. Satan had a big impact in their race's history due to his role in the creation of Good Buu through his friendship with Innocent Buu. Hit also notes that he heard the Majin are ancient beings and is surprised they actually exist.

Due to a large Rift in Time forming around Majin Buu's House in Age 790 after Mira places a Distorted Time Egg nearby which Majin Buu picked up and kept. This rift timeline is separated from the original history and as a result a different iteration of the origin of the Majin in that timeline occurred. The Majin Future Warrior witnesses Majin Buu reading Bob & Margaret: Forbidden Games as he had in the original history. Buu is inspired by Mr. Satan's parental relationship with Videl and decides to create children via fission though needs lots of food to give him the energy to. This results in the creation of the Majin family. After they return they will give the warrior an item based on their color. Buu will be grateful to the warrior for helping him create his family showing them the Distorted Time Egg he found which they convince him to give to them and if they are a Majin help them unlock their Purification Awoken Skill.

In Age 1000, the Majins play significant role, and various classes of Majin can be chosen as playable characters in Dragon Ball Online.

In Dragon Ball Fusions, Tekka can be customized to be a Majin of an unknown origin if Offworlder is selected as their race at the beginning of the game and certain hair options are selected. Tekka encounters various Majin inside the Timespace Rift, such as Ratopa, a Majin once served as a Supreme Kai.

Buu's subspecies[]

Every member of Buu's subspecies of Majin is inherently the same as the original and as such will become completely identical to him when they purify, regardless of gender.

Appearance[]

They appear to be gum-like humanoids with various skin tones and antenna on their heads.

Body manipulation[]

Buu's Majin subspecies's primary trait is their amorphous, shape-changing bodies that allow them to easily mold their flesh, allowing them to effectively dodge attacks and also extend and enlarge their limbs, as well as regenerate. In Dragon Ball Online and the Xenoverse series, though Majin lack hair they are shown to sport their antenna and the body tissue on their head in ways resembling hairstyles. The ability to absorb appears to be unique to Majin Buu, as no other Majin has ever displayed this trait. Additionally, unlike the original Majin Buu, regular Majin are not immortal and can age. Majin Buu also have demonstrated the ability to alter their facial features, such as when he made his face resemble actor Barry Kahn while trying to impress a terrified female Earthling. When Majin Buu absorbs someone he gains some of their traits.

The artificially created Majin such as Android 21 and the Kid Buu Clones in FighterZ are capable of a form of absorption as Kid Buu Clones can absorb other clones to increase their power though their appearance remains the same. While Android 21 can absorb abilities by absorbing energy Connoisseur Cut and can consume others to absorb them, only resulting in a physical change in the case of Cell.

With regards to Fission, Majin do not create exact copies; Evil Buu retained the clothing of Good Buu, but became skinny. Each member of the Majin family created via fission is born as miniature fat Majins wearing various styles of clothing and accessories such as hats and even Scouters. Miss Buu was created using ideas on feminine attributes from reading Bob & Margaret.Some Majin in the Xenoverse series refer to fissions as clones indicating it is generally considered a form of cloning among some Majin.

In Xenoverse 2, it is implied by Bentora that their malleable Majin physiology allows Majin to survive being crushed by intense gravity Kunel decides to try take advantage of her malleable body after finding dieting difficult performing to try and simply alter her appearance to give herself the perfect body but unfortunately she is unhappy with the results, though ultimately it helps her realize she is comfortable with her original appearance.

In FighterZ, Gohan surmises it is unlikely that the Kid Buu Clones were created from the deceased Kid Buu's cells as he would have regenerated were that the case. Majin cells are also apparently difficult if not impossible to control artificially making them dangerous to use in genetic engineering as exemplified by Android 21 and the Clone Buus.

Skin color[]

Traditionally, Buu's Majin subspecies were one standard color (pink) until the appearance of Evil Buu: a manifestation of Buu's dispelled evil, who is rarely depicted as pink.

In Dragon Ball Online and the Xenoverse games, during character creation, Majin can be various colors such as red, yellow, green, and blue. Some Time Breaker Majin are a similar color to Evil Buu.

In Xenoverse 2, Majin Buu's fission produced offspring can have either Red/Pink, Blue, or Yellow skin and their skin color can change if the Future Warrior gives one food five times (the Future Warrior can halt the process by telling them to Calm Down when they start to change color). The child's skin color determines which type of items they will bring back from their walk after being given food (Red/Pink for Super Souls, Blue for healing items, and Yellow for clothing). Also in Xenoverse 2, Majins retain their selected skin color when reverting to their Pure Majin form.

Gender difference[]

Dragon Ball Online is the first media to show female Majin, as those in the original series spawned from a single, male Majin (Kid Buu). Throughout the original series, it is shown that Majin come in all different body types; the frail Evil Buu, the fat Majin Buu, the tall and muscular Super Buu, and the shorter Kid Buu. However, most male Majin are fat and female Majin are slender like the evil incarnations of Buu. Unlike Majin Buu, the Majin also have more than one antennae and their numbers depend on the gender. Male Majin tend to have two to four antennae shaped similar to horns while the female ones have several that are stylized like hair. Due to Buu's creation of the first female Majin being a result of "Bob & Margaret", female Majin share certain attributes with Human-type Earthling females, such as a feminine bust and slender body shape.

Once a female Majin reaches old age their appearance changes to more closely resemble a male Majin.

While the majority of male Majin are fat like their progenitor Mr. Buu, several skinny male Majin have appeared in Dragon Ball Heroes and Dragon Ball Fusions.

In Dragon Ball Super, it is shown by Good Buu that the bodies of male Majin can slim down if they train strenuously enough, indicating that their fat bodies may be the result of their love of eating. Losing weight also increases a male Majin's power level and gain a physique similar to Super Buu. However, due to their love of food it is implied it can be hard for male Majin to slim down through strenuous training and exercise as shown by the Dekeit in Xenoverse 2 who ends up cheating on his diet by eating 30 cakes and as a result is unable to slim down despite his daily jogging routine. However in Dragon Ball Fusions, it is revealed that through sheer dedication Majin can resist unhealthy eating habits as the Majin Paopao resists the sweets he loves and is proud of his buff muscular body due to all the hard work he puts in to maintain his well earn toned physique.

It is also shown that female Majin can have issues with their body image despite being slimmer than their male counterparts, as shown by Kunel who becomes fixated on losing weight after overhearing an insensitive perverted comment about her appearance from Elder Kai and decides to go on a diet as a result though eventually decides to take advantage of her body manipulation abilities instead to deal with her body image issues, though is displeased with the results. However she eventually she grows tired of worrying about her appearance and dieting, deciding to quit dieting after coming to the realization she is okay with her body. Bazzara is also implied to be working on her weight by dieting and fitness training, cutting down on diet sodas and sweets and eat more nutritious Sweet Potatoes.

Reproduction[]

Buu's Majin subspecies have two basic forms of reproduction, both of which are demonstrated by Mr. Buu. The first method is Fission where a single Majin splits into two different copies of itself. This has only been displayed by Majin Buu with the creation of Evil Buu, Miss Buu and the Majin family. In Xenoverse 2 Majin Buu must be fed a certain amount of food in order to fill his fullness meter and gives him energy to perform Fission.

It was only after Miss Buu's creation that the second method developed. The couple longing for a child like Earthling couples, they read Bob & Margaret again to work that out and developed the process that would become the Majin main means of reproduction. They tore many pieces from various parts of their bodies, mixed them together, and birthed life into the dumpling-shaped pieces by firing their Love-Love Beam at it. This resulted in the birth of their first child, Baby Buu. It is implied they did this several more times after Baby Buu's birth ultimately resulting in establishment of the Majin as a race. Presumably this became the main form of reproduction among the Majin.

Majin can form relationships with those of other races, as displayed in Xenoverse 2 by Haishi and her Earthling boyfriend Schatz. However it is unconfirmed if they can have offspring together.

Diet[]

Due to their Transfiguration Beam technique, Buu's Majin subspecies' diet consists mainly of Candy and other sweets like cookies, ice cream, and pudding, which are by far their preference. As they can turn anything into food using the technique. Evil Buu displayed cannibalistic tendencies, having eaten another Majin turned into candy. Due to the amorphous bodies Majin can eat large amounts of food and have appetites that can rival the Saiyans. Some members have been shown to be quite selfish when it comes to food as Buu refused to let Beerus have even a single pudding cup out of the large number of Buu had. A Majin's love of food borders on gluttony, Super Buu became horrified at the prospect of spending an eternity trapped in the Hyperbolic Time Chamber without sweets, resulting him becoming so angry that he rips through the dimensional wall separating the two dimensions allowing him to escape, and celebrates his freedom by systematically turning everyone on the Lookout into food and consuming them.

Majins do seem to be capable of eating and even enjoying types of food other than sweets as seen in Son Goku and His Friends Return, when Mr. Buu is seen eating regular food with Kibito Kai and Mr. Satan. Mr. Buu is also depicted eating regular food at Bulma's Birthday Party in Dragon Ball Super, indicating that Majin are omnivorous. Bazzara also eats Sweet Potatoes and drinks Diet Soda in Xenoverse 2. Also, in Xenoverse 2, Good Buu and his fission produced offspring are shown to be able to eat a variety of food & drinks such as fish, mushrooms, fruits, vegetables, water, and Milk in addition to their traditional diet of sweets.

It has been shown that they can be generous with their ability to create food, as the Candy Beam can be used to create food for others leading many Majin to take up the culinary arts and the role of chef/cook as a career option. In Dragon Ball Online, Mighty Majin can choose the secondary career option Grand Chef Majin. However, it is revealed in Xenoverse 2 that not all Majin's are good at cooking as Kyume is revealed to be a bad cook.

Innocent Buu is shown to have a tolerance for Poison as one of Mr. Satan's failed attempts to kill him, involved Fancy Chocolates laced with poison,[4] going as far as to say that it was tastier than candy made from Earthlings. In Xenoverse 2, one of the items the Majin are capable of consuming without issue are poisonous mushroom, as shown by Haishi. However, they are also shown to be susceptible to the Secret Poison used by Frost.

It is also implied that PP Candy only partially effects Majin as Bentora is implied to have eaten some while investigating the Capsule Corp. time rift anomaly yet when he whistles, he only gets a really bad stomachache. Additionally, even a Majin's digestive system can handle extremely horrible food such as Chronoa's who is notorious for her terrible cooking skills as the Majin Future Warrior is negatively affected, suffering from stomach cramps.

Android 21 developed an eating disorder due to her cells going out of control causing her to develop an insatiable hunger that caused her mental state to deteriorate the more her hunger increased. Her hunger causes her to turn people into food and eat them. However, food produced by her version of the Transfiguration Beam results vary based on the power and nature of the person as clones tended to taste terrible due to the artificial growth process and stronger people tended to produce the best food. As a result, 21 preferred what they referred to as "organic food" essentially strong fighters who were not clones. When confronting Super Saiyan Blue Goku outside the story, Android 21 even wonders if consuming him could in fact satisfy her insatiable hunger. Evil 21 found the Power Suppression Wave generator remote tasted like garbage due to it being made of inedible materials when she swallowed it.

In Xenoverse 2, as part of the Ultra Pack 2 DLC, Majuub reveals to the Future Warrior that his appetite has gotten bigger and finds it hard to resist candy in particular, which is weird as he wasn't that way before. However, he concludes it is simply due to him getting older and decides not to resist his newfound fondness for candy.

Ki[]

Majin Buu is said to possess an odd ki signature that makes it hard to tell how strong Buu really is. Majins seem to be able to manipulate ki naturally, though it is unclear if they are able to sense ki naturally as Innocent Buu was incapable of sensing ki, while Super Buu and Kid Buu could. Majin can also multiply their ki via the Kaio-ken technique. Majin can access their hidden potential through transforming into their Pure Majin form or without transforming through their Ultimate. Pure Majin and Potential Unleashed both share the same silvery white aura in Xenoverse 2.

In Dragon Ball Heroes, Majin avatars can use godly ki via the God Class-up and Super God Class-up. Xeno Majin Buu gains the godly ki of the Demon God form by absorbing Demon God Dabura as well. In Xenoverse 2, the Majin Future Warrior gains the ability to utilize godly ki at some point before or around the time they start training under Future Zamasu as he senses the faint signature of godly ki coming from the warrior during and after their Initiation Test. Whis also considers the Majin Future Warrior a God of Destruction candidate.

Magic[]

Majin are known for being an inherently magical species and possess the power to transform people into any object or substance they wish from food, drinks, clay, or a ball via their Transfiguration Beam though they can also reverse the transfiguration restoring the target back to normal. Some Majin like Innocent or Good Buu can heal others via their magic even capable of restoring the sight of a person blind since birth. In Xenoverse 2, both Hit and Whis make note of the magical abilities of the the Majin and Whis even suggests Majin have limitless magical power though it is unclear if this applies primarily to the Majin Future Warrior or the Majin race in general.

Culture[]

Generally, Majin are a fun loving race who love to eat. Though originally a peaceful race, following Majin Mani Mani's death while fighting the Frieza Force in Age 834, many Majin were inspired to become fighters and began studying Martial Arts.

Good Buu's primary occupation until Age 793 was that of a martial artist and is known to have participated in the World Martial Arts Tournament as well as being a member of the Z Fighters. He is also known to the world at large as a student of Mr. Satan who became famous through his participation in the World Martial Arts Tournament making it to the finals against Mr. Satan thanks to their rigging tournaments to preserve Mr. Satan's reputation. It is likely that Good Buu's martial arts career had some influence on Majin martial arts as many of his techniques such as Candy Beam, Explosive Buu Buu Punch, Zigzag Express, and Majin Kamehameha are used by his descendants.

Due to their strange powers and abilities, Majin are often viewed by members of other races to be odd or strange, though some find them interesting due to their power and unusual abilities.

Due to their love of fun and making people happy, some Majin enjoy working as entertainers as many are employed at the Boo World theme park in Dragon Ball Online. Even Majin in Conton City such as Gaccho and Wabara are known to enjoy entertaining their fellow Time Patrols with Gaccho and Wabara's Magical Majin History Quizzes in Xenoverse 2. In Dragon Ball Fusions, the female Majin Lullus works as a dancer.

Some evil Majin still exist despite their origin point being the Good Buu. Additionally, there is a risk of Majins losing their good hearts when they attempt to access their pure form and essentially becoming another incarnation of Kid Buu.

Majin engage in interspecies relationships with males of other races such as Saiyans and Earthlings as female Majin Cocresa is shown to have an interest in the Saiyan Basil though this has resulted in a love triangle with a non-Majin girl named Fira, causing Cocresa to suggest sharing him though Fira refuses. The Majin Haishi is implied to be in a relationship with the Earthling Patroller Schatz who finds Haishi's personality adorable and is wrapped around her finger according to the Romance Rangers, with Ein considering her a harpy. The Earthling Mugimo mentions having her first date with Majin Yoid and she worries whether she should risk getting a black eye ruining the chance of a second date or risk getting a graze on her cheek in hopes of impressing him with her bravery. Innocent Buu is known to have found a frightened girl attractive whom he tried to impress by changing his face to resemble Barry Kahn and tried to kiss her, but her terrified rejection caused him to turn her into caramel as she had lied about finding him attractive beforehand. Ironically, Good Buu would gain several female Earthling fans after becoming famous.

Clothing[]

Main article: Buu-gi

Originally, in his pure form Majin Buu wore only bracers, shoes, and signature pants with a Demon mark M on his belt buckle, before gaining more clothes as he absorbed others. When a Majin transforms into their Pure Majin state, they will wear clothing identical to that worn by Kid Buu, though there they will revert to the clothing they were wearing before they transformed after reverting to their base form.

Innocent Buu is also known to wear pajamas while living in the house he created shortly before meeting Mr. Satan.

Generally, Majin wear a type of clothing known as Buu-gi. Buu-gi are clothes that are elastic and specifically designed to be worn by Majin and resemble clothes worn by Majin Buu, Battle Armor, Yardrat, and Metamorans. Buu-gi will also conform to a Majin's gender and body type. It is implied that Majin generally prefer clothing that looks cool (with features such as scarfs or capes), fun (such as the Jester-like Fun Suit), and/or fashionable. The Light Heart Suit is considered the ideal Buu-gi with the perfect balance of style and combat utility. When worn by females the upper body portion of the Light Heart Suit accentuates their bust giving them a more voluptuous appearance and its heart design also apparently makes it popular with females as several Time Patrollers such as Magica, Haishi, Kikiri, and Sumutocco wear the upper body portion in Xenoverse 2. In Xenoverse 2, Majin Time Patrol recruits are issued Buu-gi called the Time Patrol Gi which features the Time Patrol logo and is the official uniform for Majin recruits. There are two different versions of the Time Patrol Gi that are issued based on the Majin's gender.

Interestingly, Majin are apparently capable of regenerating their clothing as well as their bodies even if they are blown to pieces. Also, unlike most races, clothing worn by Majin hardly ever show any major battle damage. In Xenoverse, this extends not only to Majin Buu's Clothes and Buu-gi, but to all types of clothing such as Battle Suits and Turtle Hermit Uniforms as all clothing regenerate with its wearer following a Majin's use of the Ill Bomber technique to blow themselves into pieces. Additionally, all clothing worn by Majin will stretch along with its user when stretching parts of their body.

Like most humanoid females, female Majin wear garments to cover chest and/or to support their bust (in Xenoverse female Majin wear a red strapless bra as an irremovable undergarment which can see when they are either not wearing any upper body clothing or wearing upper body clothing that would expose all or part of their chest if the undergarment was not present such as Broly's Clothes or Uub's Clothes). This implies that Majin practice the same kind of modesty of dress as other races as females keeping their chest covered when in public while male Majin can bare their chest as males of other races do.

While most Majin typically wear Buu-gi, some are known to prefer other types of clothing. Taino prefers to wear Ginyu Force style battle armor as she is a big fan of the Ginyu Force. The hybrids Haru Haru and Shun Shun wear Time Breaker Battle Armor. Bazzara wears Gohan's Tracksuit, while. Dekeit wears Goku's.

Other Majin types[]

Not every member of the Majin race is a part of the subspecies spawned by Majin Buu and several other types of Majin have appeared.

One such Majin is the Teapot Genie, a Majin who existed on Earth.

Some inhabitants of the Demon Realm,[5] including the Ogres and the demon who shapeshifted into Princess Misa, are also types of Majin.[6]

Another is the Spring Majin and their variants - the Ensei Majin and Gogyo Majin, which exist on Planet Earth.

There is also Majin Ozotto, a Super Monster who dwells on the Green Planet. This type of Majin possess the special trait of shapeshifting into a foe and copying their signature abilities. The Super Monster is also capable of undergoing a transformation, becoming rotund and growing extra arms from its chest.

There are also the Phantom Majin (幻魔人, genmajin ) - called Phantasm in the English subs - with the only example being Hirudegarn, who was created from a statue of a Demon God by a clan of evil wizards who infused it with evil, turning into a living monster. It evades attacks by turning into ectoplasm, using its tail to absorb the energy of living beings, and breathing fire. The Phantom Majin has displayed two forms.

Additionally, there is such a thing as a battle-enhanced Majin, the only example being Nox - who was created by magicians.

A Majin similar to Kid Buu named Fin was created by Towa to act as a member of the Dark Empire.

It is also possible to create a hybrid Majin - such as Android 21 who is a new type of Android with cells from both Majin Buus as well as Frieza, Cell, the Z Fighters and countless researchers.

Supreme Kai

Main article: Supreme Kai

It is revealed in Dragon Ball Fusions that Majin can serve as Supreme Kai, though there is only one known example: Ratopa, who served as Supreme Kai long ago but eventually quit.

During the Galactic Patrol Prisoner Saga, Good Buu awakened the ability to transform into Grand Supreme Kai after gaining access to the Grand Supreme Kai's memories. However Good Buu lacks the full godly power of Grand Supreme Kai as a majority of it remained with Kid Buu after they split. As a result, when the Grand Supreme Kai came to Uub, the reincarnation of Kid Buu, he was able to help Uub use this power to grant Goku ki.

Classes[]

Two starting careers are available to the Majin race in Dragon Ball Online: Mighty Majin (the physical fighting class) and Wonder Majin (the spiritual class). Once reaching the required level of skill, a Mighty Majin may choose to take on one of two secondary careers Ultimate Majin or Grand Chef Majin, while a Wonder Majin may choose to take on Karma Majin or Plasma Majin.

Majin who work as Time Breakers are referred to as "Addicted Majin".

Armors

By utilizing the class upgrades, the Majin avatars in Dragon Ball Heroes are capable of gaining different armors as part of their body that increase their power.

Forms and transformations[]

Pure Majin[]

Main article: Pure Majin

In Dragon Ball Online, when members of the Majin race manage to summon Shenron, they can wish for a unique transformation labelled as Pure Form. This form resembles Kid Buu, who is Majin Buu's Pure Form. The Pure form is also mentioned in Dragon Ball Z: Shin Budokai - Another Road, when Future Super Buu achieves his Pure form, Future Kid Buu.

When a regular member of the Majin race (like the ones in Dragon Ball Online) takes on their Pure Form, their dormant power is released. When a Majin who has absorbed others to increase their power takes on their Pure Form (like Majin Buu), their power changes to what it was before the absorptions, in Super Buu's case decreasing when becoming Kid Buu.

In Dragon Ball Xenoverse 2, the Majin Future Warrior can access this form with help from Good Buu, who reveals that there is a risk of one losing their heart, causing them to essentially turn into another incarnation of Kid Buu. In their pure Majin form, the Warrior takes a form nearly identical to Kid Buu, though retains their voice and skin tone, and gains access to his techniques.

In Dragon Ball FighterZ, all of Android 21's Clone Buus are Pure Majins though Gohan suspects they were not cloned from Kid Buu's cells as had any survived due to sampling he would have regenerated were that the case. Android 21 (Good) also implies Good Buu's cells were used as he is still alive, and it is known that his descendants possess Kid Buu's latent power which can be accessed via the Pure Majin form. Presumably the clone's heartless nature and the Majin cells uncontrollable nature caused the clones to become Pure Majin which due to their heartlessness became incarnations of Kid Buu. These clones possess a weaker version of Kid Buu's absorption ability which allows them to absorb other clones to power up without taking on their absorption's characteristics.

Super Majin[]

Super Majin is the state that Titima is always in.

Shape-Up[]

A form achievable by male members of Buu's Majin subspecies through training to lose weight and become buff. It first appeared through Paopao in Dragon Ball Fusions, and Innocent Buu briefly achieved it in the anime version of the Universe Survival Saga.

Demon God

Main article: Demon God

In Super Dragon Ball Heroes, Xeno Majin Buu acquires the Demon God form by absorbing Demon God Xeno Dabura allowing him to utilize Godly ki and wield Demon God Dabura's sword.

Super Monster's transformation[]

Majin Ozotto (the Super Monster) is shown to be capable of a transformation unique to his Majin type. In his transformed state he becomes much more rotund, and he grows an extra pair of arms.

Phantom Majin transformation[]

Phantom Majin like Hirudegarn are shown to be capable of evolving into a new state, with Hirudegarn taking on his transformation after being taken down by Gotenks, this form is much stronger and grants the Phantom Majin wings in order to allow flight.

In some games, the host of the Phantom Majin can fully transform into the beast if they choose to, or when overtaken by it.

In Super Dragon Ball Heroes: World Mission, if the Phantom Majin is freed from his hosts by resonating with the dark evil ki emitted by those empowered by Villainous Mode he can reform fully evolved into his transformed state.

Known Majin[]

Buu's Majin subspecies[]

Kid Buu

Future Kid Buu

Xeno Majin Buu

Innocent Buu

Good Buu

Miss Buu

Mr. Buu

Majin family

Future Innocent Buu

Future Good Buu

Evil Buu

Future Evil Buu

Super Buu

Future Super Buu

Clone Kid Buus - Pale fast growing Pure Majin clones of Kid Buu created by Android 21. Due to the uncontrollable nature of Majin cells, Kid Buu clones are not mindless and share the original Kid Buu's evil personality and mannerisms.

Baby Buu - Child of Mr. & Miss Buu)

Majin Mani Mani - Mentioned in the Dragon Ball Online timeline, he died fighting Frieza's forces in Age 834 and inspired the Majin to become fighters.

Titima - Super Majin

Kabra - A small Majin-Buu-type Majin in Dragon Ball Heroes.

Yoshito-kun - A fancy looking Majin Buu in Dragon Ball Heroes)

Salaga - A Kid Buu-type Majin in Dragon Ball Heroes

Time Patrol Majin

Youths - From the Dragon Ball Online trailer

Majin Future Warrior - Custom protagonist in Xenoverse

Majin Future Warrior - Custom protagonist in Xenoverse 2

Female

Taino

Seino

Ein

Eioh

Haishi

Kaijiya

Kikiri

Kunel

Kyume

Cocresa

Bazzara

Magica

Nanmai

Pepero

Sumutocco

Hilack

Wabara

Mendo

Howatah

Naada[7]

Punohsa

Roim

Yosoro

Yossho

Male

Saccimo

Goma

Graham

Gejum

Gaccho

Achoh

Bentora

Choi

Chosuke

Dekeit

Dosco

Fwa'ah

Hakkyo

Hatta

Kolash

Manda

Manola

Niccimo

Nokota

Risuigo

Saim

Yoid

Yokkoi (self-proclaimed Great Saiyaman 3)

Wazari

Addicted Majins

Pakka - A skinny yet muscular male Majin who has studied martial arts and philosophy.[8]

Maida - A skinny male Majin who studies kenpo and is good at controlling ki.[8]

Paopao - A buff Majin who is very proud of his hard-earned muscles, he resists eating the sweets he loves in order to keep his body tone.[8]

Ninny - A Majin who excels at support moves.[8]

Petrona - Innocent tomboyish Majin girl. A member of the Majin Superstar Troupe PePiLu.[8]

Lullus - A Majin girl who is a dancer. A member of the Majin Superstar Troupe PePiLu.[8]

Artificial Majin[]

Artificial Pure Majin

Fin - A Pure Majin created by Demon Goddess Towa. Like Buu he can absorb others to increase his power and gain their abilities, though unlike them he can store and retain their genetic information within himself.

Bio-Android

Android 21 - A New-Type Android based on a female Earthling, possess Buu's cells, as well as those of many others. In her true form, her Majin traits are most dominant.

Android 21 (Good) - The pure good fission that represents her gentle "heart".

Android 21 (Evil) - The pure evil fission that represents her evil split personality that developed as a result of the Majin cells.

Super Mira (Fin Absorbed) - After absorbing the Majin Fin, Super Mira becomes part Majin. Fin will separate from Mira if Super Mira (Fin Absorbed) is defeated.

Android Majin - Bio-Android Time Breaker Majin based off Buu's Majin subspecies. Both male and female Android Majin exist.

Other Majin[]

Teapot Genie - a Majin who existed on Earth.

Ghastel - an Ogre.

Majin Ozotto - a "Super Monster" who lived on the Green Planet.

Hirudegarn - a Phantom Majin created on Planet Konats.

Demon Realm Race Majin

Haru Haru - A blue/purple female Demon Realm Majin who joined the Time Breakers though later defected to the Demigra Army. Shun Shun's twin sister.

Shun Shun - A green female Demon Realm Majin who joined the Time Breakers though later defected to the Demigra Army. Haru Haru's twin sister.

Spring Majin - a type of Majin which live on Earth.

Ensei Majin - a type of Majin which live on Earth.

Gogyo Majin - a type of Majin which live on Earth.

Ratopa - A skinny male Majin who once served as a Supreme Kai long ago.[8]

Nox - a battle-enhanced Majin created by magicians long ago, his main purpose is to fight, and he does nothing but that.[8]

Fusions[]

Janembuu (Super Janemba + Kid Buu; EX-Fusion)

Majin Satan (Good Majin Buu + Mr. Satan; EX-Fusion)

Majuub (Good Buu + Uub)

Trivia[]

"Majin" is a Japanese word with no direct translation, meaning "one who has a supernatural ability", and it often used to refer to creatures with magical powers. The characters in the word individually translate to "demon/demonic, devil or magical" (魔, ma) and "person" (人, jin).

Majin Buu was partially based off the Dr. Slump villain "Teapot Genie" (茶ビン魔人, Chabin Majin ), who along with resembling the fat version of Buu, was also incredibly powerful, and was referred to as a Majin, due to "majin" being a synonym for "genie" in Japanese.

In Dragon Ball Xenoverse, if a Majin Future Warrior talks to Frieza while he is their Master, Frieza will mention that he is impressed at how powerful Majin are able to become without the need to transform.

In Dragon Ball Xenoverse 2, when first fought in the main story Zarbon will find a Majin Future Warrior appearance monstrous and repulsive regardless of if they are male or female. However, while training a Majin Future Warrior, he will be jealous of the Majin's shiny and smooth skin.

In Xenoverse 2, if a Majin Future Warrior takes on Dodoria as an instructor, Dodoria will reveal he originally thought they were a member of Dodoria's race when he first saw them, but after looking at them more closely he realizes they are not.

In Xenoverse 2, Lord Slug is shown to be aware of the existence of Majin and their demonic nature as he had heard stories about the planets destroyed by Majin Buu and refers to them as those legendary creatures. However Slug is unaware of what Majin look like, and he does not recognize them as a demon at first due to their harmless looking appearance, though upon recognizing them welcomes them into his army, pleased to have such a creature as an underling.

He also notes to the Namekian Future Warrior that Namekians and Majin fight pretty well together and even asks them if they are sure if they are not part Majin as they cannot master what he has taught them unless evil resides within them, though after they compete his training he notes that could utilize his techniques regardless if they possess a strong enough constitution to prevent the power of demons from tearing their body to shreds. Presumably Majin are able to utilize that power naturally due to their inherently demonic nature.

In Dragon Ball FighterZ, it is implied that Majin cells and DNA are naturally uncontrollable making them dangerous to utilize in genetic engineering using Earth based technology as shown by Android 21 and the Clone Buus.

The Clone Buus are virtually identical to Kid Buu in terms of behavior instead of being mindless drones. This is likely the result of his cells uncontrollable nature presumably due to demonic and magical nature of the Majin.

In a special event between Adult Gohan & Good Buu against Clone Buu, Gohan points out it should be impossible to clone Kid Buu using his cells as he would be able to regenerate if any of his cells survived.

In the English releases of Dragon Ball, anyone with the Demon mark is considered a Majin but in the Japanese releases, that is not the case.

Gallery[]

References[]

Site Navigation[]

v · MajinBuu's Majin subspeciesOther Majin race membersHybrid MajinMajin FusionsMajin TransformationsOther TransformationsOrganization of BabidiRelated articles

v · DemonsDemon Realm RaceDevilsDemonic EntitiesDemonic TransformationsDemon Power-upsDemon ClansFusionsRelated

v · DeitiesKing of AllDragon GodsAngelGod of DestructionSupreme KaiKaiGuardianSuper Saiyan GodDemon GodFusion GodsAttendantOtherGodly formsRelated

v · AndroidsRed Ribbon AndroidsDr. Hedo's AndroidsBio-AndroidBio-WarriorOther AndroidsOther CyborgsUniverse 3Universe 7 FusionsRelated

v · People of the CosmosSupreme KaisKaisOgresOther beingsOther World TournamentRelated articles

v · Dark EmpireLeadersNotable MembersMembersFused MembersOther affiliatesSub-factionsConflicts

Main ConflictsAltered Timelines

Related

v · Time PatrolLeadersMembers

Heroes MembersFused MembersXenoverse MembersOnline Members

SquadronsMasters/Instructors/PartnersAlliesConflicts

Main ConflictsAltered Timelines

Related Articles