ON THE COURT

PLAYER OF THE GAME: Bucks forward Mike Dunleavy Jr. has struggled with his perimeter shot early in the season. But he broke through on Wednesday, hitting 3 of 5 three-pointers and finishing with 18 points to help Milwaukee win its third straight road game. He had 16 points in the second half and was 3 of 3 from beyond the arc.

PLAY OF THE GAME: Houston coach Kevin McHale took a timeout with 9:43 left in the fourth quarter after the Bucks had scored 14 straight points, including the first eight in the period. But after Bucks forward Larry Sanders blocked a shot by Houston's Kyle Lowry, Dunleavy responded with a three on the other end, hiking the Bucks' lead to 83-70 with 9:15 left.

PLAYING THE NUMBERS: The Bucks had a 12-0 lead but trailed by 12 (54-42) early in the third quarter. But the Bucks' 20-0 run late in the third and early in the fourth periods changed the game. Dunleavy had eight points, Beno Udrih six and Jackson four in the run, with Sanders adding the final two.

BUCKS BANTER: The Bucks ended an 11-game losing skid in Houston and an eight-game streak at the Toyota Center. Milwaukee was the last NBA team to pick up a victory in the Toyota Center, home of the Rockets.

UP NEXT

TEAMS : Bucks (7-10) vs. Chicago Bulls (16-4).

WHEN:7 p.m. Friday.

WHERE: United Center.

BROADCASTS:TV - FS Wisconsin. Radio - AM-620.

NOTEBOOK

BOGUT HURTING: Bucks center Andrew Bogut turned his left ankle late in the first quarter and could not return.

Initial X-rays were negative, but Bogut is expected to undergo a magnetic resonance imaging exam Thursday.

"It wasn't good," Bogut said of landing on Lowry's foot while trying to block a shot. "I knew when I came down I was in some trouble. Everything is fine with the X-ray, but that's to be expected. I know I didn't break a bone.

"Tomorrow is the day of reckoning where I go under the MRI machine and find out my fate."

The best-case scenario would be a bad sprain.

"Once we know what the diagnosis is, we'll know how to treat it," Bogut said. "But it's going to be ice-massage, ice-massage, ice-massage.

"I'm not optimistic with my history of unlucky injuries. But I'm hoping this one can do me a favor and (go away). Most of my injuries are unfortunate things and this goes in the same boat as that."

SAMPSON IN NEW SPOT: Former Bucks assistant coach Kelvin Sampson was greeting members of the Milwaukee coaching staff before the game.

He exchanged greetings with Bucks assistants Jim Boylan, JoeWolf and Bill Peterson, all colleagues during his three years with Milwaukee.

Now Sampson is the lead assistant for McHale in Houston.

"I've been with three different coaches in this league - Pops ( Gregg Popovich), Scott ( Skiles) and Kevin," Sampson said. "It's a blessing you're around great people.

"And they're all different. That's what makes coaching a unique profession. There's no one way to do it. The key is being who you are and coaching to your personality, and all three do."