DORSET, England --- Meggitt PLC, a global group of companies with leading expertise in the design and manufacture of high-performance components and systems for aerospace, sensing and defense applications, has announced the formation of a new Meggitt Sensing Systems division.

The division has been formed by merging the Meggitt Aerospace Systems and Meggitt Electronics groups into a single entity that aligns some of the world's most notable companies in the sensing industry with related products, services and applications.

With centers of excellence in France, Switzerland, Spain, the UK and the United States, Meggitt Sensing Systems will have unmatched capabilities to deliver more critical sensing solutions into the aerospace, energy, medical, industrial and automotive sectors than any other company. The new division will be led by Dr. Richard Greaves, a 30-year industry veteran and most recently the Managing Director of Meggitt Aerospace Systems.

"Meggitt Sensing Systems is a natural and timely evolution of our sensing businesses that blends the unique capabilities and outstanding market positions of our Electronics and Aerospace groups," said Meggitt PLC CEO Terry Twigger. "By joining forces, they will create the pre-eminent group in this field in the world with manufacturing and engineering capability on three continents, unparalleled technical resources, leading positions in our key markets, and a much stronger marketing capability."

Meggitt produces sensors for measuring virtually every physical parameter - acceleration, speed, pressure, force, temperature, distance, position, vibration and level - without fail over the long term and in severe conditions. They function on engines at high temperatures; on heart muscles and in the blood stream; on anthropomorphic dummies fixed to ejector seats; immersed in jet fuel; at missile and satellite launches; on offshore wind turbines; and on helicopter rotor heads in the desert.

The company deploys a wide array of technologies, including piezoelectric, piezoresistive, capacitive, resistive, inductive, magnetic and optical, to address its customers' key challenges in high temperature, high shock, limited space and weight, biocompatibility and communications. In-house and in conjunction with universities and national labs in Europe and the United States, Meggitt is further developing its already considerable high-temperature sensing capability, a key enabler for future jet engines and power generation, and investing substantially in micro-electronic mechanical systems (MEMS) capabilities for next generation applications.

-ends-