(1983–2011). British singer-songwriter Amy Winehouse skyrocketed to fame as a result of the critically acclaimed multiple Grammy Award-winning album Back to Black (2006). Her stormy love life, erratic behavior, and substance-abuse problems stalled her recording career even as they made her a favorite subject of tabloid journalism.

Amy Jade Winehouse was born on Sept. 14, 1983, in London, England. She was raised primarily by her mother, a pharmacist, who divorced her father, a taxicab driver, when Winehouse was nine. Early on she demonstrated an interest in the arts, but she was expelled from Sylvia Young Theatre School for wearing a forbidden nose ring. At the prestigious BRIT School, Winehouse showed ability as an actor as well as a singer, and by age 16 she was performing with jazz groups. On her critically acclaimed debut album, Frank (2003), she proved herself to be a shrewd, caustic lyricist, and her smoky, evocative vocals drew comparisons to jazz and rhythm-and-blues legends Sarah Vaughan, Dinah Washington, and Billie Holiday.

A series of tumultuous romances followed for Winehouse, none more fevered than her on-again, off-again relationship with Blake Fielder-Civil, about whom many of the heartbreak songs on her next album, Back to Black, were written. Her singing on that album, more in the vein of Motown and 1960s and ‘70s soul, delighted critics. A very different-looking Winehouse had begun appearing in the tabloids as the new album took off in Britain and broke through in the United States, entering the American charts at number seven, the highest debut position ever for a British woman. Stick-thin and tattooed, Winehouse began piling her jet-black hair in an enormous beehive that, along with heavy Cleopatra-style eye makeup, became her trademark look. After marrying Fielder-Civil in May 2007, Winehouse began behaving increasingly erratically and canceling shows. Her very public slide into personal chaos—marked by dramatic anorexic weight loss, drunken performances, an arrest in Norway for marijuana possession, and the incarceration of Fielder-Civil after a bar fight—culminated in January 2008 in the posting on the Internet by the Sun newspaper of a video in which Winehouse appeared to be smoking crack cocaine.