The date was November 18, 1993. It’s hard now to recall how few FM signals there were, three in Owensboro (92.5, 96.1 and 90.3), plus a handful from neighboring Evansville, Henderson, and Madisonville. But another commercial FM for Owensboro? We had an FM for each AM here, and that’s about all you could have in those days. Market ownership limits were still a thing, as were strict city-of-license regulations. It so happened that a frequency was available as close as Philpot, which was well within the mileage to have its studio in Owensboro.

Let’s backtrack a bit. Some 21 years before, Bayard H. “Bud” Walters had successfully launched WKCM-AM, first at 1140 and then ten years later at 1160. In the few years previous to the 1993 date we mentioned, FM’s were in the conversation again. WKCM-FM, at 102.9, launched in 1990 as a companion to WKCM. That wasn’t all. Another newly assigned frequency, 105.7FM, became available, and Walters had a chance to run this one, WLME-FM, in an LMA, or local marketing agreement. Then, the icing on the cake arrived: the availability of 94.7FM. Purchases and plans were made. A space in a building on Tamarack Road, a strip center opened a few years earlier by Massie Clarke, was secured. Offices and a studio were constructed. Now, for a leader.

Paul B. Daniel was well known in the radio community. He had been Sales Manager, then General Manager, of WBKR during a time of growth for the company. Under his leadership, the company built new facilities and underwent a power upgrade. After his time there, he went to WHIC-AM-FM (now WULF) in Hardinsburg, overseeing their power increase and building renovation. But Paul B. needed a new challenge. That’s when he met with Walters, and radio was changed in Owensboro. A few salespeople were hired, an operations manager, and an office/traffic director.

“In October 1993, I was called over to 1115 Tamarack, and among the chaotic construction going on within that space, I walked into a perfectly furnished office, with pictures of grandchildren on the walls, isolated from the rest of the place. Paul B. pulled out his pack of cigarettes and laid it on his desk, took a sip of coffee, and said in his calm manner, ‘Rob, we’re trying to put together a new radio station.’” – Rob Nichols, host of the “Country Club”

“When I walked into WBIO, I heard “Rose Garden” by Lynn Anderson playing throughout the office, and I immediately knew I was where I belonged. Serving my community has filled my heart in ways that you can never imagine. Being a source for comfort for someone, a familiar voice telling a funny joke, an important road closing, or even a fun community event, just always know that we are there. WBIO stands for We Believe in Owensboro, and we absolutely do. It is all thanks to you!” – Mel Ford, News Director and host of “Mel in the Morning” on sister station WVJS

Times have changed.

Radio has changed.

The commitment of Mr. Walters and WBIO hasn’t.

So many have passed though that door at 1115 Tamarack. Many of them are no longer with us, but helped make us who we are today.

We thank YOU for being with us on the journey.

To the next 30 years!