San Andres Apostol Church (Candaba Pampanga)

Pinac was the old name of the town. Today pinac is just a part of it, what is now known as the sanctuary of Migratory birds. The old church is one of those skinned and somewhat appears to be untouched. I remember when we went there for my cousin’s wedding I stared at the belfry it appears to be altered maybe due to destruction and preventive measures. I have read an account stating a strange feature of the church, those tiles at the front door were said to have a Chinese inscriptions. Box type retablo probably the original painted in white with goldleafing.

The above featured photo was with the consent of the owner.

Also visit their flickr account for more of these images at;

http://www.flickr.com/photos/allan_borja/

Santa Catalina de Alexandria Church (Porac Pampanga)

The avalanched of lahar almost erased this town to the map of Pampanga. Aetas made refuge of this area after their homes were devastated by the eruption of Mt. Pinatubo. “Binulo Festival” is their signature festivity recently introduced to the public. Binulo is the way of cooking of the Aetas native. The church was simple with only the circular rose window. One of its distinct feature is that the seal of The Agustinian Missionary can still be found at the head of the main door. Other churches loose this detail due to the inclusion of canopies in front of the main door. Typical Christ centered main altar.

The above featured photo was with the consent of the owner.

Also visit his flickr account at;

http://www.flickr.com/photos/allan_borja/

San Pedro Apostol Church (Apalit Pampanga)

Known for their Fluvial Festival and the life size Image of Saint Peter made of Ivory. The church stands next to a large body of water, the Pampanga River. Those who take the North Luzon Expressway can have a better glimpse of the structure. Church façade features a twin towered belfry, atop a galvanized structure same as the material used for the dome. The interior features a monochromatic painting on walls done by students of world’s famous painter Alberoni. The retablo mayor remains though painted several times, to date the paint is colored to appear as wood type. People are allowed to go up the retablos back for them to be able to touch the Image of San Pedro.

The above photos featured were with consent to the owner.

Also visit their flickr accounts at;

http://www.flickr.com/photos/munsterinc/

http://www.flickr.com/photos/allan_borja/