San Pedro Apostol Church is an old Roman Catholic church, a diocesan shrine, a National Historical Landmark, and a National Cultural Treasure located in Loboc, Bohol, Philippines. Its name is St. Peter the Apostle Parish – Diocesan Shrine of Nuestra Señora Guadalupe de Extremadura.

It is otherwise known as Loboc Church, Saint Peter the Apostle Parish Church, and Parroquia de San Pedro Apóstol.

History

Loboc was a mission station established by Fr. Juan de Torres, a friar of Society of Jesus in 1596. It was considered a parish in 1602, the year that its oldest parochial documents are dated and what is written in an inscription found on a convent wall.

Later, it became a residence of the Jesuits, chosen for its inland location and thus less likely to be attacked by seaborne pillagers and easier to be protected when assailed.

Fr. Alonso de Humanes, believed to be a saintly figure, was buried in the church. Miracles attributed to him spread and the church became a pilgrimage site.

An early church, as well as a training school for boys called “Seminario de los Indios“, was believed to be made of light materials. It didn’t survive when a fire hit in 1638.

The completion of the present church is placed to be in 1734 as opposed to oral tradition passed on that it was built a century earlier. Augustinian Recollects replaced the Jesuit mission in Bohol in 1768 and built the bell tower, convent (1854), portico and mortuary chapel (1858, within the term of Fr. Aquilino Bon, OAR), and the buttresses (1884, under the administration of Fr. Jose Sanchez and succeeding Recollect friars).

The church was declared a National Historical Landmark by the National Historical Institute in 1998. Two years later, it was declared a National Cultural Treasure by National Museum of the Philippines.

Loboc Church was heavily damaged due to an earthquake on October 15, 2013. The next year, the overflowing of Loboc River from typhoon Seniang caused further damage.

The National Museum of the Philippines funded and undertook the restoration project that began in 2017 and completed on May 16, 2021. The Tourism Infrastructure and Enterprise Zone provided additional funding for its restoration.

It was once included in the Tentative List for UNESCO World Heritage under Baroque Churches of the Philippines (Extension), but it was removed in 2014.

Its status was elevated into a diocesan shrine of its second patroness, Nuestra Señora Guadalupe de Extremadura, on May 24, 2021.

Heritage

The National Historical Institute (NHI) installed a heritage marker in 1999.

Architecture

A two-level portico with a pediment runs along the whole length of the church’s original facade. Pilasters define its five vertical sections and moldings its horizontal levels. The ground level is an arcade of three arches alternated with a wall surface, on which a relief can be found, and either sides are likewise pierced with an arch. The upper register on the other hand is a series of three arched windows, the central one flanked by two niches containing statues. The pediment is triangular and can be considered to be divided into two levels, the lower one partitioned further into five parts and the upper into three. A rose window pierces the central section of the lower pediment, flanked by cartouches which are in turn flanked by smaller rose windows. The upper portion of the pediment contains a high relief of the emblem of the papacy flanked by blind rose windows.

An octagonal tower protrudes from either side of the facade. They are topped with a pyramidal roof. The walls of the nave are supported by buttresses that slope diagonally from the wall to the ground.

Celebration

The feast of St. Peter is held every June 29th. Moreover, the feast of Our Lady of Guadalupe is held every May 24th in a celebration called Bolibong Kingking Festival.

Services

The parish office is open every day except Tuesday from 9:00 until 11:00 in the morning and 2:00 until 5:00 in the afternoon. It is closed on holidays.

Mass schedule

Below is the weekly mass schedule of San Pedro Apostol Church in Loboc, Bohol from August 26, 2024 to September 1, 2024. Please reach out to the church for an updated schedule. Additionally, you may also want to view mass schedules of churches in Loboc.

Monday

6:00-7:00 AM

Tuesday

6:00-7:00 AM

Wednesday

5:15-6:15 PM

Thursday

6:00-7:00 AM

Friday

6:00-7:00 AM

Saturday

6:00-7:00 AM

5:00-6:00 PM (Anticpated Mass - English)

Sunday

5:00-6:00 AM

6:30-7:30 AM

8:30-9:30 AM

5:00-6:00 PM

Church information

Nearby Churches

Immaculate Conception Church in Concepcion, Loay, Bohol

Most Holy Trinity Church in Loay, Bohol

Our Lady of Guadalupe Church in Quinoguitan, Loboc, Bohol

Our Lady of Guadalupe Church in Sevilla, Bohol

San Isidro Labrador Church in Bilar, Bohol

St. Anthony of Padua Church in Sikatuna, Bohol

St. James the Greater Church in Batuan, Bohol

References