Welcome to The

Anthony Quinn Estate

“Someone once said if I was left on an island, I’d reconstruct the rocks.

I have a need to say I was here.”

Anthony Quinn spent his life leaving his mark on the world. His creative mind and spirit continue to move us and enrich our lives through his art and acting. The Anthony Quinn Estate was established to document and preserve his life in art and in film for decades to come.

The Anthony Quinn Foundation

Our mission is to advocate for the important role arts education plays in personal development and in the overall improvement of social, economic and cultural systems.

Central to the pursuit of the Foundation’s mission is the life story of Anthony Quinn. His artistic legacy inspires young adults; learning about the challenges of his youth and the ways in which he overcame them helps inspire confidence in their own creative potential. Toward these ends, the Anthony Quinn Foundation:

Provides scholarship support to gifted young adults seeking to further their talents in the areas of Visual Arts & Design as well as the Performing, Media and Literary Arts.

Sponsors Exhibitions and Creative Retreats.

Provides access to the creative world of Anthony Quinn, including his private art collections.

read the Anthony Quinn story

Permanent & Private Collections

The Smithsonian AAPG Library - October 19, 2022

"The Great Spirit" book by Anthony Quinn has entered the permanent collection of the Smithsonian AAPG Library. This important work by Anthony Quinn joins the Smithsonian's special collections and rare objects related to American art and culture, and is available for research and exhibition to Smithsonian scholars and the public.

Autry Museum of the American West - November 08, 2022

“The Tribal Series” has entered the permanent collection of the Autry Museum of the American West. The work is available for loan to other institutions for temporary exhibitions. Researchers of all kinds have access to the Tribal Series through the Autry Resources Center, a new educational, research, and collections care facility of the Autry Museum of the American West.

Purchase Anthony Quinn’s Art

View and purchase a range of Anthony Quinn’s prints and books directly from the Anthony Quinn Estate. This art was the last run of prints made by Anthony Quinn before his death and are individually numbered by the artist himself.