The passing of Dr. Ebenezer Ako Adjei on January 14, 2002, at the most respectable age of 85 years; closes a chapter in the political history of Ghana. Dr. Ako Adjei's departure certainly closes the curtain on what can be adequately described as the Founding Fathers of modern Ghana; the group known as the Big Six who played a pivotal role in a defining moment of our struggle for independence from Britain.

The death of Dr. Ako Adjei also has generated discussion and debate regarding the manner in which our most respected historical figures have been ignored. Because of coup d'etats and political vicissitudes, most of the central figures in our nation's political history have been sidelined. CPP propaganda during Ghana's formative years promoted Kwame Nkrumah at the expense of the other five, who were vilified as saboteurs.

Dr. Ako Adjei is a case in point. It is reported that on the eve of his release from the Nsawam Prison in 1966, where he had been sent by president Dr. Kwame Nkrumah four years earlier, Ako Adjei completely forswore politics, and any participation thereof. This meant that, for the last 35 years of his life, Dr. Ako Adjei was unseen, and unheard, in the national discourse.

Nonetheless, Dr. Ako Adjei's life prior to his imprisonment was anything but hermit-like. Like most of the ambitious Gold Coast young men of his era, he sought university studies abroad; a journey that took him to Lincoln University in the state of Pennsylvania in the United States of America. Lincoln University is part of a cluster of universities in the United States that are referred to as "Historically Black Colleges and Universities" (HBCU). In the era of segregation and Jim Crow laws which forbade blacks to attend ‘white' universities, HBCU became a natural home for African-Americans and Africans. These institutions became the breeding ground of black leaders who would play central roles in their various countries.

It was also a nurturing political atmosphere that the university provided. Dr. Nnamdi Azikiwe, the first president of Nigeria; Justice Thurgood Marshall, the first African-American to serve on the U.S. Supreme Court, Dr. Kwame Nkrumah, the first president of Ghana; and a host of leading African politicians of the era, graduated from Lincoln University.

It was at Lincoln University that Dr. Ako Adjei met the then Kwame Nkrumah, and they struck up a friendship! They co-founded the African Student Association of America and Canada; and a newspaper called the African Interpreter, to explain African issues to American readers.

In the United States, Ako Adjei also became a follower of the fledgling Pan-African Movement which campaigned for an end to colonialism in Africa, among others. In 1945, Dr. Ako Adjei attended the seminal conference of the Pan-African Movement in Manchester, England. It was at this meeting that a forthright call was made for African independence. Among the delegates were Kwame Nkrumah and Joe Appiah from Ghana; and Jomo Kenyatta, the first president of Kenya; Dr.Nnamdi Azikiwe, of Nigeria; well as Dr. W.E.B Dubois, and George Padmore.

Thus, by the time he returned to Ghana, Ako Adjei was not only a qualified lawyer, but a veteran of the post-war political agitation among Africans in Britain to end colonialism in Africa.

He could not be expected to remain aloof from the political currents sweeping through the Gold Coast. Dr. Ako Adjei became a founding member of Ghana's (then Gold Coast) first political party called the United Gold Coast Convention (UGCC), which was inaugurated at Saltpond on August 4, 1947. Among the leaders of the UGCC were: George (Paa) Grant, who funded the party; Dr. J.B. Danquah; Edward Akuffo Addo; E. Obetsebi Lamptey; Kobina Kessie; William Ofori Atta; R.S. Blay, and R.A. Awoonor Williams; and of course, Ako Adjei.

The UGCC's aim was to ensure, ‘that by all legitimate and constitutional means the direction and control of government should pass into the hands of the people and their Chiefs in the shortest possible time"! The UGCC was not the most revolutionary party in the world!!