Joaquin Phoenix (born Joaquin Rafael Bottom, 28.10.1974)

Joaquin Phoenix is an American / Puerto Rican actor. Previously known as Leaf Phoenix, he is the younger brother of River Phoenix.

Childhood: Joaquin Phoenix was born in Rio Piedras, in Puerto Rico, the third of five children. Phoenix is his mother's surname. His parents met whilst his mother was hitch-hiking and the pair travelled through South America. Formerly members of the 'Children of God' cult, they left it in 1978 and changed the family name to Phoenix to symbolize a new start.

During his childhood, Joaquin's mother worked as a secretary for NBC and he and his siblings would regularly perform on the streets to earn money for the family. Eventually, he and his siblings were discovered by Iris Burton, a leading agent for child actors.

Joaquin retreated from the world of acting for some time and travelled with his father. His return to the public eye came about in harrowing circumstances: his brother, River, suffered a drug overdose outside The Viper Room, which was owned by Johnny Depp. The 911 call that Joaquin made was repeatedly played on news shows on television and radio. Joaquin struggled to deal with the intrusion of the media and once again, retreated from public view.

Acting career: Joaquin's early acting endeavours included two TV appearances with his brother River in Seven Brides for Seven Brothers and Backwards: the Riddle of Dyslexia. His film debut came with a role in Space Camp and his first major role was in Russkies, in 1978. Whilst he was still known as Leaf Phoenix, he also featured in Parenthood, the 1989 Ron Howard movie.

Following River's death, and in his return to acting, Joaquin tended to be drawn to roles portraying dark and insecure characters, such as his performance as an angst-ridden teen in Gus van Sant's To Die For (1995). In 2000, he played a vicious Roman emperor in Gladiator, directed by Ridley Scott. Joaquin was nominated for an Academy Award for his performance.

In Signs, the 2002 M. Night Shyamalan film, Joaquin Phoenix played a baseball player past his prime. Shyamalan later cast him in The Village as a lovestruck farmer.

In 2004, Phoenix played a cameraman in Hotel Rwanda, the harrowing portrayal of genocide in Rwanda in the early 1990s.

Joaquin Phoenix really hit the big time when he was cast to play Johnny Cash in Walk The Line, with the approval of Johnny Cash himself. Phoenix was nominated for the Best Actor Oscar in 2005 for his performance and all of the songs on the films soundtrack were sung by Joaquin Phoenix and his co-star Reese Witherspoon. Phoenix won a Grammy award for his contribution to the soundtrack.

In November 2008, whilst attending the premiere for his film Two Lovers, Phoenix had the words 'Good' and 'Bye' written visibly on his knuckles. He told reporters that he Two Lovers would be his last foray into the world of acting and that he would now be concentrating on other ventures.

Other Ventures: Phoenix has directed music videos for a number of artists, including Silversun Pickups, People In Planes and Albert Hammond Jr.

Joaquin Phoenix has been working with Tim Burgess of the Charlatans, and Anthony Langdon (formerly of Spacehog) on a new album. Reportedly, Phoenix has written the songs, and Langdon has sung them.

Biography by Contactmusic.com