For about twenty-five years following its independence in 1962, Algeria made significant progress toward developing its human and physical infrastructure, as well as a vigorous and diversified hydrocarbon sector. Income and gender inequalities were reduced, and a large degree of social cohesion was attained. The yearly flow of the petroleum rent and trade protection, however, shielded the Algerian economy from the inefficiencies inherent in its central planning of resources and in the one-party political system. Large investments in industrial development did little to create a diversified and competitive industrial base, while neglecting pressing housing needs, which reached crisis proportion.

The hydrocarbon shield was shattered with the reverse oil shock in 1986 and again in 1988, which coincided with the first political demonstrations that hit Algeria’s cities. It then became clear to policymakers that Algeria could no longer sustain an inward-oriented command economy, which subsidized its public enterprises and remained fully dependent on oil revenues. A gradual process of liberalization and reform was launched, reorienting the institutional framework toward one more compatible with a market economy. In particular, agricultural production and land tenure were increasingly liberalized, and greater autonomy was given to public enterprises.

This process gathered some momentum with IMF- and Bank-supported reform programs in both 1989 and 1991. Nevertheless, throughout this period, reform lacked a comprehensive vision and was mostly reactive to pressure points. As a result, liberalization in some areas coincided with a tightening of restrictions in other areas, exacerbating distortions and generating shortages of both imports and domestic goods and services. Above all, these reforms lacked the political will to make a decisive break with past reliance on government as the major provider of employment, housing, food subsidies, and financing for public enterprises. They neither had the demand management underpinnings nor a broad measure of support by labor unions and managers in both the private and public sectors. Attempts at easing shortages with short-term external financing of imports only bloated external debt and precipitated a payments crisis at the end of 1993. Rising unemployment, an acute housing shortage, and growing civil strife added further gloom to Algeria’s economic prospects.

The reform program launched in April 1994, in a difficult social and political environment, marked a new beginning as well as a new consensual approach. Indeed, after the failure in attempting to develop market mechanisms while maintaining a massive presence of the state in the economy, policymakers came to acknowledge that a change of strategy was needed. There was a fundamental recognition that for Algeria to be able to address its acute social and political problems, it had to reinvigorate its economy and ensure high and sustained growth, but that this objective could only be achieved by abandoning central planning and establishing an outward-oriented and efficient market economy, conducive to private sector activity and integrated with the rest of the world. This recognition provided a unifying approach to the transition and reform process, which was well sequenced and comprehensive. The initial emphasis was to set the exchange rate at a more realistic level, realign relative prices, eliminate distortions through liberalization, and stabilize domestic demand. At the same time, the following structural reforms, to be implemented over two to three years, were set in motion: public enterprise reform and privatization, banking system restructuring, social safety net provisions, and the establishment of market mechanisms such as the use of indirect instruments of monetary policy and the creation of interbank markets for foreign exchange and bank refinancing.

Within three years, by the end of 1997, this reform program had achieved remarkable success in restoring financial stability and establishing the building blocks for a market economy. While Algeria has been a latecomer in the reform process relative to other countries in the region, it has adjusted faster (see Box 13 and Figure 16).

Inflation declined to 6 percent, and after a decade of declining per capita income, there were three consecutive years of positive growth in 1995, 1996, and 1997.

A market-oriented price system was established, eliminating price restrictions and generalized subsidies.

A surplus was achieved in the fiscal and external accounts (even when allowance is made for the increase in oil prices), with a substantial buildup of external reserves to seven months of imports by the end of 1997, and a reduction in the external debt service ratio from 83 percent in 1993 to 30 percent in 1997.

The government’s disengagement from production and trading activities was accompanied by the establishment of a market-oriented banking system that imposed a tight budget constraint on its clients, including public enterprises (see Box 14).

In addition to the above-mentioned strong political will, several elements account for the successful implementation of the program.

The savings realized from the elimination of generalized food subsidies allowed the funding of a more efficient social safety net with a job-creation program, unemployment insurance, and cash transfers to the most disadvantaged groups. Budgetary appropriations for public housing were raised. The social components of the program were essential in gaining workers’ union support.

Both demand management and structural reforms were steadfastly implemented. Despite the succession of three prime ministers during this period, persistent civil strife, declining real wages, and large layoffs stemming from public enterprise restructuring, there was no weakening in public policy or wavering in the public commitment to reform. Continuity was maintained by an independent central bank, and follow up was exercised by a standing ministerial committee chaired by the Prime Minister with the sole responsibility of implementing the reform program. This whole process was supported by a dedicated civil service that ensured smooth policy coordination among the central bank, the ministry of finance, and other ministries and government agencies. Consequently, when slippages in credit policy occurred in the summer of 1995, corrective action was quickly taken.

A flexible exchange rate policy was pursued, which in Algeria’s case also played an important demand management role because of the large oil revenues that accrue to the budget. While the reduction in inflation may have taken longer, price competitiveness was preserved. Authorities successfully reduced inflation through strict demand management policies. As these policies firmly took hold in the budget and in wage negotiations, the exchange rate depreciation of the first two years gave way to a substantial degree of price stability in 1996 and 1997.

When oil prices increased sharply in 1996 and 1997, most of the oil windfall was saved. This reserve has helped cushion the recent oil price decline and will considerably ease repayment of rescheduled external debt beginning in 2000.

Comprehensive structural reforms with excellent coordination between the IMF, the World Bank, and the Algerian authorities took place. While the IMF concentrated its assistance on macroeconomic stabilization, liberalization of prices and trade and the social safety net, the World Bank assisted in the restructuring of public enterprises, the audit and financial restructuring of banks, housing, and privatization. Without public enterprise and bank reform, neither macrostabilization nor liberalization could be sustained. All these aspects must be tackled simultaneously.

A broad consensus for reform through periodic negotiations among the government, management (of both public and private enterprises), and labor unions was established. Commitments under World Bank and IMF programs were made public and widely debated in the press, establishing Algeria’s full ownership of the reform program.

An appropriate sequencing of measures took account of the public’s concerns. While some prices were quickly liberalized, food and energy subsidies were phased out gradually over three years through gradual price increases. Private sector importers were phased in into sensitive areas, such as Pharmaceuticals and essential food staples, hitherto monopolized by the public sector.

Algeria benefited from large financial assistance from foreign donors and international institutions. About $22 billion was provided over a three-year period ($17 billion in debt rescheduling and $5 billion in new lending from international and regional institutions) to support external trade and payment liberalization, eliminate import shortages, and sustain per capita consumption. This infusion of external support eased the burden of adjustment considerably and restored the sustainability to Algeria’s external debt profile.

While Algeria made remarkable progress in macroeconomic stabilization and in establishing market mechanisms, other structural reforms proved more difficult to implement and, in some cases, more intractable.

The legacy of past government intervention in prices and external trade resulted in a string of quasi-fiscal deficits, which were financed by the banking system and could not be identified early on in the program. For instance, government food importing agencies could not service their external debt—which had more than doubled after the devaluation—from current operations, but had to rely on domestic or external bank financing. When such financing was sharply reduced in the context of stricter bank lending policies, these agencies defaulted and their bank loans were taken over by the treasury. A lesson for future IMF programs is to fully flesh out the external debt implications on the financial condition of banks and enterprises following a large devaluation.

The housing crisis proved difficult to address despite the best efforts of the authorities, the World Bank, and the IMF. This was partly due to the need to restructure the entire system of housing construction and financing, while ensuring a steady yearly delivery rate. The latter was essential to ease existing shortages and provide jobs. With the benefit of hindsight, greater progress would have required a high-level task force endowed with broad powers that superseded individual ministries to obtain and develop construction sites and to mobilize financing. The establishment of clear property rights in agriculture and in housing also proved elusive, which is understandable given 30 years of socialist legacy. The absence of such rights inhibits collateralization of bank financing, reduces incentives for investment, and limits bank intermediation. Indeed, the judicial system in Algeria is not yet geared to the norms of a market economy. It is slow and cumbersome in contractual disputes, and favors tenants over landlords.

Foreign direct investment outside the hydrocarbon sector, which is essential for modernizing the capital stock and for injecting best management practices, as well as domestic private sector investment have not been forthcoming to the extent anticipated. They have been inhibited by the civil strife which, in addition to the psychological impact, has exacted substantial costs. These costs include lost production, mostly in agriculture and industry; damage to infrastructure; costs associated with the provision of security services; higher transportation costs; cost of relocating plants to safer areas; and costs of uncollected taxes and rents in areas that lack security. It has also reduced labor mobility.