The city council of Woerden wants to enable the generation of wind energy. To determine the location, the council first asked the mayor and aldermen to make a comparison between two possible search areas for the period up to 2030: the polders Reijerscop and Barwoutswaarder.

This comparison shows that Reijerscop is the most suitable. It is now up to the City Council to make a final decision. In 2021, the Woerden municipal council adopted the Assessment Framework for Large-scale Sustainable Energy. This states how much energy the municipality wants to generate with wind energy and solar energy, in which areas this can be done and under what conditions.

38-44 GWh of wind by 2030

The council has divided the task for Woerden into medium-sized projects (smaller solar fields and small wind turbines on its own property) and 76 to 88 GWh for large-scale projects, half of which will be generated with solar energy and half with wind energy. The council has indicated where solar fields may be placed, but had not yet made a choice for the location for the generation of wind energy.

The college has juxtaposed the two areas on several points. The number of homes in the area was examined. And to plans for wind energy in neighboring municipalities. It was also examined whether the wind turbines could be connected to the electricity grid in the future and whether they would not be located in the middle of a nature reserve.

The sequel

The Municipal Executive has now sent a proposal to the municipal council to continue with wind energy in Reijerscop. It is up to the city council to make a decision on this. Residents who wish to give their opinion to the council can speak at the meeting.

Once the council has made a final choice for an area, it will enter into further discussions with residents and with nature and environmental organizations and agricultural organizations in that area in order to gauge the concerns and wishes there are and what opportunities the arrival of wind energy can bring. for the environment. We use the results of these area processes to draw up a design study, an assessment framework and a social tender.

Image source: Municipality of Woerden