''Maidstone'' made a sadder but wiser man out of Norman Mailer. The 110-minute color movie, which the author directed and starred in with an amateur cast, was a kind of totally improvised ''La Dolce Vita'' shot in East Hampton in 1968. It took three years to edit, cost $300,000 of Mr. Mailer's own money, and put him in hock for years. This week he said about it: ''I would have done better to have bought a yacht and sunk it.''

Then why on earth is ''Maidstone'' being shown again tonight at the Thalia Theater on West 95th Street, with Mr. Mailer there in person to answer questions from the audience? ''Because I think it's fun - giving speeches is not usually fun,'' he said from his Brooklyn home.

In ''Maidstone,'' Mr. Mailer plays a director of pornographic films who is also running for President. He tells a Eugene McCarthy supporter: ''I'm a narcissist. The only thing that gives me pleasure is exposing myself to people. I adore shocking people.'' Would that describe Norman Mailer?

''Well, naturally you use parts of you in something like that,'' he said. ''But it's not my idea of myself.''

'People Didn't Understand'

He is much harder on his movie. ''Years ago I thought it was a good and important film that people didn't understand,'' he said. ''Now I think it's a terribly flawed and imperfect movie that's really interesting for people who are obsessed by film. The production is an interesting idea, made by a man who didn't know how to make movies.''

Fifteen years ago, on a sun-ripened July day, the first day of shooting at an East Hampton estate, he told his cast and crew, numbering nearly 100: ''We hope to prove that one can make a beautiful, tasteful, resonant, touching, evocative picture with cinema verite methods in four days. If we can do it, a lot of people in Hollywood are going to commit suicide.'' The movie took seven days to shoot.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.