Christof Koepsel/Getty Images

The first two matches of UEFA Women's Euro 2013 kicked off on Wednesday in Sweden, as powerhouse Germany looks to win its eighth title.

Coming into the tournament this year, Germany had won the last women's European championships, dating all the way back to 1995.

Of course, there are plenty of teams that are vying to end Germany's reign in this year's edition.

Here's a look at how the UEFA Women's Euro 2013 kicked off.

Italy 0, Finland 0

The match on Wednesday started off fast-paced, as several fouls were made in the first few minutes of play. Elisa Camporese of Italy took the first shot of the match in the seventh minute, but it was off target.

The Italians continued to threaten from there, registering four shots in the next 11 minutes (to zero from Finland), but ultimately weren't able to find net. Alice Parisi's shot off a rebound in the ninth minute went wide, while Melania Gabbiadini's attempt on goal in the 16th minute was saved by Finland goalkeeper Tinja-Riikka Korpela.

Gabbiadini had another shot in the 20th minute off a nice free kick from Italy, but Korpela was there once again, getting down to make the save on a low attempt.

Gabbiadini may have had the best chance after a nice exchange with teammate Patrizia Panico in the 28th minute, but the 29-year-old's low shot went wide, much to the relief of Korpela.

It wasn't until the 42nd minute that Finland finally managed its first shot. Emmi Alanen's volley sailed wide, though.

Parisi had another attempt on a volley from 25 metres out in the 45th minute, but Korpela was able to gobble it up with ease.

That was the last shot of the first half, as both teams headed into halftime with the match scoreless.

Sam Crompton of UEFA.com tweeted:

Through one half of play, Italy had managed eight shots (three on target), while Finland had posted just one shot. While the Italians were in control for most of the half, they ultimately failed to score, keeping Finland firmly in the match.

The second half started much like the first half did.

Italy continuously pressured at net, allowing little space for Finland to mount an attack of its own. Parisi showed some nice footwork at the edge of the box in the 54th minute, but her attempt cleared the bar. Gabbiadini burst past Susanna Lehtinen in the 55th minute, only to see her shot swing over the net.

Throughout all of this, Finland wasn't pushing back, instead opting to foul numerous times on the pitch in a show of helplessness.

The match continued on with Italy dominating possession but failing time and time again to actually score. In the 79th minute, Alessia Tuttino's attempt was expertly saved by Korpela. Off a corner in the 80th minute, Italy wasn't able to produce. By the end of the second half, both teams had registered a draw.

Har Journalist tweeted:

This was a match that Italy should have won and the draw will undoubtedly be disappointing for the side. The Italians got off 15 shots on Wednesday, but only four were on goal, via UEFA.com. Credit also must be given to Korpela, who kept Finland in the match throughout.

Sweden 1, Denmark 1

Sweden threatened early on Wednesday, as Kosovare Asllani got off a shot that cleared the bar off a cross from Lotta Schelin in the first minute.

Minutes later, Caroline Seger got off a shot with some space in front of her, courtesy of a play by Asllani, but the ball sailed over the goal.

In the ninth minute, Denmark's Mia Brogaard gave it a whirl from 25 metres out, but the shot didn't create any danger.

The host country was awarded a corner in the 14th minute off a foul from Theresa Nielsen, but nothing came of it. In the 22nd minute, Sweden earned another corner, but again wasn't able to do any damage.

Then, in the 26th minute, Denmark struck.

Mariann Knudsen scored the first goal of the women's Euro 2013 in dramatic fashion, weaving through two defenders on her way to the edge of the box before expertly touching the ball past Sweden goalkeeper Kristin Hammarstrom.

All of a sudden, Denmark had the advantage, 1-0.

Alistair Magowan of BBC Sport tweeted:

Knudsen threatened again in the 33rd minute, barely volleying over goal after finding space in the box. She was a picture of Denmark's burst of energy at the moment.

But Denmark's advantage was short-lived. Just two minutes later, the hosts struck back. Sara Thunebro swung a deep free kick Nilla Fischer's way in the 35th minute, and Fischer took care of the rest, heading the ball into the corner of the net.

In the 40th minute, Thunebro again created danger, swinging a pretty cross to the far post, but Asllani's header found Denmark goalkeeper Stina Petersen easily.

After one half of play, both sides were knotted up, 1-1.

Paul Saffer of UEFA.com tweeted at the half:

Sweden managed four shots (two on target) by the half, while Denmark posted three shots (one on target), per UEFA.com.

Denmark had some early chances in the second half. In the 50th minute, Knudsen took a heat check, firing from long range to test Hammarstrom. Nielsen's cross in the 55th minute was met with a diving header by Nadia Nadim, but Hammarstrom calmly collected the attempt.

Both teams continued to battle back and forth throughout the match, with neither appearing to want to score. Denmark had more chances in the second half, but few shots were that dangerous.

That is, of course, until the 66th minute, when Hammarstrom made two consecutive saves to keep the visitors from taking the lead.

Moments later, Sweden was handed a golden opportunity on a penalty kick that stemmed from Christina Orntoft challenging Asllani. But Schelin's ensuing penalty kick was saved by Stina Petersen, keeping the game tied up.

One thing was for sure: The intensity of the match had gone up a notch in a short period of time.

In the 84th minute, Sweden was handed another penalty kick off a handball by Nielsen. But, once again, Petersen made a great save on the kick.

When all was said and done on Wednesday, Sweden and Denmark each scored a draw. If it wasn't for Stina Petersen, Denmark could have easily lost.