The 13th edition of the Women's European Championship - Euro 2022 - kicked off on July 6 after the competition was rescheduled due to the Covid-19 pandemic.

England were crowned champions on home soil, defeating Germany in the final and beating defending champions Netherlands on their way to glory.

GOAL brings you everything you need to know, including where the tournament is being held, teams that have qualified, how to watch on TV and more.

Article continues below

Who are the Women's Euro 2022 hosts?

England hosted Euro 2022 having made an unchallenged bid for the rights. UEFA confirmed that England would host the tournament at a 2018 Executive Committee meeting in Dublin.

It was England's fourth time hosting the tournament and the second time as outright hosts. The country previously served as co-hosts in 1984 and 1995 (as one of multiple host nations) and hosted itself in 2005.

Which stadiums are being used for Women's Euro 2022?

A total of 10 stadiums were used at Euro 2022, including Old Trafford, Bramall Lane and St Mary's Stadium. As is customary for showpiece football events in England, Wembley played host to the final.

You can see the full list of Euro 2022 stadiums below.

Getty Images

Which teams qualified for Women's Euro 2022?

Hosts England qualified automatically for the tournament and they were joined by the nine qualifying group winners and the three best runners-up.

The qualified teams can be seen below.

England (hosts)

Netherlands (Group A winners)

Denmark (Group B winners)

Norway (Group C winners)

Spain (Group D winners)

Finland (Group E winners)

Sweden (Group F winners)

France (Group G winners)

Belgium (Group H winners)

Germany (Group I winners)

Italy (Group B runners-up)

Iceland (Group F runners-up)

Austria (Group G runners-up)

Switzerland (play-off winner)

Northern Ireland (play-off winner)

Portugal (replaced suspended Russia)

Women's Euro 2022 squads

UEFA's deadline for each nation to submit its 23-women squad was June 26.

After that, teams are allowed to make an unlimited number of changes before their opening games, in the event of serious injury or illness - which includes Covid-19 or a player being a close contact.

For the squad of every single nation competing at the Women's Euro, with details of key players, notable absentees and more, click here.

Women's Euro 2022 group tables, fixtures & results

Group tables and results will appear below.

Group A table

Group A fixtures

Group B table

Group B fixtures

Group C table

Group C fixtures

Group D table

Group D fixtures

Women's Euro 2022 quarter-final fixtures & results

Women's Euro 2022 semi-final fixtures & results

Women's Euro 2022 final

Which TV channels & online streaming services are showing Women's Euro 2022?

BBC had the rights to broadcast Euro 2022 in the United Kingdom (UK). That means every single game was be available to watch across its television channels as well as online, using the BBC iPlayer and website.

In the United States (U.S.), Univision and TUDN had rights to Euro 2022.

Games were broadcast on Optus in Australia.

How can I buy Women's Euro 2022 tickets?

Tickets for Euro 2022 could be purchased through UEFA's official ticketing portal. Fans were able get priority access to tickets if they created a UEFA Euro ticketing account before July 2021.

Some fixtures sold out early, including the final at Wembley and all of England's group stage games.

For England games, prices for group stage tickets ranged from £15 to £40, while tickets for all other games started from £10, with category one tickets costing £20.

Knockout fixtures were priced slightly higher, with category one tickets at £30 for the quarter-finals, £40 for the semi-finals and £50 for the final.

It is worth noting that UEFA strongly advises fans against purchasing tickets via third-party websites.

Further reading