The UEFA Women’s EURO 2022 final between England and Germany saw Chloe Kelly getting a dramatic winner for the Lionesses in the extra-time, on the back of which England Women won their maiden continental championship.

England’s dominance in the competition was such that the team went undefeated throughout the campaign, scoring by far the most goals (22) by any team in the tournament. The closest any team came to matching this tally was Germany, who scored 14 goals.

While their group stage journey was relatively trouble-free as they were placed alongside Austria, Norway and Northern Ireland, they did have to fend off competition from the likes of Spain and Sweden in the knockout rounds.

And now that the competition is over, here we look at some notable individual awards from UEFA Women’s EURO 2022.

Golden Boot

England’s Beth Mead and Germany’s Alexandra Popp scored six goals each, but it was the former who was given the Golden Boot as she also recorded five assists. Mead scored a total of five goals in England’s three group stage games, including a hat-trick against Norway in an 8-0 win.

Although she blanked against Spain and Germany, Mead got her sixth goal of the competition against Sweden in the semi-final.

Player of the Tournament

England forward Beth Mead was named the UEFA Women's EURO 2022 Player of the Tournament as she contributed to as many as 11 of England’s 22 goals in the competition. Not only did she finish with the most goals, but she also topped the assists tally (5).

Young Player of the Tournament

Germany’s 20-year-old midfielder Lena Oberdorf was named the UEFA Women's EURO 2022 Young Player of the Tournament. The versatile midfielder, who was also used as a defender at times, earned her 32nd senior cap at the age of just 20.

Meanwhile, a total of 95 goals were scored in 31 matches in UEFA Women’s EURO 2022, meaning that each game averaged an impressive 3.07 goals per match. Furthermore, Germany and England kept the joint-most clean sheets (4) in the competition.

As far as individual stats are concerned, Iceland’s Sveindis Jonsdottir recorded the highest speed (31.7 km/h) and Germany’s Giulia Gwinn covered the most distance (65.2 km). On the other hand, Netherlands’ Daphne van Domselaar made the most saves (23) in the competition.

Featured photo: AFP / Franck Fife