Hear from Jensen Huang at #CadenceLIVE as he discusses the pivotal role of #AI and accelerated computing in shaping industry mega-trends, and how NVIDIA and Cadence are collaborating to drive transformational change across EDA, SDA, digital biology and AI. Watch the full discussion: https://lnkd.in/gNzvramu

Our employees’ well-being is a top priority at Cadence. We offer a variety of unique benefits including providing employees with Global Recharge Days to unplug and focus on themselves and their families. We firmly believe that work-life balance and time away from work are key to our employees’ health and wellness, enabling them to recharge and continue performing at a high level. Learn more about life at Cadence in our 2023 ESG Report: ⤵️ https://ow.ly/Q2i950SA2qR

Gone are the days of waiting 6-8 weeks for the diagnosis and resolution of extracted parasitics. With the new Cadence Quantus Insight Solution, you can now close post-layout flows in just one week! Troubleshoot faster and expedite your resolution efforts through intuitive visualization inside Virtuoso Studio, user-friendly GUI, and top-notch performance. Learn more: https://ow.ly/3x1n50SmPb6

OpenEye, Cadence Molecular Sciences proudly announces a pollinator project at our “BisBEE” campus in New Mexico. Sponsored by the Northern New Mexico Foodshed Initiative, the “buzz” is homes are being built for pollinating mammals and insects. The first pollinator to receive a “lottery dream home” is the leafcutter bee. 🐝 Check out the blog here: ⤵️ https://ow.ly/nuPj50SGp7z

Congrats to McLaren Racing on finishing P1 and P2 in the Hungarian Grand Prix! Great way to start the 2nd half of the season. The best is yet to come! To witness more of McLaren's thrilling race achievements powered by Cadence, click here: ⤵️ https://lnkd.in/g9hNy_Nh

Join David Glasco, VP Compute Solutions Group, at the Chiplets: Building the Future of SoCs virtual event on July 24 & 25 as we explore advancements in chiplet technology! Alongside other trailblazers, he'll share insights on jumpstarting your chiplets journey with end-to-end system silicon solutions. Don't miss this chance to gain a competitive edge in the evolving chiplet landscape! Register now: ⤵️ ow.ly/4Lol30sEV3A

We're thrilled to have made it onto Fortune's Best Workplaces for Millennials list! 🤩 Discover more about our culture here: https://ow.ly/MwJT50SFIm4

With increasingly complex and compact packaging on the rise, thermal effects have become more critical than ever. Designs can include multiple power-dissipating components within small, high-density volumes, making it necessary to ensure that overheating does not occur. Read this blog to learn more. ⤵️ https://ow.ly/ytzS50SEMVZ