Actor Yuvika Chaudhary is under fire for using a casteist slur in one of her videos. In the now viral video, Chaudhary is seen filming a vlog while her husband Prince Narula is getting his hair done. Describing the state of her clothes, the actor made a reference to a certain community of people. The casteist remark has enraged several people who are demanding her arrest.

Source: Twitter/MdToush0786

Source: Twitter/KotwalMeena

Source: Twitter/bahujanhak

Source: Twitter/KingKisshor

Source: Twitter/Profdilipmandal

Source: Twitter/vaibhavkr86

Source: Twitter/WhoisDeepanshu

Source: Twitter/Garima750

After the backlash against Chaudhary, she issued an apology on her social media accounts.

Source: Twitter/yuvikaChaudhary

In the apology, Chaudhary said, “Hi guys I didn’t kw the meaning about that word wt I used in my last vlog I didn’t mean to hurt anyone and I can never do that to hurt someone I apologise to each n every one I hope you understand love you all [sic]”

However, people aren’t satisfied with her apology and are demanding her arrest. A tweet said, “You should be sorry but we don't need for this, please arrest this casteist lady ASAP. FYI, @MumbaiPolice Yuvika Chaudhary committed an offence under section 153A of IPC which is a cognizable & non-bailable offence & for which she must be arrested. (sic).”

Source: Twitter/KotwalMeena

Another user said, “Sure you did! If you went to a school you knew! Stop playing the victim. Accept that you are conditioned into a casteist mindset. That is the case with most of us. And make the apology specific to the community you offended.”

Source: Twitter/sen_abhik

A few days ago, an FIR was lodged against TV actor Munmun Dutta for allegedly using a casteist slur against a Scheduled Caste community.

Chaudhary shot to popularity after she starred in the 2007 blockbuster movie Om Shanti Om. She was also seen in Bigg Boss 9 where she met her now husband Prince Narula.

Social and lead image credit: Instagram/yuvikachaudhary

Read iDiva for the latest in Bollywood, fashion looks, beauty and lifestyle news.