Valis: The Fantasm Soldier Collection II is on a region-free physical cart for the Nintendo Switch. This is an open pre-order for a limited time.

PRE-ORDERS CLOSE ON SUNDAY, OCTOBER 16, 2022 AT 11:59 PM EASTERN TIME.Genre: Action

# of Players: 1 Player

Supported Languages: English

Supported Play Modes: TV mode, Tabletop mode, Handheld mode

PLEASE NOTE: There is no purchase limit on this item. This item is currently in manufacturing and artwork is subject to change. Products are typically not expected to ship until 4-5 months after the preorder window closes. Future production updates will be visible on the product page and your account page. All orders are considered final and can not be canceled.

Your adventure with Yuko is not over yet! The legendary bishojo action game series is back with its 2nd collection!

The sequel to Valis: The Fantasm Soldier Collection is here and comes packed with 3 more games in the Valis series. This second collection contains the eagerly anticipated Valis IV (PC Engine/Turbographx 16), Syd of Valis (Mega Drive/Genesis) and Valis: The Fantasm Soldier (Mega Drive/Genesis) along with a special addition of the game that started it all for the Valis series, Valis: The Phantasm Soldier for the MSX computer system. This collection is a must-have for not just Valis fans, but for anyone who enjoys retro games.

- A series supported by incredibly passionate fans

The Valis: The Fantasm Soldier series began as a side-scrolling action game on Japanese PCs in 1986. These armor-clad gals captured the hearts of many fans throughout the years with extremely satisfying gameplay and unique worldbuilding that led to the creation of many sequels over the years that have been developed and ported across many console generations. Even now, 35 years after its debut, the Valis series still has many passionate fans all over the world.

- Enjoy modern playability features on the Nintendo Switch™

Features like Sound Mode, Visual Mode, and Rewind Mode from the previous collection are back, and other menus have been brushed up to improve the experience and make the game more enjoyable for everyone.