London, UK - January 12, 2006 - Today Ubisoft, one of the world's largest video game publishers, announced Tom Clancy's Splinter Cell® Essentials, a spy action game available exclusively for the PSPTM (PlayStation®Portable) system. Available spring 2006 and developed specifically for the PSP system, Tom Clancy's Splinter Cell® Essentials will offer a new and unique gaming experience with a storyline drawn from the highest-rated spy action series of all time.

"Splinter Cell Essentials is a groundbreaking handheld game that has everything Splinter Cell fans love about the top-selling franchise," says John Parkes, EMEA marketing director at Ubisoft. "It will also feature a number of surprises that will allow players to dive deeper into the story of Sam Fisher."

About Tom Clancy's Splinter Cell® Essentials:

Tom Clancy's Splinter Cell® Essentials takes players deep into the Splinter Cell saga. Experience all-new missions and objective exclusive to the PSP system, and discover the untold story of Sam Fisher through flashbacks to various missions from the entire Splinter Cell franchise, including Tom Clancy's Splinter Cell Double AgentTM.

Key Features:

PSP system debut: The highest-rated and top-selling spy franchise hits the PSP system for the first time, pushing the boundaries of yet another platform.

Developed specifically for the PSP system: Unique gameplay sequences designed specifically for the on-the-go nature of handheld gaming and a new adapted interface.

Exclusive content: Tom Clancy's Splinter Cell Essentials starts where Tom Clancy's Splinter Cell Double Agent ends, and takes players to the years before Tom Clancy's Splinter Cell when Sam was still a Navy Seal.

A game of gadgets for your gadget: Features all the weapons and gadgets from the Tom Clancy's Splinter Cell franchise, in addition to some new ones exclusive to the PSP system version.

Accessible Wi-Fi multiplayer: Challenge your friends in Spy vs. Spy Deathmatch multiplayer mode.

For more information about Tom Clancy's Splinter Cell® Essentials please visit www.bewaresamfisher.com and www.splintercell.com

About Tom Clancy:

With over 80 million books sold, Tom Clancy is arguably the world's most recognized author. His works include fiction such as The Hunt for Red October, Clear and Present Danger, The Sum of All Fears, Rainbow Six, Red Rabbit, and The Teeth of the Tiger. Clancy also writes non-fiction works about weapons and various military units. Four of his books have already been adapted into highly successful feature films.

About Ubisoft

Ubisoft is a leading producer, publisher and distributor of interactive entertainment products worldwide and has grown considerably through its strong and diversified lineup of products and partnerships. Ubisoft has offices in 21 countries and sales in more than 50 countries around the globe. It is committed to delivering high-quality, cutting-edge video game titles to consumers. Ubisoft generated revenue of 538 million Euros for the 2004-2005 fiscal year, an increase of 8 percent over the previous fiscal year at constant exchange rates. To learn more, please visit www.ubisoftgroup.com.