Tags: Ubisoft Tom Clancy's Splinter Cell Essentials for , Action/Adventure

Quick Link: HEXUS.net/qaejh

Add to My Vault:

Wi-Fi supported stealth action

London, UK – January 12, 2006

Today Ubisoft, one of the world's largest video game publishers, announced Tom Clancy's Splinter Cell Essentials, a spy action game available exclusively for the PSP (PlayStation Portable) system. Available spring 2006 and developed specifically for the PSP system, Tom Clancy's Splinter Cell Essentials will offer a new and unique gaming experience with a storyline drawn from the highest-rated spy action series of all time.

"Splinter Cell Essentials is a groundbreaking handheld game that has everything Splinter Cell fans love about the top-selling franchise," says John Parkes, EMEA marketing director at Ubisoft. "It will also feature a number of surprises that will allow players to dive deeper into the story of Sam Fisher."

About Tom Clancy's Splinter Cell Essentials:

Tom Clancy's Splinter Cell Essentials takes players deep into the Splinter Cell saga. Experience all-new missions and objective exclusive to the PSP system, and discover the untold story of Sam Fisher through flashbacks to various missions from the entire Splinter Cell franchise, including Tom Clancy's Splinter Cell Double AgentTM.

Key Features:

PSP system debut: The highest-rated and top-selling spy franchise hits the PSP system for the first time, pushing the boundaries of yet another platform.

Developed specifically for the PSP system: Unique gameplay sequences designed specifically for the on-the-go nature of handheld gaming and a new adapted interface.

Exclusive content: Tom Clancy's Splinter Cell Essentials starts where Tom Clancy's Splinter Cell Double Agent ends, and takes players to the years before Tom Clancy's Splinter Cell when Sam was still a Navy Seal.

A game of gadgets for your gadget: Features all the weapons and gadgets from the Tom Clancy's Splinter Cell franchise, in addition to some new ones exclusive to the PSP system version.

Accessible Wi-Fi multiplayer: Challenge your friends in Spy vs. Spy Deathmatch multiplayer mode.