Acronis Foundation, a non-profit organization established by Acronis to build a more knowledgeable future, built a new school for 500 boys and girls in a remote village of Prei Changha, Cambodia.

The school was built in partnership with Swiss-based development organization Child’s Dream. Prei Changha village is located in the Banteay Meanchey Province, northern Cambodia, bordering with Thailand. It has a population of 3,255 residents and is home to 790 families.

The school provides the education for three other surrounding villages, covering levels from kindergarten to primary 1 through 6. The new facilities, which include five classrooms and facilities, will increase the number of enrollments by providing safe and motivating learning environment for boys and girls aged between 5 and 12.

As a second stage to the programme, Acronis Foundation will also supply solar-powered equipment to provide computer training to children and local villagers, teaching them the basics of digital literacy.

“This is the third school that the Acronis Foundation opened this year, and there are two more being built. This is our way of giving back to the community. We build schools in remote areas and encourage children to learn. Through our schools, children are able to access the world of knowledge through the internet and computer equipment that we supply. Education helps communities break the cycle of poverty, become more efficient and self-determined,” said Jochen Berger, MD, Acronis Foundation.

The new school will emphasize the importance of education to the whole community and provide an incentive for young people to complete their secondary education and reach their life goals.

“Prei Changha school project serves as a great example of how businesses could and should contribute to the development of younger generations around the world, inspiring them to learn, to explore and to aim higher in life. This really is a life-altering experience for the kids and their fellow villagers,” said Daniel Siegfried, co-founder and head projects, Child’s Dream Association.

Acronis Foundation has built schools in Myanmar, Tanzania, Cambodia, with three more schools under construction in Guatemala, Senegal, and Peru.

The foundation is looking for partners and donors to support further projects around the world.