Map of distance from Enterprise, UT to SGU

Click here to show map

More trip calculations

Driving Time

Cost Of Driving

Reverse Distance

Halfway

Stopping Points

Hotels near SGU

Flight Time

airports near SGU

airlines flying to SGU

Nonstop Flights

Time Difference

Distance from Enterprise, UT to SGU

The total driving distance from Enterprise, UT to SGU is 55 miles or 89 kilometers.

The total straight line flight distance from Enterprise, UT to SGU is 39 miles.

This is equivalent to 62 kilometers or 34 nautical miles.

Your trip begins in Enterprise, Utah. It ends at St. George Municipal Airport in Saint George, Utah.

Your flight direction from Enterprise, UT to SGU is South (162 degrees from North).

The distance calculator helps you figure out how far it is to get from Enterprise, UT to SGU. It does this by computing the straight line flying distance ("as the crow flies") and the driving distance if the route is drivable. It uses all this data to compute the total travel mileage.

Enterprise, Utah

City: Enterprise

State: Utah

Country: United States

Category: cities

St. George Municipal Airport

IATA: SGU

ICAO: KSGU

FAA: SGU

City: Saint George

State: Utah

Zip code: 84770

Country: United States

Category: airports

Distance calculator

Travelmath helps you find distances based on actual road trip directions, or the straight line flight distance. You can get the distance between cities, airports, states, countries, or zip codes to figure out the best route to travel to your destination. Compare the results to the straight line distance to determine whether it's better to drive or fly. The database uses the latitude and longitude of each location to calculate distance using the great circle distance formula. The calculation is done using the Vincenty algorithm and the WGS84 ellipsoid model of the Earth, which is the same one used by most GPS receivers. This gives you the flying distance "as the crow flies." Find your flight distances quickly to estimate the number of frequent flyer miles you'll accumulate. Or ask how far is it between cities to solve your homework problems. You can lookup U.S. cities, or expand your search to get the world distance for international trips. You can also print out pages with a travel map.