Description

1960 Lotus 18 Formula Junior

s/n H 9871/6, Engine no. S 167906E

Green with Red Interior

Mid-engine, lightening quick, and unprecedented handling, The Lotus 18 not only set technical milestones in racing, it consistently greeted the checkered flag in hundreds of races. The design was badly needed as an improvement over previous front engine cars. The results were typical Chapman – sparse material structure, only as needed for durability and performance reliability. The lightweight body panels were fixed to the triangulated frame acting as unified members. Fitted with a Ford 105E series 1100cc engine, the 18 was campaigned in Formula Junior events throughout the United States were they dominated in period. Fitted with a Climax FPF engine, the 18 was successfully campaigned in Formula II, becoming first Lotus chassis to win a Formula One race in 1960. Roughly 120 Lotus 18s were produced and campaigned in Formula Junior (US delivery), 29 built for European Formula II series, and two factory cars campaigned in 1960 Formula one races.

This particular car (9871) was originally sold to Peter Arundell, April 19, 1960, fitted with engine number S 167906E as verified by marque expert Duncan Rabagliatti. Autosport Magazine claimed Peter Arundell the “King of Formula Junior” and rightly so, having dominated this class in period for the Lotus factory team. During his illustrious career, he won more than twice as many races than any other in his class, taking the British Formula Junior Championship in a Lotus 22 in 1962, and again in 1963 in a Lotus 27. Arundell also won the Formula Junior race in Monaco in 1961 and 1962. After his illustrious career in Formula Junior, Arundell went on to drive for team Lotus in Formula One. Arundell competed in more than twenty documented races in this car.

This Lotus 18 is simply fantastic in every respect. Beautifully restored from the ground up, the entire car was thoughtfully researched and completed with the aid of top experts and historic references. Throughout the car, much care was given to careful updates for safety as the car has logged several historic races as witnessed by the accompanying log books presented with the car. Local race experts Hasselgren Engineering dyno tested the motor recording a 97 hp output at 7500 rpm (documentation of tests on file). Dan Marvin did the machine work. During the 105E rebuild, the 1100cc engine was set up with a Farndon crankshaft, JE forged pistons (with XC rings) and Carrillo rods. Steel valve seats were used along with bronze valve guides and Megacycle camshaft #91771. The completed engine was sorted and tested when complete and has been thoughtfully maintained by local owners and specialists on a regular basis.

As shown in the photos, the entire car was disassembled and comprehensively restored including the suspension, brakes, and steering. The exterior has been beautifully finished with very good quality deep green paint contrasted by yellow wheels shod with near-new Dunlop 5.00L -15 tires. The entire length of the car features a checkered stripe pattern, which terminates surrounding both fore and aft body sections, subtly offering spectators a glimpse into the import of this historic winner. As one might expect from a high level restoration, various details delight throughout, including care given to suspension and brakes, instrumentation and wonderful period finishes including proper brass flanged and dome molded screens protecting the twin side draft Weber carburetors . From April through December 1960, Peter Arundell competed with this car in 22 races, gridding in the top 5 for nearly all of those races, and achieving seven first-place wins and three second-place wins, finishing only once in 6th place.

This Lotus 18 drives as one might expect having been sorted to a high standard for vintage racing and appropriate historic events. Braking, shifting, and engine performance are very finely dialed in making this Lotus 18 not only historically important, but an eager candidate to return to the track and prove its historic prowess.

Eligible for historic racing in the US and Europe, this Lotus 18 represents a delightful and inexpensive entry to prestigious events. The historic racing history and stunning restoration with mechanical excellence combine to make a formidable event car that can be enjoyed for years to come.