The Grease star and global icon, Olivia Newton-John was born in Cambridge and was where she spent the first six years of her life before moving to Australia with her family. She returned to her roots in 2009 when she visited and supported Addenbrooke's Hospital.

The Cambridge-born star, Olivia Newton-John sadly passed away yesterday (August 8) after a 30-year battle with breast cancer. Her husband, John Easterling confirmed she died 'peacefully' surrounded by her friends and family at the age of 73.

The Grease star who became globally recognised with songs such as 'Summer Nights' and 'You’re The One That I Want' spent much of her early life in Australia but before this she lived in Cambridge. Before becoming the Aussie that we all knew and loved, Dame Olivia was born in Cambridge and was where she spent the first six years of her life before moving to Melbourne, Australia with her family.

Read more: John Travolta leads tributes to Grease co-star Olivia Newton-John

Her mother and father had met at Cambridge University and had bonded over their love of music. Her father, Brinley Newton-John then became a professor of German at Kings College and her mother was Irene Newton-John.

Even though their daughter Olivia was heavily in the spotlight after taking the role of Sandy in Grease in 1977, Irene and Brinley had two other children who were also successful. Olivia's sister Rona was a model and an actress and her brother Hugh was a doctor.

During their time in Cambridge Olivia's dad and Welshman, Brinley Newton-John became a headteacher at the Cambridgeshire High School for Boys. This was the position he was in when Olivia was born on September 26, 1948. Cambridgeshire High School for Boys was founded as the Cambridge and County School for Boys in Cambridge, England, in 1900. Today it is now called Hills Road Sixth Form College.

Before becoming a Cambridgeshire headteacher, Brinley had been an MI5 officer on the Enigma project at Bletchley Park (alongside Alan Turing) during WWII. After the war ended, he took his position as a headmaster.

Although having lived in Cambridge for just six years, Olivia kept a strong link to the city and returned to her roots with her husband, John Easterling in 2009. Having been treated for breast cancer in the early 1990s, Olivia returned to visit the Oncology department at Addenbrooke's Hospital and to find out about the latest breast cancer research.

After chatting to patients during her visit, Olivia was asked by an Addenbrooke’s breast cancer specialist to wish his 18-year-old son good luck in his upcoming Grease production. The Metro reports that Olivia borrowed a reporter's notebook and wrote: “Dear Joe Good Luck as Danny! Love Olivia Newton-John (ex) Sandy”, before she ripped out the page and handed it to Dr Wilson who had made the request.

Following the announcement of her passing Twitter user Bev77567211 remembers Olivia's visit to Addenbrooke's and wrote on the social media site: "So sad. My mum met her when she visited the cancer unit at Addenbrookes hospital, and mum was having her chemo. She said she was really lovely".

Olivia had planned to return to her hometown again and perform in the Cambridge Folk Festival in 2017 but unfortunately had to cancel following a second diagnosis of breast cancer. Although Olivia didn't live in Cambridge for long the Grease star and her memories remain in the city today.

Dame Olivia's husband confirmed she died 'peacefully' surrounded by her friends and family yesterday (August 8) at her ranch in Southern California. Hollywood star Travolta has been among those paying tribute, ending his message with "Your Danny."

He wrote: "My dearest Olivia, you made all of our lives so much better. Your impact was incredible. I love you so much. We will see you down the road and we will all be together again.

“Yours from the first moment I saw you and forever! Your Danny, your John!”

Get more general news from CambridgeshireLive straight to your inbox for freeHERE .