The world is paying tribute to a musical icon today following the passing of Grease star Olivia Newton-John who was born in Cambridge. Here at CambridgeshireLive we are paying tribute to the icon who passed away yesterday (August 8) after a 30-year battle with breast cancer.

The actress was born in Cambridge and spent the first six years of her life before moving to Australia with her family. Her husband, John Easterling, confirmed she died 'peacefully' surrounded by her friends and family at the age of 73 at their California ranch.

In a statement on Facebook the widower announced the dame's death and said: "Olivia has been a symbol of triumphs and hope for over 30 years sharing her journey with breast cancer. Her healing inspiration and pioneering experience with plant medicine continues with the Olivia Newton-John Foundation Fund, dedicated to researching plant medicine and cancer."

Read more: John Travolta leads tributes to Grease co-star Olivia Newton-John

CambridgeshireLive has opened a book of condolences so readers can pay tribute to Olivia and send messages of support to her family after the tragic loss.

Leave your well wishes, condolences and tributes below in the comments section. CambridgeshireLive will be monitoring the comments as they appear live on the website.

Olivia Newton-John's life in Cambridge

The Grease star, who became globally recognised with songs such as 'Summer Nights' and 'You’re The One That I Want', spent much of her early life in Australia. Before becoming the Aussie that we all knew and loved, Dame Olivia was born in Cambridge and was where she spent the first six years of her life before moving to Melbourne, Australia with her family.

Her mother and father had met at Cambridge University and had bonded over their love of music. Her father, Brinley Newton-John, then became a professor of German at King's College and her mother was Irene Newton-John.

Even though their daughter Olivia was heavily in the spotlight after taking the role of Sandy in Grease in 1977 alongside John Travolta, Irene and Brinley had two other children who were also successful. Olivia's sister Rona was a model and an actress and her brother Hugh was a doctor.

During their time in Cambridge Olivia's dad became a headteacher at the Cambridgeshire High School for Boys. This was the position he was in when Olivia was born on September 26, 1948. Cambridgeshire High School for Boys was founded as the Cambridge and County School for Boys in Cambridge, England, in 1900. Today it is now called Hills Road Sixth Form College.

Before becoming a Cambridgeshire headteacher, Brinley had been an MI5 officer on the Enigma project at Bletchley Park (alongside Alan Turing) during WWII. After the war ended, he took his position as a headmaster.

Although having lived in Cambridge for just six years, Olivia kept a strong link to the city and returned to her roots with her husband, John Easterling in 2009. Having been diagnosed with breast cancer in 1992, Olivia returned to visit the Oncology department at Addenbrooke's Hospital and to find out about the latest breast cancer research.

Olivia had planned to return to her hometown again and perform in the Cambridge Folk Festival in 2017 but unfortunately had to cancel following a second diagnosis of breast cancer. Although Olivia didn't live in Cambridge for long the Grease star and her memories remain in the city today.