Transcode and convert between video formats.

MediaCoder is a free and all-in-one media converter tool for audio and video files. The application includes code from many different open-source projects making it competent and comprehensive.

The MediaCoder interface provides an easy way to convert between audio and video formats. Converting files is quick whether they be simple audio files like MP3, OGG, AAC, RealAudio or common or uncommon video formats like MPEG1/2, MOV, WMV.

MediaCoder can be used to reduce file sizes, improve quality and make files compatible with other players or devices.

The application provides a "Device Mode" which includes presets for many common portable devices for quick conversions. Customizations of output formats include codec, bitrate and lots more.

Overall, MediaCoder provides a stable and easy way to convert audio and video files with many configuration options. It seems to have been designed for users who own portable devices like cell phone, portable gaming devices, pocket PCs or music players.

Features of MediaCoder

Audio/Video Conversion: Ability to convert between various audio and video formats.

Audio Effects: Apply and mix audio effects.

Audio Encoding: Support for various audio encoding formats.

Audio Extraction: Extract audio from video.

Audio Normalization: Adjusting volume level and dynamics of audio.

Batch Processing: Automate and speed up the conversion process.

Command Line: Ability to run MediaCoder from the command line.

Device Support: Profiles for various mobile devices.

Encoding: High quality, multi-threaded video encoding.

Filters: Add various video/audio effects.

GPU Acceleration: Hardware acceleration for faster encoding.

Streaming: Streaming media to web servers.

Subtitle Support: Ingest and embed subtitles.

Video Cutting: Trim, cut and join video clips.

Video Preview: Preview the video before encoding.

Compatibility and License

MediaCoder is a freeware, but ad-supported application available on Windows from media converter software. You may encounter different types of ads or offers when running and installing this program. Though ads might be present, download and installation of this PC software is free and 0.8.65.6050 is the latest version last time we checked.

What version of Windows can MediaCoder run on?

MediaCoder can be used on a computer running Windows 11 or Windows 10. Previous versions of the OS shouldn't be a problem with Windows 8 and Windows 7 having been tested. It comes in both 32-bit and 64-bit downloads.

Filed under: