Post by Fgzp513 on

Best MediaCoder Alternative: Pavtube Video Converter Ultimate

Description: This article mainly introduces the basic things about Mediacoder, and the best alternative to MediaCoder to convert video/audio files Windows 8.1/8 easily and successfully.

When people want to convert video/audio in Windows system (including Window 8.1/8), the first mind be brought up to their mind is MediaCoder.

Learing something about MediaCoder

MediaCoder is simply an amazing tool for media file junkies. This is an awesome tool to use for all file conversions that you have such as, MP4, AVI, MOV, WAV, and many more.

Pro:

It is free.

Support many media formats.

Support extracting small bits of audio tracks from any video files.

Support repairing damaged media file.

Cons:

It requires software download and installation prior to converting your media files.

Its platform somewhat perplexed for newbie.

Only support Windows OS.

Slow file conversion rate.

This program is indeed a good converter, but it is also necessary to have a mediacoder alternative available in case you experience some hassle that this tool possess. Pavtube Video Converter Ultimate is recommended to the MediaCoder Alternative to convert video/audio files. (See MediaCoder Alternatives for Mac)

Why do you choose Pavtube Video Converter Ultimate (support Windows 8.1/8) as the alternative to MediaCoder? Pavtube Video Converter Ultimate is a powerful program to convert Blu-ray, DVD and all kinds of videos with editing function.

Pavtube Video Converter Ultimate has a simple navigating interface. Even a green hand can handle it easily. The picture below is the screenshot of the interface of it.

The main feature of Pavtube Video Converter Ultimate include:

Rip Blu-ray/DVD to all popular formats

It could convert Blu-ray/DVD to all widely used format such as AVI, MP4, WMV, FLV, RMVB, MPEG, 3GP, MKV, MP3, AAC, etc. The conversion process will make out high quality video without compressing the original quality of Blu-ray/DVD. The extraction of audio from Blu-ray/DVD to MP3, WMA, ACC, etc is also offered.

The Blu-ray and DVD movies can be imported from not only BD/DVD disc, but also BD/DVD folder and BD/DVD ISO image.

Convert video to virtually all formats

It supports converting videos either downloaded from online or taken by camcorders to over 30 major formats, including MKV, MP4, AVI, WMV, FLV, MOV, ASF, VOB, etc.

Allow for video editing tools

The editing tools including trimming, cropping, splitting, and adding text/image effects to add more fun when watching movies and videos. It also supports adding *.srt and *.ass subtitle into video and merge them into video part.

With the help of MediaCoder Alternative, you can convert Video/Audio to any formats you need and enjoy them on your PC or transfer to other devices.

To fulfill the Mac users' need, you also can achieve the Mac version.

Get it now to enjoy 2013 Christmas & 2014 New Year Specials.

Useful Tips:

List Of Online Video Converters

An Alternative to Mac MakeMKV: ByteCopy for Mac

MakeMKV and Handbrake Alternative: Convert/Deinterlace 1080i Blu-ray on Windows/Mac

Get a Best Helper for Mavericks instead of Headbreak

Free DVD Ripper Alternative - Pavtube DVD Ripper Free Version

Best Clipwrap Alternative: Pavtube Video Converter Ultimate

WinFF Alternative for Mac: Convert Any Video or Audio Files on Mac

Source: open-media-community.com/2014/01/08/mediacoder-alternative-review/