Converting podcast video to other formats allows for broader accessibility, as it ensures compatibility with various devices and platforms, enabling a larger audience to enjoy the content. It can also optimize file size and quality, facilitating smoother streaming and quicker downloads, which enhances the overall user experience.

At some point in your production you might need to convert (transcode) your video to other formats. There are tons of applications that can help you do this, below are some popular free / freeware applications.

MediaCoder

MediaCoder is a free media converter/transcoder for Windows. Though more complicated than Format Factory, you can tweak your conversion settings to maximize your video quality and/or tweak file size.

Formats supported: mp4/m4v (H.264), mpeg, flv, ogg/ogv, webm

Link: mediacoderhq.com

SUPER

SUPER is a free media converter/transcoder for Windows. The application is essentially a graphical interface for the popular ffmpeg command line tool with additional features.

Formats supported: mp4/m4v (H.264), mpg (mpeg-4), flv, ogg, webm, avi, wmv, 3gp

Link: www.erightsoft.com/SUPER.html

HandBrake

HandBrake is a multi-platform video converter/transcoder for Mac OSX, Linux and Windows. Even though this application is geared toward converting DVDs to other formats, it works well for converting your own media to other formats.

Formats supported: mp4/m4v (H.264), ogg

Link: handbrake.fr

FFmpeg

FFmpeg is a popular open source command line converter/transcoder. You must be comfortable with using command-line applications to use this application.

Formats supported: mp4/m4v (H.264), mpg (mpeg-4), flv, ogg, webm, avi, wmv, 3gp

Link: www.ffmpeg.org

Miro Video Converter

The Miro Video Converter is a simple video converter from the folks who created the Miro music and video player. This video converter uses the popular ffmpeg command-line tool.

Formats supported: mp4/m4v (H.264), mpg (mpeg-4), flv, ogg, webm, avi, wmv, 3gp

Link: www.mirovideoconverter.com

Quicktime Pro

There is only one non-freeware application we have the conscious to recommend, and that’s Quicktime Pro by Apple. Supported both on the MAC and PC, Quicktime pro will allow you to convert your media to the appropriate formats. Unfortunately, it costs money.

Formats supported: mp4/m4v (H.264), mpg (mpeg-4), flv, ogg, avi, wmv, 3gp