When it comes to file format conversion, compression or transcoding, MediaCoder is the software mostly used. MediaCoder is the software that uses several codec for file transcoding and compression. It was introduced in 2005 especially for the Microsoft Windows. The formats supported by MediaCoder includes Mp3, Vorbis, AAC, WMA, Real Audio, WAV, MPEG-4 AVC, MPEG-4 part 2, MPEG-2, AVI, Video CD and DVD video. However, the software is not available for Mac OS which is very important and common nowadays. And the MediaCoder Mac version is expected by large volume of users who want to make video/audio conversion on Mac.

It’s worth mentioning that you don’t have to wait for the release of MediaCoder for Mac now, a better choice is the Aimersoft Video Converter for Mac, which supports almost all formats conversion and it is also available on the Mac OS. The great features of the Aimersoft Video Converter include high quality formats conversion for devices like the apple products. The facility is available for iPod, iPhone, iPad, iTunes, PSP, PS3, Xbox 360, pocket PC, smart phone, Android, iRiver PDA and many more. Apart from devices, the conversion is available to all other formats that are used globally. A few editing options are also available for basic edit including cropping, cutting, sound managing, video managing etc. This makes the software convenient and enjoyable to use.

Download Video Converter for Mountain Lion:

How to convert video/audio files on Mac (Mountain Lion)

1 Lead in video/audio files

Download and install the Aimersoft Video Converter for Mac, double click the icon to opern the display window. To lead in your video/audio files , you can drag directly the files into the item bar. You can also add multiple files at a time for the reason that Aimersoft Video Converter for Mac supports batch conversion which will save your time.

2 Format the output files

Almost any regular video formats like AVI, WMV, MP4, MOV, M4V, FLV, etc. are supported in the format selection window. Simply select the one you like. The optional adjustment such as resolution, bitrate, sample rate, frame rate, etc. are also offered.

3 Begin to convert video/audio files on Mac

Simply click the Convert button and you can get your converted files in specified formats on Mac (Mountain Lion) in a few seconds . When the conversion completes, open the default folder to get the converted videos. (The default output folder is /Users/USERNAME/Movies/Aimersoft Video Converter. You can click Preferences > Convert to set an output folder.)