Background

Lionel Andrés Messi was born in Rosario, Argentina. He is an Argentinian soccer player who currently plays for Inter Miami and the Argentina national team. Messi formerly played for F.C. Barcelona and Paris-Saint Germain F.C. He began playing soccer at a young age, and his talent was instantly recognized. However, at age 11, Messi was diagnosed with Growth Hormone Deficiency, a condition that stunts growth, and he required expensive medical treatment. River Plate, his local team, was interested in signing him, however, they were unwilling to pay for his medical treatment. It was F.C. Barcelona that took a chance on him and gave him a trial. The coach was so impressed by Messi that he proposed a contract that included paying for his therapy in Spain. Messi moved to Barcelona with his father and joined the prestigious F.C. Barcelona Youth Academy.

Messi quickly progressed through the ranks and debuted in the 2004/2005 season. He became the youngest player to score a league goal. In 2006, he was part of the double-winning team that won the La Liga and Champions League. By the next season (2006 to 2007), 20-year-old Messi was the first-choice striker and an essential part of Barcelona’s team. He scored an impressive 14 goals in 26 league games. In 2006, he played in the World Cup for Argentina, becoming the country’s youngest player to do so. Messi earned an Olympic gold medal in football for Argentina at the 2008 Beijing Olympics. As the seasons went by, Messi kept improving and breaking his records. In 2012, he broke the all-time world record for most goals scored in a calendar year. At the end of 2012, Messi turned down a lucrative offer to play for an unnamed Russian side because he was unsure he would be playing in major European championships. Instead, he signed a contract with Barcelona to remain until the end of 2018. When asked about a move to the English Premier League, he expressed his allegiance to Barcelona

In 2021, he moved to Paris-Saint Germain as F.C. Barcelona could not afford to renew his contract. This free transfer shocked the world. He stayed with the club for two years and won the Ligue 1 twice. In July 2023, he signed with the U.S. club, Inter Miami, for whom he has already helped win the Leagues Cup. Messi is one of the most exciting, skilled players of our time. He dribbles and takes on opponents like no one else. “I’ve seen great players in my career, but I’ve never seen anyone with Messi’s ball control. The ball stays attached to his foot,” Maradona said of Messi’s ball control.

Messi married Antonella Roccuzzo, his longtime sweetheart, on June 30, 2017. The couple has three children together ― Thiago, Mateo, and Ciro. He first met Roccuzzo in their hometown, Rosario, when he was five years old. “Clarín” called their civil wedding the “wedding of the century.” It took place at a fancy hotel in Rosario and Colombian pop sensation, Shakira, and famous soccer players were in attendance.