Mary Neal Ranson Mills, age 97, of Kinston, NC, passed away suddenly but peacefully on July 1, 2024. Born September 4, 1926, in Hodgenville, KY, to Neal Alexander Ranson and Mary McCreary Ranson, she lived a full life of love and service.

From a young age, she was guided by her Presbyterian faith and a heart filled with generosity, baking biscuits with her mother to share during the Great Depression and learning to play hymns on the piano. She adored her siblings and followed them to college at Muskingum. From there she would graduate, joining her grandmother, parents, and future husband as alumni. She and the love of her life, the late James Clarence (Jim) Mills, raised their four sons living in five states, finally making their home in Kinston, NC, in 1967 with the opening of their store Mills International.

It was in Kinston that she planted roots and gave herself to the community. This began in the First Presbyterian Church with Sunday School, Presbyterian Women, and multiple choirs. However, her generous spirit and love of serving others extended to Altrusa International, the American Association of University Women, Church Women United, Kinston Women’s Club, Lenoir County Historical Association, Meals on Wheels, and the Salvation Army.

Mary Neal never met a stranger. Her ability to connect with others to share stories and remember people and events was a marvel. She had the sharpest mind and the astute propensity to take care of things with little fanfare even to the end. She loved her family with unconditional devotion. She is survived by three sons and their wives: Jim and Sally Mills of Greenville, SC, Mark and Connie Mills of Marietta, GA, and Don and Cindy Mills of LaGrange, NC. She is also survived by 10 grandchildren, 20 great grandchildren, and 1 great-great grandchild. In addition to her parents, she is preceded in death by her husband Jim, her brother Paul Ranson, her sister Ruth Ranson Gault, her son and daughter-in-law David Mills and Debbie McLawhorn Mills, and her grandson Kevin Mills. The family extends gratitude to Theresa Hodges and Ginger Peel for their gentle care and assistance.

Mary Neal’s memory will always be alive. We find peace in the sands of her beloved Emerald Isle, in the sewn gifts she gave, in the many treasured letters she wrote, and in the legacy of her inspiring service and love.

Funeral services will be held at 11:00 am on Monday, July 8 at First Presbyterian Church of Kinston, 2101 North Herritage Street, with Pastor Travis Allen. The family will receive friends after the service. In lieu of flowers, donations can be made to the First Presbyterian Church Care Committee and the Salvation Army of Kinston, 2110 N. Queen Street, Kinston, NC 28501.