Mary Katherine Neal Elzey

Mary Katherine went to be with her lord and savior, surrounded by her family, March 6, 2018. The day prior she had celebrated her ninetieth birthday. She was born to the late Dallas and Meriam Wheatley Neal March 5, 1928, at Andersontown in Caroline County, Maryland on the family farm. Her paternal grandparents were the late James Dallas and Annie Collison Neal, her maternal grandparents were the late Harry C. and Bertha Coulbourn Wheatley.

Mary Katherine attended Concord Methodist Church as a child, a small country church where her family attended. At the age of 12, she became a Christian displaying her love of god by living an exemplary life until her passing. She graduated from Caroline High School in Denton, Maryland in 1946 and then enrolled at the Memorial Hospital School of Nursing in Easton graduating in 1949. Then passing her state board exam becoming a Registered Nurse in 1950. She was employed at the Eastern Shore Hospital Center for thirty years prior to retiring in June 1985. During her professional career, she worked as a Clinical Psychiatric Supervisor, Nursing Division Chief, and a liaison nurse coordinating with Public Health Nurses on the treatment of discharged Caroline and Talbot county patients. When the Chestertown Psychiatric Hospital was opened in Chestertown, Maryland, she was the Senior Nurse at the facility. Additionally, she completed a program on Alcohol Studies at Rutgers University in 1972. She also was in a nurse’s medical health study with Harvard Medical School for forty years.

Mary Katherine was a fifty-year cancer survivor and chairperson for five years of the American Cancer Society local chapter. She was a member of the First Baptist Church in Cambridge. Singing in the church choir was a lifelong pleasure. She taught Sunday School for mentally challenged attendees for many years. Miss Mary was a role model and a beautiful person to anyone that had the privilege and pleasure of knowing her.

Mary Katherine was preceded in death by her husband William Phillip Elzey. They had three children Larry D. Elzey, D. Glenn Elzey (Cindy), and B. Kay Rhea (Greg). The apple of her eye was one granddaughter Katherine (Katie) Rhea (Greg). She was the oldest of seven children and survived by Myrtle Ann Scott (Paul -deceased), Dallas Wheatley Neal (Ann), James Dallas Neal (Arleen), Keith Allen Neal (Susan). Preceding her in death were sisters Mila Jean Behlke (Richard) and Meriam Janet Reed (Richard).

A funeral service will be held on Monday, March 12, 2018 at 1 pm at the First Baptist Church in Cambridge with Pastor Steve Trice officiating. Interment will follow at Dorchester Memorial Park. Family will receive friends one hour prior to the service. Memorial contributions can be made in her name to the American Cancer Society, P.O. Box 163, Salisbury, MD 21803 or First Baptist Church, 501 Glenburn Ave., Cambridge, MD 21613. Arrangements are in the care of the Thomas Funeral Home, P.A. in Cambridge.