SUMMARY

Mary Neal joined Strathclyde in 2006 and is currently a Reader. She holds LLB (Honours) and LLM (by research) degrees from the University of Glasgow, and a PhD from Cardiff University (2005).

Dr Neal teaches and co-ordinates two Honours classes: Law, Persons and Property, and Issues in Healthcare Law and Ethics. She supervises research students in Healthcare Law and Ethics (particularly conscience in healthcare; beginning-of-life and end-of-life issues; the meaning and nature of healthcare/medical treatment, and the role of concepts like dignity, sanctity, choice, coercion, and consent in healthcare) and in Legal Theory (especially theories of property / theories of human rights).

RESEARCH

Dr Neal's main research interests are in Healthcare Law, Bioethics, and Legal Theory, and her current research focuses on conscientious objection in healthcare, beginning and end of life issues, theories of property, and meta-disciplinary concepts such as dignity, sanctity, and love.

Dr Neal supervises a number of doctoral research students, and welcomes applications that focus on any of the following areas: Healthcare Law/Ethics (particularly conscience, beginning and end of life issues, the nature of healthcare, and the professional/patient relationship), Legal Theory/Philosophy, Human Dignity, and theoretical aspects of Property.

Dr Neal was recently Principal Investigator on two projects: the Accommodating Conscience Research Network (ACoRN) funded by the Royal Society of Edinburgh, and a British Academy/Leverhulme-funded project investigating pharmacists' perceptions of and involvement in the creation of professional ethical guidance.

She was recently a Co-Investigator on an ESRC-funded project exploring professionals' attitudes to conscientious objection, working with colleagues in Liverpool and Glasgow.

Dr Neal was a member of the BMA Medical Ethics Committee 2016-22, and is currently a member of the editorial board of the journal The New Bioethics. In 2015 she advised the Scottish Parliamentary Committee scrutinising the Assisted Suicide (Scotland) Bill. In 2022 she gave evidence to the Scottish Parliamentary Committee scrutinising a petition to amend the Domestic Abuse (Scotland) Act 2018. She has also given evidence to the Isle of Man and New Zealand parliaments. She is currently chairing the Advisory Board of the CORALE project ('Conscientious Objection after Repeal: Abortion, Law and Ethics'), based at Trinity College Dublin. She is also currently a member of two other expert panels.

SELECTED PUBLICATIONS (since 2014)

Books & book chapters

Ethical Judgments: Re-writing Medical Law (Hart, 2016) (co-editor and contributor)

'The Idea of Vulnerability in Healthcare Law and Ethics: From the Margins to the Mainstream' in Bedford and Herring (eds) Embracing Vulnerability (Routledge, 2020)

'Conscientious Objection, "Proper Medical Treatment" and Professionalism: The Limits of Accommodation for Conscience in Healthcare' in J Adenitire (ed) Religious Beliefs and Cosncientious Exemptions in a Liberal State (Hart, 2019)

‘Discovering dignity: unpacking the emotional content of killing narratives’ in H Conway and J Stannard (eds) The Emotional Dynamics of Law and Legal Discourse (Hart, 2016)

‘Locating Lawful Abortion on the Spectrum of Proper Medical Treatment’ in S Fovargue and A Mullock (eds.) The Legitimacy of Medical Treatment: What Role for the Medical Exception? (Routledge, 2015) 124-141

Peer-reviewed journal contributions