Warren Beatty (born March 30, 1937, Richmond, Virginia, U.S.) is an American motion-picture actor, producer, director, and screenwriter who is best known for his politically charged portrayals of somewhat outcast but charming heroes.

The younger brother of actress Shirley MacLaine, Beatty played gridiron footballin high school but was more interested in theatre. He attended Northwestern University in Evanston, Illinois, for one year before moving to New York City, where he studied with famed acting coach Stella Adler. He occasionally appeared onstage and from 1957 on television as well. In 1959 he earned a recurring role in the television series The Many Loves of Dobie Gillis but left the show before the first season ended to make his only Broadway appearance, in A Loss of Roses (1959). Beatty made a strong screen debut as a tortured teenager in love in Elia Kazan’s Splendor in the Grass (1961), but his next films, although interesting efforts, were mostly financial disappointments.

Britannica Quiz

Oscar-Worthy Movie Trivia

Taking command of his career, Beatty assigned himself the duties of star and producer for Bonnie and Clyde (1967), the story of Great Depression-era bank robbers Bonnie Parker and Clyde Barrow. Counterculture audiences of the 1960s identified with the film’s outlaw heroes, thanks largely to Beatty’s performance, which was filled with much compassion for Barrow and the poor in America. The film, directed by Arthur Penn, with whom Beatty had worked on Mickey One (1965), also received much attention for the artfully rendered climactic shoot-out, which set new standards for screen violence. It became a colossal hit and a milestone in cinema history, and it was nominated for 10 Academy Awards, including best picture and best actor (Beatty).

Never one to rush into projects, Beatty acted in only four films in the next seven years. He costarred with Julie Christie in Robert Altman’s revisionist western McCabe & Mrs. Miller (1971) and played the lead in Alan J. Pakula’s paranoid thriller The Parallax View (1974). His next big hit was Shampoo (1975), a comic sex romp, flavoured with a left-wing sensibility, that Beatty starred in, produced, and wrote with Robert Towne. In it, Beatty plays a womanizing hairdresser who finds it impossible to juggle all his lovers on the eve of Pres. Richard Nixon’s election in 1968. Even more successful was Heaven Can Wait (1978), a showcase vehicle for Beatty’s comedic talents. For this film, Beatty was nominated for Academy Awards in four separate categories (best actor, picture [producer], writing, and direction), an unprecedented achievement in Hollywood history and an achievement he was to repeat with his next film, Reds (1981).

Reds was the film that established Beatty as a serious filmmaker. The epic romantic tale of John Reed, an American communist who influenced the Russian Revolution of 1917, the film received Oscar nominations in all the major categories and won for Beatty an Oscar for best director. He did not direct again for nine years, when he chose as his next vehicle a star-studded adaptation of the comic strip Dick Tracy (1990). His notable films of the 1990s included Barry Levinson’s Bugsy (1991), about the infamous gangster, and Love Affair (1994), both costarring Annette Bening, whom Beatty married in 1992—an act that tempered somewhat Beatty’s long-standing playboy reputation. In 1998 he cowrote, directed, and starred in Bulworth, playing a U.S. senator whose disillusionment with the political system is fueled by his immersion in hip-hop culture. Despite the accolades he received, Beatty was also part of two of Hollywood’s most expensive failures, Ishtar (1987) and Town & Country (2001). After a 15-year absence, he returned to the big screen with Rules Don’t Apply (2016), about the relationship between an aspiring actress and her driver, both of whom work for Howard Hughes. In addition to starring as the eccentric millionaire, Beatty also wrote and directed the romance.