Description

WINTRINGHAM CHURCH LANE

SE 87 SE

(north side, off)

8/90

Church of St Peter

10.10.66

- I

Church. Early C14 incorporating C12 chancel, with rebuilt east end of C15;

early C14 arcades and chancel arch; late C14 tower, repaired 1818; C15 nave

windows. Re-roofed and restored 1887. Dressed sandstone with slate roof.

West tower; 4-bay aisled nave; chancel. 4-stage tower on double-chamfered

plinth, with north- and south-west diagonal buttresses, north-east angle

buttress and south-east vice. Shouldered doorway in first stage of vice.

Chamfered string course to each tower stage. Stilted-arched west window of

3 Perpendicular lights in triple-chamfered opening with continuous

hoodmould. Slit windows to north and west of third stage. Paired louvred

bell openings with Decorated tracery in double-chamfered openings beneath

pointed hoodmoulds on shield stops. Corbel table of masks, grotesques,

fleurons and heraldic devices. Embattled parapet, enriched with wavy

tracery and armorial bearings, pierced by quatrefoils, and with pinnacles

and angle water spouts. Recessed octagonal spire. West windows to both

aisles are square-headed, of 2 lights with Perpendicular tracery, in double-

chamfered openings. Continuous coved hoodmoulds. North aisle window

largely restored. North and south aisles on double-chamfered plinths.

Pointed south door on original strap hinges, beneath hoodmould. 3 square-

headed 2-light windows with Perpendicular tracery, in double-chamfered

openings beneath continuous hoodmoulds. Chamfered eaves band with carved

water spouts. Plain parapet with carved heads in place of pinnacles.

Similar parapet to nave. North aisle exactly repeats the south. East end

windows square-headed Perpendicular. Chancel on sloping plinth with

pilaster buttresses. Narrow round-headed priests' door beneath leaf-stopped

hoodmould. Low side window of paired trefoil-headed lights beneath square

hoodmould. To east, two 2-light Perpendicular windows in double-chamfered

openings beneath head-stopped hoodmoulds. Defaced corbel table beneath

embattled parapet. North side repeats south with one Perpendicular window

only, beneath hoodmould on fleuron stops, one incised, the other in low

relief. Diagonal-buttressed east end on double-chamfered plinth. Restored

3-light Perpendicular window with chamfered sill band and hoodmould. Coped

gables. Nave and chancel gable crosses.

Interior: pointed double-chamfered tower arch, dying into sides, beneath

stopped hoodmould. North and south arcades of continuous moulded, double-

chamfered pointed arches on piers with tall bases, those to western responds

with large broach spurs. Pointed double-chamfered chancel arch. Blocked

round-arched opening in chancel north wall, in chamfer-stopped surround

beneath hoodmould. Double aumbry in chamfered openings on south side. East

end of both aisles closed off by C15 embattled screens of open traceried

panels. In south chapel thus formed is a trefoil-headed piscina in the

south wall and a carved niche with ribbed and crocketed canopy on north

side. Arcaded screen inside tower, dated 1723. C17 poppyhead nave pewing;

lectern and pulpit incorporate C17 panelling, some carved. Octagonal pulpit

tester with pendant finials. C17 baluster poorbox carved with flowers and

foliage. Norman tub font with tall octagonal cover painted with winged

cherubs and dated 1736. Other fittings include a 1723 hatchment in tower;

2 painted panels in tower, one recording its repair in 1818, the second an

admonishment to bellringers:

"I pray you Gentlemen beware

And when you ring ye Bells take care;

For he that rings and breaks a stay,

Must pay sixpence without delay;

And if you ring in Spurs or Matt,

You must likewise pay sixpence for that.

Michael Gill Clarke. 1723."

Paternoster and Commandment boards in north aisle; painted text from Genesis

over chancel arch. Metalwork: original strap hinges on both doors; two C19

brass chandeliers. Stained glass: series of C15 saints in the tracery of

all nave and aisle windows. Monument: on chancel north respond a painted

memorial to John Lister (d 1651) in the form of an acrostic. Roofs: nave

roof dated 1887 on south wall plate; north wall plate retained, dated 1685.

Arch-braced collar beams with collar and side purlins, all wind-braced:

subsidiary rafters have straight braced collars. Some roof corbels carved

as heads or fleurons. Chancel roof probably early C20: hammer-beam roof

with moulded ribs and traceried spandrels.

Listing NGR: SE8871973177

External Links

Historic England Listing

St Peter's Church, Wintringham at Wikipedia

St Peter's Church, Wintringham official website

Wikidata Q7595304

External links are from the relevant listing authority and, where applicable, Wikidata. Wikidata IDs may be related buildings as well as this specific building. If you want to add or update a link, you will need to do so by editing the Wikidata entry.

Recommended Books