The walks, taking in both coast and countryside, have been put together by the Churches Conservation Trust (CCT) and include some historic landmarks along the way.

The four walks take in five enigmatic churches in North Yorkshire - and walkers are encouraged to take photos as part of a photography competition too.

The routes have been put together by the CCT to celebrate National Walking Month which runs throughout May.

CCT is the national charity protecting historic churches at risk and has 356 historic churches under its care.

The trust's churches, along with hospitality venues and shops, have been able to open to the local community since April 12.

CCT's local community officer for North Yorkshire, Laura Bonnington, says: “We are delighted to be able to open our churches to the local community once again. It is the perfect time to be able to get out and about and our walking routes in North Yorkshire provide a great way to see the countryside and see some historic churches along the way.”

Four North Yorkshire walks

Walk 1: The Wolds

In CCT's Walking the Wolds Way trail you can explore the rolling hills and open unspoilt countryside that makes up the Yorkshire Wolds taking in two stunning CCT churches of St Peter’s in Wintringham with its ornate carved misericords and the elegant St Andrew's Church, East Heslerton.

This walk shows off some of the best countryside Yorkshire has to offer.

It is a 9.5mile circular walk tracing the Yorkshire Wolds Way.

Click here to download the walk

Walk 2: The Coast

St Stephen's Church, Fylingdales Photo - Churches Conservation Trust

If the coast is more your cup of tea then take a stroll through time with our walk around Robin Hood’s Bay.

This circular. three-mile, walk takes in the church of Old St Stephen’s in Fylingdales, up above the bay with stunning views and excellent audio tour telling some of the stories of those who lived and died in the area.

The walk then takes you down through the historic streets of Robin Hood’s Bay and the opportunity to learn more of the sometimes nefarious history the village has to offer at the local museum before taking in some delicious tea and cake before the walk back up to Old St Stephen’s.

Click here to download the walk

Walk 3: Newby Hall Estate

Newby Hall and the River Ure, by Michelle Bray.

Discover the village of Skelton-on-Ure, entrance to the Newby Hall Estate, on this circular 8km North Yorkshire walk.

This route begins on the original carriageway to Brampton Hall. Along the way, there is the opportunity to extend your walk to visit Newby Hall, one of Britain’s finest Adam houses, and its gardens.

The route takes in the splendid Victorian church of Christ the Consoler, built as a memorial to Frederick Vyner who, age 23, was captured and murdered by brigands in Greece in 1870. His mother used the money collected for his ransom to commission celebrated British architect William Burges to design the church in the grounds of her home at Newby Hall.

Click here to download the walk

Walk 4: Wars of the Roses

HISTORICAL A view across Towton Battlefield. Picture by Helen Mead

Stretch your legs while immersed in medieval history on this nine-mile North Yorkshire loop.

This walk begins with the opportunity to explore the atmospheric church of St Mary’s, Lead, known as ‘The Ramblers’ Church’ after it was rescued by a group of walkers in 1931. This tiny church dates from the 11th century, though there may have been an earlier church on the site.

The walk then proceeds for nearly 15km around the villages of Towton and Saxton, site of the infamous battle during the Wars of the Roses in 1461. It is thought to have been the largest loss of life in battle ever on English soil and the waters of Cock Beck – which you will cross twice during the walk – were said to have run red with blood.

Click here to download the walk

As part of the Walking Festival, CCT is also launching a photography competition, with the chance to win a bundle of books on historic churches and CCT membership by using #ChurchPhotos to tweet your pictures to CCT (@TheCCT).

Find out more on CCT's website at www.visitchurches/walks

All walk routes and maps can be downloaded here: www.visitchurches.org.uk/walks

Donations to individual churches are welcomed and ‘text to donate’ codes are displayed in each church. Alternatively people can donate via CCT’s website at visitchurches.org.uk