AMERICAN legend Bruce Springsteen built a career as a songwriter, musician, and singer over several decades.

The New Jersey native achieved success in his music career as a solo artist and the leader of the E Street Band.

Who is Bruce Springsteen?

Bruce Springsteen is an American musician born on September 23, 1949, in Long Branch, New Jersey.

Growing up, Springsteen was inspired to create music after watching The Beatles being televised on The Ed Sullivan Show.

Springsteen's debut studio album Greetings from Asbury Park was released in 1973 and had a slow sale, and his second album The Wild, the Innocent & the E Street Shuffle had a similar fate.

By 1974, Springsteen's band was officially called E Street Band.

The following year, in 1975, his album Born to Run gained huge commercial success, climbing to third place on the Billboard 200.

After his initial success, Springsteen began to appear on the covers of Newsweek and Time magazine.

The music legend is known for several successful records, but his signatures included the 1984 hit Born in the USA.

Around 15 million copies of the album were sold in the US and 30 million copies worldwide.

Additionally, Springsteen won 20 Grammy Awards, four American Music Awards, two Golden Globe Awards, and an Academy Award.

What is Bruce Springsteen up to now?

On May 23, 2022, Springsteen announced he was going on tour with the E Street Band.

The tour kicked off in February 2023 and made appearances in stadiums throughout Europe and parts of the United States.

On September 27, 2023, Springsteen revealed he would be postponing all his tour dates until 2024 due to illness.

The announcement came after he rescheduled an Ohio show in March, and a Pennsylvania show in August, both after falling ill.

The band is now expected to play shows in March and April of 2024, before resuming the tour in August.

Ticketholders who are unable to make the new, 2024 rescheduled dates will have 30 days to request a refund.

What is Bruce Springsteen's net worth?

The singing icon has a net worth of $650 million, according to Celebrity Net Worth, and he makes around $80 million a year.

Springsteen sold over 135 million albums globally so far, which makes him among the top 35 best-selling music artists in history.

Additionally, on October 26, 2021, Renegades: Born in the USA, the book, was published and co-authored by former President Barack Obama.

The book expands on the discussions the two share in their podcast and includes photographs and mementos from the two.

The Renegades podcast debuted on Spotify in February of 2021.

The streaming service describes the podcast as: "a series of conversations between President Barack Obama and Bruce Springsteen about their lives, music, and enduring love of America - despite all its challenges."