Bruce Springsteen ‘Born In The U.S.A.’ is an excellent example of what it is to be critical of your country while still having pride in your country. And before anyone gets worked up over the title, it is technically true. Bruce lifted the title “Born in The USA” off of a filmmaker.

The Born On The Fourth of July Factor

Bruce tells the story of a chance meeting with Ron Kovic, author of Born On The Fourth of July. The Cannon edition of the book includes a foreword from Bruce. Bruce had picked the book up by chance just a couple of weeks before he met Kovic when they happened to be staying at the same hotel.

Kovic invited Springsteen to go with him to meet some local vets. The trip was life-changing for Bruce. The stories he heard from vets that day became “Born in the U.S.A.”

Bruce spoke of the song during his Springsteen on Broadway residency, “The verses are just an accounting of events,” he said. “The chorus is a declaration of your birthplace, and the right to all the pride and confusion and shame and grace that comes with it.”

The Original Title of “Born in the U.S.A.”

When Bruce first worked on the song, he called it “Vietnam.” Bruce met Paul Schrader, a well-known director working on a movie called Born in the U.S.A.. The film was about a rock band and Shrader was hoping Bruce would take a role in the film. Bruce turned the role down, but he did pick up the title “Born in the U.S.A.”

Bruce Springsteen ‘Born in the U.S.A.’ – Making Good

Bruce Springsteen released the album Born in the U.S.A. in 1984. Paul Schrader was finally ready to make his movie in 1985. By then, everyone associated the title and song, “Born in the U.S.A” with our soldiers and the pride/shame relationship we can have with our country. Schrader had to change the name of his film.

Bruce made it right with Paul Schrader by writing and performing “Light of Day.” The song title became the new name for the movie. It was released in 1987 and starred Michael J. Fox. The movie was also the acting debut for Joan Jett. Here’s the movie trailer:

The album Born in the U.S.A. produced seven top 10 singles. In 1986, Bruce famously turned down 12 million dollars from Chrystler in exchange for the use of “Born in the U.S.A.” for advertising campaigns.

As long as we’re on the topic of Bruce, which songs are his “best?” Scroll down to see what our experts had to say. Agree? Disagree? Agree to disagree?

Donielle Flynn has two kids, two cats, two dogs, and a love of all things rock. She’s been in radio decades and held down top-rated day parts at Detroit, Philadelphia, and Washington DC radio stations throughout her tenure. She enjoys writing about rock news, the Detroit community, and she has a series called “The Story Behind” where she researches the history of classic rock songs.

Sign me up for the 94.7 WCSX email newsletter!

Stay connected to all things Classic Rock, join the WCSX Workforce- it’s free and you can win prizes, concert tickets and VIP experiences.

First Name *

Last Name

Email *

By clicking "Subscribe" I agree to the website's terms of Service and Privacy Policy. I understand I can unsubscribe at any time.