Background

Bruce Frederick Joseph Springsteen is a musical legend, born on September 23, 1949, in Long Branch, New Jersey. In over 50 years of his career, he transformed the music industry and pioneered heartland rock music, forever changing the game. His early years were spent alongside his two sisters, Virginia and Pamela, and as it would later be seen, the artistic gene ran in the family. Pamela even pursued acting before settling on photography as her full-time career. In his youth, Springsteen went to St. Rose of Lima Catholic school in Freehold. His rebellious nature caused him to have several problems with the nuns, and later on, a part of his music was inspired by his life there.

He grew up listening to Frank Sinatra on the radio, and this prompted his decision of being a musician. In 1964, after seeing The Beatles for the first time on “The Ed Sullivan Show,” he was inspired to go and buy his first guitar, and thereafter, he started playing with a band called The Rogues for audiences at local venues such as Elks Lodge. In the same year, his mother took out a loan and bought him a $60 Kent guitar that he, later on, went on to memorialize in his single “The Wish.” His prolific and specific songwriting ability brought his skills to the attention of several people which would later change his life. These were people like Jim Cretecos, who introduced him to John Hammond, the Columbia Records talent scout back then. He was signed in 1972 to Columbia Records by Clive Davis and released his first two albums, “Greetings from Asbury Park, N.J.” and “The Wild, The Innocent & The E Street Shuffle” in 1973. He rose to worldwide fame with “Born to Run” in 1975, after changing his style. Later on, in 1980, “The River” topped the U.S. Billboard Top LPs & Tape, and in 1984, he released “Born in the U.S.A.,” together with the E Street Band, and it became his most commercially successful album.

Springsteen is one of the world’s best-selling music artists and has been a recipient of numerous awards and accolades in his career, including 20 Grammy Awards, two Golden Globes, an Academy Award, and a Special Tony Award. He was inducted into both the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame and the Songwriters Hall of Fame in 1999, and in 2009, he received the Kennedy Center Honors. In 2013, he was named MusiCares person of the year, and in 2016, he was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom by President Barack Obama.