Springsteen's 'Born to Run' birthplace: a Blauvelt landmark?

Blauvelt may someday have its own rock'n'roll Rushmore.

Michael Magnone's dream is to have a historic marker installed in front of the Blauvelt Auto Spa – the site where, 40 years ago, Bruce Springsteen recorded "Born to Run."

" 'Born to Run' is a classic rock'n'roll song that really touches a lot of people and my heart personally and the fact that it was recorded in my hometown, it's a claim to fame for Bauvelt," Magnone told me.

He was one of many readers for whom my recent article about the song's recording struck a chord.

Going by the email responses and comments on social media, The Boss was practically a regular in the early 1970s when he was finding his sound at the 914 Sound Studios, at the crossroads of Erie Street and Route 303.

His first two albums, "Greetings from Asbury Park" and "The Wild, the Innocent and The E-Street Shuffle" were done at 914, as well as "Born to Run," the title track of the third.

Bruce was spotted at Carvel, the Blauvelt diner, the Orangeburg Pub and Annie's Snack Shack in Stony Point. He might have been driving a Camaro or a motorcycle up Route 9W.

Memories of Blauvelt's brush with rock'n'roll royalty were particularly poignant for Magnone, who grew up on Greenbush Road, less than a mile from the studios.

Magnone recounted a story his friend, Kevin Quaranta (also from Blauvelt ), he told about getting picked up hitchhiking by "a greasy guy driving a light blue Camaro, all the way from the G.W. Bridge right to Erie Street."

That greasy guy was you-know-who, on his way to the recording studio.

Quaranta, who went on to become a Bedford town judge, died three years ago, and when Magnone hears about 914, he thinks of his pal.

His request to the Historical Society of Rockland landed on the desk of Executive Director Susan Deeks, who grew up in Blauvelt and could see the studio building from her kitchen window.

Deeks remembers her mother bringing home London broil from Big Country Meats — which took the studio's place in the mid-70s.

She said it's up to the marker committee to weigh whether a site deserves a plaque or marker, which would have to be paid for by the person or organization making the request.

"I think it's very much worth looking at," Deeks said.

Brooks Arthur, the recording industry legend who founded 914 Sound Studios in 1971, said the prospect of his brainchild becoming part of history "fills my chest with pride." Arthur said he'd love to be on hand for the plaque's dedication, should the day come.

He, too, is filled with nostalgia about his old haunts. He has the Blauvelt diner menu hanging on a wall next to artist Haley Coletta's 914 logo. He remembers the name of his favorite waitress at the diner (Linda) and the times his daughters Jill and Jackie would go across the street to bring back Carvel for Bruce and the band.

"We all became sort of Springsteenites, part of a phenomenon we didn't know was happening yet," he said by phone from California, where he lives now.

Arthur, who lived in Valley Cottage during his time running 914, is in conversation with publishers for the memoir he's writing about working with music legends including Neil Diamond, Carole King and the Shangri-Las.

Arthur made the decision to leave for the West Coast in the mid-1970s.

Despite the great sounds being laid down at 914 by artists like the Ramones, Loudon Wainwright III, Melanie, Dusty Springfield, Janis Ian, and yes, even Springsteen, "The cash flow was so slow that it wasn't making my partners happy," he said.

"I lived by the music first and the money will come theory."

Visits to the 914 studios were part of Jeffrey Steckler's childhood.

"My father was a record producer and used 914 Studios often," Steckler said. "He would see Bruce often. I would go as kid and play on the drum set in the studio, and then play in the football field in the back."

Steckler, who was 7 or 8 at the time and lived in Chestnut Ridge, recalled his father, Allan, getting bumped from his studio slot in favor of Springsteen.

Other places Bruce was said to have popped up at were a couple of now-defunct rock clubs – The Interlude, across the street from the studio; the Orangeburg Pub, in a strip mall at Route 303 and Orangeburg Road; and in the mid-1980s, at a club called the Expo in Pomona, where The Boss joined E-Street's "Big Man" Clarence Clemons on stage.

The Boss so far has been silent about the prospects of Blauvelt immortality.

But Magnone is busy seeking permission from the property's owner and says he'll pitch in money and seek other donors. He's even started a Facebook page to keep up the beat.

"This is the song that put him on the national scene," said Magnone, who now lives in New City. "The fact that the song that put him on the map was recorded there, we really should commemorate this."

As Bruce wrote in in "Bandlands":

"Talk about a dream, Try to make it real ..."

Robert Brum is a columnist and editor of The Rockland Angle, a nightly email newsletter exclusively for Rockland County news, features and other essential information. To sign up for The Angle, visit lohud.com/newsletters, check the "Rockland Angle" box and submit your email address.

Twitter: @Bee_bob

The 1970s was a fertile time for rock'n'roll in Rockland, with a handful clubs featuring live music, besides the immortal sounds being recorded the 914 Sound Studios. Join me, Joe Delia – a gold and platinum album keyboardist who recorded at 914 – and friends for light refreshments and an informal evening chat about the glory days.

•When: 7 p.m. Wednesday, June 10

•Where: Bailey's Smokehouse, 136 E Erie St., Blauvelt

•If you're planning to come, email rbrum@lohud.com