Austin Filmmaker Justin Durban’s Short Film “Bits And Pieces” Delivers Big Budget Fantasy on Indie Filmmaker Funds.

Film Title: Bits and Pieces

Director: Justin R. Durban

Writer: Leah Weinberger

Director of Photography: John Hafner

Cast: Aileen Davila, David Collier, Nicholle Walton

SHORTFILMTEXAS (SFT): What is your short film “Bits and Pieces” about?

JUSTIN R. DURBAN (JRD): A young girl terribly scarred is kidnapped by a lonely monster who feels a connection with her because of their shared monstrous appearance. They spend the day connecting as a family. When it is time for him to return her to her lonely life the girl begs to stay and be a family together. She accepts him completely as he is and begs for him to adopt her. He loves her so much that he finds a way for them to be together forever.

SFT: What did you shoot on? (Likes/Dislikes)

JRD: We shot “Bits and Pieces” on the DSLR canon 7d. John Hafner was the Director of Photography. The 7d encodes the footage as it records, so you have to convert the footage again so your editing system can actually take on the clips. Another disadvantage is tricky focusing and hand-held work with a DSLR is just out of the question. It’s so light that it feels like a home video. So, i prefer giving it some weight or lock it down on sticks. The advantage of the 7D is the film is basically straight from camera. VERY little Color Correction was used with this film. The trickiest part was getting the right lighting with all the fog from set.

CLICK HERE TO WATCH THE FILM and READ THE FULL INTERVIEW

That was very good. Great color, great locations, and solid acting by the mummy and little girl. The ending was shocking, but it worked, and I'm not turned off by it.

I was expecting to see the little girl revived...not showing her open her eyes in the afterlife (other realm) was unexpected...I would like to have seen her join him in his reality...but that's just me not wanting to imagine her really dead...even though I know she is. I can imagine that she *will* wake in that alternate reality...he just needed to finish his ritual. Yes?

It is a bit surprising that he would kill her to spend eternity with him. It's almost like he's breaking the rules. I know he's not Death...but it still seems against the rules.

Really well done.

I really like your other work as well. Wish you guys were a bit closer, would love to work with you all. If you fly me down for your next picture...I swear to be the best giver...the best sharer ever!

Holy cow...the lead guy in Maylen (John) is an actor my brother (Anthony Penta) has worked with...he was in my brother's graduate thesis 'The Last Thing She Wanted' (UofA). Man...small world. (clip from it--you'll see him at 1:45: http://www.youtube.com/user/pentaworks#p/u/3/Sl8NYBO9wkc)

Cheers.