[Note: Combat Communications Squadrons[CBCS] are sometimes incorrectly referred to using the acronym CCS]

The 32nd Combat Communications Squadron was activated on 22 July 1988 under special order G-60 from HQ/AFCC. The 32nd Combat Communications Squadron, through the 3rd CCG, reports to the Twelfth Air Force, Davis-Monthan AFB, Arizona. Prior to the move to the Twelfth Air Force, the 32nd reported, through the 3rd CCG, to the 552nd Air Control Wing, Tinker AFB, Oklahoma. Their first reporting unit was, through the 3rd CCG, to the 602nd Air Control Wing located At Davis-Monthan Air Force Base, Tucson, Arizona. Previousl,y the 3rd CCG reported to the Tactical Communications Division, headquartered at Langley Air Force Base, Virginia.

The mission of the 32nd and it's sister squadrons is to provide mobile and tactical navigational aids, air traffic control services, and communications facilities in support of world-wide U.S. Air Force and Department of Defense requirements. The mission is broken down into two basic areas: combat readiness and emergency mission support.

Combat readiness demands extensive training in the field, as well as, participation in numerous exercises. Emergency mission support requires world-wide deployments of people and equipment to provide temporary services for facilities. The emergency mission support also assists in helping with those special projects as requested by other federal agencies.

In addition to maintaining its ever increasing mission, the 32nd is also the working advisor of the 254th Combat Communications Group (ANG) from Garland, Texas and her subordinate squadrons including: 111th Air Traffic Control Flight from Phoenix, Arizona, 221st Combat Communication Squadron from Garland, Texas; 223rd Combat Communications Squadron from Hot Springs, Arkansas, 227th Air Traffic Control Flight from Aurora, Colorado, 236th Combat Communications Squadron from Hammond, Louisiana, and the 238th Combat Communications Squadron from Meridian, Mississippi.

Historically speaking, the 32nd has sent people and equipment to nearly every corner of the world. Personnel and equipment deployed to Antarctica in December 1976 for testing of the equipment in extreme cold and adverse weather conditions. Members of the 32nd deployed in December 1979 to Salisbury, Rhodesia, providing satellite terminal support of the Military Airlift Command's airlift of peacekeeping forces.

32nd satellite communications capability was again tested in 1980 at Eniwetok Atoll in the Marshall Islands. A satellite terminal was deployed to provide communications between government cleanup crews on the atoll and project headquarters more than 4,000 miles away in Hawaii.

The combat readiness of the 32nd and its sister squadrons has been tested several times. Personnel were sent to Southwest Asia on three different occasions supporting National Command Authority directives. Operation URGENT FURY saw the deployment of satellite communications personnel and equipment to Grenada to provide secure voice and data satellite communications. Another mission in March 1984 saw Third Herders deploy in support of Operation EAGLE LOCK in response to Libyan aggression towards Egypt and Sudan.

The 32nd squadron also supported the Elf One mission (deactivated in 1989), an AWACS operation in Southwest Asia. The unit has also supported the joint-service Poker Buff mission in Central America, as well as several early space shuttle missions, using a tactical air navigation system.

The Oklahoma City Air Logistics Center has utilized the 32nd squadron's capabilities in the past. Building 3001, the ALC headquarters, caught fire in 1985, and the 32nd squadron was put into action on the home front. The unit provided the entire DSN and AUTODIN capability and complete telephone switching for nearly four months until regular service could be restored.

In April 1995, the 32nd CBCS was tasked to support the Federal Emergency Management Agency in extricating victims from the bombed Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building in Oklahoma City. The squadron provided manpower and life support equipment for around-the-clock recovery efforts.

The mission of the 32nd CBCS is to deploy quality communications-computer systems and air traffic services for military operations and emergency missions under hostile and base conditions anytime, anywhere.