by Mark Wherry

Following the Halloween-inspired unveiling of Apple’s latest M3-series iMac and MacBook Pro models, the Cupertino-based company have more good news for musicians and audio engineers this Autumn with the announcement of Logic Pro 10.8 for Mac and Logic Pro 1.1 for iPad.

The simultaneous release of new Logic Pro updates for both macOS and iPadOS underscores the parity Apple are setting out to achieve between the two versions, giving users the same set of familiar tools no matter the device on which Logic Pro is being used. And, perhaps more importantly, improving the Roundtrip experience for those sharing the same Project in Logic Pro between Macs and iPads.

Beat Breaker & Sample Alchemy now on Mac too

For example, the new Beat Breaker and Sample Alchemy plug-ins first seen in Logic Pro for iPad have been brought to the Mac in Logic Pro 10.8. And, if you haven’t used them already, this is certainly a cause for celebration.

Beat Breaker allows incoming audio to be split into rhythmic slices that can be rearranged and manipulated, facilitating contemporary-sounding, time-based remixing with flare. Sample Alchemy, which borrows from Logic Pro’s existing Alchemy plug-in, enables an audio sample to be swiftly resynthesized and manipulated into a playable instrument. And to demonstrate what’s possible, a free Hybrid Textures Sample Alchemy pack is now included featuring instruments designed for instant creative gratification, forged from a collection of 70 patches and over 80 loops.

Integrated Mastering Assistant

The main attraction in these latest versions of Logic Pro is undoubtedly the new Mastering Assistant, designed to demystify the process of adding that final layer of polish to your stereo mixes. Intended to be added as the final step before delivering your master files for distribution, Mastering Assistant performs an offline analysis of your mix before applying three types of processing categories — EQ, dynamics, and stereo spread — tailored to get the most from your material. Each section offers simplified controls, and the overall character of the signal chain can be configured by choosing from one of four easily identifiable preset names, such as Transparent and Punch.

Mark Wherry: "Having had a chance to briefly play with Mastering Assistant, I was pleasantly surprised by the quality of the results..."

Having had a chance to briefly play with Mastering Assistant, I was pleasantly surprised by the quality of the results – not to mention the perspicuous convenience by which they could be achieved. And while such a feature could be understood by paraphrasing Apple’s original ethos as ‘mastering for the rest of us’, it also has clear value for professionals and more experienced users. Having the option to quickly add a slick sonic veneer before sending out a demo, without any fear of exceeding a True Peak loudness level of -1LUFS, is certainly not unhelpful.

32-bit float recording

These updates to Logic Pro also add the capability to record 32-bit float audio when using a compatible audio interface, such as Zoom’s UAC-232. And this could be particularly useful if you want a mobile solution for field recording — or any scenario requiring content with a high dynamic range to be captured — where the convenience of running Logic Pro on an iPad might be preferable to bringing a MacBook Pro.

Logic Pro for iPad enhancements

Logic Pro 10.8 for Mac and Logic Pro 1.1 for iPad also offer numerous enhancements specific to each version. In Logic Pro 10.8 for Mac, for example, there are new Slip and Rotate tools, making it easier to move the content within a Region without changing the position of that Region. And like many other developers, Apple are gradually implementing support for MIDI 2.0, with Logic Pro 10.8 now able to display MIDI data using decimal places either within the traditional 0-127 range or as a percentage.

However, I think most Logic Pro users will concede the most important change in Logic Pro 10.8 is that the Record buttons for Software Instrument and External MIDI Tracks now blink when manually armed, just like they always have for Audio Tracks. Although, joking aside, you have to admire the fact somebody at Apple actually thought about this.

Logic Pro 1.1 for iPad adds support for the iPad’s Split View and Stage Manager, allowing effortless interaction when running additional apps alongside Logic Pro, such as the ever-useful Voice Memos. And building on this functionality, you can now select multiple audio files from the Files app and drag them into Logic Pro, making it possible to create a new Drum Kit or import the files to new or existing Audio Tracks – just like you can on the Mac.

And finally, it’s good to see the inclusion of a feature on the iPad that can be regarded as either frivolous or serious (or both), with Quick Sampler adding the Recorder mode from the Mac version. This enables users to quickly record new playable sample content, especially when using the built-in microphone. And given the countless hours of amusement I remember at school with Casio keyboards offering such a facility, it’s good to know today’s school children — considering the iPad’s popularity in education — can continue to enjoy a misspent musical youth.

Pricing & Availability

Logic Pro 10.8 for Mac requires macOS Ventura 13.5 or later and can be downloaded from the Mac App Store as a free update for existing users. It remains priced at $199 (US) for new users. For more information, visit apple.com/logic-pro.