Hello I’m very new to programming and JUCE

My DAW of choice is Logic Pro X

Running on Mac OS Catalina

About me

In my early 50’s no previous experience and programming my math is not good

I do play some guitar and keyboard

I starter into learning sound design ,audio,samplers, physical modeling synthesis etc…

And now very important to me I very visual learner by seeing things happen in realtime or close to it

As a example : In Logic I turn a parameters and see what’s happen on screen

Questions

1.Where do I start in my programming to learn the correct way to then be able to applied to JUCE 6

2. What kind of Applications can I use or create for Logic Pro X?

3.What is the most simplest audio program I can start I can learn so that I can build from there I believe in get a sold structure but if all possible very visual based

if not I make due

Thank You and ‘God Bless and Stay Safe Everyone

According to Veritasium there is no such thing as a ‘visual learner’: The Biggest Myth In Education - YouTube

However… I personally like to learn by example following some steps by step process - for JUCE6 I would say the first step is to dig into C++ in general, and I found ‘The Cherno’ youtube channel is one of the best at walking through all the concepts: Welcome to C++ - YouTube

The simplest audio program/plugin for Logic you can make is probably just a level control - a single slider that controls input audio, and attenuates it… so also check out youtube videos on ‘The audio programmer’ youtube channels for an example of that using JUCE.

https://www.youtube.com/results?search_query=the+audio+programmer

This forum is probably not the place to ask basic C++ questions though… and for more general ‘what can I make’ type discussions, I’d highly recommend to sign up to the ‘Audio Programmer’ discord channels.

+1 for Max/MSP or Pure Data. When learning, being able to see the results of your coding in realtime is invaluable. Do check them out.

Within Pure Data you can even use Ofelia, so you can learn “text coding” (using the Lua scripting language), in addition to the “visual coding” of Pure Data.

Eventually, if you want to release a commercial audio application or plugin, C++ and JUCE are probably the best bet.

One Lone Coder is another very nice (and fun) youtube channel and here is an interesting introductory video (note: what he says about not listening to people in the internet definitely does not apply to this forum, which is one of the most helpful you will find).

Thank You Sir

I understand what You have said

Now about “The Cherno” he seems very easy to listen to and as he has said he will be using video games as a example but this can then be able applied and carry over to music,JUCE etc…

I will listen to him for a week and then start to listen to “Audio Programmer”

You said they have a Discord Channel as well do You happen know that link?