It was on the cards! Stephanie J. Block reveals she and House Of Cards husband Sebastian Arcelus are expecting their first baby

Stephanie J. Block and husband Sebastian Arcelus, who stars in Netflix drama House Of Cards, are expecting their first child.

The Broadway star, 41, shared the happy news in an interview with host Seth Rudetsky during Sirius/XM Satellite Radio’s On Broadway show on Monday.

Hiding the bump: Stephanie J. Block and Sebastian Arcelus, pictured at the Second Stage 35th Anniversary Gala in New York on May 5, are expecting their first baby.

Seth blasted his exclusive out on Twitter, saying: 'Breaking news!!! @StephanieJBlock 4 months to go til #BabySebOrSteph.'

Stephanie, who met Sebastian, 37, when they both starred in Wicked! on Broadway, retweeted the news.

The couple tied the knot in 2007 and she told Broadway.com late last year that without the musical, 'I would not have my husband.

Getting the news out: The 41-year-old actress, who was around four months pregnant in this shot, shared the news on Sirius Radio's show On Broadway and host Seth Rudetsky tweeted his exclusive

'We literally got married when we were working together on Wicked. We went to the courthouse one afternoon and that night, we were singing “As Long As You’re Mine” as husband and wife.

'No one knew we had gotten married, it was a quiet thing. There are so many memories that connect us to that show. It shaped the course of our lives.'

She also told the website of her desire to start a family, saying: 'I love caring for a home and a yard, and hopefully sooner than later, a little family, with little Block-Arceluses.'

Quiet wedding: The couple met when they starred in Wicked! and got married before a performance in 2007

The couple and their pet pooch Macaco recently moved to a home in New Jersey.

Aside from House Of Cards, Sebastian will soon be seen on TV in Madam Secretary. He has also appeared on stage in A Time To Kill, Elf, Jersey Boys, Good Vibrations and Rent.

Stephanie last appeared on Broadway in The Mystery Of Edwin Drood, which earned her a Tony nomination. Among her other credits are Anything Goes, 9 To 5, The Pirate Queen and The Boy From Oz.

Once upon a time: Sebastian and Boris McGiver in the first episode of Netflix's House Of Cards, which aired in February 2013

Meanwhile, she was on the Sirius show to publicise Covenant House's Sleep Out: Broadway Edition, a one-night fundraising event on August 17, backed by theatre celebrities that aims to raises funds for homeless kids.