Said and Done is the monthly communications digest from MIT's School of Humanities, Arts, and Social Sciences. For the complete current review, visit Said and Done.

Highlights include:

RESEARCH PORTFOLIO

Who needs to understand science?

In a word 'everyone,' and science journalists play a major role in the public understanding of science. In the school’s Knight Science Journalism Fellowships program, outstanding journalists from around the globe hone their skills and perspectives for this work.

Learn more

Bookshelf | Spring 2010 Edition

These works, often the result of years of research and thinking, offer new knowledge and analysis, guidance for policy, and nourishment for lives.

Take a look

NEWS

All or Nothing

MIT experts on the future of health-care reform: Congress should still think big.

By Peter Dizikes at MIT News

Joe Haldeman receives science fiction community's highest honor

Joe Haldeman, Adjunct Professor in the School's Program in Writing and Humanistic Studies, has received the Damon Knight Memorial Grand Master award for 2010 from the Science Fiction and Science Fantasy Writers of America, the community's highest accolade, recognizing lifetime achievement.

Full story

MULTIMEDIA

Nobel laureate Robert Solow on the economic crisis — and how we can recover

Nobel Prize-winning economist, vice chairman of the Urban Institute Board of Trustees, and MIT Professor Emeritus Robert Solow explains in a four-part video series why a stateside housing slump turned into a global economic crisis, why the bailout was necessary, and how we can recover.

Watch

PBS: Professor of Music Ellen Harris on Handel's Messiah

When 18th century composer George Frideric Handel wrote his timeless "Messiah" oratorio, he not only penned a classic holiday composition, he established a foundation for a new business approach to opera. Paul Solman of PBS reports, and interviews Professor of Music Ellen Harris, who sings one of her responses.

Watch

PROFILES

Andrea Wirth | Administrative Assistant, Foreign Languages and Literatures

"I work with some of the most creative people on campus," Wirth says. Off campus, the creativity continues: for 20 years, Wirth has donned a Revolutionary War musician’s uniform, picked up her drum, and marched in a 45-member Fife and Drum Corps.

More

MAGAZINE

Soundings | Current Issue

The Magazine of the MIT School of Humanities, Arts, and Social Sciences

Stories of ideas in action

For the full digest, visit Said and Done.