While I work on new postings, you get another Raw Feed about a Joe Haldeman work.

Raw Feed (1998): Forever Peace, Joe Haldeman, 1997.

As Haldeman makes clear in his short author’s note, this book is not a plot sequel to his The Forever War, but it is examination of some of that book’s themes, and I think it draws some of its power through reference to that novel.

By itself, this book opens strongly. All throughout the book is Haldeman’s terse style which features the verbal hooks of irony, understatement, and a delay in revealing crucial information. He chooses a rather odd combination of first-person narration by Julian Case and third person omniscient narration.

The novel opens with a depiction of soldierboys, military robots operated remotely, in use. They are operated by “mechanics” “jacked” into them. The jack is a brain implant that allows full remote transmission and reception (though the traffic either way can be filtered) of sensory input as well as controlling the movements of the soldierboys.

The jacks create a subculture amongst their possessors. In the military, a platoon of soldierboys, during their ten-day tour of duty, has an intimate, gestalt-like connection to one another. Outside the military, people jack into records of other people’s sensory experiences or have sex with fellow jack possessors. There is even a group of ex-mechanics (mostly women – the jacks cannot easily be removed) who hang around as prostitutes hoping to jack with mechanics.

The war being fought is between the Ngumi and Alliance coalitions. It’s partly a race war, partly a war between the rich and poor (often a country is an official Alliance member but its poor populace has Ngumi sympathies); and partly a war between democracies and dictatorships.

Haldeman, in the first part of the novel, excitingly depicts the soldierboy operations, the culture of the mechanics who operate them (including draftee Case), and the “warboys” who follow the mechanics. They seem suspiciously like science fiction fans in their single-minded devotion, their conventions, and their costumes. They seem a credible phenomenon for a media-covered, high tech, personalized war.

As well as being an addition to the ongoing sf dialogue on war and violence that has been going on at least since Robert A. Heinlein’s Starship Troopers and, of course, includes Haldeman’s The Forever War, this is also a contribution to the nanotechnology sub-genre prevalent in the last 10 years. The US and other countries have nanoforges. However, they don’t share the technology with others, especially since the large nanoforges are powered by warm fusion plants. The test of one such fusion plant put a very large crater in North Dakota (though there is some doubt as to whether this was an accident or deliberately staged to make the technology seem dangerous enough to rigorously control). America hands out products from their nanoforge to allies – if they supply the raw materials.

Haldeman depicts a depressingly realistic and plausible “Universal Welfare State” (not just in America but throughout the world’s richest countries). Basic necessities are provided by the nanoforges though it is unclear exactly how much medical care is dispensed. If you want more than your allotment (including strictly controlled alcohol and other drugs), you have to find a job to pay for such luxuries.

Military personnel get unlimited rations of liquor and pay. All are subject to a three-year draft. Most of the draft positions are make work jobs supervising computers though Class is physicist in his civilian work and a mechanic in the military. Mechanics come in the near psychotic hunter killer variety and the more normal, pacific interdiction/disruption variety of which Class is. Only a portion of draftees serve in the military.

The first half of the book is compelling portrait of future war, its soldiers (shoes are regular infanty of the sort we have now), and the politics and society of the future.

However, the second half of the novel after Class becomes suicidal over actually killing someone, albeit accidentally, in the line of duty is less so. Essentially, it’s a thriller plot with two private conspiracies, both with government and military connections, at war with each other.

One is the Hammer of God who are an apocalyptic minded Christian sect who actively seek to bring about the end of the world. They find a convenient tool in the Jupiter Project, a huge, nanoassembled particle accelerator around Jupiter. Case and his physicist lover Amelia and another cosmologist prove that, when it’s turned on, it will create conditions like those at the very beginning of the Universe and those changes will propagate outward to destroy the universe, or, at least, our galaxy – sort of a cosmological reset button. (Haldeman spends little time rationalizing the science behind the Jupiter Project’s threat.) They try to stop the project, and the Hammer of God tries to suppress their warning.

The other conspiracy involves Julian and an appealing group of fellow academics. (They call themselves the Saturday Night Special crowd after a theme restaurant celebrating the “California Gang Era”). Its leader is Marty Larrin, one of the prime designers of the jack technology. Twenty years ago he discovered that even a group of murderers and Special Forces assassins, immersed in the gestalt of a common jack for 20 days, become “humanized”, that is develop so much empathy for fellow humans they become unable to kill except in reluctant self-defense (and then only when immediately threatened). Larrin and Class hatch a conspiracy to subject all the jacked armed forces to this process than implant jacks in the populace and immerse them in the process.

The plot succeeds, and the last of the novel is exciting (I like that Haldeman often wraps his sf concepts in thriller plots), particularly with the introduction of two very dangerous, very fanatical Hammer of God assassins, Ingram and Gavri. However, internal psychology seemed implausible and cliched – perhaps Haldeman did this to emphasize their inhumanity since Ingram resists humanization – though Dr. Jackson carefully points out that their viciousness is still not outside the bounds of human experience.

I also liked that Class loses his ability to jack and, not humanized, actually comes to want to kill Gavrila and Ingram and, in Gavrila’s case, does. His lover tries to get jacked but is unsuccessful, and their discussions over why she wants to be jacked and the barrier his inability puts between them are interesting and realistic.

Still, the last few chapters seem rushed, a trifle confusing at times, and the ending seems a bit contrived – particularly with the media moment of a humanized, old POW being whacked by a non-humanized soldier.

As a thematic sequel to The Forever War, this book inevitably invites compare and contrast to that novel. Both feature reluctant draftees cynical about their cause and the military. William Mandela of The Forever War learns humanity started the war with the Taurans. Case thinks it possible the Alliance nuked their own Atlanta for propaganda purposes. Both feature alienation of soldiers returning to civilian life. Mandela finds his own world so altered after his first tour of duty that he has to re-enlist. Case, rotating between 10 days as a soldier and twenty days as a civilian, has to have a day of transition. Both protagonists are officers. Both novels feature welfare states though The Forever War has a welfare state rationing scarce medical care. Forever Peace is a world of plenty. The humanization process of Forever Peace is the technological equivalent of the gestalt mind of the Taurans and the “Man, Kahn-clones” which eventually negotiate an end to the war.

But the most interesting thematic resonance, and it adds an element to the novel that someone not familiar with The Forever War would miss, is the transformation of Class from passive mechanic to willing and necessary killer. The humanized of Forever Peace seem incapable of effectively, fighting implacable, incorrigible psyches like Ingram. Warriors of an unempathetic sort are still needed (though Class still feels his own mortality when looking at Gaurila’s splattered remains), sometimes to kill in cold blood as when Class kills General Blaisdell. Blaisdell poses a real threat, has conspired in real killings, but the humanized, while recognizing his death is necessary, can’t bring themselves to kill. In The Forever War, it was made clear that the Taurans weren’t particularly effective fighters and would have lost the war anyway.

Is Haldeman, with his distaste for violence borne of personal combat experience, with his contention that humanity can engineer itself (or, at least, most of its members) a better nature via technology, suggesting the warrior, however reluctant, is still necessary to protect us from our fellow man who are unredeemable?