[sidebar:nobel:top=60]

[sidebar:clark:top=380]

[sidebar:rome:top=975]

Diamond receives 2010 Nobel Prize for Economic Sciences

Institute Professor Peter Diamond PhD ’63 will collect the Nobel Prize in economics on Friday, Dec. 10, during a ceremony at the Stockholm Concert Hall in Sweden. Diamond, Dale T. Mortensen of Northwestern University and Christopher A. Pissarides of the London School of Economics won the prize for their analysis of “markets with search frictions,” which roughly equates to any setting in which buyers and sellers don’t easily find one another.

More

Kaiser elected a Fellow of the American Physical Society

David Kaiser has been elected a Fellow of the American Physical Society, following nomination by the APS's Forum on the History of Physics. The citation reads: "For his outstanding publications that combine technical mastery of twentieth-century physics with a deep knowledge of recent developments in the history, philosophy, and sociology of science."

More

Huang awarded MLA's 2010 Scaglione Prize

Chinese Shakespeares cited as a "landmark" book

Alexander C.Y. Huang, Research Affiliate in the School's Literature section, and Associate Professor of Comparative Literature at Penn State, has won the MLA's Aldo and Jeanne Scaglione Prize for Comparative Literary Studies forChinese Shakespeares (Columbia University Press, 2009). Huang's book is called a "landmark" in comparative literary studies. With Peter Donaldson, Ford Foundation Professor Humanities at MIT, Huang is also the co-founder and co-editor of two open-access digital video archives, Global Shakespeares and Shakespeare Performance in Asia.

More

Esther Duflo wins the 2010 John Bates Clark Medal

The Abdul Latif Jameel Professor of Poverty Alleviation and Development Economics, was named winner of the 2010 John Bates Clark Medal. Duflo, whose influential research has prompted new ways of fighting poverty around the globe, is the second woman to be given the award, which ranks second only to the Nobel Prize in prestige within the economics profession, and is considered a reliable indicator of future Nobel consideration.

Schneider awarded a Ford Foundation International Chair

Ben Ross Schneider has been awarded a Ford Foundation International Chair, making him Ford Foundation International Professor of Political Science as of January 1, 2011.

More

Mary Fuller, Professor of Literature, has won the 2010 Levitan Prize in the Humanities. The $25,000 prize is awarded annually as a research fund to support innovative and creative scholarship in the humanities. In addition to this year's Levitan Prize in the Humanities, Fuller also recently received a 2010-11 National Endowment for the Humanities Fellowship, and is spending the current academic year at the Huntington Library in San Marino, California.

Economist Amy Finkelstein wins Presidential Early Career Award

On Friday, November 5, 2010President Barack Obama named Amy Finkelstein, Professor of Economics, and six other researchers from MIT as recipients of the Presidential Early Career Awards for Scientists and Engineers (PECASE), the highest honor bestowed by the U.S. government on science and engineering professionals in the early stages of their independent research careers.

More

Joe Haldeman, Adjunct Professor in the School's Program in Writing and Humanistic Studies, received the Damon Knight Memorial Grand Master award for 2010 from the Science Fiction and Science Fantasy Writers of America. The Grand Master Award, SFWA's highest accolade, recognizes excellence for a lifetime of contributions to the genres of science fiction and fantasy.

Sally Haslanger, Professor of Philosophy and Director of the Program in Women and Gender Studies, received highest honors from two prestigious associations in philosophy. She was named the 2011 Carus Lecturer, given by the American Philosophical Association (APA), and she has was selected Distinguished Woman Philosopher of 2010 by the Society for Women in Philosophy.

Dower's Cultures of War is 2010 National Book Award finalist

Over recent decades, Pulitzer-winning historian John W. Dower has addressed the roots and consequences of war from multiple perspectives. Here he examines the cultures of war revealed by four powerful events—Pearl Harbor, Hiroshima, 9-11, and the invasion of Iraq in the name of a war on terror.

More

Conference on Normativity honors Philosopher Judith Thomson

Fundamental ethical questions were up for debate recently as distinguished moral philosophers gathered at MIT for a daylong conference on Normativity — a groundbreaking 2008 treatise by MIT philosophy professor emeritus Judith Jarvis Thomson. “Debate was vigorous, lively, and good humored — in all the ways that humor can be good!” said Professor Richard Holton, head of the Philosophy Section.

More

Stefan Helmreich, Associate Professor of Anthropology, won the Gregory Bateson book prize for Alien Ocean, awarded by the Society for Cultural Anthropology. The Bateson Prize honors work that is theoretically rich, ethnographically grounded, interdisciplinary, and innovative.

David Jones, Associate Professor of the History and Culture of Science and Technology in the Program in Science, Technology, and Society (STS), received the 2010 Donald O'Hara Faculty Prize for Excellence in Teaching from Harvard Medical School (HMS).

Norvin Richards, Professor of Linguistics, was named a 2010 MacVicar Faculty Fellow for "outstanding undergraduate teaching, mentoring and educational innovation."

Craig Wilder, Professor of History, received a Fulbright Senior Specialists Grant to collaborate with colleagues in Israel in the Spring of 2010.