Post by maddogfagin on

Keep On Running: 50 Years Of Island Records

Island Records UK

Published on 21 Aug 2017

"In 1959, one man's passion for Jamaica and its music gave birth to the most diverse and influential independent record label in history."

Initially aired on BBC FOUR in 2009, 'Keep On Running' tells the story of Island Records over half a century, in celebration of their 50th birthday.

[Tull at 22'33"]

www.udiscovermusic.com/news/50-years-island-records-online/

‘50 Years Of Island Records’ Documentary Online For The First Time

By Tim Peacock August 24, 2017

Originally produced to coincide with the label’s 50th anniversary in 2009, the BBC’s feature length documentary Keep On Running: 50 Years Of Island Records has been uploaded to YouTube and is now available to watch online for the first time

Island has previously been described as “the most diverse and influential independent record label in history”. The documentary – which first aired on BBC Four – follows the story of the label from humble beginnings in Jamaica, where a young Chris Blackwell released budding jazz and ska bands, before relocating to the UK in May 1962 with the island’s sound system hits under his arm.

Charting the label’s growth from one-man outfit to global powerhouse, the documentary alights on Island’s major milestones – the release of Millie Small’s ‘My Boy Lollipop’ through to Blackwell’s inspired early signings such as Spencer Davis Group, Free, John Martyn, Fairport Convention, Traffic, Bob Marley, King Crimson, Grace Jones, U2 and beyond – with many of those names lending their voices to the story.

The film features a rare, in-depth interview with Chris Blackwell in addition to contributions from former Island artists Toots Hibbert, Amy Winehouse, Sly and Robbie, PJ Harvey, Brian Eno, Spencer Davis, Yusuf Islam/Cat Stevens, the B52s, Kid Creole, Greg Lake, Ian Anderson, Trevor Horn, Paul Weller, Richard Thompson and Keane.

Narrated by Damien Lewis and running for 90 minutes, Keep On Running: 50 Years Of Island Records unearths news archives and rare performance footage to tell the story of this most colourful of imprints. Leaving few stones unturned, the documentary charts Island’s contribution to bringing reggae music into the world; its expansion into progressive rock in the late 1960s; the rise of Bob Marley into a global star; and the label's reputation for consistently signing, producing and championing innovative acts from the UK and all over the world.

Post by maddogfagin on

www.loudersound.com/news/island-records-founder-chris-blackwell-to-publish-autobiography

Island Records founder Chris Blackwell to publish autobiography

By Jerry Ewing ( Prog ) published about 7 hours ago [5/4/2022]

Man who signed King Crimson, ELP, Jethro Tull, Traffic, Free and more will publish autobiography in June

(Image credit: Murphy & Hershman & Fifty Six Hope Road Music-Ltd.)

Chris Blackwell, the founder of Island Records, an early home to the likes of King Crimson, Emerson, Lake & Palmer, Jethro Tull, Free, Traffic and many more, will publish his autobiography in June.

The Islander: My Life In Music And Beyond will be published by Nine Eight Books on June 2.

Blackwell grew up in Jamaica, and after being educated at Harrow School in England, eventually got a job managing jukeboxes back in Jamaica, which brought him into contact with the country's music scene.

He founded Island records in his early 20s, with a $10,000 start-up provided by his parents and named after Alec Waugh's novel Island In The Sun. His early musical forays were all related to the local music scene, but in 1964 he produced Millie Small's over of My Boy Lollipop, which was a huge hit and helped establish Island Records.

The label flourished after Blackwell discovered the Spencer Davis Group featuring Stevie Winwood, and in the 70s and 80s also featured acts like Roxy Music, John Martyn, John Cale, Nico, Fairport Convention and Spooky Tooth, and later Ultravox, Grace Jones, Buggles and U2.

The label never forgot its association with reggae and notably brought Bob Marley and a host of other artists to worldwide attention.

Blackwell sold his stake in Island in 1989, and the labels now sit under the Universal umbrella. More recently he's been involved in elite resort management. In 2009 Music Week named Blackwell the most influential figure in the last 50 years of the British music industry.

The release of The Islander coincides with Blackwell's 85th birthdays.

“It’s over sixty years since I started Island Records, says Blackwell. "It seems a good time to write about the people and musicians I’ve worked with and the places I’ve loved. It’s been quite a trip."

(Image credit: Nine Eight Books)

Post by jackinthegreen on

I loved the Island label when I was a teenager, the band "Free" were one of my favourite bands, the live album, "Free Live" was one of the first albums I remember buying and it's still amazing.

Another early one was ELP's "Tarkus" which I remember got slaughtered in the music papers here but I loved it.

The early Island samplers, "El Pea" and "Bumpers" were brilliant and amazing value........I think I paid 17/6 for Nice Enough to Eat which was another of the early ones. Happy Days