Skaneateles Free Press, July 2, 1909

William McLaughlin, a well-known and highly respected resident of this town for the past forty years, was found dead in the barn on his premises, just north of this village, at 6 o’clock yesterday morning. His death was caused by heart disease.

He was born in County Donegal, Ireland, seventy-three years ago. He came to th United States when a young man and settled in Skaneateles in the ‘60s.

For many years he was employed as a blacksmith in the Kelley shop in the village, but retired from active work a few years since.

He was faithful in all the walks of life, and will be missed by his children and many friends. He is survived by five children – Assemblyman McLaughlin of Jordan, Miss Annie McLaughlin of Hudson, N.Y., William J. McLaughlin and Miss Elizabeth McLaughlin of this town, and one daughter, a nun, now in Belgium.

He is also survived by four brothers and one sister – James McLaughlin of Skaneateles Falls, John McLaughlin of Auburn, Hugh McLaughlin of Brooklyn, N.Y., Cornelius McLaughlin of Ireland, and Mrs. Timothy Donohue of this village.

Funeral services will be held at St. Mary’s church tomorrow (Saturday) morning at 10 o’clock. Interment in St. Mary’s cemetery.

John C. McLaughlin (1875-1948) married Helen (Nellie) Irene O'Grady (18??-1949). He was a teacher who became a prominent attorney who lived a few miles from Skaneateles in the village of Jordan and maintained an office in Syracuse. He was active in politics and for a while was a member of the New York State Assembly.

Attorney Charlie Major, a relative whose resume is equally impressive, wrote about John C. McLaughlin in his column, "The Swamp to the Glenside," in the Marcellus Observer (December 27, 2000):

"In 1894 after graduating from the Skaneateles High School, John McLaughlin went on to teach in the Chamberlain country school, at the corner of West Lake Road and Old Salt Road, for $6 per week.

"He lived with Elias Hunsinker for $2 a week for a short week's board, but stayed in Skaneateles on the weekends. Rather than pay a livery cost of $2, he walked the eight mile distance, even in the winter.

"Eventually he studied law with Martin Dillon of Skaneateles, passed the bar exam and became a state Assemblyman who was later primarily responsible for obtaining state money to build the sea wall in Skaneateles, even though he then lived in Jordan."

(The clipping actually said McLaughlin started to teach in 1883, but that was a typographical error. He graduated from high school in 1894.)

Nellie O'Grady and John C. McLaughlin had four children:

Margaret McPeak (2021)

Sister Margaret Patrick McPeak, CSJ, a Sister of St. Joseph of Carondelet for 63 years, died on November 4, 2021 at St. Joseph’s Provincial House in Latham, New York.

Sister Margaret, or Peg, was born in Jordan, New York, on March 10, 1937, the daughter of Hugh P. McPeak and Margaret H. McLaughlin. She graduated from Jordan Central High School, and in 1958, Margaret entered the Sisters of St. Joseph of Carondelet, pronouncing her first vows on March 20, 1961 and her final vows on August 6, 1966.

Sister Margaret earned a bachelor’s degree in mathematics from The College of Saint Rose in 1963 and a master’s degree in philosophy from DePaul University in Chicago in 1970.

A love of and excellence in sports had led Sister Margaret to study at SUNY Cortland for two years, in preparation for teaching physical education. When she chose to enter the Sisters of St. Joseph, her lifelong ministry and love became education. She is remembered for her excellence as a teacher of mathematics at Syracuse and Albany diocesan high schools from 1963-1971 and as a teacher of philosophy at the College of Mount St. Joseph in Mount St. Joseph, Ohio for 30 years.

In 1996, Mount St. Joseph College awarded Sister Margaret an Honorary Doctorate of Humane Letters, praising her leadership in curriculum development, commitment to the students and values of Mount St. Joseph.

In 2009, Mount St. Joseph College’s founders, the Sisters of Charity of Cincinnati, presented Sister Margaret their highest honor, the Elizabeth Seton Award, calling her 30-year stewardship of the of mission at the college “legendary.” In particular, the award praised Sister Margaret as a pioneer in the development of challenging curriculums, including the interdisciplinary women’s studies program and the Weekend College of the Liberal Arts.

Sister Margaret’s close family member and lifelong friend, her cousin Sister Katherine McPeak, recalled that Peg was warm, gentle, fun-loving, always fully attentive to the person in front of her, always ready to help out, “always a sweetheart.” Sister Margaret’s long-time golfing partner and traveling companion, Mary Jo Coleman, noted that Sister Margaret continued enjoying sports events of all kinds.

In addition to her parents, Sister Margaret was predeceased by her sister, Mary Sue Creed, and her dear friend, Sister Elizabeth Cashman, SC. She is survived by her cousins, Sister Katherine McPeak and Margaret Delaney; her nephew Frank Creed; her niece, Margaret Ribero; her dear friend Mary Jo Coleman; and her community, the Sisters of St. Joseph of Carondelet.

— Obituary from Albany Province

Marcellus Observer, October 5, 1906

Home from Europe

Back from his trip to Europe where he visited England, Ireland and Belgium, William McLaughlin, surrounded by members of his family and a few friends who had dropped in for a social chat, sat in cozy parlor last evening and recounted some of his adventures.

Mr. McLaughlin sailed from New York on Independence Day, accompanied by John McKenna and Joseph Kershaw Jr., and eight days later he landed in Liverpool and was met by his nephew, James McLaughlin Jr., and the latter’s son, Charles.

After a day's sightseeing in Liverpool, the party went to Leeds for a few days, thence to London, and later Mr. McLaughlin and his grand nephew Charles crossed to the continent where the elder man met his daughter Mary, who is teaching in a convent in Antwerp.

While in Belgium, the travelers visited the historic battlefield of Waterloo and climbed to the top of the monument erected to the memory of the Prince of Orange, ascending 225 steps leading up to a six-ton figure of a lion. They also visited the house in which Napoleon made his headquarters.

Mr. McLaughlin spent four weeks in Ireland, visiting his old home and meeting relatives and former neighbors. It was in June, 1867, that he left Buncranna, near Londonderry, to make his home in the new world and he had not been back since.

Mr. McLaughlin says he had a grand time, but the pleasantest part of his trip was the homecoming. He arrived in New York Sunday and spent the intervening time in the metropolis.

Accompanying him from Ireland to Skaneateles were John and James McKenna and Miss Mary Dougherty, the two latter having been in America before.

Mr. McLaughlin brought home a number of trinkets and souvenirs, which greatly interested his audience last evening He enjoyed excellent health during his trip and suffered but little inconvenience during the trip across the ocean.

Syracuse Herald-Journal, March 16, 1992

By ANNE ROTH

William A. McLaughlin's 90 years took him from the village of Jordan to a 44-year career with the U.S. Postal Service. His first job was delivering mail by boat. His last was by train.

Mr. McLaughlin died Saturday at Community-General Hospital after a brief illness. He lived at 833 E. Brighton Ave., Syracuse. Mr. McLaughlin retired in 1959 as a mail clerk for the U.S. Post Office's United States Railway Mail Service. He spent the last 10 years of his career riding the 20th Century Limited, a New York Central train, from Syracuse to New York City.

"Dad was one of the last few mail clerks who rode trains. He knew every small town in the state," his daughter Marge Delaney said today.

Mr. McLaughlin's first job with the postal service was delivering mail by boat from Old Forge through the Fulton Chain of lakes in the Central Adirondacks.

His favorite pastime was telling his grandchildren of those days and what it was like to grow up in Jordan at the turn of the century. One concerned the Fourth of July.

"He always told us how he and a group of boys climbed to the bell towers of the village's churches at midnight to signal the start of the holiday," Delaney said. "They sounded like Huckleberry Finn characters. He also liked to tell what it was like to skate and swim in the Erie Canal that ran through the village."

Mr. McLaughlin was born in Jordan, the son of Nellie O'Grady and John C. McLaughlin, a state Assemblyman. His McLaughlin ancestors started the teasel business in Skaneateles Falls.

Mr. McLaughlin lived in the New York City area and Marcellus before moving to Syracuse in 1959.

After retiring from the postal service, he was employed four years with Merchants National Bank.

Mr. McLaughlin was a member of the National Association of Retired Postal Employees and a former member of Benevolent and Protective Order of Elks.

He was a communicant of the Cathedral of the Immaculate Conception, Syracuse.

His wife, the former Margaret Carmichael, died in 1985. (She was 84.)

Surviving are two daughters, Rita M. Franklin of Freeville and Margaret M. Delaney of Onondaga; a brother, Francis McLaughlin of Kenmore; 10 grandchildren; six great-grandchildren; and several nieces and nephews.

Services are at 9:15 a.m. Wednesday at Whelan Brothers Funeral Home and 10 a.m. in the Cathedral of the Immaculate Conception, where a funeral mass will be celebrated by the Rev. James O'Brien.

Two of his granddaughters and a niece will read from Scripture. The Irish Blessing will be played on the organ.

When he is laid to rest in St. Mary's Cemetery in Skaneateles, he will join more than 70 ancestors.