Reporting trips like these are relentless.

Three weeks seems like a lot of time to be traveling and conducting interviews. But if you consider that we have visited more than 7 different regions in three different countries, it becomes evident that it is actually not that much time. It is not that much time to absorb, merge into the crowd, observe.

This trip was preceded by a year of research, planning, imagining where things might go, what we would be interested in doing. So it’s not necessarily that we dropped into the middle of a region clueless about what we were going to find. Many interviews were already scheduled. Our fixers (local journalists) had done a lot of legwork, using contacts developed over the years to get us connected to sources as soon as we landed in their towns.

Our fixers rock, by the way.

And when we arrived in the several regions of Senegal we visited, in Melilla, in Morocco, in Andalucia, in Madrid… we hit the ground running. We have collected hours and hours of interviews and sound, in many different languages (Bambara, Wolof, French, Spanish, Arabic, and English). People have shared their time, their feelings, their memories with us.

We are very proud of the work we have done with this travel blog, sharing with you snippets of our journey, answering your questions. And we can’t wait to bring you the series of audio stories that will air on All Things Considered and other NPR shows in a few weeks.

There is one caveat, and we want to use this farewell post to share it: These topics we are touching, these people we talked to, these places we visited, they can’t be fully covered in three weeks. As journalists, we rely on the knowledge of the people who are there, who know these realities well, to be able to portrait them, to explain them to our audiences. But the fact of the matter is that we could have spent another three weeks, another three months, or three years, and we would continue to peel layer after layer of complexities.

Still… There is so much tape that will end up on the cutting floor, as they used to say when tape was actually cut by hand. Turning our reporting into actual stories that you will hear on the air requires a sort of ruthlessness that is not for everyone. Because people have opened up to us, they have shared their most honest thoughts, their deepest feelings, and we now have to select a small percentage of that tape to build stories that, hopefully, you will love.

We bring up all of this to say one final thing: This is not the definitive body of work on the tremendously complex areas that we have touched during this trip. This is not even the only version of this body of work we could have produced. But this is the product of the effort of a team that is guided by a motivation to find individual stories, connect them to bigger concepts, truly seeing people of different backgrounds and views, and understanding. Above all, understanding.

Every story has already been told. Our story is not better or worse than others. Our story is for you.

One of the first things our host, Ari Shapiro, told us about this journey is that it would be one of the most (if not the most) ambitious reporting trips he has set out to do.

As a producer, those words invoked a bit of intimidation as well as excitement at the chance to connect the dots between some of the most urgent issues of our time.

Climate change is a demanding and challenging topic to cover on its own, as is migration and the rise of right-wing extremism. But our reporting has found that these issues don’t take place in a vacuum.

We wanted our audience to see the consequences of climate change and hear directly from people whose decision to leave their home was influenced by it. We wanted to take you into the same seas that were once a powerhouse for fishing villages. We believed that the stories of strawberry farmers in the fields of Huelva, Spain were interlaced with those fishermen in Saint-Louis, Senegal. We thought that childhood friends in Kayar, Senegal were just as enthralled with local politics in Madrid because it impacted their neighbors thousands of miles away.

We could not have done this reporting without a number of people:

Our team in Washington D.C. has been the backbone of this trip. Our digital editor, Patrick Wood, has kept you in the loop and guided you through our journey by way of this blog. Sarah Handle and Matt Ozug are our diligent editors who have helped us shape and make sense of really difficult stories. Our managers have been behind the scenes, giving us the time and space needed to do this reporting.

But the most critical people on this trip are our fixers. In Senegal, we were lucky enough to work with the legend that is Khadidiatou Ba. She helped connect us with voices that would have been impossible for us to hear from. Laura was with us during tense moments in Nador and Melilla and gave us great advice on staying safe. In Huelva, we leaned on the experience of Rosa who was with us as we gleaned on intricate details from personal stories. Finally, Manu and Rocío in Madrid helped us navigate a complicated city.

In short, this entire trip has been the result of a lot of people. Whether it is journalists who helped us with our reporting or migrating people who shared their experiences with us.

But we are not done yet. Look out for all our reporting next month.

As we travel, ask us a question using this form and we'll seek to answer it in this blog.

How safe do each of you feel while traveling? How do you combat any sense of foreboding, especially after your encounter with the police? As reporters of varying backgrounds and experiences, I'm sure there's something both familiar and daunting about tackling this subject you're researching. But every situation is different, so how do you fight fear? Praying for y'all's safety! Thanks! — Danielle

Hi Danielle,

Thanks so much for your question. To say that safety is a top priority is probably cliché but that is the truth.

But what some people don’t immediately realize is safety takes many forms.

For example, our ability to swim in the ocean was a point of heavy conversation before this trip, given that we planned to take a pirogue into the Atlantic Ocean.

Malaria was another safety aspect that we had to consider and we were advised to consult medical professionals about the best ways to keep us healthy.

There are the other safety protocols we had to employ during this trip, like making sure sensitive interviews were done in private places as well as making sure our social media posts didn’t give our location away.

Also, every NPR staffer on this trip had to take hostile environment safety training, which covered a lot of these issues. These tools and practices help us feel a little safer but we are always aware that safety is never guaranteed.

Which brings me to your point about the sense of foreboding.

When you are in an unsafe or threatening situation, like when police were following us, your only goal is to stay safe. I make sure to prioritize the needs and concerns of local fixers and interviewees that often don’t have the luxury of leaving the country if needed.

The thoughts around safety are constant, often starting before the reporting begins.

The anxiety that comes with this constant worry almost always lasts longer than the reporting trip.

We are lucky that NPR provides mental health resources for its staff. The fixers and local journalists who help us with stories have access to the same mental health resources we have.

In recent years, our industry has become somewhat better at addressing stress induced by difficult reporting assignments. Journalists have become more vocal about mental health, a trend that needs to continue. — Ayen

Rafael Brome, the president of Vox Huelva, walked in to greet us in his organization’s office.

We were there to interview him.

He walked past me to shake everyone else’s hand first. Then finally shook mine, the only Black journalist on our team.

“Where are you from?” he asks me.

I responded, “the U.S., America,” realizing he didn’t ask any of my colleagues where they were from.

Unsatisfied with my answer, he follows up with, “Which state in the United States?”

This follow-up and his demeanor gave off micro-aggressive vibes, but I offer an answer.

“Texas,” I say.

“Well, then you should know Spanish,” he says in Spanish.

I couldn’t help but take in the irony.

I came up listening to right-wing politicians in Texas and their supporters openly talk about how immigration was changing the state of Texas.

It is common to hear conservatives there blame immigration on an evolving culture and language in the state.

To hear Brome say that I should know Spanish because I grew up in Texas spoke to the fears of the far-right in Texas.

They say they fear being replaced by a foreign culture, a foreign language.

And here was Brome, insisting that I should know Spanish because I grew up in Texas.

Brome is part of a party with a platform with the same talking points. His party also does not want mass immigration for similar reasons.

As we travel, ask us a question using this form and we'll seek to answer it in this blog.

You reported that many Senegalese are smuggled on boats to Morocco. Do any go there over land? — Nadya

Thanks for the question, Nadya. From coastal Senegal, boats are the most common way that people travel north. But across sub-Saharan Africa, many people do make the journey to Morocco by land. It can be arduous and take years.

As I spoke to people in Morocco and Spain about their journeys, I learned to recognize a common list, almost like an incantation. It was the recitation of countries someone passed through on the way to their destination.

In Southern Spain, one man who didn’t want us to use his name rattled off: Senegal, Togo, Niger, Algeria, Morocco. He told us he spent three years in Algeria. That’s not uncommon. Sometimes people are caught and conscripted into forced labor. Other times they have to pause their journey to earn enough money to continue.

At a migrant center in the Spanish enclave city of Melilla, a South Sudanese man named Abdul Muhammad Ahmad encapsulated years of struggle into this numbered list:

11 months in Libya

1 year, 4 months in Algeria

2 months in Egypt

4 months in Niger

That was all before he reached Morocco and crossed into Spain.

Another man at the Melilla migrant center, named Steven Khonkhon, told me that he left his home in Sudan in 2016 and didn’t reach Spain for six years. He tried “maybe 15 times” to enter Europe by boat from Libya, but police caught him every time.

Sometimes when Libyan police would intercept his boat at sea, they would send him to prison for up to six months. For a sense of what life in a Libyan migrant prison can be like, check out this New Yorker piece. If there was one thing that every man I interviewed agreed on, it was that Libya was the hardest part. Abdul Muhammad Ahmad called it “the most terrible country in the whole world.”

Steven Khonkhon eventually decided to leave Libya and try the land crossing between Morocco and Spain. In June, he and hundreds of other migrants charged the fortified border fence. Many died that day, but Steven successfully made the crossing to arrive in Europe at last. — Ari

I had never been to Palos de la Frontera before, so I just assumed that the town in Southern Spain always has Spanish flags lining the street. But no, these were for a national holiday. It’s actually a holiday the U.S. celebrates too, under different names — Columbus Day, or Indigenous People’s Day.

In Spain, October 12 was known for decades as “Dia De La Raza,” or “Day of the Race.” In the 1950s it was renamed “Dia De La Hispanidad.” Then in the 1980s it officially became “Fiesta Nacional de España,” though everyone still calls it “Dia De La Hispanidad.” Through all the name changes, the holiday has remained an overt celebration of the former Spanish empire.

In the U.S., we have begun to recognize the problems with this sort of celebration. For the indigenous peoples of the Americas, the exploits of Columbus and the men who followed him amounted to a genocidal land grab.

Spain has not wrestled with its colonial past in such an overt way. There is no “Indigenous People’s Day” alternative to “Dia De La Hispanidad.” While some people have begun to suggest that Spain should consider apologizing for the abuses of its colonialist past, conservative political parties have mounted an even louder response — insisting that Spain has nothing to be ashamed of, and that Spanish people should be proud of their history. There are certain parallels with the debate in the U.S. over how we teach history, but Spain is more than 85% white, so it’s more of a one-sided argument here.

As we travel through Senegal, Morocco and Spain reporting on the links between climate change, migration, and the rise of the right, some of these echoes from the past come ringing back into the present. One member of the far right Vox party in Southern Spain told us he did not mind legal immigration as long as people adapted to Spanish culture, rather than trying to superimpose their own culture on Spain. I wondered whether he was afraid that others might do to his people what Spaniards in boats began doing to the Americas more than 500 years ago.

Ricci Shryock for NPR

As we travel, ask us a question using this form and we'll seek to answer it in this blog.

So, this town of Melilla is new to me. Does that mean part of the E.U. is actually on the continent of Africa? And with the British part of Spain (Gibraltar) means that a non-E.U. country has land in Europe. I'm assuming these are all hangovers from colonialism, but it makes one feel like some borders really make no sense at all. Like a river or an ocean or even a mountain range, but these fenced-in areas that have a totally different government/money/benefits — it's a kind of insanity. — Monica

Hi Monica. Indeed you are correct that part of the E.U. is on the continent of Africa. There are actually two Spanish enclave cities on the African continent, Melilla and Ceuta, both surrounded by Morocco.

Just to complicate matters a bit more, these cities are part of the E.U. but not part of the Shengen area that guarantees free movement.

And one more head scratching detail: Morocco technically considers Ceuta and Melilla to be “occupied” by Spain and demands their return. But even while paying lip service to the claim that these cities should be part of Morocco, the Moroccan government aggressively enforces the border between the two (per the E.U.’s wishes).

As you can imagine, this control over two key gateways to Europe gives Morocco a lot of leverage over the European Union. Whatever Morocco might want from Europe, whether security funding or control over the disputed territory of Western Sahara, the threat that Morocco might turn a blind eye to people jumping the fence in Melilla and Ceuta is enough to get the attention of European policymakers. — Ari

The fence around Melilla is tall, and after reading and hearing about it for so many years, seeing it feels a bit like seeing a monument.

Except that this is a monument to the separation of states, human beings, goods.The fence surrounds Melilla with a roughly semicircular shape.

It doesn’t take too long to drive along it, from the water on one side, to the water on the other.

In the middle, there are houses that come close to the border on the Moroccan side. There is a golf course at one point, on the Spanish side. There is a cemetery on the Moroccan side. There is a pine forest on the Spanish side.There are cameras that watch at all times.

It’s very quiet, and it is hard to imagine that over the years, groups of men from various African countries have charged the fence in an attempt to touch Spanish soil. And they have been successful at times.

But Spain and Morocco talk. They talk about ways to stop these groups from even approaching the fence. There are body heat cameras, there is harassment of migrants on the Moroccan side. There are the so-called “devoluciones en caliente”, the practice of “returning” a migrant to Morocco after they’ve set foot on Melilla. The Spanish government denies it is done. But it is done.

On June 24, the greatest migratory tragedy in the history of the fence took place. At least 23 died in an attempt to enter Melilla. Local human rights organizations say more 35 people died. It was a devastating episode in the complicated history of the fence.

So now, you can barely find migrants in Melilla, or Nador. They’ve been pushed further and further away into Morocco. Closer to the border with Algeria. Where we can’t see them.

I am not here to make any judgments. I am only here to observe, ask questions, get answers, be confused, be informed, and inform. I am not here to deliver the story I thought I was going to find before I landed in Melilla. Because reality is more complicated. Melilla is complicated.

When you sit down for an interview, you hope to get as much information as possible from your source. What you don’t expect is to learn that you’re being followed by police.

This is what happened to us one morning while reporting on the experience of migrating people in Morocco.

We were warned days before we landed that the police were cracking down on people in transit, and by extension, any journalist asking questions. So we were prepared for tension.

But we still hoped to get a glimpse of the city we had read so much about.

Nador is bustling. The sound of clinking spoons against glass cups emanate from tea shops. It is a colorful place, filled with radiant kaftans, djellaba and shopkeepers trying to sell them. The constant hum of cars and loud street chatter is steady. The spice shops sell nostalgia in burlap sacks full of cinnamon or cumin that remind you of home cooking.

But we would soon find out that it's eclipsed by the role of police in Nador.

Throughout the course of this journey, we’ve heard from migrating people who have detailed harrowing, near-death encounters with Moroccan police. They told us the police were relentless.

And so we were calculated in our movements and cautious with our interactions in Morocco.

One migrating person on the Spanish side of the Morocco-Spain border locked eyes with me (Ayen) and said there were no Black people in Nador. I don’t think he meant that as a soundbite for our reporting, it felt more like a personal and well-intentioned warning meant for me, the only Black African on our team.

He also mentioned that the police would round up anyone who looked like a migrant, which we understood to be colloquialism for Black people who are migrating from other parts of Africa.

This would later be corroborated by a police officer who stopped our host, Ari Shapiro, for questioning.

It was just after 6pm local time while reporting when we got a group text from Ari.

“An undercover officer has us waiting for police to arrive,” Ari wrote.

Earlier in the day, we had decided to split the group in half. Ari’s group was trying to gather audio, the other group was trying to see more of Nador. The plan was to reunite before our reporting was over. That plan was suddenly interrupted by Ari’s text.

The text triggered an hour of uncertainty and unease. During the questioning, the authority told Ari, in English, “We work on this to not have any Black people here.”

The incident only lasted an hour, but it impacted the rest of our time in Morocco. We wanted to be safe, and we wanted the same for everyone around us.

At this moment, we continue our reporting from Spain and we plan to bring you all of our reporting.

We plan to continue keeping you updated along this journey, and we hope to receive any questions you might have, which you can send through using this form.

Walking through the narrow streets of the old city in Melilla, Spain, I spotted a sign high up on a wall.

“Aqui estuvo la primera sinagoga de Melilla,” it said. My Spanish is less than poor, but the Jewish star and the menorah on the sign confirmed what I understood the words to mean. Plus, I recognized the Hebrew letters for “bet haknesset.” This was the site of the first synagogue in the city of Melilla.

A few blocks away, another tile was embedded in the wall of the ancient city. This one was a bit of more modern with its branding. It had the letter M in four alphabets: Arabic, Latin, Hebrew, and Hindi. That tile represents groups of people who have lived in this city, together, for centuries.

Every place has a story that it tells about itself. And the story of Melilla is one of coexistence. The Spanish city has perched here on Africa’s northern coast for centuries. People passing through by boat and by land have created a rich cultural stew. But the stories places tell can also be myths.

This week our team met an elegant woman named Irene Flores. She was born and raised in Melilla and has worked as a journalist here for more than 35 years. She told us that Muslims in the city were not granted citizenship until the 1980s. Before that, they were effectively stateless. Today, the city is surrounded by layers of fortified fences to keep out people from sub-Saharan Africa who want to reach Europe from neighboring Morocco.

“Melilla is a gateway,” Irene told us, “and it is also a bunker.” She is realistic about the distance between the story Melilla tells about itself and the geopolitical reality. But I’d suggest that maybe that gap is an opportunity. Perhaps the story of coexistence isn’t a myth; maybe instead, it can be an aspiration.

Ari Shapiro / NPR

I was born in a border town with a twin city on the other side. Not in South Texas or California. I spent the first 8 years of my life in Fargo, North Dakota. The border to our east wasn’t fortified or even especially well marked. Just across the Red River from Fargo is Moorhead, Minnesota.

This week I woke up in a different border town. Nador, Morocco, is the neighbor to Melilla, Spain. As we make this journey reporting on climate change, migration, and the rise of the political far right, I have thought about my early childhood. Going back and forth from Fargo to Moorehead, I don’t recall any awareness that I was crossing a state border separating North Dakota from Minnesota.

Crossing from Melilla to Nador yesterday required an hour standing in line and answering questions from Spanish and Moroccan border guards. And that was on a day that things were running relatively smoothly.

Of course a state border within a country is different from borders between countries — and in this case, between places that are politically defined as parts of different continents, Africa and Europe. The tall multi-layered fence between Melilla and Nador reminds me more of fortified walls that I’ve seen in Jerusalem, running through the center of a single neighborhood.

But a human rights activist we met this morning told us that when he moved to Nador in the 1990s, the border looked more like the one that I grew up on. Buses went back and forth every day, no passport required. Yesterday, as we waited for our turn to cross, two young girls politely ushered us to go ahead of them in line. They looked like they were about the same age I was when I lived in Fargo, also living life on two sides of a border.

Ari Shapiro / NPR

As we travel, ask us a question using this form and we'll seek to answer it in this blog.

I’d be interested in the changing gender dynamics in these areas. With so many young men attempting the journey to Europe, and climate change affecting both agricultural and fishing practices, how are women adapting? In ways similar to No Sex For Fish in Kenya, are women taking a larger role in the economy or taking on roles that are more traditionally held by men? — Anne

Thanks for your question, Anne. During our week in Senegal I was surprised by how fixed gender roles remain. There are jobs traditionally held by men (such as fishing) and those traditionally held by women (such as salting and preserving fish).

The people who leave for Europe are overwhelmingly men, though not exclusively. Families in Senegal that were once supported by a fisherman might now be supported by remittances from that same man doing agricultural work or construction overseas. It is not uncommon for a man going to Europe to leave behind a wife and children in Senegal.

To me, this underscores the way in which migration is deeply tied to community needs. Far from being a selfish act, leaving for Europe may be an act of self-sacrifice; giving up home and family in order to support them through hard work in an unfamiliar place.

There are isolated exceptions to the strict gender roles, such as a young graffiti artist we met named Dieynaba Sidibe, aka Zeinixx. She is Senegal’s first female graffiti artist, and she told us about her efforts to inspire other young women to defy expectations of their gender. (You’ll hear from her in one of our radio stories next month.)

Although this is hardly a scientific analysis, in our interviews I did not see any examples of migration creating a shift in gender roles. I would be interested to know whether others who have studied this issue more thoroughly have observed something different. — Ari

When I board the bus that takes you to the small plane that takes you to Melilla, I notice something immediately. People are talking to each other. They also greet each other, as if they were neighbors or something.

On the plane, I fall asleep with the chatter in the background. I wake up to the turbulence the plane goes through as it approaches Melilla. As soon as we land I look at Google Maps, to get an idea of where we are landing in relation to the rest of the territory. As I walk out of the plane I stand on the tarmac looking out at the fence. Morocco on the other side.

I soon learn that planes have to make a challenging maneuver to get into Melilla. I also hear that on days when visibility is very poor, the plane might simply turn around and not land. I guess I was lucky today. Cloudy, but not too cloudy. You can still see Mount Gurugú in the distance.

It turns out that there was a group coming back from a bachelorette party, and a group that had been at a wedding as well, hence the chatter on the plane. But I also get a sense that people just know each other here. They also get a 75% discount on planes going to the mainland. So, going away for a fun weekend is not expensive. And I am sure I would want to get away often if I lived in this 5 square-mile patch of land in the north of the African continent.

I’ve been in Melila for only a short while, and I have not stopped asking questions. Questions that get answers that inevitably lead to more questions.

There aren’t quite that many places in the world like Melilla, and Ceuta, the two autonomous cities Spain still has in the northern coast of Africa, surrounded by the Mediterranean Sea, and by Morocco. And that relationship, between Spain and Morocco, is messy.

So questions always lead to more questions. Such as: How did this city end up here? Who lives here? People of Spanish descent or people of North-Moroccan origins? It’s both of course.

There are even, to this day, stateless people in Melilla. So, it’s not unusual to have a coffee at a local bar in the morning, where the staff is of Moroccan descent, customers are a complete mix, and there is plenty of code switching, to the point that I have a hard time identifying what language they are speaking. Meanwhile, a prominent local conservative politician arrives with his entourage to also get their coffee fix. Everyone knows him, but I also get a sense that people just know each other here.

As the teams says goodbye to Noah, who produced from Senegal, I am stepping in to see us through into Spain. Let's see what the next two weeks brings.

As we travel, ask us a question using this form and we'll seek to answer it in this blog.

Curious to hear the extent to which global football and/or other sports are a source of entertainment and healthy living there — local youth leagues and on the national level. Teams from rival religious or ethnic groups working it out on the field?

Maybe it's an elitist question, or a distraction from your main focus there, but from what I've heard, global football (what we call soccer in the U.S.) can be a source of pride and exercise and team-building for youth in most of the world. — Michael

Hi Michael, Futbòl is a huge source of pride in Senegal. We can see it in people’s faces when they smile at any mention of the national team.

You might get an enthusiastic response if you bring up the team’s first AFCON championship title earlier this year. Sadio Mané, who led team Senegal through that win, is a hero to some.

But the local level is where I think futbòl plays a pivotal role. It seems to me that young people play because it is fun, but it's also a bonding activity among neighborhood friends.

So it is common to see young boys play futbòl at dusk with a goal made from fish nets. We saw one young goalie use house slippers in both hands as goalie pads, which is pretty ingenious. — Ayen

As an audio producer, every once in a while a new sound gives you the shivers. Or, the tingles. Or, whatever you wanna call that feeling of encountering something both sublime and unexpected.

For me, on this trip, that moment came on Thursday night, as we followed the sound of chanting into a building and up the stairs to a room of people deep in devotional song. Around 20 men sat in a circle, all in deep blue robes. Books with Arabic text lay open on stands in front of them. They were singing a poem, layering their voices in sequence, like a round. I got whispered permission to record, and crouched at the edge. Listen to it here:

Listen to the sounds of chanting in Senegal.

It was hypnotic and deeply personal, and if they hadn’t been blasting the sound out into the street with megaphones, I would have felt like a voyeur.

I don’t mention this because I see any direct connection between the singing and climate change or migration. I mention it because:

It’s a sound I’ll never forget, and to me finding those sounds is the whole point of recording anything in the first place; and,

It’s moments like that which make me sad — but grateful — to hand off recording duties as the team heads to Morocco.

Hopefully this blog has shown (along with sights and sounds and stories) how many people are required to pull off a reporting trip like this. We’re a group of six here in Senegal — including our fixer Dady Ba and our driver Gane — and we have four editors back home (hi Matt, Sarah, Pat and Courtney!). Countless others have helped/are helping to mold the eventual audio and digital stories and coordinate coverage across NPR’s desks and shows.

And one key member of the team is in Spain right now, laying the groundwork for our reporting there and in Morocco: the producer-extraordinaire Miguel Macias. He’ll meet Ari, Ayen and Ricci in Melilla, a Spanish enclave on the coast of Morocco, and pick up recording duties for the rest of the trip.

I can’t wait to hear the sounds that he and the team will gather. My one piece of parting advice: follow the singing up the stairs!

As we travel, ask us a question using this form and we'll seek to answer it in this blog.

Please ask the citizens and officials of Senegal why their population is growing so rapidly despite signs that this may be unsustainable. — Steve

Good article. But I really think it misses a critical point — which is high population growth. Given limited resources of any government, distribution battle (for resources/capital) is therefore a key reason why significant parts of the population don’t have access to adequate healthcare, education, water etc.

Of course global warming exacerbates these problems. But other factors are cultural and religious that “legitimize” strong population growth. Any party that wants to help these people and countries (be it another government, the UN, IMF, etc) needs to take the impact of high population growth seriously.

I am not advocating for a 1 child policy, but indeed, China and other countries that had programs to curb population growth are now more successful economically, and therefore can battle global warming more effectively, because they could use their limited resources to build infrastructure and provide basic services which led to economic growth and higher incomes. — Dhawan

Thanks for raising these questions. We’re happy to have a chance to address them, as they tend to come up a lot in conversations about climate change and migration.

There are a few ways of looking at population growth in the context of environmental sustainability. One is in terms of carbon footprint. There’s a common refrain that, as The Guardian put it in 2017, the best way to save the planet is to have fewer children. And it is of course true that every human adds carbon to the atmosphere, increasing the warming of the earth.

But this generalization glosses over an important fact. As Mother Jones pointed out in this 2008 article, one American kid generates as much carbon as 106 Haitian kids.

There is also the context that climate change was caused by highly developed countries and is being disproportionately experienced by poorer countries with smaller carbon footprints. For most of the last century, the U.S. was overwhelmingly the largest emitter of carbon. (Recently it fell to second place after China, but US emissions are still climbing.) As the BBC put it last year, “The rich are driving climate change.”

Meanwhile, countries like Senegal are feeling the consequences of decisions that Americans have made. To be specific, Senegal’s carbon emissions in 2018 were .62 metric tons per capita, according to the World Bank. In the U.S., that number was 15.24 metric tons per person. And researchers have found that the emissions gap between rich and poor people is growing. Senegalese families may have more children, but American families have cars, fast fashion, air conditioning, big houses…the list goes on.

It is also worth noting that arguments about overpopulation have historically been used as a justification for policies that exclude individuals on the basis of race, both in the U.S. and in other countries. This is an issue that the Sierra Club has wrestled with very publicly.

All that to say, there are many difficult and complicated questions surrounding climate change, migration, and political solutions. But to say that Senegal’s problem is too many babies is to miss the forest for the trees. — Ari

As we travel, ask us a question using this form and we'll seek to answer it in this blog.

Do you hear any of the frustration and unrest in any of the music you hear or the art you see? — Anthony

Hey there, Anthony. There’s a ton of art and music here that’s addressing both climate change and migration. We spent an afternoon with the rapper Matador, who’s a bit of a legend in the Dakar hip hop scene. In his lyrics he’s explicit about how environmental changes cause people to move around. Here are a few lines from his song “Catastrophe” (tune in when our radio pieces air to hear him rap some of this track for us):

With the first rains come the first wave of departures

Those who prayed for rain sure got their prayers answered

Long gone are the days where we would beg the spirits for water

Today the rain is falling and it won’t stop

In one of his songs he mentions a popular – if morbid – adage in Wolof, one of the main languages spoken here in Senegal: “Barca wala barsak,” which loosely means, “Barcelona or death.” It speaks to the pull of migrating to Europe despite the obvious dangers of the journey by boat. But there are also lots of people here trying to discourage young men from leaving – and you can see that sentiment in the art, too. At the top of this post is a mural we passed today in the coastal city of Saint Louis – at the top it reads “No Barca Barsak.” — Noah

My name is Ayen, which is a common name of the Dinka tribe of South Sudan, where I am from.

Despite this fact, I have run into Senegalese throughout my life who think I am a native and begin speaking Wolof or French immediately upon meeting me. This has happened in San Francisco, London and everywhere in between. So when I arrived in Senegal for the first time this week, I knew what to expect.

Everyone here thinks I am Senegalese. In fact, during this reporting trip, I have tried to learn how to say in Wolof and French: I don’t speak Wolof or French, I am from South Sudan.

Within hours of my arrival, our fixer, convinced that I was from her home country, gave me a Senegalese name from the Lebu people, whom I apparently resemble. Her name is Khadidatou and the name she gave me is Chaiba Ndoye. I am not sure why she chose this name, but I welcome it.

While we were reporting on the coast this week, one man told me my nose looks similar to that of his own people. Others have said my connection to Senegal is my very dark complexion, which I am immensely proud of. Another person said it is my tall and lanky figure that reminds me of her people.

This has happened to me so much that I have looked into it. There must be an answer, right? It can’t be pure coincidence.

But to be fair, the feeling of confusing each other for the other is mutual. I’ve seen Senegalese on the D.C. metro or on the streets of New York City and felt an urge to do that head nod that we South Sudanese do when we see and recognize each other.

So I will end this blog post with the words I tell Senegalese who have told me I am so similar to them that there is no way I am not one of their own:

We have our differences, but we are all Africans.

As we travel, ask us a question using this form and we'll seek to answer it in this blog.

I'm an American living in Madrid. I'd love to know more about the gentlemen, who I presume to be Senegalese, who travel around the touristy areas of Madrid selling handbags, sunglasses, and other items. While they are selling, they are constantly on the lookout for law enforcement and you can see them packing up their goods quickly in a large canvas sack if law enforcement is spotted nearby. They seem to have a lot of customers. In my limited interaction, they've been very polite and never pushy in their sales (I haven't purchased anything; only observed).

I'd like to know: what's their story? If they are in Spain pursuing a better life, how can people, tourists or city residents like me, best support them?

Long story: My husband is Spanish and we've come to Spain for me to gain permanent residency and hopefully citizenship someday. We moved to Spain in February 2022, but I've been back in the U.S. since May 2022 — six months due to immigration challenges. While I love being in Spain, I'm also heartbroken to leave family and friends in the U.S. Eventually we'd like to live in both places, but the cost of living in the U.S. is astronomically high compared to Spain. I leave my friends and family saying "see you later" without really knowing when I'll see them again. My immigration/migration story is still being written. And is surprisingly fraught with challenges, despite my immense privilege of being a white American passport holder, married to a Spaniard, and the ability to hire a lawyer to help us navigate this process.

I appreciate you doing this series. I want to learn more about what's happening in this region of the world that's one of my homes. I can't wait to learn more. Thank you. — Rachel

Hi Rachel, thank you so much for your comments and your question. There is a lot in there, and I feel we could probably talk for hours about the migration experience. Your thoughts reminded me of a personal project I published this past May. I think you might relate to some parts of it, so please allow me to share it with you. It’s called Limbo, and you can find it here. Feel free to reach out to me if you do get to listen and have thoughts to share.

As far as the story of the Manteros: We are going to be focusing on their community when we arrive in Madrid later this month. For now what I will say is that your first impressions are mostly right. They are mostly Senegalese, they tend to be very kind, they are often chased by police, and they have made their grievances public telling stories of harassment, racism, and oppression in Madrid, and Barcelona. They even formed the so-called “Sindicato de Manteros” or “Manteros Union” to organize, fight against racism, and sell their own products. When you make it back to Madrid, I highly recommend that you visit their store, Pantera, in the neighborhood of Lavapies – which is where many of Senegalese migrants have settled. They sell really cool t-shirts, bags, and other things. We gave them a visit earlier this year and interviewed one of the members of the collective; you can find that NPR story here. — Miguel

As we travel, ask us a question or leave feedback using this form and we'll seek to respond in this blog.

At first I thought: Oh oh, here we go yet again.

But I am heartened by the early framing of this issue. (You also spoke with a former student of mine, Arame Tall! She graduated from Smith College nearly 20 years ago. She is a wonderful person.)

Many of us are deeply concerned about the notion of "climate refugees." Not climate refugees, but the notion. As you may know, it's been around as a concept for decades. And it's been so often debunked. You noted that migration studies shows that people don't move great distances after environmental change — they can't. They often suffer in place. They don't have the resources, strength, contacts, etc. to move.

Still it persists as a concept. (A zombie concept?) For all kinds of complicated reasons.

As you also point out (correctly) people move for all kinds of other reasons.

As I often say: To use the climate adjective in front of the refugee or migrant noun does all kinds of disservice to reality and politics.

Some works you would find valuable? Neel Ahuja's recent book, "Planetary Specter." Or Andrew Baldwin's "The Other of Climate Change: Racial Futurism, Migration, Humanism." Also, on the train you're on, you'd find Ruben Andersson's "Illegality Inc."

Maybe you're already deep inside such literature and good thinking.

Pushing the connection to eco-fascism is fruitful. Using "climate refugees" as a (cynical) way to get people interested in / worried about climate change — and the policy solutions that are more oriented toward border security — is at the heart of eco-fascism on the far right and even more center-right discussions.

Good luck on your trip. — Greg

Thank you for the thoughtful feedback and reading recommendations!

From the time we started working on this project almost a year ago, getting the nuance right was a top priority for us. There’s a tension inherent in reporting on climate migration: how do you do it without adding fuel to extremist political narratives?

We realized early on that some of the people talking about the issue most are politicians who want to stop cross-border migration altogether. This story we did in April about eco-fascism came out of some of our early research into these issues. — Ari

As we travel, ask us a question using this form and we'll seek to answer it in this blog.

How do the local farmers describe their experience with farming? How do climate change and foreign and local governments/companies enhance or detract from their work? And how much sovereignty do the farmers have over the land they farm? — Lucas

Hi Lucas. We spent a day with farmers from all over West Africa who have come to Senegal to work the fields because, as they put it, “the rainy season is bad” in their home countries. All of them grew up on farms. But now, as a Malian man told us, “the desert is advancing,” so they’ve been forced to move.

In Senegal, agriculture is more reliable. A Gambian man said: “Here in Senegal they grow all this food. If you could have that in neighboring countries, nobody would go abroad.”

The men we met all work for Senegalese land owners. One common arrangement is for the field workers to get paid a small amount for their labor and also be given planting beds to tend on their own, either for subsistence farming or additional income.

These men are not illegal immigrants. They have freedom to move across borders within West Africa, in the same way citizens of the European Union can cross E.U. borders freely.

This arrangement points to the complexity of climate migration; we chose Senegal as a starting point for this reporting project because it is not only a departure point for Senegalese people going to Europe, it’s also an arrival point for agriculture workers from nearby countries and from inland Senegal, where changing weather patterns have made farming less reliable. Most people who are forced to relocate for climate-related reasons will stay in their home country if they can, or stay in their region if they cannot. For many West Africans, going to Europe is a last resort option. — Ari

As we travel, ask us a question using this form and we'll seek to answer it in this blog.

In the personal math that every individual has to calculate for themselves, I'm wondering if the people of these cities and nations and nationalities you're wandering through believe that governments are — on the average — helping more than they're hurting? Helping with climate change, helping fight ethno-nationalism, helping to bring people together to find a way out or are they trying to pretend all of this.. climate change and bigotry and greed over the rule of law.. doesn't exist? — Drew

Hi Drew. So far in Senegal, we’ve encountered a lot of frustration with the government. In the seaside community of Thiaroye-sur-mer just outside of Dakar, people have made a living from the water for generations. Now, as a man named Moustafa Diop told me, “The sea is empty.” He fumed about the Senegalese government’s decision to allow trawlers from Europe and China to fish (overfish, some would argue) in Senegalese waters. And people are equally frustrated about the refusal of European governments to grant visas to Senegalese people. A common refrain here is, “They’ll take our fish, but they won’t take us.” This also shows how climate change is rarely the only factor in someone’s decision to leave. Combine climate change with overfishing, poverty, and other pressures and — as one expert told me — migration becomes a coping strategy. — Ricci

This is our team on the ground.

Ari Shapiro — host

For the last year, when friends have asked if I’m working on anything I’m especially excited about, this is the project I’ve described. I can’t believe it’s finally here! You can follow me on Twitter and Instagram at @arishapiro.

Ayen Bior — producer

The consequences of climate change destroy homes, tear families apart and force people to make impossible decisions. And if the science is correct, things won’t get better any time soon. The urgency of this reporting trip has kept me on my toes for months, and now I am most looking forward to hearing from real voices in all three countries. You can follow me on Twitter @Ayen_Grace.

Noah Caldwell — producer

Last year, a team at All Things Considered had the chance to see the diplomatic world try to address the threats of climate change, at the U.N. climate conference in Glasgow. Now we get to hear about those threats, and the ways they influence peoples’ movements, directly from those who are most impacted. You can follow me on Twitter @noahgcr.

Miguel Macias — producer

If you asked me what the most important story of our time is, I would say it’s migration across the world. People are pushed by wars, poverty, violence, or simply the search for a better life. And then there is climate change, the other great story of our time. If you combine migration and climate change, you have a reality that will reshape our societies for generations to come. There is enough there to report for years, but at All Things Considered we are going to make one (first) attempt to chronicle how these two forces intertwine. You can follow me on Twitter @miguelmacias.