Shaun Livingston Biography

Perseverance is a word that most accurately describes three-time NBA champion point guard Shaun Livingston. Livingston was the fourth overall pick of the Los Angeles Clippers in the 2004 NBA Draft. Coming straight out of high school, many thought he was destined for superstardom, but injuries derailed several seasons early in his career. Despite the obstacles, Livingston turned around his fortunes to have a productive and lengthy pro career. In 2015, he won his first championship as a reserve with the Golden State Warriors. Livingston played 17.9 minutes a game during the 21 game postseason run. He went on to win two more championships before retiring as a Warrior in 2019. Livingston had the unique distinction of jumping straight to the NBA from Peoria Central High School in Illinois. There, Livingston was a McDonald’s All-American, Illinois Mr. Basketball, and a two-time state champion.

Book Shaun Livingston for your Next Event

Disclaimer: AthleteSpeakers assists companies seeking to hire talent like Shaun Livingston for speaking engagements, virtual meetings, appearances, product endorsements, and business sanctions. Our speakers bureau does not claim to exclusively represent Shaun Livingston. Our booking agency can help with finding an athlete or sports celebrity that aligns with your upcoming events date, location, and budget. When an organization request booking details for a celebrity like Shaun Livingston, we work closely with the client to make sure the proposed dates does not interfere with the requested athletes schedule. We then confirm the sports celebrity fee based on the details of the request. The fees listed on the speaker profile are rough estimates based on the previous market rate for the talent. Our team then works with Shaun Livingston's agent, manager or assistant on the booking request. For parties interested in hiring Shaun Livingston, we recommend filling out the booking request form so our booking agents can help with making your next event a success.

Interested in booking Shaun Livingston for a virtual meeting?

Contact Athlete Speakers today at 800-916-6008 to book Shaun Livingston for a virtual event, virtual meeting, virtual appearance, virtual keynote speaking engagement, webinar, video conference or Zoom meeting. The booking agents at Athlete Speakers work to get you the best price for your desired sports personality.

Athlete Speakers is a leader when it comes to booking virtual events in the sports world. Since 1999, we have built close relationships with top athletes, agents, publicists and managers. We assist all types of companies as well as event planners with booking athletes like Shaun Livingston for these virtual engagements. Companies continue to turn to Athlete Speakers to get Shaun Livingston’s latest virtual speaking fee, appearance cost and schedule availability.

Book Shaun Livingston for your Virtual Meeting