Eight years ago Shaun Livingston, who is currently the backup point guard to Stephen Curry on the Golden State Warriors, sustained one of the most gruesome injuries anyone has ever witnessed in the NBA. On February 26, 2007 while playing for the LA Clippers against the Charlotte Bobcats, Livingston would go up for a lay up thinking he would earn two easy points for his team. He would come down not knowing that he dislocated his patella tendon and tearing 3 out of the 4 major ligaments in his knee. A first round and number 4 draft pick from Peoria Central High School in 2004, Shaun Livingston’s career was now in jeopardy. He faced the possibility of amputation if any damage was done to a major artery in his knee. Luckily medical doctors didn’t see any issue with his artery.

On March 13, 2007 Dr. James Andrew and Dr. William Clancy performed successful surgery on Shaun Livingston’s left knee in Alabama. Dr. Clancy who is considered the “father of ACL reconstructive surgeries” repaired his ACL, PCL, and MCL. These two surgeons used a patella tendon graft to replace his torn ACL. After the surgery Livingston spent 2-3 weeks with physical therapist (PT) Kevin Wilks in Alabama before returning to LA to finish his rehabilitation with Judy Seto, current head PT for Lakers. Livingston worked with Seto five days a week for a year. His first six weeks were on crutches slowly progressing to walking and next riding a bike. He would later be able to walk in the pool and his last stages consisted of him running on a treadmill and eventually sport -specific drills and exercises.

Kala Flagg, PT and Rehabilitation Coordinator for University of Maryland, who works with both collegiate and professional athletes discussed the challenges with us that Livingston may have faced during his rehabilitation and how he maintains his strength now. She said that Livingston would have a faced a variety of issues after surgery and during this rehabilitation to include “infection, scar tissue adhesion inside the joint, significant muscle atrophy [and] limited range of motion.” Now playing in the NBA Finals Flagg said of Livingston that “at this point the biggest focus …is to maintain his flexibility, endurance, and strength. It will be a life-long regimen.”

When asked about new technology and how it can aid in the road to recovery, Flagg mentioned that as a physical therapist “new devices are presented to [her] for rehab, almost monthly.” One device that she has used is the Alter G, an anti-gravity treadmill. This is what Kobe Bryant used during his rehabilitation from a ruptured Achilles tendon. The treadmill allows for a patient or athlete to decrease their body weight so they can run with less pressure on any lower body extremity.

Flagg recommended that for a knee injury as severe as Livingston that isokinetic training and knee stability training can be beneficial on quad function, which assist in the extension of the knee. Technological devices that can help with this include Balance System SD and Multi-Joint System 4 by the company Biodex. The Balance System SD helps to strengthen a lower extremity by improving on balance and developing muscle tone through various computerized exercises on a balance board. The Multi-Joint System 4 allows for a certain body to specifically work on a target muscle group by adjusting resistance and speed while the body part is going through limited or full range of motion.

“There will definitely be a significant increase in the use of apps and fitness tools [in physical therapy] that will monitor athletes and patients,” says Flagg. Although technology can aide in the road to recovery she went on to explain that the physical interaction and one on one time is immeasurable in one’s rehabilitation process.

While we are simply rooting for a compelling series between the Warriors and Cavs, we are absolutely rooting for Shaun Livingston to remain on the court.