Fullback starred at Savannah High, Arkansas State and in the NFL

Leroy Harris learned to play football by trying to keep up with his four older brothers, and his toughness earned him a college football scholarship and a brief career in the National Football League.

It was 30 years ago this year that Harris started at fullback for the Philadelphia Eagles in the Super Bowl against the Oakland Raiders. On Monday, the 56-year-old Harris will be inducted in the Greater Savannah Athletic Hall of Fame as a reward for his accomplishments while at Savannah High, Arkansas State University and in the NFL.

“I feel really good (about being inducted),” said Harris, who lives in Savannah and will be at the induction ceremony on Monday at the Savannah Civic Center. “I think I was long overdue to be in it, and I’m happy I’m being inducted now. It’s fantastic because with some of the people already in there, it feels good to be one of them.”

After being injured during his sophomore and junior seasons at Savannah High, Harris had a breakout senior season and attracted the attention of top flight football programs like Georgia, Oklahoma, Kansas and Kansas State. He won the Coca Cola Golden Helmet MVP Award and was selected to be a member of the Savannah Morning News All-City First Team, and after two years at Fort Scott Community College, he landed at I-AA Arkansas State University.

In 1976, he was selected as an Honorable Mention NCAA I-AA All American by the Associated Press, and he earned All-Southland Conference honors in 1975 and 1976 while rushing for almost 2,000 yards and scoring 15 touchdowns. In his first year at Arkansas State, the team finished unblemished with an 11-0 record.

Harris was the 123rd pick in the 1977 NFL Draft, going to the Miami Dolphins in the fifth round. He played for the Dolphins for five years and established franchise records for the longest run from scrimmage (77 yards) and a Dolphins’ rookie record for most rushing yards in a single game (140), and his 77-yard run in 1977 against the Baltimore Colts on Monday Night Football remains tied for the longest run from scrimmage in Dolphins’ history.

Harris then became the starting fullback for the Philadelphia Eagles and carried 104 times for 341 yards and three touchdowns in 1980-81 as the Eagles advanced to the Super Bowl to play the AFC Champion Oakland Raiders. In the Eagles’ 20-7 NFC championship victory over the Dallas Cowboys, Harris carried 10 times for 60 yards and scored a 9-yard touchdown that put the game out of reach.

In the 27-10 Super Bowl loss to Oakland, Harris started and carried seven times for 14 yards and caught a pass from Philadelphia quarterback Ron Jaworski. During his professional career, Harris carried more than 440 times, amassed more than 1,800 rushing yards and scored 13 rushing touchdowns.

“What made me able to do what I did was my power and speed,” Harris said. “I was lucky to be able to play with guys who were older than me when I was younger and learned a lot about the game. The I started to just reacted to where I was and what I saw.”

GSAHOF CLASS OF 2011

Athletes

Harry South, Football

Leroy Harris, Football

Donnie Woeltjen, Jr., Baseball

Larry Thompson, Multisports

Citation Honorees

Doyle Kelley, Coaching

Edward “Flip” Homansky, M.D., Sports medicine

Lawton M. Calhoun

Athlete of the Year

Stephen Williams, Calvary Day

Greater Savannah Athletic Hall of Fame

What: Annual induction ceremonies and banquet

When: 6:15 p.m., Monday

Where: Savannah Civic Center

Tickets: $20 per person, call Earl Etheridge at 351-3852.

Info: www.gsahof.com