Julie Greenwald has been elevated to chairman & CEO of the newly created Atlantic Music Group.

In her new post, Greenwald oversees Atlantic Records — including the Atlantic, Atco, Big Beat, and Canvasback labels — as well as 300 Elektra Entertainment, which encompasses 300, Elektra, Fueled by Ramen, Roadrunner, Low Country Sound, DTA, and Public Consumption.

Greenwald and Craig Kallman will continue to jointly lead Atlantic Records, with Kallman continuing as chairman & CEO. Late last year, the company launched 300 Elektra Entertainment with Kevin Liles as chairman-CEO, merging the two labels as part of Atlantic parent Warner Music’s acquisition of 300 Entertainment.

Since joining Atlantic 18 years ago, Greenwald’s formidable skills — particularly in management and marketing — have made her one of the most powerful executives in the music business and played an integral role in the careers of countless artists: The announcement lists (with no exaggeration) Cardi B, Kelly Clarkson, Coldplay, Cordae, Gaye, Jack Harlow, Lil Uzi Vert, Lizzo, Charli XCX, NBA YoungBoy, Gucci Mane, Bruno Mars, Ava Max, Janelle Monáe, No Cap, Kodak Black, Panic! at the Disco, Paramore, Charlie Puth, Roddy Ricch, Ed Sheeran, Shinedown, Tiësto, Rob Thomas, Twenty One Pilots, and Wiz Khalifa, among many others, as well as the Original Broadway Cast Recordings of Hamilton, Dear Evan Hansen, and Jagged Little Pill. Her longtime partnership with Kallman has made Atlantic the industry’s most consistently successful label — they’ve launched at least one superstar act virtually every year for nearly two decades — and their particular brand of tag-team leadership has become an industry standard.

Greenwald has been chosen five times as Billboard’s Women in Music Executive of the Year — more than any other person — and appeared multiple times on the Variety500 index of the world’s most influential business leaders. She has also been featured as one of The Hollywood Reporter’s “Power 100 Women in Entertainment,” Forbes’ “Power Women to Watch,” and on Newsweek’s “Women in Leadership” roster.

Greenwald said: “I love nurturing the next generation, contributing to culture, and building vibrant communities for our artists. We have the most fantastic talent at Atlantic, 300, and Elektra, from superstars to baby bands, from expert execs to young people just starting out in the business. I want them all to feel that this is the best place to do bold, brave, creative work, and build real careers. I’m so proud to be in it with them, shoulder to shoulder, every day. I’d like to thank Craig and Kevin for being my partners, Max and Steve for their leadership, and our allies across the industry who help us bring great music to the world.”

Max Lousada said: “Julie’s a force of nature – a fearless champion of original talent, a mentor to countless artists and executives, and the visionary behind game-changing moves, such as Atlantic’s early embrace of streaming and the spin-off of the Elektra Music Group. She’s made artist development an artform in its own right, by combining passion and intelligence, gut sense and strategic thinking, the big picture and the smallest detail. This new role only hints at the full scope of her influence and impact across our industry, but it’s still much deserved recognition of her dynamic leadership at our company.”

He added: “Julie’s strengths, combined with Craig’s extraordinary creative talents, make them one of the outstanding partnerships in the history of music. We’re all extremely fortunate to be working with them as they write the next great chapter in the Atlantic story.”

Greenwald, a New York native, began her music career in 1992 at Def Jam Records. Six years later, she was charged with overseeing the entire marketing department of the newly formed Island Def Jam Music Group (IDJ). Greenwald was named President of Island Records/EVP of IDJ in 2002, becoming one of only three women holding that title at a major record label.

When Greenwald joined Atlantic Records as President in 2004, it marked the second time in her career that she was charged with helping rebuild an iconic brand. She became the architect of the company’s forward-thinking marketing and digital strategies and was promoted to chairman & COO in 2009. She began her career at the hip-hop powerhouse Rush Management in 1992, where she worked with Run-DMC, Pubic Enemy and others.