Ann Crady Weiss just raised a $7 million Series A round for her second company, parenting tech startup Hatch Baby, but the money didn't always come so easily -- and she was sometimes the reason why. Ten years ago, Weiss had her first investor meeting for Maya's Mom, a social network for moms. The meeting went well, but as they approached the parting handshake, Weiss got cold feet and didn't ask for an investment -- so she didn't get one.

Weiss, now 44, has since gotten over that fear. Hatch Baby announced its funding Thursday and recently debuted its first product, a $299 wireless-enabled diaper-changing pad. In a baby's earliest weeks, parents often fret over the baby's weight and how it compares to other infants. Instead of needing to see a pediatrician to get weighed, parents can use the smart changing pad to track their child's weight and overall development instantly on their smartphone.

Hatch Baby's fundraising round went smoothly -- lead investor True Ventures had funded her last company, so they had a good relationship already -- but Weiss took the opportunity to reflect on her second time around as an entrepreneur, especially a female one. (She sold Maya's Mom to Johnson and Johnson's BabyCenter in 2007.)

"I had a really hard time asking for money at the very beginning," Weiss said. "You have to ask. It's about having the gumption and the belief that this was such a great thing that everyone should be so lucky as to be involved."

But even when Weiss felt she had conquered her own hangups, she said she still faced the "challenge of not looking like most of the people I’m pitching to."

"I definitely am aware of my gender and that most places I pitch do not have female investors," she said. "It's obvious when you’re a woman pitching to a room full of guys."

Weiss said she believes that Silicon Valley is earnestly trying to be a meritocracy where the best ideas win -- which means that when discrimination happens, it's driven by uncnscious bias and on a much subtler level.

"In this day and age, I don’t believe anyone intends to discriminate against anyone," she said. "Every funder is looking for a backable team and idea. But I think the reality is, there are times when discrimination is unintentional. When you don’t have exposure to something, you don’t understand it, many, many studies have shown that there are subtle and unintentional bias that enter into people’s mind. When someone looks like you or is of your background, you’re more likely to connect with them."

She also stressed the importance of educating people on the problem you're solving -- especially if it's something that a room of male venture capitalists might be less familiar with. "The first time I pitched, I was pitching a social network for moms," Weiss said. "One of the big reasons I got a no was, 'Moms don’t have time for this' -- which we all know now is totally not true. But that, I think, is probably the product of someone not being a mom, not understanding there are times where you do feel isolated at home."