IBM Threat Detection and Response Services (TDR)

These services harness AI-powered solutions to swiftly identify and respond to security incidents. Using advanced ai algorithms, they provide proactive threat detection and incident response, coordinating defenses against cyber threats and hackers, thereby safeguarding sensitive data.

IBM Security® Guardium®

IBM Security Guardium is a data security platform that provides complete visibility throughout the data lifecycle and helps address data compliance needs. It features built-in AI outlier detection based on multiple risk factors, with functionality that provides organizations with superior data monitoring and quicker identification of data threats.

IBM Security QRadar® SIEM

IBM Security QRadar SIEM deploys AI to provide advanced threat detection, investigation and response technologies. Built on an open foundation, it empowers security analysts with enhanced threat intelligence and automation, enabling them to work with greater speed, efficiency and precision across their security tools.

IBM Security Verify

IBM Security Verify uses AI advancements to provide in-depth analysis for both consumer and workforce identity access management (IAM). It safeguards your users and applications, functioning efficiently both inside and outside the enterprise, through a seamless, cloud-native, software-as-a-service (SaaS) methodology.

IBM Security MaaS360®

MaaS360, harnessing the capabilities of AI, facilitates the management and security of enterprise devices. It provides extensive visibility and control over various devices and platforms. Utilizing predictive patching, risk-based policy enforcement, and contextual device actions, it bolsters the overall security posture.

IBM Security Managed Detection and Response Services

IBM Security Managed Detection and Response (MDR) Services use automated and human-initiated actions to provide visibility and stop threats across networks and endpoints. With a unified, AI-powered approach, threat hunters can take decisive actions and respond to threats faster.

IBM Security Trusteer®

Trusteer uses AI and machine learning to establish digital identity trust. By analyzing various data points and user behavior, it can accurately distinguish between legitimate users and potential malicious actors, providing seamless security that doesn't compromise the user experience.

IBM watsonx™ Governance

This AI-powered solution enhances data governance strategies by providing a comprehensive framework for data quality, cataloging, privacy, and policy management. It aids in understanding, categorizing, and safeguarding sensitive data, ensuring regulatory compliance.

Sutherland Global Services

Sutherland delivers great customer experiences for its clients through a combination of consulting, services, implementation of proprietary and third-party software solutions, and SaaS and PaaS offerings, including implementing AI to enhance data security.

Credico

Credico, a professional services firm, enabled 100% tablet policy compliance and enhanced endpoint security with IBM Security MaaS360 – an AI-powered UEM solution, allowing them to manage 2,000 – 3,000 tablets for a diverse set of independent sales offices (ISOs) spread out across the US, Canada and beyond.

United Family Healthcare

To better protect its patient data and applications and to comply with regulations, United Family Healthcare deployed an AI-enabled security operations platform that increased visibility and sped up its time to detect, contain and respond to ransomware attacks through the use of AI.