Bob Bender, an 18-year finance professional with broad experience in health care, has been named vice president of finance and operations at Bristol Regional Medical Center.

Bender comes to Bristol Regional from Banner Casa Grande Medical Center in Casa Grande, Arizona, where he has served exceptionally as chief financial officer and compliance officer for two years. During his tenure, he has implemented strategic growth initiatives to increase market share and championed $35 million in capital projects.

In his new role, Bender will be a member of Bristol Regional’s executive leadership team. He joins the administrative staff of the 348-bed tertiary hospital Oct. 10.

“Bob has produced tangible results that have materially improved the performance of the medical facilities he has served,” Todd Dougan, Wellmont Health System’s interim chief financial officer said. “Due to his achievements throughout his career, he has consistently been recognized with positions of increasing responsibility. We are confident he will help Bristol Regional provide the highest quality care at the lowest possible cost.”

Prior to joining Banner Casa Grande, Bender served as finance director at Banner Desert Medical Center and Cardon Children’s Medical Center in Mesa, Arizona, from 2012 to 2014. There, he oversaw the annual operational budget process and assisted the chief financial officer with the financial operations of the two-hospital campus. Banner Desert had the busiest emergency department in the state in 2013, and the two hospitals provide care with more than $550 million in annual net revenue and more than 3,200 employees.

“We are excited to select a talented and innovative leader whose experience and financial acumen will enhance our status as a premier hospital for Northeast Tennessee and Southwest Virginia,” Greg Neal, Bristol Regional’s president said. “Bob’s skill set will blend well with the rest of our team as we work collaboratively to meet the needs of our patients. His extensive track record of success shows he will play an integral role in our delivery of superior health care with compassion.”

Before embarking on his 15-year career in health care, Bender served as an auditor for Deloitte & Touche in Phoenix for three years.

Bender said he has held a longtime interest in living in Tennessee, and when he learned about the position at Bristol Regional, he researched the hospital and Wellmont and was impressed with the number of awards they had received.

“Health care is an honorable calling that fundamentally improves people’s lives, and I admire the way Bristol Regional and Wellmont focus not only on treating patients when they are sick but partnering with them to keep them healthy,” Bender said. “As I take the next step in my career, I am excited by the prospect of working collaboratively with the leadership, physicians and staff to build on the hospital’s excellent reputation and enhance the health and well-being of the community.”

Bender has a bachelor’s degree in accounting from Arizona State University and a master of business administration degree from Grand Canyon University in Phoenix.

​tchildress@bristolnews.com

276-645-2512

Twitter: @TChildressBHC

Be the first to know

Get local news delivered to your inbox!

* I understand and agree that registration on or use of this site constitutes agreement to its user agreement and privacy policy.