WTWW shortwave Radio 1.4

Download

Free Version

Publisher Description

What is Shortwave Broadcasting?

Shortwave broadcasting – the common term for High Frequency or HF broadcasting – is a radio service licensed by the FCC to operate between 5,950 KHz and 26,100 KHz. Shortwave is an international broadcast service intended to be received by the general public in other countries.

The uniqueness of shortwave is its reach. A powerful FM station may be heard for about 60 miles in any direction. One of the handful of remaining clear-channel AM stations may be heard up to 750 miles away at nighttime. But depending on the amount of power, the location of the station and its antennas, a shortwave station can be heard for vast distances. The secret is the ionosphere – a layer of the earth's atmosphere that reflects some radio waves back to the earth – rebounding shortwave to radio receivers thousands of miles from their point of origin.

Shortwave Radio and the World

Shortwave radio remains the only medium capable of direct communication from one country to listeners in another country without govermental intervention. With more than 1.5 billion shortwave receivers in use worldwide, the BBC estimates that at any given moment, over 200 million sets are tuned to shortwave broadcasts. Especially in developing countries, shortwave remains the dominant mass communications medium.

For example, shortwave listenership in the Americas ranges from 61% (Peru) to 41% (Guyana), 35% (northern Brazil) and 37% (Caribbean nations). Many of the boom box-type radio/tape player units sold in other countries, particularly in Latin America, include shortwave bands. Mexico, with about one third the population of the United States, alone has over 16 licensed shortwave stations and over 5 million shortwave users.

Despite the wealth of broadcast, cable, satellite and Internet services available, shortwave remain the dominant form of mass communications in many places throughout the world. And with the remarkably wide area coverage shortwave radio provides, it is a service that Paul himself might have had in mind when he quoted the Psalmist: "Their voice has gone out into all the earth, their words to the ends of the world.

About WTWW shortwave Radio

WTWW shortwave Radio is a free app for Android published in the Recreation list of apps, part of Home & Hobby.

The company that develops WTWW shortwave Radio is Tux-Support.com. The latest version released by its developer is 1.4.

To install WTWW shortwave Radio on your Android device, just click the green Continue To App button above to start the installation process. The app is listed on our website since 2022-03-12 and was downloaded 46 times. We have already checked if the download link is safe, however for your own protection we recommend that you scan the downloaded app with your antivirus. Your antivirus may detect the WTWW shortwave Radio as malware as malware if the download link to appinventor.ai_a2782d4.wtww2 is broken.

How to install WTWW shortwave Radio on your Android device:

Click on the Continue To App button on our website. This will redirect you to Google Play.

Once the WTWW shortwave Radio is shown in the Google Play listing of your Android device, you can start its download and installation. Tap on the Install button located below the search bar and to the right of the app icon.

A pop-up window with the permissions required by WTWW shortwave Radio will be shown. Click on Accept to continue the process.

WTWW shortwave Radio will be downloaded onto your device, displaying a progress. Once the download completes, the installation will start and you'll get a notification after the installation is finished.

Program Details

General

Publisher Tux-Support.com Released Date 2022-03-12 Languages English

Category

Category Home & Hobby Subcategory Recreation

System requirements

Operating systems android

Download information

File size Total downloads 46

Pricing

License model Free Price N/A

Version History

Here you can find the changelog of WTWW shortwave Radio since it was posted on our website on 2021-12-12. The latest version is 1.4 and it was updated on soft112.com on 10 June, 2024. See below the changes in each version:

version 1.4

posted on 2022-03-13

New Streams from the station.

version 1.2

posted on 2018-10-19

had issue with code, now fixed. no longer pop up on stream on some phones.

RELATED PROGRAMS

Our Recommendations