I started at about age five, so roughly 1991. I'm thankful that the NES was phenomenal enough to last for ten years, or else I would've missed out on the classics (although there have been many re-releases). Still, the SNES was the latest thing back then, and it's become my favorite. Regardless, the early 90s NES games are awesome IMO, and the early NES games are rather simple in comparison (although the arcade ports can be excluded). The 90s is when games began to get complex.

I think I was around 4 when first played a video game on my N64. I didn't REALLY get into games until I was like 8 years old when I got my GBA Oh, good times.

With the C64, but I got into gaming in a big way when I got my first Gameboy, and Super Mario Land. I literally played that game, and tetris, to death.

I believe that I was 6 or 7 when I first started playing video games. My memory is kind of hazy but I do remember that the very first game I played was Robotron 2084 in an Arby's restaraunt.

My first TV-bound console was one of the many Pong clones from the late 70s and early 80s. It had two hard-wired paddle controllers and TV aerial lead. I have no idea what the name of the manufacturer was because there were so freaking many of them in that era. It had a switch where you choose between Squash, Tennis and other popular sports which were all actually slightly different variations of Pong. Really boring, honestly.

With the exception of the occasional quarter I could weasel out of my parents on trips to Pizza Hut for Ms. Pacman and whatever else they had back in the day, I first started playing video games at 7 when I got a Sega Game Gear. That's right, I played in color.

7 or 8 (whenever Space Invaders was released), though frankly I was too short to properly play games until I was older and I don't remember any arcades existing to play them in until age 10, though I may have been playing Atari games at a friend's house before then...

Haha I don't remember sometimes I think I must have been born with a gbcolour in my hands. But pokemon blue was my first game and I think i might have been - uh 2,3 maybe(idk-I have picture from when I was 1 with one in my hands...)? I think.... My first console was a ps2 when I was 4, But this was shared.

How did you play Pokemon at 2 or 3? I don't think I'd have understood what was going in even the lightest RPG at that age.