All sorts of details have been coming out in the breaking story of Tony Parker and Eva Longoria’s divorce after just over 3 years. The latest information is that Tony was cheating with the wife of one of his former basketball teammates, a detail that is assumed to had been leaked by way of Eva to her BFF at Extra, Mario Lopez. The alleged mistress has been named, and he or she’s Erin Barry, the estranged wife of Tony’s good friend, former San Antonio Spurs participant Brent Barry. Apparently Eva found masses of textual content messages between Erin and her husband, which brought on her to report for divorce. She also supposedly found proof on Facebook that he had cheated on her with some other lady again after they have been first married.

Celebuzz has an unique today with information from a “supply” who claims that Parker was simply buddies with this other girl, and that their hundreds of text messages were “innocuous.” Give me a destroy!

As the sector nonetheless adjusts to the inside track of Eva Longoria and Tony Parker’s imminent divorce, Celebuzz has bought unique new information about the instances in the back of their break up.

A source close to Parker confirms rumors that the NBA celebrity had sent a lot of textual content messages to his former San Antonio Spurs teammate Brent Barry’s wife, Erin Barry (pictured above), but that the two had NOT shared a romantic relationship.

According to the supply, the Barrys were close pals with Longoria and Parker for some time, even spending New Year’s Eve in combination a couple of years ago at Longoria’s Los Angeles eating place, Beso. The Barrys are recently in the course of a divorce and, our source adds, Parker and Erin’s texts concerned the 2 leaning on each and every other as their respective marriages went thru troubles. A reputedly blameless change between close pals, it might appear, however Longoria seems to be vulnerable to jealousy in her marriage to Parker.

One fascinating word, Parker recently signed a four-year, $forty five million extension with the Spurs. Eva waited til after that deal was signed to file for divorce.

Whatever the reason may were, our supply stresses that Parker and Longoria’s break up is amicable.

[From Celebuzz]

First of all, doesn’t each and every guy use this “we’re simply pals” line after they get busted cheating? Even assuming that is true, it’s now not innocuous to have an ongoing emotional affair with another person and under no circumstances does it “help” a marriage. If anything, it totally ruins the believe and feeds discontent within the relationship. When you have a new particular person on the side fawning in all places you you’re infrequently making an attempt to mend issues with your wife. Plus, if it was “risk free” why didn’t he tell his wife about it? So either approach, Tony were given what was coming to him. I also love the element that Eva waited to file till Tony got his $45 million contract nailed down. You know that he’s the person who leaked this tale to make himself appear to be the wronged birthday celebration.

Also, I read US Weekly’s duvet story on Eva and Tony and nowhere does it say that she is sure that he was snoozing with this woman. Still, some of these messages are damning sufficient on their very own. How can she ever consider the fellow once more?

ncG1vNJzZmivp6x7pLHLnpmirJOdxm%2BvzqZmampmboZze9OopbKXoJa%2FrLHRmKuroZWorLW7vpyjmqGdlMGprdOYq6GdopqsuK3SmKWorJieu6ir0aikmqaknrCgw8itn5islZa6rq3TnqqYr5mbsnA%3D