TONY Parker is a future Hall-of-Famer — and a very lucky man.

The former San Antonio Spurs guard, 40, had a tumultuous life during his NBA career, but he's seemingly found the one in Alize Lim.

A sexting scandal involving the wife of his former teammate, Erin Barry, contributed to the end of Parker's marriage to Eva Longoria in 2011.

The Spurs legend got divorced again nearly a decade later, splitting from French journalist Axelle Francine.

But the four-time NBA champion looks like a happy man again thanks to Lim — a former tennis player whose fans love her "gorgeous smile" that "lights up any room."

Parker and Lim, 32, started sharing snaps of them together in early 2021.

"Perfect and reinvented measure, wonderful and unforeseen reason," read the translated caption of her first Instagram post with Parker.

It showed Lim in Parker's warm embrace as they stood on a country road, looking at the horizon.

Lim has always kept herself busy.

She now is a broadcaster for Discovery and Eurosport, covering the Australian Open for the last two years.

But the Paris-born beauty started making tennis video features and interviewing other players way before injuries effectively ended her tennis career.

And her restlessness appears to be one thing that made her and Parker click.

When the former NBA player celebrated his 39th birthday, Lim shared pictures from the many different trips and dates they had gone for in just a few months.

They had surfed, ridden horses and motorcycles, and scuba-dived.

The pair had also skied and snowboarded — obviously, as Lim loves snow.

But she said they were just starting to explore the world together.

"Happy Birthday," Lim wrote in the Instagram post.

"Can’t wait for the next million adventures we have on our bucket list."

And on Lim's 31st birthday, Parker showed he shared the sentiment.

"Happy Birthday, can’t wait for the future together," he wrote on Instagram.

"It’s only the beginning!!"

Being with Parker has been Lim's "quantum of solace."

And it does indeed look like her world now revolves around the NBA legend.

In May 2022, she shared a couple of snaps from one of their voyages by the coast.

A third picture was a screenshot quote from Victor Hugo's poem Je Respire Ou Tu Palpites about the darkness of living in the absence of the love of one's life.

It translated: "What do you want me to become if I can no longer hear your steps?"

"Is it your life or mine — who leaves?

"I don’t know."