Krista Allen is a versatile American actress and comedian known for her appearances on Baywatch and Days of Our Lives. She has appeared in many other TV series and films, including Anger Management in 2003 alongside Adam Sandler, The Final Destination in 2009, and the TV series, Meaningful Mother in which she played the role of Lydia. Marlowe for 9 episodes in 2015.

Krista also appeared on the reality TV show Fast Cars and Superstars: The Gillette Young Guns Celebrity Race in 2007 alongside other celebrities like rodeo champ Ty Murray and skateboarder Tony Hawk. Here are some things to know about Krista Allen.

Who is Krista Allen?

Krista Allen was born on April 5, 1971 in Ventura, California, USA After her birth, her family moved to Houston, Texas where she was raised. She eventually moved to Austin, Texas. After high school, she was admitted to Austin Community College.

It’s not necessarily the course you studied Associated with an actress, Krista studied at the University of Texas and earned a degree in education. After graduating from the University of Texas, she hopes to pursue a career in the teaching profession, which leads her to intern as a kindergarten teacher. However, after interning for a while, she changed her mind to build a future in the teaching profession and later moved to California to pursue a career in acting.

Krista’s first foray into Hollywood landed her the role of Emmanuelle in the erotic series. Emmanuelle in space which was released in 1994. Her next project was an appearance in the television series, Love, Glory and Beauty in 1995. In 1996, she starred in the movie, Raven as Cali Goodwin.

She also played Mrs. Fleisig in the television series Deadly Games and Patty in an episode of the television series High Tide in 1996. Between 1996 and 1999, she appeared in the television series, Days of Our Lives, where she portrayed the role by Billie Reed.

At the turn of the century in 2000, she starred as Kristy Hopkins in the pilot episode of CSI: Crime Scene Investigation and in a later first season episode. She also appeared in the movie, Sunset Strip Jennifer in 2000. Between 2000 and 2001, she portrayed the role of Jenna Avid in the popular television series Baywatch. She also featured in 3 episodes of the TV series Charmed as a guest.

Moreso, she appeared on an episode of the TV series, Friends in 2002, Face Value (2002) and Confessions of a Dangerous Mind. Her other works include Anger Management as Stacy alongside Adam Sandler, The Banquet (2005), Leo in 2007.

Other films to his credit include The Third Nail, Alien Presence, Shannon’s Rainbow, The Final Destination, Silent Venom, Black Widow, Amazing Racer, and Big Cars.

In addition to an impressive career as an actress, Krista has devoted much of her recent professional events to Los Angeles. She is also an accomplished yoga instructor.

Also Read: Skandar Keynes Age, Height, Gay, Girlfriend, Where Is She Now?

6 quick facts about the actress

1. Krista had a stint in nude modeling

Allen has done nude modeling and been featured in magazines such as French magazine, Spanish magazine, Maxim magazine and Newlook. She was named number 70 on Maxim magazine’s Hot 100 of 2005 list.

2. She was divorced twice

Krista Allen has been married twice. Her first marriage was to producer and production manager Justin Moritt, in 1996. Union packed up in 1999. They have one son, Jakob Nolan Moritt. In 2010 she remarried, this time to Iranian rapper Mams Taylor, they separated in 2012.

3. She is also an entrepreneur

Krista Allen has made most of her fortune from acting. However, she was also shown to be very keen on business. For years, she ran a line of t-shirts called Superexcellent.

4. Height, weight and body measurements

His height is 1.70 m (5 feet 7 inches). She weighs 48kg and displays an impressive hourglass with her vital stats reading 35-24-34.

5. She had romantic relationships with many famous names

In addition to his marriages, Allen dated two notable men, including George Clooney. Also, she reportedly had a long-term relationship with ABC’s Nathan Fillion. Castle