In a twist ripped right from Desperate Housewives, the show’s star, half-pint hottie, Eva Longoria Parker is dumping her b-ball playing beau, accusing him of cheating with a teammate’s wife.

Longoria Parker, 35, recently discovered that her husband Tony Parker, 28, has been exchanging text messages with a Erin Barry, the estranged wife of former San Antonio Spur, Brent Barry for nearly a year — including hundreds in just one month, according to sources close to Parker.

PHOTOS: EVA LONGORIA

“There’s no physical relationship between Tony and Erin,” the source said. “There was texting that went on for a while and probably crossed the line. Eva found out by looking at his phone.”

Longoria filed divorce papers in Los Angeles today to end her three-year marriage to Parker.

“It is with great sadness that after 7 years together, Tony and I have decided to divorce,” Longoria said in a statement obtained by Us Weekly. “We love each other deeply and pray for each other’s happiness.”

Longoria, 35, married the 28-year-old French athlete in a lavish Parisian ceremony in July 2007 but early on the relationship was plagued with rumors of infidelity by Parker.

Months after their fairytale ceremony in the City of Light, French model Alexandra Paressant claimed in December 2007 that she met Parker at his wedding and began an affair with him just two months later.

At the time, Longoria stood by her husband — who denied the claim.

The final straw was the actress discovering the text messages.

“She is devastated, she wants us all to know that,” Longoria’s friend, Extra host Mario Lopez, said. “But she’s strong.”

Longoria canceled her scheduled appearance at the American Music Awards on Nov. 21 and will spend Thanksgiving with friends.

The divorce petition, filed today citing irreconcilable differences, came just one day after reps for both Longoria and Parker denied reports Parker had filed for divorce in Texas.

The rumor mill was ablaze Tuesday when TMZ claimed the NBA player filed for divorce, citing two clerks at the Bexar County Courthouse in Texas.

But a rep for the actress immediately issued a statement saying Parker did not file divorce papers and did not have a divorce lawyer — prompting the celebrity gossip website to remove the story.

But today the Los Angeles Superior Court filing confirmed the couple were splitting. Longoria, who had taken her husband’s surname, requested that her name be restored to Eva Jacqueline Longoria in the petition. The filing also stated that the couple had a prenuptial agreement.

Longoria asked the court to require each side to pay its own attorneys’ fees, and to rule that she should not have to pay spousal support to Parker.

It was the second marriage for the Texas-born actress, who was previously married to “General Hospital” actor Tyler Christopher from 2002 to 2004.

It was the first marriage for Parker.

Before moving to the US, Parker had played for two years in the French basketball league.

He was selected by the San Antonio Spurs with the 28th overall pick in the 2001 NBA draft and became their starting point guard. He helped the Spurs win three NBA Championships in 2003, 2005 and 2007.

With Newscore