All sorts of details have been coming out in the breaking story of Tony Parker and Eva Longoria’s divorce after just over three years. The latest news is that Tony was cheating with the wife of one of his former basketball teammates, a detail that is thought to have been leaked by Eva to her BFF at Extra, Mario Lopez. The alleged mistress has been named, and she’s Erin Barry, the estranged wife of Tony’s friend, former San Antonio Spurs player Brent Barry. Apparently Eva found hundreds of text messages between Erin and her husband, which prompted her to file for divorce. She also supposedly found evidence on Facebook that he had cheated on her with another woman back when they were first married.

Celebuzz has an exclusive today with news from a “source” who claims that Parker was just friends with this other woman, and that their hundreds of text messages were “innocuous.” Give me a break!

As the world still adjusts to the news of Eva Longoria and Tony Parker’s impending divorce, Celebuzz has obtained exclusive new information about the circumstances behind their split.

A source close to Parker confirms rumors that the NBA star had sent numerous text messages to his former San Antonio Spurs teammate Brent Barry’s wife, Erin Barry (pictured above), but that the two had NOT shared a romantic relationship.

According to the source, the Barrys have been close friends with Longoria and Parker for some time, even spending New Year’s Eve together a couple of years ago at Longoria’s Los Angeles restaurant, Beso. The Barrys are currently in the midst of a divorce and, our source adds, Parker and Erin’s texts involved the two leaning on each other as their respective marriages went through troubles. A seemingly innocent exchange between close friends, it would seem, but Longoria appears to be prone to jealousy in her marriage to Parker.

One interesting note, Parker recently signed a four-year, $45 million extension with the Spurs. Eva waited til after that deal was signed to file for divorce.

Whatever the motive might have been, our source stresses that Parker and Longoria’s split is amicable.

[From Celebuzz]

First of all, doesn’t every guy use this “we’re just friends” line when they get busted cheating? Even assuming this is true, it’s not innocuous to have an ongoing emotional affair with another person and in no way does it “help” a troubled marriage. If anything, it completely ruins the trust and feeds discontent within the relationship. When you have a new person on the side fawning all over you you’re hardly trying to mend things with your wife. Plus, if it was “innocuous” why didn’t he tell his wife about it? So either way, Tony got what was coming to him. I also love the detail that Eva waited to file until Tony got his $45 million contract nailed down. You know that he’s the one who leaked this story to make himself look like the wronged party.

Also, I read US Weekly’s cover story on Eva and Tony and nowhere does it say that she is positive that he was sleeping with this woman. Still, all these messages are damning enough on their own. How can she ever trust the guy again?