Peter Herrmann was a German composer and academic teacher. He composed three operas and a ballet, but mainly instrumental music both for orchestra and chamber music. His works have been performed internationally; his second string quartet was awarded a prize at the Prague Spring International Music Festival. He was professor of composition at the Musikhochschule Leipzig from 1969, serving as its rector from 1984 to 1987.

Peter Herrmann was born on December 19, 1941, in Chemnitz, Saxony, Germany. His birth geographical coordinates are 50° 50’ 9” North latitude and 12° 55’ 45” East longitude. Peter Herrmann passed away at the age of 73 in 2015.

Astrologically, Peter Herrmann falls under the Sun sign of Sagittarius, with Aquarius as his Ascendant, Capricorn as his Moon sign, and Gemini as his Black Moon Lilith sign.

Planets

Planets represent different aspects of personality, life themes, and energies within a birth chart, influencing individual characteristics, motivations, and experiences.

Planets in Signs

Planets in a zodiac sign denote how the energies and qualities associated with those planets express themselves within the context of the themes and attributes of that particular zodiac sign.

Sun Sagittarius Moon Capricorn Mercury Sagittarius Venus Aquarius Mars Aries Jupiter Gemini Saturn Taurus Uranus Taurus Neptune Virgo Pluto Leo Ceres Capricorn Chiron Leo Eros Scorpio Hygiea Taurus Juno Scorpio Pallas Capricorn Vesta Sagittarius Ascendant Aquarius Black Moon Lilith Gemini Midheaven Sagittarius North Node Virgo South Node Pisces Part of Fortune Pisces Vertex Virgo

Sunin Sagittarius27° 7’ 50”

The Sun in Sagittarius in the Natal Chart is an ideal placement for a natural leader. You are attracted to spiritual and philosophical subjects and […] Read more »

Moonin Capricorn11° 17’ 20”

The Moon in Capricorn in the Natal Chart makes you old-fashioned and emotional. You are compassionate and use your empathy to connect with others. You […] Read more »

Mercuryin Sagittarius25° 40’ 14”

Mercury in Sagittarius in the Natal Chart indicates a gregarious and loving personality. You are idealistic and have a strong sense of conviction. You are […] Read more »

Venusin Aquarius11° 4’ 23”

Aquarius Venus in the Natal Chart makes you unusual and brilliant. You value people who inspire breakthroughs. You love epiphanies that help you understand the […] Read more »

Marsin Aries19° 33’ 38”

Aries Mars is a powerful placement, as Mars is this sign’s planetary ruler. You are charming and can be energetic and optimistic. You are passionate […] Read more »

Jupiterin Gemini14° 56’ 30”

Jupiter in Gemini in the Natal Chart makes you talkative and popular. You are social and outgoing. You attract people from all walks of life […] Read more »

Saturnin Taurus22° 43’ 19”

Taurus Saturn in the Natal Chart is a placement shared by people born within three years of each other. They are part of a cohort […] Read more »

Uranusin Taurus27° 12’ 48”

Is Uranus in Taurus good or bad? Taurus Uranus brings generational awareness to shared values. You are part of a cohort that helps others awaken […] Read more »

Neptunein Virgo29° 49’ 55”

Neptune in Virgo in the Natal Chart makes you part of a generation known for bringing peace, harmony, and healing. You are gentle and can […] Read more »

Plutoin Leo5° 24’ 5”

The Pluto in Leo generation empowers celebrities, giving those with status the authority to lead. Society is materialistic during this transit, and you are part […] Read more »

Ceresin Capricorn26° 13’ 6”

Ceres in Capricorn in the Natal Chart indicates a generation committed to making others comfortable. You are sensitive to others’ needs and can be compassionate […] Read more »

Chironin Leo14° 8’ 54”

Chiron in Leo in the Natal Chart indicates a generational placement associated with empowerment through the arts. You are insecure and question your strengths. You […] Read more »

Erosin Scorpio29° 49’ 16”

Eros in Scorpio in the Natal Chart makes you intense and overwhelming. You are passionate and dramatic as you pursue your sexual desires. You are […] Read more »

Hygieain Taurus27° 28’ 10”

Hygiea in Taurus in the Natal Chart indicates a desire to pursue beauty and strength. You are helpful and use your nurturing gifts to encourage […] Read more »

Junoin Scorpio8° 37’ 44”

Juno in Scorpio in the Natal Chart indicates a desire for love and intimacy. You are passionate about sharing your insights and can be persuasive […] Read more »

Pallasin Capricorn8° 15’ 19”

Pallas in Capricorn in the Natal Chart gives you a broad perspective and gift for organizing plans to improve your business and career. You can […] Read more »

Vestain Sagittarius4° 21’ 9”

Vesta in Sagittarius in the Natal Chart brings passion and energy. You are excited about adventure and freedom. You can be loving and devoted to […] Read more »

Ascendantin Aquarius18° 30’ 10”

Aquarius Ascendant in the Natal Chart indicates you have an otherworldly sense of events. You have a gift for being on the edge of new […] Read more »

Black Moon Lilithin Gemini1° 51’ 32”

Gemini Black Moon Lilith makes you dramatic and eager to push boundaries. You can fall for extreme ideas and are attracted to taboo and unconventional […] Read more »

Midheavenin Sagittarius12° 2’ 20”

Sagittarius Midheaven in the Natal Chart makes you eager to pursue your ideals as part of your career. You stand out because of your flamboyant […] Read more »

North Nodein Virgo17° 30’ 34”

Virgo North Node in the Natal Chart is an ideal placement for research and analysis. You are methodical and use your gifts to set a […] Read more »

South Nodein Pisces17° 30’ 34”

Pisces South Node in the Natal Chart makes you mystical and intuitive. You can be generous and use your instincts to heal others. You are […] Read more »

Part of Fortunein Pisces2° 39’ 39”

Part of Fortune in Pisces in the Natal Chart makes you spiritual and compassionate. You are most successful when sacrificing selfish ambitions to elevate others. […] Read more »

Planets in Elements

Planets in elements denote how the fundamental energies and qualities associated with those planets interact with the elemental nature of the signs they inhabit, shaping an individual’s overall temperament and approach to life.

Earth Element

The earth element in astrology is associated with practicality and grounding. This element is associated with career and wealth. Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorn are signs […] Read more »

Fire Element

The fire element in astrology is associated with passion and motivation. This element brings creativity and intensifies planets and natal houses. Your competitive nature comes […] Read more »

Air Element

The air element in astrology corresponds to three signs; Gemini, Libra, and Aquarius. This element is associated with new insights and perspectives. The air element […] Read more »

Water Element

Astrologers and other occultists study the water element to understand emotional healing. This element relates to love and compassion. Numerous planets in water signs in […] Read more »

Planets in Qualities

Planets in qualities signify how the inherent attributes and tendencies of those planets align with the modalities of the signs they occupy, influencing an individual’s style of action, decision-making, and engagement with the world.

Mutable Quality

The third Quality astrological signs are grouped into is mutable. Mutable Signs come at the end of a season. Mutable Signs are associated with flexibility […] Read more »

Fixed Quality

The second Quality in astrology is the Fixed modality. Fixed Signs follow the Cardinal Signs, bringing strength and endurance. These signs build upon the foundation […] Read more »

Cardinal Quality

The Cardinal quality in astrology is associated with new seasons and initiative. Cardinal signs mark the equinoxes and solstices. The Cardinal modality represents the extremes […] Read more »

Planets in Houses

Planets in a zodiac house signify where in life’s areas and experiences the energies and influences of those planets are predominantly focused and expressed.

Sun Tenth House Moon Eleventh House Mercury Tenth House Venus Twelfth House Mars Second House Jupiter Fourth House Saturn Third House Uranus Third House Neptune Seventh House Pluto Sixth House Ceres Twelfth House Chiron Sixth House Eros Ninth House Hygiea Third House Juno Eighth House Pallas Eleventh House Vesta Ninth House Black Moon Lilith Third House North Node Seventh House South Node First House Part of Fortune First House Vertex Seventh House

Aspects

Aspects reveal the dynamic relationships and interactions between planets within a birth chart, influencing the way their energies combine and manifest in an individual’s life experiences and personality traits.

Within this birth chart, there are 17 major aspects, alongside 9 minor aspects, as well as 5 extra aspects.

Major Aspects

Major aspects highlight significant connections between planets, providing insights into key dynamics, challenges, and potentials shaping an individual’s life journey and psychological makeup.

Sun Quincunx Uranus Sun Conjunct Mercury Mercury Quincunx Uranus Sun Square Neptune Mercury Quincunx Saturn Uranus Trine Neptune Sun Quincunx Saturn Moon Quincunx Jupiter Mercury Square Neptune Venus Trine Jupiter Saturn Conjunct Uranus Mars Sextile Jupiter Mercury Trine Mars Venus Opposite Pluto Neptune Sextile Pluto Saturn Trine Neptune Sun Trine Mars

Explore detailed articles on the major aspects in this birth chart, gaining deeper insights into this cosmic identity. Dive into each aspect and uncover how it shapes Peter Herrmann’s life journey.

Sun Quincunx Uranusorb: 0°

The Sun quincunx Uranus in a Natal Chart makes you intense, yet sometimes awkward. You don’t feel secure and go to extremes to assert your […] Read more »

Sun Conjunct Mercuryorb: 1°

Sun conjunct Mercury in the Natal Chart can make you bright, playful, and talkative. Your intellectual gifts are among your best characteristics. You can be […] Read more »

Mercury Quincunx Uranusorb: 2°

Mercury quincunx Uranus in a chart typically indicates that someone can be rebellious, but they are a bit impractical and scattered regarding what they rebel […] Read more »

Sun Square Neptuneorb: 3°

The Sun square Neptune in the Natal Chart makes you dreamy and mystical. Yet you aren’t open to expressing your unique traits because you are […] Read more »

Mercury Quincunx Saturnorb: 3°

Mercury quincunx Saturn in a Natal Chart can create overwhelming energy in a person’s life. There may be a constant struggle between working too much […] Read more »

Sun Quincunx Saturnorb: 4°

The Sun quincunx Saturn in a Natal Chart makes you aware of your limitations. You question your abilities and play small. You aren’t being humble, […] Read more »

Moon Quincunx Jupiterorb: 4°

The Moon quincunx Jupiter in a Natal Chart creates an intense clash between a person’s inner sense of safety and emotional expression and their sense […] Read more »

Saturn Conjunct Uranusorb: 4°

Saturn conjunct Uranus in a chart can make a person seem highly energetic. They will have a side of them that is practical and grounded […] Read more »

Mars Sextile Jupiterorb: 5°

Mars sextile Jupiter in a chart typically indicates that a person is outgoing, bold, and enthusiastic about life. They likely have a lot of energy […] Read more »

Mercury Trine Marsorb: 6°

Mercury trine Mars in a chart typically means a person is intelligent, confident, and decisive. A person with this trine in their Natal Chart can […] Read more »

Venus Opposite Plutoorb: 6°

Venus opposite Pluto in a chart creates intensity regarding romance, attraction, and relationships. There is also a darkness in this opposition. The intense love and […] Read more »

Sun Trine Marsorb: 8°

The Sun trine Mars in the Natal Chart makes you ambitious and strong-willed. You are caring and affectionate. You show warmth and generosity. You can […] Read more »

Minor Aspects

Minor aspects represent subtler connections between planets, offering additional nuances and layers of interpretation to understand more detailed influences on an individual’s personality and experiences.

Sun Quincunx Hygiea Uranus Conjunct Hygiea Neptune Sextile Eros Venus Sextile Midheaven Mars Sextile Ascendant Jupiter Sextile Chiron Jupiter Square Vertex Uranus Trine Ceres Pluto Trine Vesta

Discover additional layers of meaning with this collection of articles on the minor aspects found in Peter Herrmann’s birth chart. Delve deeper into these cosmic nuances to gain a richer understanding of this astrological profile.

Sun Quincunx Hygieaorb: 0°

The Sun quincunx Hygiea’s meaning relates to your ability to care for yourself and remain true to your authentic nature. Your creativity and artistic gifts […] Read more »

Extra Aspects

Extra aspects, though less emphasized than major or minor aspects, contribute subtle nuances and intricacies to the overall astrological interpretation, offering additional insights into an individual’s personality traits and life experiences.

Juno Sextile Pallas Ceres Trine Hygiea Ascendant Quincunx North Node Black Moon Lilith Square Part of Fortune Vesta Square Part of Fortune

Explore how these extra aspects contribute to the intricate tapestry of Peter Herrmann’s life path through subtler influences. Dive into each extra aspect and uncover the hidden gems that shape a unique cosmic identity.

Houses

A house starting in a zodiac sign indicates the area of life where the qualities and themes of that sign are particularly emphasized and influential within an individual’s birth chart.