Classic British Submarine Film - We Dive at Dawn review by GI

Spoiler Alert

09/04/2021

This is a fantastic adventure war film, a story of derring do with the tension and atmosphere that submarine films have to have and it culminates in a neat land based battle. John Mills plays the commander of a British submarine sent out on a mission to hunt a German battleship. They eventually become the hunted as German destroyers try and sink them and by the time we get to that there's been the introduction to the lives, loves and friendships of the crew members so that the audience is caught up in their desperate attempt at escape and survival. They have to come up with a daring plan to get home leading to a clever final section of the film that's as good as any war film of any age. What is especially entertaining about this film is it seems to be less about flag waving and more focused on being a good war story and like all these films made during and immediately after the war there's the marvellous nostalgic images of England in the 40s. This is an exciting and superb war film, one of the great submarine combat films and well worth seeking out.

1 out of 1 members found this review helpful.

Submarine warfare (spoiler). - We Dive at Dawn review by Steve

Spoiler Alert

31/01/2024

WWII submarine drama made during the Battle of the Atlantic. The propaganda is unusually realistic. The perilous pursuit of a battleship called the Brandenburg is fictional, but the film gives a potent impression of what combat in a submarine must have been like, but backed by the comical make-do typical of British war films,

It also informs the home front of the incredible risks which are routinely being taken by ordinary people. And to expect those who fight to come home changed. John Mills is the skipper, but the most prominent role goes to Eric Portman, a resentful loner who ultimately saves the crew through an act of selfless bravery.

This isn't a prestige production, but Anthony Asquith's accomplished direction makes it a cut above the glut of low budget action films made during the war. While the episode when Portman almost singlehandedly seizes a Nazi fuel depot with his practical German and a lot of pluck is unrealistic, the skill of the cast and creatives make us want to believe.

The crew represents a cross section of regions and classes. These are ensemble roles, though the credits list the cast in order of rank! The home lives of the men are a turmoil which they occasionally revisit on leave, but are unable to resolve. They walk away to execute extraordinary acts of courage. Asquith acknowledges their sacrifice.

0 out of 0 members found this review helpful.