Information

Title

Carte de visite of Heinrich Gustav Reichenbach

Record type

Photographs

Original Reference

P/CDV/R/18

Author or creator

August Brasch

Role

photographic business

Scope & content

Black and white full-length standing portrait of Heinrich Gustav Reichenbach. Printed inscription on recto, 'August Brasch Leipzig Lindenstrasse No.7.'. Heinrich Gustav Reichenbach (1824-1889) was a Germanbotanist and ornithologist. He became an expert on orchids, widely regarded as leading expert on the subject after the death of John Lindley. Frederick Sander compiled the massive work 'Reichenbachia' in his honour. He dictated in his will that his orchid collections would not be examined for 25 years after his death; it is generally assumed that this was an intended blow at his rival, F. A. Rolfe, but the consequence was that by the time Reichenbach's collections were examined, most of the work they could have stimulated had already been done elsewhere._x000D_

His father was Heinrich Gottlieb Ludwig von Reichenbach, also a botanist and ornithologist, and with whom he assisted with the publication of 'Icones Florae Germanicae'.. Heinrich Gustav Reichenbach (1824-1889) was a Germanbotanist and ornithologist. He became an expert on orchids, widely regarded as leading expert on the subject after the death of John Lindley. Frederick Sander compiled the massive work 'Reichenbachia' in his honour. He dictated in his will that his orchid collections would not be examined for 25 years after his death; it is generally assumed that this was an intended blow at his rival, F. A. Rolfe, but the consequence was that by the time Reichenbach's collections were examined, most of the work they could have stimulated had already been done elsewhere._x000D_

His father was Heinrich Gottlieb Ludwig von Reichenbach, also a botanist and ornithologist, and with whom he assisted with the publication of 'Icones Florae Germanicae'.

Extent

1 carte de visite

Physical description

10.4 (h) x 6.1 (w) cm. Portrait. Photographic print

Is part of

Carte de Visite photography collection

Copyright

No known copyright restrictions

Credit Line

August Brasch / RHS Collections

Usage terms

Public Domain