DERON Williams is a former NBA star who famously played for the Utah Jazz, Brooklyn Nets, Dallas Maverick and Cleveland Cavaliers.

Thanks to his career, he has been able to amass an extensive net worth and following.

Who is Deron Williams?

Born June 26, 1984, Williams, 37, is known as a former NBA star.

In 2005, he was drafted by the Utah Jazz as a first-round third overall choice, and played for the team for over five season, where he averaged 17 points and 9 assists per game and made two All-Star team appearances.

In the beginning of his career, he was considered one of the best point guards in the league and even won three Gold Medals as a member of Team USA at the 2007 FIBA Americas Championship, the 2008 Olympic Games and the 2012 Olympic Games.

Williams decided to retire in 2017 at the age of 33 after following a poor season with the Cavaliers.

"I was getting hurt, getting injured, missing games. I felt like I'm letting people down because I'm missing games. And it was just frustrated," he said at the time.

Since his retirement, Williams has focused on his sports podcast, Ballers and Brawlers, which he started back in his Utah days with his two friends.

He has also returned to his roots and become a partial owner of an MMA gym, MMA Fortis, where he also trains.

Prior to his basketball success, Williams was a former wrestling star and won two Texas state titles at the age of 8 and 12.

Since 2006, he has been married to Amy Young Williams.

What is Deron Williams' net worth?

As of 2021, Williams has an estimated net worth of $65million with an annual salary of $19.8million, according to Celebrity Net Worth.

This number comes from his decade long career in the NBA that lasted from 2005-2017.

In 2015, Williams hit a single-season salary high of $19.78million while playing for the Nets.

Despite leaving the team in 2015, Williams was still getting paid from the Nets until 2020 because of a buyout agreement that guaranteed the former star $5.5million over the course of five years after the team decided to waive him with two years and $43million left on his contract.

He then went on to sign with the Mavericks for an additional $14.4million.

Is Deron Williams fighting Jake Paul?

YouTuber turned professional boxer Jake Paul is scheduled to fight Tommy Fury in Tampa, Florida, on December 18, 2021.

On November 5, it was announced that Williams will be joining the match as an undercard.

At this time, his opponent has not been chosen but it has been reported that he could face NFL star Frank Gore, who is currently third on the NFL’s all-time rushing yards list.

More information is expected in the coming weeks.