SALT LAKE CITY — Deron Williams says he’s looking forward to returning to Europe with the Utah Jazz for two preseason games.

He’s just not sure yet who the rest of the team will be. The Jazz are still waiting to hear who will stay and who will go as free agents this summer.

Carlos Boozer, Mehmet Okur and Kyle Korver can all opt out of the final year of their contracts and have until the end of the month to do so.

“I’m not too worried about it. I’m sure it will work itself out,” Williams said during a conference call from Madrid, where the Jazz will play Real Madrid in an exhibition game Oct. 8.

The Jazz are awaiting decisions from all three players – who would cost the team almost $27 million if they return next season – and it could be a few more weeks before the team knows.

Okur has been spending the offseason with family in his native Turkey, where he celebrated his 30th birthday last week.

Marc Fleisher, Okur’s agent, said his client probably won’t make a decision until close to the June 30 deadline. Agents for Korver and Boozer did not return messages Tuesday.

If any of the three opt out, it would free up some money for the Jazz. Boozer is in line to make $12.7 million next season and Korver is due over $5 million if he stays.

The Jazz also want to re-sign restricted free agent Paul Millsap, but aren’t sure yet how much they’ll have to offer. Utah can match any offers to Millsap, who had a run of 19 straight double-doubles while starting when Boozer was sidelined for 44 games this season.

Utah faces either being light on cash – but with last season’s team virtually intact to make a run in the playoffs – or having some money to spend on filling big holes left by the departure of anyone who elects to go.

“There’s a lot of options the organization can go in,” Williams said. “There’s just too much to worry about at this time.”

The NBA announced the Jazz-Real Madrid game on Tuesday, and it will come two days after Utah plays the Chicago Bulls in an exhibition game in London.

Williams flew to Europe as part of an NBA promotion for the games and was immediately asked during the conference call about the pending status of Boozer, Williams’ teammate with the Jazz and on the U.S. Olympic gold medal team last summer. Boozer has not been heard from since saying the day after the season ended that he would like to stay in Utah if the Jazz can come up with a long-term deal.

“A lot of things could happen between now and July,” Williams said. “The team could be totally different. It could be pretty similar. It’s just a matter of which direction the organization wants to go.”

Williams said the Jazz haven’t asked his thoughts, which he’s always happy to share – wanted or not.

“I’m never shy about voicing opinion,” Williams said.