As long as I can remember, I have always loved looking at maps. When we were kids, we had a giant atlas, which (along with our A-Z encylopedia set!) I spent a great deal of time reading. The various maps, satellite images, and aerial views of places around the world just fascinated me. It is still the same today: I love looking for features and places while flying, and studying maps to understand where exactly I am when I travel to a new place. Geography, unfortunately, is not a commonly-taught subject anymore, and yet it is one which is so important for many other fields- including meteorology! Today, we will review some basic geography to better understand how latitude and longitude work.

Why do we need latitude and longitude?

For as long as humanity has been navigating from one place to another, it has been important to know where one is in space. The earliest maps date to ancient times; civilizations including the Babylonians, Chinese, ancient Greeks, and many others have tried to map the world around them using the most high-tech tools at their disposal. Once trans-oceanic navigation and the age of exploration began, it became even more important than ever to understand one’s position on the Earth’s surface. One logical way to do this is to divide the spherical earth into a grid. One set of gridlines run from north to south through the poles: these are lines of longitude. The second set of gridlines run from east to west (or west to east), creating a series of concentric circles around the Earth which are known as latitude.

Latitude

As it turns out, latitude is MUCH easier to determine than longitude. Looking at the image above, we can see that the latitude line which runs through the widest part of the Earth is known as the Equator. From there, lines of latitude are parallel to each other: each line is the same distance apart from the next one at every point on the globe. It is for this reason that latitude lines are sometimes known as ‘parallels’. Latitude is given in ‘degrees’, with zero degrees being the Equator, and 90 degrees North and South being at the North and South Poles, respectively. Due to the way the Earth moves around the sun in space, it is easy to determine one’s latitude based upon the altitude of the sun above the horizon at a particular time of year.

At night, latitude can be determined using the position of the single fixed star in the night sky. The star that is located directly above either pole appears to be ‘fixed’ in space to observers on Earth, and all other stars rotate around that star. In the Northern Hemisphere, that star is known as Polaris, or the North Star. Thus, early mariners could study the positions of constellations and calculate their north-south position on Earth from there.

The ‘longitude problem’ was one that plauged mariners and astronomers for generations. Because longitude cannot be determined simply by astronomical features as latitude can, it was very difficult, if not impossible, to determine one’s east-west position on Earth. Lines of longitude are not parallel as latitude lines are, but rather become closer together in distance as one nears the poles (where all lines of longitude meet at a single point). In fact, mariners had to rely on a technique called ‘dead-reckoning’, which essentially involved tracking one’s known position in time and distance travelled in order to estimate position. As you might imagine, this technique is fraught with errors, and it was very common for ships to find themselves hundreds of miles off course when crossing large bodies of water.

In 1714, the British Parliament passed the Longitude Act, and offered up a large monetary prize for the individual who was able to solve this problem. In her book entitled Longitude, Dava Sobel tells the story of John Harrison, the determined, self-taught man who became the first to solve this problem. If you have time, it is a great read and I highly recommend it! However, an abbreviated version of the narrative can be found at the U.S. Naval Institute.

Longitude and Time

Because the earth is round, one could start counting longitude from any north-south line on the Earth’s surface. The convention we use today starts the zero line of longitude through Greenwich, England. This line, known as the Prime Meridian, is indicated on the image below in red. From there, one can count degrees of longitude either East or West of the Prime Meridian as shown. Halfway around the world from the Prime Meridian, one reaches 180 degrees, or the International Date Line. There are 360 degrees in a circle, so 180 degrees to the west and 180 degrees to the east of the Prime Meridian account for all positions on Earth.

One’s position on Earth can be given at any point by a specific latitude and longitude. Today, that is most commonly done by using GPS, or global positioning satellites. These satellites orbit at much lower altitudes than many common weather satellites. The signals from these satellites are picked up by receivers (including those in your cell phone!), and position can be determined by calculating the distance from multiple GPS satellites. Latitudes north of the Equator and longitudes east of the Prime Meridian are positive or annotated with an N or E, while latitudes in the Southern Hemisphere and longitudes to the West of the date line (left in the image above) are negative numbers OR positive numbers annotated with a W or S. Here in the U.S., our latitudes are positive numbers while our longitudes are negative numbers.

Although latitude and longitude are in units of degrees and can be expressed in units of degrees/minutes/seconds, it is also possible to convert latitude and longitude into decimal degrees using some simple math. In fact, in Google Earth, one can toggle the options to express position using either of these two formats. Below are the latitude/longitude coordinates of some famous places.

I highly encourage any geography buffs, or anyone who is interested in maps, to check out Google Earth. In this software (which has web, mobile and desktop versions), one can look up any address, lat/lon coordinates, or landmark on Earth and see incredibly detailed satellite imagery. Additionally, the ‘street view’ option allows you to dive right down into the streets as if you were actually there yourself! Next time you are checking out a place to visit for the first time or looking for a new vacation spot, try Google Earth street view to really get a feel for how things look! On that note, here are 14 fun things to look at using Google Earth!

Stay tuned to future blogs where we will continue our dive into geography and learn more about its importance to the field of meteorology!