Rock & Roll Jihad

A Muslim Rock Star’s Revolution

Salman Ahmad

with Robert Schroeder

Free Press

New York London Toronto Sydney

Free Press

A Division of Simon & Schuster, Inc.

1230 Avenue of the Americas

New York, NY 10020

www.SimonandSchuster.com

Copyright © 2010 by Salman Ahmad

All rights reserved, including the right to reproduce this book

or portions thereof in any form whatsoever. For information address

Free Press Subsidiary Rights Department, 1230 Avenue of the Americas,

New York, NY 10020

First Free Press hardcover edition January 2010

FREE PRESS and colophon are trademarks of Simon & Schuster, Inc.

For information about special discounts for bulk purchases, please contact Simon & Schuster Special Sales at 1-866-506-1949 or business@simonandschuster.com

The Simon & Schuster Speakers Bureau can bring authors to your live event.

For more information or to book an event contact the Simon & Schuster Speakers

Bureau at 1-866-248-3049 or visit our website at www.simonspeakers.com.

Designed by Carla Jayne Jones

Manufactured in the United States of America

10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication

Data Control No. 2009020265

ISBN 978-1-4165-9767-4

ISBN 978-1-4165-9769-8 (ebook)

For Samina

To God belong the East and the West.

Wherever you turn the glory of God is everywhere.

—Holy Quran

Contents

Introduction by Melissa Etheridge

ONE: The Taliban and the Guitar

TWO: Growing Up

THREE: Wandering Spirits

FOUR: American Desi

FIVE: Finding My Way

SIX: Rock & Roll Jihad

SEVEN: Freedom

EIGHT: Junoon

NINE: Banned in Pakistan

TEN: Fusion

ELEVEN: The Flight

TWELVE: Speak

THIRTEEN: Ghoom Tana

Epilogue

Discography & Filmography

Acknowledgements

About the Author

Introduction

by Melissa Etheridge

The story you are about to read is the story of a light-bringer, a way-shower. He will be the first to insist that there is nothing special about anything that he has done. Yet there is no other that has gone before him and walked his path.

I had the blessing to cross the path of Salman Ahmad in December 2007, when we were in Oslo, Norway, for the Nobel Peace Prize Concert.

I had been on a life-changing adventure of my own. Diagnosed with cancer in 2004, I lay in bed for weeks on dose-dense chemotherapy (a new and intense form of chemo). And it was there and then that I found my meaning in life.

We are one.

I sent out a prayer to the cosmos. Make me a channel for changing the world. I want to work with people who want to change the world. People who are through with the current paradigm that we have been agreeing to uphold day after day, people who know there is a great shift happening and that peace is the only thing that matters in the world.

Before long, I received a call from former vice president Al Gore, asking me to write a song for his film An Inconvenient Truth. It was an opportunity for me to put out a call to arms, a chance to get people to wake up. I watched as that one film single-handedly changed people; I saw it ignite a spark. I realized that one person’s dream can make a huge difference to the whole world. I was surprised and honored to win an Oscar for the song I had written, I Need to Wake Up.

In 2007, I was asked to participate in Live Earth, a concert raising awareness about global warming that was being held on 7-7-07, on all seven continents, all day long. It was an ambitious attempt to bring the world together though technology. I took this as a sign that finally we were all waking up to the need to understand our oneness, and that for the first time, we might begin to rise as one to address and resolve the serious environmental issues facing this Earth right now. With excitement, I prepared a trilogy of songs to be played for my twenty minutes on stage. I planned to play two new songs from my not-yet-released album The Awakening, then end with the Oscar-winning song I Need to Wake Up.

A couple of weeks before the concert, my manager told me that the organizers of the concert, acting, we assume, under pressure from their corporate sponsors, really wanted me to do a hit song. I could not believe my ears. On the one hand, the world was coming together as never before; on the other, I was being asked to sing Come to My Window. Now, don’t get me wrong: I love that song and am very grateful to have a hit or two under my belt, but the thought of turning this momentous occasion into a demand to roll out a hit song was starting to get me down. I told my manager that I would be doing the new songs or I would watch the concert at home. Eventually, the organizers backed off, and we agreed that I would perform the new songs.

The thought of having a live television audience, worldwide, for twenty minutes was exciting. Onstage at Giants Stadium, I chose to ask the question, What happened to us? I spoke about fear and change. I hoped to inspire somebody, anybody. I did not know it at the time, but Salman Ahmad and his family, who had arrived in New York City only months before, were at the stadium that day to watch this live concert event. I wish I could have seen them from the stage. As it was, I could only see a number of smiling faces, and a couple of folks who were really there to hear Bon Jovi and who also probably wanted me to stop talking and sing more (maybe that Window song).

As I left the stage, I took a good look at the corporate sponsors all around the stadium. With sadness I realized that this moment was brought to us by Verizon and a host of other green-washed companies, corporate hypocrites that seemed to jump on the green wagon just to sell more widgets. My heart really sank later, when I learned that not a note of my performance was shown on the three-hour NBC broadcast that night. Not even the Academy Award–winning song to the movie that got this whole thing going in the first place. All that made the corporate cut was my introduction, Ladies and gentlemen, Mr. Al Gore.

This changing the world thing was going to take a lot longer than I thought.

Later that year, I received the request to join Mr. Gore in Oslo, where he was to receive the Nobel Peace Prize. I was asked to play I Need to Wake Up and one other song at the Nobel Peace Prize Concert. I found out that this concert was going to be broadcast on television to many nations.

Thanks to previous experience, I was feeling a little skeptical about just how much good a television show masquerading under the label of A Concert could do. I was starting to see that no matter how extraordinary an event like this can be, when it turns into television entertainment, you always hear the same thing over and over: Let’s bring peace to the world, shall we? And now, a word from our sponsor. What noble sentiment there is gets watered down, if not eliminated entirely, by the commercial interests that prevail over it. But I wanted to be there for my friend Al, so I said yes. I had been mumbling some of my doubts to my long-time tour manager and friend Steven Girmant on the plane ride over, when he said, There is some reason you are here. You never know what might happen or who you might meet. I hate it when Steven uses on me any of the spiritual pick-me-ups that I use on him. I decided to take my own advice and start looking for the purpose of my journey to a very cold place to perform on a TV show.

At the sound check, among the arena chairs I saw a beautiful couple, a man and woman. I sang my song to an otherwise empty hall. When I was finished, this strong man with amazing eyes approached the stage. He reached out both his hands to me. I bent down and grabbed them, and he gently told me in his Pakistani yet Americanized accent, I love the vibration you are on. These words filled my soul. I had found another spirit who was searching for something more. I looked at him and said, I live there. What a sweet smile he had. I met him again backstage, where he told me of his work. I saw him perform at the concert and was amazed by his vocal and guitar abilities. Here was this traditional Eastern sound that was rocking hard at the same time. We exchanged information, and I flew back to Los Angeles, satisfied that the universe knew what it was doing dragging me to Norway in December.

Salman and I made arrangements to meet up in Los Angeles. I told him we needed to write something together. He came to my home and we spent two days just talking. We could feel each other’s vibrations, and again we were on the same wavelength, as we spoke of our dreams and each of our paths. I have a history of making choices that might seem brave to some. But when he told me about what had happened to him in Pakistan, the story that you’re about to read in this book, I suddenly felt that my history paled in comparison to choices he made that could have resulted in his death. I was so inspired to create something in conjunction with this soul. He returned home and sent me some musical ideas. I found in one track a haunting guitar part that I kept playing over and over until finally the words started to come. Whose God is God? Whose light is light? Whose law is wrong? Whose might is right? This would truly be a song about peace. A song about finally ending the fear of differences.

I was recording a holiday album that I was calling A New Thought for Christmas. I wanted to bring out an alternative way of thinking about all of our religious differences. It seemed to me that a collaboration between a Sufi Muslim and a Midwestern lesbian might do the trick. I invited Salman to come to the studio, where he tracked with us for a full day. His smooth vocals and steady guitar playing made for a magical experience. We created a song, Ring the Bells, and with the help of Deepak Chopra, the song became a movement of its own. I hope you hear it and are yourself moved to sound an alarm for peace and change in this world.

Peace in this world begins with peace in our hearts. Salman Ahmad has placed that peace in his heart and it now shines like a beacon for millions of people in the East, the West, and everywhere.

Read on, my friend, and know that his story is a part of our history. We are all connected, and as each day goes by, the connections become clearer.

Salman Ahmad inspires me to reach always for the greatest heights and never to fear. I am so blessed to know this extraordinary man.

—May 2009

ONE

The Taliban and the Guitar

On a cool, clear November morning in 1982, I woke up in my bedroom in Lahore, filled with anticipation. A little more than a year earlier, my parents, siblings, and I had returned to Pakistan after six years in America. That evening, I would finally break out my long-unused sunburst Les Paul and play before a live audience of my medical school classmates at our college talent show. My plan was to channel the eighties guitar hero Eddie Van Halen and perform Eruption—and to blow everybody away as only that classic one-minute, 42-second guitar solo could. Consumed by a musical passion, I threw on my white doctor’s overalls and grabbed my anatomy and physiology books and headed for the door. I was eighteen years old.

The sweet smell of jasmine greeted me as I stepped outside and climbed into my beat-up, rusting yellow Mazda, the consolation prize given to me by my father for having taken me away from the life I loved in Tappan, New York. My parents and siblings had settled in the southern port city of Karachi while I had moved in with my mother’s parents at 54 Lawrence Road for my studies. That hopeful morning, I drove down Mall Road, the main city thoroughfare, and into the cyclone that is Lahori traffic: an anarchic scrum of blue rickshaws, horse-drawn tongas, bicyclists wearing shalwar kameez (long shirt over baggy trousers), and Japanese motorbikes and cars all flouting the cops and running red lights. Navigating the chaotic roads, I motored past the palatial Punjab governor’s mansion and Jinnah’s Garden, the beautiful park known as Lawrence Gardens during the colonial Raj. I gazed for a second at the gymkhana where I often played cricket. Its picturesque ground was encased in pine and eucalyptus trees and its pavilions were lined with red tiles. My eyes were still re-adjusting to the sights of Pakistan, and all of this looked like a scene right out of a dream.

My parents had enrolled me in Lahore’s King Edward Medical College in the hope that I would give up my teenage fantasies of being a rock musician and adopt a respectable profession. They had been patient and even supportive when I joined Eclipse, our high school garage band in Tappan, founded by my Tappan Zee High School buddies Brian O’Connell and Paul Siegel. And they’d been sincerely happy when we won our high school’s battle of the bands in 1980. But as I sat in the lecture hall that day, my old life in America was a world away and I was just another young Pakistani studying anatomy—albeit one who was constantly humming the chorus of Helter Skelter and Revolution.

About two years earlier, my father’s brother-in-law, Ismat Anwar, had visited us at our home in Tappan. At the behest of my parents, Dr. Anwar, a leading Pakistani surgeon, had a man-to-man talk with me about my career plans. I sat across from the serious-looking Uncle Anwar in my small room, focusing my bored gaze past him on the poster of Jimi Hendrix on my wall. With a shrug of my shoulders, I told my uncle that I didn’t know about the future. But I knew that I wanted to rock.

"Rock? What does that mean, beta (son)?" Dr. Anwar asked in his Punjabi-inflected English.

I tried to explain in my New York accent. Uncle, I just want to play guitar and be in a band for the rest of my life. That’s my dream. Just like these guys, I said, pointing to the life-size posters of Led Zeppelin, the Beatles, the Rolling Stones, Hendrix, and Van Halen covering the walls of my room in our house on Lester Drive. My uncle took a look around at all the color posters in amazement, as Lennon and McCartney, Hendrix, Plant, Page, and Jagger seemed to strike poses of silent support.

Uncle Anwar pointed incredulously to the long-haired musicians playing guitars and exclaimed, "Salman mian [young man], you want to become a mirasi [low-class musician]? Your parents have high expectations of you and you want to waste the rest of your life playing this tuntunna [gizmo]?" He shook his open palms in the direction of my sunburst Les Paul, which rested proudly against the back of my guitar amplifier in the corner of my room.

Before I could answer I was saved by a car honking outside. It was Brian, come to take me to band practice. I ran out of the room carrying my amplifier in one hand and my guitar in the other. Freed from the interrogation, I yelled back, I have to go, Uncle, our band Eclipse is rehearsing for the Tappan Zee High School battle of the bands!

I escaped, but Uncle Anwar’s words had unsettled me. It was only a matter of months until the other shoe dropped and my parents told me we were all going back to Pakistan. I was already reeling from two of my heroes’ deaths, and now I had to face a forced march back to the motherland. That winter, I’d been devastated by the tragic killing of John Lennon, and had mourned the loss of drummer John Bonham of Led Zeppelin not long before. Both Zeppelin and the Beatles had been like close friends and teachers to me over the past six years. I had jammed with them with the head phones on, dissecting their guitar riffs. I had tried to mimic their impossibly cool fashions and belted out their tunes in front of my mirror at high decibels. I’d sung along with Robert Plant to Zeppelin’s Stairway to Heaven or Kashmir, and crooned Day Tripper or A Hard Day’s Night by the Beatles. As a Pakistani kid who’d struggled with integrating into American life, rock and roll fed my soul and steered me toward a personal centeredness. Looking at myself in the mirror, I didn’t see a Pakistani, an American, or a Muslim, or anyone who fit into a single label or category. I just imagined myself standing onstage, playing my guitar and making people happy. And that was all I wanted.

But in the summer of 1981, the clock was ticking. I dodged reality by spending more and more time jamming with my friends in Eclipse. As the August day of departure got closer, I felt more like a visitor to the U.S. from a parallel universe. I was leaving. But I didn’t really know where I was going.

The America I knew was rock concerts at the Nassau Coliseum, Yankees games, and a close-knit group of teenage friends that made up a living mosaic of my adopted country. There was my Irish-American buddy Brian, my Jewish friends Paul Siegel and Michael Langer, and Frank Bianco, the New York Italian kid I perfected my ping-pong game with. And then there was me, a brown-skinned, Pakistani-American Muslim named not Brian or John or Shawn, but Salman. We were one big circle of light brought together by music, sports, and shared experiences. None of us cared about the made-up divides of color, culture, or religion. A month before I was to return to Pakistan, five of us had sped down the Palisades Parkway in Cindy Shaw’s father’s red and white Oldsmobile, singing at the top of our lungs along with David Lee Roth to Ain’t Talkin’ ’Bout Love. In that car, with those friends on my way to my final Van Halen concert, I shot footage for a mental movie of what I thought were the last days of my American life.

There was so much to leave behind. All around me, in 1981 in New York, kids had dyed their hair red or purple and identified themselves as punks after the movement spearheaded by Britain’s notorious Johnny Rotten and the Sex Pistols. That year everyone wore dark sunglasses indoors. The musical-film Fame dazzled audiences. Rocky Horror Picture Show fans were doing the time warp. American hostages were finally brought home after 444 days of captivity in Iran, Pakistan’s western neighbor. That spring, President Reagan had been shot in an assassination attempt in Washington. Bruce Springsteen sang about a hungry heart. Girls wore boots in the sun and high, open-toe Candies in the rain.

And then one day in August I was gone, sitting sullenly in the seat of a PIA 747 and jetting with sickening speed away from the New York skyline. I could see the cars zig-zagging on the highways, the tall buildings of Manhattan trying to kiss the sky, and the golden glint of the flame in the hand of the Statue of Liberty. Soon we left New York far behind and climbed higher over the Atlantic Ocean. I was full of resentment, frustration, and anger. But as I fell into dreamland, my journey—from East to West and back again—was really just getting started.

I couldn’t pay attention in anatomy class that November day. I kept sneaking desperate glances at the clock to see when the session would end. Meanwhile, I threw knowing looks at my co-conspirator of the day—Munir, known to everyone as Clint due to his obsession with Dirty Harry. Munir was a quiet, bohemian guy whom I had quickly befriended when I learned that like me, he listened to bootleg tapes of Hendrix, the Beatles, and Zeppelin. He also happened to own the only set of drums I could find anywhere in Lahore—making Munir my only candidate for musical backup that night. Clint rolled his eyes as the assistant professor droned on about the heart’s inferior and superior vena cavas, sinoatrial valves, and bundle of His. We weren’t slackers, but that day we were ready to get as far away from campus as we could.

In fact, we couldn’t get very far. In the Pakistan of the day, there wasn’t much to do but study. In 1982, democracy was dead and a dictator, General Muhammad Zia-ul-Haq, was running the show. A war was raging in neighboring Afghanistan, and Pakistan, a U.S. ally, was being transformed into a virtual arms bazaar, with Kalashnikovs as common a sight as a squirt gun at a kid’s birthday party. To me it seemed as if the body and soul of Pakistan had been snatched by aliens in Pakistani disguise. I still loved Pakistan for all the happy memories I had of growing up with my family and friends, and it was those childhood memories that kept me from losing my mind after I returned. But so much had changed. I couldn’t, for example, even think about looking over at any of the handful of girls in class. In General Zia’s Pakistan, male and female professors alike would call out and humiliate any amorous young man who took his eyes off the instructor and let them wander toward the pretty young women who sat together in the first couple of rows. The freewheeling country I knew had become dark, suffocated by religious extremism and gender-segregated. It felt like the last place in the world for an aspiring artist.

After three hours of anatomy, and another three agonizing hours of physiology, we were finally dismissed, and I raced back to Anarkali Bazaar to grab my car. It was mid-afternoon and the bazaar was packed. Girls dressed in colorful shalwar kameez walked past the merchants, who were hawking everything from cricket bats and balls, paprika, garlic, curries, lentils, and addictive paan (betel leaves). The shops displayed sparkling bangles, necklaces, and engagement rings. All of this was juxtaposed with a variety of live animals ready for the slaughter. Roadside fortune-tellers with monkeys and parrots offered to tell you the future for only one rupee, while the sky was alive with kites of all shapes and sizes, flown by young and old from the neighboring rooftops. I breathed in the intoxicating smell of the chicken kebabs from sidewalk vendors.

As I approached my car, I passed Mayo Hospital, where I was confronted by the stark suffering of the poor of Pakistan—as well as the collateral damage from the war raging up north in Afghanistan. Walking by, I saw old men and women from the villages of Pakistan pushed by interns on ramshackle wheelchairs. Afghan refugees with amputated legs and arms shuffled nearby. And then there were the little children suffering from terminal diseases, their eyes haunted and already half-dead. It broke my heart to know that many of these impoverished and unlucky patients would die, despite the best efforts of the doctors on staff.

Back at my grandmother’s house, I quickly threw off the medical overalls and changed into black jeans and an AC/DC T-shirt. Around my wrist I wound a string of blue prayer beads favored by adherents of Sufism, the mystical branch of Islam. I dabbed some black paint under my eyes and put on my favorite necklace with a gold Allah pendant. I felt like a New Yorker all over again—except there was no mistaking that I was back in Lahore. I played Eruption in front of the mirror before I left, just for one last practice run.

While in America I’d lived the life of a suburban teenager—a life that I couldn’t have imagined as a young kid in Lahore. I had arrived as a confused desi (South Asian) with my family in Rockland County, New York, in 1975. From 1975 to 1981 I had gradually transformed from an awkward, ill-at-ease Pakistani immigrant boy into a high school senior with a dream: I wanted to be a rock star. I would only whisper that to myself, afraid of saying it too loud in case someone overheard and burst my bubble. The rock and roll environment that had nurtured my starriest hope was now gone. But tonight was a chance, however small, to get some of that groove back.

As I stepped out of my small room, I saw my grandmother Aziza. She was a remarkable woman, full of love and life. She was one of the few women of her generation to be educated at the famed Aligarh University in India, and was always ahead of her time. Even though Pakistan had fallen under a cloud of military dictatorship and religious fanaticism, she retained her progressive values and vision. And like me, she loved music, TV, and movies. Seeing me dressed up in my makeshift rocker garb, the guitar on my shoulder, she smiled approvingly. I asked her to pray for me, to pray that tonight’s performance would go well. She smiled and promised to do so. But as I walked away, she said something that I didn’t fully grasp at that moment.

Remember that everything which happens is a sign from God, she said. We are all His instruments. She kissed me and said "Khuda Hafiz—May God’s protection be with you." I didn’t think much about her words at that moment, but they would take on profound meaning in a few short hours.

I threw my Les Paul in the back seat of the Mazda, along with my MXR distortion box and Crybaby wahwah pedal. In the Pakistan of the 1980s, where Western rock and pop music was considered as sinful, this guitar gear was as foreign as a Star Trek communicator from the future. I managed to emerge from the Lahore traffic in one piece and arrived at the site of our little talent show—The International Hotel. That regal-sounding place was actually pretty down at the heels, but I didn’t mind. We had rented out a small ballroom for the show, and for a bunch of broke college kids it might as well have been New York’s famed rock club CBGB.

At 6 p.m., the students started pouring in. About sixty kids from the freshman class showed up. We were excited about the turnout. If things went well, my friends on the organizing committee—mostly fellow Overseas Pakistanis—planned to do three more shows that year.

The night’s performances began after a student named Timoo recited a verse from the Holy Quran in a beautiful voice. In the verse, God tells mankind that He created us as men and women from different nations and tribes so that we could get to know each other. It was a message that meant a lot to the students, who came from all over the world—the United States, England, Saudi Arabia, and Afghanistan—as well as a variety of cities and villages all over Pakistan.

Maybe Pakistan wasn’t so bad, I thought as I watched the acts. A guy in glasses named Ali read Urdu poetry by the famous poet Faiz Ahmed Faiz, including a piece called Speak. A series of Punjabi comedians had us in stitches, although they watered down some of their bawdy jokes out of respect for the girls in the room. Others performed skits mocking the stern professors and their idiosyncrasies. Then there was a juggling act and then it was my turn.

Fifteen months before that evening, I’d sat, rapt, inside the Nassau Coliseum in Uniondale, New York, watching my atomic punk hero Eddie Van Halen