You can rely on us.

100 percent.

Since 1986, our customers have been placing their trust in us to ensure quality, health & safety and environmental protection in buildings, companies and infrastructures. As an independent and official inspection body, Vinçotte plays a key role in the field of statutory inspections throughout Luxembourg. Our laboratory, numerous services in the certification of management systems and our knowledge-sharing offering round off our range of services for businesses, public authorities and households.

Numbers and facts

Active in Luxembourg since 1986

Over 130 specialist services

Over 100 employees, engineers and specialists

Regular staff training and upskilling

The Vinçotte & Kiwa Group expert network with its 10,000 specialists

Expert opinions, audits and certifications based on Luxembourg and European legislation

Missions

We fulfil our missions

consistently and competently.

If there’s one thing we can do, it’s to keep you safe and sound! Our missions cover a wide range of activities, with a focus on testing, expert opinions, audits and certifications. As an officially accredited company, we carry these out independently, autonomously and on the basis of current Luxembourg legislation. Vinçotte Luxembourg has the necessary authorisations for all activities in these fields.

Our missions include

Checking the conformity of buildings and technical facilities to ensure the workplace health & safety.

The compilation of expert opinions, taking into account all standards, guidelines and directives in the fields of health & safety, the environment, sustainable development and building quality.

Optimisation and protection of employee health and the environment.

Duties

We keep our promises.

Promised.

For our customers and their staff, one thing counts above all else when working with us: 100% reliability. For this reason, we attach great importance to transparency and verifiability of our work.

We pledge:

To ensure the independence of our expert opinions at all times and to comply with all laws.

To focus our activities primarily on health & safety, quality development and environmental protection.

To complete each of our projects in line with our high-quality standards and to ensure the best possible quality in all our services.

To support our customers and their projects as equals and in close dialogue.

To handle all information provided confidentially.

History

Reliable.

By tradition.

1872

In 1872, Robert Vinçotte was commissioned by a group of industrialists to improve the safety of their pressure vessels. At that time, steam was a key means of propulsion in industry. Vinçotte soon extended his work to other machines.

1890

In 1890, Henri Adan founded the AIB (Association des Industriels de Belgique). The company’s objectives included research into accident prevention and the implementation of related workplace measures. The AIB activities thus both competed with and complemented those of Vinçotte.

The 1930’s

In 1938, Vinçotte started performing radiographic tests on pressure vessels and other pressurised containers.

The 1940’s

When the General Occupational Safety and Health Regulation was drawn up in 1947, AIB and Vinçotte already had extensive experience in the health & safety and inspection field, resulting in the competent ministers accrediting them to oversee the correct application of most of its provisions.

The 1960’s

In the 1960s, AIB organised the first international congresses on the non-destructive testing of materials and on workplace health & safety. At that time, Vinçotte was mainly active in the fields of lifting equipment and electricity.

The 1980’s

On 29 August 1986, the companies signed an association agreement, with the new association operating under the name AIBLUX asbl. Internationally, AIB and Vinçotte continued to expand, becoming global players in the field of health & safety. In 1989, the two companies merged.

The 1990’s

AIBLUX became AIB Vinçotte Luxembourg asbl in 1990.

2004

AIB Vinçotte became Vinçotte.

2023

Vinçotte Luxembourg now has 100 employees working side by side with our customers and partners. Together with more than 10,000 engineers and specialists belonging to the Vinçotte & Kiwa Group, they are committed to protecting the environment, safety and quality.