michel

andreenko

and ukrainian artists in paris

The current permanent collection arrival as a refugee in 1923 until

exhibition highlights twentieth- his death in 1982. These include

century artist Michel [Mychajlo] Alexis Gritchenko [Ukr.: Oleksa

Andreenko (1894-1982) and work Hryshchenko] (1883-1977), Sophia

by a selection of his contemporary Zarytska [-Omelchenko] (1887 or

1903-1972), Severyn

Borachok (1898-1975),

Mykola Hlushchenko

(1901-1977), Mykola

Butovych (1895-1961),

Mykhailo Moroz (1902-

1993), Andriy Solohub

(1922-2010), Liuboslav

Hutsaliuk (1923-2003)

and Themostocle

Wirsta (1923-2017).

Andreenko exhibited

with some of these

artists repeatedly,

others once, or not

at all. They were

friends, acquaintances,

and professional

colleagues whose

work and lives

intersected - through

a complicated network

of exhibitions, cultural/

national affinity,

and professional

support, over a long

period of extremes.

War, displacement

from home, loss of

possessions, property,

and economic security

were experiences they

shared in common, just

Alexis Gritchenko [Oleksa Hryshchenko], as several of these artists were

Untitled (A street in Spain) (1934), Oil on born early enough to have lived

canvas, 18 x 11.33”, Gift of Mr. Bohdan Kow- through both the first and second

alsky

World Wars, such as Andreenko,

Ukrainian peers, with whom he others only the second. Among

crossed paths during his near 60- the older, Gritchenko, Zarytska,

year residency in Paris, from his Borachok and Hlushchenko

exhibited with Andreenko multiple abstraction. Different styles by the

times before World War II, while same artist, are also presented,

Butovych and Moroz, only once such as Zarytska’s bending

in Lviv in 1931. Solohub, Hutsaliuk erratic abstraction of a figure

and Wirsta arrived in the 1950s hung alongside two intimate,

and were colleagues and friends. monochromatic green forest

This exhibition offers a glimpse landscapes, as well as Borachok’s

into their own artistic styles, fauvist still life displayed next to a

some slightly similar, but most café scene of a social realist bent.

quite different, ranging from Andreenko himself is represented

street and landscape scenes by two abstract works, an undated

representationally interpreted by oil and late period lithograph from

Gritchenko to those by Hutsaliuk 1977, emblematic of the geometric

and Solohub, visualized through forms and compositions with

both painterly and geometrically which his modernism became

oriented abstractions. Moroz’s distinguished.

landscapes focus on broad

strokes of pigment capturing Andreenko, like numerous artists

the effects of light. Expressive from Eastern Europe, gravitated

color characterizes the work of towards Montparnasse,

Wirsta as well as Hlushchenko, generally situated in the 14th

yet their interests, technique and arrondissement or district in

subjects are vastly apart. Wirsta’s Paris’ Left Bank. The area had a

bursts of bright expressive color history as an artist neighborhood

and textured brushwork seem since the mid-19th century, when

to thoughtfully evoke the music French artists clustered there,

he often played while painting. and over time, attracted others.

Hlushchenko’s abstracted Private art schools or académies

interpretations of flowers depart run by artists were commonly

far from their original subject, available, among them the noted

drawing our attention rather Académie Colarossi and nearby

to the movement of his delicate Académie Grande Chaumière. By

brushstrokes across the picture the late 19th century, Americans

plane, and only slightly suggesting were more apparent, and in the

a bud, a petal perhaps through 20th century, up until the 1930s,

a gentle touch of color. Butovich foreigners made up some 30 to 40

is represented by his late career percent of the district’s artists. To

1

watercolors of witches, based give it further perspective, Paris

on Ukrainian folklore, boldly alone was reported home to some

colorful and evocative in their 40,000 artists in the 1920s. One

2

1 Mary Blume, “Marie Vassilief: A Splash of Montparnasse Color,” The New York Times, Oct. 3,

1998.

2 Vita Susak, Ukrainian Artists in Paris, 1900-1939, Kyiv: Rodovid Press, 2010, p. 97. Susak’s

volume provides the most complete study on the subject to date.

could live and rent studio space Rooms to some tenants, as Vita

in Montparnasse cheaply, albeit Susak noted, resembled elongated

many of low standard, without coffins, and the corridors often

running water or electricity. The shared with mice and rats, with

complex La Ruche [the Beehive] roaming cats to catch them.

3

was one example. The brainchild Alexander Archipenko, who lived

of French sculptor Alfred Boucher there for a year, from 1908 until

(1850-1934), it was constructed of 1909, himself struggling for money,

remaining structural elements described it as “living inside a

Gruyère cheese”.

4

After World War I, the largest influx

of artists came from the former

Russian Empire and Eastern

Europe, primarily refugees,

among the over 45,000 displaced

by World War I. Many were poor

5

or impoverished, having lost

belongings, income and family,

and found the generosity of

neighborhood café owners such as

those at La Rotonde, comforting,

where patrons could pay their

bill with artwork, often displayed

and then returned once monetary

payment became available. It was

into these general circumstances

that Andreenko would have likely

found himself when he arrived in

December of 1923. His extensive

Seweryn Boraczok [Severyn Borachok],

Women in Café (1960s), Oil on canvas , 20 art training in a variety of media

x 16”, Gift of Mr. Bohdan Kowalsky and in theater served him well in

finding work as an art restorer,

from 1900 World’s Fair pavilions in stage decorator for theater, ballet

an effort to provide artist housing. and film, in addition to creating

3 Ibid, p. 29.

4 Ibid.

5 Maria Rubins, “Introduction: Russian Montparnasse as a Transnational Community,” in

Russian Montparnasse: Transnational Writing in Interwar Paris, Palgrave Macmillan, Hound-

mills, Basingstoke, Hampshire, UK; New York, NY: 2015, p. 1. Numbers of refugees are probably

higher, and official papers only designated citizenship, not cultural membership. Thus, one’s

government papers would have likely identified those arriving from the former Russian Em-

pire as Russian, denoting their citizenship within the Empire, however, this did not mean they

were Russian. They could be Russian, but also Ukrainian, Georgian, Lithuanian, etc. Eastern

Europeans outside the borders of the Russian Empire, are also excluded.

art. In 1925, he participated in in 1925, after graduating from

the “Exhibition of 33 Russian the Berlin Academy of Art a year

Artists” at Café de La Rotonde, earlier. A Soviet citizen, he worked

which included paintings and as “chief artist for trade and

sculptures by Hlushchenko, industrial exhibitions mounted by

Natalia Goncharova, Mikhail the Soviet Union abroad,”

6

Larionov, and Sergei Charchoune and advocated for socialist aims

(1888-1975) among others. in Paris. He hosted numerous

Charchoune, a noted Russian

Dada poet as well as a

painter, would become

one of Andreenko’s

closest friends. In 1926,

Andreenko sent work

to the International

Theater Exhibition in New

York, and the following

year, through the

organizational efforts

of Mykola Hlushchenko,

participated in the “All-

Ukrainian Exhibition for

the 10th Anniversary of

the October Revolution,”

in Kharkiv-Kyiv-Odessa.

Liuboslav Hutsaliuk, Untitled (Abstract)

(1952), Oil on canvas, 21.5 x 28.75”, Gift of

Opportunities of course, Mr. Bohdan Kowalsky

presented themselves at different

times for different artists. Alexis gatherings at his studio which

Gritchenko, about eleven years included artists and dignitaries,

older than Andreenko and as well as many Russian and

established before World War Ukrainian emigres. His networking

I, had arrived in 1921 and by 1923 skills and organizational aptitude

had sold 14 works through his benefitted Ukrainian artists in

new gallery dealer to millionaire sending their work to Lviv for

Albert C. Barnes, a chemist the major 1931 exhibition at the

who had come to Paris on an newly formed Association of

art buying spree for his new Independent Ukrainian Artists

museum, the Barnes Foundation, or ANUM in addition to others.

in Merion, Pennsylvania. However, his placement in Paris

Gritchenko continued to have a worked to his advantage as a

number of solo exhibitions as did Soviet agent, a position he held

Hlushchenko, who had arrived through his residency there until

6 Susak, p. 122.

1936, when he returned to the a student. He was joined by his

Soviet Union. Unlike Andreenko, peers from the Krakow Academy

7

Gritchenko or Hlushchenko, of Arts in Poland which he began

attending in 1920. Called

the Kapists, abbreviated

for the Paris Committee

of Relief for Students

Leaving for Artistic

Studies in France in

Polish, they focused on

colorism and especially

its development in the

work of French artist

Pierre Bonnard. Borachok

distinguished himself as

a colorist at that time,

particularly in the Neo-

Impressionist idiom.

8

Mykola Butovych

and Mykhajlo Moroz,

arrived in Paris in 1928

but didn’t stay long.

Butovych was pursuing

a dream, wanting to

try the “artistic mecca”

and see what would

develop professionally,

9

having been awarded

a two-year stipend

from the Ukrainian Scientific

Mykola Butovich, Ukrainian Witch (1960),

Watercolor on paper, 14 x 11”, Gift of Mr. Institute in Berlin, while Moroz had

Bohdan Kowalsky been awarded a Metropolitan

Sheptytsky scholarship from Lviv

Severyn Borachok arrived in to pursue his art studies with

Paris in 1924 with the idealism of fellow artists Sviatoslav Hordynsky

7 The full details of Hlushchenko’s activity have yet to be made public, however, it appears

he was recruited officially in 1926 and assumed the name ‘Yarema’. See Oleksandr Skrypnyk,“

The Famous Ukrainian artist and Intelligence Agent Mykola Glushchenko reported to Stalin

of Hitler’s Preparations for War against the Soviet Union as far back as June, 1940,” Foreign

Intelligence Service of Ukraine, https://szru.gov.ua/en/news/publications/the-famous-

ukrainian-artist-and-intelligence-agent-mykola-glushchenko-reported-to-stalin-of-hitlers-

preparations-for-war-against-the-soviet-union-as-far-back-as-june-1940.

8 Susak, p. 168.

9 Oleksandr Fedoruk, Mykola Butovych Zhyttia I Tvorchist, Kyiv-New York: M.P. Kotz, 2002, p.

63.

(1906-1993) and Vasyl Diadyniuk of Arts before moving to Paris.

(1900-1944). Although the artists Others also arriving via Prague,

10

knew each other in Paris, little is although not represented in this

documented of those exchanges. UIMA exhibition, included Vasyl

Butovych’s experience there was Khmeliuk (1901-1986), in 1928, and

mixed. He sold a painting at the Mykola Krychevsky (1898-1961)

1928 Salon d’Automne entitled in 1929, also via Prague. Vasyl

Dance, and had worked on a series Perebyinis (1896-1966) had moved

of sketches of scenes of Paris, for in 1927, having studied briefly with

transfer to etchings. However, Krychevsky’s uncle Fedir at the

11

his expectations of the city Ukrainian Academy of Arts in Kyiv

were met with disappointment, in 1918. Ivan Babij (1896-after 1949)

primarily from lack of funds and moved to Paris in 1925 by way of

the realization that most artists Berlin, becoming a very successful

needed to take on commercial, portraitist, and three years earlier

art industry related jobs, even in 1922, Mane Mané-Katz (1894-

forging antiquities to make ends 1962), who became known for his

meet. Montparnasse was filled paintings of Jewish life. As more

12

with artists, some successfully Ukrainian artists appeared on the

selling work from street displays, Paris scene, a sense of needing to

yet for Butovych, the art itself organize an association offering

catered to what was fashionable, economic and cultural support

and generally lacked inherent grew among some of the artists. In

substance or soul. 13 1929, the Association of Ukrainian

Artists in Paris was established,

Throughout the 1920s, the number with Andreenko a board member.

of Ukrainian artists in Paris grew, of Activities were divided among

which we’ve seen some examples theater, cinema, plastic arts, music

above. Just as Moroz was taking and dance. Andreenko consulted

classes at various schools in Paris, for the theater section, however,

such as the Académie Julian, and the organization was short lived

the École Nationale Supériere and disbanded in 1931. A more

14

d”Arts et Métiers, Sophia Zarytska effective association emerged in

arrived with her artist husband, 1930, with its first exhibition in 1931,

Petro Omelchenko (1894-1952) as the Association of Independent

in 1928. They had met in Prague Ukrainian Artists (ANUM) in Lviv.

where they both studied at Many of the Parisian residents

the Ukrainian School of Plastic were members or participants

Art, and the Prague Academy in the exhibitions, which lasted

10 Metropolitan Archbishop Andriy Sheptytsky (1865-1944) was head of the Ukrainian Greek

Catholic Church from 1901-1944. In addition to his tenure there, he was an active and dedi-

cated supporter of Ukrainian cultural endeavors, including art.

11 Ibid, p. 64.

12 Mykola Butovych, ‘Monparnas,” Mystetstvo/L’Art, Vol. 1, (Spring 1932), p. 22.

13 Ibid, p. 21.

14 See Susak, pp. 178-179.

until the association disbanded Khmeliuk, Perebyinis, Krychevsky,

in 1939. The first exhibition was a Borachok, Moroz and Mykola

massive undertaking, organized Butovych. Some had already

by Sviatoslav Hordynsky with the exhibited together in Paris, at

assistance of Hlushchenko and Galerie Hirshman that spring,

Perebyinis and others. It featured with the exception of Gritchenko,

15

116 works by 42 artists – Ukrainian Butovych and Moroz, and the

addition of Babij and Mané-Katz.

The exhibit was multinational and

included Severini who had been

associated with the avant-garde

Italian Futurists before World War

I, among others less known today.

The activities of ANUM seriously

promoted their members, through

regular exhibitions– there were

fourteen in all, “six monographs,

a collection entitled Ex Libris, and

five issues of Mystetstvo (Art),”

17

an art magazine featuring timely

articles and criticism, on a range of

European artistic developments

of the day. The first issue, for

example, featured notable

avant-garde artists, Emil Nolde,

George Grosz, Franz Marc, Pablo

Picasso and others, in addition to

articles on Ukrainian 17c graphics,

art conservation practices, a

translation of De Stijl artist and

Sofia Zarytska [Omelchenko], Untitled theoretician Theo Van Doesburg’s

(Male Figure) (nd.), Oil on paperboard, 15 x

12”, Gift of Dr. and Mrs. Adrian Kesala 1918 “Notes on Monumental Art

with Reference to Two Fragments

artists working in Paris, as well as of a Building”, and enamel

prominent French, Belgian and work by artist Maria Dolnytska.

Italian artists, such as Picasso, Two figurative sculptures of

Chagall, Severini, Gromaire, composers by Evhen Archipenko,

Modigliani, and Derain. Among Alexander Archipenko’s brother,

16

the Ukrainians from Paris, were also included. Andreenko,

18

were Andreenko, Gritchenko, Hlushchenko, Gritchenko each

Hlushchenko, Zarytska, Perebyinis, had monographs published, and

15 Ibid, p. 183.

16 Ibid, pp. 182-187 for details of this exhibition and subsequent activity of ANUM.

17 Ibid, p. 181.

18 The issue is downloadable at http://uartlib.org/zhurnali/mistetstvo-lart-1-1932/.

the latter two, solo exhibitions

as well. The success of the 1931

exhibition led to another in

1932, with a prequel in Paris at

Galerie Marseilles before its Lviv

National Museum venue in winter

of 1933. Andreenko exhibited

with fifteen of the ‘Paris group of

Ukrainian Artists’ featured there,

with Borachok, Hlushchenko,

Hryshchenko, Krychevsky, Petro

Omelchenko and his wife Sophia

Zarytska, Vasyl Khmeluk, his wife Mykhailo Moroz, Catskill Mountains (1963),

Marie Antoinette-Chaperon Oil on canvas, 20 x 24 ”, Gift of Dr. and Mrs.

and Sophia Levytska, all of Adrian Kesala

whom were shown with a group

of artists from France and Italy The 1930s gradually saw a

including Severini, Andre Lhote, diminishing of exhibition activity

Raoul Dufy, and others. As before, overall in Paris, as the impact of

Ukrainian artists were paired the 1929 American stock market

with French and Italian, and crash and subsequent Depression

the cooperative arrangement drastically reduced travel,

among national groups met with tourism, and the availability of

funds to buy art, not only for

wealthy American travelers of

the 1920s, such as Barnes, but

worldwide. Andreenko himself

moved to a smaller apartment on

Rue Vaugirard, workable also as

a studio, in an effort to downsize

his expenditures. He shifted his

work from geometric abstraction

towards representation, bearing

affinities with Surrealism. The

changing political climate of

Europe and ensuing outbreak

Themostocle Wirsta, Paris (nd.), Acrylic on of World War II with Germany’s

board, 11 x 14.25”, Gift of Drs. Daria and

Jaroslaw Myndiuk invasion of Poland in 1939,

overturned daily life not only

favorable reviews in Lviv, where during the war years themselves,

19

the interrelationship of European but during reconstruction in the

artistic developments was years that followed, well into the

affirmed. 1950s. Andreenko successfully hid

19 Susak, pp. 185-186.

his wife Rikla, who was Jewish, in New York in 1949. He became a U.S.

their apartment from Nazi’s and citizen and enrolled at the

their sympathizers in Paris during

the war, others like Wirsta, whose Cooper Union School of Art where

family left their western Ukrainian he graduated in 1954. He spent

home in Bukovina for Romania, the following year in Paris until

kept moving from one location 1956, returning in 1958-59, taking

to another, attempting to stay a studio on Rue Vaugirard, where

he divided time working

there and New York.

Unlike Hutsaliuk, Wirsta

and Solohub made

Paris their final home.

Both continued to study

art after they arrived

while also establishing

themselves economically,

a phenomenon common

to refugees. Wirsta

retold of his early days

of painting Parisian

landmarks from the

Andriy Solohub, Boats, (1950), Oil on can- sidewalk, such as Notre

vas, 20 x 28”, Gift of Mr. Bohdan Kowalsky Dame, in the hope of making a

sale to someone passing-by, and

steps ahead of incarceration and of taking work as a decorator for

death, before peacetime became film, and other jobs. His work was

20

a reality. Solohub was taken to figurative primarily at the time, and

work in German labor camps he was interested in sculpture as

before resettlement in a displaced well. His commitment to engaging

persons camp in Salzburg in 1945, with the art of his day however,

and Hutsaliuk, after fighting in particularly modern art and its

the war and becoming wounded, contemporary developments,

moved to multiple displacement led him to abandon figuration

camps before moving to Munich in for abstraction, beginning in

1946. 1957-58. Solohub enrolled at the

National Academy of Fine Arts,

It was out of this context, similar continuing art studies he had

to Andreenko’s own during World begun in Salzburg. Andreenko

War I, that many artists found himself, continued his Vanishing

their way to Paris - Wirsta and Paris series, but also travelled

Solohub in 1950 and Hutsaliuk by extensively in Spain in 1955 and

1955, having emigrated first to then Northern Europe in 1957,

20 Jean-Francois Drouard, Wirsta, Itineraire d’un Peintre, Paris: Editions P.I.U.F. et le groupe

Reflets, p. 87

immersing himself in his work in Michel Andreenko and Ukrainian

what became a very productive Artists in Paris is curated by

period. During that time, and Adrienne Kochman, in anticipation

certainly by 1956, he had returned of the exhibition Michel

to non-representational painting. Andreenko:Revisited. A survey

of his career–from theatrical set

Andreenko’s work was included in designs and non-representational

a number of museum exhibitions in work of the 1920s, surrealistic

Western Europe focusing on non naturalism, his Vanishing Paris

objectivity and early 20th century Mykola Hlushchenko, Untitled (1965),

abstract art, as well as stage Monotype on paper, 14.5 x 21”, Gift of Mr.

design, all of which were being Bohdan Kowalsky

reappraised by Western scholars series of the 1940s-1950s and

in the 1960s and 70s. He also return to non-representation in

had several solo gallery exhibits. the mid-1950s will be represented

In 1964, he published his first through the largest collection

story, ‘Mice’ in the Munich-based of his work in the United States,

Ukrainian journal Suchasnist loaned by Drs. Alexandra and

[Modern Times], increasingly Andrew Ilkiw. The exhibition,

devoting himself to writing – on postponed a year due to the

the artist and the importance pandemic, will open in Spring 2021.

of honing his craft, his European A catalogue is already available

travels from an artist’s perspective through UIMA.

and short story fiction. He passed

away in 1982.

Front cover: Michel [Mychajlo] Andreenko-Nechytailo, Untitled (1962), Lithograph on

paper, 20 x 25”, Gift of Dr. and Mrs. Mychajlo Holowaty