A solemn academy dedicated to the memory of the outstanding British translator of the Ukrainian literature in English, poetess Vera Rich took place on April 24, 2017 in the Mirror Hall of the Ivan Franko National University of Lviv.

The Rector of Lviv University, Professor Volodymyr Melnyk congratulated the participants. He thanked everyone who joins the popularization of the creative heritage of the British interpreter.

“This is really a unique phenomenon when a person logging into the intellectual and cultural context of our nation, made great efforts to promote and implement heritage of famous Ukrainians into the cultural and scientific world heritage”, said Volodymyr Melnyk.

In addition, the Rector expressed his belief that the life and career of Vera Rich is a prime example that Europe is not separated from the Ukrainian intellectual thought and takes it to parity, on equal basis.

Chairman of the Shevchenko Scientific Society Roman Kushnir emphasized the invaluable contribution of Vera Rich into the process of spreading “the treasures of Ukrainian philology, poetry and creativity in the English-speaking world”.

The Executor of the Estate of Vera Rich, a member of the Kingston University Senate in London, Dr. Alan Flowers shared his opinion and explorations about Vera Rich’s identity and facts from the life of translator connected with the patronage of St. George. Then Alan Flowers and Volodymyr Melnyk presented the Memorial Icon (carved by Petro Pelekh), which will later be installed in the Belarusian Greek Catholic Church in London.

Deputy Dean of the Faculty of Foreign Languages Lina Hlushchenko focused on the brilliant translations of Taras Shevchenko and other classics of Ukrainian literature by Vera Rich. “This brilliant woman devoted her entire life to the promotion of Ukrainian culture abroad, to combining two worlds: English- and Ukrainian-speaking,” said Lina Hlushchenko.

According to the Lina Hlushchenko, providing translation of Ukrainian texts into English and other languages should be a strategic objective of the state, which seeks to enter the international arena.

Later, Academician of Higher School of Ukraine, Head of the Hryhoriy Kochur Department of Translation Studies and Contrastive Linguistics, Professor Roksolana Zorivchak briefly presented the main stages of the creative activity and life of the prominent British translator, and students and staff of the Faculty of Foreign Languages recited poetry by classic and contemporary Ukrainian authors in translations by Vera Rich.

In addition, Professor Andriy Sodomora and other representatives of the Faculty of Foreign Languages – all those for whom the prominent British lady is an example of tireless work, great talent and devoted love for Ukraine – shared the memories about the translator.

The highlight of the event was the awarding of winners of the annual competition of student works “Vera Rich: Talent and Devotion”. In “Poetic Translation” nomination (for the best Ukrainian translations of “Elizabeth the Wise-King’s daughter” by Vera Rich), the victory came to Liliya Yakym. Second place was awarded to Olha Shchyrba, and Aliona Derdel became the third. In the nomination “Translation Studies Analysis” (for the deepest analysis of an extract (Canto XVIII) from the poem “Lord’s Jests” by Ivan Franko in Vera Rich’s translation), the winner was Valeriya Khashhachyk. Second place was awarded to Mariya Bondarenko, the third came to Serhiy Malaiko.