The recent death of Australia's greatest motor racing identity, Sir Jack Brabham, brought to an end an extraordinary life which left an indelible mark on Western Australia.

Brabham's visits to WA as a competitor in the Australian Grand Prix at Caversham in 1957 and 1962 remain among the highlights of motor racing in this State.

In the five short years between those two visits, Brabham's career changed dramatically.

When he came to race his Cooper Climax T41 at Caversham in 1957, Brabham had already been immersed in the European racing scene for two years.

He had by that time dabbled in Formula One and, although it was clear he was going places very fast, he was also still an ambitious young colonial with no Formula One wins to his name.

In the 1957 AGP at Caversham, Brabham nonetheless fared well, finishing third behind winner Lex Davison in a Ferrari 625 and Stan Jones in a Maserati 250F.

By the time Brabham returned to Caversham for the Australian Grand Prix in 1962, he had won the Formula One World Drivers' Championship twice - in 1959 and 1960.

Ironically, late in the 1962 Caversham race, the now more-worldly Brabham suffered a crash with a slower car he was lapping, which forced him to retire on the 50th lap.

For thousands of West Australians, having world-class drivers such Brabham and his contemporaries racing at Caversham was a huge deal and many retain fond memories of this period in WA motorsport history.

So much so that in 2009 the Vintage Sports Car Club arranged for the Caversham circuit to be kept as a bushland reserve which in 2009 was named after Brabham. In 2011, a new nearby suburb became Brabham, named in his honour.

Brabham's race results during the European off-season at this old World War II airfield near the most isolated city in the world were insignificant compared to what he had already achieved on the world stage.

Even then, he hadn't peaked. That would come in 1966, when Brabham secured his third world drivers' championship win in a car he built.

Brabham famously remains the only driver to have won a Formula One World Championship in a car of his own construction.

The car Brabham used for most of that winning 1966 season, the one and only Repco V8-powered BT19, now resides in the National Sports Museum in Melbourne.

The Motor Museum at Whiteman Park has assembled a display dedicated to Brabham, including a beautifully restored Brabham BT18 racing car.

MOTOR MOMENTS

Today-Tomorrow

Carnival of Karts, Cockburn International Raceway, Henderson.

Racing from 9am both days. See tigerkartclub.com.au.

Tomorrow

Triumph Sports Owners Association of WA 40th Anniversary celebration. Houghtons Winery. Phone

0419 271 609 or email president@tsoa-wa.com.

May 31-June 1

Albany Classic. Mt Clarence Hillclimb and Round-the- Houses. See vsccwa.com.au

June 14-15

WA Hot Rod and Street Machine Spectacular, Claremont Showgrounds. Admission $20 adults. See wahotrodshow.com.au