INDIANAPOLIS (2016 FIBA Olympic Qualifying Tournaments) - Ian Mahinmi is having his best season in the NBA as the starting center for the Indiana Pacers. He has played so well that some believe he should play for France at the FIBA Olympic Qualifying Tournament (OQT) in Manila.

It's certainly something that he has been thinking about, donning the national team jersey. Because he is a free agent at the end of the season, though, everything is on hold for the 29-year-old.

Will he sign a new contract with Indiana or another team? Does France coach Vincent Collet envision Mahinmi, someone that has not played for the national team since the 2010 FIBA Basketball World Cup in Turkey, being in the Philippines? If Collet wants him, will Mahinmi sort out his NBA future in time to join the national side?

Mahinmi does want to play this summer for France. He speaks often with his fellow Frenchmen in the NBA. Trying to help his national team make it to the Rio de Janeiro Games is something he'd like to do.

"Yes, it is," he said to FIBA.com. "I have that in mind, that's for sure. But everybody knows that the tournament (OQT) is going to be around the same period as the beginning of free agency so it is a different situation from what we have been used to in the past. We are going to find a solution at the end of the NBA season."

Mahinmi has been in the NBA for nearly a decade. He signed with the San Antonio Spurs in 2007 after they selected him with the 28th pick in that summer's draft. After a couple of seasons in San Antonio and another pair of campaigns with the Dallas Mavericks, he joined the Pacers in 2012.

The Rouen-born pivot has made the most of his time as a starter for Indiana this season, averaging 9.1 points and 7.2 rebounds per game. He is playing important minutes - 30.2mpg in his last 10 games.

The 2.11m Mahinmi has had some very big performances, too. One of his best came in a narrow Pacers' triumph on 27 March at home against Houston when he equalled a career-high in scoring by pouring in 19 points. He also corralled 11 rebounds in that win.

"A lot of things are different when you are a starter," he said. "It's great because it's a better opportunity of showing what you can do but it is also good as you improve more on the chemistry with your teammates and you gain so much experience."

After starting in most of the games this season, I feel that the chemistry with the other starters is way better and we understand each other better on the court now. It's a big difference in comparison to the previous years of my career. - Mahinmi

By being productive, Mahinmi has positioned himself to get a very good contract. He doesn't know where he will be in 2016-17.

"I try not to think about it and to just stay focused on helping the team reach the play-offs," he said.

What about next year? Who will he sign with in the free agency period?

"A lot of people ask me about it, but I am just trying for now to stay focused on having the best season I can with the Pacers," he said.

If Mahinmi doesn't yet know about his availability for France, something he is certain of is that the OQT is going to be difficult to win. Collet's squad will play in Group B with New Zealand and the Philippines and if they advance to the Semi-Finals, they will face Canada, Senegal or Turkey. The two Semi-Final winners will battle for a spot in the Rio Olympics.

"All the teams that are going to Manila are very competitive," Mahinmi said. "Canada, Turkey and the other teams can play very good basketball. It's going to be a tough fight, but I think Les Bleus have a lot of chances to have a good tournament. There is no other solution than going to the Philippines and winning the OQT."

And if things do work out and Mahinmi is able to feature for France, he is going to pull out all stops to help the national team make it to Rio. Playing at an Olympic Games is one of his aims.

It would be a dream come true. It would be great to have an opportunity to play and compete in Rio this summer. I would never say no to this kind of opportunity and things are going to be clearer at the end of the NBA season. - Mahinmi