Ian Mahinmi is a 30-year-old basketball player currently signed to the Washington Wizards.

For the past four years, Mahinmi has been married to Alexis Flores, with whom he has two children.

Here’s what you need to know about Ian Mahinmi’s wife, Alexis Flores.

1. She & Ian Were Married in July 2013

Alexis Flores and Ian Mahinmi were married in July 2013.

At the time, Mahinmi posted a photo from the wedding on his Twitter page, writing, “Thanks everybody for all the wedding wishes! Me and my beautiful wife are opening a new chapter in our life!”

The wedding took place in San Antonio, according to Pacers Blogs.

2. Ian Mahinmi Says Alexis Is His Queen

On his social media profiles, Ian Mahinmi frequently refers to his wife as his queen.

Recently, on Mother’s Day 2017, Mahinmi posted, “Happy Mother’s Day my ??! In my kingdom every day is Mother’s Day !”

In April, Mahinmi posted a photo of his wife and wrote, “Miss my queen! San Antonio south side finest! My lotus flower!”

On New Year’s Eve 2016, Mahinmi wrote, “So happy to bring the new year with awesome friends and my Beautiful queen!”

In February 2016, Mahinmi referred to his wife using a different nickname, writing, “Back at it again with my little Latina.” That same month, he also referred to his wife as “my better half.”

On Mother’s Day 2016, Mahinmi said of his wife, “The best mother I could wish for my 2 beautiful princess. So thankful for what u do everyday for me Camille and Axelle! You are truly the key of our happiness, love you.”

3. She & Ian Have Two Daughters

In April 2012, Ian and Alexis had their first child together.

Camille Mahinmi was born on April 7th, 2012.

Since Ian Mahinmi refers to his wife as his queen, he has also referred to his daughter Camille as a princess.

Just a few weeks ago, Camille turned five. Ian Mahinmi celebrated the occasion by writing on Instagram, “Happy birthday my princess!!!! The big 5!!!!”

Ian Mahinmi and his wife also have another daughter, Axelle, who is turning two years old this July.

Axelle was born on July 20th, 2015. At the time, Mahinimi wrote on his Instagram page, “New addition to the crew!!! And it’s another princess/ Une nouvelle princesse viens d’arriver!”

4. In 2016, She & Ian Bought a $2.65 Million Home in Washington, D.C.

In 2016, Ian Mahinmi and his wife bought a home in Washington, D.C.

According to the Washington Business Journal, Ian and Alexis paid $2.65 million for a six-bedroom home in Cleveland Park in Washington, D.C.

This came a few months after Ian Mahinmi signed a four-year contract with the Washington Wizards worth $64 million.

5. She is Friends With C.J. Miles’ Wife

Alexis Flores is evidently close friends with some other wives of basketball players.

In 2016, Lauren Smith, the wife of C.J. Miles, said in an interview that she is good friends with Alexis Flores and that Flores helped her adjust to her new reality of being married to a celebrity.

“Alexis Mahinmi (wife of Indiana Pacer Ian Mahinmi) is definitely a person I look to learn from,” she said in the interview. “She’s been an NBA wife for several years now and she took me under her wing when I first got to Indiana and helped make the transition easier.”

Ian Mahinmi, of course, used to play for the Indiana Pacers until 2016, when he signed with the Washington Wizards.