PRINCESS ANNE — WESM 91.3 FM will begin a new weekly schedule Monday, June 29 in a move to deliver programming that has a broader global focus and coverage of issues that affect the state.

WESM is partnering with WYPR 88.1 in Baltimore to carry its flagship newsmagazine “Maryland Morning with Sheilah Kast.” The hour-long program will be simulcast on the Princess Anne-based NPR member station on Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays at 9 a.m. via a live feed from Baltimore, expanding WESM’s morning news coverage.

The program covers the state “from the Atlantic to the Appalachians probing beyond the news headlines, unraveling local implications of national news stories and exploring the science, history, arts and culture of Maryland.”

“We are grateful that WYPR has generously partnered with us to carry the ‘Maryland Morning’ program,” said Stephen Williams, WESM’s general manager. “We believe it will serve our audiences within the state, as well as the greater region’s need for thoughtful and relevant news programming. It also fits more closely with the goal of the station’s host institution, the University of Maryland Eastern Shore, to help foster globally-competent citizens.”

“WYPR is delighted that the thoughtful reporting that earned ‘Maryland Morning with Sheilah Kast’ a DuPont Award will be a cornerstone of WESM’s new sound,” said Tony Brandon, president and general manager of WYPR. “Our attention to statewide issues is already heard on WYPF in Frederick and WYPO in Ocean City, as well as in Baltimore, and we’re gratified that our partnership with WESM now brings it to a larger portion of the Eastern Shore.”

Award-winning journalist Tom Ashbrook’s two-hour weekday call in show, “On Point,” also debuts on WESM 91.3 FM starting Monday. The NPR News show produced by WBUR Boston features discussion and in-depth analysis of the day's biggest stories with feedback and reactions from callers. Other changes in the morning news lineup include a two-hour expansion of NPR’s “Morning Edition,” now starting at 5 a.m.; with the “BBC Newshour” airing Tuesdays and Thursdays at 9 a.m.

On the music side, “Jazz24” from KPLU in Seattle will begin airing overnights from 1-5 a.m. replacing “Jazz with Bob Parlocha.” Local music programs will expand in the afternoons, Williams said, with the debut of “Afternoon Jazz” Monday through Thursday, from noon to 4 p.m. and the addition of a new “Latin Jazz” program at 2 p.m. every Friday. Local host, Yancy Carrigan, rolls out the new “Evening Jazz Unlimited” weekdays from 7-10 p.m. The traditional Friday “Jazz Night in America” moves to 7 p.m.

Expansion of weekend news and information programming includes: NPR’s “Snap Judgment,” “Living on Earth,” “A Way With Words,” “Intelligence Squared” and “Weekend All Things Considered.”