ENGLEWOOD, Colo.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Sling TV unveiled new single-stream and multi-stream services, “Sling Orange” and “Sling Blue.” Sling Orange now includes BBC America and is still priced at $20 per month. Sling Blue now features NBC, USA, Bravo, NBC Sports Network (NBCSN), Syfy, BBC America and costs $25 per month for new customers. In addition, Sling has introduced a multi-service discount that brings Sling Orange and Sling Blue together for $40 per month. Additional NBCUniversal networks are available in Sling Blue’s Extra packs, including E!, CNBC, MSNBC, Oxygen, Golf and NBCUniverso.

“Consumers now have more than 100 channels to choose from as they customize their ideal television experience,” said Roger Lynch, CEO, Sling TV. “With our new multi-service option and NBC Universal programming, Sling is one of the few pay-TV options where value continues to improve.”

Sling TV Pricing Updates

Introduced as a “beta” service in April, Sling TV’s multi-stream service, Sling Blue, is now priced at $25 per month. Customers who signed up during the beta phase will receive the additional channels found in Sling Blue and their price will remain $20 per month with their current subscription.

The single-stream service, Sling Orange, remains priced at $20 per month.

Sling TV Programming Updates

Sling Orange and Sling Blue

Sling Orange and Sling Blue core services now include BBC America. For more information on BBC America, visit blog.sling.com.

Sling Blue

Sling Blue (multi-stream) is available to new customers for $25 per month and includes local NBC (for select markets), USA, Bravo, NBCSN and Syfy.

Sling Blue customers will have access to live, local NBC broadcast stations in the following 10 markets: Chicago, Dallas-Fort Worth, Hartford, Conn., Los Angeles, Miami, New York, Philadelphia, San Diego and Washington D.C. Access to on-demand programming will be available in a later update.

Regional Sports Networks for select markets (Comcast SportsNet: California, Bay Area, Chicago and Mid-Atlantic) coming soon.

Sling TV expects to add local content from NBC affiliates in the future on a market-by-market basis.

Sling Blue Extra Packs

Sling TV launched new networks across its Sling Blue Extras, each priced at $5 per month:

“Sports Extra” (New Extra Pack) – Golf Channel joins beIN Sports, Outside TV and Univision Deportes

“Lifestyle Plus Extra” – E!, Oxygen and Vibrant TV join VH1, Cooking Channel, DIY, FYI, WE tv and LMN

“World News Extra” – BBC World News, CNBC and MSNBC join HLN, euronews, France 24, News18, NDTV 24/7 and RT Network

“Best of Spanish TV” – NBCUniverso joins 24 other Spanish and bilingual channels

All other Extras for Sling Blue remain unchanged

Sling Orange Extra Packs

Sling TV launched new networks across its Sling Orange Extras, each priced at $5 per month:

“Lifestyle Plus Extra” – Vibrant TV joins VH1, BET, Cooking Channel, DIY, FYI, WE tv and LMN

“World News Extra” – BBC World News joins HLN, euronews, France 24, News18, NDTV 24x7, Fusion and RT Network

For a full list of Sling Orange and Sling Blue channel lineups, including Extras, visit http://news.sling.com/document-library/sling-tv-beta-multi-stream-service-channels.

Additional Sling TV updates

In addition to the Sling Orange and Sling Blue updates, Sling TV also made changes to its Spanish-language programming and packaging, “Best of Spanish TV.” For more information about these changes, visit blog.sling.com.

About Sling TV

Sling TV L.L.C., a subsidiary of DISH Network Corporation (NASDAQ: DISH), provides over-the-top television services, including domestic and international live and on-demand programming. It is available on televisions, tablets, computers, smartphones and other streaming devices. Sling TV offers two streaming services, which collectively include more than 100 channels and programming content from Disney/ESPN (single-stream service only), Fox (multi-stream service only), NBC (multi-stream service only), HBO®, AMC, A&E, Turner, Scripps, Viacom, EPIX and Univision. Additionally, Sling Latino offers a suite of standalone and add-on Spanish-language programming packages tailored to English-dominant, bilingual and Spanish-dominant U.S. households. Sling International currently provides more than 250 channels in 20 languages across multiple devices to U.S. households. Sling TV is a next-generation service that meets the entertainment needs of today’s contemporary viewers. Visit www.Sling.com.