ENGLEWOOD, Colo., July 16, 2024 – Sling TV announced today that it will offer a 4K viewing experience, starting with FOX Sports’ 25th broadcast of the MLB All-Star Game tonight. For the first time, Sling TV subscribers, in certain markets, can enjoy a live event in stunning 4K resolution, on supporting Roku and Amazon Fire TV devices.

“At Sling TV, we’re all about delivering the ultimate gameday experience,” said Seth Van Sickel, senior vice president, product & operations, Sling Video Services. “With live sports now in 4K, we’re upping our game and giving fans front-row seats to every thrilling moment. Get ready to see your favorite sports like never before, with crystal-clear action that brings you right into the heart of the play!”

Sling TV will continue to deliver unparalleled sports experiences with a lineup of top and most-watched sports available in 4K for no additional cost, like NBCUniversal’s 24/7 coverage of the 2024 Paris Olympics on USA Network, your favorite college and pro football games on FS1, ESPN and more.

Millions of households across America now own TVs with 4K capabilities. Sling TV’s new service offers viewers significantly enhanced video quality, making sports viewing more enjoyable and immersive.

Unlike some of the other streaming services, Sling TV provides 4K content for no additional fees, ensuring that users have access to the best sports experience without additional costs. Tune in to watch the MLB All-Star Baseball Game on FOX at 8pm ET/5pm PT live in 4K and stay tuned for more exciting sports content throughout the year.

The MLB All-Star Game in 4K will be available to Sling Blue customers in select markets.

For more information and additional 4K details visit sling.com/4k.

About SLING TV

SLING TV is an Emmy® Award-winning live streaming TV service that provides more than 700 channels from today's most popular networks across its general market, Latino and international services. It is available on all major streaming devices, smart televisions, tablets, game consoles, computers and smartphones. SLING TV offers two general market streaming services, SLING Orange and SLING Blue, that collectively feature content from Disney/ESPN, FOX, NBC, AMC, A&E, AXS, Discovery, Scripps, Turner, Viacom, NBA TV, NFL Network, NHL Network, GSN, Hallmark, SHOWTIME, STARZ and EPIX. SLING TV offers customers access to free content via Sling Freestream, à la carte channels and services, plus Pay-Per-View events and movies on-demand. SLING TV provides a suite of stand-alone and add-on Spanish-language services and packages tailored to English-dominant, bilingual and Spanish-dominant U.S. households. SLING TV is the leading U.S. provider of foreign-language programming, with more than 400 channels in 27 languages. Visit sling.com for more information. SLING TV L.L.C. is an indirect wholly-owned subsidiary of EchoStar Corporation (NASDAQ: SATS).