Dwight David Howard (born December 8, 1985) is an American professional basketball player for the Houston Rockets of the National Basketball Association (NBA). Howard, who usually plays center but can also play power forward, had an outstanding high school career at Southwest Atlanta Christian Academy. He chose to forgo college and entered the 2004 NBA Draft, and was selected first overall by the Orlando Magic. An eight-time All-Star, seven-time All-NBA team selection, five-time All-Defensive member, and three-time Defensive Player of the Year, Howard has been ranked consistently as one of the best in the league in rebounds, blocks, field goal percentage and free throw attempts, and has set numerous franchise and league records. He led the Magic to three division titles and one conference title, and he was the winner of the 2008 NBA Slam Dunk Contest. In the 2008 Olympics, he was the starting center for Team USA, which went on to win the gold medal. He was traded to the Los Angeles Lakers in 2012, and signed with the Houston Rockets in 2013.

Before he was drafted in 2004, Howard said that he wanted to use his NBA career and Christian faith to "raise the name of God within the league and throughout the world". In November 2009, he was named one of the 10 finalists for the Jefferson Awards for Public Service, which awards athletes for their charitable work.

In early July, Howard met with the Lakers, Dallas Mavericks, Houston Rockets, Golden State Warriors and Atlanta Hawks, and on July 5, 2013, announced via Twitter that he intended to sign with the Rockets. He officially signed with Houston on July 13, 2013, joining James Harden to form a formidable duo. With the Rockets, he was initially moved from center to power forward to make room for Ömer Aşık at center. However, Aşık was injured for most of the season, so Howard returned to playing the center position. In his first game for the Rockets, Howard recorded 17 points, a career high-tying 26 rebounds and 2 blocks in a 96-83 win over the Charlotte Bobcats. On March 4, Howard recorded his 545th career double-double, passing David Robinson. Howard finished the regular season with averages of 18.3 points and 12.2 rebounds per game. During the 2014 NBA playoffs, Howard averaged 26 points and 13.7 rebounds per game, but the Rockets were eliminated by the Portland Trail Blazers in the first round, losing the series 4-2. Howard was named to the All-NBA Second Team on June 4, 2014.