ORLANDO - Orlando Magic center Dwight Howard hasn't played in the City Beautiful in over a decade, but that could change soon.

Howard took to TikTok on Sunday, posting a video that revealed that he would want to retire with the Magic.

Howard was one of several former Magic players to visit Orlando this past weekend to support former coach Stan Van Gundy after his wife Kim passed away at the age of 61.

"Took a trip down to Orlando to support Stan," Howard said in his TikTok caption. "And meeting up with my old teammates got me emotiobal [sic]. Having a chance to go back where it all started was so amazing. I really missed this beautiful city. I appreciate all the amazing moments that make this my home, despite the miscommunication or trials we've been through. I am grateful for my lessons and what they have taught me. And I value them. Orlando I value you. I value the moments we had good and bad. Wins and losses. The s*** was still the best. Blue and white will always ignite."

Howard, the No. 1 overall pick in 2004, went to eight consecutive All-Star games in Orlando and has built one of the most impressive statistical resumés on both ends of the floor.

Van Gundy coached Howard from 2007-12 in Orlando, and while the pair had a questionable relationship ... especially at the end of his Magic tenure, it's clear that the respect is still there.

Since leaving the Magic, Howard has played for six different teams, including three one-year stints with the Los Angeles Lakers. Now that he's a journeyman, it's often easy to forget about how good "Superman" was when he played for the Magic.

This past season, Howard played in Taiwan with the Taoyuan Leopards.

At 37 years old, Howard doesn't have much basketball left in his career. But if he is open to returning to the NBA, the Magic may call him back home.

You can follow Jeremy Brener on Twitter @JeremyBrener.

Want the latest in breaking news and insider information on the Magic? Click Here.

Follow The Magic Insider on Facebook.

Follow The Magic Insider on Twitter.