Dwight Howard. What’s the first thing that comes to your mind when that name is mentioned? Maybe, its the Kobe and Dwight beef from back in the day. Perhaps, it’s his complete inability to have more than two post moves in his repertoire and still put up 22 PPG in his prime. Could be, his childlike nature and iconic smile with the superman cape he wore when he won the 2008 NBA dunk contest. Might be, his off the court drama with his many kids with many different women. You need to forget all that and realize how important Dwight Howard really was to the modern NBA. The concept of having a star-big man and surrounding him with elite shooters started with Dwight and the 2009 Orlando Magic squad he led to the finals.

In this era of pace and space, this Magic team would fit right in. In 2009, they were a team that had “accidentally” created a new style of basketball. Stan Van Gundy, the 2009 Magic coach, told Ringer’s Kevin Clark: “It wasn’t some revolutionary thought or some genius idea. It was: These are the players we have and the best way to play.”

In 2009, the Orlando Magic led the NBA in 3-point attempts per with 27.3 per game. Today, the 2019–20 league leader Houston Rockets, shoot a mind-boggling 44.2 3-pointers a game. The concept of the offense was simple enough, feed Dwight Howard in the post and surround him with shooters, so that he has space to operate in the post. The defense would be collapse on him, leaving some lethal shooters behind the line completely open. The inverse-Steph Curry gravity effect, if you will.

Dwight averaged 18 pts/13.2 rebs/1.8 asts that year along with DPOY winning defense. Along the way, his teammates also had career years. The lineup around Dwight Howard featured stretch bigs Rashard Lewis and Hedo Turkoglu who both stood at a towering 6-foot-10. The true predecessors to the Kevin Love and Kristap Porzingis of today. Along with them, renowned podcaster (lol) JJ Reddick and sharpshooter Courtney Lee helped space out the floor. Throw in an All-Star year from point guard Jameer Nelson and baby you got something special cooking. The result? The team shot 37.5% from 3-point land which was 3rd best in the entire NBA.

This style of play led them all the way to the NBA finals. They beat LeBron’s Cavaliers in six games in the Eastern Conference Finals. The Magic even prevented perhaps the most sought after finals matchup ever in Kobe’s Lakers vs from LeBron’s Cavaliers at that time from happening. Fun fact, LeBron James has beaten every single team in the Eastern Conference in the playoffs (besides the teams he played for) except for the Orlando Magic.

They faced an absolute gauntlet of teams who they beat from the star-studded Celtics ( who lacked KG in the playoffs) to LeBron’s Cavs who had won 66 games in the regular season. In the finals, they faced a Lakers team that had lost in 6 games in the finals the previous year and were out for blood. Ultimately, the Lakers were too much for the Magic and won the series in six games.

The end result of not winning the finals makes us forget how unique and before their time the 2009 Orlando Magic squad really was. Their style of play forced LeBron James out of his comfort zone. Stan Van Gundy, the 2009 Magic coach, told Ringer’s Kevin Clark: “Our theory defensively, we wanted him to be more of a scorer and less of a guy to help those guys play well. Those other guys needed LeBron to play well. He put up absolutely huge numbers, but we had more overall talent.” LeBron averaged 35 pts/8 rebs/8 asts, but it didn’t matter because his teammates suffered without him setting them up. The Cavaliers only shot 32 pct from three that series.

On the offensive end, they barraged the Cavaliers with a spaced floor full of shooters and a prime Dwight Howard. As a team, they averaged 40 pct from 3-point land. The Magic shot an astounding 48 pct FG while averaging about 104 PPG against a Cavaliers team that only let opponents shoot 44 pct FG and score 96 PPG in the regular season.

Lost in the spur of the 3-point evolution and Morey ball, the 2009 Orlando Magic were the hidden innovators. The blueprint they set on the teams in the current iteration of the league can be seen today. For example, the current record-breaking Bucks essentially play the same style of play with Giannis playing the Dwight role. So, next time you see some Dwight Howard/Magic slander on the timeline make sure to tell timeline how important they really were to the modern NBA.