Dwight Howard is the type of player who is constantly criticsed and derided when his name is considered next to the big men that went before them. When Howard’s name is brought up in a conversation with a player like Shaquille O’Neal or Kareem Abdul Jabbar, Dwight Howard is shit on. Dwight may not be the player he was today but many people are quick to forget that the Wizards centre was one of the dominant players at his peak.

In 2004, Orlando was facing a bleak situation as their attempt at a super-team had fallen apart. Tracy McGrady had skipped town, Grant Hill was stuck on the treatment table and Tim Duncan had refused to complete an otherworldly trio four years earlier. The team needed a win in the draft as they had done in the draft when they took Penny Hardaway and Shaq in the early 1990s. Orlando had gone 21–61 during the regular season and lost their best player for the remnants of Steve Francis and Cuttino Mobley.

Dwight Howard was an interesting prospect coming out of Southwest Atlanta Christian Academy, he was a lanky big men who was fast enough to play the guard position in high school. Dwight Howard had led his high school team to a 31–2 record while averaging 25/18/4 and eight blocks per game. The athleticism of Howard was unheard for a prospect who played a front-court position, the only comparable player for Howard was Shaquille O’Neal. Both players had the same explosiveness but the key difference was that Dwight was a defensive presence foremost rather than being a dominant scorer.

In terms of instant impact, Dwight was brilliant. He averaged twelve points and ten rebounds for his first season as rookie who had previously only played at a high school level. Howard was the youngest player to ever average a double-double, it spoke to his athletic abilities before he even developed a skillset fit for the NBA. Howard was a large part in improving Orlando’s record by fifteen wins in comparison to the previous season with Tracy McGrady. That season also laid the foundations for Orlando’s future.

In 2004, Orlando had a factory reset, they moved on Tracy McGrady, the former franchise centerpiece while bringing in talented young players. Dwight Howard was the foremost young player acquired but Orlando also acquired Jameer Nelson through the draft and Hedo Turkoglu through free agency. By the end of the season, these players began to come through and finally there was stability with the appointment of Brian Hill.

In the off-season of 2005, Brian Hill went to work in terms of developing Dwight Howard’s game. In 2005, basketball still wanted forwards who could bang down low and while Dwight was physically adept at scoring in the post, he was raw from a skills perspective. Brian Hill worked on Howard’s post-moves and had Dwight put on twenty pounds of muscle so he would not be bullied by players like Shaquille O’Neal or Kevin Garnett in the post.

The effect of Dwight Howard’s development was stunning, he became a legitimate force in the middle who could rebound with the best and get buckets. Howard increased his scoring average, rebounding and assist numbers compared to his previous season. While this should be expected from a sophomore player, it was impressive how Dwight achieved this goal. For large stretches of the season, Grant Hill was injured as was Jameer Nelson for a solid month due to a foot injury. Dwight had to become more aggressive and carry a heavy burden because the alternative was an erratic Steve Francis. He was a rookie who led the team with his scoring and rebounding, it should also be noted that Dwight did not struggle with the attitude problems that plagued him in his later career.

Over the last five years, D12 had cultivated a reputation for himself that speaks to his worst attributes, the immaturity and ego that Howard has in spades. The most prominent example of Howard’s ego getting in the way of his abilities as a basketball player was the Cold War that existed between himself and James Harden on the Houston Rockets. Dwight Howard had a growing tension with James Harden as he felt that the system should run through the post and wanted a lot post touches in a game. Dwight did not want to run pick and roll offence as he felt it did not maximise his talents as a player. The tensions between the two players culminated in Howard bringing his statsheet into the locker-room to complain about his touches and James Harden refusing to interact with the rest of the team.

It seemed that in this case, Howard had destroyed an entire team culture in one go which eventually resulted in Dwight leaving in free agency, Kevin McHale retiring from coaching and James Harden being freed to play as he wanted. If this was an isolated incident, this tension between Howard and Harden could be explained by the difference in personality between the two players but Howard has previous for off-the court issues.

For most Orlando, the ‘Dwightmare’ came after an improbable rise to the top. The young core which had been built by Otis Smith came to roost under Stan Van Gundy. The Magic brought in Rashard Lewis and moved Dwight Howard to the centre where he was a wrecking ball. In 2009, Howard was simply unstoppable in the post, he was supremely athletic while being experienced enough to beat any player one on one. He had elevated his level of play to an MVP standard, in 2009 he averaged twenty points, fourteen rebounds and three blocks per game. He was a top-level two-way player who finally had the right talent around him.

Jameer Nelson was a steady hand at the point who could be relied on to feed the post and knock down outside shots, JJ Redick was a pure shooter, Hedo was the team’s glue while Rashard played the stretch-four to perfection. In terms of pure talent and fit, the 2009 Orlando Magic were pretty perfect in terms of versatility. The team could score inside/outside while being dominant defensively. The team was also coached to perfection.

Stan Van Gundy despite his relative inexperience as a head coach was able to design a system that managed to enable all of the talents that Howard had. The four-out, one-in system meant that Howard had plenty of space to work due to the fact defences were stretched out as they tried to cover four perimeter-oriented players. The system also gave Howard plenty of options, he could score down-low or kick the ball out to a waiting shooter like JJ Redick who could knock down shots with great efficiency.

The correct system with personnel who accepted Howard as the team captain meant that Orlando had their most successful season since the all-too brief Shaq-Penny partnership. Orlando made the Finals on the back off Dwight Howard’s outstanding player, he was simply a machine that could not be stopped. The one team who had the Magic on the ropes was the Boston Celtics but Dwight managed to fight through the Big Three to drag the Magic to the Finals. The Magic broke some records, they broke the Celtics 32–0 home record when leading a series with their victory in Game 7 and were the last team to beat a LeBron-led team in the ECF.

However, the Orlando Magic could not win a championship on the back of Howard’s contributions. In the Finals, the relatively inexperienced Magic could not contend with the battle-hardened Lakers who had made the Finals the previous year. The Lakers had already won a ring and knew how to win a second ring with tough defensive play that managed to neuter Howard. The athletic Andrew Bynum and Pau Gasol took D12 out of his rhythm and the Magic struggled to score key buckets when it counted. That was the key difference between the two teams, the Lakers had that experience and players like Kobe and Pau who could get clutch-time buckets, on the Magic they did not necessarily have that type of player.

The three-season stretch from 2008 to 2010 was rewarding for Dwight Howard on a personal level. He won defensive player of the year three times in a row and the Magic were consistently contenders who could feasibly win a championship. It just did not happen for the Magic and eventually Dwight became frustrated with the leadership in Orlando.

It should be important that for a player who was as highly regarded for Dwight, there was an expectation that he would win a championship like all of the greats who came before him. Shaq, David Robinson and Kevin Garnett had all won championships and yet Dwight couldn’t. It became hugely frustrating to Dwight that he could not lead the Magic to a championship and therefore the ‘Dwightmare’ happened.

The ‘Dwightmare’ is a term that is used to describe the prolonged and painful departure from the Orlando Magic for Dwight Howard. There were also reports that Howard had become frustrated with management officials like Stan Van Gundy and Otis Smith for not sufficiently improving the team so that it was a legitimate contender. Dwight wanted SVG to run a system that primarily fed off post-ups rather than the four-in, one-out system which focused on moving the ball around the perimeter. This tension between coach and player eventually resulted in an awkward moment during a Van Gundy press conference where Howard embraced his coach as he told the media that Howard wanted him out.

The ‘Dwightmare’ did not solely revolve around clashes with the front-office, there was also remarkable indecision on the part of Howard. During the two years, Howard could not definitely decide whether he wanted to move with the Orlando Magic. He had requested trades to certain teams but then rescinded his request in order to sign a one-year contract extension. It meant that the Magic could not prepare for a future without Dwight, the front-office could not work out trades which would provide a sufficient return. By Howard declaring his desire to leave the Magic, it tanked his trade value which meant that teams like the New Jersey Nets or the Los Angeles Lakers were not willing to part with significant assets.

It should also be noted that this was a difficult point in Dwight’s life, he was in a dark place as he had been shunned by his community. Dwight as a player in the league had always been a strong proponent of his faith. He had went to a Christian highschool and slept under a Holy Bible as a child, it was clear that this was a pillar of his life. When Howard had a child out of wed-lock, his local church community shunned him and he lost this guiding light in his life. His descent continued with all of the media criticisms that Howard received, D12 wanted to be anybody but himself.

For Lakers, this was especially true. In Los Angeles, Howard seemed to be focused on emulating the great Laker big men, he did not want to be Dwight. He did not want to be the supremely athletic, charismatic big man who could take over games all by himself. Moreover, Howard seemed at odds with the rest of his team. Kobe thought that Howard was soft and Steve Nash did not like the constant complaining that he received from Howard during pick and roll plays. Dwight wanted to run the offence through his post-ups instead of Coach D’Antoni’s pick and roll system. It created tension between his team-mates who had all sacrificed to be on the Lakers, a team that could win a first championship for Steve Nash and a sixth for Kobe Bryant.

Dwight was also not the same player that he was during his Orlando days. The herniated disk he suffered in 2012 also took away some of the raw athletic ability that Howard had. He was not the same explosive giant which he had developed into for the Magic. All of these things together created an incredibly toxic atmosphere around the Lakers and a team which was expected to cruise through the season scraped into the play-offs as an eight seed. The Lakers were bounced in the first-round by the San Antonio Spurs and Howard would become an NBA drifter.

Dwight Howard today is now seen as damaged goods by front-offices, his immaturity and inability to be a serious NBA player has meant that his talent has been wasted. For most competitive teams, Howard is not a serious option due to the various locker-room issues that have arisen during his NBA career. In Houston, he had a Cold War with a future MVP, in Atlanta his team-mates became disillusioned with his personality and in Charlotte, many of Howard’s teammates felt he was a fraud in his attempt to lead. Moreover, Howard is a poor-fit for the current NBA, the post-up is antiquated and a centre who needs touches in the post is not useful. Dwight has not worked enough on his game to develop his weaknesses. D12 is still a below-average free throw shooter who cannot stretch the floor at all, he would be a dominant rim-runner but he still clings to the last vestiges of his personal success. He has not embraced change like Brook Lopez or Marc Gasol.

Howard will still likely be a Hall of Famer for the fact he won three DPOYs in a row and was a force in his prime. He was one of the only players in the league who was capable of beating LeBron in his prime and that should be merited when Howard’s career is discussed. It is a strange that such a talented player never made good due to locker-room issues. It is also incredibly strange that for a player who was so successful, Howard is disliked by many fans and players. Howard had experienced the highest of highs in the NBA and now he is regarded as a delusional washed-up star, the fall from grace has been huge.