Cardinal Lluís Martínez Sistach was born in Barcelona on April 29, 1937. He was ordained as a priest on September 17, 1961, after studying theology and philosophy. He was sent to Rome in 1962 to implement his studies on Canon Law, obtaining his PhD with a dissertation on "El derecho de Asociación en la Iglesia". In 1973 he was named judge of the Section 3 of the Ecclesiastical Court of Barcelona.

In 1979 Cardinal Narcís Jubany appointed him Vicar General of Barcelona. From 1970 to 1987 he worked as a Canon Law professor at the Facultad de Teología de Catalunya. In 1983 he was elected President of the Asociación Española de Canonistas. He has given several speeches in conferences and meetings about Civil and Canon Law. He was the Secretary of the Bishop´s Conference of Tarragona, where he was responsible for youth ministry, health ministry and relations with the orders and religious congregations in the area of Catalonia.

On June 15, 2004 he was named First Archbishop of Barcelona by Pope John Paul II. On October 17, 2007, Pope Benedict XVI announced his appointment as a Cardinal. He was elected President of the Bishops Commission for Legal Affairs in 1990 and re-elected for four consecutive three-year periods. He is the President of the Bishops Commission for Liturgy and a member of the Standing Committee of the Spanish Bishops Conference. He has been a member of the Pontifical Council for the Laity since 1996, Pontifical Council for Legislative Texts since 2002, Supremo Tribunale della Segnatura Apostolica since 2006 and of the Prefecture for the Economic Affairs of the Holy See since 2009.

He is Grand Chancellor of the Facultad de Teología and the Facultad de Filosofía de Catalunya. He is Doctor honoris causa by the Universidad Católica Mater et Magistra, Santiago de los Caballeros (Dominican Republic) and by the Pontifical Faculty of Theology in Warsaw (Poland) as well.

Furthermore, since the publication of his doctoral dissertation in 1973 he has kept on writing, emphasizing within his numerous works, books, articles and lectures, about the relations between Church and State.

Cardinal and Archbishop of Barcelona.

President of the Bishops Commission for Liturgy and a member of the Standing Committee of the Spanish Bishops Conference.

Grand Chancellor of the Facultad de Teología and the Facultad de Filosofía de Catalunya.

Doctor honoris causa by the Universidad Católica Mater et Magistra, Santiago de los Caballeros (Dominican Republic) and by the Pontifical Faculty of Theology in Warsaw (Poland) as well.

Return