Looking for recommendations on bands & albums that were classified as post-rock after the term came into being in the mid 90s. I’m good on:

Talk Talk - Spirit Of Eden

Slint - Tweez

What do you know, folks?

For those who want a more general definition of Post Rock:

Post-rock - Wikipedia

For those who want to a definitely incomplete list of Post-Rock pioneers:

Post-rock - Wikipedia

Ideally, I'm looking for 80s (or earlier) acts that could today be considered Post Rock.

Thanks all!

Talk Talk

Slint

This Heat

Savage Republic

PiL

The Durutti Column

Bark Psychosis

Pram

Seefeel (maybe)

Stereolab (if we stretch the term a little)

Dif Juz (maybe)

Glenn Branca (?)

Generally speaking it's not so easy to pinpoint this proto-post genre apart from Slint of course which are the obvious answer every time this question is asked.

Thanks Nikolaos!

While I was reading this thread, I was listening to Pat Metheny's "As Falls Wichita, So Falls Wichita Falls". I would never label it as post-rock of course but just listen to the introduction and you'll see that there were certain things already present across many genres as back as the start of the 80s and even earlier. Also the title of this is so Constelation-style that is funny.

A lot of West German music of the 70's sounds distinctly post rock to these ears. Can and Cluster have already been mentioned but Neu! and Harmonia also fit the bill. Harmonia were a collaboration between members of Cluster and Neu! so no surprise there. Check out the music of Harmonia and Eno.

The question for me becomes; can the same elements of a song be described by two or more styles (genres)? I know styles can be mixed, but that would be multiple elements.

In another thread about pre-shoegaze influences, this (see below) was posted and it had a very similar sound to the description of post rock. Can it be both?

Dif Juz- "Mi" (1981)

What about the center section of the Wipers- "Youth of America" that starts around 2:50, or even the whole song?

Wipers- "Youth of America" (1981)

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YaUzYISKKAI