Post-rock is one of the most commonly discussed genres of music in the realm of /mu/. By definition, post-rock is essentially the use of standard "rock" instruments (Drums, guitar, bass, keyboard), utilized to create rhythms, textures, and timbre not associated with normal rock. Most post-rock lack vocals. Some believe that the only reason why post rock is popular amongst the indie crowd is due to its obscurity and its very apparent differences from contemporary music, therefore somehow gaining the listener more "indie cred." It's suggested that you ignore this crowd.

Origins[]

Most believe the term was coined by music critic Simon Reynolds, who had used the term whilst reviewing Hex by Bark Psychosis. He further elaborated on his new term by describing it as "using rock instrumentation for non-rock purposes, using guitars as facilitators of timbre and textures rather than riffs and power chords."

Most post rock is influenced by the drone/noise artist of the past, such as Sonic Youth and the Velvet Underground.

The "first wave" of post-rock was brought by Slint's Spiderland and Talk Talk's Spirit of Eden. Spiderland had more of a "hardcore" influence whilst Spirit of Eden was a bit more "art-rock" at its core. These two variables have influenced the genre, with bands such as Swans utilizing the hardcore aspect and other acts like Explosions in the Sky utilizing a more "art-rock" approach.

As the nineties went on, more and more post-rock bands emerged. The use of vocals had dropped in the middle of the second wave, with almost no bands singing except for Sigur Ros and Mogwai. Post rock was especially popular in Eastern Canada, which brought us some of the genre's most prominent bands in Godspeed You! Black Emperor and Do Make Say Think.

Despite the badmouthing by critics, post-rock still maintained popularity by the early 2000s, with such groundbreaking releases coming out such as Sigur Ros' Ágætis byrjun, GY!BE's Lift Yr Skinny Fists Like Antennas to Heaven, and other such albums. To this day, the musical genius masses on /mu/ still argue over the genre via pointless flow charts and yelling at each other. The "third wave" of post-rock inspired by Explosions in the Sky is a highly contentious subject.

Popular Post-Rock Acts[]