Duke University is a private university located in North Carolina. It is a research institution founded in 1838. It is funded by the Duke family of American tycoons. There is also support from the state as well.

There are 256 buildings on the campus of Duke University, which consists of 4 main zones. The west campus is considered the main campus.

History of Duke University

The history of Duke University is not that long. It was founded by two Christian groups in 1838 in North Carolina, since then it has changed several names. At the end of the 19th century, it was renamed at the request of the head of one of the colleges in gratitude to Washington Duke, an American tycoon whose donations greatly contributed to the development of the university. Washington Duke bequeathed 100,000 USD with the wish that the university open its doors to women and guarantee full equality.

Subsequently, his son James Duke continued the work of funding the university by founding the Duke Foundation. Duke Graduate School opened in 1926.

Over the past three years, Duke University has risen significantly in many rankings (both national and global). In addition, being a private university, Duke receives quite high funding (the program conducted in 2003 brought the university over $2 billion).

The university consists of the following colleges: Trinity (arts and humanities), Pratt (engineering), Nicholas (natural resources and ecology), Sanford (political science), as well as schools of law and medicine.

Specialties and tuition

Duke University offers students 46 majors in arts and sciences, 4 engineering majors, 52 minors, and two programs that will allow you to create your own business in the future. Not to be overlooked is the availability of 24 program certificates that open up many opportunities. As statistics show, almost 85% of students choose Trinity College for their studies, the rest prefer Pratt School of Engineering.

As for research, the university is actively investing in this direction, state as of 2015 it has invested more than 1037 billion dollars in this university offshoot.

The cost of education at the bachelor’s and master’s programs for residents of the country is not more than 20 thousand dollars.

Foreigners can expect to pay for an academic year in the amount of 47,488 dollars – at the bachelor’s level, and 43 thousand dollars – at the master’s level. Including the costs of accommodation, food and other everyday trifles, a foreigner will need to have at least 65 thousand dollars for a year of study. In this case, qualified experts UP-STUDY recommend looking at universities in Poland, which offer many areas of study, quality European diploma and a fairly loyal cost.

To summarize, it is worth noting that Duke University is a promising university that provides an opportunity to study and conduct research. Has many scientific achievements and conveniently arranged classrooms that contribute to the development of its students and researchers. It helps students in international exchange programs and allows them to get scholarships. However, it is not the only interesting university, so there are many alternatives.