Although it is no secret that Scarlett Johansson has been married since 2020, fans are still curious to learn more about her husband, Colin Jost. Spanning almost two decades, the couple’s journey together is quite interesting.

Here’s everything you need to know about Colin Jost, including his age, as well as how the two met.

Who is Scarlett Johansson married to?

Scarlett Johansson is married to Colin Jost, who has been an SNL staff writer since 2005.

Also a comedian and actor, Colin Jost is the co-anchor of the Weekend Update segment on SNL since 2014. He was born and raised in New York City, and pursued his majors in history and literature from Harvard University.

Apart from being an SNL staple, Colin Jost has appeared as a stand-up comic in several TV shows and also co-hosted the 2018 Primetime Emmy Awards.

What is Colin Jost’s age and height?

Colin Jost is currently 41 years old and will turn 42 on June 29, 2024.

Speaking of Jost’s height, he stands 1.79 meters tall, which is roughly 5 feet and 10 inches, as per IMDb. Scarlett Johansson and her husband have an age difference of around 2 years, with the actress currently being 39.

How did Scarlett Johansson and Colin Jost meet?

Scarlett Johansson and Colin Jost first met in 2006 when she first hosted SNL.

Johansson shared with The Hollywood Reporter that she got to know him well in 2010. The two collaborated when she performed one of the sketches he wrote for SNL. However, the news of Johansson and Jost being a couple first surfaced much later in 2017, when Page Six reported that they were spotted kissing at the SNL season finale afterparty.

Soon after, they went public with their relationship in the same year at the American Museum of Natural History Gala. Scarlett Johansson and Colin Jost got engaged two years later in 2019, and their wedding was in October 2020. The two have a son named Cosmo, whom they welcomed back in 2021.

Bridgerton Season 3 Episode 4 Ending Explained: Who Does Penelope Marry?

Marry My Husband Episode 2 Trailer: Park Min-Young Initiates Her Revenge Plan To Change Destiny

When Is The Met Gala 2024? Date and Time Revealed

EXO Fan Meeting 2024: Date and Lineup of K-Pop Group’s Concert Revealed

K-Dramas Like Wonderful World: Marry My Husband, The Glory & More