Scarlett Johansson has spoken candidly about her marriage to Ryan Reynolds.

The Avengers actress was married to the Canadian actor from 2008 to 2011 after they began dating in 2007. During their relationship, the actors were notoriously private, rarely photographed together and opted not to speak about each other much in interviews.

Johansson reflected on her youth in her first marriage and the different way she interpreted exchanging vows compared to now in a new interview with Vanity Fair, though did not mention the Deadpool actor by name.

Reynolds and Johansson at the Tony Awards in June 2010

'I mean, the first time I got married I was 23 years old,' she told the magazine. 'I didn’t really have an understanding of marriage.

'Maybe I kind of romanticised it, I think, in a way.'

After announcing their divorce in December, 2010 - through a joint statement affirming their continued 'love and kindness' for each other - Johansson found love again with French journalist Romain Dauriac, who she married in 2014 though separated from three years later.

Around the time of her divorce from Dauriac, who she shares a five-year-old daughter with, Johansson met with director Noah Baumbach who was writing the script for a new film Marriage Story about a couple going through a divorce.

With Dauriac in April 2017

'I had some kind of shared experience with the character, or with any person going through a divorce, really,' Johansson said. 'I understood the bittersweetness of it somehow, in a way. All those kind of in-between feelings that the character has. I understood them because I had gone through them myself.'

In the upcoming Netflix film - which has already released an emotional trailer - Johansson plays Nicole who is in the midst of a divorce from her husband Charlie, played by Adam Driver. The couple share a child too, which Johansson explains she could relate to more as she co-parents her daughter with Dauriac.

'Understanding what it is to co-parent—that’s a very specific thing,' she says candidly. 'It’s hard to raise a child with someone you’re no longer with. It’s not probably how it’s "supposed to be"—in quotes—or whatever…. But, you know, I think my ex and I do it as well as we can. You have to prioritise your child and not put yourself in the middle. It has its challenges.'

Johansson is now soon to be wed to her boyfriend of two years Saturday Night Live actor Colin Jost after they became engaged in May. She displayed her impressive pear-shaped engagement ring recently at the annual Comic-Con festival.

With fiance, Jost

The 35-year-old reflected on what she's learned about marriage now, after going through her experiences of divorce and finding love again.

'It’s a different part of my life now,' she said, in comparison to the first marriage with Reynolds. 'I feel like I’m in a place in my life [where] I’m able to make more active choices. I’m more present, I think, than I’ve been before.'

Just last weekend, Reynolds - who has been married to Blake Lively since 2012 and shares three daughters with the Gossip Girl actress - made a surprise cameo on SNL where he shared the screen with Jost on 'Weekend Update,' demonstrating the amicable position of all the adults involved.

Kudos to them, we say.