Scarlett Johansson offered a rare comment on her marriage to Ryan Reynolds, during an appearance on Gwyneth Paltrow’s Goop podcast.

The Marvel actress, 38, married the Deadpool star, 46, in 2008 after around a year of dating, but they eventually split in 2010 – with their divorce finalized in 2011.

Lifting the lid on her love life in the candid chat with her Iron Man 2 co-star, she described her first husband as a ‘good guy’.

‘You’ve been married two times?’ the host, 50, asked, to which she corrected: ‘Three times.’

‘Oh that’s right, because I forgot that you were married to Ryan Reynolds! Goals,’ Gwyneth laughed.

‘Yes! We weren’t married very long, but we were married when I first met you, for Iron Man or whatever,’ Scarlett explained.

Clearly a fan of the actor, Gwyneth added: ‘We love a good Ryan Reynolds in our house.’

Scarlett simply agreed: ‘He’s a good guy.’

Following their marriage, the He’s Just Not That Into You actress walked down the aisle with Romain Dauriac – who she shares daughter Rose with – in 2014, before tying the knot for the third time with Colin Jost in 2020, welcoming their son Cosmo the next year.

While Ryan went on to marry Blake Lively in 2012, with the couple recently welcoming their fourth child together.

Elsewhere on the podcast, Gwyneth questioned her guest on how her view on marriage had changed over the years, and what she had learned through the partnerships.

‘It’s funny. I knew Colin for a long time, but only through work. And when we first started seeing other, I would never have probably been ready for a relationship like the one that I have with Colin, at different times in my life,’ she continued.

‘Because I wasn’t comfortable with setting my own boundaries, and I didn’t know what I wanted or needed from somebody else.

‘One of the things that I realized is that there are certain fundamental things in your own personality that you need – for me, anyway – I needed to share with the other person.

‘Obviously, it’s hard to be in a relationship anyway because you have to compromise all the time and sometimes your lives separate and come back together,

‘I never realized, “Oh, it’s really important for me, I need to be with a compassionate person. That’s a fundamental characteristic that has to be there”.

‘Understanding what those fundamental things are that you need in a partner is a must – for longevity, anyway.

‘Identifying those things was a game-changer for me.’

‘That’s why it worked with Colin and I at that time,’ she added. ‘I was finally able to step back and actually respect myself enough to know what those things were and be okay with it. That was a life lesson.’

Got a story?

If you’ve got a celebrity story, video or pictures get in touch with the Metro.co.uk entertainment team by emailing us celebtips@metro.co.uk, calling 020 3615 2145 or by visiting our Submit Stuff page – we’d love to hear from you.

MORE : Director Dexter Fletcher promises Chris Evans fans get to see actor in whole new way in Ghosted: ‘It’s flipping expectations!’