Scarlett Johansson Discusses Why She Divorced Ex Ryan Reynolds

Ryan Reynolds and Scarlett Johansson were briefly married from 2008-2011.

By Chad Langen |

Ryan Reynolds, the star of Deadpool 3, has been happily married to Blake Lively since 2012, but he was previously married to Scarlett Johansson. Despite their divorce, according to Entertainment Weekly, the Black Widow star spoke highly of Reynolds during a recent chat with Gwyneth Paltrow on the Goop Podcast. Johansson corrected Paltrow when asked if she had been married twice, revealing she had been married three times, with Reynolds being one of her former spouses.

“Oh that’s right,” said Gwyneth Paltrow. “I forgot that you were married to Ryan Reynolds.” Considering how brief Scarlett Johansson’s marriage to Reynolds was, it’s easy to understand how the relationship slipped Paltrow’s mind.

Ryan Reynolds and Scarlett Johansson were married from 2008 to 2011. Following their divorce, Johansson tied the knot with French journalist Romain Dauriac in 2014, but the couple ended their marriage just three years later. Since 2020, the 38-year-old actress has been married to Colin Jost, the host of Saturday Night Live Weekend Update.

“We weren’t married very long, but we were when I first met you for Iron Man or whatever,” said Scarlett Johansson. In 2010’s Iron Man 2, Gwyneth Paltrow reprised her role as Pepper Potts, while Scarlett Johansson made her debut in the Marvel Cinematic Universe as Natasha Romanoff. In the film, Paltrow’s character serves as the personal assistant to Tony Stark (Robert Downey Jr.), and Johansson’s character introduces herself as a Russian spy hired to keep an eye on Stark.

Later in the podcast, Gwyneth Paltrow asked Scarlett Johansson for her thoughts on marriage and long-term relationships. Johansson responded by saying, “I think one of the things I realized is that there are certain fundamental things in your own personality that you need – me, anyway – I needed to share with the other person.” Johansson seemed to indicate that when she married Ryan Reynolds, she was too young and inexperienced to fully understand what she wanted in a relationship.

Despite the short-lived nature of their marriage, Ryan Reynolds and Scarlett Johansson seem to hold no ill will towards one another. Gwyneth Paltrow even expressed her admiration for the actor, saying, “We love a good Ryan in our house.” Johansson responded by stating that Reynolds is a “goody guy.”

Ryan Reynolds is currently preparing to make his debut in the Marvel Cinematic Universe as Wade Wilson in Deadpool 3, while Scarlett Johansson is set to star in the upcoming romantic comedy Asteroid City. The film, which is scheduled to arrive in theaters this June, was directed by acclaimed filmmaker Wes Anderson. The story revolves around the itinerary of a Junior Stargazer convention that is spectacularly disrupted by world-changing events.

While Ryan Reynolds’ MCU journey is only just getting started, Scarlett Johansson has indicated that she’s done with Marvel. During her appearance on the Goop Podcast, she told Gwyneth Paltrow that she has put that chapter of her career behind her. After making her first appearance as Natasha Romanoff/Black Widow in Iron Man 2 and returning as the character in eight additional MCU movies, it’s safe to say Johansson deserves a break.

Of course, virtually anything is possible in the Marvel Cinematic Universe. We’d be lying if we told you that we weren’t holding out hope for Ryan Reynold’s Deadpool to meet Scarlett Johansson’s Black Widow in a future MCU movie. The witty exchanges between the two characters would undoubtedly result in an entertaining on-screen pairing loaded with laughs and intense action sequences.