Scarlett Johansson recently praised her ex-husband Ryan Reynolds. The actress dated the Deadpool’ star before marrying him in 2008, which lasted until 2011.

Reynolds later married Blake Lively in 2012 and the couple now shares four children together. While Johansson went on to marry French Journalist Romain Dauriac in 2014 before splitting in 2017. The two welcomed a daughter together.

While Johansson appeared on Gwyneth Paltrow’s Goop podcast Tuesday, the actress opened up about what she learned from being married three times. She also praised her ex-husband Reynolds in the process.

A good guy

“You’ve been married two times?” asked Paltrow, 50, as she began the discussion, to which Johansson responded, “Three times.”

“Oh, that’s right, because I forgot that you were married to Ryan Reynolds! Goals!” added Paltrow.

“Yes,” laughed Johansson. “We weren’t married very long, but we were when I first met you, for Iron Man [2] or whatever.”

“We love a good Ryan Reynolds in our house,” continued Paltrow, to which Johansson replied with a laugh, “He’s a good guy.”

However, Johansson has moved on from her previous relationships. She is now married to Saturday Night Live writer and star Colin Jost.

The couple tied the knot in an intimate ceremony in October 2020 and later welcomed their son Cosmo in August 2021.

Previous relationships

Paltrow later questioned Johansson on what she has learned from her previous relationships, Paltrow asked, “How has your shift towards marriage or long-term relationships changed? What have you learned?”

“It’s funny,” began Johansson. “I knew Colin for a long time, but only kind of through work. And when we first started seeing each other, I would never have probably been ready for a relationship like the one that I have with Colin at different times in my life because I wasn’t comfortable with setting my own boundaries, and I didn’t know what I wanted or needed from somebody else.”

She continued, “I think one of the things that I realized is that there are certain fundamental things in your own personality that you need — me, anyway, [that] I needed to share with the other person.”