Here are some examples of popular good bots used in enterprise applications today.

Chatbots

Chatbots simulate human conversation with artificial intelligence and machine learning (AI/ML) technologies. They can respond to queries on behalf of the customer support team. Highly intelligent chatbots like Amazon Alexa can converse naturally with humans. These chatbots are also known as knowledge chatbots.

Web crawlers

Web crawlers, or spiders, are search engine bots that scan and index webpages on the internet. They help search engines to produce a better search experience by extracting data to understand the structure and relevance of web content.

Scrapers

Scrapers, or web scraping crawlers, scan and download specific content on the internet. For example, ecommerce businesses use scraper bots to monitor live product prices on different retail platforms. Marketers use scrapers with natural language capabilities to run sentiment analysis on social media feeds.

Shopping bots

Shopping bots scan product prices on multiple websites to help customers find the best deals. A shopping bot can also send personalized recommendations on instant messenger apps.

Monitoring bots

Monitoring bots limit your exposure to security incidents by constantly scanning your systems for bugs and malicious software. They alert you to unusual web activity by collecting and analyzing user interaction data and web traffic. Some monitoring bots can also work alongside other bots, such as chatbots, to ensure they perform as intended.

Transaction bots

Transaction bots ensure payment details are in order before finalizing transactions on ecommerce sites. They check credit card details and personal data accuracy during checkout. These bots are built with highly secure features to protect sensitive financial data.

Also known as malware bots, malicious bots perform activities that create security risks for organizations. For example, they might disrupt operations, create unfair disadvantages, send out unwanted emails, or attempt unauthorized access to sensitive data. We give some common types of malicious bots below.

Download bots

Download bots are bots programmed to download software or applications automatically. This creates a false impression of popularity and helps the application rise in ranking charts. By using download bots, an application publisher expects to gain more visibility and attract real human subscribers.

Spambots

Spambots scrape the internet for email addresses, turn the gathered data into email lists, and send spam messages in large batches. Alternatively, a spambot can create false accounts and post messages on forums and social media. These bots can entice a human user to click on a compromised website or download unwanted files.

Ticketing bots

Ticketing bots scan websites to buy tickets at the lowest price only to later resell the tickets at a higher value to make a profit. The process is naturally automated and leaves the impression that a human is purchasing the ticket. While ticketing bots are regulated in some countries, the practice is considered unethical.

DDoS bots

Distributed denial of service (DDoS) bots are malicious programs used to perform a distributed denial of service (DDoS) attack. A DDoS attack is a malicious attempt to affect the availability of a targeted system, such as a website or application, to legitimate human users. Typically, DDoS bots generate large volumes of packets or requests that may overwhelm the target system.

Read how to protect against DDoS attacks »

Fraud bots

Fraud bots, or click fraud bots, use artificial intelligence to mimic human behavior to perform ad frauds. For example, a fraud bot automatically clicks on paid ads with plans to increase the ad revenue for the publisher. These fake clicks increase marketing expenditure without leading to real customers.

File-sharing bots

A file-sharing bot records frequent search terms on applications, messengers, or search engines. It then provides recommendations with unwanted links to malicious files or websites.

Social media bots

Social media bots, or social bots, generate false social media activity such as fake accounts, follows, likes, or comments. By imitating human activity on social media platforms, they spam content, boost popularity, or spread misinformation.

Botnet

A botnet is a group of malicious bots that works together in a coordinated manner. The group performs tasks that require a high volume of computing power and memory. In order to save costs, bot creators may attempt to install bots on network-connected devices that belong to others. In doing this, they can control the bots remotely and plan to utilize computing power without paying for it.