Format: Sega Mega Drive / Genesis Publisher: Electronic Arts Developer: Vectordean Release year: 1992 Genre: Platformer

Randomised Gaming reviewed the European Sega Mega Drive version of Rolo to the Rescue. It was played on both a Japanese NTSC Mega Drive at 60hz and a European PAL Mega Drive at 50hz.

So last week after a couple of delays, I finally set aside a whole day to play and video Rolo to the Rescue. With only four main worlds in the game and sixty fairly small levels it wasn't going to take more than a few hours or so I thought. Knowing that you could only see the true ending if the player freed all of Rolo's friends, I foolishly set about trying to finish every level in the game. The first world took about an hour to clear all the stages and things where looking good for this to be finished after lunch. Then, after I got halfway through the second world, I hit a level that redefines the word frustration. An hour and two hundred lives later I finally cleared it, by which point my sanity had long since left me and I was turning the air blue. At this point I realised it was going to be a very long day and little did I know that many of the levels were just going to get even harder.

I partly wondered if I had some twisted home brewed version of the game, with levels designed by fans of the series. After all, you only have to look at games like Super Mario Maker to see how fans, like to design insanely hard levels that suck the fun out of the franchise.

You will be seeing the continue screen an awful lot, unless you plan to cheat or hoard extra lives.

However, no this was an actual official level of the game, it was clear from this point onwards that many of the extra stages in Rolo to the Rescue had been designed by either a sadist or someone married to a dominatrix. Things then just went from bad to worse as the extra stages got harder and harder. One stage required you to perfectly time your jumps to dodge about ten flying bear traps that jump straight at you, another saw you being chased by about twenty ghosts, one miss timed jump and it was goodbye Rolo. While the progress required stages maintained a stable difficult, if you don't venture out into the extra stages you will only ever see the bad ending.

Something clearly Vectordean the developers realised and to squeeze out as much last ability as possible they just decided to make the game as hard as they could!

Right this review is getting a little ahead of itself at this point, so why don't we start at the beginning. Rolo to the Rescue is a game developed by a British studio called Vectordean who were best known, for the James Pond series of video games. Rolo to the Rescue even features a cameo from James Pond himself in Splash Gordon attire on one of the later stages. But this small cameo is the only real link between the two games.

James Pond's Moon mission cameo is a much needed chance to grab some extra lives, shame he doesn't stay to lend Rolo a hand.

From the opening sequence alone you can see the quality of the presentation and the in-game graphics. Rolo is clearly aimed at young children and the bright, bold colourful graphics clearly show this even if the game's difficult doesn't. All the animal characters have a very cute look with large eyes, huge smiles and colourful faces, even the enemies on the whole fall into this same design look. Bar the main villain McSmiley the ringmaster who has that classic Hanna-Barbera, Dick Dastardly look with the long moustache and top hat.

The backgrounds are also well drawn in this game and feature a number of layers of parallax scrolling to boot within them. As nice as they look they are a little over used at times and a variant design for the forest and desert wouldn't have gone a miss. The later city world, however, doesn't suffer from this problem as much, due to it featuring quite a large number of background themes including a haunted house, circus and city at night theme amongst others.

You have to give credit to the two artists who did the graphics, they did a superb job with the direction of the art. As Rolo's sprite artwork holds up well even today and has a very British look with how he is drawn. The character animation is also very fluid and just watching Rolo's run animation shows the care the developers took when drawing him. The game even has time to have a sense of humour, with Rolo adopting different hats to wear in the various world. Donning a Stetson in the wild west stages and an Safari explorer hat in the desert ones.

Despite the many flaws of Rolo to the Rescue, it's hard not to like his antics at times.

The gameplay itself is also very simple with the core of the game being little more than a straight up platformer. The twist here is that for Rolo to finish many of the levels he must first rescue all his friends. To do this Rolo must first find and defeat McSmiley on each level, doing so grants him a key which then allows him to free his caged up animal buddies. Once you have freed them all it's on to the stage exit. While early stages are little more than a race to the exit. Later stages require you to take control of your animal friends in order to finish the stage.

Rolo can keep three animal friends with him at any one time and each animal has a different ability. The bunny rabbit can jump super high, the beaver can swim in water, while the squirrel can climb and the mole can dig underground. All these skills will come into play on many of the later stages as you are often required to have your friends collect hidden puzzle pieces or access a part of a level Rolo himself cannot. A fifth friend the baby hedgehog at first starts life as an enemy of Rolo, but you can choose to reunite the baby hedgehog with its mother on one stage making all hedgehogs in-game friendly from then on after.

Not to be out done by his friends Rolo himself can obtain temporary power ups as well to help on certain levels. The vacuum cleaner allows Rolo to suck up items and a glass of lemonade allow him to squirt his enemies with water for a short while. One of the funnier power ups is the helium tank which sees Rolo become a giant floating balloon. All of which you will get very familiar with as you try to unlock all the missing puzzle sections of the world map needed to progress to the next level.

The world map, slowly reveals itself as you find the missing puzzle pieces on each stage.

There's a nice mix of platforming action and puzzles to solve in Rolo to the Rescue which on the whole isn't a bad mixture. The main challenge for the game comes from the fact that if anything hits Rolo he dies instantly. Each friend he finds grants him an extra hit, but at the start of any level where Rolo begins alone you have to be very careful. Spikes, however, use the Mega Man gaming law of kill anything they touch instantly. As with most of the classic platform games jumping on enemies allows Rolo to defeat then, which is surprisingly realistic for a game in the platform genre, as an elephant landing on just about anything in real life would crush it to death.

Here however, is where the first major problem with Rolo to the Rescue appears, as someone clearly didn't correctly check the collision of Rolo. As he has no hitboxes on his front legs only his back ones, meaning that if only his front legs touch an enemy or land on a platform, the enemy will hit you and you will fall straight through the platform. Rolo having no collision on half his sprite is a big problem, which makes jumping on some of the smaller platforms rather tricky. As you need to make sure his back legs hit any platform he jumps for. Unless you plan on taking Rolo for a pit diving exercise jumping into a bottomless pit. Trust me when I say Rolo to the Rescue is filled to the brim with instant death jumps in the later stages should you fail a jump.

This sadly is not the only issue with Rolo's jumping ability as he suffers from one of the cardinal sins of platform gaming or slip sliding away as I like to call. Yes, you've guessed it, Rolo's controls start sliding as soon as he finishes a jump, forcing the player to counter balance as soon as they land. This makes landing on really small platforms a nightmare, as you have no margin for error. The combination of these factors makes precision jumping rather tricky and that's not all the control issues either.

The age old quote “In this world nothing can be said to be certain, except death and taxes” need not apply for Rolo as he doesn't have to worry about taxes, but instead gets a double helping of certain death.

To round off this trio of problems, is the delay in the jump, as true to being a huge elephant Rolo takes a little while to get off the ground. Or to be more precise after pressing the jump button he takes a couple of frames to get off the ground. Which during the run animation gives you plenty of time to slide off a platform long before Rolo ever takes to the air, even after you have pressed the jump button. It's so bad in fact that you end up getting used to pressing the jump button long before you reach the end of the platform in order to jump at the correct point when Rolo does get there.

Yes, as you can imagine Rolo's jumping ability certainly makes for a unique platforming experience, one that will most likely see you banging your head against a brick wall in frustration. Assuming of course that you haven't already thrown your Rolo to the Rescue cartridge and/or Mega Drive at said brick wall at a high velocity.

There's also the small matter of the camera having a nasty habit of rising up as you jump, so you can't see the platform you're jumping to. Forcing you to memorise the distance between your current location and where you want to be, as the parallax scrolling prevents you from using a fixed reference point. Let's not worry about this issue too much however, as this game was clearly designed for sadist and most normal gamers at this point will likely be a quivering wreck in the corner screaming “please Rolo, no more, no more”. Makes you wonder why the ringmaster is so angry at Rolo, perhaps it's his night-time activity with the ringmistress which likely involves black leather and whips.

The roller coaster and mine cart sections provide a much welcome break from the standard platforming levels.

The underlying issue here is that the broken jumping mechanics combine with a deliberate attempt to make some levels incredibly hard, causes major problems. So much so the term difficultly spike doesn't even describe it correctly, this is more a mountainous spire of death. Meaning that only the most skilled and determined players will ever truly finish the game 100%. So if you don't have the patience of a saint you can forget about finishing it without cheating.

Clearly the difficultly is aimed at the bedroom locked children of the 90s, who would spend weeks on end playing and mastering the same game. Clearly the developers also knew this as well, as the game is packed with extra lives on almost every stage. In many ways the game clearly trolls the player as well, by putting extra lives just out of reach or by implying Rolo is mentally scarred forever if he doesn't save all his friends in the bad ending.

Clearly inspired by Disney's Dumbo, Rolo has also learned to fly with the help of Helium gas and no kids don't try this at home.

Smart players will even work out the stages, extra lives re-spawn on each time you load into the level. Indeed, in our case we found how to grab the three lives hidden on stage three (fall to the left side of the waterfall to find a secret teleport) and then we just repeated this stage over and over again until we had enough lives to hopefully finish the next level. For players that still struggle there is always the debug menu cheat, but when you have to resort to cheating in a game something is fundamentally broken. Partly this is likely down to the size of the game which with short levels and only four main worlds makes for a game you can finish on paper in a few hours. One playthrough video on the internet sees the whole game finished 100% in less than an hour.

There is some nice design in this game as well, the art looks great and the mechanics behind how Rolo's animal friends play is really good fun. It's just that the core part of the game is highly flawed, one point that is interesting is the rabbit character has perfect jumping collision with his feet, unlike Rolo. Suggesting that both characters may be using the same collision and it made us wonder if Rolo hadn't been the main player character originally. As the rabbit doesn't suffer from some of the jumping issues Rolo has.

Rolo's far from alone in his journey and you will have to call on his friends from time to time in order to finish a stage.

At this point it is worth mentioning the music, even if there isn't a huge amount in game. While the world map and boss battles have their own themes, most of the stages just draw from a selection of random tunes. They're nice enough to listen to, but the lack of different theme for different world rapidly causes you to lose interest in it. There's the odd unique fanfare when you first enter some worlds, but that's your lot. Once you've played the game for about an hour, you heard all the music in-game. The songs also tend to repeat on themselves very quick and after awhile of listing to them you may find yourself reaching for the mute button.

While the jumping may be rather flawed the rest of the movement controls work fine, Rolo can also run using the A button to speed through each level. However, the game was clearly designed to run at 50hz and not 60hz meaning that on an NTSC Mega Drive/Genesis it runs way too fast. Something that was never corrected by Vectordean in the Japanese or US version of the game either.

Bonus stages are a much needed chance to grab some extras lives or some old smelly socks depending how your luck goes with the present boxes.

While Rolo does have it flaws, there is still a lot to like in the game. The levels are packed full of secrets too find and the explorative side of the game works very well. It's always great to find a hidden cave full of extra lives or a shortcut to another world in the game. The boss battles are also nicely balanced as you fight the various members of the circus ranging from the clowns in a giant fire truck, the strongman and his weight and of course the final battle with the ringmaster. There's also a lot of charm with Rolo and his friends and the ability to have Rolo's buddies stand on his back is very funny to watch. The formats is all here for a truly great game, but the problems with the core game mechanics just bring it all crashing down.

Rolo to the Rescue would have been a game easy to recommend, had the flaws with the jumping controls been ironed out. As it stands, however, there are hundreds of platform games better than it. The 16bit era is full of games like Sonic, Rocket Knight Adventures and Ristar on the Sega Mega Drive which out classes Rolo in every area. There's just no room for a platform game where the jumping mechanic is heavily flawed. It's not impossible to finish the game, but it does feel like the developers, have tied your legs together, stuck a blindfold on you and suspended you from the ceiling. Before telling you “OK now jump to the other side of the room”. All in all it feels like there is a lot of needless effort required on your part in order to finish Rolo to the Rescue

Looking at Rolo to the Rescue you can't help feel a bit sorry for the artists who did a great job with the art style itself. It's just a shame the level designers felt the need to make many of the extra levels as obtusely hard as possible to increase the last ability. This coupled with the bad jumping controls makes for a game that just causes you to want to rip your hair out. I'm amazed the developers weren't violently dispatched by the quality assurance department, as this game would have driven just about anyone insane who had to play it for more than a month straight.

The boss battles are one of Rolo to the Rescue's high points and it would have been nice to see a few more in the game. Don't be fooled by the smiling faces of the clowns they mean business with that fire truck.

You do have to question what kind of monster would want to make a game that's this hard for children. To be fair to the developers Electronic Arts may well have been the ones to blame for the difficulty. The fact remains this game is insanely hard and this is coming from someone who has finished all the main Mario games 100% even that terrible final level at the end of Super Mario 3d World. Even Sonic Advance 2, which I reviewed previously, is not an easy game to fully clear, but we did so in the last review. Rolo to the Rescue takes the biscuit however, with levels that require hours of practice before you can clear them.

Don't be fooled by the cute graphics this is a game only platforming masters can truly finish. As much as I may want to champion British games design this is not its shining hour and while far from the worse platforming game ever made, it's not the best either. Vectordean's James Pond series has a lot to blame for this, as Robocod was just as hard as Rolo in the later stages. It's one of those series that was great as a child, but now that you look back on it, you realise it just wasn't very good to begin with. Sadly Rolo falls into the same category and he is best left to play with his friends on his own, as no one wants to be Rolo's whipping boy.

Review by Random Gamer Riven.

Twitter: RDGamerRiven

Email: randomgamerriven@gmail.com

The video version of this review can be watched here:

Follow Randomised Gaming on Tumblr, for video game, art, reviews, features, videos and more. You can alsofollow us on twitter and subscribe to us on YouTube for even more Randomised Gaming content.