n/a

This short article is in need of work. You can help Sega Retro by adding to it.

Rolo to the Rescue, called Zou! Zou! Zou! Rescue Daisakusen (ゾウ！ゾウ！ゾウ！ レスキュー大作戦) in Japan, is a 1992 platformer developed by Electronic Arts and Vectordean and released by Electronic Arts for the Sega Mega Drive.

Gameplay

The player controls Rolo, an elephant who must rescue his animal friends who have been locked up in cages scattered throughout various landscapes by poachers. The player starts out by choosing levels on a map screen. At the beginning of each level, they are told how many animals to rescue. Holding runs. jumps. Jumping on poachers will kill them. Getting hit by a poacher once will make the player lose a life. Some poachers carry the keys to open cages; once the player gets the key, they must simply touch a cage to open it. The animal inside will follow them. Once all the animals are freed, the player must find the exit sign to move on to the next level. Pressing START accesses a menu where the player can choose between Rolo and the animals he has collected, each having their own ability:

Rabbit: Jumps higher.

Beaver: Can survive water.

Mole: Digs through certain walls.

Squirrel: Climbs walls.

Some levels also contain vacuum cleaners; if Rolo collects these, he can hold to suck items into his trunk; once something is in his trunk, let go of , then press to fire that item at an enemy.

James Pond also makes a small cameo in the game.

Versions

Localised names

Also known as Language Localised Name English Translation English Rolo to the Rescue Rolo to the Rescue English (US) Rolo to the Rescue Rolo to the Rescue Japanese ゾウ！ゾウ！ゾウ！ レスキュー大作戦 Zou! Zou! Zou! Rescue Daisakusen

Production credits

Source:

In-game credits[11]

Magazine articles

Main article: Rolo to the Rescue/Magazine articles.

Promotional material

Physical scans

80 Based on

36 reviews

Rolo to the Rescue

Technical information

Main article: Rolo to the Rescue/Technical information.

References