LIKE his Tractarian hero John Henry Newman, Mgr Graham Leonard, who died on Wednesday, aged 88, after a long illness, began his Christian life in the Evangelical wing of the Church of England. His journey to Roman Ca­thol­icism took him through a position of un­rivalled influence among traditionalist Anglo-Catholics. But unlike Newman he had attained high office in the Church of England before being received with honours by Rome.

His decade as Bishop of London from 1981 to 1991 coincided with a period of feverish ecclesiastical politics, in which he led the Anglo-Catholic opposition to the ordination of women, as the last synodical hurdle lay ahead.

At the 1978 Lambeth Conference, Leonard had organised meetings of those bishops op­posed to the ordination of women to the priest­hood, with the aim of preventing an uncon­ditional resolution in favour of it. He made the main opposing speech in the General Synod debate in November 1979. And, in January 1982, he was joined by Archbishop Runcie in deploring an illegal celebration when Elizabeth Canham, an English woman who had been ordained priest in the United States by Bishop Spong, visited London and celebrated the eucharist in the Deanery of St Paul’s.

Over women bishops, he had said since the mid-’80s that he would be out of communion with bishops who consecrated a woman to the episcopate; and in 1987 he warned that a schism would ensue on the ordination of women to the priesthood, and that those who broke away would be entitled to a share in the C of E’s re­sources. Other bishops accused him of having failed to make his intentions known in the House of Bishops when it debated its report on the scope of the legislation.

Leonard would have liked to see a permanent diaconate before the question of women’s ordination was introduced. Nevertheless, he supported the ordination of women deacons, and, from 1987, ordained them, despite the expectations that this was bound to raise.

He submitted to Rome when the Priests (Ordination of Women) Measure was carried. “That was the detonator,” he said later in an interview, “because it represented the establish­ment of a new communion, according to which one must believe in something that previously the Church had never required as a matter of faith.”

The General Synod’s passing of the Porvoo Agreement close on the heals of the women priests’ Measure made it almost inevitable that Anglican-Methodist union, the other running battle in which Dr Leonard had been closely engaged, would be reopened again; though he had helped to ensure that its advocates would adopt a different strategy from the one that he had opposed in the 1960s and early 1970s.

GRAHAM LEONARD was not “born” a Cath­olic. His father, the Revd Douglas Leonard, was a liberal Evangelical. He was assistant curate of St Peter’s, Greenwich, when Graham was born, and later Vicar of St Michael’s, Wands­worth Common. He educated his son at the firmly Evangelical Monkton Combe School.

But there were signs that Graham would take a very different path. He warmed to a mission at the Ascension, Lavender Hill, in south London, in the 1920s, at which there were a processional cross, banners, and incense, and a sermon to which members of the Salvation Army who were present responded with “Hallelujah!”

Although ordination was in his mind when he left school, Graham read for a science degree (botany) at Balliol College, Oxford. His involve­ment with the Oxford Inter-Collegiate Christian Union lasted less than a term. He attended services in the University Church, and a University Mission conducted by William Temple. He read Charles Gore’s Belief in God, and concluded that Evangelicals over-em­phasised the need for redemption, and neglected the doctrine of creation.

After a shortened course under wartime conditions, he graduated in 1941. By then, he had already met Priscilla Swann, a don’s daughter, who was also reading for a science degree. They married in 1943. His war service kept him on the mainland as a captain in the Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire Light In­fantry 1941-45, seconded to the Army Operational Research Group of the Ministry of Supply for his last year. Stationed at Warminster, he came under the influence of the Vicar, Charles Tolson, and was able to use the library of St Boniface’s College.

On demobilisation, he went to train for the priesthood at Westcott House, Cambridge. He disliked the gentlemanly atmosphere, and was relieved to begin a curacy at St Andrew’s, Chesterton. It was a parish with a sung eucharist at 9.30. as well as 11 a.m. matins. The first time he celebrated, he used the English Missal. From then on, he said a daily mass.

A new vicar came, strictly BCP, and in 1949 Leonard moved to All Saints’, St Ives, and was put in charge of St Peter’s, Oldhurst, and St John the Baptist’s, Woodhurst. After four months, he moved to Stansted Mountfitchet, where the Vicar, Canon John Barrow, kindled his interest in education. He began to write articles and Bible-study notes.

From 1952 to 1955, Leonard was Vicar of Ardleigh in Essex. His singing voice and per­sonal authority proved attractive; and he visited conscientiously. He caused hard feelings by banning the Methodist minister from officiating in the Remembrance Sunday service in the parish church, and there was a dispute about the omission of the Gloria in Lent and Advent.

Leonard was tireless in teaching, and his uncompromising approach drew respect. The church moved up in churchmanship, and the vicarage was open house. The Vicar became secretary of a diocesan working party on moral welfare, and then in 1955 became Diocesan Director of Education for St Albans.

This was a task into which he threw himself with great energy. In 1957, he was appointed to a residentiary canonry at St Albans. In 1958, he was made general secretary of the National Society, and secretary of the Schools Council of the Church of England Board of Education. He won praise for his dealings with the Govern­ment over grants to aided schools. In 1961, he was offered the archdeaconry of Hampstead.

Leonard also had his own church, St Andrew Undershaft, in the City, which he used as a centre of teaching focused on the incarnation and the sacraments. But, amid the ferment of the 1960s, even Leonard’s soundness was called in question. In 1962, he shocked a Church Union gathering by suggesting that a bishop might, under special conditions, celebrate a eucharist at which intercommunion took place.

IN 1964, Leonard was appointed Bishop of Willes­den. He set about welding the new epis­copal area together, becoming a familiar face to the clergy and laity, and deepening congrega­tions’ spiritual life. In 1971, he filled Acton Town Hall for a mission, and was the author of the Archbishop’s Lent Book, The Gospel is for Everyone.

But although he was well-liked in the area, beyond it he was becoming the butt of criticism for his firm views on the proposed scheme for Anglican-Methodist union; while his stature grew among the objectors. He served on the body Towards Anglican-Methodist Unity, and from 1965 on the Anglican-Methodist Unity Council. He held that the basic flaw in the process was that it was unity by negotiation.

In 1967, he convened a conference in Friern Barnet for the Catholic Societies. A paper he had written crystallised Catholic objections to the proposed service of reconciliation of min­istries, shared by others such as John Moorman and Cyril Eastaugh (though not Eric Kemp). In 1968, he said: “The proposals for reconciliation involve an intentional ambiguity which makes the prayers of the service of reconciliation irrelevant or irreverent. . . This is not a matter of a fine point of theology — it is a matter of common honesty.”

Leonard told Archbishop Michael Ramsey privately that if the scheme were implemented, he would have to provide for the clergy who could not in conscience accept it. He sent out 20,000 copies of a booklet, To every man’s conscience. . .

With the failure of the scheme in the Convocations in 1969, Leonard was accused of be­ing one of the “wreckers”, who were chal­lenged to produce their own proposals. This resulted in a book with Eric Mascall, Colin Buchanan, and Jim Packer, Growing into Union. It advocated “the simple expedient of inau­gurat­ing a united Church in a piecemeal way territorially, leaving the existing denominations to exist alongside each other in every place where conscience, even untutored conscience, might so decree”.

The existing scheme, however, was revived in the new General Synod. There, once again, it failed to win the necessary majority. Leonard was relieved, although a stone was thrown through the window of his former house in Highgate.

Leonard had been unhappy with Ramsey’s leadership and many of the reports and opinions emerging in the 1960s: situation ethics, the Paul report, and the new alternative services. In 1968, he agreed to chair a commission for the Mothers’ Union, of which he was a keen supporter. It dealt with the ques­tion of the admission of divorced members. The commission was divided, and reported amid some acrimony in 1972.

In 1969, he had been asked to stand for election to the see of St Andrews. The clergy, but not the laity, voted for him. He was elected Bishop of North Queensland in Australia, but turned down the appointment, because of his father’s ill-health. Between 1971 and 1973, he was passed over for a number of English dio­cesan bishoprics. These included London, despite strong feeling in the diocese: in 1973, Gerald Ellison was translated to London from Chester, and Leonard was translated to Truro. Eight members of the Greater Chapter of St Paul’s, five of them members of the vacancy-in-see committee, voted against Ellison’s election.

IN Truro, Leonard sought once again to be a father-in-God, and to impart a vision. He was meticulous about the outward signs of professionalism. He revived the suffragan see of St Germans, and appointed Richard Rutt, from Taejon in Korea, and then, in 1978, Rutt’s successor, Brother Michael SSF. Leonard gained a reputation as uncompromising in public, but as soft-hearted with individuals. When the Sheffield formula for the allocation of clergy was introduced in 1974, he was critical of it.

In the wider Church, Leonard was appointed to the Anglican-Orthodox International Com­mis­sion, and then to chair the Board for Social Responsibility. Under his chairmanship, it tackled euthanasia and, in 1979, homosexuality. The Gloucester report had concluded that there were circumstances in which some people might justifably choose a committed homo­sexual relationship.

The Board was divided, and Leonard was critical of the report, not least for lacking a gen­eral discussion of sexuality and the gospel before coming to the specific matter of homo­sexuality. When the report was published, it was as only “a contribution to discussion”, with crit­ical observations from the Board, and Leonard’s foreword, which stated: “The question of homosexuality raises questions to do with the authority of scripture and the Church’s tradition. Because of this, we do not think that the Church of England is yet ready to declare its mind on the subject of homosexuality.”

In 1974, the Churches Unity Commission was set up; and in 1976 it produced Ten Propositions to test out the attitude of the Churches to visible unity. In Truro diocesan synod, Leonard proposed an alternative motion asking for doctrinal differences to be taken seriously; and it was carried. But the General Synod accepted the Ten Propositions, and a Council for Covenanting was set up.

Leonard was an active consultant to it. With two other Anglo-Catholic members of the coun­cil, Oswald Clark and Canon Peter Boul­ton, he expressed reservations about the report in a Memorandum of Dissent. When the pro­posals failed to attain the required majority in the General Synod in July 1982, Leonard was one of 11 bishops who voted against. He had, in the mean time, urged Catholics not to leave the Church over the plan.

In 1978, Leonard made his maiden speech in the Lords; and in 1980, Bishop Ellison retired from London. “The majority of the diocesan hierarchy did not want Leonard. St Paul’s Cathedral did not want Leonard,” writes his biographer, John Peart-Binns; but many others in the diocese did.

The appointment was long delayed. When an announcement came on 30 March 1981, there was a row. Rumour had it that the first name put forward to the Prime Minister, Margaret Thatcher, was John Habgood’s (then Bishop of Durham), with Leonard’s second. It was also even rumoured that the Queen had been dismayed by Leonard’s choice, and had asked whether the nomination could be reconsidered. Between his nomination and enthronement, his book God Alive: Priorities in pastoral theology was published.

LEONARD’s enthronement was a grand oc­casion — lampooned in Not The Church Times, a one-off venture by west-London clergy which went on sale in the September.

One of his first decisions was to take personal responsibility for the pastoral care of the cities of London and Westminster, where his prayerfulness and compassion and grasp of the fundamentals of the faith were much appre­ciated by the clergy. In the City of London, his sermons and speeches were perhaps too formal and theological to warm many hearts; but in the diocese and beyond it, his ability as a chairman was admired by those who found his strong leadership helpful. His trust in those who were loyal to him led, on the other hand, to some unsuitable appointments, and his relations with the press were uneven.

His profile nationally continued to rise, as chairman successively of the General Synod’s Board for Social Responsibility and Board of Education. In 1983, it was his task to introduce the report The Church and the Bomb in a televised debate in the General Synod. The report favoured unilateral disarmament, but his own belief in the need for a nuclear deterrent was firm, and the final resolution reflected his view.

In 1984, the whole question of marriage and divorce came before the General Synod. Leonard opposed the use of the marriage service for divorcees. He was ranged, too, against the views of David Jenkins, the new Bishop of Durham, on doctrines of the creed, though he was not one of those calling for Dr Jenkins’s resignation. He simply proclaimed a different view, and endorsed a House of Bishops statement put out alongside the report The Nature of Christian Belief in 1986.

He played an important part in the debates in the House of Lords on the Education Reform Bill, and secured amendments that were included in the 1988 Act. He was responsible in the Lords for guiding through matters parti­cularly affecting church schools and the religious aspects of education.

He was involved in issues of broadcasting, serving on the Central Religious Ad­visory Committee, where he intro­duced the approach of asking producers, as well as officers of the BBC and ITA, to meet to discuss their ideas and aims.

For a decade, he was acting chair­man of the Board of Governors of the Church Commis­sioners; and he also chaired the Churches Main Commit­tee. His well-known book Firmly I Believe and Truly, and a sequel, appeared during his London epis­copate; and he contributed to several others, including a joint book with Peter Toon and Iain Mackenzie, Let God Be God, an attack on relativism.

GRAHAM LEONARD made a number of over­seas visits. The one that is chiefly remembered was to St Michael’s, Broken Arrow, Tulsa, in Oklahoma, whose priest was the Revd John C. Pasco. In 1984, the diocese of Oklahoma, re­puted to be hostile to the existence of St Michael’s on churchmanship grounds, initiated a lawsuit against Fr Pasco over an in­dependent trust for the support of the church, to which members of the congregation were encouraged to give.

The parish, reduced to a mission and on the verge of expulsion from the Episcopal Church, was isolated. Pasco wrote to Leonard asking for help to “assist in preserving us from the sin of schism”.

Leonard did not at first accede to the request to enter into communion with them. Fr Pasco was deposed in April 1986. He had publicised Leonard’s interest in his case, and the Bishop of Oklahoma wrote to Leonard asking him to disown Pasco. Leonard, however, had con­sidered the priest’s claims, and had written to him declaring that “as a bishop” rather than as Bishop of London he held communion with St Michael’s and Fr Pasco, no longer regarded as part of the Episcopal Church.

The letter was copied to the Archbishop of Canterbury as well as to the Bishop of Oklahoma. Leonard was strongly critical of the legal pro­cess that had deposed Pasco, and criticised the over-free use of deposition by US bishops.

The question of a confirmation arose. At first, the plan was to send the Bishop of Fulham, John Klyberg, to Tulsa. A frank letter from Runcie to Leonard warned him, among other things, that to send his suffragan would be to go against the position that he was not acting as the Bishop of London. So Leonard himself went instead. The US Bishops issued a state­ment expecting Runcie to discipline Leonard.

Leonard found this hard to credit in view of the lack of any punishment when English bishops had assisted the US bishops who took part in the illegal ordinations of women in Phila­d­elphia in 1974, or in any other instances where jurisdiction had been by-passed (such as the celebration in the St Paul’s Deanery in 1982).

At the press conference on his return from Tulsa, he was asked: “Have you broken the law?” and he replied “No.” “What have you done then?” he was asked. He replied: “I’ve upset the club.”

A paper, Episcopal Jurisdiction, over Runcie’s signature (prepared with help from Leonard’s adviser, Gareth Bennett, who, unbeknown to him, was also advising Runcie) was prepared for the House of Bishops. After a debate, they voted by 47 to one that a bishop should not exercise epis­copal care over a priest without the consent of the diocesan author­ities. The Bishop of Edmonton, Brian Masters, voted against, and Bishops Eric Kemp and Leonard abstained.

Runcie would not forbid Leonard to go, however, and so Leonard went. He returned home to a barrage of condemnation. In the end, there was an agreed court settlement, in which the diocese withdrew its charges of fraud and deceit, and its claims to the St Michael’s land and buildings.

When the Crockford Preface ap­peared that year, lambasting the Archbishop of Canterbury and prais­ing Leonard as “securely in the main­stream of Anglicanism”, Leonard phoned Gareth Bennett, and was one of those to whom Bennett denied its authorship. Leonard believed him. He was a concelebrant at Bennett’s re­quiem in New College Chapel.

Leonard was Dean of the Chapels Royal, and ex-officio prelate of the Order of the British Empire, and was awarded the KCVO when he retired as Bishop of London in 1991, aged 70. He was an Hon. Bencher from the Middle Temple, and received a num­ber of honorary doctorates, mainly from the United States.

IN 1992, after the General Synod’s decision over women priests, Leonard set out his doctrinal reasons for be­com­­ing a Roman Catholic in a lecture published as Truth, Unity, and Concord.

“In my judgement,” he said, “[the Synod’s decision] questions the wisdom of God in creating us male and female, equal but different; it questions his choice of the time and place of the incarnation with its particular culture; it questions the adequacy of Christ’s humanity if both male and female are necessary to represent humanity; it questions the authority of our Lord in the choice of the apostles; it questions the role of the priesthood. That list is not ex­haustive!”

Leonard was received into the Roman Catholic Church in April 1994, shortly after the first ordina­tions of women priests in the Church of England. Soon afterwards he was ordained sub conditione to the priesthood. He was incardinated in the archdiocese of Westminster, but, resident in Oxfordshire, he was also granted faculties in Birmingham archdiocese. He was appointed a Prelate of Honour to the Pope in 2000.

As well as assisting in local RC parishes, he was in demand as a re­treat leader. He was as zealous in encouraging others to follow his path into the Roman Church as he had been in his advocacy of Anglo-Catholicism, contributing to several books on the subject.

In 1995, he was invited to give the keynote address in New Orleans to inaugurate a conference series, “The Path to Rome”, for which he was a regular speaker, and president 1997-2001, to be succeeded by John Selwyn Gummer. With his help and encour­age­­ment, the members of Miles Jesu in England began the Continuity Movement, to promote the renewal of the Roman Catholic faith in the British Isles, chiefly through the pro­motion of testim­onies, “stories of conversion”.

He is survived by his widow and two sons.