Written in tribute by SRA Organic Chemist, Peimaneh Lee-Steere and Queensland Alliance for Agriculture and Food Innovations Director, Dr Michael O’Shea*

Dr Graham Leonard is remembered for being an outstanding researcher, serving the sugar industry through his work at the Bureau of Sugar Experiment Stations (BSES) and the Sugar Research Institute (SRI).

Graduating with a PhD in Chemistry, Graham was at home in all facets of that science.

He joined BSES in 1974 as part of the Mill Technology Division based in Indooroopilly, where he was in charge of the Chemistry Laboratory.

The lab provided (and still does as part of SRA) analytical services on samples provided by BSES researchers working out of the Research Stations in sugarcane growing areas across Queensland. It also provided certification of equipment and devices used in the mills’ analytical labs.

Graham was particularly proficient in organic and polymer chemistry and much of his work and impact was based in those areas.

His research career involved a lot of work spanning various aspects of sugar quality and cane quality, but he also worked across many areas where analytical chemistry methods were required – this included the breeding program, pathology and agronomy disciplines.

Graham never did anything without prior research and study, always endeavouring to do his best. Young researchers who worked with him learned not to question one of his comments if they had not done a lot of research reading in advance. One also figured out not to ask Graham a question just before morning tea – “If you did that, you could kiss your tea break goodbye and probably be still standing there at lunch time,” commented one chemist who wishes to remain anonymous.

Graham was always dedicated to the task in hand, and not easily distracted. He was an avid learner and always sought to improve his knowledge. One particular example came from Graham listening to the ABC radio while driving home from work when he heard a QUT scientist talking about the spectroscopic analysis of human hairs for drug detection.

He reached out to that person and after a few conversations, he got together with Dr Michael O’Shea to drive a program of work that lasted around eight years where similar tools were used for disease detection on sugarcane plant surfaces.

That program enabled PhD and MSc graduates to work on these problems, funded through the Commonwealth ARC Linkage scheme and the SRDC; all thanks to Graham’s inquisitive nature and thirst for knowledge.

Graham is particularly remembered for his outstanding research work in the area of sugar quality, standing tall alongside other sugar industry researchers at CSR, SRI and BSES. This includes his work on an Australian sugar industry trade secret.

Graham first developed the measurement methods which are still in use today, almost 40 years after they were developed. That is a true testament to the methods’ robustness in solving a particularly difficult problem that had defied many other scientific approaches to understanding it across many decades.

After developing the methods, Graham then found a way to adapt them for plant breeding applications. Again, those methods are still used today.

It is a shame that Graham’s ground-breaking work in this area has not and cannot be appropriately recognised due to confidentiality and trade secrets. It is quite a story of hard work, chemistry insights and curiosity, doggedness and collaboration.

While Graham was an outstanding researcher, the same could not be said for his abilities on computers. While people take this for granted today, Graham was not raised in an era when computers were common-place in offices and laboratories.

It is fair to say that his computer filing system was almost non-existent, yet he knew where every piece of paper was in his office. Almost weekly, someone was in his office helping him on the computer to either use a program or find a file. Going through his electronic archive after his retirement was both an exercise in discovery and an enormous chore!

On a personal note, Graham Leonard is remembered by his staff and colleagues as one of the Australian sugar industry’s nice guys. Moreover, his legacy has not faded away as his good works remain for others to continue to build on.

He was a man who was honest, loyal, truthful, thoughtful, kind and decent. A walking encyclopedia in the research areas where he worked, staff agree it was a pleasure to work with and for him: “Speaking on behalf of all of us who knew him, he taught us many things and did so in a humble way. Whether we worked for the BSES chemlab or in other parts of the organisation, we were proud to call him our boss, mentor, colleague and friend.”

*Michael started work at BSES in November 1997 as Graham’s successor, leaving in March 2021.