July 16, 2019

─

The Chair of the Board of Directors of the Montreal Heart Institute Foundation, Mr. Lino A. Saputo, Jr., is pleased to announce the appointment of Mr. Alain Gignac as Chief Executive Officer of the organization. He will take office on Monday, August 19, 2019.

“We are very pleased to welcome Alain Gignac to our team”, said Mr. Lino A. Saputo, Jr. “His vision, which is based on business intelligence, innovation, creativity and team commitment, is essential to continue the excellent work initiated at the Foundation and to promote Montreal’s expertise in cardiology.”

Alain Gignac has more than thirty years of experience in business management, marketing and communications at the regional and national levels. A graduate in marketing from HEC Montréal, he has held important strategic positions in the private and public sectors, ranging from services to retail, telecommunications, entertainment and media.

“Commitment to my community is at the heart of my journey, and health has always been a passion. The Montreal Heart Institute is undeniably a Quebec and Canadian jewel, and it is with great pleasure that I take over the helm of the Foundation, which supports this unique institution in the world”, said Mr. Alain Gignac.

About the Montreal Heart Institute

Founded in 1954 by Dr. Paul David, the Montreal Heart Institute constantly aims for the highest standards of excellence in the cardiovascular field through its leadership in clinical and basic research, ultra-specialized care, professional training and prevention. The Montreal Heart Institute is one of the three best cardiology centres in the world. It has the first Prevention Branch in Canada, a cardiovascular genetics centre, and Canada’s first simulation-based education program focused on cardiology. The Institute is affiliated with the Université de Montréal and has more than 2,000 employees, including 245 CMDP doctors and more than 85 researchers. We practise more than 2,200 surgeries each year.

About the Montreal Heart Institute Foundation

Founded in 1977, the Montreal Heart Institute Foundation raises and administers funds to support the Institute’s priority and innovative projects and fight cardiovascular diseases, the world’s number one cause of mortality. Its philanthropic events and the contributions of its donors have enabled this leading cardiovascular health care organization to become the largest cardiac research centre in the country. Since its creation, the Foundation has raised more than $283 million in donations. Its 27,514 donors helped make important discoveries and support specialists, professionals and researchers of the Institute to provide care at the cutting edge of technology to tens of thousands of patients in Quebec.