Dear Birmingham,

For every dream home, every landmark, every awe-inspiring structure that reaches for our skies, there is an architect who laid the groundwork for that greatness.

It’s the duty of that architect to create an infrastructure that is safe, secure and can withstand the test of time. From the neighborhood in which the structure stands, to the residents who will walk its halls and call it home, every aspect must be measured and properly weighed.

To make history, you need a blueprint. It’s the roadmap to success.

In that spirit, I am honored to present to you with “The Blueprint,” a publication that embodies my vision for a path forward for our city’s success. As beneficiaries of a city where bloody battles were fought for freedom and justice, we owe a debt to create a community that will flourish for them, for us, and for all.

When you elected me in 2017, we worked to create a strong foundation, which included dismantling outdated systems, renovating parks, repairing roads, and investing in our children’s futures. Now, two years into my second term, we’re beginning to see the fruits of that labor, but there’s so much more to be done.

I often ask myself, “How can we architect a system that will serve residents spanning 99 neighborhoods, 23 communities, countless businesses, and schools?” It requires listening to their needs while building a team of servant leaders, advisors, and community partners.

This document delves into the hurdles, objectives, and opportunities we face. It gazes forward, outlining strategies to fortify our infrastructure with a robust plan.

Looking ahead, our blueprint symbolizes rebuilding—restoring faith in our systems, supporting our youth, enhancing infrastructures, nurturing homeownership dreams, and cultivating entrepreneurship.

Together, let’s build a better, brighter, bolder Birmingham.

Sincerely,

Randall L. Woodfin

Mayor, City of Birmingham

READ THE BLUEPRINT STRATEGIC UPDATE HERE.

___________________________________________

A Strategic Plan for Progress

Mayor Woodfin is honored to be elected to a second term as Mayor of the great City of Birmingham.

This publication, The First 100: A Citizen-Led Transition Report, represents the collective strength of community voice, alignment and goals in key areas of his administration.

Mayor Woodfin offers sincere thanks to the Transition Team co-chairs, subcommittee leaders, and residents who contributed to this report. You all have his commitment to consider every recommendation put forth by the team.

The First 100: A Citizen-Led Transition Report (click here to view the Transition Report)

Mayor Randall L. Woodfin announced his strategic plan for progress for Birmingham in October 2018. The plan was created from the knowledge obtained from our residents, employees and strategic partners. The Woodfin administration analyzed the findings from The Woodfin Way Transition Team Report, the City of Birmingham Performance Assessment, Building (it) Together Workforce Study, the city’s Comprehensive Framework Plan and reviewed the operating and capital budgets to formulate the detailed set of initiatives and projects for the city.

The Woodfin Way: A Strategic Plan for Progress identifies six strategic goals:

1.Safe, Secure and Sustainable Communities

2.Healthy, Thriving and Diverse Neighborhoods

3.High-Performing, 21st Century Education and Workforce Development Systems

4.Innovative and Inclusive Economy Supported, Shared and Served by All

5.Highly Effective, People-First, Smart Government

6.Global, Legacy Leadership Partner for Equity and Social Justice

View the Progress: The Woodfin Way strategic plan here!

Intro and Strategy Section

Mayor’s Section

Land Bank Section

World Games and Close Out Section

Progress: The Woodfin Way Presentation (3.31.21)

Read The Big Picture: An Update on Birmingham’s Strategic Plan (March 2019)

Read The Big Picture: A Two-Year Update on Birmingham’s Strategic Plan (December 2019)

The Woodfin Way: A Strategic Plan for Progress in Birmingham (October 2018)

Additional documents used in creation of the strategic plan can be found at the bottom of this page.

Progress Reports

311 Progress Report

Initiative #86 of The Woodfin Way: A Strategic Plan for Progress addressed the city’s 15-year-old 311 system.

Evaluate and move 311 to a resident-facing department to achieve greater customer

service and accessibility.

The city began analyzing data to improve inefficiencies and solidify communication. The City of Birmingham’s 311 Revamp System, launched in November 2019, provides a new approach to the 311 system.

Read the 311 Progress Report (July 2020)

Additional Reading

The Woodfin Way: A Citizen-Led Transition for Progress in Birmingham (April 2018)

City of Birmingham Performance Assessment: Results and Initiative Recommendations (March 2018)

Burning Glass Technologies: Building (It) TogetherBuilding (it) Together: A Framework for Aligning Education and Jobs in Greater Birmingham (June 2018)

Birmingham Comprehensive Framework Plan (October 2013)

Contact

Please email your questions or comments to strategy@birminghamal.gov

Stay informed. Text BHMINFO to 888-777 for updates from the city about important information and events.