In anticipation of the total solar eclipse this spring on April 8th, the Foundation put more than 20,000 special eclipse glasses on sale… and sold out a few weeks before the big day! To all those who purchased glasses, thank you for supporting the Foundation.

Learn more about how the Science Centre will be an official viewing location on the afternoon of the eclipse: https://www.montrealsciencecentre.com/special-event/total-solar-eclipse-at-the-montreal-science-centre

On February 10, 2024, the Montréal Science Centre inspired young women and girls to engage with science and tech with its annual Women and Girls of Science event. In keeping with the UN’s International Day of Women and Girls in Science, this event is designed to foster the equal participation of women and girls in STEM fields.

Nearly 25 collaborators participated in this 7th edition of Women and Girls of Science with demos, workshops, and captivating talks. More than 3,300 enthusiastic visitors attended. The day was presented by Amazon Web Services in partnership with UQAM’s Faculty of Science. All proceeds went to support the Science Centre Foundation.

Heartfelt thanks to all our collaborators and to all those who contributed to the success of this inspiring event.

To see the video of the event, click here

The Foundation’s first virtual auction took place from October 18 to 25, 2023 and featured more than 60 lots each more varied than the next, offering everyone something unique to bid on. The entirety of the proceeds raised by this initiative allow students from less privileged schools to enjoy a Science Centre visit for free.

The Foundation thanks each and every one who donated and bid on items as part of this auction initiative.

This fundraising event was held on August 12, 2023, in conjunction with the Hockey: Faster Than Ever exhibition. Young visitors and their families discovered the science of our national sport, and many enjoyed an exciting family air field hockey tournament.

Thank you to all the participants in this all-hockey day, to the companies who invited families, and to our event partners Tim Hortons and Soucy Baron.

Since its opening, the Science Centre and its team of educational specialists have worked at developing new educational programs in keeping with the cycle levels of Québec students:

Rock'n' Roll Marbles (Elementary, Cycle 1)

Tourbillon invites children to build marble runs with a collection fun objects. The challenge is to make the marbles travel for the longest time possible!

Planet of the Sense (Elementary, Cycle 1)

This workshop invites students to program Sensor, a super robot explorer, to help it discover a new habitable planet for humans.

Shhh! It’s Story Time (Elementary, Cycle 2)

This workshop lets students bring an Indigenous tale to life by creating sound effects and lighting for the stage. The experience helps them explore the mysteries of sound and light.

M-organ’s Journey (Elementary, Cycle 2)

Students explore the amazing human body thanks to giant interactive games and discover the inner workings of the body’s systems, including digestion, respiration, and circulation.

Mysterious Machines (Elementary, Cycle 3)

This workshop asks students to assemble and bring a mysterious machine to life. Their activities allow them to have fun while exploring the principles behind simple machines (wheel, lever, pulley, etc.).

Shock Wave! (Secondary, Cycle 1)

This workshop asks students to become civil engineers and build an earthquake-resistant building. They learn about protecting those living in high seismic activity areas.

In 2018, the Foundation funded the creation of the very first travelling program aimed at disadvantaged schools from outside the Montréal region as well as special education groups unable to offer their students school outings.

The MSC on the Road program was designed to offer school group activities beyond the Science Centre’s walls, primarily to reach students with behavioural, communication, and autism spectrum disorders.

This project’s unique offer — programming formatted specifically to meet student needs — earned the Science Centre the “Télé-Québec Coup de cœur du jury” prize in 2019 from the SMQ (Société des musées du Québec), the province’s museums organization.

Offered thanks to generous contributions from the Trottier Family Foundation.