Hand Numbered Limited Edition Screen Print (24" x 36")

Mint Rolled; Artist Martin Ansin

Mad Duck Posters, 2017

Capturing the hero-like essence of Orson Welles' Charles Foster Kane, Martin Ansin's alternative art ode to all things Citizen Kane makes for one fetching poster. This mint and untouched Limited Edition regular version has been Hand Numbered 100/400 in pencil in the bottom right corner. Through creative vision and original inspiration, Alternative Art in the form of Limited Edition Screen and Giclee Prints has vastly become a big part of the movie poster collecting industry amongst artists, fans, and galleries. With some starting as early as the 2000s, companies like Mondo, Spoke Art Gallery, Bottleneck Galleries, Vice Press, Mad Duck Posters, Skuzzles, and more have procured some of the most talented artists in the world to create lush and loving fan-desired art that was never available before. What began as a very small alternative for those seeking something unique from their favorite film has turned into a major industry where the best posters can sell out in a matter of minutes. Renowned names like Drew Struzan, Roger Kastel, Laurent Durieux, Tyler Stout, Olly Moss, Ken Taylor, Killian Eng, Mark "Jock" Simpson, Steve Chorney and so many others have shown there is indeed demand for amazing art that is sometimes as good as or even better than the original posters from a film.

The print is in mint condition showing no signs of being used or displayed. It shows only the most minimal signs of handling.

Cinema was never the same after 25-year-old Orson Welles produced, directed, and starred in Citizen Kane. Charting the life of a fictional press baron, it not only spun an engrossing story with a delicious twist, but also employed astonishing new visual techniques that, for decades, placed it at the top of virtually every 'Greatest Movie' list.

Estimate: $100 - 200

View all lots from CITIZEN KANE

View all lots from The Alternative Art Genre

Bidding for this lot will end on Thursday, May 18th. Lots will begin closing at 9:00am PST. Each lot has a countdown clock (as seen above) indicating when the lot will close. Any bid placed in the last five (5) minutes of the countdown clock will result in five (5) additional minutes being added to the clock. Note other lots in the auction may close on Wednesday, May 17th.