Rachel McAdams is one of the most beautiful and immensely talented actresses in the Hollywood industry. The star made her acting debut with The Hot Chick in 2002. She has been part of several noteworthy films like The Notebook, The Vow, Wedding Crashers, The Time Traveler’s Wife, and others. She made a mark with her impactful role in Marvel movies like Doctor Strange. Among her films, the one which made her a popular name was Lindsay Lohan’s Mean Girls.

Advertisement

The star did the film when she was starting as an actress, and she was willing to do any role in the film. As per the diva, the movie gave her a career boost, with the character of a conniving girl, Regina George.

Also read- Rachel McAdams Rejected $543M Movie With Marvel Co-Star Robert Downey Jr as “It’s not a lead part”

Advertisement

Rachel McAdams was ready to take any role in Mean Girls

About Time actress Rachel McAdams did the film Mean Girls, at the beginning of her career. Playing the antagonist in the film offered her immense fame and limelight to the star. The actress played the lead antagonist against Lindsay Lohan’s Cady.

In conversation with The New York Times, the actress shared that she was very excited to be part of the film and was ready to take up any role. She recalled,

“I remember when I read it, I called my agent right away and said, ‘I will play any part in this, please, please, please. I was at the beginning of my career, and it was a lofty thing out there, that I really, really, really wanted to do. I’m always looking for larger-than-life characters, which is probably why I like playing villains. They get away with so much.”

After a series of screen tests, McAdams was cast as Regina George, the main antagonist in the film. Her performance in the project was critically acclaimed and became one of her iconic roles. The star also credited it for paving the way for the success in her career that she is enjoying to date.

Advertisement

Also read- “Either it’s going to work out or it’s not”: Rachel McAdams Cries Sour Grapes After Her Picky Attitude Cost Her $1B Christopher Nolan Film

Rachel McAdams was unsure of the direction of her career after Mean Girls

As per the actress, she attained fame and love for her role as an antagonist in the film. However, she had to reassess her choices after the movie. She shared in conversation with Marie Claire (via Contact Music),

“I had to kind of reassess and go, ‘What did I want this [success] to be, and how did I expect it to look?’’”

In the context of the impact of the negative role in Mean Girls on her personal life, Rachel McAdams shared with The New York Times,

Advertisement

“Does Regina George haunt me every day? She does have that quality,” she joked. “No, I have to thank Regina George for giving me some longevity. I’m forever grateful to Tina Fey and Mark Waters [the director].”

Mean Girls was a teen comedy film directed by Mark Waters and written by Tina Fey. The film became a cult classic and grossed $130.1 million worldwide.

Mean Girls is available for streaming on Apple TV and Paramount+.

Also read- “Is this too much? Is this distracting?”: Despite Her A-List Status, Rachel McAdams Felt Too Self-Conscious in Film With 99% Rotten Tomatoes Rating

Advertisement