Black History Month in 2021

While the Museum recognizes black history every month, in February we especially highlight the lives and actions of African Americans who used their First Amendment freedoms to contribute to our American fabric.

Throughout this month, we will be posting activities and events that will amplify black voices and experiences, and increase your knowledge of our nation’s history.

Black History Month’s origins

Black History Month began as Negro History Week in 1926 and was initiated by Dr. Carter G. Woodson, founder of what is today known as the Association for the Study of African American Life and History (ASALH), as a way to teach about African Americans’ contributions to society.

Over the following decades, the tradition grew and in 1970 the first Black History Month celebration officially took place at Kent State. Fifty years after it began, during the bicentennial celebration of 1976, President Gerald Ford announced that Black History Month was an officially recognized holiday, stating that Americans should “seize the opportunity to honor the too-often neglected accomplishments of Black Americans in every area of endeavor throughout our history.”

2/1/1960 – Lunch counter Sit-In

2/1/1960 – On this day in First Amendment History, the first sit-in at Woolworth’s lunch counter took place in Greensboro, N.C. when four black college students took seats at an all-white lunch counter in the segregated department store. After being refused service, the four students refused to leave, and police and media were called to the scene. Over the next few days, the students returned with an ever-increasing number of protestors; less than a week later, 1,000 students packed into the Woolworth’s.

While their sit-in was not the first (nor the last) of its kind during the Civil Rights movement, it certainly gained traction and media attention, and variations occurred in cities throughout the south. The Greensboro Woolworth’s finally desegregated 5 months later after incurring massive financial losses, but it took another 5 years of protest before the Civil Rights Act of 1965 was passed, mandating desegregation.

Today, you can visit the original site of the Greensboro Woolworth’s sit-in by visiting the International Civil Rights Center & Museum

Black History Month – Quiz 1

Test your knowledge of African American history by taking our short quiz. Don’t forget to share your results!

2/4/1913 – Rosa Parks is born

2/4/1913 – On this day in First Amendment History, Rosa Parks was born.

Perhaps one of the most famous figures from the Civil Rights Movement, Rosa Parks made national headlines in 1955 when she refused to give up her seat to a white man on a bus in Montgomery, Alabama.

Rosa was arrested for – and later convicted of – breaking Montgomery city code, which stated that the front rows on a bus were reserved for white passengers, while black passengers had to sit in the back. In reaction to her arrest, the black community initiated the Montgomery Bus Boycott.

More than a year later, the Supreme Court ruled that bus segregation was unconstitutional.

In her 1992 autobiography, Rosa wrote: “People always say that I didn’t give up my seat because I was tired, but that isn’t true. I was not tired physically… No, the only tired I was, was tired of giving in.”

Video: “To Make a Poet Black: Notes from a Literary-Musician“

Regie Gibson hosts brings the audience into the creative power of speech in the modern Black spoken-word tradition in an engaging, educational online performance that took place on Thursday, February 4th, 2021.

Watch the recording here.

One on 1 with Noelle Trent

Noelle Trent is the Director of Interpretation, Collections & Education at National Civil Rights Museum. She talks to us about the movement in the wake of George Floyd’s murder, differences between the protests of today and in the ’60s, and how the First Amendment is Americans’ “superpower”.

Watch the interview here.

Black History Month – Quiz #2

Test your knowledge of African American history by taking our medium quiz. Don’t forget to share your results!

2/17/1942 – Huey P. Newton is born

2/17/1942 – On this day in First Amendment history, activist Huey P. Newton was born.

Disappointed with what he saw as failures in the nonviolent civil rights movement, Newton co-founded the Black Panther Party in 1966 in Oakland, CA. Originally called the Black Panther Party for Self Defense, the organization originally provided armed patrols to “copwatch” in black neighborhoods to deter police brutality.

Over time, the Black Panther Party gained chapters throughout the United States, combining the values and ideals of Black nationalism and socialism, and including a strong militant emphasis. Often led by women, the chapters advocated for community reforms and provided free food for children, health clinics for the sick, legal aid, and other services for disenfranchised communities suffering from economic and social inequality.

Throughout the ‘70s and into the early ‘80s, the Black Panther Party’s power diminished after being targeted by the FBI, party in-fighting, and negative public perceptions of party violence. Newton was assassinated in 1989 by a member of the Black Guerilla Family.

If you’d like to learn more about the Black Panther Party – including how the FBI COINTELPRO’s program contributed to its demise – watch “Judas and the Black Messiah” – a new release on HBO. The film is based on the true story of an FBI informant who infiltrated the Chicago chapter of the Black Panther Party led by Fred Hampton.

2/18/1934 – Audre Lorde is born

2/18/1934 – On this day in First Amendment history, Audre Lorde was born.

A self-described “black, lesbian, mother, warrior, poet”, Lorde was an iconic civil rights activist, feminist, and writer whose work helped promote the idea of intersectionality – the idea that social categories and identities are interlinked in an individual and result in that person experiencing differing levels of discrimination or privilege. While intersectionality often focuses on gender and race, it can involve other identities such as class, religion, sexuality, disability, and age, as well.

Lorde pushed back against the second-wave feminism of the 1960s, which she viewed as a white, middle-class movement. Though she died in 1992 after an extensive battle with breast cancer, Lorde’s ideas and writings significantly influenced the third-wave feminism of the 1990s which promoted inclusivity and intersectionality and connected gender to issues with broader social concerns.

You can read some of Audre Lorde’s poetry here – https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poets/audre-lorde#tab-poems

Video: “Bending The Arc of the Moral Universe…”

Professor Hasan Jeffries presents on the struggle African Americans have faced in trying to live their five First Amendment freedoms in this online presentation that took place on Thursday, February 18th, 2021.

Watch the recording here.

2/21/1940 – John Lewis is born

2/21/1940 – On this day in First Amendment history, monumental civil rights activist and politician John Lewis was born.

Lewis was a young man when he first got involved in the Civil Rights Movement. As a student in Nashville, he organized sit-ins at segregated lunch counters and bus boycotts. At the age of 21, he was one of the original 13 Freedom Riders, and took a bus ride through the South to test a 1960 Supreme Court decision that declared segregated facilities for interstate passengers illegal. The Freedom Riders faced serious danger for their rides – they were met with mob violence in cities throughout the South and arrested for ‘unlawful assembly.’

In 1960, Lewis helped form the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC) and took over as chairman in 1963. SNCC was the biggest organizer of student-led Civil Rights-focused activism and managed voter registration drives, sit-ins, marches, and boycotts. Lewis was one of the “Big Six” civil rights leaders who organized the March on Washington and gave his own speech from the dais right before MLK’s famous “I Have a Dream” speech.

On “Bloody Sunday” in 1965, Lewis led the march across the Edmund Pettus Bridge in Selma, Alabama. He and other marchers were met with extreme police violence on the other side; Lewis sustained injuries including a skull fracture.

With more than 40 arrests, as well as multiple severe injuries, Lewis remained committed to the nonviolent approach and continued to support the civil rights movement through various organizations in the ‘70s and ‘80s. In 1986, Lewis was elected to Congress, representing Georgia’s Fifth Congressional District. Between 1988 and 2018, he was re-elected 16 times.

Up until his death, he was still committed to fighting for injustice – speaking out against police brutality and supporting the BLM movement. Included is an image of Lewis standing on BLM Plaza in DC, just a month before his death. Lewis passed away last year on July 17th.

John Lewis is a featured “youth activist” in our upcoming exhibit. Learn more about him in our bio here – https://firstamendmentmuseum.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/09/John-Lewis.pdf

We are still accepting applications for YOUR artwork to be featured in our exhibit. Does John Lewis’ story inspire you? Would you like to illustrate him? Learn more about how to participate and submit your artwork here – https://firstamendmentmuseum.org/call-for-artists/

To learn more, check out the biography of John Lewis released last year by Jon Meacham ‘His Truth Is Marching On: John Lewis and the Power of Hope.’

Gee’s Bend Quilting Craft

Learn about the African American Gee’s Bend quilting tradition while making a beautiful ‘quilt’ of your own! Check out this fun, easy, and educational First Amendment and Black History Month-themed craft for you and your kids here.

2/23/1868 – W.E.B. Du Bois is born

2/23/1868 – On this day in First Amendment history, W.E.B. Du Bois was born.

W.E.B. (William Edward Burghardt) Du Bois was a civil rights activist, sociologist, educator, historian, writer, and scholar.

In 1895, Du Bois became the first African American to earn a Ph.D. from Harvard. He went on to teach sociology at the University of Pennsylvania, then economics and history at the historically black Atlanta University, where he hosted the annual Atlanta Conference of Negro Problems.

In 1905, Du Bois co-founded the Niagara Movement, a civil rights organization that opposed racial segregation. To promote the Niagara Movement, Du Bois used his freedom of the press to establish two periodicals, the Moon Illustrated Weekly and The Horizon: A Journal of the Color Line.

In 1909, Du Bois co-founded the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP). The civil rights organization was founded in the aftermath of the devastating Springfield Race Riot of 1908, during a period when lynchings of African Americans were at an all-time high. Du Bois served as the NAACP’s Director of Publicity and Research, as a board member, and as the founder-editor of The Crisis, the NAACP’s monthly publication.

A firm believer in Pan-Africanism, Du Bois organized a series of Pan-African Congresses around the world – in 1919, 1921, 1923, and 1927 – to battle colonialism in Africa. Du Bois moved to Ghana towards the end of his life and received Ghanese citizenship; he died in Ghana the night before the historic March on Washington in 1963.

Learn more about the life and legacy of W.E.B. Du Bois here.

Black History Month – Quiz #3

Test your knowledge of African American history by taking our longest quiz. Don’t forget to share your results!

2/26/1877 – Wallace Fard Muhammad born

2/26/1877 – On this day in First Amendment history, religious and political activist Wallace Fard Muhammad was born.

Originally born in Mecca in what is today Saudi Arabia, Fard immigrated to the US sometime prior to 1930. He arrived in Detroit and sold silks door to door in African American neighborhoods, regaling customers with stories of his homeland. Fard described it as a utopia, largely due to the Islamic faith the people practiced.

That same year, Fard founded the Nation of Islam (NOI), a new African American political and religious movement. The goal of the NOI was to “teach the downtrodden and defenseless Black people a thorough Knowledge of God and of themselves, and to put them on the road to Self-Independence with a superior culture and higher civilization than they had previously experienced.” Fard’s teachings appealed to a disenfranchised community suffering from the Great Depression, and within three years the movement grew to include nearly 9,000 members, mostly in Detroit and Chicago.

Fard disappeared in 1934; while his leadership was short-lived, his legacy lives on. Today, the NOI’s membership is estimated to be between 20,000 – 50,000 people. Past adherents have included Malcolm X, Muhammed Ali, and Huey P. Newton.

The NOI is criticized for its anti-Semitic, racist, and anti-LGBTQ attitudes, and is designated as a hate group by the Southern Poverty Law Center.

In the Nation of Islam, today is called Saviour’s Day in honor of Fard.

Did you know that the daffodil was the symbol for Maine suffragists during their fight for the right to vote? That right was secured in 1920 with the ratification of the Nineteenth Amendment to the US Constitution.

Here at the Gannett House, we have a historical connection to the Maine suffragette movement. Anne Gannett, the wife of Guy P Gannett and former resident of the house that is now the First Amendment Museum, was a leader of the suffrage movement in Augusta, Maine.

Free Speech

During Anne’s time, it was considered shocking for a woman to speak to mixed-gender crowds in public. Conventions featuring female speakers were attacked by mobs, and Susan B. Anthony herself said, “No advanced step taken by women has been so bitterly contested as that of speaking in public.” Opponents were afraid of women spreading their radical ideas about the right to vote, or suffrage. As many of the founders of the suffrage movement had also been involved in the abolition and temperance movement, they understood the importance of speaking as a group in order to advance their cause. Image: Suffrage lecture announcement, Belfast, ca. 1915, from Maine Historical Society

Interestingly enough, the suffrage movement propelled other women – even women who were fundamentally opposed to women’s involvement in politics – into politics. These women were known as “Antis”, and Anne Gannett’s mother-in-law, Sadie Gannett, was one. Despite their belief that women would be corrupted by politics, Antis organized as much as Suffragists did by producing and distributing anti-suffrage pamphlets, letters, and slogans.

Guy Gannett, who was a member of the Maine legislature at the time, found himself caught in the middle – with a Suffragist wife and an Anti mother. He famously wore a daffodil, symbol of the Suffragists, on one lapel and a red rose, symbol of the Antis, on the other.

Free Press?

Despite the free press being a cornerstone of American democracy, many contemporary mainstream papers trivialized, ridiculed, or ignored the suffragist movement.

And while Comfort Magazine, William Gannett’s publication, featured women writers, their articles focused exclusively on domestic topics and not the suffrage movement.

Image: excerpt from Comfort Magazine, December 1919

Using the Right to Petition

Through the abolitionist and temperance movements, women learned about the power of gathering signatures and submitting petitions. They used these same tactics in the suffrage movement. At the time, no one expected the government to take real action, so petitions were used as a way to build consensus and reflect on the will of the people.

Image: a 1917 petition signed by 1233 Bangor residents in favor of the suffrage referendum

Arrested for Assembly

8,000 suffragists descended on Washington, D.C. the day before Woodrow Wilson’s inauguration in 1913 to advocate for suffrage. In fact, suffragists were the first group to protest outside the White House. Suffragists burned an effigy of President Wilson and copies of his speeches in front of the White House and were promptly arrested. While in jail, some suffragists began a hunger strike.

Wilson, aware of both the negative press and the growing political strength of the movement, publicly endorsed women’s suffrage in his second term, in 1918. It took another year before there were enough votes in Congress to support the passage of the 19th Amendment, and then another year before there were enough states to ratify – or formally approve – the amendment giving women the right to vote.

Image: Maine Governor Carl Milliken signing that he will ratify the 19th Amendment, with Anne Gannett second from left

For the last century Maine women have taken an ever-expanding role in politics. Dora Pinkham was the first woman elected to the Maine legislature in 1923, and Margaret Chase Smith was the first woman to serve in both the US House of Representatives (1940–49) and the US Senate (1949–73) and the first woman to represent Maine in Washington, D.C. More recently, Olympia Snowe represented Maine in the US Senate from 1995 – 2013.

Today half of Maine’s federal delegation is female – Senator Susan Collins and Congresswoman Chellie Pingree. And within the Maine legislature, there are more women than ever, with just over a third of State Senators and Representatives being women.

In November 2019, citizens all over the state of Maine planted thousands of daffodil bulbs designed to bloom this year during the National Suffrage Centennial, and every year thereafter as a bright and beautiful tribute to the Suffragette Movement. The First Amendment Museum took part as well, and now the daffodils are finally blooming in our garden, just steps away from the dome of the State Capitol and the Blaine House, home to Maine’s first female governor, Janet Mills.

Daffodils in bloom in the lawn of the First Amendment Museum , May 2020

Learn more about the history of the suffrage movement in Maine at the Women’s Suffrage Centennial, including more information on the Daffodil Tribute project.