What is the Santa Susana Field Laboratory (SSFL)?

With the detonation of the world’s first nuclear weapon by the United States Army on July 16, 1945, the world ushered in the "Atomic Age." Two years later, an American aerospace company called North American Aviation selected a rural location in the hills above Simi Valley to build a secret research facility. At first, the purpose of the site was to test rocket engines. But in 1953, under the supervision of the U.S. Atomic Energy Commission, the predecessor of the Department of Energy and the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, the Field Lab added Area IV. This 209-acre section of the Field Lab was dedicated to nuclear research including the development and testing of experimental nuclear reactors. Over the course of four decades, Area IV would be home to 10 reactors, a plutonium fuel fabrication facility, a uranium fuel facility and a "hot lab" for remotely cutting up dangerous radioactive material. The rest of the site, more than 2,000 acres was used for the testing and development of rocket engines for the U.S. space program and for advanced weapons research. During its operational history, more than 30,000 rocket engine tests were conducted at SSFL.

Why was it called a Field Lab?

According to California Senate Bill 990 (a state law passed IN 2007 to clean-up SSFL), the site was initially intended to be a remote location for doing scientific work that was considered too dangerous to be done around more populated areas. The Santa Susana Field Laboratory Advisory Panel, funded by the California Legislature, reports that while at the Field Lab, scientists had the freedom to experiment, test and in some cases push their equipment to its limits and beyond.

Over the years, the site was used to test new rocket designs and 10 experimental nuclear reactors. The freedom to experiment resulted in a host of technological breakthroughs, including the development of many of the engines that rocketed American astronauts and satellites into space. But according to the Advisory Panel, the experimental nature of the site also created an atmosphere where science sometimes trumped safety and environmental concerns. They say this has now resulted in serious chemical and radioactive contamination throughout the site. Studies by the DOE and EPA have determined that significant chemical and radioactive contamination can still be found on the site today.

Where is the Field Lab located?

The Santa Susana Field Lab is more than 2,800 acres atop the Simi Hills overlooking Simi Valley to the north, Chatsworth, West Hills and Canoga Park to the east, Woodland Hills and Thousand Oaks to the south, and Moorpark to the west.

Why did they pick that location for the Field Lab?

North American Aviation wanted a remote site for performing dangerous scientific work that was far from prying eyes and away from populated areas. When the company was looking for a location for the Field Lab, they evaluated six potential locations around Southern California. The company looked at safety factors such as weather challenges, possible water contamination and the distance to residential communities. Santa Susana ranked fifth out of the six sites because its weather patterns increased the risk of contaminated air and water flowing off-site. Despite these concerns, the company selected the Santa Susana location for the Field Lab. The site was ultimately chosen because of its proximity to local research universities where many of the Field Lab scientists also worked and taught, according to a 2006 California State report on the Field Lab.

How is the Santa Susana Field Lab organized?

The Santa Susana Field Lab is divided into four areas. Areas I through II were used primarily for rocket testing, missile testing and munitions development. A small section of Area I and the 409 acres of Area II are owned by the U.S. government and used by NASA for rocket testing. Area IV was used primarily for nuclear reactor development, experimentation and testing. While the land for Area IV has been owned by various aerospace companies over the years, the U.S. government has leased and overseen most of the nuclear research that occurred at this part of the site. Although the Field Lab was divided into four areas, some employees worked in multiple areas. In interviews with the Department of Energy and the U.S. EPA, some of these workers say they would frequently move between the areas while working on a variety of projects.

Who owns SSFL?

In 1947, the Santa Susana Field Lab property was acquired by North American Aviation. A few years later, a division of North American Aviation called Atomics International developed Area IV on behalf of the Atomic Energy Commission, the predecessor of the Department of Energy and the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, to test experimental nuclear reactors. In 1955, Rocketdyne was founded as a division of North American Aviation and oversaw operations in Areas I-III at the Santa Susana Field Lab. In 1967, North American Aviation merged with Rockwell Standard to become North American Rockwell. Six years later, the company changed its name to Rockwell International. Rocketdyne remained a division of Rockwell International. Boeing acquired Rocketdyne in 1996 when acquiring the aerospace divisions of Rockwell International and is the current owner of the majority of the SSFL with the exception of Area II which is currently Federal property under the responsibility of NASA. The U.S. Department of Energy also leases a portion of Area IV.

Who is responsible for the clean-up of the Santa Susana Field Lab?

As the current owner of the site, Boeing is responsible for the majority of the clean-up of the Field Lab, which is regulated by the California Department of Toxic Substances Control. NASA is responsible for cleaning up its sections of the site, 41 acres in Area I and 409 acres in Area II. The U.S. Department of Energy has taken responsibility for cleaning up most of Area IV as the nuclear work was done on behalf of the United States government.

What is the status of the clean-up at SSFL?

Over the years, some cleanup work has been done on the site. Many of the buildings have been removed and, according to Boeing, "a substantial amount of contaminated soil."

California Senate Bill 990, signed into law by Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger in 2007, would have required the responsible parties to clean up the Santa Susana Field Lab to a level suitable for agricultural or residential use, whichever was more stringent. The law, however, was struck down by a federal court after Boeing challenged its validity on the grounds that it singled out one particular site in California for stringent action.

IIn 2010, NASA and the U.S. Department of Energy signed Administrative Orders of Consent (AOC) with the State of California to fully clean up their sections of the Field Lab to background levels. This means any contamination that they created would have to be cleaned up. The California Department of Toxic Substances Control (DTSC), the agency that regulates the site, told NBC4 they will hold the DOE and NASA to those agreements. Boeing did not sign an AOC. Instead, their cleanup is bound by a 2007 State of California Consent Order. This order gives the DTSC authorization to determine the cleanup levels for the Boeing sections of the site. DTSC tells NBC4 that they have not yet determined those levels. Boeing tells NBC4 "the cleanup will be based on established science and follow the regulatory process with transparency and full community participation." Further, the company says that in the future the site will only be used as "undeveloped open space."

According to Dan Hirsch, a nuclear policy instructor at U.C. Santa Cruz who has reviewed Boeing's latest cleanup plan and has been advocating for a full clean-up for decades, Boeing's latest plan would leave the majority of the contamination on the site. And Linda Adams, former Secretary of the CalEPA, tells NBC4 that all of the contamination should be cleaned up. She is concerned that leftover contamination could travel to neighboring communities. DTSC will make the final decision on the cleanup levels.

United States Department of Energy

"DOE is committed to the safe cleanup of the Energy Technology Engineering Center and is actively working on groundwater characterization having already completed soil characterization. We look forward to continuing to work with the State of California, Congress, the Chumash tribe, and local stakeholders in fulfillment of this important mission."

NASA

"NASA remains committed to meeting its obligations under the 2010 Administrative Order on Consent for remediation of the areas of Santa Susana Field Laboratory under NASA purview and achieving a cleanup that is protective of public health and the environment. We are making progress with demolition of obsolete administrative facilities, soil and groundwater investigations, groundwater monitoring, and treatability studies involving both laboratory and field-testing in preparation for a comprehensive soil cleanup effort.

While decisions about national monument status are outside of NASA’s authority, the agency shares with many in the community a desire to protect cultural and historical resources at Santa Susana. We will defer the demolition of the historic test stands, including those within the Coca Test Area, for as long as deferment does not impact the agency’s overall cleanup responsibilities, while the appropriate offices within the executive branch consider the National Monument proposal."

Boeing

"Boeing has made significant progress investigating, cleaning up and restoring Santa Susana. We have already removed a substantial amount of contaminated soil under the direction of two state agencies. We installed state-of-the-art treatment systems for cleaning groundwater and improving stormwater quality. We are ready to move forward and finish the soil cleanup to fulfill our responsibilities outlined in the 2007 agreement, as soon as the final remedy is selected by the state.

"We remain resolute in our commitment to perform a comprehensive and fully protective cleanup of Santa Susana. The cleanup will be based on established science and follow the regulatory process with transparency and full community participation. We will restrict Boeing’s property so it will never be used for residential, commercial, industrial or agricultural purposes, but the land will be cleaned up so it is safe enough that houses could be built there if it wasn’t restricted. This level of cleanup is about ten times more protective of human health than is required for the site’s future use as undeveloped open space.

"Numerous studies conclude that there is no evidence that past facility operations have affected the health of the local community. In an April 2013 letter to the mayor of Simi Valley, the Department of Toxic Substances Control stated, 'To date we have not found evidence of off-site contamination from SSFL that would pose a risk to human health or the environment.'

"These findings, together with a fully protective cleanup, mean Santa Susana can be safely enjoyed by future generations. Santa Susana sits within a crucial habitat linkage frequented by mountain lions and many other species. It is a site rich in Native American heritage. We want to protect these invaluable natural and cultural resources for the future, which is why we will take the balanced actions necessary to clean up, preserve and protect Santa Susana as undeveloped open space for the benefit of wildlife and enjoyment by people."

Brandeis-Bardin Institute

Below is a statement to NBC4 in response to our report, which mentions that radiation from the Santa Susana Field Lab was found offsite in the soil at the nearby Brandeis-Bardin Institute (BBI), home to Camp Alonim—a summer camp attended by some 30,000 children. In 1993, a US EPA-supervised study found “radioactive elements” in a limited number of soil samples from the Brandeis property. In December 1995, Brandeis-Bardin sued the owner of the field lab at the time (Rocketdyne), alleging that “hazardous materials” from Santa Susana—including radioactive elements--have “seeped into... the soil and groundwater” of Brandeis, and “will cause great and irreparable injury” to its land. In May 1997, Brandeis settled that suit in a confidential agreement with Rocketdyne. A Brandeis spokesman, Rabbi Jay Strear told the I-Team that BBI routinely tests its groundwater and soil and believes “the site is safe.” The I-Team asked BBI to see those soil and water tests, and any recent documentation that the state or federal government has certified the property as “safe,” but BBI declined to share that information with us. Here is BBI’s Statement to NBC4:

There is absolutely no question that the Brandeis-Bardin Institute (BBI) property is safe, and has been for decades, if not longer.

American Jewish University (AJU) acquired the BBI site in 2007 after conducting extensive diligence on the environmental condition of the property, including a comprehensive evaluation of two decades worth of testing by state and federal authorities, and by BBI. Based on an exhaustive records review and the conclusion of scientific experts, we found no cause for concern about the health and safety of the campers, staff or other visitors – past or present. Current testing confirms the safety of the property.

Importantly, the BBI property has never had a validated reading of unsafe contamination levels in water, soil, milk or vegetation. In 1995, the Environmental Protection Agency definitively concluded that there was no health risk to campers or camp counselors on the BBI property. In fact, the risk level to campers or counselors measured less than one in a million.

Continued testing since AJU’s acquisition of the site confirms the ongoing safety of the property. Soils, milk and agriculture on the BBI property are tested on a periodic basis, and groundwater is tested multiple times each year, all supervised by the California Department of Toxic Substances Control. These results have consistently shown the site to be safe.

Since 1964, 100 percent of the site’s drinking water has come from the Calleguas Municipal Water District, which provides water to roughly three-quarters of Ventura County residents. Further, AJU has no evidence that drinking water used prior to that time came from well water on the property. In any case, the BBI property has never had a validated reading of unsafe contamination levels in water.

AJU remains committed to the health and well-being of all campers, staff and visitors at BBI. We are proud of the long-standing track record of safety and the ongoing commitment to testing to ensure a safe and healthy environment for everyone who visits.

Runkle Canyon LLC

"Under no circumstances would we have ever built on this land if it posed potential health issues for our homeowners and neighbors. That is why, before starting construction at Runkle Canyon, we followed rigorous testing protocols and received approval from the California DTSC. Furthermore, testing by the U.S. EPA has shown that Runkle Canyon soil is no different than soil tested at other areas throughout Greater Los Angeles. It is irresponsible for KNBC to frighten viewers by relying on old research using outdated methodologies while ignoring verifiable scientific findings which show that Runkle Canyon is safe for residential development."