Solace 2006

사랑할 때 이야기하는 것들

Director Byun Seung WookActors Han Suk Kyu & Kim Ji Soo Also known as When She Beckons // Official website

HAN SUK KYU 한석규 (Han Seok Kyoo/Gyu/Gyoo) Born: November 3, 1964 (koreanfilm.org: b. August 17, 1964)Family: married; has 1 daughter.Height/Weight: 175 cm (5' 9") / 68 kg (150 lbs) School: Dongkuk University

TV dramas Hotel (Hyung-bin)

Complete filmographySolace (2006)A Bloody Aria (2006)Forbidden Quest (2006)Mr. Housekeeper (2005) The President's Last Bang (2005)The Scarlet Letter (2004) Double Agent (2003)Tell Me Something (1999)Shiri (1999) Christmas in August (1998)The Contact (1997)No. 3 (1997)Green Fish (1997)The Gingko Bed (1996)Dr. Bong (1995)Mommy, the Star, and the Sea Anemone (1995, cameo)

More on Han Suk Kyu at http://koreanfilm.org/actors.html#hansg

KIM JI SOO 김지수 (Kim Ji Su)Real name: Yang Sung YoonBorn: October 24, 1973 Height: 167 cm (5' 6")Weight: 45 kg (99 lbs)

TV dramas Age of Heroes (So-sun) First Love - SBS (Suh-kyung) Flowing River (Sang-hee) Days in the Sun (Hee-ju) Full of Sun (Ji-sook)Bad Boys (Sang-eun) Angel in My Heart (Yu-kyong)Love (So-jin) When She Beckons (In-ha)Love & AmbitionM

MoviesSolaceTraces of Love (2006)The Romance (2006) This Charming Girl (2005)

AwardsBest New Actress - 26th Blue Dragon Awards 2005Singapore International Film Festival Best Actress Award (2005)

November 26, 2006

Solace' twists melodrama to its advantage

By Yang Sung-jin The Korea Herald

Sometimes, we watch films to satisfy our burning (yet often unfulfilled) desire for a better world - a cheap entertainment that whets our insatiable appetite for a sugarcoated fantasy that we hope will help replace our cheaper reality.

"Solace," directed by Byun Seung-wook, defies such convention. The world it portrays is far from beautiful: Life is tough, all the characters are trapped, relationships are hard to forge and even harder to maintain.

In-gu (Han Seok-gyu) is a likable pharmacist. He smiles a lot, is friendly, and pleasant to talk with. His drugstore is small but he seems comfortable in the cramped space, playing an online poker game in his leisure time and ordering Chinese food for a quick lunch.

But his life is anything but happy-go-lucky. Older brother, In-seop (Lee Han-wi), is mentally disabled, and In-gu bears the burden of taking care of his brother, often involving a wild-goose chase around town because he tends to disappear. His older brother's presence poses a bigger stumbling block to In-gu's life. Not long ago, In-gu lost a chance to marry a woman he loved because her family did not like his mentally disabled brother. In-gu did not want to lose her, but he could not cut off relationships with his poor brother, either.

Deep inside though, all he really wants is a burden-free life. He admits it is morally wrong, but he cannot resist thinking about other, better possibilities, especially when his older brother makes his life complicated and he misses one romantic moment after another.

Hye-ran (Kim Ji-soo) is equally stuck with her deplorable life conditions. She is barely making a living as a copycat designer. She sells fake brand clothes in Seoul's Dongdaemun shopping mall at the risk of humiliating detentions at a police station. She sees no hope. Her father has left a huge debt on his death, and she thinks she probably cannot repay the obligation in her lifetime.

At night, in his own drugstore, In-gu drinks beer by himself; his former girlfriend is getting married to another man. Hye-ran enters the store, asking for some sleeping pills. She needs a really good, sound sleep to forget her debt-ridden life, even for a night. The kind-hearted pharmacist's on-the-spot prescription: beer.

The pill request leads to beer at the pharmacy, and one thing leads to another, with the couple having a one-night stand at a shabby motel. But there is no romantic atmosphere whatsoever. They have sex. They sleep together, not spooning, but back-to-back. In the early morning, she wakes up, put on her clothes, stepping out of the motel alone. Meanwhile, he is awake too, but pretends to be sleeping, saying not a word.

Despite constant obstacles, In-gu and Hye-ran struggle to meet with each other and deepen their relationship at a slow pace. They finally pull off a truly romantic moment, only to be hurriedly brought back to the frustrating reality.

They are aware of the limitations of their relationships. They have feelings toward each other, but they don't have any room for handling such emotions because of their respective family-related burdens. Sensing the predictably negative conclusion, Hye-ran declares bravely, "Why don't we stop here?"

But the couple does not stop there, nor does director Byun, who pushes the plot forward by amplifying the emotional resonance through more family-initiated developments that produce some sentimental scenes.

"Solace" may not be the melodrama of choice for moviegoers in their 20s. But for the thirtysomethings, it is a refreshing 'solace' - thanks to its realistic and inspiring details that capture ordinary Koreans in this stage of their lives.

Nov 15, 2006

The Season's Great Movie Kisses

The full article posted here.

Fall is closing in, and with it comes the time for bittersweet melodrama in the movie theaters. Lovers meet like ships passing in the night, unforgettable memories are born, tear-moistened hankies freeze stiff in the midnight air. Some say a romantic film stands and falls with the quality of the screen-filling kiss. Actors know it and go to extreme lengths to create the world’s most beautiful kiss scene. The Chosun Ilbo looks at the outstanding kisses of the season.

◇ Solace

Kim Ji-su and Han Suk-kyu

Following the kiss scene with Yoo Ji-tae in "Traces of Love," Kim Ji-su is part of another steamer, "Solace," that will be released on Nov. 30. To complete the second love, she kisses Han Suk-kyu. Even though neither of them is short of skills in melodrama, ahead of the kiss scene tension was palpable on set. Since it had to be a surprise kiss, the key was for Han to spin Kim around in a commanding way. But in the shoot, Han had a hard time controlling his strength and was unable to pull her around in the right manner. It took scores of trial and error for the duo to finally get it just right. The movie is released on Nov 30.

Source: englishnews@chosun.com

http://english.chosun.com/w21data/html/new...0611150003.html

--:--:--:--:--:--:--:--:--:--:--:--:--:--:--:--:--:--:--:--

Please watch out for possible spoilers

2006/11/21

New movie 'Solace' appeals with open ending

SEOUL, Nov. 21 (Yonhap) -- The delicately written melodrama "Solace" involves less sentimentality and music than its local predecessors in the genre, but the emotional reticence creates more space for the audience to chew over the plot, and thus makes the story more engaging.

The film, about a couple in their 30s who are too experienced and saddled with worries to fantasize about love, follows the rules of melodrama and may be overly sentimental at times, but in the end conveys a powerful catharsis that overcomes the predictability.

Director Byun Seung-wook, who spent five years working on the movie's scenario, said he hoped to distance the story from being a predictable tear-jerking melodrama. Within the love story framework lies the irresistible yoke of life, such as love, family and aging, which are also real-life issues for many in the audience, he said.

"I basically had a concern about how to make this melodrama, how to make it different from ones that we usually think of," Byun said after a press screening in a Seoul theater on Monday.

"I decided that that quality is formed at the scenario stage, so we tried to cut down on sentimental stuff as much as possible and tried to fill that space with an emotional one," he said.

The first hook for the director's feature debut is its cast, Han Seok-gyu (as In-gu) and Kim Ji-soo (Hye-ran), but its emotional span is deepened with Lee Han-wi playing In-gu's mentally disabled brother.

After his girlfriend leaves him because of the burden of having to care for the disabled brother, In-gu, a popular, humorous pharmacist, finds himself immune to new love.

Hye-ran's life is no better. A copycat designer who sells fake Chanel and Gucci in Seoul's crowded Dongdaemun shopping mall, she has inherited a large debt from her father and often has to endure police questioning and detention for her illegal business to get by.

Their initial encounter and one-night stand don't do much to start their romance. It is rather the dismal, tough sides of their lives -- his brother and her debt-ridden status -- that build their emotional bonds and convince viewers.

The story also involves sentimental elements that are typical in a melodrama, such as when In-gu's mother dies or Hye-ran clashes with her sister over her choice of marriage partner, but the predictable plot pays off for patient viewers at the end. The precious moment comes when In-gu listens to the heart of his brother, and the movie has an open-ended conclusion that stays true to real life.

hkim@yna.co.kr

Source: Yonhap News

http://english.yna.co.kr/Engnews/20061121/...21092448E9.html

11-27-2006

Look Similar? They Pretty Much Are

By Kim Tae-jong

Staff Reporter

If you take a look at the posters of upcoming movies, you may be struck by the similarities. If you read their plot summaries, you may even get the impression that you have read the same outline twice.

It's true that movies in the same genre share many similarities, but it does not mean that they should be indistinguishable, even at a glance.

Such similarities have caused worries that the local movies lack the originality and creativity.

"This year, especially, it's true that there have not many films with creative stories," said Huh Moon-young, a film critic and programmer of the Korean Panorama section at the Pusan International Film Festival.

"It may be inevitable that there are some similarities in movies, as commercial movies tend to mix limited elements that can appeal to the audience, but it’s disappointing and a matter of concern."

Here are brief introductions to six movies and comparisons of them in pairs to help you tell one from another.

"Cruel Winter Blues" and "Sunflower"

At first glance, these two movies have many striking similarities. They revolve around criminal gangsters who for the first time experience a mother's love from a middle-aged woman that they don’t know. These women also happen to run restaurants.

In "Cruel Winter Blues," Jae-mun (played by Sol Kyoung-gu) decides to kill a man, Dae-sik, to avenge his dead friend.

But when he goes to Dae-sik's hometown, he happens to meet Dae-sik's mother (by Na Mun-hee). She treats him like his son, and Jae-mun becomes perplexed.

In "Sunflower," Tae-sik (Kim Rae-won) becomes a new man after being released from a prison. He tries hard to keep three promises to himself _ never drink, never fight and never cry.

He meets Duk-ja (Kim Hae-sook), who takes care of him as if he were her son. But he finds it hard to keep his promise.

It seems that the two films' directors wanted to combat the stereotypes and typical formulas of gangster movies, using the theme of motherly love.

They cast two veteran actresses _ Na and Kim Hae-sook _ who are often described as having typical Korean mothers' characteristics.

"How the Lack of Love Affects Two Men" and "Who Slept With Her?"

These two films are adult comedies. Movies in this genre tend to have simple plotlines that are boldly developed, focusing on fragmented episodes revolving around wackos, perverts and a sexy woman.

These two films follow the formula. The films revolve around men with unfulfilled sexual desires, and the characters try hard to get to the heart _ and body _ of a sexy woman. In the development of the story, the directors added jokes and toilet humor.

The differences between the two films are only in who fights for the woman and how they fight.

In "How the Lack of Love Affects Two Men," a father and his son fight over a woman who moves into a downstairs room in their house, and the two men compete for her.

"Who Slept With Her?" takes place in a boys high school, where a bunch of male students and teachers are fascinated by a new student teacher at the school. As is expected, they all fight to get her. But when a rumor spreads that she slept with one of the men from the school, a group tries to find out his identity.

"Once in a Summer" and "Solace"

Melodramas are probably one of the most formulaic genres _ a man and woman meet, they are usually played by a beautiful actress and a handsome actor and they surmount problems. The film ends either with a happily-ever-after ending or with a sad yet touching conclusion.

With these limitations, these two new melodramas try to escape the formulas and show something new and different.

Starring Lee Byung-hun and Su Ae, "Once in a Summer" takes the audience back to the late 1960s to depict a pure and innocent love.

Professor Yoon Suk-young (Lee) recalls his first and unforgettable love Suh Jung-in (Su) whom he met when he was a college student.

"Solace," however, uses more realistic settings and doesn't beautify love or romance. It stars Han Seok-gyu and Kim Ji-su.

In-gu (Han) lives with his mother and a mentally challenged brother. To take care of is brother, In-gu is forced to give up a marriage. Hye-ran (Kim) is some 500 million won debt. She inherited the debt from her father, and she believes she doesn't have time for romance.

The two regard their families as a burden but come to see them in a new light as the relationship develops.

e3dward@koreatimes.co.kr

Source: The Korea Times

http://times.hankooki.com/lpage/culture/20...17522911700.htm

Hi jojo, very happy to see you here. Indeed, I agree... KJS is certainly going places. Working with well known movie actors and directors, making an impact her own way yet steadily and surely in the Korean movie industry.

---------------------

Monday, December 04, 2006

Korea Weekend Box Office - Dec. 1-3

Another quiet weekend this week, with SUNFLOWER (Haebaraji) rising a notch to take the No. 1 spot outright this week (last week it was No. 2 in Seoul, but No. 1 nationwide). I still have not seen it, though, so have nothing to say about the film.

No. 2 goes to Guillermo del Toro's fastasy epic PAN'S LABYRINTH, which makes me quite happy. With 215,700 admissions nationwide, that works out to around $1.45 million in its first three days. Not huge, but not bad for a Spanish-language film. One of the film's biggest problems, imho, is a slightly misplaced marketing campaign, which made the film look more like THE CHRONICLES OF NARNIA than the dark, nuanced and fascinating film that it is. (Not that there is anything wrong with Narnia, but we're talking about totally different target audiences... kids versus adults). At the fairly full screening I was at Friday night, judging by the conversations I overheard on the way out, a lot of people were surprised and a little miffed by the movie. I, on the other hand, loved it and recommend it heartily. Gorgeous looking film, intriguing... just first-rate.

And although SUNFLOWER beat out PAN, it is worth noting that SUNFLOWER had around 75 percent more screens.

SAW 3 came in third, coincidentally enough. No comments about the gore-fest, either.

THE DEPARTED fell to No. 4, which does not surprise me. As I said last week, I found the film weak and lacking oomph. Apparently many Koreans agreed with me.

The big surprises to me are the Nos. 5 and 6 films, two new openings featuring actors who were once major players in the Korean entertainment scene. ONCE IN A SUMMER (Yeoreum Iyagi) stars Lee Byung-hun, in a story that seems rather like HARMONIUM IN MY MEMORY. SOLACE (Sarang Halttae Iyagi Haneun Geotdeul) features Han Suk-hyu, who starred in such 1990s hits as SHIRI and THE CONTACT (and a favorite of mine, GREEN FISH). Actually, neither flop was really a "surprise," but it is fascinating to see how tastes change.

About a year ago, I happened to meet Mr. Lee, when he talked about how he was torn about what to do next in his career -- stay in Korea, doing what he knows and does so well, or take a big risk and try to break into Hollywood. I hope this most recent setback encourages him to make the attempt to go abroad. I think it is almost always better to take a chance than to play it safe... but then I am not a big movie star, so what do I know?

To be fair to Mr. Lee, I'm guessing his latest film was made with the Japanese market in mind as much as (or even more than) the Korean market. So I think the poor debut does not reflect on his choice as much as it might otherwise. At any rate, I would like to mention that every time I have met Lee Byung-hun, he has always been very suave, mellow and a gentleman. I cannot claim to be friends with him or know him well, but he strikes me as being one of the good guys.

Mark Russell is a Seoul-based movie writer who's also a contributor at koreanfilm.org.

http://koreapopwars.blogspot.com/

Thanks to Darcy Paquet for the link & highlight, and Mark Russell for the box-office report. Source: Film2.0

Dear edm, I love what you wrote last night and was about to reply when the forum goes into maintenance-mode. Unfortunately, we had lost some data including your message. I'm really sorry about that. As it does happen occasionally, best if we could have a back up for long postings especially. Hopefully you won't stop writing and sharing your thoughts.

Please share more on HSK with us, I can update his information at the first post as a reference for others wanting to learn about him. I don't really know much about HSK but I like him in Christmas in August with SEH. And I've seen him in The Scarlett Letter, too. Daring but good yet the movie's not one that I'd like to remember... sadly because of the storyline, as well as being LEJ's last work. About his lack of action against negative publicity... maybe he's just not bothered with it, like they said... bad publicity is still publicity, right? Come to think of the movies he made recently, HSK is taking quite the challenge with his roles.. from Scarlett Letter to (period piece) Forbidden Quest to Mr. Housekeeper... I mean... totally at the end of the pole for each. I must say though the role in Solace kinda reminds me of Christmas in August... man at the counter, pharmacist vs photographer-manning a quaint photo shop. :blush:

On a similar note, I really appreciate your positive observation on LBH and Once in a Summer, which I can't agree more. As for LBH... his work is quite well-known in Japan, in fact... they might even have all his past series & movies, some going back to the early years as a newbie. But his most popular series has to be Beautiful Days (as well as All In) and his post-2000 movies, all the way from JSA till A Bittersweet Life. I guess he's lucky in the sense that the J-fans love BD so much that they're keeping tab of all his upcoming & in-coming movies. And yes... his team of management should be applauded as well.

Despite the situation regarding Solace and Summer... with the new movies coming out today especially, all the expectation, competition and feedback... I just hope both movies & the cast will be noted for something much more than what's shown by the B.O numbers.