ABOUT THE GAME STUDIO

About Turn 10 Studios

Turn 10 is a division of Microsoft Games Studios and was established in 2001 as a first-party game developer. The studio’s first game – the original Forza Motorsport – launched in May 2005. With an emphasis on cutting edge simulation and showcasing both Xbox Live as well as the Xbox hardware, the game launched to critical acclaim.

FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS

For more help you can read our Frequently Asked Questions or contact us.

What is their history and background?

Turn 10 Studios was founded in 2001, and have been around for 23 years. Their first title was Forza Motorsport 3 (2009), and have since created a total of 9 video games for 3 different platforms in collaboration with 2 other game studios.

To learn more about Turn 10 Studios visit their official website: forzamotorsport.net.

Do they have any upcoming titles?

We don't have any announced upcoming titles on file for Turn 10 Studios. As soon as we know about any we'll add them in here!

What companies have they often worked with?

Turn 10 Studios has worked with a total of 2 other game studios to create their games, here is the full list:

Xbox Game Studios (9 games)

Playground Games (3 games)

What is their official website?

The official website for Turn 10 Studios that we have on file is forzamotorsport.net. Visit their website for news, potential job openings and more!

VISIT forzamotorsport.net

Do they have any job openings or career opportunities?

Unfortunately, we don't have a job openings page on file for Turn 10 Studios - there is still a chance this game studio is hiring; feel free to check their website and social channels for more information.

How many video games have they released?

Turn 10 Studios has released 9 video games from the years 2009 to 2023. They have created games on the following 3 platforms:

Steam

Xbox

Xbox Play Anywhere

How do I report out-of-date/incorrect details or submit edits?

If you would like to report out-of-date or incorrect information about a game studio please contact us and we will investigate further. For any page edit requests please also get in touch and we will get our team to update accordingly.

SHARE THIS PAGE WITH OTHERS

Spread the word about Turn 10 Studios with friends, family & others.

Studio Images (Branding)

Download studio logo as Logo (Square), Logo (Banner) or Logo (Original).

These images are property of Turn 10 Studios - please use fairly.

SOCIAL MEDIA

Follow Turn 10 Studios on social media if you're a fan.

Name:Turn 10 Studios Type:Company Founded:2001 (~23 years ago) Games Created:9 (9 released / 0 upcoming) Official Website:https://www.forzamotorsport.net/en-us/turn10 Contact Email:fo*****@******.com

Sign up for a free NEXARDA™ account to view all 1 Turn 10 Studios contact emails.

© NEXARDA™ 2018 - 2024, All Rights Reserved. All trademarks are the property of their respective owners.

By using our website you agree to the Terms & Conditions, Privacy Policy & Cookie Policy.