This article covers logos that contain a jump scare.

Editors should list the timestamps, under the videos where such content occurs.

Background

Turn 10 Studios is an American video game developer based in Redmond, Washington and was established in 2001 under Microsoft Game Studios (now known as Xbox Game Studios). The company is known for developing the Forza series, which includes the Forza Motorsport franchise and the Forza Horizon franchise (additional work only), for Xbox platforms.

1st Logo (May 24, 2007-October 3, 2014)

Visuals: On a black background, there is a silvery-whitish arrow. The screen zooms out on it as a race track appears. It goes around and stops near the bottom of the screen and its trail forms the word "TURN". As the arrow moves, the track disappears and the number "1" slides in, followed by a "0". The logo shines and fades to the Microsoft Studios logo.

Technique: CGI.

Audio: A car vrooming sound.

Audio Variants: On Forza Motorsport 2 and Forza Motorsport 3, a different car vrooming sound is heard, alongside a electronic synth hum and some whoosh sounds.

Availability: Seen on the Forza games from Forza Motorsport 2 to Forza Horizon 2.

2nd Logo (September 15, 2015-)

Visuals: On a black background, there are several streaks of light, which reveals the Turn 10 Studios in a different font. Later, the streak disappears and more streaks of light appear and this time, when the lights slow down, it shows the Microsoft Studios logo (in its 2012 typeface). After this, the logo disappears.

Variant: Starting with the release of Forza Horizon 5, the Microsoft Studios logo is replaced with a horizontal version of the Xbox Game Studios logo. The reflection is now at a higher resolution.

Technique: CGI.

Audio: Race car sounds when the streaks of light pass by with dramatic music.

Availability: Seen on all Forza games since Forza Motorsport 6. The Microsoft Studios variant can be seen from the release of Forza Motorsport 6 in 2015 until to the release of Forza Horizon 4 in 2018 (including the Xbox Series X/S and Steam versions of the game, which both of these versions were released in 2020 and 2021, respectively), while the Xbox Game Studios variant can be seen on Forza Horizon 5.

3rd Logo (October 5, 2023-)

Visuals: On a dark background, the headlights of a car switch on. The lights move up and down before flashing, revealing the Turn 10 icon from the first logo. The car's lights continue to scan up and down before flashing again, revealing the Xbox Game Studios logo. The logo fades, followed by the car headlights switching off shortly after.

Technique: CGI.

Audio: Car engine sounds accompanied by electronic beats synced to the animation.