The Xbox Games Showcase begins in just 192 hours; in the lead up to the event we are looking at what to expect from each first party studio - today we look at Turn 10 Studios.

Founded in 2001, Turn 10 Studios has rhythmically released Forza Motorsport entries on a biannual basis since its first in 2005 - until last year. After six consecutive laps of successful two year development cycles, Turn 10 has broken loose of the track toward roads unknown. Forza has been a pillar of Xbox's first party output through the years, and three have already released on Xbox One. With XGS expanding to fifteen studios and games turning more into services; Turn 10 has been given the time to breathe and assess its weaknesses as it tries to fend off any feelings of franchise fatigue entering the next generation.

Probably the studio with the most clearly defined future, Turn 10 are certainly working on Forza Motorsport 8 and assisting with Forza Horizon 5. After Forza Motorsport 7 released, support work continued into 2019 instead of developing the next entry as has been done in the past. What this extra development time is going toward is anyone's guess. There have been rumors of details and rumblings of a cinematic director, but nothing concrete enough to generate too much speculation. Its also worth mentioning that Dan Greenwalt, Creative Director at Turn 10, wants to get the input of the fans as they build their next entry. It will be interesting to see if what is going on in the Forza Discord is what he's referring to, or a new approach to release with a different roll out philosophy and some sort of beta. Also of interest is whether this game will be a cross-gen release; are there things that can't be done with current Forza games that could if the Xbox One was left behind and that's why they've slowed development? It would make sense, but that would mean a long time without a new entry if their cross-gen release strategy lasts as long as we think.

Cars and next generation showcases go hand and hand, and its hard to imagine this one being any different. Its important to note that there is a timing concern with making sure Forza Motorsport and Forza Horizon don't overlap each other too much so one of the two needs to be shown soon and most believe Forza Motorsport 8 would be the next in line. Maybe going forward that spacing between games will be wider than it has been in the past, with the two series releasing eighteen months apart as opposed to twelve. I've gone back and forth on whether this will be shown in July, later this year at X020, or a different event entirely. Phil mentions knowing the memes and having this Showcase unfold without a Gears or Forza announcement could work toward showing customers who feel Xbox has been too reliant on those franchises that there is so much more to expect from their output going forward. We know Forza games are going to continue, so it doesn't have to be revealed at the event unless its coming soon. Ultimately I'm leaning toward us seeing a tease, with more information coming later this year, and a vague 2021 release date given.

Do you expect to see Turn 10 Studios at the Showcase - If so, what are your hopes? If not, why and when will we see them next?

- 192 Hours Remain -

*If I forget anything or the wording/information is off, feel free to let me know in a post or DM and I'll edit it in; same goes for things you may think I'm unaware of for studios I've yet to post. I try to keep track of everything, but I may lose sight of some smaller things and rumors so all resources are appreciated!

Click the image below to see the posts for each studio that has been revealed so far - (let me know if this is too annoying, and studio names with hotlinks are better)

Not everyone has issues but Windows Store and the Xbox beta app's names are mud for a reason. You go in to any thread regarding Windows Store and Game Pass PC and there are plenty of people having all kinds of random issues. Plenty more than Steam. There's a reason why Steam is so popular and why Sea of Thieves has completely blown up on Steam despite being available on Windows Store and Game Pass for the past couple of years.

We shouldn't be defending it, we should be calling it for what it is and encouraging MS to finally ditch the UWP bullshit that causes so many issues for so many people.

Yep, defending this atrocity of a store/launcher is just silly. I've played a ton of games on gamepass for PC, and while I haven't had any major issues with games themselves, I know they exist. And I know how stupid it is to lock everything in the restricted WindowsApps folder. I actually think that ends up causing a lot of issues. The first time I installed a game I messed up the permissions of WindowsApps and broke something because I wanted access to the files (for some reason I forget). Out of frustration I just deleted the whole folder and thought I'd start over. Big mistake. The Xbox app refused to install anything and wouldn't tell me why. It just did nothing when you clicked the button... until eventually I manually created a new WindowsApps folder on that drive and suddenly it's happy. No problems since then, but that's only because I won't touch that folder with a 10 foot pole. They need to store games in a regular folder like human beings. I don't know why they're so terrified of someone having access to game files when they release this stuff on steam anyway. I find it humorous that Origin is light years beyond the Xbox app as a launcher.