50 years later, Molland amazed by British Invasion

As a teenager in Liverpool in 1962 and 1963, Joey Molland had an up-close view of the acts and music that would launch the British Invasion.

Molland, who later joined the British rock band Badfinger, played Chuck Berry songs on his guitar on Penny Lane while local groups showed off the Merseybeat sound in the city's Cavern Club.

"There were so many impressive bands in Liverpool: The Beatles, of course, and The Searchers, Gerry and the Pacemakers, Rory Storm and the Hurricanes," Molland said in an interview last week. "I don't know quite how it happened, but Liverpool is a famous city for music and entertainers. There must have been something in the water!"

Molland will help celebrate the 50th anniversary of the British Invasion on Sunday when he headlines Summerfest 2014 on Binghamton's State Street. The city will shut down part of State Street (from Court Street to Hawley Street) for the show, which takes place from 5-9 p.m.

Joining Molland on the bill are two performers who also have ties to the British Invasion. Denny Laine sang the Moody Blues' first hit in 1965, "Go Now," and played with Paul McCartney's Wings for 10 years. Terry Sylvester spent more than a dozen years as a vocalist/guitarist with The Hollies, performing on hits such as "The Air That I Breathe" and "Long Cool Woman in a Black Dress."

Molland met Sylvester as a 13-year-old in Liverpool and recalled watching Sylvester's band at the time, The Escorts, practice their songs. The Escorts were just one of the many bands that impressed Molland. He remains awed by some of the performers who did not achieve superstar status during the British Invasion.

"It was scary," he said. "In 1962, I was 15 and the bands were of a very high standard. Brian Griffiths (of The Big Three) was one of the greatest guitar players I ever heard in my life. A fellow named Colin Manley (of The Remo Four) was an unbelievable player. There were great people playing in and around the city."

The British Invasion came full circle for Molland when he joined Badfinger in 1969. The group formerly known as the Iveys was signed to The Beatles' Apple Records in 1968 and had a Top 10 hit the next year with the McCartney-written "Come and Get It." The next five years saw Badfinger become one of the world's premier rock bands, thanks to hits such as "No Matter What," "Day After Day," "Baby Blue," "Midnight Caller" and "Apple of My Eye." A 1970 song written by band members Tom Evans and Pete Ham on the "No Dice" album — "Without You" — became a No. 1 record for Harry Nilsson two years later.

In the early 1970s, Molland, Ham, Evans and drummer Mike Gibbins found themselves in the inner circle of the post-breakup Fab Four. They not only performed on George Harrison's "All Things Must Pass" album and John Lennon's "Imagine" album, but joined Harrison, Ringo Starr and other musical giants onstage at the Concert for Bangladesh in 1971. Harrison also produced some Molland-written songs for the band's "Straight Up" album that year.

Working and performing with members of The Beatles was intimidating, Molland said.

"They were The Beatles and there was no getting around that," he said. "I love The Beatles and I love to play, but to be in a studio with these guys either playing for them or with them was a very intimidating experience — a scary thing!

"John Lennon played us 'Jealous Guy' just one time all the way through," Molland said. "The beauty of these songs are that they are simple to play: intro, verses, chorus, another verse, a solo, another chorus and the end. Once you grasp those things, you can play the songs easily. But it's still Lennon singing the song! Or it's George Harrison singing in your earphones. It was all of the (emotions) you would imagine: frightening, intimidating, exhilarating."

It wasn't just The Beatles that captivated Molland: He recalled being amazed by legendary musicians such as Eric Clapton, Billy Preston, Bobby Whitlock and Klaus Voorman.

"I always looked at this group of people and was overwhelmed, really," he said. "They were all nice, friendly people. And we had a few hits of our own by then. But I don't know if they ever looked at us and ever said: 'Wow! That's Badfinger over there.'"

As the 1970s progressed, Badfinger became the quintessential triumph-and-tragedy band. Management issues and Ham's suicide in 1975 led to the band's first breakup. Molland and Evans reunited as Badfinger in 1979 on Elektra Records and released "Airwaves," which produced a minor hit with the Molland-written "Love is Gonna Come At Last." A second reunion album, "Say No More," was released in 1981. Songwriting-royalty litigation ensued and Evans committed suicide two years later. Gibbins died in 2005.

Molland has a seemingly modest view of the legacy of a band that helped usher in the power-pop era.

"All we ever did as a band was our best," he said. "We brought our best songs and played with each other and for each other. It wasn't a pop group where we were going to put on outfits and (perform). We really thought about the music as something special."

Badfinger experienced a resurgence in 2013 when the Ham-written "Baby Blue" was featured in the closing scene of the AMC blue-meth TV show "Breaking Bad." The song and the band were exposed to a new audience, as digital sales of "Baby Blue" jumped more than 2,900 percent in a week.

"It was a great thing, wasn't it?" Molland said. "It was a big surprise — I had no idea it was going to happen. I got phone calls right after (the show) ended. They said: 'Did you see that?' I went back and had a look at the end of the show. The next day, it was the No. 1 classic-rock download in America.

"For the next week to 10 days, it was like Badfinger was back in the charts like the old days. I was doing loads of interviews and TV shows. They were even talking about us in financial newspapers. … The only difference was I didn't feel like we had done anything! It was a record we made 40 years ago. But it was a big treat. Believe me, it was a big treat."

Molland plans to perform "Baby Blue" and other Badfinger hits when he takes the Summerfest 2014 stage with his band. He will also perform a song or two from his latest CD, "Return to Memphis," released earlier this year. The CD was recorded at Royal Studios in Memphis and is special to Molland because he was inspired to become a musician by Elvis Presley's recordings in the city.

"The day before I heard ('Blue Suede Shoes'), I was doing all the things that an 11-year-old boy does: I was riding my bike and climbing trees," he said. "I heard that record, got my brother's guitar out and started to teach myself how to play. The Elvis Presley records knocked me out."

Molland said he plans to continue to record new music and hopes to do more regional-based albums.

"Since I made the Memphis record, I've been dreaming about going to Detroit and making a record there with Detroit musicians. Or go to Kansas City and make a record there. There are completely different sounds in each of these cities.

"I'm still ambitious about writing a big hit song. I've played on a lot of big hits and had some minor hits of my own that I wrote. I think every songwriter in the world has that same dream."

IF YOU GO

• What: Summerfest 2014 with Joey Molland, Denny Laine and Terry Sylvester

• When: 5 p.m. Sunday

• Where: State Street, downtown Binghamton