A Senate Resolution commending the United States Armed Forces, intelligence community, and the United States President for bringing Osama bin Laden to justice.

Whereas, Osama bin Laden, the founder of the al-Qaeda terrorist organization, was self-admittedly responsible for the September 11, 2001 attacks on the United States which resulted in the horrific deaths of 2,974 innocent people; and

Whereas, His actions caused numerous deaths due to mass-casualty attacks against civilian and military targets including, but not limited to, the 1998 series of U.S. Embassy bombings in Africa, which resulted in the death of 258 people and the injury of over 5,000 people, and the attack on the USS Cole on October 12, 2000, which resulted in the death of 17 and injury of 39 Sailors; and

Whereas, Osama bin Laden evaded capture since first being placed on the Federal Bureau of Investigation's lists of Ten Most Wanted Fugitives on June 7, 1999, for his involvement in the 1998 U.S. Embassy bombings, and on October 10, 2001, after being placed on the FBI's Most Wanted Terrorists for the September 11, 2001 attacks; and

Whereas, The United States launched a War on Terror in 2001, lead by President George W. Bush and carried out by the U.S. intelligence community and the U.S. Armed Forces, to protect democracy in America and around the globe; and

Whereas, Upon taking office, President Barack Obama directed Leon Panetta, the director of the CIA, to make the killing or capture of Osama bin Laden a top priority; and

Whereas, After years of painstaking work by the U.S. intelligence community, on April 29, 2011, at the direction of President Barack Obama, the United States launched a targeted operation in Abbottabad, Pakistan to bring Osama bin Laden to justice; and

Whereas, On May 1, 2011, a small team of U.S. Navy SEALs carried out the operation with such extraordinary courage and capability so that no Americans were harmed and civilian casualties were carefully avoided, and as a result Osama bin Laden was shot and killed; and

Whereas, Because of the unflagging dedication and hard work of so many people throughout the world committed to freedom and security, including our brave and professional U.S. Armed Forces, Osama bin Laden is no longer a threat to our nation; and

Whereas, Osama bin Laden's death represents a small measure of relief and justice for the families of those killed on Sept. 11, 2001, and countless other victims of the al Qaeda terror network; and

Whereas, This historic victory in the War on Terror is a reminder to the world that attacks on American citizens will not go unanswered and that our nation must remain ever vigilant in providing the U.S. Armed Forces with the resources they need to complete the mission so that they may return home as soon as possible; now, therefore,

Be It Resolved by the Senate of the State of New Jersey:

1. This House honors the United States Armed Forces, intelligence community, and the United States President for bringing Osama bin Laden to justice.

2. Duly authenticated copies of this resolution signed by the Senate President and attested by the Secretary of the Senate thereof, shall be transmitted to the Governor of this State, the President of the United States, to each member of New Jersey's Congressional delegation, and the all branches of the United States Armed Services.

STATEMENT

This resolution honors the United States Armed Forces, intelligence community, and the United States President for bringing Osama bin Laden to justice.

On May 1, 2011, a special forces team of U.S. Navy at the direction of President Barak Obama, killed the founder of the al-Qaeda terrorist organization, Osama bin Laden.

Osama bin Laden was responsible for the 1998 series of U.S. Embassy bombings in Africa, the attack on the USS Cole in 2000, and the September 11, 2001 attacks on the United States, to name only a few.

The brave sacrifices of our U.S. Armed Services has brought closure to many who lost loved ones by the hands of the al-Qaeda terrorist organization.