Duck Soup is a 1933 American pre-Code musical black comedy film written by Bert Kalmar and Harry Ruby (with additional dialogue by Arthur Sheekman and Nat Perrin) and directed by Leo McCarey. Released by Paramount Pictures on November 17, 1933, it stars the four Marx Brothers (Groucho, Harpo, Chico, and Zeppo in his final film appearance) and also features Margaret Dumont, Louis Calhern, Raquel Torres and Edgar Kennedy. Duck Soup was the last of the five Marx Brothers films released by Paramount Pictures. In the film, Groucho portrays the newly installed president of the fictional country of Freedonia. Zeppo is his secretary, while Chico and Harpo are spies for the neighboring country of Sylvania. Relations between Groucho and the Sylvanian ambassador deteriorate during the film, eventually leading the two countries to war.

The Alban Arts Center is a small arts organization in the heart of downtown St. Albans. Located within the historic Alban Theater, originally built in 1938 as a movie house, the Alban Arts Center provides a wide array of artistic opportunities for St. Albans and the surrounding community within its intimate 225 seat theater. Primarily focusing on the performing arts, the Alban produces 4-6 productions every year, in addition to hosting several other theatre companies and touring productions. The Alban, as a small and energetic organization, can segue from large, family oriented casts to intimate and intense dramas in the course of their season; and even produces an annual Shakespeare in the Park at St. Albans City Park. The Alban also hosts concerts, movies, and a variety of other performances throughout the year.

In addition to producing and hosting theatrical productions the Alban Arts Center also houses the Alban Arts Academy, a twice yearly extra-curricular academy that has provided artistic education to the greater-metro area, since 2010. Academy classes include Acting, Improv, Musical Theatre and much more. All classes are taught by local artists, and over 1,000 students from 7 counties have traveled to St. Albans for their arts education needs. Every spring and fall semester the Alban Arts Academy offers 15+ classes and awards scholarships to students that may need them.