'Duck Soup' is a classic comedy movie made in 1933, directed by Leo McCarey and starring the Marx Brothers (Groucho, Harpo, Chico and Zeppo) with Margaret Dumont, Raquel Torres, Louis Calhern and Edgar Kennedy.

The movie had a mixed reception when it was first released but it was rediscovered in the 1960's and is now generally regarded as a masterpiece of anarchic comedy and one of the greatest movies made by the Marx Brothers. The United States Library of Congress has declared Duck Soup "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant" and it is currently ranked at number 60 in the American Film Institute's list of 100 Greatest Films.

Its poor reception has been blamed on the political and economic crisis in the 1930's, with the Great Depression in the US and growing concern over the rising power of Adolf Hitler in Germany which meant that audiences were just not ready for the disrespect, cynicism and brilliant satire in the movie. For similar reasons the film received no Academy Award nominations.

Search Amazon for 'Duck Soup'

The movie is full of jokes, both subtle and unsubtle, visual and verbal and contains some classic comedic scenes, such as the famous mirror scene, which are just as funny now as when the movie was made. Groucho gave his own strange recipe to explain the film's title: "After one taste, you'll duck soup for the rest of your life."

The storyline is just what you might expect and indeed hope for from a Marx Brothers film - completely far-fetched and unbelievable. It revolves around Groucho playing Rufus T Firefly, the dictator of a small state called Freedonia. He attempts to win the hand of rich Mrs. Teasdale, played beautifully by Margaret Dumont, once again the perfect foil for Groucho's outrageous insults.

Groucho and the Ambassador of neighbouring Sylvania declare war on each other because of the use of the word 'upstart' and everyone breaks into a negro spiritual song and dance number - "All God's chillun got guns!". To make matters even more chaotic, sylvania sends in the word's most inept spies, Chicolini and Pinky to obtain top secret information, creating more mayhem and of course, more opportunities for sublime anarchic comedy.

The movie's biting satire takes aim at deceitful governments, petty dictators and war in general and its irreverent message is universal. It is a piece of Marx Brothers magic.

Main Cast

Groucho Marx ... Rufus T. Firefly

Harpo Marx ... Pinky

Chico Marx ... Chicolini

Zeppo Marx ... Lt Bob Roland

Margaret Dumont ... Mrs. Gloria Teasdale

Raquel Torres ... Vera Marcal

Louis Calhern ... Ambassador Trentino of Sylvania

Edmund Breese ... Zander

Leonid Kinskey ... Sylvanian Spy-Agitator #1

Charles Middleton ... Prosecutor

Edgar Kennedy ... Bald street vendor

Credits

Director ... Leo McCarey

Producer ... Herman J. Mankiewicz (uncredited)

Written by Bert Kalmar, Harry Ruby, Arthur Sheekman, Nat Perrin

Cinematography ... Henry Sharp

Music ... Bert Kalmer, Harry Ruby

Distributed by Paramount Pictures

Release date ... November 17, 1933

Running time ... 68 minutes

Academy Awards

No Nominations: