Robin Lamont Williams, 62, of Henderson, Nevada transitioned to be with the Lord on Saturday, January 6, 2018 after a brief illness. Robin was born August 28, 1955 in Canton Ohio.

A graduate of Canton McKinley High School, "Rob" as everyone knew him, was a unique soul who loved to work on cars, have fun, and make you laugh. It was because of his uniqueness that he also loved to do Karaoke, and he was no ordinary Karaoke singer. There was always costumes, choreography and full performances involved, he even did a performance of "Brick House" dressed as Santa Claus because he loved to put a smile on people's faces.

Rob was also very passionate about children and because of this passion he moved to Nevada in 2008 to assist his niece Dovey Williams-Walker & her husband Ivan Walker, with their children Tahani, Richelle, Ivy, & his little buddy Julian; they truly loved "Uncle Rob" and he truly loved them and all of their friends as well! If you would ask Rob what was his profession, he would tell you in a heartbeat "I am a Professional Babysitter"!

Rob was preceded in death by his brother Michael Williams, his father Miles Bowman, his dad John "JW" Williams, maternal grandparents George & Laura Dunwoody, paternal grandparents Will & Beatrice Williams, his cousin Steven Knox, his nephew Rashad Williams, his great-niece Marveiah Williams and his uncle Pastor George Dunwoody Jr.

He leaves to cherish his memories; his mother Jacolia Williams & aunt Artelia Doss, both of Canton Ohio, (6) six brothers, Ivan, Marvin (Valerie) and Byron (Kenna) Williams all of Canton. Darryal (Judy) & Jermaine (Tracy) Williams of Massillon Ohio and Walter Williams of the famous O'Jays, Cleveland Ohio. (8) eight sisters, Valencia Williams, Vivica Williams and Carla Penn all of Canton, Awanya (Michael) Mitchell of Columbus Ohio, Saralyn Stevens, Gloria Williams and Venosha (Richard) Craig all of Akron Ohio. Brenda Bowman of Canton. Special cousins that were like his brothers Kevin & Keith Knox and aunts Sharon Faulkner & Pastor Robin Dunwoody all of Canton.

Uncle Rob also had a host of nieces, nephews, great-nieces, great-nephews, cousins, friends and his Penn Place family!

Celebration of Life services will be held Saturday, January 20th at 12:00pm at Life Ministries International Church, 2651 Market Ave N, Canton, OH 44714 with calling hours at 11:00am.

Family & friends will be received at the home of Jacolia Williams, 1933 Penn Pl. NE, Canton Ohio 44704