Never-Before-Published Restored Edition

In 1940, as the world hurtled into the darkness of global conflict, Edgar Rice Burroughs turned his legendary writing talents toward an interstellar tale of wonder and adventure set on a war-racked planet - one whose star was so distant that it was invisible to the Earth's most powerful telescopes. Featuring a protagonist who is transported to the planet Poloda by means reminiscent of John Carter's projection to Mars, Beyond the Farthest Star is set in a wholly unique solar system in which all the planets are aligned in the same orbit and connected by means of an atmosphere tube that allows for potential travel between worlds via airplane.

What has been unknown to listeners is that the 1941 Blue Book magazine publication comprising Part I of Beyond the Farthest Star was heavily edited, with a substantial number of line edits on almost every page and several lengthy and meaningful passages - some more than a page long - excised throughout. That altered and abridged text was used as the basis for all editions of the novel — until now. We are pleased to announce that we have gone back to Edgar Rice Burroughs’ original typescript from our archives in Tarzana, California, and restored the author's preferred text of the novel in Beyond the Farthest Star: Restored Edition. Now, for the first time, enjoy this classic science fiction adventure in the way that Edgar Rice Burroughs intended!

A Planet in Peril

When Nazi warplanes blast an American fighter pilot out of the sky, he awakens not in the expected afterlife but on a far-flung planet - one of 11 interconnected worlds hurtling around a strangely constructed star system. On Poloda, he earns a new name - Tangor, one who came from nothing - and a new home among the brave people of Unis, a nation locked in perpetual war against the brutish, totalitarian Kapars. But when news comes of a powerful invention that could turn the tides of the conflict, Tangor must undertake a daring undercover mission behind enemy lines. There, in vile Kapara, he will not only risk life and limb, but also brand himself as a traitor in the eyes of his newfound friends, as he continues his fight for freedom beyond the farthest star!