Table of Contents

849 relations: Abbia (journal), Abdullah Gül, Abong-Mbang, Accion International, Action Against Hunger, Adamawa languages, Adamawa Plateau, Adamawa Region, Adamawa State, Adamawa–Ubangi languages, Adult, Aedes albopictus, Africa Cup of Nations, African art, African black duck, African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights, African fat-tailed gecko, African forest elephant, African French, African hip hop, African Institute for Mathematical Sciences, African manatee, African spurred tortoise, African thrush, African-American culture, African-American history, Afriqiyah Airways, Afrotropical realm, Age of majority, Agroforestry, Ahmadou Ahidjo, AIESEC, Air Service Gabon, Aka people, Alain Aspect, Alexander Pushkin, Allen's swamp monkey, Altona, Hamburg, Ambazonia, American Museum of Natural History, Amour Patrick Tignyemb, Anaang people, Ancient history, Andrée de Jongh, Angélique Kidjo, Ange-Félix Patassé, Anglican Communion, Angwantibo, Antipodes, April 6, ... Expand index (799 more) » « Shrink index

Abbia (journal)

Abbia: Cameroon Cultural Review (fr: Abbia: Revue Culturelle Camerounaise) was an academic journal covering the culture of Cameroon.

See Cameroon and Abbia (journal)

Abdullah Gül

Abdullah Gül (born 29 October 1949) is a Turkish politician who served as the 11th president of Turkey from 2007 to 2014.

See Cameroon and Abdullah Gül

Abong-Mbang

Abong-Mbang is a town and commune in the East Region of Cameroon.

See Cameroon and Abong-Mbang

Accion International

Accion is an international nonprofit.

See Cameroon and Accion International

Action Against Hunger

Action Against Hunger (Action Contre La Faim - ACF) is a global humanitarian organization which originated in France and is committed to ending world hunger.

See Cameroon and Action Against Hunger

Adamawa languages

The Adamawa languages are a putative family of 80–90 languages scattered across the Adamawa Plateau in Central Africa, in northern Cameroon, north-western Central African Republic, southern Chad, and eastern Nigeria, spoken altogether by only one and a half million people (as of 1996).

See Cameroon and Adamawa languages

Adamawa Plateau

The Adamawa Plateau (Massif de l'Adamaoua) is a plateau region in west-central Africa stretching from south-eastern Nigeria through north-central Cameroon (Adamawa and North Provinces) to the Central African Republic.

See Cameroon and Adamawa Plateau

Adamawa Region

The Adamawa Region (Région de l'Adamaoua) is a constituent region of the Republic of Cameroon.

See Cameroon and Adamawa Region

Adamawa State

Adamawa Stateis a state in the North-East geopolitical zone of Nigeria, bordered by Borno to the northwest, Gombe to the west, and Taraba to the southwest while its eastern border forms part of the national border with Cameroon.

See Cameroon and Adamawa State

Adamawa–Ubangi languages

The Adamawa–Ubangi languages are a geographic grouping and formerly postulated family of languages spoken in Nigeria, Chad, the Central African Republic, Cameroon, Gabon, the Republic of the Congo, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and South Sudan, by a total of about 12 million people.

See Cameroon and Adamawa–Ubangi languages

Adult

An adult is a human or other animal that has reached full growth.

See Cameroon and Adult

Aedes albopictus

Aedes albopictus (synonym Stegomyia albopicta), from the mosquito (Culicidae) family, also known as the (Asian) tiger mosquito or forest mosquito, is a mosquito native to the tropical and subtropical areas of Southeast Asia.

See Cameroon and Aedes albopictus

Africa Cup of Nations

The Africa Cup of Nations, commonly abbreviated as AFCON and officially known as the TotalEnergies Africa Cup of Nations for sponsorship reasons, is the main quadrennial international men's association football competition in Africa.

See Cameroon and Africa Cup of Nations

African art

African art describes the modern and historical paintings, sculptures, installations, and other visual culture from native or indigenous Africans and the African continent.

See Cameroon and African art

African black duck

The African black duck (Anas sparsa) is a species of duck of the genus Anas.

See Cameroon and African black duck

African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights

The African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights (ACHPR) is a quasi-judicial body tasked with promoting and protecting human rights and collective (peoples') rights throughout the African continent as well as interpreting the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights (also known as the Banjul Charter or the African Charter) and considering individual complaints of violations of the Charter.

See Cameroon and African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights

African fat-tailed gecko

The African fat-tailed gecko or fat-tail gecko (Hemitheconyx caudicinctus) is a ground-dwelling species of gecko from West Africa and Cameroon.

See Cameroon and African fat-tailed gecko

African forest elephant

The African forest elephant (Loxodonta cyclotis) is one of the two living species of African elephant.

See Cameroon and African forest elephant

African French

African French (français africain) is the generic name of the varieties of the French language spoken by an estimated 167 million people in Africa in 2023 or 51% of the French-speaking population of the world spread across 34 countries and territories.

See Cameroon and African French

African hip hop

Hip hop music has been popular in Africa since the early 1980s due to widespread African American influence.

See Cameroon and African hip hop

African Institute for Mathematical Sciences

The African Institute for Mathematical Sciences (AIMS) is a tertiary education and research institute in Muizenberg, South Africa, established in September 2003, and an associated network of linked institutes in Senegal, Ghana, Cameroon and Rwanda.

See Cameroon and African Institute for Mathematical Sciences

African manatee

The African manatee (Trichechus senegalensis), also known as the West African manatee, is a species of manatee that inhabits much of the western region of Africa – from Senegal to Angola.

See Cameroon and African manatee

African spurred tortoise

The African spurred tortoise (Centrochelys sulcata), also called the sulcata tortoise, is an endangered species of tortoise inhabiting the southern edge of the Sahara Desert, the Sahel, in Africa.

See Cameroon and African spurred tortoise

African thrush

The African thrush or West African thrush (Turdus pelios) is a passerine bird in the thrush family Turdidae.

See Cameroon and African thrush

African-American culture

African-American culture, also known as Black American culture or Black culture in American English, refers to the cultural expressions of African Americans, either as part of or distinct from mainstream American culture.

See Cameroon and African-American culture

African-American history

African-American history started with the arrival of Africans to North America in the 16th and 17th centuries.

See Cameroon and African-American history

Afriqiyah Airways

Afriqiyah Airways is a Libyan airline based in Tripoli, Libya.

See Cameroon and Afriqiyah Airways

Afrotropical realm

The Afrotropical realm is one of the Earth's eight biogeographic realms.

See Cameroon and Afrotropical realm

Age of majority

The age of majority, also known as legal age, is the threshold of legal adulthood as recognized or declared in law.

See Cameroon and Age of majority

Agroforestry

Agroforestry (also known as agro-sylviculture or forest farming) is a land use management system that integrates trees with crops or pasture.

See Cameroon and Agroforestry

Ahmadou Ahidjo

Ahmadou Babatoura Ahidjo (24 August 192430 November 1989) was a Cameroonian politician who was the first president of Cameroon, holding the office from 1960 until 1982.

See Cameroon and Ahmadou Ahidjo

AIESEC

AIESEC is an international "youth-run" and led, non-governmental and not-for-profit organization that provides young people with business development internships.

See Cameroon and AIESEC

Air Service Gabon

Air Service Gabon was an airline based in Libreville, Gabon.

See Cameroon and Air Service Gabon

Aka people

The Aka or Biaka (also Bayaka, Babenzele) are a nomadic Mbenga pygmy people.

See Cameroon and Aka people

Alain Aspect

Alain Aspect (born 15 June 1947) is a French physicist noted for his experimental work on quantum entanglement.

See Cameroon and Alain Aspect

Alexander Pushkin

Alexander Sergeyevich Pushkin was a Russian poet, playwright, and novelist of the Romantic era.

See Cameroon and Alexander Pushkin

Allen's swamp monkey

The Allen's swamp monkey (Allenopithecus nigroviridis) is a species of Old World monkey and the only member of the genus Allenopithecus.

See Cameroon and Allen's swamp monkey

Altona, Hamburg

Altona, also called Hamburg-Altona, is the westernmost urban borough (Bezirk) of the German city state of Hamburg.

See Cameroon and Altona, Hamburg

Ambazonia

Ambazonia, alternatively the Federal Republic of Ambazonia or State of Ambazonia, is a political entity proclaimed by Anglophone separatists who are seeking independence from Cameroon.

See Cameroon and Ambazonia

American Museum of Natural History

The American Museum of Natural History (AMNH) is a natural history museum on the Upper West Side of Manhattan in New York City.

See Cameroon and American Museum of Natural History

Amour Patrick Tignyemb

Amour Patrick Tignyemb (born 14 June 1985) is a Cameroonian professional footballer who plays as a goalkeeper.

See Cameroon and Amour Patrick Tignyemb

Anaang people

Anaang (also spelled Annang and Ànnang) is an ethnic group in Southern Nigeria, whose land is primarily within 8 of the present 31 Local Government Areas in Akwa Ibom State: Abak, Essien Udim, Etim Ekpo, Ika, Ikot Ekpene, Obot Akara, Oruk Anam, Ukanafun in Akwa Ibom State.

See Cameroon and Anaang people

Ancient history

Ancient history is a time period from the beginning of writing and recorded human history through late antiquity.

See Cameroon and Ancient history

Andrée de Jongh

Countess Andrée Eugénie Adrienne de Jongh (30 November 1916 – 13 October 2007), called Dédée and Postman, was a member of the Belgian Resistance during the Second World War.

See Cameroon and Andrée de Jongh

Angélique Kidjo

Angélique Kpasseloko Hinto Hounsinou Kandjo Manta Zogbin Kidjo (born July 14, 1960) is a Beninese-French singer-songwriter, actress and activist noted for her diverse musical influences and creative music videos.

See Cameroon and Angélique Kidjo

Ange-Félix Patassé

Ange-Félix Patassé (25 January 1937 – 5 April 2011) was a Central African politician who was president of the Central African Republic from 1993 until 2003, when he was deposed by the rebel leader François Bozizé in the 2003 coup d'état.

See Cameroon and Ange-Félix Patassé

Anglican Communion

The Anglican Communion is the third largest Christian communion after the Roman Catholic and Eastern Orthodox churches.

See Cameroon and Anglican Communion

Angwantibo

Angwantibos are two species of strepsirrhine primates classified in the genus Arctocebus of the family Lorisidae.

See Cameroon and Angwantibo

Antipodes

In geography, the antipode of any spot on Earth is the point on Earth's surface diametrically opposite to it.

See Cameroon and Antipodes

April 6

No description.

See Cameroon and April 6

Arabic

Arabic (اَلْعَرَبِيَّةُ, or عَرَبِيّ, or) is a Central Semitic language of the Afroasiatic language family spoken primarily in the Arab world.

See Cameroon and Arabic

Arabization

Arabization or Arabicization (translit) is a sociological process of cultural change in which a non-Arab society becomes Arab, meaning it either directly adopts or becomes strongly influenced by the Arabic language, culture, literature, art, music, and ethnic identity as well as other socio-cultural factors.

See Cameroon and Arabization

Arabs

The Arabs (عَرَب, DIN 31635:, Arabic pronunciation), also known as the Arab people (الشَّعْبَ الْعَرَبِيّ), are an ethnic group mainly inhabiting the Arab world in West Asia and North Africa.

See Cameroon and Arabs

Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo

The Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo (Forces armées de la république démocratique du Congo) is the state organisation responsible for defending the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

See Cameroon and Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Arrondissement

An arrondissement is any of various administrative divisions of France, Belgium, Haiti, certain other Francophone countries, as well as the Netherlands.

See Cameroon and Arrondissement

Association of Community Organizations for Reform Now

The Association of Community Organizations for Reform Now (ACORN) is an international collection of autonomous community-based organizations that advocates for low- and moderate-income families by working on neighborhood safety, voter registration, health care, affordable housing, and other social issues.

See Cameroon and Association of Community Organizations for Reform Now

Atlantic slave trade

The Atlantic slave trade or transatlantic slave trade involved the transportation by slave traders of enslaved African people to the Americas.

See Cameroon and Atlantic slave trade

August 21

No description.

See Cameroon and August 21

Autonomous republic

An autonomous republic is a type of administrative division similar to a province or state.

See Cameroon and Autonomous republic

AZ Alkmaar

Alkmaar Zaanstreek, better known internationally as AZ Alkmaar, or simply and most commonly as AZ in the Netherlands, is a Dutch professional football club from Alkmaar and the Zaan district.

See Cameroon and AZ Alkmaar

Ø

Ø (or minuscule: ø) is a letter used in the Danish, Norwegian, Faroese, and Southern Sámi languages.

See Cameroon and Ø

Bafoussam

Bafoussam is the capital and largest city of the West Region of Cameroon, in the Bamboutos Mountains.

See Cameroon and Bafoussam

Baggara Arabs

The Baggāra (translit "heifer herder") or Chadian Arabs are a nomadic confederation of people of mixed Arab and Arabized indigenous African ancestry, inhabiting a portion of the Sahel mainly between Lake Chad and the Nile river near south Kordofan, numbering over six million.

See Cameroon and Baggara Arabs

Baka people (Cameroon and Gabon)

The Baka people, known in the Congo as Bayaka (Bebayaka, Bebayaga, Bibaya), are an ethnic group inhabiting the southeastern rain forests of Cameroon, northern Republic of the Congo, northern Gabon, and southwestern Central African Republic.

See Cameroon and Baka people (Cameroon and Gabon)

Bakassi

Bakassi is a peninsula on the Gulf of Guinea.

See Cameroon and Bakassi

Balafon

The balafon (pronounced, or, by analogy with xylophone etc.) is a gourd-resonated xylophone, a type of struck idiophone.

See Cameroon and Balafon

Ball python

The ball python (Python regius), also called the royal python, is a python species native to West and Central Africa, where it lives in grasslands, shrublands and open forests.

See Cameroon and Ball python

Bamenda

Bamenda, also known as Abakwa and Mankon Town, is a city in northwestern Cameroon and capital of the Northwest Region.

See Cameroon and Bamenda

Bamileke people

The Bamiléké are a group of 90 closely related peoples who inhabit the Western High Plateau of Cameroon.

See Cameroon and Bamileke people

Bangangté

Bangangté is a town and commune in Cameroon.

See Cameroon and Bangangté

Bantu expansion

The Bantu expansion was a major series of migrations of the original Proto-Bantu-speaking group, which spread from an original nucleus around West-Central Africa.

See Cameroon and Bantu expansion

Bantu languages

The Bantu languages (English:, Proto-Bantu: *bantʊ̀) are a language family of about 600 languages that are spoken by the Bantu peoples of Central, Southern, Eastern and Southeast Africa.

See Cameroon and Bantu languages

Barb Jungr

Barb Jungr (born 9 May 1954) is an English singer, songwriter and theatre writer, who has recorded versions of songs by Bob Dylan, Sting, Elvis Presley, Bruce Springsteen and Leonard Cohen.

See Cameroon and Barb Jungr

Barbary falcon

The Barbary falcon (Falco peregrinus pelegrinoides) is a medium-sized falcon about the size of a crow.

See Cameroon and Barbary falcon

Bay duiker

The bay duiker (Cephalophus dorsalis), also known as the black-striped duiker and the black-backed duiker, is a forest-dwelling duiker native to western and southern Africa.

See Cameroon and Bay duiker

Beat Raaflaub

Beat Martin Raaflaub (born 19 August 1946 in Winterthur) is a Swiss conductor.

See Cameroon and Beat Raaflaub

Bellview Airlines

Bellview Airlines was an airline headquartered at Bellview Plaza in Ikeja, Lagos State, Nigeria.

See Cameroon and Bellview Airlines

Benue River

Benue River (la Bénoué), previously known as the Chadda River or Tchadda, is the major tributary of the Niger River.

See Cameroon and Benue River

Benue State

Benue State is one of the North Central states in Nigeria with a population of about 4,253,641 in the 2006 census.

See Cameroon and Benue State

Benue–Congo languages

Benue–Congo (sometimes called East Benue–Congo) is a major branch of the Volta-Congo languages which covers most of Sub-Saharan Africa.

See Cameroon and Benue–Congo languages

Bernard Fonlon

Bernard Nsokika Fonlon (19 November 1924 &ndash; 27 August 1986) was a Cameroonian politician and educationist who worked on the development of bilingualism in Cameroon.

See Cameroon and Bernard Fonlon

Beti-Pahuin peoples

The Beti-Pahuin are a Bantu ethnic group located in Center region of Cameroon.

See Cameroon and Beti-Pahuin peoples

Biafra

Biafra, officially the Republic of Biafra, was a partially recognised state in West Africa that declared independence from Nigeria and existed from 1967 until 1970.

See Cameroon and Biafra

Bight of Biafra

The Bight of Biafra, also known as the Bight of Bonny, is a bight off the west-central African coast, in the easternmost part of the Gulf of Guinea.

See Cameroon and Bight of Biafra

Bikutsi

Bikutsi is a musical genre from Cameroon.

See Cameroon and Bikutsi

Bikya language

Bikya (also known as Furu) is a potentially extinct Southern Bantoid language spoken in Cameroon.

See Cameroon and Bikya language

Bili ape

The Bili apes, or Bondo mystery apes, were names given in 2003 in sensational reports in the popular media to a purportedly new species of highly aggressive, giant ape supposedly inhabiting the wetlands and savannah around of the village of Bili in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

See Cameroon and Bili ape

Billy Gibbons

William Frederick Gibbons (born December 16, 1949) is an American rock musician, best known as the guitarist and primary vocalist of ZZ Top.

See Cameroon and Billy Gibbons

Biometrics

Biometrics are body measurements and calculations related to human characteristics and features.

See Cameroon and Biometrics

Biu–Mandara languages

The Biu–Mandara or Central Chadic languages of the Afro-Asiatic family are spoken in Nigeria, Chad and Cameroon.

See Cameroon and Biu–Mandara languages

Black Canadians

Black Canadians, also known as African Canadians (French: Canadiens Africains) or Afro-Canadians (French: Afro-Canadiens), are Canadians of full or partial sub-Saharan African descent.

See Cameroon and Black Canadians

Black History Month

Black History Month is an annual observance originating in the United States, where it is also known as African-American History Month and was formerly known as Negro History Month before 1976.

See Cameroon and Black History Month

Black people

Black is a racialized classification of people, usually a political and skin color-based category for specific populations with a mid- to dark brown complexion.

See Cameroon and Black people

Black rhinoceros

The black rhinoceros, black rhino or hook-lipped rhinoceros (Diceros bicornis) is a species of rhinoceros, native to eastern Africa and southern Africa, including Angola, Botswana, Kenya, Malawi, Mozambique, Namibia, South Africa, Eswatini, Tanzania, Zambia, and Zimbabwe.

See Cameroon and Black rhinoceros

Blackcap babbler

The blackcap babbler (Turdoides reinwardtii) is a member of the family Leiothrichidae.

See Cameroon and Blackcap babbler

Blue duiker

The blue duiker (Philantomba monticola) is a small antelope found in central, southern and eastern Africa.

See Cameroon and Blue duiker

Bois de Vincennes

The Bois de Vincennes, located on the eastern edge of Paris, France, is the largest public park in the city.

See Cameroon and Bois de Vincennes

Bongo (antelope)

The bongo (Tragelaphus eurycerus) is a large, mostly nocturnal, forest-dwelling antelope, native to sub-Saharan Africa. Bongos are characterised by a striking reddish-brown coat, black and white markings, white-yellow stripes, and long slightly spiralled horns. It is the only tragelaphid in which both sexes have horns. Bongos have a complex social interaction and are found in African dense forest mosaics. They are the third-largest antelope in the world. The western or lowland bongo, T. e. eurycerus, faces an ongoing population decline, and the IUCN Antelope Specialist Group considers it to be Near Threatened on the conservation status scale. The eastern or mountain bongo, T. e. isaaci, of Kenya, has a coat even more vibrant than that of T. e. eurycerus. The mountain bongo is only found in the wild in a few mountain regions of central Kenya. This bongo is classified by the IUCN Antelope Specialist Group as Critically Endangered, with fewer individuals in the wild than in captivity (where it breeds readily). In 2000, the Association of Zoos and Aquariums in the USA (AZA) upgraded the bongo to a Species Survival Plan participant and in 2006 added the Bongo Restoration to Mount Kenya Project to its list of the Top Ten Wildlife Conservation Success Stories of the year. However, in 2013, it seems, these successes have been compromised by reports of possibly only 100 mountain bongos left in the wild due to logging and poaching.

See Cameroon and Bongo (antelope)

Boomslang

The boomslang (or; Dispholidus typus) is a highly venomous snake in the family Colubridae.

See Cameroon and Boomslang

Boris Dittrich

Boris Ottokar Dittrich (born 21 July 1955) is a Dutch politician, jurist, author and human rights activist who served as Leader of the Democrats 66 (D66) from 2003 to 2006.

See Cameroon and Boris Dittrich

BQT

BQT may be an acronym, code, or abbreviation for.

See Cameroon and BQT

Bristol Zoo

Bristol Zoo was a zoo in the city of Bristol in South West England.

See Cameroon and Bristol Zoo

British Caledonian

British Caledonian (BCal) was a private independent airline in the United Kingdom that operated from 1970 until it merged with British Airways in 1988.

See Cameroon and British Caledonian

British Cameroon

British Cameroon or the British Cameroons was a British mandate territory in British West Africa, formed of the Northern Cameroons and Southern Cameroons.

See Cameroon and British Cameroon

Brooklyn College

Brooklyn College is a public university in Brooklyn in New York City, United States.

See Cameroon and Brooklyn College

Bruce Strauss

Bruce Strauss (born February 6, 1952) is an American retired boxer who competed in the middleweight division, his nickname was The Mouse.

See Cameroon and Bruce Strauss

Bubi people

The Bubi people (also known as Bobe, Voove, Ewota and Bantu Bubi) are a Bantu ethnic group of Central Africa who are indigenous to Bioko Island, Equatorial Guinea.

See Cameroon and Bubi people

Bung language

The Bung language is a nearly extinct, endangered language of Cameroon spoken by three people (in 1995) at the village of Boung on the Adamawa Plateau.

See Cameroon and Bung language

Burqa

A burqa or a burka (برقع) is an enveloping outer garment worn by some Muslim women which fully covers the body and the face.

See Cameroon and Burqa

The Burundi national football team, (Ikipe y'igihugu y'Uburundi y'umupira w'amaguru), nicknamed The Swallows (Les Hirondelles; Intamba m'Urugamba), represents Burundi in international football and is controlled by the Football Federation of Burundi.

See Cameroon and Burundi national football team

Bushmeat

Bushmeat is meat from wildlife species that are hunted for human consumption.

See Cameroon and Bushmeat

Caecilian

Caecilians (blind ones) are a group of limbless, vermiform (worm-shaped) or serpentine (snake-shaped) amphibians with small or sometimes nonexistent eyes.

See Cameroon and Caecilian

Caledonian Airways

Caledonian Airways was a wholly private, independentindependent from government-owned corporations charter airline in the United Kingdom formed in April 1961.

See Cameroon and Caledonian Airways

Camel train

A camel train, caravan, or camel string is a series of camels carrying passengers and goods on a regular or semi-regular service between points.

See Cameroon and Camel train

Cameroon Airlines

Cameroon Airlines was an airline from Cameroon, serving as flag carrier of the country.

See Cameroon and Cameroon Airlines

Cameroon Armed Forces

The Cameroon Armed Forces (Forces armées camerounaises (FAC)) are the military of the Republic of Cameroon.

See Cameroon and Cameroon Armed Forces

Cameroon at the 2004 Summer Olympics

Cameroon competed at the 2004 Summer Olympics in Athens, Greece, from 13 to 29 August 2004.

See Cameroon and Cameroon at the 2004 Summer Olympics

Cameroon Democratic Union

The Cameroon Democratic Union (Union Démocratique du Cameroun) is a political party in Cameroon.

See Cameroon and Cameroon Democratic Union

The Cameroon national football team (French: Équipe du Cameroun de football), also known as the Indomitable Lions (French: les lions indomptables), represents Cameroon in men's international football.

See Cameroon and Cameroon national football team

Cameroon People's Democratic Movement

The Cameroon People's Democratic Movement (CPDM; Rassemblement démocratique du Peuple Camerounais, RDPC) is the ruling political party in Cameroon.

See Cameroon and Cameroon People's Democratic Movement

Cameroonian

Cameroonian may refer to.

See Cameroon and Cameroonian

Carbon dioxide

Carbon dioxide is a chemical compound with the chemical formula.

See Cameroon and Carbon dioxide

Cardinal vowels

Cardinal vowels are a set of reference vowels used by phoneticians in describing the sounds of languages.

See Cameroon and Cardinal vowels

Carmelites

The Order of the Brothers of the Blessed Virgin Mary of Mount Carmel (Ordo Fratrum Beatissimæ Virginis Mariæ de Monte Carmelo; abbreviated OCarm), known as the Carmelites or sometimes by synecdoche known simply as Carmel, is a mendicant order in the Roman Catholic Church for both men and women.

See Cameroon and Carmelites

Caste

A caste is a fixed social group into which an individual is born within a particular system of social stratification: a caste system.

See Cameroon and Caste

Cedilla

A cedilla (from Spanish, "small ceda", i.e. small "z"), or cedille (from French cédille), is a hook or tail (¸) added under certain letters as a diacritical mark to modify their pronunciation.

See Cameroon and Cedilla

Center for International Forestry Research

The Center for International Forestry Research (CIFOR) is a non-profit scientific research organization that conducts research on the use and management of forests with a focus on tropical forests in developing countries.

See Cameroon and Center for International Forestry Research

Central Africa

Central Africa is a subregion of the African continent comprising various countries according to different definitions.

See Cameroon and Central Africa

Central African Republic

The Central African Republic (CAR), formerly known as Ubangi-Shari, is a landlocked country in Central Africa.

See Cameroon and Central African Republic

Centre College

Centre College is a private liberal arts college in Danville, Kentucky.

See Cameroon and Centre College

Centre Region (Cameroon)

The Centre Region (région du Centre) occupies 69,000 km2 of the central plains of the Republic of Cameroon.

See Cameroon and Centre Region (Cameroon)

CFA franc

The CFA franc (franc CFA), or Franc of the Financial Community of Africa (originally the Franc of the French Colonies in Africa,; colloquially franc; abbreviation: F.CFA), is the name of two currencies, the West African CFA franc, used in eight West African countries, and the Central African CFA franc, used in six Central African countries.

See Cameroon and CFA franc

Chad

Chad, officially the Republic of Chad, is a landlocked country located at the crossroads of North and Central Africa.

See Cameroon and Chad

Chadic languages

The Chadic languages form a branch of the Afroasiatic language family.

See Cameroon and Chadic languages

Chari River

The Chari River, or Shari River, is a long river, flowing in Central Africa.

See Cameroon and Chari River

Charles Taylor (Liberian politician)

Charles McArthur Ghankay Taylor (born 28 January 1948) is a Liberian former politician and convicted war criminal who served as the 22nd president of Liberia from 2 August 1997 until his resignation on 11 August 2003 as a result of the Second Liberian Civil War and growing international pressure.

See Cameroon and Charles Taylor (Liberian politician)

Charlotte Uhlenbroek

Charlotte Jane Uhlenbroek (born 16 May 1967) is a British zoologist and BBC television presenter.

See Cameroon and Charlotte Uhlenbroek

Chimpanzee

The chimpanzee (Pan troglodytes), also simply known as the chimp, is a species of great ape native to the forests and savannahs of tropical Africa.

See Cameroon and Chimpanzee

Chinese Taipei

"Chinese Taipei" is the term used in various international organizations and tournaments for groups or delegations representing the Republic of China (ROC), a country commonly known as Taiwan.

See Cameroon and Chinese Taipei

Chris Rock

Christopher Julius Rock (born February 7, 1965) is an American comedian, actor, and filmmaker.

See Cameroon and Chris Rock

Chris Tucker

Christopher Tucker (born August 31, 1971) is an American stand-up comedian and actor.

See Cameroon and Chris Tucker

Christine Stewart

Christine Susan Stewart, (3 January 1941 – 25 April 2015) was a Canadian politician.

See Cameroon and Christine Stewart

Church of the Lutheran Brethren of America

The Church of the Lutheran Brethren of America (CLBA) is a Lutheran denomination of Christians rooted in a Pietist Lutheran spiritual awakening at the turn of the 20th century.

See Cameroon and Church of the Lutheran Brethren of America

Church of the Province of West Africa

The Church of the Province of West Africa is a province of the Anglican Communion, covering 17 dioceses in eight countries of West Africa, specifically in Cameroon, Cape Verde, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Liberia, Senegal and Sierra Leone.

See Cameroon and Church of the Province of West Africa

Cigar

A cigar is a tobacco product made to be smoked.

See Cameroon and Cigar

Circle of latitude

A circle of latitude or line of latitude on Earth is an abstract east–west small circle connecting all locations around Earth (ignoring elevation) at a given latitude coordinate line.

See Cameroon and Circle of latitude

Civitan International

Civitan International, based in Birmingham, Alabama, is an association of community service clubs founded in 1917.

See Cameroon and Civitan International

Claire Denis

Claire Denis (born 21 April 1946) is a French film director and screenwriter.

See Cameroon and Claire Denis

Clifton, Bristol

Clifton is both a suburb of Bristol, England, and the name of one of the city's thirty-five council wards.

See Cameroon and Clifton, Bristol

Clipper barb

The clipper barb (Enteromius callipterus) or Congo barb is a freshwater and brackish tropical fish belonging to the minnow family (Cyprinidae).

See Cameroon and Clipper barb

CM

CM or its variants may refer to.

See Cameroon and CM

CME

CME.

See Cameroon and CME

Coat of arms of Cameroon

The coat of arms of Cameroon consists of a shield with a banner above and below it.

See Cameroon and Coat of arms of Cameroon

Coffea

Coffea is a genus of flowering plants in the family Rubiaceae.

See Cameroon and Coffea

Common ostrich

The common ostrich (Struthio camelus), or simply ostrich, is a species of flightless bird native to certain large areas of Africa.

See Cameroon and Common ostrich

Common warthog

The common warthog (Phacochoerus africanus) is a wild member of the pig family (Suidae) found in grassland, savanna, and woodland in sub-Saharan Africa.

See Cameroon and Common warthog

Commonwealth Games

The Commonwealth Games is a quadrennial international multi-sport event among athletes from the Commonwealth of Nations, which consists mostly, but not exclusively, of territories of the former British Empire.

See Cameroon and Commonwealth Games

Commonwealth War Graves Commission

The Commonwealth War Graves Commission (CWGC) is an intergovernmental organisation of six independent member states whose principal function is to mark, record and maintain the graves and places of commemoration of Commonwealth of Nations military service members who died in the two World Wars.

See Cameroon and Commonwealth War Graves Commission

Condoleezza Rice

Condoleezza Rice (born November 14, 1954) is an American diplomat and political scientist who is the current director of the Hoover Institution at Stanford University.

See Cameroon and Condoleezza Rice

Confederation

A confederation (also known as a confederacy or league) is a political union of sovereign states or communities united for purposes of common action.

See Cameroon and Confederation

Congo Craton

The Congo Craton, covered by the Palaeozoic-to-recent Congo Basin, is an ancient Precambrian craton that with four others (the Kaapvaal, Zimbabwe, Tanzania, and West African cratons) makes up the modern continent of Africa.

See Cameroon and Congo Craton

Congo River

The Congo River, formerly also known as the Zaire River, is the second-longest river in Africa, shorter only than the Nile, as well as the third-largest river in the world by discharge volume, following the Amazon and Ganges rivers. It is the world's deepest recorded river, with measured depths of around. The Congo–Lualaba–Luvua–Luapula–Chambeshi River system has an overall length of, which makes it the world's ninth-longest river. The Chambeshi is a tributary of the Lualaba River, and Lualaba is the name of the Congo River upstream of Boyoma Falls, extending for. Measured along with the Lualaba, the main tributary, the Congo River has a total length of. It is the only major river to cross the Equator twice. The Congo Basin has a total area of about, or 13% of the entire African landmass.

See Cameroon and Congo River

Cooking banana

Cooking bananas are a group of starchy banana cultivars in the genus Musa whose fruits are generally used in cooking.

See Cameroon and Cooking banana

Cotton

Cotton is a soft, fluffy staple fiber that grows in a boll, or protective case, around the seeds of the cotton plants of the genus Gossypium in the mallow family Malvaceae.

See Cameroon and Cotton

Country code top-level domain

A country code top-level domain (ccTLD) is an Internet top-level domain generally used or reserved for a country, sovereign state, or dependent territory identified with a country code.

See Cameroon and Country code top-level domain

Cross River State

Cross River State is a state in the South-South geopolitical zone of Nigeria.

See Cameroon and Cross River State

Culture of Equatorial Guinea

While lying on the enriched continent of Africa, Equatorial Guinea has proved to be entrenched in ancient rituals and songs.

See Cameroon and Culture of Equatorial Guinea

Cyperus

Cyperus is a large genus of about 700 species of sedges, distributed throughout all continents in both tropical and temperate regions.

See Cameroon and Cyperus

Daniele Comboni

Daniele Comboni, MCCJ (15 March 1831 – 10 October 1881) was an Italian Catholic prelate who served as Vicar Apostolic of Central Africa from 1877 until his death in 1881.

See Cameroon and Daniele Comboni

David Dacko

David Dacko (24 March 1930 – 20 November 2003) was a Central African politician who served as the first President of the Central African Republic from 14 August 1960 to 1 January 1966 and as the third President of the Central African Republic from 21 September 1979 to 1 September 1981.

See Cameroon and David Dacko

De Havilland Heron

The de Havilland DH.114 Heron is a small propeller-driven British airliner that first flew on 10 May 1950.

See Cameroon and De Havilland Heron

December 25

No description.

See Cameroon and December 25

December 3

No description.

See Cameroon and December 3

Decolonization

independence. Decolonization is the undoing of colonialism, the latter being the process whereby imperial nations establish and dominate foreign territories, often overseas.

See Cameroon and Decolonization

Demographics of Cameroon

The demographic profile of Cameroon is complex for a country of its population.

See Cameroon and Demographics of Cameroon

Demographics of Equatorial Guinea

Demographic features of the population of Equatorial Guinea include population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects of the population.

See Cameroon and Demographics of Equatorial Guinea

Demonym

A demonym or gentilic is a word that identifies a group of people (inhabitants, residents, natives) in relation to a particular place.

See Cameroon and Demonym

Denticle herring

The denticle herring (Denticeps clupeoides) is a small, up to long, species of ray-finned fish found only in the rivers of Benin, Nigeria, and western Cameroon.

See Cameroon and Denticle herring

Deurne, Netherlands

Deurne is a rural municipality and eponymous village in the province of North Brabant in the Netherlands.

See Cameroon and Deurne, Netherlands

Diallo Telli

Boubacar Diallo Telli (1925 – February 1977) was a Guinean diplomat and politician.

See Cameroon and Diallo Telli

Didier Julia

Didier Julia (born 18 February 1934) is a French politician.

See Cameroon and Didier Julia

Dimitri Amilakhvari

Prince Dimitri Zedginidze-Amilakhvari, more commonly known as Dimitri Amilakhvari (დიმიტრი ამილახვარი, Dimitri Amilakvari) (31 October 1906 &ndash; 24 October 1942) was a French military officer of noble Georgian descent and Lieutenant Colonel of the French Foreign Legion.

See Cameroon and Dimitri Amilakhvari

Divination

Divination is the attempt to gain insight into a question or situation by way of an occultic ritual or practice.

See Cameroon and Divination

Dome

A dome is an architectural element similar to the hollow upper half of a sphere.

See Cameroon and Dome

Don Cheadle

Donald Frank Cheadle Jr. (born November 29, 1964) is an American actor.

See Cameroon and Don Cheadle

The Double, in association football, is the achievement of winning a country's top tier division and its primary domestic cup competition in the same season.

See Cameroon and Double (association football)

Double-spurred spurfowl

The double-spurred spurfowl (Pternistis bicalcaratus) is a gamebird in the pheasant family Phasianidae of the order Galliformes, gallinaceous birds.

See Cameroon and Double-spurred spurfowl

Drums in communication

Developed and used by cultures living in forested areas, drums served as an early form of long-distance communication, and were used during ceremonial and religious functions.

See Cameroon and Drums in communication

Duala language

Duala (Duala: ɓwambo ba duālā; also spelt Douala, Diwala, Dwela, Dualla and Dwala) is a dialect cluster spoken by the Duala and Mungo peoples of Cameroon.

See Cameroon and Duala language

Dugout canoe

A dugout canoe or simply dugout is a boat made from a hollowed-out tree.

See Cameroon and Dugout canoe

Dwe'e people

The Badwe'e (also Bajwe'e; French Badjoué) are an ethnic group inhabiting the rain forest zone of southeastern Cameroon.

See Cameroon and Dwe'e people

East Chadic languages

The three dozen East Chadic languages of the Chadic family are spoken in Chad and Cameroon.

See Cameroon and East Chadic languages

East Region (Cameroon)

The East Region (Région de l'Est) occupies the southeastern portion of the Republic of Cameroon.

See Cameroon and East Region (Cameroon)

Eba

Ẹ̀bà (Yoruba) also known as Ebe or Pinon' (in Togo, Benin, and southern Ghana) is a staple swallow from Nigeria, Togo and Benin, also eaten in the West African sub-region and other African countries.

See Cameroon and Eba

Economic history of Africa

The earliest humans were hunter gatherers who were living in small, family groupings.

See Cameroon and Economic history of Africa

Economy of Africa

The economy of Africa consists of the trade, industry, agriculture, and human resources of the continent.

See Cameroon and Economy of Africa

Economy of Cameroon

The economy of Cameroon was one of the most prosperous in Africa for a quarter of a century after independence.

See Cameroon and Economy of Cameroon

Economy of Equatorial Guinea

The economy of Equatorial Guinea has traditionally been dependent on commodities such as cocoa and coffee, but is now heavily dependent on petroleum due to the discovery and exploitation of significant oil reserves in the 1980s.

See Cameroon and Economy of Equatorial Guinea

Economy of the Central African Republic

The economy of the Central African Republic is $2.321 billion by gross domestic product as of 2019, even lower than much smaller countries such as Barbados with an estimated annual per capita income of just $805 as measured by purchasing power parity in 2019.

See Cameroon and Economy of the Central African Republic

Ecotone

An ecotone is a transition area between two biological communities, where two communities meet and integrate.

See Cameroon and Ecotone

ECOWAS

The Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS; also known as CEDEAO in French and Portuguese) is a regional political and economic union of fifteen countries of West Africa.

See Cameroon and ECOWAS

Edéa

Edéa is a city located along the Sanaga River in Cameroon's Littoral Region.

See Cameroon and Edéa

Education in Cameroon

Cameroon is a Central African nation on the Gulf of Guinea.

See Cameroon and Education in Cameroon

Efik mythology

Efik mythology consists of a collection of myths narrated, sung or written down by the Efik people and passed down from generation to generation.

See Cameroon and Efik mythology

Eighth grade

Eighth grade (also 8th Grade or Grade 8) is the eighth year of formal or compulsory education in the United States of America.

See Cameroon and Eighth grade

Elections in Cameroon

Elections in Cameroon occur in a system of electoral autocracy, as the ruling party (which has been in power since independence in 1960) manipulates elections and represses political opposition.

See Cameroon and Elections in Cameroon

Emirate

An emirate is a territory ruled by an emir, a title used by monarchs or high officeholders in the Muslim world.

See Cameroon and Emirate

Emperor scorpion

The emperor scorpion (Pandinus imperator) is a species of scorpion native to rainforests and savannas in West Africa.

See Cameroon and Emperor scorpion

Endangered language

An endangered language or moribund language is a language that is at risk of disappearing as its speakers die out or shift to speaking other languages.

See Cameroon and Endangered language

English-speaking world

The English-speaking world comprises the 88 countries and territories in which English is an official, administrative, or cultural language.

See Cameroon and English-speaking world

Ephraïm Inoni

Ephraïm Inoni (born 16 August 1947).

See Cameroon and Ephraïm Inoni

Equatorial Guinea

Equatorial Guinea (Guinea Ecuatorial; Guinée équatoriale; Guiné Equatorial), officially the Republic of Equatorial Guinea (República de Guinea Ecuatorial, République de Guinée équatoriale, República da Guiné Equatorial), is a country on the west coast of Central Africa, with an area of.

See Cameroon and Equatorial Guinea

Ergot

Ergot or ergot fungi refers to a group of fungi of the genus Claviceps.

See Cameroon and Ergot

Erykah Badu

Erica Abi Wright (born February 26, 1971), known professionally as Erykah Badu, is an American singer and songwriter.

See Cameroon and Erykah Badu

Ethiopian Airlines Flight 961

Ethiopian Airlines Flight 961 was a scheduled international flight serving the route Addis Ababa–Nairobi–Brazzaville–Lagos–Abidjan.

See Cameroon and Ethiopian Airlines Flight 961

European Investment Bank

The European Investment Bank (EIB) is the European Union's investment bank and is owned by the 27 member states.

See Cameroon and European Investment Bank

European mantis

The European mantis (Mantis religiosa) is a large hemimetabolic insect in the family of the Mantidae ('mantids'), which is the largest family of the order Mantodea (mantises).

See Cameroon and European mantis

European Union Association Agreement

A European Union Association Agreement or simply Association Agreement (AA) is a treaty between the European Union (EU), its Member States and a non-EU country that creates a framework for co-operation between them.

See Cameroon and European Union Association Agreement

Extremes on Earth

This article lists extreme locations on Earth that hold geographical records or are otherwise known for their geophysical or meteorological superlatives.

See Cameroon and Extremes on Earth

Fair trade

Fair trade is a term for an arrangement designed to help producers in developing countries achieve sustainable and equitable trade relationships.

See Cameroon and Fair trade

Fang language

Fang is a Central African language spoken by around 1 million people, most of them in Equatorial Guinea, and northern Gabon, where it is the dominant Bantu language; Fang is also spoken in southern Cameroon, the Republic of the Congo, and small fractions of the islands of São Tomé and Príncipe.

See Cameroon and Fang language

Fanti saw-wing

The Fanti saw-wing (Psalidoprocne obscura), also known as the Fanti rough-winged swallow, is a small passerine bird in the swallow family.

See Cameroon and Fanti saw-wing

Fasces

Fasces (a plurale tantum, from the Latin word fascis, meaning 'bundle'; fascio littorio) is a bound bundle of wooden rods, often but not always including an axe (occasionally two axes) with its blade emerging.

See Cameroon and Fasces

Fatoumata Kaba

Fatoumata Lejeune-Kaba (born 1969, Jeuneafrique.com, March 4, 2002.) is a Guinean journalist who works for the UNHCR as Communications Officer.

See Cameroon and Fatoumata Kaba

FC Akhmat Grozny

Republican Football Club Akhmat (футболан клуб Ахмат Соьлжа-ГӀала; Республиканский футбольный клуб Ахмат Грозный), commonly known as Akhmat Grozny, and formerly as Terek Grozny from 1958 to 2017, is a Russian professional football club based in Grozny that plays in the Russian Premier League.

See Cameroon and FC Akhmat Grozny

FC Pyunik

Football Club Pyunik Yerevan (Ֆուտբոլային Ակումբ Փյունիկ Երևան), commonly known as Pyunik ("Phoenix"), is an Armenian professional sports club based in the Kentron neighbourhood of Yerevan.

See Cameroon and FC Pyunik

February 14

It is observed in most countries as Valentine's Day.

See Cameroon and February 14

Federation

A federation (also called a federal state) is an entity characterized by a union of partially self-governing provinces, states, or other regions under a federal government (federalism).

See Cameroon and Federation

Female genital mutilation

Female genital mutilation (FGM) (also known as female genital cutting, female genital mutilation/cutting (FGM/C) and female circumcision) is the ritual cutting or removal of some or all of the vulva.

See Cameroon and Female genital mutilation

Ferdinand Oyono

Ferdinand Léopold Oyono (14 September 1929 – 10 June 2010, Jeune Afrique, 10 June 2010.) was a diplomat, politician and author from Cameroon.

See Cameroon and Ferdinand Oyono

Fight for Your Mind

Fight for Your Mind is the second album by Ben Harper.

See Cameroon and Fight for Your Mind

Finswimming

Finswimming is an underwater sport consisting of four techniques involving swimming with the use of fins either on the water's surface using a snorkel with either monofins or bifins or underwater with monofin either by holding one's breath or using open circuit scuba diving equipment.

See Cameroon and Finswimming

First-past-the-post voting

First-preference plurality (FPP)—often shortened simply to plurality—is a single-winner system of positional voting where voters mark one candidate as their favorite, and the candidate with the largest number of points (a '''''plurality''''' of points) is elected.

See Cameroon and First-past-the-post voting

Flag of Cameroon

The national flag of Cameroon (drapeau du Cameroun) was adopted in its present form on 20 May 1975 after Cameroon became a unitary state.

See Cameroon and Flag of Cameroon

Flag of convenience

Flag of convenience (FOC) is a business practice whereby a ship's owners register a merchant ship in a ship register of a country other than that of the ship's owners, and the ship flies the civil ensign of that country, called the flag state.

See Cameroon and Flag of convenience

Fnac

Fnac is a French multinational retail chain specializing in the sale of entertainment media and consumer electronics.

See Cameroon and Fnac

Folk costume

A folk costume (also regional costume, national costume, traditional clothing, traditional garment or traditional regalia) expresses a national identity through clothing or costume, which is associated with a specific region and period of time in history.

See Cameroon and Folk costume

Fontem

Fontem is a sub division in the Lebialem division of Cameroon.

See Cameroon and Fontem

Food and Agriculture Organization

The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United NationsOrganisation des Nations unies pour l'alimentation et l'agriculture; Organizzazione delle Nazioni Unite per l'alimentazione e l'agricoltura.

See Cameroon and Food and Agriculture Organization

Football hooliganism, also known as soccer hooliganism, football rioting or soccer rioting, constitutes violence and other destructive behaviors perpetrated by spectators at association football events.

See Cameroon and Football hooliganism

Foreign exchange controls

Foreign exchange controls are various forms of controls imposed by a government on the purchase/sale of foreign currencies by residents, on the purchase/sale of local currency by nonresidents, or the transfers of any currency across national borders.

See Cameroon and Foreign exchange controls

Foreign relations of Cameroon

Cameroon's noncontentious, low-profile approach to foreign relations puts it squarely in the middle of other African and developing country states on major issues.

See Cameroon and Foreign relations of Cameroon

Foreign relations of Chad

The foreign relations of Chad are significantly influenced by the desire for oil revenue and investment in Chadian oil industry and support for former Chadian President Idriss Déby.

See Cameroon and Foreign relations of Chad

Foreign relations of Gabon

Gabon has followed a non-aligned policy, advocating dialogue in international affairs and recognizing both parts of divided countries.

See Cameroon and Foreign relations of Gabon

Foreign relations of Niger

Niger pursues a moderate foreign policy and maintains friendly relations with both East and West.

See Cameroon and Foreign relations of Niger

Foreign relations of Nigeria

Since independence, with Jaja Wachuku as the first Minister for Foreign Affairs and Commonwealth Relations, later called External Affairs, Nigerian foreign policy has been characterised by a focus on Africa as a regional power and by attachment to several fundamental principles: African unity and independence; capability to exercise hegemonic influence in the region: peaceful settlement of disputes; non-alignment and non-intentional interference in the internal affairs of other nations; and regional economic cooperation and development.

See Cameroon and Foreign relations of Nigeria

Foreign relations of Turkey

Physically bridging Europe and Asia and being above Africa, Turkey is a secular country that has historically pursued a Western-oriented foreign policy.

See Cameroon and Foreign relations of Turkey

Four-banded sandgrouse

The four-banded sandgrouse (Pterocles quadricinctus) is a medium-sized bird in the sandgrouse family.

See Cameroon and Four-banded sandgrouse

François Bozizé

François Bozizé Yangouvonda (born 14 October 1946) is a Central African politician who was President of the Central African Republic from 2003 to 2013.

See Cameroon and François Bozizé

Françoise Mbango Etone

Françoise Mbango Etone (born 14 April 1976 in Yaoundé) is a Cameroonian-born female track and field athlete.

See Cameroon and Françoise Mbango Etone

Francisco Franco

Francisco Franco Bahamonde (4 December 1892 – 20 November 1975) was a Spanish military general who led the Nationalist forces in overthrowing the Second Spanish Republic during the Spanish Civil War and thereafter ruled over Spain from 1939 to 1975 as a dictator, assuming the title Caudillo.

See Cameroon and Francisco Franco

Franglais

Franglais or Frenglish is a French blend that referred first to the overuse of English words by French speakers and later to diglossia or the macaronic mixture of French (français) and English (anglais).

See Cameroon and Franglais

Freddy Matungulu

Mbuyamu Ilankir "Freddy" Matungulu (born January 4, 1955 Belgian Congo (DRC) is a Congolese economist. He was Minister of Finance of the Democratic Republic of the Congo from 2001 to 2003.

See Cameroon and Freddy Matungulu

Freedom Now

Freedom Now is a Washington, D.C.-based non-profit, non-partisan organization that protects individuals and communities from government repression and defends human rights through direct legal support, targeted high-leverage advocacy, and capacity-building analysis and assistance.

See Cameroon and Freedom Now

French colonial empire

The French colonial empire comprised the overseas colonies, protectorates, and mandate territories that came under French rule from the 16th century onward.

See Cameroon and French colonial empire

French Equatorial Africa

French Equatorial Africa (Afrique équatoriale française, or AEF) was a federation of French colonial territories in Equatorial Africa which consisted of Gabon, French Congo, Ubangi-Shari, and Chad.

See Cameroon and French Equatorial Africa

French language

French (français,, or langue française,, or by some speakers) is a Romance language of the Indo-European family.

See Cameroon and French language

Fufu

Fufu (or fufuo, foofoo, foufou) is a pounded meal found in West African cuisine.

See Cameroon and Fufu

Ful

Ful or FUL may refer to.

See Cameroon and Ful

Fula language

Fula,Laurie Bauer, 2007, The Linguistics Student's Handbook, Edinburgh also known as Fulani or Fulah (Fulfulde, Pulaar, Pular; Adlam: 𞤊𞤵𞤤𞤬𞤵𞤤𞤣𞤫, 𞤆𞤵𞤤𞤢𞥄𞤪, 𞤆𞤵𞤤𞤢𞤪; Ajami: ࢻُلْࢻُلْدٜ, ݒُلَارْ, بُۛلَر), is a Senegambian language spoken by around 36.8 million people as a set of various dialects in a continuum that stretches across some 18 countries in West and Central Africa.

See Cameroon and Fula language

Fula people

The Fula, Fulani, or Fulɓe people are an ethnic group in Sahara, Sahel and West Africa, widely dispersed across the region.

See Cameroon and Fula people

Fulbert Youlou

Abbé Fulbert Youlou (19 July 1917 – 6 May 1972) was a laicized Brazzaville-Congolese Roman Catholic priest, nationalist leader and politician, who became the first President of the Republic of the Congo on its independence.

See Cameroon and Fulbert Youlou

Gabon

Gabon (Ngabu), officially the Gabonese Republic (République gabonaise), is a country on the Atlantic coast of Central Africa, on the equator, bordered by Equatorial Guinea to the northwest, Cameroon to the north, the Republic of the Congo on the east and south, and the Gulf of Guinea to the west.

See Cameroon and Gabon

Gaboon viper

The Gaboon viper (Bitis gabonica), also called the Gaboon adder, is a viper species found in the rainforests and savannas of sub-Saharan Africa.

See Cameroon and Gaboon viper

Gap, Hautes-Alpes

Gap is the prefecture of the department of Hautes-Alpes, in the region of Provence-Alpes-Côte d'Azur, Southeastern France.

See Cameroon and Gap, Hautes-Alpes

Garoua

Garoua (also Garua; Fula: 𞤺𞤢𞤪𞤱𞤢, Garwa) is a port city and the capital of the North Region of Cameroon, lying on the Benue River.

See Cameroon and Garoua

Gastropholis

Gastropholis is a genus of Equatorial African lacertid lizards of the family Lacertidae which is distributed in southern Liberia, Ivory Coast and Ghana, western Cameroon, Equatorial Guinea, Democratic Republic of Congo, eastern Kenya, Tanzania and south to northeastern Mozambique.

See Cameroon and Gastropholis

Güiro

The güiro is a percussion instrument consisting of an open-ended, hollow gourd with parallel notches cut in one side.

See Cameroon and Güiro

General Certificate of Education

The General Certificate of Education (GCE) is a subject-specific family of academic qualifications used in awarding bodies in England, Wales, Northern Ireland, Crown dependencies and a few Commonwealth countries.

See Cameroon and General Certificate of Education

General Conference on Weights and Measures

The General Conference on Weights and Measures (abbreviated CGPM from the Conférence générale des poids et mesures) is the supreme authority of the International Bureau of Weights and Measures (BIPM), the intergovernmental organization established in 1875 under the terms of the Metre Convention through which member states act together on matters related to measurement science and measurement standards.

See Cameroon and General Conference on Weights and Measures

Geography of Africa

Africa is a continent comprising 63 political territories, representing the largest of the great southward projections from the main mass of Earth's surface.

See Cameroon and Geography of Africa

Geography of Cameroon

At, Cameroon is the world's 53rd largest country.

See Cameroon and Geography of Cameroon

Geography of Chad

Chad is one of the 47 landlocked countries in the world and is located in North Central Africa, measuring, nearly twice the size of France and slightly more than three times the size of California.

See Cameroon and Geography of Chad

Geography of Equatorial Guinea

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea is located in west central Africa.

See Cameroon and Geography of Equatorial Guinea

Geography of Gabon

Gabon is a country in Central Africa, lying along the Atlantic Ocean, just south of the Bight of Biafra.

See Cameroon and Geography of Gabon

Geography of Niger

Niger is a landlocked nation in West Africa located along the border between the Sahara and Sub-Saharan regions.

See Cameroon and Geography of Niger

Geography of Nigeria

Nigeria is a country in West Africa.

See Cameroon and Geography of Nigeria

Geography of the Central African Republic

The Central African Republic is a landlocked nation within the interior of the African continent.

See Cameroon and Geography of the Central African Republic

Geography of the Republic of the Congo

The Republic of the Congo is located in the western part of central Africa, on the Equator.

See Cameroon and Geography of the Republic of the Congo

Geography of Turkmenistan

Turkmenistan is a landlocked country in Central Asia, bordering the Caspian Sea to the west, Iran and Afghanistan to the south, Uzbekistan to the north-east, and Kazakhstan to the north-west.

See Cameroon and Geography of Turkmenistan

Geophagia

Geophagia, also known as geophagy, is the intentional practice of eating earth or soil-like substances such as clay, chalk, or termite mounds.

See Cameroon and Geophagia

George Taubman Goldie

Sir George Dashwood Taubman Goldie (20 May 1846 – 20 August 1925) was a Manx administrator who played a major role in the founding of Nigeria.

See Cameroon and George Taubman Goldie

Georges Pompidou

Georges Jean Raymond Pompidou (5 July 19112 April 1974) was a French politician who served as President of France from 1969 to his death in 1974.

See Cameroon and Georges Pompidou

Gerald Durrell

Gerald Malcolm Durrell, (7 January 1925 – 30 January 1995) was a British naturalist, writer, zookeeper, conservationist, and television presenter.

See Cameroon and Gerald Durrell

German colonial empire

The German colonial empire (Deutsches Kolonialreich) constituted the overseas colonies, dependencies, and territories of the German Empire.

See Cameroon and German colonial empire

German diaspora

The German diaspora (Deutschstämmige) consists of German people and their descendants who live outside of Germany.

See Cameroon and German diaspora

German Empire

The German Empire, also referred to as Imperial Germany, the Second Reich or simply Germany, was the period of the German Reich from the unification of Germany in 1871 until the November Revolution in 1918, when the German Reich changed its form of government from a monarchy to a republic.

See Cameroon and German Empire

German language

German (Standard High German: Deutsch) is a West Germanic language in the Indo-European language family, mainly spoken in Western and Central Europe. It is the most widely spoken and official or co-official language in Germany, Austria, Switzerland, Liechtenstein, and the Italian province of South Tyrol. It is also an official language of Luxembourg and Belgium, as well as a recognized national language in Namibia. There further exist notable German-speaking communities in France (Alsace), the Czech Republic (North Bohemia), Poland (Upper Silesia), Slovakia (Košice Region, Spiš, and Hauerland), Denmark (North Schleswig), Romania and Hungary (Sopron). It is most closely related to other West Germanic languages, namely Afrikaans, Dutch, English, the Frisian languages, and Scots. It also contains close similarities in vocabulary to some languages in the North Germanic group, such as Danish, Norwegian, and Swedish. Modern German gradually developed from the Old High German which in turn developed from Proto-Germanic during the Early Middle Ages. German is the second-most widely spoken Germanic and West Germanic language after English, both as a first and a second language. Today, German is one of the major languages of the world. It is the most spoken native language within the European Union. German is also widely taught as a foreign language, especially in continental Europe (where it is the third most taught foreign language after English and French), and in the United States. The language has been influential in the fields of philosophy, theology, science, and technology. It is the second-most commonly used scientific language and among the most widely used languages on websites. The German-speaking countries are ranked fifth in terms of annual publication of new books, with one-tenth of all books (including e-books) in the world being published in German. German is an inflected language, with four cases for nouns, pronouns, and adjectives (nominative, accusative, genitive, dative); three genders (masculine, feminine, neuter) and two numbers (singular, plural). It has strong and weak verbs. The majority of its vocabulary derives from the ancient Germanic branch of the Indo-European language family, while a smaller share is partly derived from Latin and Greek, along with fewer words borrowed from French and Modern English. English, however, is the main source of more recent loan words. German is a pluricentric language; the three standardized variants are German, Austrian, and Swiss Standard German. Standard German is sometimes called High German, which refers to its regional origin. German is also notable for its broad spectrum of dialects, with many varieties existing in Europe and other parts of the world. Some of these non-standard varieties have become recognized and protected by regional or national governments. Since 2004, heads of state of the German-speaking countries have met every year, and the Council for German Orthography has been the main international body regulating German orthography.

See Cameroon and German language

German submarine U-459

German submarine U-459 was a Type XIV supply and replenishment U-boat (Milchkuh or 'milk cow') of Nazi Germany's Kriegsmarine during World War II.

See Cameroon and German submarine U-459

Giant eland

The giant eland (Taurotragus derbianus), also known as the Lord Derby's eland and greater eland, is an open-forest and savanna antelope.

See Cameroon and Giant eland

Giraffe

The giraffe is a large African hoofed mammal belonging to the genus Giraffa.

See Cameroon and Giraffe

Gizzard

The gizzard, also referred to as the ventriculus, gastric mill, and gigerium, is an organ found in the digestive tract of some animals, including archosaurs (birds and other dinosaurs, crocodiles, alligators, pterosaurs), earthworms, some gastropods, some fish, and some crustaceans.

See Cameroon and Gizzard

Global 200

The Global 200 is the list of ecoregions identified by the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF), the global conservation organization, as priorities for conservation.

See Cameroon and Global 200

Gnetum

Gnetum is a genus of gymnosperms, the sole genus in the family Gnetaceae within the Gnetophyta.

See Cameroon and Gnetum

Goethe-Institut

The Goethe-Institut (GI, Goethe Institute) is a non-profit German cultural association operational worldwide with 159 institutes, promoting the study of the German language abroad and encouraging international cultural exchange and relations.

See Cameroon and Goethe-Institut

Goliath frog

The goliath frog (Conraua goliath), otherwise known commonly as the giant slippery frog and the goliath bullfrog, is a species of frog in the family Conrauidae.

See Cameroon and Goliath frog

Goma

Goma (from the Kongo ng'oma or ngoma: ritual drum carved from solid wood, used by the Bantus) is the capital and largest city of the North Kivu Province in the eastern region of the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC).

See Cameroon and Goma

Gorilla

Gorillas are herbivorous, predominantly ground-dwelling great apes that inhabit the tropical forests of equatorial Africa.

See Cameroon and Gorilla

Goukouni Oueddei

Goukouni Oueddei (كوكوني عويدي; born 1944) is a Chadian politician who served as President of Chad from 1979 to 1982.

See Cameroon and Goukouni Oueddei

Grameen Bank

Grameen Bank (গ্রামীণ ব্যাংক) is a microfinance specialized community development bank founded in Bangladesh. It makes small loans (known as microcredit or "grameencredit") to the impoverished without requiring collateral. Grameen Bank is a Statutory Public Authority. It is originated in 1976, in the work of Professor Muhammad Yunus at University of Chittagong, who launched a research project to study how to design a credit delivery system to provide banking services to the rural poor. In October 1983 the Grameen Bank was authorized by national legislation to operate as an independent bank. The bank grew significantly between 2003 and 2007. As of January 2022, the total borrowers of the bank number nearly 9.5 million, and 96.81% of those are women. In 1998 the Bank's "Low-cost Housing Program" won a World Habitat Award. In 2006, the bank and its founder, Muhammad Yunus, were jointly awarded the Nobel Peace Prize. The bank's success has inspired similar projects in more than 64 countries around the world, including a World Bank initiative to finance Grameen-type lending systems.

See Cameroon and Grameen Bank

Greater spotted eagle

The greater spotted eagle (Clanga clanga), also called the spotted eagle, is a large migratory bird of prey in the family Accipitridae.

See Cameroon and Greater spotted eagle

Green-backed eremomela

The green-backed eremomela (Eremomela canescens) is a member of the Cisticolidae.

See Cameroon and Green-backed eremomela

Grey-cheeked mangabey

The grey-cheeked mangabey (Lophocebus albigena), also known as the white-cheeked mangabey, is an Old World monkey found in the forests of Central Africa.

See Cameroon and Grey-cheeked mangabey

Guinea pig

The guinea pig or domestic guinea pig (Cavia porcellus), also known as the cavy or domestic cavy, is a species of rodent belonging to the genus Cavia in the family Caviidae.

See Cameroon and Guinea pig

Guinea turaco

The Guinea turaco (Tauraco persa), also known as the green turaco or green lourie, is a species of turaco, a group of African otidimorph birds.

See Cameroon and Guinea turaco

Gulf of Guinea

The Gulf of Guinea is the northeasternmost part of the tropical Atlantic Ocean from Cape Lopez in Gabon, north and west to Cape Palmas in Liberia.

See Cameroon and Gulf of Guinea

Gum arabic

Gum arabic (gum acacia, gum sudani, Senegal gum and by other names) is a natural gum originally consisting of the hardened sap of two species of the Acacia tree, Senegalia senegal and Vachellia seyal. However, the term "gum arabic" does not actually indicate a particular botanical source.

See Cameroon and Gum arabic

Gur languages

The Gur languages, also known as Central Gur or Mabia, belong to the Niger–Congo languages.

See Cameroon and Gur languages

Gustave Bahoken

Gustave "Gus" Baheten Bahoken (born 13 June 1979) is a Cameroonian football player, who last played for Mitra Kukar in Indonesia.

See Cameroon and Gustave Bahoken

Hanno the Navigator

Hanno the Navigator (sometimes "Hannon"; 𐤇𐤍𐤀) was a Carthaginian explorer (sometimes identified as a king) who lived during the fifth century BC, known for his naval expedition along the coast of West Africa.

See Cameroon and Hanno the Navigator

Hanover Zoo

Hanover Zoo is located in the city centre, or Mitte borough, of Hanover, Germany.

See Cameroon and Hanover Zoo

Haraldur Sigurðsson

Haraldur Sigurðsson or Haraldur Sigurdsson (born May 31, 1939) is an Icelandic volcanologist and geochemist.

See Cameroon and Haraldur Sigurðsson

Harry Johnston

Sir Henry Hamilton Johnston (12 June 1858 – 31 July 1927) was a British explorer, botanist, artist, colonial administrator, and linguist who travelled widely across Africa to speak some of the languages spoken by people on that continent.

See Cameroon and Harry Johnston

Hausa language

Hausa (Harshen/Halshen Hausa; Ajami: هَرْشٜىٰن هَوْسَا) is a Chadic language that is spoken by the Hausa people in the northern parts of Nigeria, Ghana, Cameroon, Benin and Togo, and the southern parts of Niger, and Chad, with significant minorities in Ivory Coast.

See Cameroon and Hausa language

Hausa music

The Hausa are one of the largest ethnic groups in Nigeria, Niger, Ghana, Sudan, Cameroon and in many other West and Central African countries.

See Cameroon and Hausa music

Hawaii International Film Festival

The Hawai'i International Film Festival (HIFF) is an annual film festival held in the United States state of Hawaii.

See Cameroon and Hawaii International Film Festival

Head of state

A head of state (or chief of state) is the public persona of a sovereign state.

See Cameroon and Head of state

Heads of Diplomatic Missions of the United Kingdom

The Heads of British diplomatic missions are persons appointed as senior diplomats to individual nations, or international organizations.

See Cameroon and Heads of Diplomatic Missions of the United Kingdom

Heinrich Barth

Johann Heinrich Barth (16 February 1821 – 25 November 1865) was a German explorer of Africa and scholar.

See Cameroon and Heinrich Barth

Helen Keller International

Helen Keller Intl is a US-based nonprofit organization that combats the causes and consequences of blindness and malnutrition by establishing programs based on evidence and research in vision, health, and nutrition.

See Cameroon and Helen Keller International

Higher National Diploma

Higher National Diploma (HND), part of the Higher Nationals suite of qualifications, is an academic higher education qualification in the United Kingdom and various other countries.

See Cameroon and Higher National Diploma

Hissène Habré

Hissène Habré (Arabic: حسين حبري Ḥusaīn Ḥabrī, Chadian Arabic:;; 13 August 1942 – 24 August 2021), also spelled Hissen Habré, was a Chadian politician and convicted war criminal who served as the 5th president of Chad from 1982 until he was deposed in 1990.

See Cameroon and Hissène Habré

History of Africa

Archaic humans emerged out of Africa between 0.5 and 1.8 million years ago.

See Cameroon and History of Africa

History of Cameroon

At the crossroads of West Africa and Central Africa, the territory of what is now Cameroon has seen human habitation since some time in the Middle Paleolithic, likely no later than 130,000 years ago.

See Cameroon and History of Cameroon

History of Cape Verde

The recorded history of Cape Verde begins with the Portuguese invasion and colonization of the island in 1458.

See Cameroon and History of Cape Verde

History of Chad

Chad (تشاد; Tchad), officially the Republic of Chad, is a landlocked country in Central Africa.

See Cameroon and History of Chad

History of Equatorial Guinea

The History of Equatorial Guinea is marked by centuries of colonial domination by the Portuguese, British and Spanish colonial empires, and by the local kingdoms.

See Cameroon and History of Equatorial Guinea

History of the Central African Republic

The history of the Central African Republic is roughly composed of four distinct periods.

See Cameroon and History of the Central African Republic

History of the Quebec sovereignty movement

The History of the Quebec sovereignty movement covers various movements which sought to achieve political independence for Quebec, which has been a province of Canada since 1867.

See Cameroon and History of the Quebec sovereignty movement

History of the Republic of the Congo

The history of the Republic of the Congo has been marked by diverse civilisations: Indigenous, French and post-independence.

See Cameroon and History of the Republic of the Congo

History of Zambia

The history of Zambia experienced many stages from colonisation to independence from Britain on 24 October 1964.

See Cameroon and History of Zambia

HIV

The human immunodeficiency viruses (HIV) are two species of Lentivirus (a subgroup of retrovirus) that infect humans.

See Cameroon and HIV

HIV/AIDS in Africa

HIV/AIDS originated in the early 20th century and has become a major public health concern and cause of death in many countries.

See Cameroon and HIV/AIDS in Africa

Hoodoo (spirituality)

Hoodoo is a set of spiritual practices, traditions, and beliefs that were created by enslaved African Americans in the Southern United States from various traditional African spiritualities and elements of indigenous botanical knowledge.

See Cameroon and Hoodoo (spirituality)

Hurricane Beulah

Hurricane Beulah was an intense Category 5 hurricane which impacted the Greater Antilles, Mexico, and Texas in September 1967.

See Cameroon and Hurricane Beulah

Ibibio people

The Ibibio people (Pronunciation: /ɪbɪˈbiːəʊ/) are a coastal people in Southern Nigeria.

See Cameroon and Ibibio people

ICAO airport code

The ICAO airport code or location indicator is a four-letter code designating aerodromes around the world.

See Cameroon and ICAO airport code

Idriss Déby

Idriss Déby Itno (إدريس ديبي; 18 June 1952 – 20 April 2021) was a Chadian politician and military officer who was the 6th president of Chad from 1991 until his death in 2021 during the Northern Chad offensive.

See Cameroon and Idriss Déby

Igbo people

The Igbo people (also spelled Ibo" and historically also Iboe, Ebo, Eboe, / / Eboans, Heebo; natively Ṇ́dị́ Ìgbò) are an ethnic group in Nigeria.

See Cameroon and Igbo people

Ijaw people

The Ijaw people, otherwise known as the Ijo people, are an ethnic group found in the Niger Delta in Nigeria, with significant population clusters in Bayelsa, Delta, and Rivers.

See Cameroon and Ijaw people

Illegal drug trade

The illegal drug trade, drug trafficking, or narcotrafficking is a global black market dedicated to the cultivation, manufacture, distribution and sale of prohibited drugs.

See Cameroon and Illegal drug trade

Immigration to the United States

Immigration to the United States has been a major source of population growth and cultural change throughout much of its history.

See Cameroon and Immigration to the United States

Imperialism

Imperialism is the practice, theory or attitude of maintaining or extending power over foreign nations, particularly through expansionism, employing both hard power (military and economic power) and soft power (diplomatic power and cultural imperialism).

See Cameroon and Imperialism

Articles (arranged alphabetically) related to Cameroon include.

See Cameroon and Index of Cameroon-related articles

Indigo dye

Indigo dye is an organic compound with a distinctive blue color.

See Cameroon and Indigo dye

Initial events of the Rwandan genocide

The assassination of presidents Juvénal Habyarimana and Cyprien Ntaryamira in the evening of April 6, 1994 was the proximate trigger for the Rwandan genocide, which resulted in the murder of approximately 800,000 Tutsi and a smaller number of moderate Hutu.

See Cameroon and Initial events of the Rwandan genocide

International Bank Account Number

The International Bank Account Number (IBAN) is an internationally agreed upon system of identifying bank accounts across national borders to facilitate the communication and processing of cross border transactions with a reduced risk of transcription errors.

See Cameroon and International Bank Account Number

International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights

The International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR) is a multilateral treaty adopted by the United Nations General Assembly (GA) on 16 December 1966 through GA.

See Cameroon and International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights

International Electrotechnical Commission

The International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC; Commission électrotechnique internationale) is an international standards organization that prepares and publishes international standards for all electrical, electronic and related technologies – collectively known as "electrotechnology".

See Cameroon and International Electrotechnical Commission

International English

International English is the concept of using the English language as a global means of communication similar to an international auxiliary language, and often refers to the movement towards an international standard for the language.

See Cameroon and International English

International Institute of Tropical Agriculture

The International Institute of Tropical Agriculture (IITA) is a nonprofit organization that works with partners to enhance crop quality and productivity, reduce producer and consumer risks, and generate wealth from agriculture, with the ultimate goals of reducing hunger, malnutrition, and poverty.

See Cameroon and International Institute of Tropical Agriculture

International Labour Organization

The International Labour Organization (ILO) is a United Nations agency whose mandate is to advance social and economic justice by setting international labour standards.

See Cameroon and International Labour Organization

International law and the Arab–Israeli conflict

The International law bearing on issues of Arab–Israeli conflict, which became a major arena of regional and international tension since the birth of Israel in 1948, resulting in several disputes between a number of Arab countries and Israel.

See Cameroon and International law and the Arab–Israeli conflict

International Mathematical Union

The International Mathematical Union (IMU) is an international organization devoted to international cooperation in the field of mathematics across the world.

See Cameroon and International Mathematical Union

International Men's Day

International Men's Day (IMD) is a global awareness day for many issues that men face, including parental alienation, abuse, homelessness, suicide, and violence, celebrated annually on November 19.

See Cameroon and International Men's Day

International Pollutants Elimination Network

The International Pollutants Elimination Network (IPEN) (formerly International POPs Elimination Network) is a global network of NGOs dedicated to the common aim of eliminating pollutants, such as lead in paint, mercury and lead in the environment, persistent organic pollutants (POPs), endocrine disrupting chemicals, and other toxics.

See Cameroon and International Pollutants Elimination Network

International reactions to the prelude to the Iraq War

This article describes the positions of world governments before the actual initiation of the 2003 invasion of Iraq, and not their current positions as they may have changed since then.

See Cameroon and International reactions to the prelude to the Iraq War

International Republican Institute

The International Republican Institute (IRI) is an American nonprofit organization founded in 1983 and funded and supported by the United States federal government.

See Cameroon and International Republican Institute

International Simultaneous Policy Organization

The International Simultaneous Policy Organisation (ISPO) is a voluntary organization that promotes the Simultaneous Policy (Simpol) campaign.

See Cameroon and International Simultaneous Policy Organization

International Stuttering Awareness Day

International Stuttering Awareness Day (ISAD), or International Stammering Awareness Day, is an annual celebration held on October 22.

See Cameroon and International Stuttering Awareness Day

International Telecommunication Union

The International Telecommunication Union (ITU)French: Union Internationale des Télécommunications is a specialized agency of the United Nations responsible for many matters related to information and communication technologies.

See Cameroon and International Telecommunication Union

Iraq disarmament timeline 1990–2003

24 July 1990.

See Cameroon and Iraq disarmament timeline 1990–2003

Islam in Nigeria

Islam is one of the two largest religions in Nigeria.

See Cameroon and Islam in Nigeria

ISO 3166-1

ISO 3166-1 (Codes for the representation of names of countries and their subdivisions &ndash; Part 1: Country codes) is a standard defining codes for the names of countries, dependent territories, and special areas of geographical interest.

See Cameroon and ISO 3166-1

ISO 3166-1 alpha-2

ISO 3166-1 alpha-2 codes are two-letter country codes defined in ISO 3166-1, part of the ISO 3166 standard published by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO), to represent countries, dependent territories, and special areas of geographical interest.

See Cameroon and ISO 3166-1 alpha-2

ISO 3166-1 alpha-3

ISO 3166-1 alpha-3 codes are three-letter country codes defined in ISO 3166-1, part of the ISO 3166 standard published by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO), to represent countries, dependent territories, and special areas of geographical interest.

See Cameroon and ISO 3166-1 alpha-3

ISO 3166-1 numeric

ISO 3166-1 numeric (or numeric-3) codes are three-digit country codes defined in ISO 3166-1, part of the ISO 3166 standard published by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO), to represent countries, dependent territories, and special areas of geographical interest.

See Cameroon and ISO 3166-1 numeric

ISO 3166-2

ISO 3166-2 is part of the ISO 3166 standard published by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO), and defines codes for identifying the principal subdivisions (e.g., provinces or states) of all countries coded in ISO 3166-1.

See Cameroon and ISO 3166-2

Italo Balbo

Italo Balbo (6 June 1896 – 28 June 1940) was an Italian fascist politician and Blackshirts' leader who served as Italy's Marshal of the Air Force, Governor-General of Italian Libya and Commander-in-Chief of Italian North Africa.

See Cameroon and Italo Balbo

ITU prefix

The International Telecommunication Union (ITU) allocates call sign prefixes for radio and television stations of all types.

See Cameroon and ITU prefix

J. Fred Muggs

J.

See Cameroon and J. Fred Muggs

JAARS

Founded in 1948 as Jungle Aviation and Radio Service by William Cameron Townsend, JAARS is a worldwide, non-profit, mission aviation and support organization with a primary focus on Bible translation support operations.

See Cameroon and JAARS

Jack Ryan (character)

John Patrick Ryan Sr. (Hon.), nicknamed Jack, is a fictional character created by author Tom Clancy and featured in his Ryanverse novels, which have consistently topped the ''New York Times'' bestseller list over 30 years.

See Cameroon and Jack Ryan (character)

January

January is the first month of the year in the Julian and Gregorian calendars.

See Cameroon and January

January 1

January 1 is the first day of the year in the Gregorian Calendar; 364 days remain until the end of the year (365 in leap years).

See Cameroon and January 1

JCDecaux

JCDecaux Group (JCDecaux SA) is a multinational corporation based in Neuilly-sur-Seine, near Paris, France, known for its bus-stop advertising systems, billboards, public bicycle rental systems, and street furniture.

See Cameroon and JCDecaux

JD Edwards

J.D. Edwards World Solution Company or JD Edwards, abbreviated JDE, was an enterprise resource planning (ERP) software company, whose namesake ERP system is still sold under ownership by Oracle Corporation.

See Cameroon and JD Edwards

Jean-Alain Boumsong

Jean-Alain Boumsong Somkong (born 14 December 1979) is a French former professional footballer who played as a defender.

See Cameroon and Jean-Alain Boumsong

Jean-Jacques Annaud

Jean-Jacques Annaud (born 1 October 1943) is a French film director, screenwriter and producer.

See Cameroon and Jean-Jacques Annaud

Jeanne-Irène Biya

Jeanne-Irène Biya (October 12, 1935 &ndash; July 29, 1992) was the former First Lady of Cameroon and first wife of Paul Biya, who has served as the President of Cameroon since 1982.

See Cameroon and Jeanne-Irène Biya

Jeffrey Donaldson

Sir Jeffrey Mark Donaldson (born 7 December 1962) is a British former politician, who served as leader of the Democratic Unionist Party (DUP) from 2021 to 2024, and leader of the DUP in the UK House of Commons from 2019 to 2024.

See Cameroon and Jeffrey Donaldson

Jihad of Usman dan Fodio

The Jihad of Usman dan Fodio was a religio-military conflict in present-day Nigeria and Cameroon.

See Cameroon and Jihad of Usman dan Fodio

Joan Ryan (politician)

Joan Marie Ryan (born 8 September 1955) is a British former politician who served as Member of Parliament (MP) for Enfield North from 1997 to 2010 and from 2015 to 2019.

See Cameroon and Joan Ryan (politician)

John Robarts (Baháʼí)

John Aldham Robarts (November 2, 1901 – June 18, 1991) was a prominent Canadian Baháʼí.

See Cameroon and John Robarts (Baháʼí)

Joseph Roth

Moses Joseph Roth (2 September 1894 – 27 May 1939) was an Austrian-Jewish journalist and novelist, best known for his family saga Radetzky March (1932), about the decline and fall of the Austro-Hungarian Empire, his novel of Jewish life Job (1930) and his seminal essay "Juden auf Wanderschaft" (1927; translated into English as The Wandering Jews), a fragmented account of the Jewish migrations from eastern to western Europe in the aftermath of World War I and the Russian Revolution.

See Cameroon and Joseph Roth

Kamerun

Kamerun was an African colony of the German Empire from 1884 to 1920 in the region of today's Republic of Cameroon.

See Cameroon and Kamerun

Kanem–Bornu Empire

The Kanem–Bornu Empire existed in areas which are now part of Nigeria, Niger, Cameroon, Libya and Chad.

See Cameroon and Kanem–Bornu Empire

Kanuri language

Kanuri is a Saharan dialect continuum of the Nilo–Saharan language family spoken by the Kanuri and Kanembu peoples in Nigeria, Niger, Chad and Cameroon, as well as by a diaspora community residing in Sudan.

See Cameroon and Kanuri language

Kanuri people

The Kanuri people (Kanouri, Kanowri, also Yerwa, Barebari and several subgroup names) are an African ethnic group living largely in the lands of the former Kanem and Bornu Empires in Niger, Nigeria, Chad, and Cameroon, as well as a diaspora community residing in Sudan.

See Cameroon and Kanuri people

Kaolinite

Kaolinite (also called kaolin) is a clay mineral, with the chemical composition: Al2Si2O5(OH)4.

See Cameroon and Kaolinite

Karl Offmann

Karl Auguste Offmann, GCSK (25 November 1940 – 12 March 2022) was a Mauritian politician who briefly served as the president of Mauritius from 2002 to 2003.

See Cameroon and Karl Offmann

Katharine Gun

Katharine Teresa Gun (née Harwood; born 1974) is a British linguist who worked as a translator for the Government Communications Headquarters (GCHQ).

See Cameroon and Katharine Gun

Köppen climate classification

The Köppen climate classification is one of the most widely used climate classification systems.

See Cameroon and Köppen climate classification

Kebab

Kebab (كباب, kabāb, كباب,; kebap), kabob (North American), kebap, or kabab (Kashmir) is a variety of roasted meat dishes that originated in the Middle East.

See Cameroon and Kebab

Kenya

Kenya, officially the Republic of Kenya (Jamhuri ya Kenya), is a country in East Africa.

See Cameroon and Kenya

Khwe language

Khwe (also rendered Kxoe, Khoe) is a dialect continuum of the Khoe branch of the Kwadi-Khoe family of Namibia, Angola, Botswana, South Africa, and parts of Zambia, with some 8,000 speakers.

See Cameroon and Khwe language

Kimberley Process Certification Scheme

The Kimberley Process Certification Scheme (KPCS) is the process established in 2003 to prevent "conflict diamonds" from entering the mainstream rough diamond market by United Nations General Assembly Resolution 55/56 following recommendations in the Fowler Report.

See Cameroon and Kimberley Process Certification Scheme

Kob

The kob (Kobus kob) is an antelope found across Central Africa and parts of West Africa and East Africa.

See Cameroon and Kob

Koro (disease)

Koro is a culture bound delusional disorder in which individuals have an overpowering belief that their sex organs are retracting and will disappear, despite the lack of any true longstanding changes to the genitals.

See Cameroon and Koro (disease)

Krio language

The Sierra Leonean Creole or Krio is an English-based creole language that is lingua franca and de facto national language spoken throughout the West African nation of Sierra Leone.

See Cameroon and Krio language

Kumba

Kumba is a metropolitan city in the Meme department, Southwest Region, Western Cameroon, commonly referred to as "K-town" colloquially.

See Cameroon and Kumba

Kwe people

The Bakweri (or Kwe) are a Bantu ethnic group of the Republic of Cameroon.

See Cameroon and Kwe people

Kyoto Protocol

The was an international treaty which extended the 1992 United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) that commits state parties to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, based on the scientific consensus that global warming is occurring and that human-made CO2 emissions are driving it.

See Cameroon and Kyoto Protocol

Kyparissia

Kyparissia (Κυπαρισσία) is a town and a former municipality in northwestern Messenia, Peloponnese, Greece.

See Cameroon and Kyparissia

Laccosperma secundiflorum

Laccosperma secundiflorum, the gao, is a species of palm found in the Dzangha-Sangha tropical forests of Cameroon.

See Cameroon and Laccosperma secundiflorum

Lactuca

Lactuca, commonly known as lettuce, is a genus of flowering plants in the family Asteraceae.

See Cameroon and Lactuca

Lake Chad

Lake Chad (Kanuri: Sádǝ) is an endorheic freshwater lake located at the junction of four countries: Nigeria, Niger, Chad, and Cameroon in western and central Africa respectively, with a catchment area of.

See Cameroon and Lake Chad

Lake Nyos

Lake Nyos is a crater lake in the Northwest Region of Cameroon, located about northwest of Yaoundé, the capital.

See Cameroon and Lake Nyos

Lakhdar Brahimi

Lakhdar Brahimi (Algerian pronunciation:; الأخضر الإبراهيمي;; born 1 January 1934) is an Algerian United Nations diplomat who served as the United Nations and Arab League Special Envoy to Syria until 14 May 2014.

See Cameroon and Lakhdar Brahimi

Landlocked country

A landlocked country is a country that does not have any territory connected to an ocean or whose coastlines lie solely on endorheic basins.

See Cameroon and Landlocked country

Languages of Africa

The number of languages natively spoken in Africa is variously estimated (depending on the delineation of language vs. dialect) at between 1,250 and 2,100, and by some counts at over 3,000.

See Cameroon and Languages of Africa

Latastia

Latastia is a genus of lizards of the family Lacertidae.

See Cameroon and Latastia

Lauraceae

Lauraceae, or the laurels, is a plant family that includes the true laurel and its closest relatives.

See Cameroon and Lauraceae

Laurel forest

Laurel forest, also called laurisilva or laurissilva, is a type of subtropical forest found in areas with high humidity and relatively stable, mild temperatures.

See Cameroon and Laurel forest

Lawrence Hill

Lawrence Hill (born January 24, 1957) is a Canadian novelist, essayist, and memoirist.

See Cameroon and Lawrence Hill

Lawyers Without Borders

Lawyers Without Borders (LWOB) is an international non-profit organization founded in 2000 by Connecticut Attorney, Christina M. Storm, which operates worldwide from its central headquarters located in New Haven, Connecticut, U.S.A. Its single affiliate, Lawyers Without Borders UK, was founded in 2003 and is headquartered in London, having acquired UK charity status in June 2010.

See Cameroon and Lawyers Without Borders

Left- and right-hand traffic

Left-hand traffic (LHT) and right-hand traffic (RHT) are the practices, in bidirectional traffic, of keeping to the left side and to the right side of the road, respectively.

See Cameroon and Left- and right-hand traffic

Leptosiaphos koutoui

Leptosiaphos koutoui is a species of skink, a lizard in the family Scincidae.

See Cameroon and Leptosiaphos koutoui

Les Têtes Brulées

Les Têtes Brulées are a Cameroonian band known for a pop version of the bikutsi dance music.

See Cameroon and Les Têtes Brulées

Lesbian

A lesbian is a homosexual woman or girl.

See Cameroon and Lesbian

Levirate marriage

Levirate marriage is a type of marriage in which the brother of a deceased man is obliged to marry his brother's widow.

See Cameroon and Levirate marriage

Liberia Airways

Liberia Airways was an airline based in Liberia.

See Cameroon and Liberia Airways

Libreville

Libreville is the capital and largest city of Gabon, located on the Gabon Estuary.

See Cameroon and Libreville

Limbé, Cameroon

Limbé or Limbe (known as Victoria from 1858 to 1982) is a seaside city in the South-West Region of Cameroon, At the 2005 Census, the population was 84,223.

See Cameroon and Limbé, Cameroon

Linguistic imperialism

Linguistic imperialism or language imperialism is occasionally defined as "the transfer of a dominant language to other people".

See Cameroon and Linguistic imperialism

List of acronyms: C

(Main list of acronyms).

See Cameroon and List of acronyms: C

List of African writers by country

This is a list of prominent and notable writers from Africa.

See Cameroon and List of African writers by country

List of airports by IATA airport code: B

The DST column shows the months in which Daylight Saving Time, a.k.a. Summer Time, begins and ends.

See Cameroon and List of airports by IATA airport code: B

List of airports by IATA airport code: D

The DST column shows the months in which Daylight Saving Time, a.k.a. Summer Time, begins and ends.

See Cameroon and List of airports by IATA airport code: D

List of airports by IATA airport code: E

The DST column shows the months in which Daylight Saving Time, a.k.a. Summer Time, begins and ends.

See Cameroon and List of airports by IATA airport code: E

List of airports by IATA airport code: F

The DST column shows the months in which Daylight Saving Time, a.k.a. Summer Time, begins and ends.

See Cameroon and List of airports by IATA airport code: F

List of airports by IATA airport code: K

The DST column shows the months in which Daylight Saving Time, a.k.a. Summer Time, begins and ends.

See Cameroon and List of airports by IATA airport code: K

List of airports by IATA airport code: M

The DST column shows the months in which Daylight Saving Time, a.k.a. Summer Time, begins and ends.

See Cameroon and List of airports by IATA airport code: M

List of airports by IATA airport code: N

No description.

See Cameroon and List of airports by IATA airport code: N

List of airports by IATA airport code: O

No description.

See Cameroon and List of airports by IATA airport code: O

List of airports by IATA airport code: T

No description.

See Cameroon and List of airports by IATA airport code: T

List of airports by IATA airport code: Y

No description.

See Cameroon and List of airports by IATA airport code: Y

List of beaches

This is a list of beaches of the world, sorted by country.

See Cameroon and List of beaches

List of Boeing 767 operators

The following is a list of current commercial operators of the Boeing 767, and any of its variants.

See Cameroon and List of Boeing 767 operators

List of bridge failures

This is a list of bridge failures.

See Cameroon and List of bridge failures

List of Buddhist temples

This is a list of Buddhist temples, monasteries, stupas, and pagodas for which there are Wikipedia articles, sorted by location.

See Cameroon and List of Buddhist temples

List of circulating currencies

There are 180 currencies recognized as legal tender in United Nations (UN) member states, UN General Assembly non-member observer states, partially recognized or unrecognized states, and their dependencies.

See Cameroon and List of circulating currencies

List of Commonwealth heads of government

The Commonwealth Heads of Government (CHOG) is the collective name for the government leaders of the nations with membership in the Commonwealth of Nations.

See Cameroon and List of Commonwealth heads of government

List of Commonwealth of Nations prime ministers

This is a list of the prime ministers of the Commonwealth of Nations in order of appointment.

See Cameroon and List of Commonwealth of Nations prime ministers

List of contemporary ethnic groups

The following is a list of contemporary ethnic groups.

See Cameroon and List of contemporary ethnic groups

List of countries and dependencies and their capitals in native languages

The following chart lists countries and dependencies along with their capital cities, in English and non-English official language(s).

See Cameroon and List of countries and dependencies and their capitals in native languages

List of countries and territories where English is an official language

The following is a list of countries and territories where English is an official language used in citizen interactions with government officials.

See Cameroon and List of countries and territories where English is an officia