*** It has been brought to my attention by someone that while my site lists the video formats, it does not list whether or not if the videos come with the smalls. I apologize if this confused and/or disappointed anyone. I have seen many trading sites over the years and not every site lists smalls or formats for that matter. So I assumed listing the small files were optional. So just to be clear moving forward, all of the videos on here do not have smalls. I have not received them all the time, and when I do I usually don't keep them because I have no personal use for them and don't want to take up extra space on my computer with them. I understand that this may upset some people, but it is a personal choice. And many people have told me that if they want a video bad enough, having the smalls does not matter a great deal. So unless it is listed, just know that you will not be getting smalls, just the video files. If you want smalls of certain videos, you are free to contact me and I may be able to refer you to a site that does have them.

​London

Colm Wilkinson, Sarah Brightman, Clive Carter

1985; Sydmonton Workshop

Horrifying quality - black and white with lots of green lines running through it; lots of generation loss. Sound is decent, though. Act 1 only, lots of old lyrics, and very interesting to see the show in its first incarnation. MP4.

Michael Crawford, Rebecca Caine, Steve Barton

1987; London

Highlights. Extremely difficult to make out anything other than the figures of people; black-and-white image and very heavy generation loss. VOB.

Dave Willetts, Jan Hartley-Morris, Michael Cormick

1988; London

Clearer than the Rebecca Caine video above, but there's a lot of generation loss and tons of washout and color bleeding. Dave Willetts and Jan Hartley-Morris are both very lovely, old school actors. MP4.

Dave Willetts, Jan Hartley-Morris, Michael Cormick

1988; London

From the same show as above, but it is a little clearer. The trader told me this copy was gotten directly from the master tape, so it has basically the original quality of the video versus the full one above that has had some generation loss over the years from being traded so much. Only 35 minutes though.

Ethan Freeman, Jill Washington, Simon Bowman

1995; London

Proshot by RUG. Fuzzy picture, some color loss in darker parts, and hard to see face expressions except in the occasional closeups. Quite a bit of spotlight washout, but big picture and has survived fairly well for something so old. Very nutball Phantom in Ethan Freeman, nice classical Christine in Jill Washington, and solid Raoul in Simon Bowman. VOB.

Scott Davies, Meredith Braun, Matthew Cammelle

​March 9, 2000; London

Filmed very close to the stage, so there are some heads, but nothing terrible. MP4.

Scott Davies, Charlotte Page, Matthew Cammelle

Summer 2000; London

Bright colors and detail. MP4.

John Owen-Jones, Celia Graham, Robert Finlayson

September 21, 2002; London

Shot from the stalls, so many good closeups but has a few heads to film around. Okay quality, more color bleeding and fuzzier detail than some older London videos. John Owen-Jones and Celia Graham have great chemistry; Celia notices the camera at one point in 'Think of Me'. VOB

John Owen-Jones, Rachel Barrell, Oliver Thornton, Anthony Cable (u/s), Sam Hiller, Sally Harrison, Emma Edwards (u/s), Rohan Tickell, Claire Tilling

October 15, 2004; London

Filmed at the beginning of Rachel's run. Some people say she isn't as good as she was later on, but I think she sounds and acts the role wonderfully, she just developed and added things a bit more as time went on.

John Owen-Jones, Rachel Barrell, Oliver Thornton

February 26, 2005; London

John Owen-Jones's last show of his first run. Filmed from the stalls, so great closeups but lots of heads. Rather funny flub where the overture track stops for a few seconds before starting over; too bad there's a blackout there. John Owen-Jones and Rachel Barrell are on fire here, great chemistry. Missing the beginning of 'Masquerade', so footage of Celia Graham as Christine was spliced in. MP4.

Earl Carpenter, Katie Knight-Adams, David Shannon, James Barron, Richard Sidaway (u/s), Wendy Ferguson, Annette Yeo, Rohan Tickell, Heidi Ann O'Brien

2006; London

SA78's master. Previously only a few clips had existed for trade, so it is wonderful to have the full video!

Earl Carpenter (Phantom), Celia Graham (alt Christine), David Shannon (Raoul), David Lawrence (u/s Firmin), Sam Hiller (André), Wendy Ferguson (Carlotta), Emily Harvey (u/s Giry), Rohan Tickell (Piangi), Heidi Ann O'Brien (Meg), Philip Griffiths (Auctioneer/Reyer), Richard Sidaway (Lefèvre), Gavin Mitford (Slave Master), Joanna Loxton (u/s Princess), Cecilia Smiga (Wild Woman), Colin Zammit (u/s Buquet), Siani Owen (u/s Mme Firmin), Ellen Jackson (Wardrobe Mistress), Deborah Crowe (Confidante), Andrew Thwaite (Jeweller/Porter), Mark Cunningham (Hairdresser/Passarino), David Fortune (u/s Don Attilio), Simon Rackley (Porter/Policeman), Howard Ellis (Lionman/Fire Chief), David Erik (Porter/Marksman), Anna-Lee Robertson (Page)

January 2005; London

Previously there were only 2 clips of this video, but the master has recently released the full one! SA78's master. There is lots of detail due to close zooming, a bright lens and encoding to MP4. Black bar in lower part of the picture, and an evil head of doom on centre/stage right. Some shakiness results at times. Mix of mediums and close ups. Really sweet moment at the end of MotN where Earl sits next to the boat. ​

Earl Carpenter, Rachel Barrell, David Shannon, David Lawrence (u/s), Sam Hiller, Wendy Ferguson, Emily Harvey (u/s), Rohan Tickell, Heidi Ann O'Brien

January 2006; London

​VOB

Earl Carpenter, Rachel Barrell, David Shannon

February 4, 2006; London

Highlights. Great quality video of the performance with many excellent closeups. Includes a flub where the Phantom does not get his dressing robe in time for 'Stranger Than You Dreamt It'. Some head obstruction on the left side of the stage, and the kiss at the end of the 'Final Lair' is missed. VOB.

Matthew Cammelle (s/b), Rachel Barrell, David Shannon, James Barron, Sam Hiller, Wendy Ferguson, Annette Yeo, Rohan Tickell, Heidi Ann O'Brien

February 25, 2006; London

Little bonus in 'Masquerade: the Man/Woman costume is replaced with the slavegirl costume from Hannibal. WMV files, really clear picture.

Matthew Cammelle (s/b), Rachel Barrell, David Shannon, James Barron, Sam Hiller, Wendy Ferguson, Annette Yeo, Howard Ellis (u/s), Naomi Cobby (u/s)

June 17, 2006; London

Evening performance.

Ramin Karimloo, Leila Benn Harris, Alex Rathgeber, Wendy Ferguson, David Lawrence, Craig Nicholls (u/s), Lindsey Wise

September 6, 2008; London

Last night for Leila Benn Harris, Alex Rathgeber, Wendy Ferguson, David Lawrence, and Lindsey Wise. Act 2 only. Also includes a very blurry, out of focus clip of 'Point of No Return' performed by Nic Greenshields and Robyn North. VOB.

Ramin Karimloo, Gina Beck, Simon Bailey

September 9, 2008; London

Gina and Simon’s first performance, as well as others. VOB.

David Shannon, Gina Beck, Simon Bailey, Rebecca Lock, Gareth Snook, Barry James, Nicky Adams, Emma Harris

August 18, 2010; London

Full video, gorgeous video. On most trading sites it is listed as not for trade, but the person who I got it from said to list it as extremely limited trade. So you can email me about it, but it will only be traded for under specific circumstances. 3:1 ratio. VOB.

​David Shannon, Gina Beck, Will Barratt (u/s), Rebecca Lock, Gareth Snook, Barry James, Nicky Adams, Emma Harris

August 24, 2010; London

Act 1 starts at Hannibal, Act 2 at 'Wishing'. Another gorgeous video, and another that's not for trade.

John Owen Jones, Katie Hall, Killian Donnelly, Wendy Ferguson

September 2011; London

Three MP4 clips, featuring about half of the Overture, Title Song, and All I Ask of You.

Ramin Karimloo, Sierra Boggess, Hadley Fraser, Wendy Ferguson, Barry James, Gareth Snook, Wynne Evans, Liz Robertson, Daisy Maywood

2011; Royal Albert Hall

MP4, but very good quality. This is the DVD version.

Ramin Karimloo, Sierra Boggess, Hadley Fraser, Wendy Ferguson, Barry James, Gareth Snook, Wynne Evans, Liz Robertson, Daisy Maywood

2011; Royal Albert Hall

MP4, but very good quality. This is the livestream version, which has different angles than the DVD one. The sound isn't as good on this one though when you listen with headphones. But very cool to see the difference between this one and the one above.

​

Marcus Lovett, Anna O'Byrne, Simon Thomas

September 2012; London

Trio-oriented highlights. MP4.

Marcus Lovett, Sofia Escobar, Simon Thomas

August 2013; London

Pretty good quality, pretty much the same angles as the video above. No closeups though. AVI files.

Geronimo Rauch, Sofia Escobar, Sean Palmer

September 4, 2013; London

Four MP4 files. Full show, but most of Act 1 is audio only save for 'Think of Me' and the scenes in the dressing room. Video is flipped briefly in Act 2 but rights itself quickly. Two versions of Act 1 available: the first is flipped on its side but is larger quality, the second is upright but lower quality. Generally wideshot.

Geronimo Rauch, Harriet Jones, Liam Tamne

January 3, 2015; London

MP4 files, most of Act 1. Very wide shot, lots of washout.​

Geronimo Rauch, Harriet Jones, Richard Munday (u/s)

April 2015; London

Trio-centered highlights, MP4 files. Lovely cast!

Geronimo Rauch, Lisa-Anne Wood (u/s), Liam Tamne, Andy Hockley, Martin Ball, Lara Martins, Jacinta Mulcahy, John Ellis, Layla Harrison (u/s)

May 22, 2015; London

NFT. Highlights from Act 2. Lots of blackouts and obstruction. Rare video. MOV files.

stillsortofquiettrading's master.

Geronimo Rauch, Lisa-Anne Wood (u/s), Liam Tamne, Andy Hockley, Martin Ball, Lara Martins, Jacinta Mulcahy, John Ellis, Alicia Beck

June 5, 2015; London

NFT. Act 1 only, blindshot. MOV,

stillsortofquiettrading's master. Rare video.

John Owen Jones, Lisa Ann Wood (u/s), Nadim Naaman

January 28, 2016; London

great musical trader's master.

Act I is complete, Act II only includes Masquerade plus curtain calls. Picture is dark/slightly grainy and sound is not great. Rare video. All are AVI files, except for the last one, which is MP4 for some reason. Someone sent me their conversation with the master which said that they were allowing the video to be traded out now.

Ben Lewis, Amy Manford, Jeremy Taylor

​August 2018; London

5 clips: AoM to STYDI, Il Muto, Masquerade, Wishing & Wandering Child, PONR to Final Lair. You can see pretty much everything, but it can be a bit shaky. Shot from further back so there aren't any closeups and it is a little blurry. But not bad. ​

David Thaxton (The Phantom), Amy Manford (alt. Christine Daae), Jeremy Taylor (Raoul)

December 2018; London

There are some blackouts and a bar in the way at times, but also some lovely closeups. Amy sounds beautiful, I think this is the best I’ve heard her sing the role yet. She definitely improves each show. Hopefully she’ll be principal in her own right someday. MP4 (original format).

David Thaxton (The Phantom), Amy Manford (alternate Christine Daae), Danny Whitehead (understudy Raoul de Chagny), Kimberly Blake (Carlotta Giudicelli), Ross Dawes (Monsieur Firmin), Alan Vicary (Monsieur Andre), Jacinta Mulcahy (Madame Giry), Paul Ettore Tabone (Ubaldo Piangi), Georgia Ware (Meg Giry)

April 2019; London

Hitmewithyourbethshot's master. Shot around heads and lighting equipment, but clearer and more action is shown than the one from December. MP4 files (original format). Newly up for trade!​

Tim Howar, Amy Manford, Jeremy Taylor

August 23 or 30 (?), 2019; London

6 clips, including The Mirror/Title Song, Rooftop, Twisted Every Way, WYWSHA, PONR, and about 3/4 of the Final Lair. They are shot from the right and there is some blocking, but it is much better quality than the clips of Ben and Amy. Very clear. Her Wishing is great. If the date is right, then this was about a week before Tim, Amy, and Jeremy's final show. I just got the Rooftop clip sent to me so if I traded with you for these you can message me for that clip too! Limited trades. MP4.

​David Thaxton (Phantom), Kelly Mathieson (Christine), Jeremy Taylor (Raoul), Kimberly Blake (Carlotta), Ross Dawes (Monsieur Firmin), Kris Manuel (Monsieur Andre), Jacinta Mulcahy (Madame Giry), Matt Bateman (u/s Ubaldo Piangi), Georgia Ware/Lily Howes (Meg Giry), Matthew Barrow, James Bisp, James Butcher, Bridget Costello, Hadrian Delacey, Paul Erbs, Hannah Grace, Philip Griffiths, Katy Hanna, Hettie Hobbs, Andrei Teodor Iliescu, Ellen Jackson, Adam Robert Lewis, Tim Morgan, Rebecca Ridout, Rachel Spurrell, John Stacey, Victoria Ward, Danny Whitehead, Sophie Cottrill, Morven Douglas, Emily Hodge, Grace Horne, Anna Shircliff, Claire Tilling

March 2019; London

Georgia seems to have left the show after Act 1. Maybe due to illness or injury. Nice it get something of Matt too! Also, the other two videos of David with Amy were great, but rather obstructed. This one has no obstruction, nice color and details, and the show is followed really well. Similar to the Rachel Barrell, Gina Beck, etc. videos of the day. The best or at least one of the best to come out of the London production. NYCG8R’s master. VOB.​

​​Josh Piterman, Kelly Mathieson, Alistair So (u/s), Britt Lenting, Paul Ettore Tabone, Georgia Ware

November 2019; London

An amazing cast. So great to see a video of an u/s! Shot around heads and lighting equipment so a decent amount of the show is not there, bethtrades's master. ​

Killian Donnelly, Lucy St Louis, Rhys Whitfield, Saori Oda, Matt Harrop, Adam Linstead, Francesca Ellis, Greg Castiglioni, Ellie Young

August 2021; London

Two MTS files of act 2 only. Includes act 1 audio. Bethtrades's master​

Killian Donnelly, Holly-Anne Hull (alt.), Rhys Whitfield, Saori Oda, Matt Harrop, Adam Linstead, Francesca Ellis, Greg Castiglioni, Ellie Young

September 2021; London

​Five MTS files of the entire show. Barrier blocks part of the action below. Bethtrades's master,​

Killian Donnelly, Anouk van Laake (u/s), Rhys Whitfield, Saori Oda, Matt Harrop, Adam Linstead, Francesca Ellis, Greg Castiglioni, Ellie Young

February 2022; London

​Bethtrades's master, five MTS files, shot around heads.

James Hume (u/s), Holly-Anne Hull, Matt Blaker, Kelly Glyptis, Matt Harrop, Tim Southgate (u/s), Francesca Ellis, Greg Castiglioni, Ellie Young

October 2022; London

Bethtrades's master

​Killian Donnelly, Holly-Anne Hull, Connor Carson (u/s), Kelly Glyptis, Matt Harrop, Adam Linstead, Francesca Ellis, Greg Castiglioni, Skye Weiss (u/s)

​November 2022; London

Bethtrades's master

Killian Donnelly, Lucy St Louis, Matt Blaker, Kelly Glyptis, Matt Harrop, James Hume (u/s), Francesca Ellis

January 2023; London

Lasagnatrades's master, filmed near the end of Lucy St Louis's run.

Earl Carpenter (t/r), Paige Blankson, Ralph Watts (u/s), Kelly Glyptis, Matt Harrop, Adam Linstead, Francesca Ellis, Greg Castiglioni, Ellie Young

March 2023; London

Lasagnatrades's master, One MP4 file, somewhat obstructed in the first act.

Earl Carpenter (t/r), Eve Shanu-Wilson (u/s), Connor Carson (u/s), Kelly Glyptis, Matt Harris, Adam Linstead, Emma Harris (u/s), Greg Castiglioni, Ellie Young

April 1, 2023; London

​Lasagnatrades's master. Earl Carpenter's final performance, omits 'Notes I' and 'Prima Donna'. Very obstructed at times but with some great shots at others.​

James Gant (u/s), Paige Blankson, Matt Blaker, Kelly Glyptis, Matt Harrop, Adam Linstead, Francesca Ellis, Greg Castiglioni, Ellie Young

July 2023; London

Lasagnatrades's master, NFT until December 29, 2023. One MP4 file.

James Gant (u/s), Holly-Anne Hull, Matt Blaker, Kelly Glyptis, Matt Harrop, Adam Linstead, Francesca Ellis, Greg Castiglioni, Ellie Young

July 2023; London

Last show for this cast. One MP4 file. Lasagnatrades's master

Jon Robyns, Colleen Rose Curran (u/s), Ralph Watts (u/s), Lily De-La-Haye (u/s), Matt Harrop, Adam Linstead, Francesca Ellis, Simon Whitaker (u/s), Maiya Hikasa

September 2023; London

Bethtrades's master, two MTS files, Act II only but includes audio of Act I.

​

James Gant (u/s), Eve Shanu-Wilson (u/s), Joe Griffiths-Brown, Lily De-La-Haye (u/s), Matt Harrop, Adam Linstead, Francesca Ellis, David Christopher-Brown, Maiya Hikasa

December 2023; London

WhatYouWill's master, two MP4 files totaling 17 GB. NFT until December 31, 2024 and limited trade after that. Act I is pretty wideshot with a lot of spotlight washout and obstruction along the bottom; Act II is better with more zooms.

Jon Robyns, Lily Kerhoas, Michael Colbourne (u/s)

January 2024; London

WhatYouWill's master, NFT until January 31, 2025.

​Jon Robyns, Lily Kerhoas, Michael Colbourne, Kelly Glyptis, Matt Harrop, Adam Linstead, Francesca Ellis, David Kristopher-Brown, Maiya Kikasa

January 2024; London

WhatYouWill's master, NFT until January 31, 2025. Different video from the one above from another date.

​

Michael Colbourne (u/s), Lily Kerhoas, Ralph Watts (u/s), Kelly Glyptis, Tim Morgan (u/s), Adam Linstead, Francesca Ellis, David Kristopher-Brown, Maiya Hikasa

February 2024; London

Two MP4 files, 17 GB total, comes with full audio of the show (tracked and untracked). NFT until February 28, 2025. WhatYouWill's master.

Broadway

Michael Crawford, Sarah Brightman, Steve Barton, Hal Prince, Charles Hart

1987; Broadway

Rehearsal footage, around 40 minutes long. Professionally filmed and sometimes static-y and fuzzy, but rare glimpse of the original cast and director working on the production. MP4.

Michael Crawford, Sarah Brightman, Steve Barton

1988; Broadway

About 6 minutes of press reels of the original Broadway cast. Includes the title song, 'Music of the Night', 'All I Ask of You', 'Masquerade', and 'Wishing You Were Somehow Here Again'. A lot of generation loss. Also includes press reels from other shows. VOB.

Michael Crawford, Sarah Brightman, Steve Barton

April 1988; Broadway

Starts partway through 'Overture'. Color bleeding, washout, generation loss, and several unimportant scenes ('Prologue', 'Magical Lasso', etc.) are cut out, but nevertheless a video of the original cast on Broadway (and they are splendid). MP4.

Michael Crawford, Dale Kristien, Steve Barton, Nick Wyman, Cris Groenendaal, Judy Kaye, David Romano, Leila Martin

October 8, 1988; Broadway

Michael Crawford's penultimate show. VOB.

Cris Groenendaal, Rebecca Luker, Steve Barton

1989; Broadway

Almost black-and-white video with constant flickering lines. Dark and tons of generation loss and washout. But hey, it’s the only video of Rebecca Luker that I know of and she’s pretty great. VOB.

Davis Gaines, Tracy Shayne, Ciaran Sheehan

1995; Broadway

Comes with D’Ambrosio, Shayne, Sheehan video. MP4.

Thomas James O'Leary, Tracy Shayne, Gary Mauer

January 26, 1998; Broadway

37 minutes of scattered highlights of the tenth anniversary performance on Broadway. MP4.

Thomas James O' Leary, Sandra Joseph, Gary Mauer, Jeff Keller, George Lee Andrews, Patricia Hurd, Lelia Martin, Ted Keegan

July 1998; Broadway

Pretty clear filming and details, especially for something so old. VOB.​

Howard McGillin, Adrienne McEwan (alt), Gary Mauer, George Lee Andrews, Jeff Keller (?), Leilia Martin (Giry?)

September 20, 1999; Broadway

Highlights, runs 77 minutes. Nice close-ups. Color is a little low. It seems that the taper sort of knows the show, but the camera wanders a lot and doesn't always get the right shots. On the rarer side. Regarded by many as one of Howard's best shows

Howard McGillin, Adrienne McEwan, Jim Weitzer (u/s)

September 1, 2001; Broadway

Pretty good detail and color.

Howard McGillin, Elizabeth Southard, Michael Shawn Lewis, Jeff Keller, George Lee Andrews, Rebecca Eichenberger, Marilyn Caskey, David Gaschen (u/s), Joelle Gates*

March 27, 2002; Broadway

Pretty shaky filming and some washout, but otherwise a decent video.

Howard McGillin, Elizabeth Southard, Michael Shawn Lewis, Wren Marie Harrington, Jeff Keller, George Lee Andrews, Marilyn Caskey, David Gaschen (u/s), Joelle Gates*

July 31, 2002; Broadway

Howard McGillin, Adrienne McEwan, Jim Weitzer (u/s), Patty Goble (u/s), Jeff Keller, George Lee Andrews, Sally Williams, Larry Wayne Morbitt, Joelle Gates

April 5, 2003; Broadway

Fairly good quality, probably the best video of Adrienne McEwan. Another large head obstructs most of the bottom left screen. I really like Adrienne. MP4.

Hugh Panaro, Lisa Vroman, John Cudia

May 20, 2003; Broadway

Decent picture and quality, some washout in wider shots. This cast is really amazing all around. VOB.

Hugh Panaro, Sandra Joseph, John Cudia, Jeff Keller, George Lee Andrews, Patricia Phillips, Marilyn Caskey, Larry Wayne Morbitt, Joelle Gates

August 9, 2003; Broadway

Hugh Panaro, Julie Hanson, Jim Weitzer

October 7, 2003; Broadway

Full show. Much sharper filming and detail than previous Broadway videos. VOB,

Howard McGillin, Julie Hanson, John Cudia, Jeff Keller, George Lee Andrews, Kris Koop (u/s), Larry Wayne Morbitt, Marilyn Caskey, Heather McFadden

June 28, 2004; Broadway

Howard McGillin was covering for Hugh Panaro, who was on vacation. While the quality is alright, the filming leaves much to be desired - tons of heads in the way, really shaky filming, and many moments of camera straying or wideshots only.

Hugh Panaro, Julie Hanson, John Cudia

March 2, 2005, Broadway

Lovely quality video, nice color and details, but filmer didn't know show very well, resulting in more wideshots than might be usual. Hugh, Julie, and John make a stunning trio, though Hugh was apparently having an off-night. VOB.

James Romick (u/s), Marie Danvers, John Cudia

April 2, 2005; Broadway

Marie Danvers filled in for Christine while Julie Hanson was on vacation. Starts during Carlotta's rant, includes James Romick's BCEFA speech at the end. MP4.

Hugh Panaro, Sandra Joseph, Tim Martin Gleason, Jeff Keller, George Lee Andrews, Anne Runolfsson, Marilyn Caskey, David Gaschen (u/s), Kara Klein

June 6, 2005; Broadway

Act Two starts in the middle of Masquerade. Sandra stands caressing the Phantom's face for several moments after the kiss. Some audience members start laughing during the Masquerade reprise.

Hugh Panaro, Julie Hanson, Tim Martin Gleason

June 22, 2005; Broadway

Hugh Panaro, Rebecca Pitcher (alt), Tim Martin Gleason, Jeff Keller, George Lee Andrews, Anne Runolfsson, Marilyn Caskey, Larry Wayne Morbitt, Kara Klein

July 16, 2005; Broadway

Highlights of the matinee. Rebecca's second performance on Broadway. After being so Raoul-biased on the tour, she attacks Hugh during the kiss so fiercely that he nearly falls over backward. A flub during the Final Lair where Rebecca does not throw the veil properly and it lands somewhere near the portcullis so Hugh has to make do without it at the end. Really steady filming. WMV files.

Tim Martin-Gleason (u/s), Susan Owen (u/s), Stephen R Buntrock (u/s)

August 10, 2005; Broadway

Nice video, much the same as many of the other 2005 videos released around this time. MP4.

Stephen R. Buntrock (u/s), Rebecca Pitcher, Fred Rose (u/s)

August 13, 2005; Broadway

Some blackouts, but great quality video. MP4

Hugh Panaro, Sandra Joseph, Tim Martin Gleason, James Romick (u/s), George Lee Andrews, Anne Runolfsson, Marilyn Caskey, Larry Wayne Morbitt, Kara Klein

October 1, 2005; Broadway

Hugh Panaro's last performance at the time, includes curtain call and speeches at the end. Beautiful, clear picture with great detail and quality, and the entire cast was on fire. MP4.

Howard McGillin, Sandra Joseph, Tim Martin Gleason

January 9, 2006; Broadway

Record-breaking performance. Video quality is very nice, save for a head blocking a lot of the right side of the screen. Unfortunately only features Act 1 and the curtain call and speeches at the end. MP4

Howard McGillin, Rebecca Pitcher, Michael Shawn Lewis, Julie Schmidt (u/s), David Cryer, George Lee Andrews, Marilyn Caskey, Roland Rusinek, Heather McFadden

August 18, 2006; Broadway

Gary Mauer, Jennifer Hope Wills, Jason Mills (u/s), George Lee Andrews, David Cryer, Patricia Phillips (u/s), Roland Rusinek, Sally Williams (u/s), Heather McFadden, James Romick (u/s)

May 9, 2007; Broadway

Beautiful video shot in widescreen, no obstructions at all and follows the show very well. Includes a hilarious flub where Joseph Buquet fails to come out during 'Magical Lasso' and Heather McFadden, Sally Williams, and the rest of the ballet girls improvise. VOB.

Gary Mauer, Jennifer Hope Wills, Michael Shawn Lewis, George Lee Andrews, David Cryer, Roland Rusinek, Kris Koop (u/s), Patricia Philips (u/s), Heather McFadden

2007; Broadway

So this video is either the one from May 12th or December 5th. There is not one from the December date that exists (that I know of) and watching the video it fits the description of the May 12th one. So it's most like from May 12th, but I'm still not sure. At any rate, I didn't have this video already. AVI files.

Howard McGillin, Elizabeth Loyacano, Jeremy Stolle (u/s), George Lee Andrews, David Cryer, Rebecca Judd, Evan Harrington Heather McFadden, Katie Banks, Chris Bohannon, Harriet Clark

May 12, 2008; Broadway

Nice color, features the recorder filming a bit of the outside of the theater. However, fuzzy detail, shaky filming, and some head obstruction, plus the picture is stretched. VOB.

Howard McGillin, Jennifer Hope Wills, Tim Martin Gleason, George Lee Andrews, David Cryer, Rebecca Judd, Evan Harrington, Polly Baird, Dara Adler, Chris Bohannon

August 12, 2008; Broadway

Last known recorded performance of Howard.

Hugh Panaro, Trista Moldovan, Kyle Barisich, Michele McConnell, Joelle Gates, Cristin J Hubbard, Aaron Galligan-Stierle, Kevin Ligon, Christian Sebek

October 13, 2012; Broadway

Incredible quality video, some of the brightest colors and details in a Broadway video. A couple of blackouts and head obstruction and Act 2 starts right before the lyrics in Masquerade begin. Hugh is even better than in his first run, and Trista is quite nice as well. VOB.

Hugh Panaro, Trista Moldovan, Kyle Barisich, Kevin Ligon, Aaron Galligan-Stierle, Michele McConnell, Christian Sebek, Cristin J. Hubbard, Kara Klein

October 31, 2012; Broadway

Trio-oriented highlights, some head obstruction and shaky filming, but otherwise a really great quality video. VOB.

Greg Mills (u/s), Marni Raab, Kyle Barisich, Kevin Ligon, Aaron Galligan-Stierle, Michele McConnell, Christian Sebek, Cristin J. Hubbard, Kara Klein

November 8, 2012; Broadway

Some camera straying during the beginning of the show. Marni seems to be having a decent performance here. She also lays down on the PONr bench on her stomach, which is interesting. But nice to see her do something different. MP4

Hugh Panaro, Trista Moldovan, Kyle Barisich, Kevin Ligon, Aaron Galligan-Stierle, Michele McConnell, Christian Sebek, Cristin J. Hubbard, Kara Klein

November 10, 2012; Broadway

Trio-oriented highlights, almost the full show. Trista Moldovan's last show. MP4.

Hugh Panaro, Samantha Hill, Kyle Barisich, Michele McConnell, Tim Jerome, Jim Weitzer, Ellen Harvey, Christian Sebek, Kara Klein

November 22, 2012; Broadway

Shot by the same person as the October 13, 2012 video, so same great quality and steadier filming this time around, only a few small blackouts. I personally think Sam sounds better here vocally than in other later videos. VOB.

​Hugh Panaro, Marni Raab, Kyle Barisich

November 26, 2012; Broadway

Shot from the stalls; good closeups and follows the action fairly well, but quite a few heads. You can see sparkles it's so close! MP4

Hugh Panaro, Sierra Boggess, Kyle Barisich, Michele McConnell, Christian Sebek, Jim Weitzer, Tim Jerome, Ellen Harvey, Kara Klein

February 21, 2013; Broadway

MP4.

Jeremy Stolle (u/s), Samantha Hill, Greg Mills (u/s), Michele McConnell, Christian Sebek, Tim Jerome, Richard Poole (u/s), Ellen Harvey, Kara Klein*

March 9, 2013; Broadway

Missing part of Act 1 ('Stranger Than You Dreamt It' to Il Muto), but otherwise complete. VOB.

Hugh Panaro, Marni Raab, Kyle Barisich, Michele McConnell, Tim Jerome, Jim Weitzer, Kelly Jeanne Grant (u/s), Christian Sebek, Kara Klein

April 9, 2013; Broadway

​inallyourfantasies's master.​

Hugh Panaro, Samantha Hill, Kyle Barisich, Michele McConnell, Tim Jerome, Richard Poole (u/s), Christian Sebek, Ellen Harvey, Kara Klein

April 27, 2013; Broadway

Hugh Panaro's last show before his 4 month break. inallyourfantasies's master. MP4.

Peter Joback, Elizabeth Welch (u/s), Kyle Barisich, Michele McConnell, Christian Sebek, Tim Jerome, Richard Poole (u/s), Ellen Harvey, Kara Klein

May 9, 2013; Broadway

inallyourfantasies's master.

Peter Joback, Samantha Hill, Jeremy Stolle (u/s), Michele McConnell, Tim Jerome, Richard Poole (u/s), Ellen Harvey, Christian Sebek, Kara Klein

May 18, 2013; Broadway

inallyourfantasies's master. MP4.

Peter Joback, Marni Raab, Kyle Barisich, Michele McConnell, Scott Mikita (u/s), Jim Weitzer, Ellen Harvey, Christian Sebek, Kara Klein

June 3, 2013; Broadway

inallyourfantasies' master. VOB.

Peter Jöback, Samantha Hill (final), Kyle Barisich, Marilyn Caskey (final), Michele McConnell, Jim Weitzer, Kenneth Kantor (u/s), Christian Sebek, Kara Klein

July 27, 2013; Broadway

Last for Samantha Hill and Marilyn Caskey. There is one head wearing glasses in front of the camera, but the master works around it well. But that does mean that one side versus the other of the stage is shown. Focused more on Samantha since it was her final show. inallyourfantasies' master. MP4

Jeremy Stolle (u/s), Mary Michael Patterson, Jeremy Hays

November 8, 2013; Broadway

Filmed from the left front row so not all of the action is caught, but when the actors are in the middle or the left the angle is really cool. About 40 minutes of highlights. Act I runs from The Mirror through STYDI. Act II includes Wandering Child and PONR through the Final Lair. VOB.

Jeremy Stolle (u/s), Mary Michael Patterson, Jeremy Hays

November 22, 2013; Broadway

Turnofthescorpion's master. Highlights, about an hour long. About the same angle as the above video, but you can see abit more. M2T file.

Hugh Panaro, Sarah Bakker (u/s), Jeremy Hays

November 28, 2013; Broadway

Sarah Bakker's Broadway debut as Christine. Christine-centered highlights, the only video of Sarah out there. turnofthescorpion's master. M2T file.

Jeremy Stolle (u/s), Mary Michael Patterson, Jeremy Hays

January 11, 2014; Broadway

VOB.

Laird Mackintosh (u/s), Mary Michael Patterson, Jeremy Hays

January 25, 2014; Broadway

Laird Mackintosh's third time as the Phantom on Broadway; highlights. MP4.

Paul A. Schaefer (u/s), Mary Michael Patterson, Jeremy Hays, Janet Saia (u/s Carlotta)

​January 29, 2014; Broadway

inallyourfantasies' master. VOB.

Laird Mackintosh (u/s), Sara Jean Ford, Jeremy Hays

March 17, 2014; Broadway

VOB.

Greg Mills (u/s), Mary Michael Patterson, Jeremy Hays

March 20, 2014; Broadway

turnofthescorpion's master. Filmed from the balcony with some head obstructions and cover-ups. The camera tends to wander and has trouble focusing at times. Greg's voice is rich and he has a great evil laugh. His hat pops off just after he helps Mary out of the boat during the title song, but they both handle it smoothly and he tosses it away after Mary faints at the end of MOTN. His "floating, falling" is very sensual, I wish Mary would have given something back! Mary always is great in PONR, especially when she arches her back on the bench when the Phantom sits down behind her. Greg plays on that and it makes for a lot of tension. I only wish the filmer had stayed on it the entire time! And I believe you can hear Jeremy call out "Christine, no!" when she kisses the Phantom. He most likely did because I've heard him do it in other videos, and he did it when I saw him live a few times. A great addition. Includes curtain calls and Greg's BC/EFA speech.

Hugh Panaro, Sara Jean Ford, Jeremy Hays

March 31, 2014; Broadway

This was during Sara’s brief return as alternate. Really cool to see Hugh and Sara reunite after being opposite each other a few years back.

turnofthescorpion's master. VOB.

Hugh Panaro, Mary Michael Patterson, Jeremy Hays

April 3, 2014; Broadway

turnofthescorpion's master. MP4.

Hugh Panaro, Sara Jean Ford, Jeremy Hays

April 17, 2014; Broadway

turnofthescorpion's master

Filmed close to the stage on the left, so there are some cool shots. A few heads in the way. MP4.

Hugh Panaro, Mary Michael Patterson, Jeremy Hays

April 30, 2014; Broadway

turnofthescorpion's master, MP4 file. One of Hugh's last shows.

Hugh Panaro, Mary Michael Patterson, Jeremy Hays

May 3, 2014; Broadway

Hugh Panaro's last show as the Phantom. Speeches included. MP4. Very nice quality.

Norm Lewis, Sierra Boggess, Jeremy Hays

May 12, 2014; Broadway

Norm’s first. MP4.

Norm Lewis, Sierra Boggess, Jeremy Hays, Laird Mackintosh, Tim Jerome, Ellen Harvey, Heather Hill, Christian Sebek

May 17, 2014; Broadway

MKV files.

Laird Mackintosh (u/s), Kaley Ann Voorhees, Jeremy Hays, Michele McConnell, Richard Poole (u/s), Tim Jerome, Ellen Harvey, Christian Sebek, Kara Klein

November 6, 2014; Broadway

Wonderful quality. VOB.

Norm Lewis, Kaley Ann Voorhees, Jeremy Hays

September 22, 2014; Broadway

Act 2 only. I think Act 1 exists, but it hasn't been released to my knowledge.

James Barbour, Julia Udine, Jeremy Hays, Michele McConnell, Laird Mackintosh, Tim Jerome, Linda Balgord

March 26, 2015; Broadway

MP4. Nice quality.

James Barbour, Julia Udine, Jeremy Hays

April 18, 2015; Broadway

Ripped from YouTube. Two MP4 clips of the full show recorded on a phone, no zooms.

James Barbour (The Phantom), Julia Udine (Christine), Jeremy Hays (Raoul), Michele McConnell (Carlotta), Craig Bennett (Firmin), Laird Mackintosh (Andre), Kelly Jeanne Grant (u/s Madame Giry), Jeremy Stolle (u/s Piangi), Kara Klein (Meg), Scott Mikita (u/s Passarino)

December 3, 2015; Broadway

Jeremy Stolle almost never goes on for Piangi so this is a rare one! Piangi-centric highlights; very brief clips throughout Act 1; Act 2 is much more complete. Runs about an hour total. Also includes the audio of the whole show. MP4.

Laird Mackintosh (u/s), Julia Udine, Jeremy Hays, Michele McConnell, Scott Mikita (u/s), Craig Bennett, Rebecca Eichenberger, John Easterlin, Kara Klein

May 12, 2016; Broadway

VOB.

James Barbour, Rachel Eskenazi-Gold, Jordan Donica, Kara Klein, Rebecca Eichenberger, Michele McConnell, Laird Mackintosh, Craig Bennett, John Easterlin

June 16, 2016; Broadway

VOB.

James Barbour, Ali Ewoldt, Jordan Donica, Michele McConnell, Laird Mackintosh, Craig Bennett, Rebecca Eichenberger, John Easterlin, Kara Klein

July 21, 2016; Broadway

MP4.

Ben Crawford, Ali Ewoldt, Rodney Ingram, Raquel Suarez Groen, Carlton Moe, Laird Mackintosh, Craig Bennett, Kara Klein, Maree Johnson

April 27, 2018; Broadway

DeChagnyTrades's master, NFT except through them. MOV files, Act 2 only, blindshot footage of one of Ingram's last performances. Also comes with short 15-second clips of Ingram's Raoul taken from various performances posted on Instagram. ​

Ben Crawford, Ali Ewoldt, Jay Armstrong Johnson, Raquel Suarez Groen, Laird Mackintosh, Craig Bennett, Maree Johnson, Ted Keegan (u/s), Polly Baird, Carrington Vilmont, Jason Forbach, Jim Weitzer (u/s), Kenneth Kantor, Richard Poole, Jeremy Stolle, Justin Peck, Kfir, Katharine Heaton, Chris Georgette, Patricia Phillips, Satomi Hofmann, Elizabeth Welch, Kelly Jeanne Grant, Janinah Burnett, Paul A. Schefer, Giselle O. Alvarez, Jessica Bishop, Ashlee Dupre, Jolina Javier, Carly Blake Sebouhian, Erica Wong, Joelle Gates

September 2018; Broadway

If you want a very good quality, full video of Ali and don’t want James Barbour as the Phantom, this is the one for you! Really lovely quality. I believe the taper did note though that it came out a bit darker and not as crisp as they had intended, but it really is a great video in my opinion. Great closeups as well. VOB.

NYCG8R's master

Ben Crawford, Ali Ewoldt, Jay Armstrong Johnson, Raquel Suarez Groen, Laird Mackintosh, Craig Bennett, Maree Johnson, Carlton Moe, Polly Baird, Jim Weitzer (swing Buqet)

October 1, 2018; Broadway

Notes: Act 1 cuts out before All I Ask Of You. MP4.

Laird Mackintosh (u/s), Ali Ewoldt, Paul Schaefer (u/s)

October 25, 2018; Broadway

Two MP4 clips of Masquerade and the Final Lair/Curtain Call. Pretty nice quality; looks like it was shot on the left front row.

Paul A. Schaefer (u/s), Kaley Ann Voorhees, Jay Armstrong Johnson

January 26, 2019; Broadway

31st anniversary performance. Two MOV files, from 'Notes II' to 'Wandering Child'

Ben Crawford, Eryn LeCroy, Jay Armstrong Johnson, Raquel Suarez Groen, Carlton Moe, Maree Johnson, Kelsey Connolly, Rachel Anne Moore

February 7/28, 2019; Broadway

Matinee shows. Five MP4 clips, featuring Wishing You Were Somehow Here Again, Wandering Child, and Point of No Return and the Final Lair. They are shot from the front row, so sometimes things can be missed. But not as much as you’d expect. It is a nice first visual look at Eryn in action. Also, if you look at the back row on the right, you can spot Rachel Anne Moore in the Sitzprobe scene! The ones shot from the right of the stage are from the 7th, the ones from the left are from the 28th.

​Ben Crawford (The Phantom of the Opera), Meghan Picerno (Christine Daaé), John Riddle (Raoul, Vicomte de Chagny), Raquel Suarez Groen (Carlotta Giudicelli), Bradley Dean (Monsieur André), Craig Bennett (Monsieur Girmin), Maree Johnson (Madame Giry), Carlton Moe (Ubaldo Piangi), Sara Esty (meg giry), Carrington Vilmont (Auctioneer), Jim Weitzer (Monsieur Reyer/hairdresser), Ted Keegan (jeweler), Richard Poole (Monsieur Lefevre/firechief), David Michael Garry (Joseph Buquet/Don Attilio), Jeremy Stolle (Passarino), Kfir (solo dancer), Justin Peck (solo dancer), Katharine Heaton (page), Chris Georgetti (porter/fireman), Patricia Phillips (Spanish lady), Satomi Hofmann (wardrobe mistress/confidante), Elizabeth Welch (princess), Kelly Jeanne Grant (Madame Firmin), Janinah Burnett (innkeeper's wife), Paul A. Schaeffer (marksman), Giselle O. Alvarez (ballet chorus), Xiaoxiao Cao (ballet chorus), Kelly Loughran (ballet chorus), Jessica Radetsky (ballet chorus), Carly Blake Sebouhian (ballet chorus), Erica Wong (ballet chorus)

October 2021; Broadway

starcuffedjeans' master. So happy someone got video of Meghan! Follows the action well, there is some obstruction but when the camera zooms in it almost looks as if it was taken from the first couple rows. Wonderful video overall and stunning cast.

Ben Crawford, Julia Udine (s/b), John Riddle, Raquel Suarez Groen, Bradley Dean, Craig Bennett, Maree Johnson, Carlton Moe, Sara Esty

November 2021; Broadway

Starcuffedjeans's master. ​

Jeremy Stolle (u/s), Emilie Kouatchou, John Riddle, Jainah Burnett (u/s), Bradley Dean, Craig Bennett, Maree Johnson, Carlton Moe, Sara Esty

December 2021; Broadway

Starcuffedjeans's master.​

Ben Crawford, Emilie Kouatchou, John Riddle, Bradley Dean, Craig Bennett, Raquel Suarez Groen, Rebecca Eichenberger, Carlton Moe, Sara Esty

March 2022; Broadway

One MP4 file, mynewfavoriteday's master.

Ben Crawford, Emilie Kouatchou, John Riddle, Bradley Dean, Craig Bennett, Patricia Phillips (u/s), Rebecca Eichenberger, Carlton Moe, Sara Esty

March 2022; Broadway

Juniper-47's master, one MP4 file.​

Ben Crawford (The Phantom), Emilie Kouatchou (Christine Daaé), John Riddle (Raoul de Chagny), Patrica Phillips (understudy Carlotta Giudicelli), Bradley Dean (Monsieur Andre), Craig Bennett (Monsieur Firmin), Rebecca Eichenberger (Madame Giry), Ted Keegan (understudy Ubaldo Piangi), Sara Esty (Meg Giry)

April 2022; Broadway

hitmewithyourbethshot's master.

Ted Keegan (u/s The Phantom of the Opera), Emilie Kouatchou (Christine Daaé), John Riddle (Raoul), Raquel Suarez Groen (Carlotta Giudicelli), Craig Bennett (Monsieur Firmin), Jim Weitzer (u/s Monsieur André), Rebecca Eichenberger (Madame Giry), Carlton Moe (Ubaldo Piangi), Sarah Esty (Meg Giry), Carrington Vilmont (Auctioneer/u/s Hairdresser), Scott Mikita (s/w M. Reyer/Jeweler/Marksman), Richard Poole (Monsieur Lefevre), David Michael Garry (Joseph Buquet), Jeremy Stolle (Passarino), Justin Peck (Hannibal Solo Dancer), Kfir (Il Muto Solo Dancer), Katharine Heaton (Page), Chris Georgetti (Porter/Fireman), Patricia Phillips (Spanish Lady), Satomi Hofmann (Wardrobe Mistress/Confidante), Elizabeth Welch (Princess), Kelly Jeanne Grant (Madame Firmin), Trista Moldovan (Innkeeper's Wife)

April 10, 2022; Broadway

shesmydoctor’s master. ​

​Jeremy Stolle (u/s The Phantom of the Opera), Emilie Kouatchou (Christine Daaé), John Riddle (Raoul, Vicomte de Chagny), Raquel Suarez Groen (Carlotta Giudicelli), Bradley Dean (Monsieur André), Craig Bennett (Monsieur Firmin), Rebecca Eichenberger (Madame Giry), Chris Georgetti (alt Ubaldo Piangi), Polly Baird (u/s Meg Giry), Carrington Vilmont (Auctioneer/Hairdresser), Giselle O Alverez (Ballet Chorus), Janinah Burnett (Innkeeper's Wife), Kanisha Marie Feliciano (Page), Chris Georgetti (Porter/Fireman), Scott Mikita (s/w Joseph Buquet/Don Attilio), Richard Poole (Monsieur Lefévre/Firechief), Jim Weitzer (s/w Passarino), Jason Forbach (s/w Ensemble)

​May 2022; Broadway

AwkwardJewishTheatreNerd's master. NFT exvept through them until June 15, 2027. Missing the auction, rising of the chandelier, and the very beginning of Hannibal. Probably the best filmed parts are Christine as the silent pageboy sequence, and Masquerade. The audio lags/is behind by a few milliseconds every now and then. ​

Jeremy Stolle (u/s), Julia Udine (alt), Greg Mills (u/s), Raquel Suarez Groen, Bradley Dean, Stephen Tewksbury, Maree Johnson, Chris Georgetti (u/s), Sara Esty, Carrington Vilmont (u/s Passarino)

May 23, 2022; Broadway

Video starts from Hannibal. Shot from center orchestra, some head obstruction. Filmed in clips and cut them together, so there are some missing scenes. NFT except through angelofmusicishere.

Ted Keegan (u/s), Julia Udine (alt.), Jordan Donica, Janinah Burnett (u/s), Bradley Dean, Stephen Tewksbury, Maree Johnson, Carlton Moe, Sara Esty

June 10, 2022; Broadway

Act 1 starts at Little Lotte, Act 2 doesn’t have Wishing. Really no obstructions, shot close to the stage. NFT except through angelofmusicishere.

Jeremy Stolle (u/s), Emilie Kouatchou, Jordan Donica (t/r), Janinah Burnett (u/s), Stephen Tewksbury (t/r), Greg Mills (u/s), Maree Johnson, Carlton Moe, Sara Esty

June 16, 2022; Broadway

Bikinibottomdays's master. One MP4 file. Some obstruction and wandering and the first 8 minutes of Act 2 is missing.

​

​​Paul Schaefer (u/s), Kanisha Marie Feliciano (u/s), Jordan Donica, Janinah Burnett (u/s), Scott Mikita (u/s), Stephen Tewksbury (t/r), Maree Johnson, Carlton Moe, Sara Esty

June 27, 2022; Broadway

First performance for Kanisha! Act 2 only, NFT except through angelofmusicishere. No obstructions as it's shot from one of the left boxes!

​Ben Crawford, Emilie Kouatchou, Jeremy Stolle (u/s), Janinah Burnett (u/s), Stephen Tewksbury (u/s), Craig Bennett, Maree Johnson, Sara Esty, Kenneth Kantor (e/c)

July 24, 2022; Broadway

NFT except through angelofmusicishere. Shot from one of the boxes on the right, so no obstructions except that the back of the stage is sometimes missed. MP4.​

Ted Keegan (u/s), Elizabeth Welch (u/s), Bronson Norris Murphy (u/s), Raquel Suarez Groen, Maree Johnson, Stephen Tewksbury (t/r), Craig Bennett, Carlton Moe, Sara Esty

​August 8, 2022; Broadway

The first time this trio has ever happened! NFT except through angelofmusicishere.​

Jeremy Stolle (u/s), Elizabeth Welch (u/s), Paul A. Schaefer (u/s), Raquel Suarez Groen, Stephen Tewksbury, Craig Bennett, Maree Johnson, Carlton Moe, Sara Esty

August 13, 2022; Broadway

Shot from right box. Missing Auction and Masquerade. Good quality. The first time this trio ever happened, despite them all being in the show together for years! Jeremy and Elizabeth are a real life couple, which makes their scenes even better. Matinee show. Blooper: Elizabeth did not pulled Jeremy's wig off in PONR until the second time. NFT except through angelofmusicishere; note that the video is limited trade.

​Ted Keegan (u/s), Emilie Kouatchou, John Riddle, Raquel Suarez Groen, Craig Bennett, Nehal Joshi, Maree Johnson, Carlton Moe, Sara Esty

September 2022; Broadway

Catherinewasamassivec's master. One MP4 file, filmed from an upward angle from the front row so you get some really interesting views of the actors but also miss some of the action.

Greg Mills (u/s), Emilie Kouatchou, John Riddle, Patricia Phillips (u/s), Nehal Joshi, Craig Bennett, Maree Johnson, Chris Georgetti (u/s), Sara Esty

September 30, 2022; Broadway

Shot from second row right, partial view during some scenes, a bit head obstruction. NFT except through angelofmusicishere, note that the video is limited trade.​

​Ben Crawford (The Phantom of the Opera), Kanisha Marie Feliciano (u/s Christine Daaé), Paul A. Schaefer (t/r Raoul), Raquel Suarez Groen (Carlotta Giudicelli), Craig Bennett (Monsieur Firmin), Nehal Joshi (Monsieur André), Maree Johnson (Madame Giry), Jeremy Stolle (Ubaldo Piangi), Erica Wong (Meg Giry), Carrington Vilmont (Auctioneer/Hairdresser), Jim Weitzer (M. Reyer), Tug Watson (Jeweler), Stephen Tewksbury (Monsieur Lefevre), David Michael Garry (Joseph Buquet), Peter Lockyer (Passarino/Porter/Fireman), Saverio Pescucci (Hannibal Solo Dancer), Justin Peck (Il Muto Solo Dancer), Patricia Phillips (Spanish Lady), Satomi Hofmann (Wardrobe Mistress/Confidante), Elizabeth Welch (Princess), Kelly Jeanne Grant (Madame Firmin), Janinah Burnett (Innkeeper's Wife), Scott Mikita (Marksman), Giselle O. Alverez, Jessica Bishop, Xiaoxiao Cao, Ayaka Kamei, Kelly Loughran, Carly Blake Sebouhian

October 29, 2022; Broadway

So ecstatic to have video of Kanisha! She is a wonderful Christine; scond black and first Latinx actress to do the role on Broadway! Matinee, shesmydoctor's master. 2 MP4 files.

Ben Crawford, Kanisha Marie Feliciano (u/s), Jason Forbach (t/r), Raquel Suarez Groen, Craig Bennett, Nehal Joshi, Maree Johnson, Carlton Moe, Kelly Loughran (t/r)

December 1, 2022; Broadway

One MP4 file, about 9 GB, angelofmusicishere's master.

Ted Keegan(u/s), Emilie Kouatchou, Paul A. Schaefer, Raquel Suarez Groen, Nehal Joshi, Craig Bennett, Maree Johnson, Carlton Moe, Polly Baird

December 17, 2022; Broadway

Whole show shot from front orchestra. Wonderful quality, steady camera without any obstruction. angelofmusicishere's master, MP4, limited trade

Ben Crawford (The Phantom of the Opera), Emilie Kouatchou (Christine Daaé), Paul A. Schaefer (u/s Raoul, Vicomte de Chagny), Raquel Suarez Groen (Carlotta Giudicelli), Craig Bennet (Monsieur Firmin), Nehal Joshi (Monsieur André), Carlton Moe (Ubaldo Piangi), Sara Esty (Meg Giry), Carrington Vilmont (Auctioneer), Jim Weitzer (Monsieur Reyer/Hairdresser), Tug Watson (Jeweler), Laird Mackintosh (Monsieur Lefévre/Firechief), David Michael Garry (Joseph Buquet/Don Attilio), Jeremy Stolle (Passarino), Kfir (Solo Dancer "Hannibal"), Justin Peck (Solo Dancer "Il Muto"), Kanisha Marie Feliciano (Page), Chris Georgetti (Porter/Fireman), Trista Moldovan (Spanish Lady), Satomi Hofmann (Wardrobe Mistress/Confidante), Elizabeth Welch (Princess), Kelly Jean Grant (Madame Firmin), Marni Raab (Innkeeper's Wife)

January 2023; Broadway

mirrorbluenight's master

Ted Keegan (Phantom), Emilie Kouatchou (Christine), John Riddle (Raoul), Trista Moldovan (Carlotta), Craig Bennett (Firmin), Nehal Joshi (André), Maree Johnson (Madame Giry), Jeremy Stolle (u/s Piangi), Polly Baird (t/r Meg Giry)

January 6, 2023; Broadway

Includes All I ask of you reprise/chandelier crash, Masquerade, wandering child, and Final Lair

Ted Keegan (u/s), Emilie Kouatchou, John Riddle, Raquel Suarez Groen, Nehal Joshi, Craig Bennett, Maree Johnson, Chris Georgetti (u/s), Sara Esty

February 13, 2023; Broadway

MP4 file. Angelofmusicishere's master.

Jeremy Stolle (u/s), Julia Udine, Paul A.Schaefer (t/r), Raquel Suarez Groen, Nehal Joshi, Craig Bennett, Maree Johnson, Ted Keegan(u/s), Sara Esty

March 20, 2023; Broadway

Black out from Hannibal through 'The Mirror'. Major flub during the title song. Angelofmusicishere's master.

Ted Keegan (u/s), Julia Udine (alt), John Riddle, Raquel Suarez Groen, Nehal Joshi, Craig Bennett, Maree Johnson, Carlton Moe, Sara Esty

April 3, 2023; Broadway

Ted's final scheduled show for Phantom, though he did end up having some more shows after this. NFT except through angelofmusicishere.​

Jeremy Stolle(u/s), Julia Udine(alt), John Riddle, Raquel Suarez Groen, Nehal Joshi, Craig Bennett, Maree Johnson, Carlton Moe, Sara Esty

April 6, 2023; Broadway

Jeremy took over for seven shows that week due to Ben Crawford being out sick.

Greg was on for Passarino. NFT except through angelofmusicishere.​​

US Tour/Other US Productions

Michael Crawford, Dale Kristen, Reece Holland/Steve Barton

1989; Los Angeles

Lots of washout and generation loss, but the best video of Michael Crawford around. According to another site, it is Reece Holland as Raoul in the video, though some footage may be from Steve Barton's three week stint in the production. VOB.

Michael Crawford, Mary D'Arcy, Reece Holland

1990; Los Angeles

MP4.

​​​Michael Crawford, Dale Kristien, Michael Piontek

January 3, 1991; Los Angeles

Comes with 2 versions of the video, the original VOB and 2 MKV files with a restored version. The best video of Crawford, you can see some facial expressions and details. Assuming the date is right, this should be from Crawford's brief return to the role in 1991.

Kevin Gray, Dodie Pettit/Teri Bibb, Keith Buterbaugh/Nat Chandler, David Hunerjaeger

June 25/26, 1992 / 1993; Philadelphia/Detroit

​3 shows in 1: extended highlights of the June 25th show, Phantom-oriented highlights of June 26th show (both with Dodie Pettit as Christine), and Phantom-oriented highlights of the 1993 show, with Teri Bibb. Quality of the first two is alright, but there are many big closeups in the Teri Bibb one. The color is sepia toned but it's in great condition considering it's age. Rather hilarious flub where the lasso breaks during the 'Final Lair' of the June 25th show.

Franc D'Ambrosio, Tracy Shayne, Ciaran Sheehan

July/September, 1993; Pittsburgh

Highlights, Phantom-focused, starting at 'The Mirror'. Many closeups and fairly good quality for it's age; graininess and some generation loss are its main problems. Comes with Gaines, Shayne, Sheehan video. MP4.

Davis Gaines, Dale Kristien, Michael Piontek, Norman Large, Leigh Munro, Barbara Lang, Gualtiero Negrini, Elizabeth Stringer

August 29, 1993; Los Angeles

Final evening performance of the Los Angeles sit-down production. Full stage shot, slightly darker than the matinee performance video. Features a TV spot in the beginning, the Phantom messing up a line in 'Down Once More', and speeches at the end. Dale Kristien's 'Think of Me' cadenza goes on forever. VOB.

​Brad Little, Amy Jo Arrington or Megan Starr Levitt

1998; Texas, US Tour

A rare find! It's only about 12 minutes of the show; I wish it was longer or even the full show not only because of the cast but because some of the closeups are pretty good. Because of the quality and that Amy and Megan did look a little similar, I can't tell which one of them it is. So if you know let me know! Extremely limited trades, 3:1 ratio. MP4.

Davis Gaines, Marie Danvers, Lawrence Anderson

September 1998; Los Angeles

Pretty good quality considering it's age; has yellow-ish tinge but is quite clear in details and facial expressions. Flub during the mirror scene, where the light doesn't go on to illuminate the Phantom. VOB.

​​​Davis Gaines, Marie Danvers, Lawrence Anderson, Leila Martin

​October 4, 1998; US Tour

Ok, so I have a few notes on this one. First, this cast is listed as being on Broadway and the second US Tour both in 1998 if we are going by records that are online. But the master told me that Madame Giry was definitely Leila Martin, and I don't believe that she was ever anywhere but New York. But then I am also a bit in question because according to an online record, this cast wasn't on Broadway past September of 1998 and there is in fact another video of Davis and Marie from September 1998 from the tour. So I do not know where this is exactly from. But it is such good quality and a solid cast, so I doubt the location matters too much. Highlights, taken by the same person as the one above and below. Pretty great quality. About a hour long. Limited trades. Also, finding out who the Raoul is from the master, so pending!

​​Franc D'Ambrosio, Lisa Vroman, Christopher Carl

October 14, 1998; US Tour

Highlights, amazing quality for the time. Definitely the best quality one Franc and probably Lisa too. A hour long.

​​Franc D'Ambrosio, Lisa Vroman, Christopher Carl

October 15, 1998: US Tour

Shot by the same person who did the highlights video of these two. A longer video with the same great quality; about an hour and a half. Has all of Act 2 and misses a little of Hannibal, Magical Lasso, some of Notes, and Prima Donna. MP4 files.

Ian Jon Bourg/Brad Little, Rebecca Pitcher, Richard Todd Adams, David Cryer.

1999; Salt Lake City & Philadelphia

Ian Jon Bourg Highlights video; runs about 80 minutes. Compiling performances of Ian as both the Phantom and M. Andre (Brad plays the Phantom when Ian is Andre). Only video of Ian from an American production. To narrow the time frame down a bit, the video was taken sometime between November/December in Salt Lake and December/January in Philly.​

Brad Little, Rebecca Pitcher, Richard Todd Adams

November 11, 1999; US Tour

Highlights, taken by the same person as the Franc and Lisa one. Pretty great quality. A hour long. Limited trades.

Ted Keegan, Rebecca Pitcher, John Cudia

November 30, 2000; US Tour

Highlights. Includes: part of the auction to the end of the Hannibal rehearsal, part of Angel of Music to the end of MOTN, a bit of the Il Muto ballet, part of the Rooftop, most of AIAOY to the end of the Reprise, most of Masquerade, Why So Silent, part of Notes II, most of Wishing, Wandering Child, part of Don Juan Triumphant, and then PONR to the end of the Final Lair. The taper tends to wander and the picture is fuzzy. A shame that this isn't a full show or even a better quality highlights video because Ted is fantastic as always and Rebecca was so much nicer earlier in her run. VOB.

​Ted Keegan, Rebecca Pitcher, Tim Martin Gleason, David Cryer, D.C. Anderson, Kim Stengel, Patti Davidson-Gorbea, Frederic Heringues, Erin Sacks

December 1, 2002; Philadelphia; US Tour

Heavy head obstruction, but the taper does a good job of shooting around it. No important parts missed. I really like Ted's PONR. Rebecca is eh. But I had to have this video because I love Ted and this was from my town. VOB.

Brad Little, Marni Raab, Tim Martin Gleason, David Cryer, D.C. Anderson, Kim Stengel, Jimmy Smagula, Patti Davidson-Gorbea, Kate Wray

November 18, 2003; Los Angeles

Nicely shot video and good quality, though it gets grainier in closeups. MP4.

Brad Little, Lisa Vroman, Tim Martin Gleason, David Cryer, D.C. Anderson, Kim Stengel, Patti Gorbea, Kate Wray

November 19, 2003; Los Angeles

MP4.

Brad Little, Elizabeth Southard (alt), Tim Martin Gleason

January 11, 2004; US Tour

Brad Little's second-to-last with the tour. I'm fairly certain that this is the only footage of Little and Southard together.

Brad Little, Rebecca Pitcher, Tim Martin Gleason, David Cryer (Firmin), DC Anderson (Andre), Kim Stengel (Carlotta), Jimmy Smagula (Piangi), Patti Davidson-Gorbea (Giry), Kate Wray (Meg)

January 11, 2004; US Tour

musicinthestars' master. VOB. Brad's final show on tour. ​

Tim Martin Gleason (u/s), Sarah Lawrence, Peter Lockyer (u/s)

June 6, 2004; Salt Lake City

Not particularly good quality for its age - shaky, washed out, poor color and lots of bleeding, very fuzzy detail. VOB.

​

Peter Lockyer (u/s), Rebecca Pitcher, Tim Martin Gleason, David Cryer, D. C. Anderson, Laureen Vigil (u/s Carlotta), John Whitney, Patti Davidson-Gorbea, Sarah Spradlin-Bonomo

February 11, 2005; Ft. Myers

Highlights, trio-oriented. Includes a flub where Peter takes off his coat along with his cape and performs all of 'Music of the Night' in his shirtsleeves. VOB.

Peter Lockyer (u/s), Elizabeth Southard (alt), Tim Martin Gleason, David Cryer, DC Anderson, Laureen Vigil (u/s Carlotta), John Whitney, Patti Davidson-Gorbea, Sarah Spradlin-Bonomo

February 13, 2005; FT. Myers

Act one starts at Think of Me. Missing some dialogue between TOM and Angel of Music. Short cut just before Little Lotte, then includes the entire sequence from The Mirror to the end of the first Lair. Only the Phantom's parts of Il Muto were taped. Includes the entire Rooftop. Act two starts at the last verse of "Masquerade" for "Why so Silent." Cuts made in Notes II – begins at "Raoul I'm frightened." Cut out the Rehearsal, and the Before the Premiere scenes, and video picks back up at Point Of No Return. Mode switch for DOM, and back to normal for the Final Lair. Some great closeups.

​Stephen R. Buntrock (u/s), Rebecca Pitcher, Peter Lockyer (u/s), David Cryer, DC Anderson, Joan Sobel (u/s), John Whitney, Patti Davidson-Gorbea, Sarah Spradlin-Bonomo

February 18, 2005; US Tour

Gary Mauer, Rebecca Pitcher, Tim Martin Gleason, David Cryer, DC Anderson, Kim Stengel, John Whitney, Patti Davidson-Gorbea, Sarah Spradlin-Bonomo

February 24, 2005; Ft. Meyers

Phantom-oriented highlights. filmed fairly early in Gary's run. VOB.

Gary Mauer, Elizabeth Southard (alt), Tim Martin Gleason, David Cryer, DC Anderson, Kim Stengel, Patti Davidson-Gorbea, John Whitney, Kate Wray

March 31, 2005; US Tour

Most of the show, starts at Carlotta's “Think of Me”. On the shaky side. Unfortunately some synching problems cause half-second late audio lags during the second act. 2nd show and Southard's first performance of the Boston tour stop. Quirks: the curtain never goes up after Think of Me for Christine to take her bows, and the curtain during curtain call takes quite awhile to go up as well (you can hear the creaking as the technicians raise it manually). MP4

Gary Mauer, Elizabeth Southard, Tim Martin Gleason

April 3, 2005; Boston

Full show, with only a few cover-ups in the beginning. VOB.

Gary Mauer, Elizabeth Southard (alt), Tim Martin Gleason, John Kuether (u/s), DC Anderson, Kim Stengel, Rebecca Judd (u/s), John Whitney, Kate Wray

April 17, 2005; US Tour

First Act shot from the orchestra, starts from announcement to turn off cell phones and runs until the end of Magical Lasso. Picks up again in the middle of the Rooftop and runs till the end of the act. Second Act shot from balcony (after the taper was caught) runs from Point of No Return through Mauer's hilarious BC/EFA speech. Starts out shaky in the beginning and some blockage from a large moving head, but otherwise definitely some good shooting. Mid to close-close-ups all the way through. MP4

Gary Mauer, Marie Danvers, Michael Shawn Lewis, David Cryer, DC Anderson, Kim Stengel, John Whitney, Kate Wray

August/September 10, 2005; Atlanta

Have seen this video under two different dates. Nicely shot video, good color and details. Starts midway through Hannibal. VOB.

Gary Mauer, Elizabeth Southard, John Cudia, Kim Stengel, David Cryer, DC Anderson, Patti Davidson-Gorbea, John Whitney, Kate Wray

January 5, 2006; Pittsburgh

Evening show. Rare.

Gary Mauer, Elizabeth Southard, John Cudia

January 22, 2006; Pittsburgh, US Tour

Shot from the stalls, so some insane closeups that show every expression on the actors’ faces. But there’s also a huge head blocking the center at times, which can be annoying. Includes the flub where Christine cannot quite get the hood off the Phantom’s head during Point of No Return. Starts at Think of Me in Act I and halfway through Masquerade in Act II. Also includes Point of No Return and Final Lair with Marie Danvers as Christine from January 18. Gary’s voice is luminous.​

Gary Mauer, Elizabeth Southard, Jim Weitzer, Kim Stengel, John Jellison, DC Anderson, Patti Davidson-Gorbea, John Whitney, Kate Wray

April 6, 2006; Dallas

Gary Mauer, Elizabeth Southard, and John Jellison's last. VOB

Gary Mauer, Elizabeth Southard, Jim Weitzer, Kim Stengel, John Jellison, DC Anderson, Patti Davidson-Gorbea, John Whitney, Kate Wray

April 6, 2006; US Tour

This is Tape 2 of the multicam edit of Mauer and Southard's last show, so it is different from the usual multi-cam one. ​VOB.

John Cudia, Marie Danvers, Jim Weitzer, Bruce Winant, DC Anderson, Kim Stengal, John Whitney, Patti Davidson-Gorbea, Kate Wray

April 7, 2006; Dallas

John Cudia's first as principal Phantom. Phantom-centered highlights. MP4.

John Cudia, Sarah Lawrence, Jim Weitzer, Kim Stengel, Bruce Winant, DC Anderson, Patti Davidson-Gorbea, John Whitney, Kate Wray

May 6, 2006; Kalamazoo

Starts right after the 'Overture'. High quality capture of the show, taper follows the show well and there's good detail and color. VOB.

John Cudia, Jennifer Hope Wills, Adam Monley, Bruce Winant, DC Anderson, Kimilee Bryant (u/s Carlotta), Patti Davidson-Gorbea, John Whitney, Kate Wray

July 1, 2006; St. Louis, US Tour

Closing night in St. Louis. The first video to be released of Jennifer Hope Wills as Christine. This was only her third performance with the tour. This is also Kimilee's final show with the tour. And the only video of Adam as Raoul; people know him for his run as Javert in Les Miz. Shot from the rear orchestra so there is a head in the way when the action takes place on the far left of the stage. VOB.

​Anthony Crivello, Elizabeth Loyacano, Tim Martin Gleason, Elena Jeanne Batman, John Wolfe, Lawson Skala, Rebecca Spencer, Brianne Morgan, Larry Morbitt*

August 28, 2006; Las Vegas

Good color and sharper detail than the other Vegas video below. Filming is also a bit steadier; filmer catches the chandelier fall, for one thing. I got the show in 3 separate videos, 2 of them are MP4 and 1 is VOB. Still not sure why.

Brent Barrett, Sierra Boggess, Tim Martin Gleason, Geena Jeffries Mattox, John Wolfe, Lawson Skala, Rebecca Spencer, Brianne Morgan, Larry Morbitt

August 30, 2006; Las Vegas

Fuzzy and rather dull capture of the Las Vegas show. Shot from quite far back in the theater, so filming is shaky, tends to stray, and is obstructed by several heads. But decent enough. Cool to see Sierra before she was as well known. MP4.

John Cudia, Marni Raab, Greg Mills, D. C. Anderson, Bruce Winant, Laureen Vigil (u/s), Rebecca Judd, John Whitney, Polly Baird

August 2, 2007; Washington, D.C.

Beautiful video shot in widescreen, great color, excellent and steady camera work.

Jason Mills, Sarah Lawrence, Greg Mills, Kim Stengel, William Patrick Dunne (u/s), Bruce Winant, Rebecca Judd, John Whitney, Polly Baird

December 5, 2007; Chicago

VOB.​

Anthony Crivello, Kristi Holden, Andrew Ragone, Geena Jeffries Mattox, John Leslie Wolfe, Lawson Skala, Tina Walsh, Larry Wayne Morbitt, Brianne Kelly Morgan

August 8, 2008; Las Vegas

VOB

Richard Todd Adams, Kelly Jeanne Grant (alt), Greg Mills

August 19, 2008; US Tour

Act 1 only. The only video of Richard's Phantom; he was Phantom for a really short time. The sound isn't really good and it's really low; when I first watched it I thought there was no sound at all. I had to turn my speaker all the way up and it was still rather low. The picture is decent, but no where near as good as the other video of Kelly. VOB.

​Tim Martin Gleason, Kelly Jeanne Grant, Sean MacLaughlin, Satomi Hofmann (u/s), Dallyn Vail Bayles (u/s), Michael McCoy, Nancy Hess, John Whitney, Jessica Bishop

August 30, 2009; Milwaukee

Only full video of Kelly as Christine. VOB.​

Tim Martin Gleason, Trista Moldovan, Sean MacLaughlin, Kim Stengel, Luke Grooms, Paloma Garcia-Lee, Michael McCoy, DC Anderson, Anne Kanengeiser (u/s)

August 19, 2010; Cleveland

Highlights, Artistkae's master, pretty shaky with a lot of washout. Includes: 'Think of Me', 'Angel of Music', 'The Mirror', part of the title song, 'Music of the Night', part of 'Notes I / Prima Donna', audio only of 'All I Ask of You' and the reprise, part of 'Notes II', 'Twisted Every Way', audio of 'Wishing You Were Somehow Here Again', 'Point of No Return', and the 'Final Lair'. Anne later became Giry full time in the Restaged US Tour. MP4

Tim Martin Gleason, Trista Moldovan, Sean MacLaughlin

October 31, 2010; Los Angeles

Last performance for the US Tour, includes the speeches by Tim and ALW and the appearance by Sarah Brightman. MP4.

Cooper Grodin, Julia Udine, Ben Jacoby, Jacquelynne Fontaine, Craig Bennett, Linda Balgord, Edward Staudenmayer, Frank Viveros

February 19, 2014; Chicago

MP4.

Cooper Grodin, Grace Morgan, Ben Jacoby, Lindsay O'Neil (u/s), Brad Oscar, Linda Balgord, Edward Staudenmayer, Frank Viveros

July 27, 2014; Milwaukee

Lovely video of the alternate Christine on the tour. MP4.

Chris Mann, Katie Travis, Storm Lineberger, Jacquelynne Fontaine, Edward Staudenmayer, David Benoit, Anne Kanengeiser, Frank Viveros, Morgan Cowling

August 12, 2015; Costa Mesa

VOB.

Derrick Davis, Kaitlyn Davis, Jordan Craig, Trista Moldovan, Price Waldman, David Benoit, Tynan Davis (u/s), Phumzile Sojola, Emily Ramirez

November 16, 2016; Cincinnati

VOB.

Quentin Oliver Lee (Phantom), Eva Tavares (Christine), Jordan Craig (Raoul) Trista Moldovan (Carlotta), David Benoit (Firmin), Rob Lindley (André), Susan Moniz (Madame Giry), Phumzile Sojola (Piangi), SarahGrace Mariani (Meg), Emma Grimsley (Princess), Mark Emerson (Auctioneer)

December 21, 2018; Dallas

Broadway Enthusiast's master. Act 2 only. Filmed with a mix of wides, mediums, and close-ups, with occasional obstructions and dropouts due to the audience. Newly up for trade September 1st! VOB.​

Quentin Oliver Lee, Eva Tavares

February 2, 2019; US Tour

Two MP4 clips, Think of Me and Music of the Night. It looks like it was filmed on a phone. Limited trades.

Derrick Davis, Jenna Burns (u/s), Jordan Craig, Trista Moldovan, David Benoit, Rob Lindley. Susan Moniz, Phumzile Sojola, Sarah Grace Mariani

July 21, 2019; Costa Mesa

Five MOV files, blindshot with lots of washout and much taller than it is wide. Highlights, includes 'Think of Me', the First Lair, the Rooftop, 'Twisted Every Way' and the Graveyard scenes, and 'Point of No Return' and half of 'Final Lair'. Matinee performance. Jenna Burns's debut performance as Christine. GlassPrism's master. ​

UK Tour

John Owen Jones, Katie Hall, Simon Bailey

2012; UK Tour

Four MP4 clips including Think of Me, The Mirror/Title Song, PONR, and the Final Lair.

Earl Carpenter, Olivia Brereton, Simon Bailey, Angela M. Casar, Andy Hockley, Simon Green, Elizabeth Marsh, Vincent Pirillo, Hannah Cadec

2012; UK Tour

Nice quality video, a little dark. It is listed now as NFT, but the person I got it from said that because everyone has it by now already it can be listed as limited trade. So this will be traded for 1 video and an audio or 3 audios. VOB.

Earl Carpenter, Katie Hall, Simon Bailey, Angela M. Casar, Andy Hockley, Simon Green, Elizabeth Marsh, Vincent Pirillo, Hannah Cadec

2013; UK Tour

Missing most of “Music of the Night”. Nice quality video, a little dark. It is listed now as NFT, but the person I got it from said that because everyone has it by now already it can be listed as limited trade. So this will be traded for 1 video and an audio or 3 audios. VOB

World

Masachika Ichimura, Ryoko Nomura, Yuichiro Yamaguchi

1988; Tokyo, Japan

A great cast, if a little subtle. MP4.

Alexander Goebel, Luzia Nistler, Alfred Pfeifer, Priti Coles, Sergio Lombana, Jack Poppell, Wolfgang Pampel, Diana Bennet, Alexandra Young-Schmidt

1988; Vienna, Austria

Making-of video, includes interviews and proshot clips. MP4.

​Yuichiro Yamaguchi (Phantom), Sakoto Yoshioka (Christine), Yuji Osa/Kanji Ishimaru (Raoul)

1990; Japan

​This contains 2 videos: the first one is 36 minutes of highlights with excellent quality, filmed from right side of the stalls, Yuji Osa as Raoul. The second one is Act 1 from a different performance filmed from the circle, good quality for its age. Kanji Ishimaru is Raoul. The chandelier fall was borrowed from the highlights, Both videos have some shakiness and are a bit flattened. Also includes 4 minutes of the show which is unknown at the end. The last video file is damaged by digital glitches starting from second video's AIAoY where glitches are not a serious problem, from "I must go" till the end the video becomes hardly watchable. The first year for Yuichiro Yamaguchi as the Phantom after playing Raoul for 2 years. Later in the interview he said that he felt he was too young to play the Phantom so he didn't express all his feelings. This is also the debut for Kanji Ishimaru who was a student at that moment. Haven't ever seen anything of Sakoto's Christine before!

Todd Noel (u/s), Susan Cuthbert

1990; Toronto

The only video of Todd and Susan! Half of the Title Song and MOTN. Looks like this was part of a proshot video. Extremely limited trades. VOB.

Jeff Hyslop, Teresa DeZarn, David Rogers(?)

1991; Vancouver, Canada

Extended highlights, 70 minutes. Raoul may also be Byron Nease. Picture is sepia to black/white colored and fuzzy. This has often been labeled as having Patti Cohenour as Christine, but it is actually Teresa DeZarn. I received it with the Wilkinson/Cohenour video already attached in it as one file, so you’ll get that as well. MP4.

Ernst-Dieter Suttheimer, Colleen Besett, Timothy Breese, Dietrich Hergt, Horst Reeh (u/s), Linda Healy (alt), Claudia Rose Golde (u/s), Sergio Lombana, Eva-Maria Weber (u/s)

August 25, 1991; Vienna, Austria

Good color and clear picture, tends more towards blues and whites. Shot on a tripod from the right balcony, so some parts of the stage are obstructed. VOB.

Mikael Samuelson, Inger Olsson Moberg, Bengt Nordfors

September 22, 1991; Stockholm

Black and white house cam video so no closeups. But this cast really sounds wonderful. MP4.

Nicholas Saverine, Colleen Besett, Thorsten Tinney, Dietrich Hergt, Jack Poppell, Robin Lee, Diana Bennett, Sergio Lombana, Alexandra Young-Schmidt

1992; Vienna, Austria

Shot on a tripod from right box. Color and detail is sharper in this video, though. MP4.

Yuichiro Yamaguchi (The Phantom of the Opera), Kyoko Suzuki (Christine Daaé), Masayuki Sano (Raoul), Toshihide Mura (Monsieur Firmin), Jun Sawaki (Monsieur André)

1992; Japan

MP4

Yuichiro Yamaguchi (Phantom), Takako Nakazawa (Christine), Masayuki Sano/Kanji Ishimaru (Raoul), Jun Sawaki (André)

1992; Japan

Pretty much the usual quality for a video in the early 90s with some generation loss and yellow tint, filmed from the circle. AIAoY and most of the Final Lair have being replaced with footage from another performance, filmed from the first rows with marvelous close-ups. In the replaced footage Raoul is played by Kanji Ishimaru.

Yuichiro Yamaguchi (The Phantom of the Opera), Kyoko Suzuki (Christine Daaé), Masayuki Sano (Raoul)

1992/94; Japan

MP4

Colm Wilkinson, Patti Cohenour, Byron Nease

1992; Toronto, Canada

51 minutes of Phantom and Madame Giry oriented highlights. Sepia-toned, but facial features are quite distinguishable; same general quality as the other Toronto videos that came out around the same period. I received it with the Hyslop/DeZarn video already attached in it as one file, so you’ll get that as well. MP4.

Jun Sawaki, Kyoko Suzuki, Kanji Ishmaru

1992; Tokyo, Japan

Proshot video, but a lot of generation loss makes for a very blurred video; faces are hard to distinguish. Has a counter in the top corner. VOB.

Yuichiro Yamaguchi (Phantom), Takako Nakazawa (Christine), Masayuki Sano (Raoul)

January 18, 1992; Japan

Despite being just slightly affected by the generation loss, filming is somewhat poor with shakiness and midshots only. Sound constantly switches from brilliant to good. it also includes second unmasking and parts of the Final Lair, curtain call and playout from 1990 highlights, plus 2 clips from an unknown show. There is also a damaged 3rd video file, so the second half of the Final Lair from the has some occasional glitches but right before "Christine, I love you" the video becomes absolutely unwatchable, which leads to missing the rest of the show.

Henk Poort, Joke de Kruijf, Peter de Smet

1993; Scheveningen, Netherlands

This is a great cast. MP4.

Alexander Goebel, Luzia Nistler, Thorsten Tinney

June 30, 1993; Vienna, Austria

Last performance for the Austrian cast. Very good quality for its age - decent color and detail and with numerous closeups and wideshots. Features a few funny ad-libs by the supporting cast; curtain calls included. MP4.

Peter Karrie, Teresa DeZarn, David Rogers

1994; Toronto, Canada

50 minutes of Phantom-oriented highlights. Almost black-and-white picture and quite dark, but detail is sharp considering its age. VOB.

Eiji Akutagawa, Hisako Hanaoka, Kanji Ishimaru

April 6, 1994; Sapparo, Japan

This is a lovely cast and Eiji is a great Phantom. But his PONR is something else jsut ebcause of his... acting choices. Last show in Sapparo. MP4.

Cris Groenendaal, Teresa DeZarn, David Rogers

1995; Toronto, Canada

Phantom and Madame Giry-oriented highlights, same general quality as the other Toronto videos. Color is a bit better in this one. VOB.

Toshihide Mura, Kyoko Suzuki, Daisuke Yanase

April 13, 1996; MP4.

Ben Cramer, Maaike Widdershoven, Hans Peter Janssens

July 28, 1996; Scheveningen, Netherlands

Very interesting video filmed from the side of the stage. Filming is choppy and disjointed, stopping and picking up again every few minutes, which gives a great look at the backstage workings but makes it hard to judge performances. VOB.

Henk Poort, Els Bongers, Peter de Smet

August 2, 1996; Scheveningen, Netherlands

Last performance of the Netherlands production open to the public. Full stage shot from the theatre monitor, no zooms. Full show, including curtain calls and speeches. VOB.

Dale Tracy, Colby Thomas, Ray Gabbard

1997; Hamburg, Germany

Dale is a really nice Phantom; shame this is only a highlights video.​

Peter Karrie (Phantom), Elizabeth DeGrazia (Christine), David Rogers (Raoul)

November 15, 1998; Toronto

Looks like it was filmed on middle 00s Nokia. Great close-ups though. Phantom-oriented highlights, ~ 37 min, including: Mirror - MOTN, AIAOY Reprise, Wandering, PONR and Final Lair.

Peter Karrie (Phantom), Elizabeth DeGrazia (Christine), David Rogers (Raoul)

November 15, 1998; Toronto

The same video as above, but much better quality. Doesn't have that stretched out look, and is clearer. And it's 52 minutes instead of 37! Limited trades for now.

Jerzy Jeszke, Carla Nicholson, Bjorn Olsson

March 31, 1999; Hamburg, Germany

Intense colors and some generation loss. Filmer knows the show well and filming is pretty steady. VOB.

Jerzy Jeszke, Lori Zeglarski, Bjorn Olson, Anders Sohlmann, Reinhard Schulze

April 1, 1999; Hamburg, Germany

Intense colors and some generation loss, but overall good quality, though color bleeding is a bit more noticeable and detail is slightly fuzzier. VOB.

Paul Stanley, Melissa Dye, David Rogers

July 3, 1999; Toronto, Canada

Probably the only full video of the Toronto production. Mostly mid- to wideshots, detail is a bit low. VOB.

​David Hunerjaeger (u/s), Valentina Kozhanova (u/s), Kyle Gonyea, Laurie Ann McGowan, Linda Bruske, Marcello Roncietto, Sabrina Harper, Stephan Drakulich, Eberhardt Neitzel

August 22, 1999; Hamburg, Germany

Shot on two different days, so the angle changes between acts. Fairly good picture filmed from the side. VOB.

​Phantom Family Video

October 31, 1999; Toronto, Canada

90 minute video made by David Rogers for the staff of Phantom in Canada, includes lots of backstage footage, cabaret performances by the different casts, and a reenactment of the title song with Barbies.

Saulo Vasconcelos, Claudia Cota Gamez/Lolita Cortes(?), Jose Joel

1999/2000; Mexico City, Mexico

​Highlights from two performances. The first has Claudia Cota and goes from the overture to 'Don Juan Rehearsal', cutting out most of 'Think of Me'. The second was labeled with Irasema Terrazas as Christine, but it looks more like Lolita Cortes. It goes from the auction to just before the kiss in the 'Final Lair'. Somewhat shaky and pixelated, faces are a white blur in wideshots but distinguishable in close shots.​

Saulo Vasconcelos, Irasema Terrazas, Jose Joel, Luis Rene Aguirre, Jose Antonio Lopez Tercero, Tatiana Marouchtchak, Javier Cortes, Laura Morelos

2000; Mexico City, Mexico

Proshot for cast and crew. Extremely limited trades. The person I got the video from would only trade it to me in exchange for 10 audios worth of stuff, so I will only trade it for 8-10 audios worth of things too. VOB.

Hans Peter Janssens, Inneke van Klinken, Michael Shawn Lewis, An Lauwereins, Marc Meersman, Ernst Van Looy, Stephanie H. Tschïppe

April 2000; Antwerp, Belgium

Intense color bleeding that tends to red and yellow, but filming has very good closeups. Focuses more on the right part of the stage since there's a huge head blocking the left side, some blackouts in the beginning of the show. Also includes a making-of feature in the beginning. Minor flub during 'Notes II' where one of the managers switches to English for one line. VOB.

Ian Jon Bourg, Alison Kelly, Kyle Gonyea

April 25, 2000; Hamburg, Germany

Shot from the left side of the stage; tons of good closeups, great color and detail, but a little dark. Excellent cast.

Ian Jon Bourg, Alison Kelly, Kyle Gonyea

November 11, 2000; Hamburg, Germany

One hour of Phantom-oriented highlights. Pretty dull quality.

Ian Jon Bourg (The Phantom of the Opera), Valentina Kozhanova (u/s Christine Daaé), Rob Pitcher (u/s Raoul), Evelyn Werner (Carlotta Giudicelli), Anders Sohlman (Monsieur Firmin), David Hunerjaeger (Monsieur André), Kate Lawrence (Meg Giry)

2001; Hamburg

Something of Rob some 14 years before he was a Phantom and Raoul u/s in Hamburg again!

Ian Jon Bourg, Olivia Safe (u/s), Kyle Gonyea

2001; Hamburg, Germany

Nicely shot video. Filmer knows the show well, and the color and detail is pretty sharp for it's age. VOB.

Juan Navarro/Saulo Vasconcelos, Claudia Cota/Irasema Terrazas, Jose Joel

January 14, 2001; Mexico City, Mexico

Final performance(s) in Mexico; one cast for Act 1, another cast for Act 2. Big chunks missing in Act 2. VOB.

Michael Nicholson (alt), Olivia Safe (u/s), Christopher Morandi (alt), Reinhard Schulze (u/s?), Anders Sohlmann, Evelyn Werner (u/s), Linda Bruske, Charlie Serrano, Kate Lawrence

June 30, 2001; Hamburg

Final matinee performance in Hamburg and the final performance open to the public. Shot from the balcony. The rail gets in the way at times, but only during wide shots. Funny closing ad libs: the center skull from Robert le Diable is wearing sunglasses, the marksman is in the pit applauding Christine after ToM, crazy cadenzas during Il Muto. Also, a flub-up in the show, the backdrop never falls in “Hannibal”.

Ian Jon Bourg, Colby Thomas, Kyle Gonyea, David Hunerjaeger, Anders Sohlmann, Vera Borisova, Linda Bruske, Marcello Roncietto, Kate Lawrence

June 30, 2001; Hamburg

Final performance in Hamburg

Juan Carlos Barona, Julia Moller, Zenón Recalde (u/s)

2002; Madrid, Spain

Three-camera proshot. Sharp details and colors, but looks pixelated, like it was compressed when burned to DVD. Audio gets out of synch in the final scenes, unfortunately. MP4.

Luis Armando, Felicidad Farag, Armando Pita

2002; Madrid, Spain

Proshot from a single camera. Lots of color bleeding and fuzziness, tending towards reds and yellows. But I do love this cast, especially Felicidad. VOB.

Ian Jon Bourg, Janine Kitzen, Michael Shawn Lewis

November 16, 2002; Stuttgart, Germany

Monitor video of one of the first shows in Stuttgart, with audio fed in from the soundboard. Decent color and exposure; better than the other two monitor videos that came out of Stuttgart. Filming continues through intermission, so video features 30 minutes of curtains. LIMITED TRADE.​

Juan Carlos Barona, Julia Moller, Zenon Recalde (u/s)

​2003; Madrid, Spain

Single-camera proshot of the alternate Spain cast. Excellent quality, though a lot of mechanical noise from the camera as it moves.​ VOB.

Roy Weissensteiner (u/s), Marion Wilmer (u/s), Carsten Lepper

2003; Stuttgart, Germany

Full stage shot and soundboard audio. I just watched part of the video and it turns out that I don't have MOTN to the beginning of Prima Donna. I guess the person I traded with didn't realize it/didn't have it and I didn't watch that part to know. So I don't have it. VOB.

Sandor Sasvari, Andrea Maho, Gabor Bot

2003; Budapest, Hungary

​Small video of the non-replica Hungarian production. Mostly mid to full stage shots, not many zooms, and lots of washout, but gives a good look at all the changes. VOB.

Attila Csengeri, Renata Krassy, Gabor Bot

2003; Budapest, Hungary

VOB.

Zoltan Miller, Linda Kiraly, Zsolt Homonnay

May 21, 2003; Budapest, Hungary

Somewhat fuzzy picture, but biggest video and steadiest filming of the three 2003 videos of the Hungarian production. Sound only comes from the right side. Zoltan Miller cracks in the title song. VOB.

Steve Lucas (u/s), Maike Switzer, Carsten Lepper, Stefan Mueller-Ruppert, Marko Woytowicz, Barbara Grey Nystrom, Anette Kuhn, Marcello Ronchietto, Lara Glew

November 28, 2003; Stuttgart

Includes flub in which Red Death could not make it up to the staircase during 'Masquerade', so he walks through the crowd to get there. VOB

Attila Csengeri, Barbara Fonyo, Zsolt Homonnay, Peter Pankotay, Bela Szerednyey, Robert Weil, Patricia Kuthy, Ilona Bencze

2004; Budapest, Hungary

Highlights, about 45 minutes. The only video of Barbara in the role. She has quickly become one of my favorites. VOB.

Attila Csengeri, Eszter Biro, Zsolt Homonnay

2004; Budapest, Hungary

Highlights, 20 minutes, comes also with some Sasvari/Krassy/Miller. VOB.

Roy Weissensteiner (u/s), Maike Switzer, Carsten Axel Lepper

March 2004; Stuttgart, Germany

Monitor video, full stage shot, quite a bit of color bleeding and exposure. Soundboard audio which gives out sometimes. VOB.

Thomas Schulze, Maike Switzer, Carsten Axel Lepper, Ernst van Looy, Jonathan Agar, Barbara Gray Nystrom, Gabriele Ramm, Marchello Ronchietto, Katie Wood

May 23, 2004; Stuttgart, Germany

Last show for the Stuttgart production; features some funny ad-libs from the cast including the famous 3rd kiss after Christine returns the Phantom’s ring. Big picture, a little fuzzy. Blocking from heads and the bar in front; camera can be very shaky. Many wideshots and gigantic closeups as well. MP4.

Zoltán Miller, Andrea Maho, Gábor Bot

July 28, 2005; Budapest, Hungary

Highlights, about an hour long, quite a bit of obstruction due to filming from the left balcony and the camera often goes out of focus, giving us a blurry picture, but there are also a lot of beautiful close-ups to make up for it. VOB.

Thomas Borchert, Sandra Danyella, Nikolaj Alexander Brucker, Laurie Ann McGowan, Gabriele Ramm

November 27/December 28, 2005; Essen, Germany

Have seen this video under two different dates. I do very much love Sandra's TOM cadenza.

Saulo Vasconcelos, Kiara Sasso, Nando Prado

2006 (?); Sao Paulo, Brazil

Monitor video, date is unknown so I took a guess. MP4.

Saulo Vasconcelos, Kiara Sasso, Nando Prado

2006(?); Sao Paulo, Brazil

Audience recording, looks like from two cameras. MP4.

Ethan Freeman (Phantom), Anne Goerner (Christine), Nikolaj Alexander Brucker (Raoul), Ernst van Looy (Firmin), Fernand Delosch (André), Karen Buck (Carlotta), Bonifacio Galvan (Piangi), Gabriele Ramm (Mme Giry), Annabel Knight (Meg Giry)

April 30, 2006; Essen

Ethan's last show.​​ VOB.

Uwe Kroeger, Beatrix Reiterer, Lucius Wolter (u/s), Ernst van Looy, Fernand Delosch, Laurie Anne McGowan, Gabriele Ramm, Daniel Brenna, Annabel Knight

July 15, 2006; Essen, Germany

Huge picture, wonderful quality, sharp details and colors, filmed from near the front, with a few heads in the center. VOB.

Masayuki Sano, Tamami Sai, Yuosuke Kitazawa

July 1, 2007; Osaka, Japan

Nice, recent video of the Japanese cast. Taper sometimes drifts away from the action to focus on the stage. MP4.

Tomasz Steciuk, Kaja Mianowana, Lukasz Talik

2008 (?); Warsaw, Poland

Low quality video of non-replica Polish production; no closeups and shot from the same angle the entire time. Small, fuzzy picture and pretty poor sound quality. Starts during Christine's 'Think of Me', general trio-oriented highlights. Still, it is one of the only videos from the Polish production. AVI.

Simon Pryce (s/b), Ana Marina, Alexander Lewis

April 22, 2008; Brisbane, Australia

Nicely shot with good colors and quality.

Alexander Lewis (u/s), Ana Marina, David Somerville (u/s), Andrea Creighton, Jackie Rees, Nadia Komazec

Septmeber 11, 2008; Australia

Mostly obstructed footage; some is audio only. Fragmented Christine-oriented highlights: 'Overture', Hannibal, last bit of 'Think of Me', parts of 'Angel of Music', 'The Mirror', title song, 'Stranger Than You Dreamt It', and the rooftop scene, most of 'Twisted Every Way' and last half of 'Wishing You Were Somehow Here Again', and almost all of 'Point of No Return' and 'Final Lair'. MP4

Anthony Warlow, Ana Marina, Alexander Lewis

2009 (?); Australia

Seven AVI clips. No idea as to the exact location or date. Phantom-oriented highlights. Really great quality except for the 'FInal Lair', which is much smaller and more pixelated. I adore this cast. MP4.

Flemming Enevold, Teresia Bokor, Tomas Ambt Kofod, Eva Malmgren, Steen Springborg, Morten Staugaard, Marie Bo, Fernando Concha, Jennifer Wagstaffe

April 2009; Copenhagen, Denmark

Three performances edited into one. MP4.

Peter Jorde, Teresia Bokor, Tomas Ambt Kofod

2009; Copenhagen

6 MP4 clips and 1 audio clip. The audio clip is of The Mirror. The videos are of the title song, Music of the Night, Wishing, Point of No Return, and Down Once More. The video is shot from further away, but sometimes the camera zooms in. But there are no good close ups or sharp details.

Anthony Warlow, Ana Marina, Alexander Lewis, John O'May, Derek Taylor, Andrea Creighton, Jackie Rees, David Rogers Smith, Nadia Komazec

May 22, 2009; Adelaide, Australia

Act 1 only. Consists mostly of shaky wideshots. Tons of blackouts and camera tends to stray a lot. But it does show the screens that were on the sides so that's interesting. MP4.

Mathias Edenborn, Valerie Link, Nicky Wuchinger

December 11, 2013; Hamburg, Germany

I adore Valerie and Nicky. Very nice quality. VOB.

Brad Little, Claire Lyon, Anthony Downing

January 1, 2014; Shanghai, China

Pretty decent video. MP4.

David Arnsperger, Valerie Link, Nicky Wuchinger, Debra Fernandes (u/s), Anton Rattinger, Guido Gottenbos, Linda Veenhuizen, Raymond Sepe, Theano Makariou

January 19, 2014; Hamburg, Germany

MP4, but still pretty good quality.

Brad Little, Kristi Holden, Anthony Downing, John O'May, Jason Ralph, Andrea Creighton, Tina Walsh, Thabiso Masemene, Eleanor Waite

January 26, 2014; Shanghai, China

Last performance in Shanghai. Lovely video, though parts of Act 2 are lower quality and look like they were taken from a different source. Cherry and kn11ee2066's master. VOB.

David Arnsperger, Lauri Brons, Nicky Wuchinger, Norbert Kohler, Anton Rattinger, Rachel Anne Moore, Joan Ribalta, Linda Veenhuizen, Theano Makariou

April 11, 2014; Hamburg, Germany

VOB.

Dmitri Ermak, Tamara Kotova/Elena Bahtiyarova, Evgeny Zaycev

September 23, 2014; Moscow

Rehearsal footage of Music of Night, All I Ask of You, and Masquerade. Includes a few nice shots of just the scenery.

Ivan Ozhogin, Tamara Kotova, Eugeny Zaytsev, Irina Samoylova, Alexei Bobrov , Yuri Mazihin, Elena Charkviani, Valeriya Migalina

December 30, 2014; Moscow, Russia

AVI files, highlights, includes: Hannibal ballet, 'Think of Me', 'Angel of Music', 'Little Lotte', 'The Mirror', 'The Phantom of the Opera', 'Music of the Night', 'Stranger Than You Dreamt It', part of Il Muto, 'All I Ask of You', 'Wishing You Were Somehow Here Again', 'Point of No Return', and 'Final Lair'.

Mathias Edenborn, Daniela Braun (u/s), Nicky Wuchinger, Norbert Kohler (u/s), Anton Rattinger, Rachel Anne Moore, Raymond Sepe, Michaela Christl, Vanessa Spireti

March 1, 2015; Hamburg, Germany

Video was originally pretty dark (and still is in parts), but the master edited it to be brighter. This does mean that certain parts have a lot of washout while others are very grainy. Nevertheless, a pretty nice video. MP4.

Dmitriy Ermak (Phantom), Tamara Kotova (Christine), Evgeniy Zaycev (Raoul), Irina Samoylova (Carlotta), Alexey Bobrov (André), Yuriy Mazikhin (Firmin), Oganes Georgiyan (Piangi), Elena Charviani (Mme Giry), Valeria Migalina (Meg)

March 7, 2015; Moscow

Great close-ups, picture is very steady and there're no obstruction at all. Starts right before chorus in Hannibal, otherwise complete.

Marian Vojtko, Michaela Gemrotova/Monika Sommerova, Tomas Vanek

April 2015; Prague, Czech Republic

Blindshot highlights. Michaela Gemrotova plays Christine in all but the last two clips, where Monika Sommerova is Christine and is shot at a closer and different angle. Lots of blackouts and heads covering the screen. MP4.

Andrey Shkoldychenko (u/s Phantom), Tamara Kotova (Christine), Eugeny Zaytsev (Raoul), Natalia Gromova (u/s Carlotta), Alexei Bobrov (Monsieur André), Yuri Mazihin (Monsieur Firmin), Yulia Churakova (u/s Mme Giry), Valeriya Migalina (Meg Giry)

April 2, 2015; Moscow

Highlights from Act II. Shot from mid-orchestra, so there are no heads in the way!

Andrey Shkoldychenko (u/s), Elena Bahtiyarova, Eugeny Zaytsev, Ekaterina Lehina, Sergei Sorokin (u/s Andre), Yuri Mazihin, Elena Charkviani, Valeria Migalina

pril 19, 2015; Moscow, Russia

Large MPG files. Contains 'All I Ask of You (reprise)' and all of Act 2. VampireInTheOpera’s master.

Andrey Shkoldychenko (u/s), Tamara Kotova, Eugeny Zaytsev, Irina Samoylova, Sergei Sorokin (u/s), Yuri Mazihin, Elena Charkviani, Anastasiya Efimova (u/s)

April 25, 2015; Moscow

Highlights.Shot from fairly close in the orchestra, so there are great close-ups but a lot of heads. The harp is super clear during Wandering Child, which is fun.

Dmitry Ermak, Elena Bahtiyarova, Eugeny Zaytsev, Yuri Mazihin, Alexei Bobrov, Irina Samoylova, Oganes Georgiyan, Elena Charkviani, Valeria Migalina

June 21, 2015; Moscow, Russia

vampireoftheopera’s master. MP4.

Rob Pitcher (u/s), Valerie Link, Nicky Wuchinger, Guido Gottenbos, Anton Rattinger, Rachel Anne Moore, Joan Ribalta, Michaela Christl, Vanessa Spiteri

August 7, 2015; Hamburg, Germany

Full show, dark picture with yellow tint. VOB.

David Arnsperger, Daniela Braun, Nicky Wuchinger, Guido Gottenbos, Anton Rattinger, Rachel Anne Moore, Joan Ribalta, Michaela Christl, Vanessa Spiteri

August 9, 2015; Hamburg, Germany

I like the quality of this video than the other one of her. VOB.

Dmitry Ermak, Maria Ivleva (u/s), Eugeny Zaytsev, Ekaterina Lehina, Oganes Georgiyan, Yurii Mazihin, Alexei Bobrov

September 12, 2015; Moscow

Evening. First for Maria Ivleva as Christine. Highlights. Maria whispers something to Dmitry during the ring return. Though it's shot close to the stage there are some heads in the way; Act 2 has a few less heads and a little better of an angle. The only video of Maria.

Ivan Ozhogin, Tamara Kotova, Ivan Rak (u/s), Petr Markin, Sergey Sorokin, Irina Samoylova, Oganes Georgian, Elena Charkviany, Regina Ahmetshina

October 11, 2015; Moscow, Russia

MP4. Vampireoftheopera's master.

Marian Vojtko, Michaela Gemrotova, Tomas Vanek

2016 (?); Prague, Czech Republic

One MP4 clip consisting of 22 minutes of highlights. Includes: part of the title song, part of 'Music of the Night', 'Wandering Child', 'Point of No Return', and 'Final Lair'. Some head obstruction.

Brad Little, Emilie Lynn, Anthony Downing.

January 1, 2016; Beijing

Three MP4 clips, Think of Me, Wishing, and the Final Lair. From the New Year’s day performance.

Brent Barrett, Elizabeth Welch, Max Niemeyer

March 24, 2016; Oberhausen, Germany

Generally trio-centered highlights. Shot at a bit of an angle, but good quality. Very cool to see Elizabeth as principal in another language! MTS files.

Andrey Shkoldychenko, Elena Bahtiyarova, Eugeny Zaytsev, Yuuri Mazihin, Alexei Bobrov, Irina Samoylova, Ekaterina Rybinskaya (u/s), Elena Charkviani

April 24, 2016; Moscow, Russia

MP4 clips, consisting of 'Angel of Music' to 'Stranger Than You Dreamt It', 'Wishing', 'Point of No Return', and 'Final Lair'. Andrey Shkoldychenko's last as Phantom. Very good quality.

Dmitri Ermak, Tamara Kotova, Rinat Albikov (u/s)

April 24, 2016; Moscow, Russia

Grainy audience recording. MP4. This originally said Ivan, but it's Dmitri.

Peter Joback, Emmi Christensson, Anton Zetterholm

February 2017; Stockholm, Sweden

Video of the full show from the first row. Usually people have the MP4 version ripped from YouTube, but this one seems like it is better quality. This might be the original file. Because it is so close and to the right, things happening at the very back or very left of the stage is missed, but some nice closeups when things are at the right. Also, very beautiful closeups of the curtains in the Overture. TS file.

Fred Johanson, Sofie Asplund, John Martin Bengtsson

September 23, 2017; Gothenburg, Sweden

Non-replica production based on the Finnish production, Act 1 only. MP4.

Radim Schwab, Monika Sommerova, Tomáš Vaněk

2016/18/19; Prague

Five MP4 clips, Think of Me, the end of the Title Song and MOTN, the Rooftop, and Wishing. These come from at least three different shows, the Rooftop scene is not as good quality as the others (not bad by any means though) and is shot from the left. That clip comes from Monika and Tomáš' last show in May 2019. Think of Me comes from September 16, 2016 and Wishing comes from October 21, 2018. The Title Song/MOTN one doesn't have a date.

Thiago Arancam, Giulia Nadruz/Lina Mendes (?)

2018; Brazil

13 minutes of highlights from Act 2. Still not sure who is Christine here, some say Lina and some say Giulia. MP4.

Dmitry Ermak, Elena Bahtiyarova, Eugeny Zaytsev

March 16, 2018; Moscow, Russia

MP4 file, highlights from different cameras. Includes: part of the title song, part of 'Music of the Night', part of Il Muto, 'All I Ask of You', 'All I Ask of You (Reprise)', part of 'Masquerade', part of 'Wandering Child', part of 'Point of No Return', and 'Final Lair'. From the concert version with the Moscow cast.

Dmitry Ermak, Tamara Kotova, Evgeny Zaycev, Ekaterina Lyokhina, Alexey Bobrov, Yuri Mazikhin, Alexey Sumilov, Elena Charkviani, Anastasia Bedulova

March 17, 2018; Moscow, Russia

Concert version starring most of the original cast of the Moscow production. MOV files, missing a few small parts. Limited trades, vampireintheopera's master.

Thomas Ambt Kofod (Phantom), Sibylle Glosted (Christine), Christian Lund (Raoul), Carl Christian Rasmussen (Monsieur Firmin), Sebastian Harris (Monsieur André), Louise Fribo (Carlotta), Rasmus Jupin (Piangi), Elisabeth Halling (Madame Giry), Imogen-Lilly Ash (Meg Giry), Jesper Paasch, Kim Hammelsvang, Paul Frederiksen, Martin Loft, Maria Hanke, Anna Vaupel, Sandra Kassman, Merete Laursen, Sidsel Aja Eriksen, Cecilia Lindwall, Üartick Egersborg, Mikkel Hoé Knudsen, John Martin Bengtsson, Kristoffer Emil Appel, Nahla Gill Ellzondo, Amelia Jackson, Victoria Paine, Corina Clark, Chloe Dowell, Heidi Richards, Jacob Williams Hughes, Trevor Schoonraad, Catherine Leppingwell, Mia Karlsson

March 2019; Copenhagen

Just went up for trading on July 15th! A really lovely capture of the Copenhagen production before it closed. I love this cast. Rumpel-trades' master. VOB.

​Thiago Arancam, Giulia Nadruz, Fred Silveira, Sandro Christopher, Marcos Lanza, Bete Diva, Cleyton Pulzi, Tais Viera, Fernanda Muniz

March 20, 2019; Brazil

4 MOV Christine oriented clips featuring “Think of Me”, “All I Ask of You”, “Masquerade”, and “Wishing”.

​​Fred Silveira (u/s), Giulia Nadruz (alt.), Henrique Moretzsohn (u/s), Sandro Christopher/Rodrigo Miallaret, Beth Diva, Krista Vieira, Fernanda Muniz

April 6/May 11, 2019; Brazil

Shot from the left side a little ways back, so the picture is decent, but no closeups. A few heads in the way, but nothing terrible. MP4.

Thiago Arancam, Lina Mendes, Fred Silveira, Bete Diva, Sandro Christopher, Marcos Lanza, Taís Vieira, Fernanda Muniz, Cleyton Pulzi

May 3, 2019; Sao Paulo, Brazil

Paparose2015's master.

Fred Silveira (alt.), Lina Mendes, Henrique Moretzsohn (u/s)

May 17/18, 2019; Brazil

6 MP4 clips, featuring Think of Me, some of Why Have You Brought Me Here and all of AIAOY, Wishing, a little of the Final Lair, and a video of Instagram clips that were combined. Shot on a phone, so no great closeups and it’s kind of blurry. But when the actors come into the view of the camera you can make out the action. Nice look at two understudies— Fred I think is still termed as an u/s, but I’m calling him the alt. cause he goes on pretty much every week. Still not sure if these are the same performance or two different ones.

Jonathan Roxmouth, Meghan Picerno, Matt Leisy, Beverly Chiat, James Borthwick, Curt Olds, Melina Kalomas, Thabiso Masemene, Hillary Reiter (swing Meg)

May 23, 2019; Singapore

Apr1n4's master. No obstructions (except for the first 2 minutes of Act 1). Filmed with a mix of wide, mediums and close-ups, across both Act One and Act two. Minimal wandering, other than a change in set, no major dropouts. The video has some lag and drops in framerate throughout, though, so it almost looks like the audio is playing normal but the video is in a sort of slow motion. Due to a trading issue with someone, the master has decided to make this video NFT. So at least for now there isn't any recording, or at least a full good one of the tour unfortunately. MOV file.

Jonathan Roxmouth (Phantom), Meghan Picerno (Christine), Matt Leisy (Raoul), Beverley Chiat (Carlotta), Thabiso Masemene (Piangi), James Borthwick (Fermin), Curt Olds (Andre), Melina Kalomas (M. Giry), Skye Weiss (u/s Meg)

May 26, 2019; Singapore

Some blind shot clips, about an hour's worth. NFT

Jonathan Roxmouth (Phantom), Meghan Picerno (Christine), Alexander Mendoza (u/s Raoul), Beverley Chiat (Carlotta), Thabiso Masemene (Piangi), Jas Borthwick (Fermin), Curt Olds (Andre), Melina Kalomas (M. Giry), Hillary Reiter (u/s Meg)

May 29, 2019; Singapore

Some blind shot clips, about half an hour. Limited trades. The first time Alex and Meghan went on together I think.​ NFT

Damian Aleksander, Paulina Janczak, Rafał Supiński

June 8, 2019; Bialystok

A little over 40 mimutes of the non-replica production. Not sure if it was shot on a phone, but there aren't any zooms and it's a bit blurry. But it is still a decent video, and I would say definitely the best one to come out of this production by far. Limited trades (3:1 ratio). MP4.

Fred Silveira (u/s Phantom), Lina Mendes (Christine Daaé), Henrique Moretzsohn (u/s Raoul), Joyce Martins (Carlotta), Sandro Christopher (Firmin), Marcos Lanza (André), Taís Vieira (Madame Giry), Fernanda Muniz (Meg Giry), Cleyton Pulzi (Piangi)

July 2019; Sao Paulo, Brazil

Fred Silveira (u/s), Giulia Nadruz, Henrique Moretzsohn (u/s), Joyce Martins, Sandro Christopher, Marcos Lanza, Taís Vieira, Fernanda Muniz, Cleyton Pulzi

July 20, 2019; Sao Paulo, Brazil

PapaRose2015's m