First, we need to review how Calvin Coolidge came to be president. As this image shows, he was Warren G. Harding’s running mate in 1920. After they won the election, Coolidge served quietly as Vice President until Harding’s sudden and unexpected death on August 2, 1923. He was on a western trip and had suffered from abdominal pain for a week or so before his death. His wife did not permit an autopsy and ordered that his body be embalmed one hour after his death, but he most likely died from cardiac arrest or a cerebral hemorrhage. Rumors swirled, however; in 1930, a former Harding administration member published a book claiming that Florence Harding poisoned her husband.

When Harding died in San Francisco, Vice President Coolidge was in Vermont visiting his family home, which had neither electricity nor a telephone, when he received word by messenger of Harding’s death. His father, a notary public and justice of the peace, administered the oath of office in the family’s parlor by the light of a kerosene lamp at 2:47 am on August 3, 1923. Coolidge then went back to bed and returned to Washington the next day. He was sworn in a second time by a federal judge to forestall any questions about the authority of a state official to administer a federal oath.

Coolidge was reelected in his own right in 1924.

Because Coolidge was from Vermont and his roots ran deeply into New England, I’m not surprised to see that my connection to him goes through my Pease family line into Massachusetts. Martha Marchant (#7) (1732-1771) was my 5th great-grandmother. I’ve done a lot of work on my Pease family, and I’m comfortable with this link.

I already had Martha’s sister Ruth (#8) on my tree, and it wasn’t hard to determine that her husband was Thomas White. Thomas had a brother named Melatiah (or something like that), and he married Mary Sprague. Mary Sprague’s mother, Elizabeth Turner, had married twice – first to Micah Sprague (Mary’s father) and then to Jonathan Delano. Elizabeth and Jonathan had a daughter named Irana (#12). Jonathan had also been married several times; with his first wife, Elizabeth Winslow, they had a daughter named Elizabeth (#13). With her first husband, John Penney, she had a son named Jonathan (#14), who had a daughter named Priscilla (#15). Priscilla had a daughter named Abigail, whose daughter Victoria was the mother of President Calvin Coolidge.

The surname ‘Delano’ pops out in this connection, as I’ll be looking at my connection to Franklin Delano Roosevelt next week. On closer examination, it looks as if the Delano in the Coolidge line is a different line, although they are both descended from Philippe de Lannoy. A little research revealed that Philip Delano (as the name was anglicized) was also a nephew of Mayflower passenger Francis Cooke (my 12th great-grandfather, just sayin’). Philip came to Plymouth in 1621, on the Fortune.

President Coolidge was Philip’s 8th great-grandson through his son Jonathan Delano. President Franklin D. Roosevelt was Philips’s 5th great-grandson through his son Thomas Delano. I can’t explain the generational discrepancy; either I haven’t accounted for all of the generations, or FDR’s ancestry moved more slowly because it includes a lot of younger sons and multiple marriages. I don’t need to resolve this. It’s just interesting that the connection exists at all.

This Geni connection looks good for several generations. I recognize the names through Nathan Wilcox, I (on the left end of the second row). I already had his daughter Hannah on my tree, so that works. Hannah married David Bartlett, they had a daughter named Sarah, and I was able to make short work out of verifying the rest of these connections.

I don’t have a lot of stories to tell about President Coolidge. However, he was a Mayflower descendant. His 7th great-grandfather (through his Delano line) was Edward Doty, whose quick temper and fraudulent business dealings created an extensive court record in Plymouth.

Let’s do a brief review of what led to the election of 1920. The election was dominated by the social and political environment in the aftermath of World War I. The ailing Woodrow Wilson toyed with the idea of a third term, but he got little support. Former president Theodore Roosevelt had returned to the Republican Party after his third party run in 1912 delivered the presidency to Wilson, but Roosevelt was not well (he died in 1919) and was never a serious candidate.

The Democrats ultimately nominated Governor James E. Cox of Ohio to lead their ticket; their nominee for vice-president was the 38-year-old Secretary of the Navy Franklin D. Roosevelt – Teddy’s fifth cousin. Roosevelt had not yet contracted the paralytic illness that would render him permanently disabled in 1921.

The Republican Party hosted a wide-open convention in June of 1920. The convention deadlocked between the two frontrunners – Major General Leonard Wood and Governor Frank Orren Lowden of Illinois. A number of other names were placed in nomination, and the convention proceeded to vote. Here’s what happened on the ten ballots:

Harding’s nomination was said to have been secured in negotiations in the proverbial “smoke-filled room.” One reason often suggested for Harding’s nomination was that “he looked like a President.” The convention quickly selected Calvin Coolidge to serve as Harding’s running mate.

The Harding/Coolidge ticket won a convincing victory, although Harding’s call for a “return to normalcy” was derided by the press because “normalcy” was not actually a word.

Seems quaint, doesn’t it?

I did’t know much about Harding’s background, although one persistent rumor was that one of his great-grandmothers was African American. I remember reading a book about Harding’s life, The Shadow of Blooming Grove, which recounted the story of this scandal. In the 1990s, DNA technology allowed researchers to disprove this allegation.

So let’s dive right in. This WikiTree connection takes me over familiar ground once again. My maternal Workman family line has provided connections through this series of essays. This connection initially looks pretty good; I recognize all of these names through my 5th great-grandfather Jacob Workman (#7). Because the Workman family is pretty well documented, I also recognize Jacob’s brother Stephen (#8) and his daughter Hester (#9). But I’ve never developed the next part of this connection, which runs through the family of Hester’s husband Samuel Clutter.

It took a little bit of trial and error, but I think this is a good connection. It got a little squishy in the Clutter line (connecting my direct line to President Harding’s direct line), but I think it’s accurate. The Clutters (Samuel, his brother John, and John’s daughter Lavina) lived in New Jersey, Pennsylvania, and Ohio in the last quarter of the 18th century and the first quarter of the 19th century, and record-keeping was a little sketchy in their part of the country. So this gets a ‘B’ rather than an ‘A’.

Before I move on, I want to recount a couple of stories about the people in this connection. My 5th great-granduncle Stephen Workman (#8) and four of his brothers (including my 5th great-grandfather Jacob Workman) received Revolutionary War land grants in Cumberland County, Maryland. I also recognize the Wicoff/Wikoff names. Jacob married Elizabeth Wyckoff, 3rd great-granddaughter of Pieter Claeszen Wyckoff, who came to New Amsterdam in 1636 at the age of 16. His house still stands in Brooklyn. It’s considered to be the oldest structure in the state of New York. Here’s a synopsis of an ancestry post confirming this. The four Wicoff/Wikoff men and four of the five Workman men on this list were my 5th great-granduncles. Jacob was my 5th great-grandfather. Pretty cool, right?

According to Thelma C. Anderson’s Workman Family History (the ‘Bible’ for people researching this family), my 5th great-grandfather Jacob Workman was a “sharpshooter in the Revolutionary War.” The source goes on to recount the following story:

“He was a daring hunter in the savage mountains of New Jersey, Pennsylvania, and Maryland. He had many hunting matches with men of skill, but he always came out first. His children have all handed down the stories to their descendants, of how he used to take his sons with him on some of his hunts to teach them the art of hunting. The boys brought up the rear of the tramp, always on the alert for the appearance of game, or a signal from thier father. If he shook his hand quiveringly in the air, they knew that by his superior skill he had detected the appearance of game, when to them there had been no audible sign. But the crouched, or hunched down in their tracks immediately, scarcely daring to breath, yet trying to keep a watch on their father as he stealthy located the game and took aim. At the crack of the gun, all the boys jumped, and looked, many times a big buck deer lunged into the air, then floundered to the ground as they were by its side. Jacob was an exceptionally good marksman, who seldom, if ever missed his aim.”

Geni also takes me through my Workman/Wyckoff family line, but does an excursion way back into colonial New Amsterdam. As I venture back along this line, I encounter familiar Dutch names – although they are, shall we say, ‘creatively’ spelled. This is a recurring problem with researching this part of American history; the Dutch naming conventions are unfamiliar to me, as are the vowel and consonant combinations. That’s true for most people who have researched these families in America as well, so we all attempt to ‘correct’ what we see as misspellings. In addition, various researchers along the way have anglicized the Dutch forenames: Geertje became Gertrude, Jan became John, and so forth. The result is a wholesale confusion.

But given all of that, I soldier on. My 9th great-grandmother Geertje Janse Vankirk (I have her on my tree as Verkirk but whatevs) had a brother named Jan Janse Vankirk/Verkirk. I haven’t researched Jan’s descendants at all, so I’ll try to trace this connection. We should note – all of this is happening in the second half of the 17th century, just after the English took over New Amsterdam and renamed it New York. The English required all of the Dutch residents to adopt English naming systems, so things were in a bloody mess for a while.

As I tried to build out this connection on Ancestry, I found that Jan had a son named Hendrick (Henry), who also had a son named Henry, and the rest of the line also proves out.

This connection is interesting to me because, unlike most of these connections, it doesn’t involve any relationships-by-marriage. Warren G. Harding and I have common ancestors – at least according to Geni. My 10th great-grandparents Jan Jelisz Verkerk/Van Kirk and Marijke Gijsbertse Gerrets (try saying that with gum in your mouth) are President Harding’s 5th great-grandparents.

I’m a little weary with President Harding at this point, but I’ll keep going. This time, Geni takes me through my father’s family line back to my Wilcox and Tripp families in Rhode Island. The advantage of this connection will be that I’ll probably be able to pronounce all of the names.

William Wilcox (second from the left in the second line) was my 5th great-grandfather. I haven’t traced the line of his sister Mary, but I recognize the ‘Tripp’ surname. She married William Tripp, the great-grandson of my 9th great-grandfather John Tripp (1610-1677) who came to Rhode Island in the 1630s. I was able to confirm the connection from William Tripp, his brother Isaac, and Isaac’s son John before encountering Phoebe Tripp, who married George Tyron Harding. I had placed George on my tree earlier when I was trying to confirm the WikiTree connection, so once I linked Phoebe to George I had the connection. It is solid.

When I confirm these connections, I usually poke around a bit to see if I can tease out any interesting stories before moving on. As I was working on the Harding family line, I discovered that President Harding’s great-grandmother was named Elizabeth Madison. As a genealogist from Virginia who has a lot of ancestors in my home state, I pricked up my ears when I saw this. A little research showed that Elizabeth Madison was a descendant of the storied Madison family in Virginia. Her father, William Madison, was born in 1776 in Montpelier, Virginia, the home of the Madison family. She was the daughter of Ambrose Madison, brother of President James Madison. Ambrose and James were the grandsons of Ambrose Madison and his wife Frances Taylor – thus also linking them to the family of President Zachary Taylor. Earlier in this series I identified President James Madison as my 2nd cousin 8x removed, so this is another connection to President Harding.

In addition, Ambrose Madison was the grandfather of Bishop James Madison – President James Madison’s first cousin, the first Episcopal Bishop of the Diocese of Virginia, and President of the College of William and Mary 1777-1812. When he became William and Mary’s president, he worked with Thomas Jefferson on reorganizing the college, including closing the divinity school and the Brafferton Indian School. The college was placed on a firmer financial footing and graduate schools in law and medicine were established by 1779. A college dorm is named Madison Hall in his honor.

This means that President Harding was a descendant of the Madison family in Virginia. I can’t determine whether the public knew this at the time, or whether the Hardings even knew it. I find this interesting.

First, let’s review what happened in this election. I wrote last week about how Teddy Roosevelt chose not to run for reelection in 1908, instead supporting Taft for his party’s nomination. By 1911, Roosevelt regretted this decision and decided to run in 1912. The Republican Party convention gave the nomination to Taft, so Roosevelt decided to run as a candidate for a third party, the Progressives. Eugene Debs also ran, as the candidate for the Socialist Party. The resultant split between Roosevelt and Taft supporters allowed Wilson to coast to an easy victory in the Electoral College although he was only 41.8% of the popular vote. If Taft and Roosevelt had joined forces, the tickets would probably have defeated Wilson.

It’s hard for us to recall that 120 years ago, progressive ideas were important in both political parties, with the most vocal progressives in the Republican Party. Wilson also ran as kind of a progressive, and the result of the 1912 election was that progressivism found a firm footing in the Democratic Party, where it has remained to this day.

Now on to this week’s essay.

I’m going to switch things up and write about the Geni connection this week – mainly because I think it’s more interesting and because it lets me talk about some of the storied families in the history of the colony of Virginia.

This connection begins simply enough. It takes me through my maternal grandmother’s line through the Botts family and back into Virginia. My 6th great-grandfather John Botts (in the middle of the second line) was born in 1754 in Overwharton Parish, Stafford, Virginia, USA. He died in Mason County, Kentucky in 1796. I have done a lot of research on this family and I’m fairly certain about this relationship.

The connection moves into less familiar territory as it includes Elizabeth Botts, John’s daughter, and her husband John Wigginton. Elizabeth and John had a son named Benjamin, as this connection suggests, and his daughter Anne Elizabeth married William Holcombe of the well-known Bolling family of Virginia. Their daughter, Edith White Bolling, married President Woodrow Wilson in 1915 after his first wife had died the previous year.

I want to take a diversion to write about the Bolling family. As I mentioned earlier, they are identified as one of the FFV – First Families of Virginia. Here’s what Copilot, the Microsoft AI assistant, told me when I asked it about the First Families of Virginia.

This is what Wikipedia says about the First Families of Virginia (FFV):

They were socially prominent and wealthy families in the British colony of Virginia during the 17th century. Although not necessarily the earliest settlers, they descended from European colonists who primarily established themselves in regions such as Jamestown, Williamsburg, and along the James River. These elite families, including the Byrds, Carters, Washingtons, Harrisons, [Bollings], and others, formed the core of Virginia’s plantocracy for centuries. . They generally married within their social class for generations, resulting in most FFV surnames dating back to the colonial period. Despite the American Revolution breaking ties with Britain, the First Families maintained social and political leadership. By the mid-20th century, they adapted to modern agricultural technology and integrated wealthy “Yankees” into their upper-class, rural horse-estate society. The FFBs played a significant role in shaping Virginia’s history and culture, leaving a lasting legacy in the Old Dominion.

The Bollings of Virginia trace their lineage to Robert Bolling, who immigrated to the Virginia Colony in 1660. Robert Bolling married twice. His first wife was Jane Rolfe, daughter of Thomas Rolfe and granddaughter of Pocahontas. They had one son, John Bolling. Robert Bolling’s second wife was Anne Stith, with whom he had several children. The descendants from Robert Bolling’s first marriage are sometimes referred to as the “Red Bollings” due to their Native American lineage through Pocahontas. The Bollings who are descended from the children of Robert and his second wife are called the “White Bollings.” Woodrow Wilson’s wife Edith was a Red Bolling.

I want to note, first, that WikiTree documents an odd connection. It moves through Woodrow Wilson’s daughter, Jessie Wilson; the connection is through her husband’s family line rather than through her Wilson line.

This connection also moves through my maternal grandmother’s line, but through her mother’s line (May Wilson, #3) this time rather than her father’s. I recognize my direct ancestors on this line through Benjamin Deuel (#6). His brother Jeremiah (#7) was already on my tree. He had a .son named Albert (#8), who married Catherine Dodson (#9). Catherine’s father was Joseph Dodson (#10), and he had a brother named John (#11).and he had a son (Catherine’s brother) Charles Millard Dodson (#12), whose son Alan (#13) married Sarah Whitney Chandler (#14). Sarah’s mother was Mary Eliza Sayer (#15), whose brother Francis (#16) married Jessie Wilson (#17), the daughter of President Wilson (#18). In genealogy lingo, this makes President Woodrow Wilson the father of the wife of the uncle of the wife of the 1st cousin 1x removed of the wife of my 1st cousin 5x removed.

Even though this gets a smiley face rating, it is officially ridiculous. Time for a little levity.

I had hoped that my connection to President Wilson would bring in my Wilson ancestors who lived in Augusta County at the same time that Woodrow Wilson’s family lived there. But I couldn’t make the connection. President Wilson’s family was from Ohio and lived in Augusta County only briefly in the middle of the 19th century before they moved to Georgia when the future president was less than a year old. ‘My’ Wilson ancestors were in Augusta County for several generations before moving to Kentucky and then to Illinois by 1850. So they share the Wilson surname but nothing else, so far as I can tell.

June 24, 2024

William Howard Taft and Me

William Howard Taft ran as the Republican nominee in 1908 because his predecessor, Theodore Roosevelt, fulfilled a promise he had made after winning the election in 1904. Because Roosevelt had first come to office when McKinley was assassinated, only six months into his second term, when Roosevelt won in 1904 he announced that he would abide by the precedent (not yet law) that Presidents should only serve two terms in office.

As the 1908 election neared, Roosevelt cast about for his successor. His Vice President, Charles Fairbanks, had worked against Roosevelt’s policies during his administration, so Roosevelt worked against his nomination. Instead, he endorsed his close friend and political ally, William Howard Taft, for the position – although Teddy began to regret his decision not to run, because he felt he still had a lot he wanted to do. He was confident, however, that Taft (who had served as his secretary of war and trusted advisor) shared his views and would work toward their common goals. As we’ll see when we look at the 1912 election, Teddy was wrong about Taft.

Anyway.

Once again, I recognize this connection immediately. It goes through my Cody family line, which I’ve already written about in five of these essays –John Adams, Franklin Pierce, Rutherford B. Hayes, James A. Garfield, and Chester A. Arthur. So here I am again. I don’t have to look at my tree back to my 5th great-grandmother, Mary Parmenter (1737-1817). I already have her sister Lois Parmenter (#8) on my tree.

It wasn’t hard to verify that she married James Hayward (#9) in Massachusetts in 1746, and that James had a sister named Patience (#10). The other connections also check out. This view of the connection makes it a little easier to understand, as there are several sibling/spouse connections that link this together.

I’ve grown accustomed to connections that meander all over the place. This one is pretty straightforward: a straight shot back to my 5th great-grandmother Mary Parmenter, then from sibling to spouse to sibling to spouse to sibling, then a straight shot from John Chapin to William Taft. I think this is rather elegant.

This Geni connection looks promising. I recognize the names through Lettice Jenkins, on the right end of the second row.

I’ve had a chance to write about my Hunt family connection five times in this series – for Presidents Fillmore, Buchanan, Lincoln, Cleveland, and McKinley. But this time the connection is through a branch of my family in the South, rather than in New England, which makes this a bit more interesting.

I’ve previously written about Elizabeth Betsey Hunt, but not about her connection to my Jenkins family in New England. Elizabeth’s parents were John Hunt and Martha Jenkins, who met and married in South Carolina in 1781 (after John was released from a British prison camp where he was imprisoned after the fall of Charleston to the British in 1780). I’ve traced John’s Hunt family ancestors back into 17th century Virginia. But Martha’s story is a bit different.

SIDE NOTE: This is as good a time as any to acknowledge the benefit of having ancestors who are connected to someone famous. John and Martha had a lot of children between 1790 and 1810 but in addition to Betsy, one of their children was my 4th great-uncle Jefferson Hunt (1804-1879), who was to become an important figure in the Mormon settlement in Nauvoo, Illinois, and later when the Mormons moved to Salt Lake City. The Mormons have written extensively about Jefferson Hunt, and John gets a lot of attention in. these narratives. This is one reason I have this image, which is a hand-drawn map of the early life of John Hunt in Virginia, North Carolina, and South Carolina. It is the frontispiece of a 1958 book Captain Jefferson Hunt of the Mormon Battalion by Pauline Udall Smith. I retrieved this book from the Hathitrust web site.

The right side of this map shows John’s early life in Virginia and North Carolina, which is what I’ve been talking about so far. The left side of the map shows John’s life in South Carolina. Nice of the author to provide us with this aid while we examine John’s life.

You can see that on the right side of the map, the author points out several places where the Martha Jenkins’ family lived. Martha has an interesting background. Her 2nd great-grandfather (and my 8th great-grandfather) Edward Jenkins (1618-1699) came to Massachusetts as part of the Puritan Great Migration in the 1630s. His grandson, Thomas Jenkins (1700-1775) appears to have been born in Massachusetts but then moved first to Pennsylvania and then to North Carolina. The family may have been Quakers – their names appear in areas in both Pennsylvania and North Carolina where Quakers gathered, but I’m not sure about this.

One interesting genealogical side-note: I am connected to the Jenkins family in Massachusetts through another family line. This family tree chart shows this connection:

Mary Farnsworth (1637-1705) is the ancestor who provides this connection. You can see that Mary was married to Edward Jenkins. She was his second wife, and my Jenkins family is descended from his first wife, Lettice Hanford (1617-1691) through their son Thomas Jenkins (on the right of this chart). Mary’s first husband, Abraham Ripley (1684-1683), had died in 1683, leaving Mary with a lot of children, including five who were less than 10 years old. Mary was 20 years younger than Lettice, and I can imagine that Edward married Mary to provide economic security to a widow with young children. The interesting part (well, at least I think it’s interesting) is that one of the children that Mary with her first husband Abraham Ripley was my 7th great-grandfather Joseph Ripley (1667-1737) (on the left side of the chart) on my father’s side. I’m descended from both of Mary’s husbands. This makes Mary both my paternal 8th great-grandmother AND my maternal 8th step-great-grandmother. I think.

Anyway. Back to the Geni connection. Here it is again in case you’ve lost track.

I can prove that Lettice married a man named Edward Foster before she married Edward Jenkins and that they had a son named Timothy. I made my way through the rest of the connections, and they check out. I noticed something interesting, however. In the middle of the third row, you see the ‘Davenport’ surname. I recognized that name; I have Davenport ancestors in Massachusetts, which is also the home of these Davenports. I did a little looking around, and I realized that the John Davenport that Naomi Jones married was the brother of my 9th great-grandfather Jonathan Davenport. I have a few questions about this – like, how likely is it that a man named John would have a brother named Jonathan? I’m not going to explore this any further, however. I do have a life.

My Ancestry DNA tells me that I am overwhelmingly English and Northern European (59%), with another 12% Irish and 11% Scottish. I’m not hung up about these percentages; the paper trail pretty much supports these numbers. I have a few Scottish ancestors in the 19th century in the United States – mainly Stewart and Wilson – and some way-back ancestors named McIntyre. I married a McPherson, so I’m somewhat accustomed to the idea of being Scottish. When I got to this week’s challenge, to assess my connection to President William McKinley, I guessed that the connection would be Scottish in some fashion.

I was wrong.

Before I go any further, I want you to know that I learned something this morning. The color coding on the WikiTree connections means something. Green highlights not a direct connection, while the yellow notes a connection by marriage. It is obvious (now that it has been pointed out to me) but I didn’t see it before.

So this was interesting. This line took me along a familiar path through my Dutch ancestors on my mother’s side of the family. My connection to Martin Van Buren was through this line, and I’ve written about it in two other essays – one about William Henry Harrison and one about Ulysses S. Grant – both of which took me through this line but included incorrect information.

So here I am again. How does this line hold up?

I don’t have to look very hard through #11, Geertje Simonse Van Arsdalen (1659-1730), who married my 9th great-grandfather Cornelius Pietersen Wyckoff (1656-1746) in Brooklyn in 1678. I’ve researched this line a number of times and I’m pretty confident in it. I have her brother Jan (#12) on my tree already, but I don’t have anything about his family.

NOTE: The Dutch patronymic naming system is hard to manage. The spellings are – shall we say – creative when transcribed by people (like me) who aren’t familiar with the spelling, pronunciation, or naming protocols.

I was able to determine that Jan married and had a daughter named Hilletje (#13). Hilletje married Garret Dorland, and they had a son named Luke (#14). Luke married Eleanor Aulche (#15) in 1773. After Luke’s early death in 1787 at the age of 40, Eleanor remarried, to David McKinley, as this article indicates:

DISCLAIMER: I found the WikiTree connection you saw earlier in this essay a few months ago when I was outlining this project. When I came back to President McKinley this week, the connection had disappeared; this profile, managed by the WikiTree ‘US President’s Project,’ had been changed by one of the profile managers, and the result was to erase (or at least extend) the link between President McKinley and the Dutch ancestral line I have been pursuing. One thing I’ve learned is that WikiTree provides only the shortest link, and whatever the change was, it may have only extended the link, but not eliminated it. So I’m going to continue a bit further because there’s more to see here.

David McKinley did not have children with Eleanor Aulche, so far as I can tell. He married her when they were both in their 60s. David had children with his first wife, Sarah Gray, including a son named James (#17). James had a son named William (#18), whose son William (#19) became president in 1896.

I give this connection a “B,” because although the original connection was severed sometime over the past few months, I was able to prove the connection anyway, as you’ll see below.

So why didn’t I give it an “F” and be done with it? Because when I asked WikiTree last week to suggest a connection to President William McKinley, it didn’t give me the one I just talked about – but it did give me a different connection that ends up in the same place.

Once again, this is familiar territory for me. Numbers 1-5 are my direct Workman family ancestors; however, instead of taking me the rest of the way from James Workman’s father Abraham through his wife’s Wyckoff ancestors in Dutch New Amsterdam, this connection takes me through James’s wife’s Bilyeu family ancestors. I was happy to see this, because this connection lets me tell a couple of interesting stories.

First, let’s talk about the Workman and Bilyeus. In 1962, Thelma Chichester Anderson published Workman Family History, which is the Bible for people researching this family and any lines connected to it. On page 42, here’s what she says about the Bilyeus.

I have become very well acquainted with the Bilyeu line. My immigrant ancestor on this line was Pierre Billiou, who came from France to Staten Island (by way of Leyden in the Netherlands) as a Huguenot refugee in 1660. Peter Bilyeu (#8) was his grandson (and also my 6th great-grandfather). But the most interesting part of this story is Peter’s mother, Ida Sueberingh (#9). More specifically, it is her grandfather (my 8th great-grandfather), Johannes Theodorus Polhemius (1598-1676) who is most interesting. Here’s what I wrote about him in connection with a different research project:

After training as a minister at Heidelberg University in the early years of the 17th century, Johannes served a church in the Palatinate during the 1620s, marrying and having at least one child there. The record is mute on his life for the next decade; he re-emerges in 1635, when he is appointed by the Dutch West Indies Company to serve a church in the New Netherlands settlement in eastern Brazil. This was one of three anchors for Dutch settlement in the Western Hemisphere; the others were in New Amsterdam/New York and in the Caribbean.

In 1643, at the age of 45, Johannes married Catherina Van Werven, a 15-year-old Dutch girl living in Recife. They had four children in Brazil between 1644 and 1649 before their lives were turned upside down in the 1650s. In 1653, the Dutch lost its Brazilian colonies to the Portuguese. In 1654, the new Portuguese rulers gave the Dutch three months to convert to Catholicism and become Portuguese – or to leave. Catherina took her children to Amsterdam, in part to collect Johannes’s overdue wages from the Dutch West Indies Company.

At the same time, Johannes sailed on a Dutch trader bound for New Netherland (New York) to minister to the Dutch people on Long Island. It is safe to say, I think, that his journey did not go as expected.

First, his ship encountered a Spanish Privateer (a government-licensed pirate ship). Which took the Dutch ship, its sugar cargo, crew and passengers, to the Cape Verde Islands off the African coast. I’m not sure how long they were held, but when he was released, the ship that carried him and 23 Portuguese/Brazilian Jews (?) was again pirated by a French man-o-war. The French ship, the St. Charles, arrived in New Amsterdam in 1654.

Johannes was installed as minister in the Dutch town of Midwout – now know as Flatbush, Brooklyn. He was the first minister of the Dutch Reformed Church there. Within a couple of years, Catherina and their children joined him there (having been uncertain about his fate while they were separated). They went on the have three more children while they were living in New Amsterdam. I am descended from their oldest daughter Adrianna. I think it’s interesting that my 8th great-grandmother was born in Brazil. Who’d a thunk it?

Getting back to the connection with William McKinley: Ida had a younger brother, Lucas Seubering (#10), who married Marritje Dorlant (#11). Marritje’s bother was Gerret Dorland (#12), whose son Gerret (#13) had a son Luke (#14). From here, the connection to William McKinley is the same as on the earlier chart. Phew!

But wait! There’s more!

But this connection from Geni isn’t it. As you can see, this takes me back to someone in the 14th century preposterously identified as “Duncan MacIntosh of that ilk, 11th Laird of Mackintosh, 12th Chief of Clan Chattan.” This line falls apart before you get that far back; Geni insists that Hannah Workman’s mother was Hannah Burgess of Massachusetts, and I have never found any evidence of this. So I don’t have to go all the way back to the Laird to prove that this is a no-go.

But never fear; Geni is undaunted. Maybe it should be. On my tree, I show Betsey Hunt (on the left in the second row) with a sister named “Catherine ‘Caty’ Jane Hunt,” but I have no primary source for this person, she was born six years after the “Jane (Hunt) Allison” that Geni gives me, and I can’t find anything to document that she married a man named Isaac Allison. So this connection is a loser as well.

Buckle up – this story encompasses a mass murderer, two Mormon polygamist families, a journey back to a parish church in 16th century England that I actually visited in 2022, a detour to the Caribbean, two signers of the Declaration of Independence, two families that settled in the Northwest Territory before any states were formed, and the only man in history to have been both the son and the father of a President of the United States.

Since I already wrote about my connection to Benjamin Harrison’s grandfather, President William Henry Harrison, on February 26 in this series, I thought I might have to find another person to write about this week. But that was not the case, for two reasons. One reason was that I couldn’t actually prove the suggested connections between me and William Henry Harrison a couple of months ago. The other was that I am connected to Benjamin Harrison through lines other than his historic Harrison family.

At first glance, this WikiTree connection looks familiar, as it takes me through my Workman family line to John Lee (#8). My regular readers may recognize this name; he and his wife Mary Workman (#7) also featured in my connections to President Washington and President Grant. It’s not hard to understand why John Lee keeps popping up. Here’s what Wikipedia says about John Doyle Lee:

Lee was born on September 6, 1812, in Kaskaskia, Illinois Territory, and joined the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints in 1838. He was a friend of Joseph Smith, founder of the church, and was the adopted son of Brigham Young under the early Latter Day Saint law of adoption doctrine. In 1839, Lee served as a missionary with his boyhood friend, Levi Stewart. Together they preached in Illinois, Ohio, Kentucky, and Tennessee. During this period Lee converted and baptized “Wild Bill” Hickman. Lee practiced plural marriage and had 19 wives (at least eleven of whom eventually left him) and 56 children.

Wikipedia adds a bit more about John Doyle Lee: Lee was later convicted as a mass murderer for his complicity in the Mountain Meadows massacre, sentenced to death and was executed in 1877. You can read more about the Mountain Meadows massacre in its Wikipedia entry.

One of the women he married was Mary Workman, my 1st cousin 6x removed. Her grandfather, Jacob Workman (1740-1821) was my 6th great-grandfather. Her father, John A. Workman, was among the people who converted to the Mormon faith in Overton County, Tennessee, in 1840. He and his wife, Lydia Bilyeu, soon moved to Nauvoo, Illinois, to join the Mormons who were moving there to join up with Brigham Young and Joseph Smith.

Once in Nauvoo, John Workman and his family quickly became involved in the affairs of the new community. John’s 17-year-old daughter, Mary (Polly), soon became John Lee’s seventh wife. She moved with him to Utah later that year, but returned to Illinois in 1847. She remarried and lived the rest of her life in a normal marriage, bearing a half-dozen children and dying in Iowa at the age of 75.

The connection between John Lee and President Benjamin Harrison relies on Louisa Free (#9), another of Lee’s wives. I was able to confirm this marriage pretty easily, along with the fact that Louisa had a sister named Emeline (#10). But then I ran into another LDS polygamy thicket; Emeline was the 21st wife of Brigham Young (he had something like 50 wives – the count is a little iffy). Brigham and 16 of his wives had a total of 56 children (I just noticed that this was the same number of children that John Lee had. Seems improbable, but I don’t need to check this out). Emeline had 10 of those children; she married him in 1844 when she was 18 years old, and unlike many of his wives, never left him to marry someone else. According to some accounts, she was his favorite wife, accompanying him to many social events and becoming extremely jealous when he married other, younger, women.

Her last child, Ardella Young, married Frank Harrison in Salt Lake City in 1855. A descendant of the historic Harrison family of Virginia and Indiana Frank was born in Indiana and became a physician; I don’t know how he came to be in Utah. It was a little complicated to figure out how he was connected to President Benjamin Harrison; the Harrisons had lots of children and named a lot of them John, William, and Benjamin. But after screwing up my Ancestry tree several times trying to document this connection, I deleted all of the Harrisons I had put in, got a good night’s sleep, and started over again, this time writing things out before I put them on my tree. With this method, I documented the link through the rest of the WikiTree connection. I can claim beyond a shadow of a doubt that President Benjamin Harrison is the 1st cousin 1x removed of the husband of the niece of the wife of the husband of my 1st cousin 5x removed. There ya go.

Here’s another way of looking at this connection:

You can see that this connection wanders around a bit. My 2nd great-grandfather James Workman (1827-1874) is the generational peer of six people in this connection – his 1st cousin Mary Workman (1829), Mary’s husband John Lee (1812), John’s wife Louisa (1824), Louisa’s sister Emeline Free (1826) and her son-in-law’s father John Harrison (1829), and John’s 1st cousin, President Benjamin Harrison (1833). Not to mention two LDS wreaths.

After the excitement [sic] of the WikiTree connection, I wondered if Geni could top it. A quick glance shows me that the answer is no – Geni previously suggested this connection when I explored my relationship with President William Henry Harrison, the grandfather of Benjamin Harrison. It fell apart then over the problem that Elizabeth Wyckoff (Workman) did not have a sister named Susannah. She still doesn’t, so this connection is no good.

Geni gives me a second possible connection, however, and it has potential. When I was working in Ancestry to verify the connection through WikiTree, I ran into the Symmes family. I recognized this surname from my own research, and I wondered if there was a connection. Geni suggests that there is.

I was initially concerned because this connection is through my Walton family in Virginia, and I have discovered that Geni often gets this connection wrong. However, I am pleased to report that Geni has it right this time. Simeon Walton (in the middle of the second line) was my 6th great-grandfather, and his mother was Mary (Sims) Walton. (I will never stop being aggrieved that Geni puts women’s married names in the tree rather than their birth names.)

So how well does it work from this point?

As it turns out, I know a fair amount about my Sims (Syms, Symms, Symmes, etc.) ancestors going back to England in the 17th century. The father of Mary Sims was indeed George Sims (as Geni suggests), and George’s father was named William Sims. This is where it gets a little more interesting; William was born in Winterbourne in Gloucestershire County, England – and my husband and I were able to visit his church when we were in England in September of 2022.

I am actually descended from two men who were significant figures of this church:

Nicholas Crandall (1530-1589), whose grandson, John Crandall (1617-1676) settled in colonial Rhode Island in 1643; in the 1660s, he was one of the founders of the town of Westerly, Rhode Island, while serving as a Baptist Minister.

Thomas Symes, father of William Symes, who is mentioned on the next plaque along with his wife Amy Bridges. Amy is mentioned first. If you look back at the first plaque, you’ll see (if you squint) the name Richard Bridges underneath Nicholas Crandall’s name. I think Amy is either a niece or cousin of Richard Bridges. So her family was prominent, and that’s why they got a plaque all their own. When I asked the St. Michael’s Church Warden why he thought there was a plaque dedicated to this family, his response was “Money may have been involved.” Fair enough.

The story gets even more interesting. (Hard to imagine, right?) Thomas and Amy Bridges Symes had 16 children – 12 boys and four girls. I’m descended from their 7th child, William Sims, whose path from Winterbourne to Virginia is crooked and unexpected. William and several of his siblings moved to the Caribbean island of Antiqua at some point, but I have not been able to figure out exactly when. It is not too surprising that they moved to Antiqua; the British colonies in the Caribbean were thriving in the 17th century and were not a bad place for the younger sons in a large family to earn their fortune. I don’t know how much actual fortune they earned, however; according to one source, the three brothers left Antigua and went to Virginia in the 1670s or 1680s. Richard soon returned home to England, but George and William settled in southern Virginia. George moved north from there, receiving a land grant in New Kent County. New Kent is about 20 miles from me.

But William in Virginia is not the end of this story. In fact, I need to go back a couple of generations in England to get to the Harrison connection. Thomas Symes father was named John Symmes, as Geni suggests, but now things get a little squishy. It appears that John had a brother named William, although I confess I have not examined every document that purports to prove this connection. I mean, we’re talking about the middle of the 16th century here. William seems to have a son named Zachariah, so that’s good. But I’m concerned – the information I have says he came to the colonies but settled in Massachusetts. How did he get linked up with the Harrison family of Virginia?

As I worked my way through this connection, I realized that although “my” branch of the Symmes [sic] family came to Virginia, the Symmes in the Harrison line came into Massachusetts. So where did these lines come together? A little research showed that the 2nd great-granddaughter of the Boston Symmes immigrant William was named Anna Livingston, daughter of William Livingston of New Jersey. If that name sounds familiar, that’s because he was one of the signers of the Declaration of Independence in 1776 – as was President Benjamin Harrison’s grandfather, Benjamin Harrison V.

I don’t think these lines met in Virginia. I think they met in Philadelphia; William Henry Harrison (the son of one signer, from Virginia) married Anna Symmes (the granddaughter of another signer, William Livingston) in 1795, after both families had moved to the developing Northwest Territory. William Henry Harrison went from being a member of the First Families of Virginia to being a founder of Indiana Territory. Anna left her East Coast roots when her parents moved to North Bend Ohio (later Cleveland) in 1789. Her father’s tombstone inscription reads: Here rest the remains of John Cleves Symmes, who at the foot of these hills, made the first settlement between the Miami Rivers.”

This line checks out. President Benjamin Harrison is my 8th cousin five times removed. This means that my 3rd great-grandfather Joshua Botts (1813-1863) was the generational peer of President Benjamin Harrison (1833-1901). They had a common 9th great-grandfather, William Symmes (1544-1597) of Winterbourne, Gloucestershire, England.

Before I leave this entirely, I want to comment on why I found the Indiana connection particularly interesting this week. In another genealogy research project I’m working on, I’ve been diving into the history of one of my more difficult lines. The surname is Anthis (spelled a bunch of different ways) and the time is right after the American Revolution. The ancestor I’m researching – my 3th great-grandfather John Anthis, Jr. – is an elusive character. He was born in 1793, but the location has been difficult to pin down. In the 1850 census, he said he was born in New Jersey. In the 1860 census, he said he was born in Virginia. And in the 1870 census, he gave his birthplace as Maryland. He died before the 1880 census, but I bet he would have claimed a different birth state in that census. I think he may have been born in Pennsylvania, but I can’t find evidence that he was born in any of these locations – the surname doesn’t seem to exist.

But where do I pick up his story? You guessed it – he was an early settler of Vincennes, Indiana, not far from Indianapolis where the Harrison family gained in the 19th century. I’m learning a whole lot about Indiana this week.

Once again WikiTree takes me back into my Pease family in Martha’s Vineyard. I’ve written about them as I explored my connection to four Presidents earlier in this series: (Van Buren, Fillmore, Grant, and Arthur), so I’m pretty familiar with them by now. I’m familiar with these names back to Martha Marchant (#7), who was my paternal 5th great-grandfather. Her brother John (#8) was already on my tree as well, and it didn’t take long to find that he had married Miriam Cleveland (#9). I did discover, however, that I have some incorrect information about John Marchant’s family; it doesn’t matter for this essay, because it doesn’t mess up his marriage to Miriam Cleveland. I’ll need to come back and clean that up for make sure my direct line is correct.

It didn’t take me long to connect the long line of Clevelands to President Grover Cleveland.

But before we go on, I want to tell you a little about Cleveland’s private life. He did not marry until he was in the White House; in 1886, at the age of 49, he married the 21-year-old Frances Folsom. He is the only president who was married in the White House while he was president. They had five children and were apparently happy. However, he had claimed paternity of a child born in Buffalo in 1874 to a woman named Maria Halpin.

This Geni connection is not worth pursuing, as I already see an error in the second line. I talked about this in my essay on President Rutherford B. Hayes a few weeks ago, so I won’t go into it in detail here. Suffice it to say that Hannah Workman (born Hannah Burgess) on the second line is incorrectly linked to a Burgess family in Massachusetts. It’s always possible, but I’ve never seen any evidence that connects her to this family. Without this connection, the link disappears.

This Geni connection doesn’t fall apart immediately, so I began to look into it more carefully. I recognize this line back through Jefferson Hunt (on the second line), as I wrote about this family in my essays on Millard Fillmore, James Buchanan, and Abraham Lincoln, all of whom connect to me through this line.

Jefferson Hunt (my fourth great-uncle) had a son named Marshall, whose daughter Charlotte married Edwin Dustin. They had a son named Burton, who married Sarah Eliza Burnham. Sarah’s father was George Franklin Burnham, and the line continues through Mary Ann Huntley (Burnham), Sally Huntley (Hitchcock), and Gaius Hitchcock. By this time, we are back in colonial New England; Gaius was born in Massachusetts in 1864 and died in Vermont in 1843.

Before I continue to explore this connection, I want to mention that the birth name of Gaius’s wife was Ruth Stebbins. I recognized the Stebbins name from my family tree back into colonial Massachusetts, so I checked this out a bit. Ruth Stebbins was the 3rd great-granddaughter of Rowland Stebbins, my 11th great-grandfather. That makes Ruth my 4th cousin 8x removed or something along those line. This provides another connection to Grover Cleveland, one that may be more direct without going through the Hunt family at all. I am a direct descendant of Rowland Stebbins through my Arnold family line; as we’ll see, Grover Cleveland descends directly from Rowland Stebbins as well. Gaius had a sister named Margaret, who married William Cleveland. I traced this line while I was analyzing the WikiTree connection. From there, the line is clear through Margaret Cleveland’s daughter (also named) Margaret, her son Richard Cleveland, and his son Stephen Grover Cleveland.

So this connection checks out in two different ways. Always fun!

Up to now in this series of essays, I have found myself retracing old ground – my Cody family in the northern states and my Botts/Walton/Gaines family in the South. This week I find myself examining a family I haven’t done much with – the ancestors of my great-grandmother May Wilson (1875-1950). I realized a year or so ago that I probably met her when I was about a year old. We (my mother, brother, and I) had made a trip back to Tucson to visit extended family in 1948, and I have pictures from that visit that include me and my paternal grandparents, John and Orpha Arnold. Other pictures from the same event (a picnic on Mt. Lemmon outside of Tucson) show my grandmother (wearing the same dress) with her mother, May Wilson, who was apparently visiting at the same time. I don’t have a picture of May holding the infant me, but I imagine that it happened.

I would have liked to trace the Wilson family back a few more generations – I pick them up in Augusta County, Virginia, in the 18th century, but I’m shaky on where they were before that. I think it was Maryland, but the Wilson name is hard to trace, and one of the other ancestral lines is based on the Stuart (Stewart?) line, which is also hard to trace in this part of Virginia settled bperiodical source indexy so many people from Scotland.

However, this connection links through May’s younger sister, Lulu (#4). I was quickly able to verify that Lulu married a man named John Sullivan (#5) and that his mother was named Alice McCumber (#6). A bit more sleuthing revealed that Alice had a sister named Mary (#7), who married a man named Pardon Hobart (#8).

At this point I got lucky – I happened upon some pretty solid genealogy work on the Hobart family, which helped me over the next couple of connections.

Pardon’s father was Jonas Hobart (#9), and Jonas’s mother was Keziah Chase (#10). Keziah’s mother was Mary Hadley(#11), and Mary’s father was Parrott Hadley (#12). Parrott had a brother named Samuel (#13) and Samuel had a daughter named Hepzibah (#14). I was a little confused for a bit here, because there were several men named Samuel Stone (Sr., Jr., and III) and I had a bit of a tussle figuring them out. But once I got them straight, I was back on track. Hepzibah married Uriah Stone (#15) and they had a son named George Washington Stone (#16). He was born in 1777, so I understand why they named him for George Washington.

George Stone married Judith Stevens, and they had several children, including a daughter named Malvina (#17), who married William Arthur in 1821 in Quebec (interestingly enough). Their son was Chester Alan Arthur (#18), who assumed the presidency in 1881 after the assassination of James A. Garfield.

I want to tell a couple of stories I found while doing this research.

President Arthur had two ancestors who served in the American Revolution.

Keziah Chase’s father, Joshua Chase, served in the New Hampshire militia during the American Revolution. (He was President Arthur’s 1st cousin 3x removed, if I’m counting correctly). Twenty years earlier, he had served in the militia in the Crown Point Expedition that was part of the French and Indian War. He was at Bunker Hill in 1775, and served later in the Continental Army in 1779.

Uriah Stone, Sr., President Arthur’s great-grandfather, also served New Hampshire in the Revolution.

Historically, there was some controversy over whether Arthur was actually born in the United States. His father, William Arthur, was an Irish immigrant who came to Canada as a young man. In 1821, he married Malvina Stone in Canada, which is where their first three children were born. By the time Chester came along, his family was living in Fairfield, Vermont (about 30 miles south of the Canadian border). This was a made-up story by Arthur’s political enemies and has no basis in fact.

A couple more things about President Arthur’s father, William, who became a Baptist preacher in 1828 and pastored 11 churches in Vermont and New York in the following years. He was also a co-founder of the New York Antislavery Society.

Geni provides me with a different connection, as I have come to expect. This connection takes me through my Arnold/Pease/Meservey line into colonial Massachusetts and Maine, a line that I’m pretty familiar with. I am familiar enough with this line, however, to note where I think there is probably a problem. At the end of the second line, the name John Martin jumped out at me. Here’s why.

This connection is accurate back to Rebecca (Martin) Meservey. Her father was John Martin, but I think this is the wrong John Martin. I explored this connection a few years ago, after I had found that I’m descended from Margaret Stephenson Scott, one of the women hanged for witchcraft in Salem, Massachusetts, in 1692. As I was researching the descendants of these unfortunate souls, I found what I thought was a connection to Susannah North Martin, who was hanged in July of 1692. But try as I might, I could not prove that Rebecca’s father John Martin was descended directly from Rebeccas North Martin and her husband George Martin. There is a lineage society (imagine that!) that documents the accepted lineage from each of the individuals involved in this dark time in American history (both the victims and the perpetrators), and they do not recognize this connection.

I couldn’t prove my connection to this branch of the Martin family then, and I don’t plan to spend the time and energy on investigating it again.

I decided to spend a few more minutes to determine whether President Arthur is descended from Susannah North Martin – and this line checks out. Jane (Martin) Hadley (on the second row from the bottom) was the 9th children of Susannah and her husband George Martin, which makes her the 5th great-grandmother of President Chester A. Arthur. So even though this connection didn’t prove out, I was able to determine that our my 8th great-grandmother Margaret was hanging out with his 5th great-grandmother Susannah.

I’ll show myself out.

WikiTree shows me this connection to President Garfield. At first glance it looks okay, running through my Cody family (again! – see my essays on John Adams and Franklin Pierce, both of whom also run through this line). My 4th great-grandfather Daniel Cody (#6) had a sister named Rhoda (#8), who married #8 Jonathan Reed. Jonathan’s father, Charles Reed (#9) married Keturah Spencer in Dutchess County, New York, in 1762; however, they lived as a family in Massachusetts, the home of the Reed family. Charles was a private in the Continental Army during the American Revolution. After his death in 1785, Keturah remarried and moved to Onondaga County, New York, where Mary Parmenter Cody (the mother of Daniel and Rhoda) had also moved in the late 1780s.

Charles Reed’s brother, Thomas Reed (# 10), died in Cambridge, Massachusetts, in 1776. At first I thought that this might be connected to the Revolution, but I noted that Thomas was in his 60’s when he died, probably too old to serve; at any rate, I found no evidence that he had served.

Thomas married Lydia Parker and they had a daughter named Kezia (#11) – probably named after Thomas’s sister, Kezia Reed. Kezia married Caleb Parker (#12) in Woburn, Massachusetts, in 1762. You’ll note that Kezia’s mother was a Parker and Kezia married a Parker. This confused me at first, as I kept getting my Kezias and my Parkers confused. I took a brief detour into the history of Lydia Parker and Caleb Parker, and didn’t immediately find a connection. If they are related, it’s more than four generations back and in England.

You’ll note that #13, Hannah Garfield, is also identified as the wife of Caleb Parker. Kezia, Caleb’s first wife, died in April of 1776 at the age of 30; Caleb remarried in December of that year. Hannah’s brother, Solomon, saw action at Lexington and Concord and was later in Boston, although I can’t determine where he was exactly.

According to Find-a-Grave, following the war Solomon and his wife Sarah moved their family from Massachusetts to Oswego County, New York. Their son Thomas (#15) married Asenath Hill and had three children with her, including Abram (#16). Abram married Eliza Ballou in Ohio in 1820, and their fourth child, James Abraham Garfield (#17) was born there in 1831.

This is a common migration pattern – New England to western New York (probably drawn by Revolutionary War veteran land grants) to Ohio (after about 1815, when steamboats began to provide ready transportation to the Midwest via the Great Lakes). Several of my ancestral lines made a trip like this.

This is rock-solid. President James A. Garfield is definitely the great-grandnephew of the wife of the husband of the paternal 1st cousin of the husband of my 4th great-grandaunt. It proves out beautifully and there weren’t any “and then the magic happened” moments in this path.

Geni shows me a different path. This one also goes through my paternal line, but through my grandfather rather than my grandmother. My great-grandmother, Angelina Wilcox (Arnold) is descended from the Wilcox line I already discussed in my essays about Franklin Pierce and Rutherford B. Hayes.

This line is solid through Elizabeth Baker (Wilcox), my 5th great-grandmother (in the middle of the second row). Elizabeth was John Baker (son of Thomas and Mary), who lived in Exeter, Rhode Island. My Wilcox family lived in Rhode Island for several generations, so this makes sense.

I had a hard time with John Baker’s sister, Sarah. Sarah was supposedly born in 1703, and my information shows one sister (Suzanna) who was born that year, but I had no further information about her. So I decided to plug Sarah’s name into Ancestry as an additional sister for John to see what panned out.

In case you’re wondering, “making stuff up to see what happens” is a perfectly legitimate research strategy. In technical terms, it’s called “formulating and testing a hypothesis,” which sounds much better tbh.

I began to tease out some potentially useful information. I found several family trees that included “Sarah” among the children of Thomas Baker, but these appeared to be the result of convenience and wishful thinking rather than documents. But one of the hints I got showed me a screenshot of a handwritten birth record (unfortunately, the source was not identified, although I could probably find it if I needed it for a lineage society application. I don’t need it for a random Monday blog post.)

This record shows that a girl named Sarah was born to Thomas and Sarah Baker in February of 1703. But Thomas’s wife was named Mary. What gives? So I went back to Thomas’s profile and did a bit more digging around. There is some evidence that he was married three times, and that he married his third wife, named (drumroll please) Sarah, in 1702 – just in time for them to have a daughter (whom they named Sarah) the following year. Is this proof? No. But it strongly suggests an avenue for further research, which I would do if I really cared about proving this to any degree of certainty.

As I continued to search for evidence that this might be a valid connection, I decided to continue to make things up — formulate hypotheses — to see what would happen. So I added “Peter West” as the husband of the ephemeral Sarah Baker, and began to poke around, using the individuals provided on the Geni tree. After a couple of entries, I encountered Peter’s grandmother, Susannah Soule – a name that is readily recognized by anyone doing research on the passengers on the Mayflower. Sure enough, Susannah Soule was the daughter of George Soule of Mayflower fame. Now I was getting somewhere. All genealogists know that some family connections are more sought-after than others, and the Mayflower is the pot of gold. These lines are heavily documented and sourced. Could this help me out?

The Mayflower-supported information showed me that Susannah was married to Francis West and that they had a son also named Francis West, Jr. So far, so good. The “Silver Books” (which are ironically the gold standard for documenting the Mayflower passengers) show that Francis Sr. and Susannah had another son, John, which tracks with the Geni information. Again according to Geni, John West married Mehitable Bullock, and they had a daughter named Elizabeth.

I encountered a several-generation dry path as I attempted to figure out if this connection was valid. I just kept putting in placeholder information — testing hypotheses — to see what I could dig up.

After more effort than it was probably worth, I concluded that one link in this connection – Mehitable Ingalls (Ballou) – presented an obstacle I couldn’t overcome. I could link “Mehitable Ballou” to James A. Garfield, but I could not link her to the Ingalls line, and so I lost the connection to my Wilcox line. So although this was fun to experiment with, it essentially ended in failure.