South Pacific

Music by Richard Rodgers, and lyrics by Oscar Hammerstein II

Directed by Michael Lichtefeld

Starring Theodore Baerg,

Cynthia Dale, Laird Mackintosh

At the Stratford Festival

Rating: ***

Somewhere between a romantic Polynesian holiday brochure and a racist, exploitative piece of exotica lies the fascinating South Pacific. Many theatre insiders have long given up on reviving South Pacific in the mistaken belief (and fear) that its story is no longer in tune with our progressive-looking attitudes toward different races and cultures. The show has not received a major revival on Broadway since it closed in January of 1954 after 1,925 performances, nine Tonys and a Pulitzer Prize for drama.

The same folks have obviously not been catching up on the American military's record of abuse and misbehaviour in Iraq in the last three years, to name but one example. The picture of racial degradation and xenophobia that the musical draws is as much a part of that country's military operations now as in the 1940s. The musical hasn't dated; on the contrary, it's only become more topical.

While choreographer-director Michael Lichtefeld's production doesn't delve too deeply into this ugly side of the story, it doesn't shy away from it either. There's some contemporary if muted resonance. Like Oliver!, the other musical in the festival this year, this is a highly romanticized look at troubled times. The "oh, what a beautiful war!" ironic stance occasionally takes too literal a turn -- the men have spent more time working on their six-pack abs and less on combat skills and the girls have washed more than just men out of their fabulous hairdos. Unlike Oliver!, however, South Pacific is expertly, exuberantly staged and has every right to indulge in a luscious, romantic point of view.

This is a musical whose most enduring song is Some Enchanted Evening and where "proud protestations of faith in romance" is more than a passing lyric. Richard Rodgers's score and Oscar Hammerstein II's lyrics make nods to racism ( You've Got to Be Carefully Taught) and exoticism ( Bali Ha'i), but the show's true rhythm is to be found in the romanticism of I'm in Love with a Wonderful Guy, Younger than Springtime and the aforementioned Some Enchanted Evening.

This may suggest a fragmented score, but the book (by Hammerstein and the show's original director, Joshua Logan) integrates romance and race to create its emotional ruptures. Against the backdrop of the American navy's presence in the South Pacific, nurse Nellie Forbush (Cynthia Dale) breaks off her relationship with French plantation owner Emile de Becque (Theodore Baerg) when she discovers that he has two children from an old relationship with a native woman. Racial prejudice also leads another character, Lieutenant Joseph Cable (Laird Mackintosh), to run away from his feelings towards Liat, the young woman "offered" to him by her mother, local trader Bloody Mary (Grace Chan). The two love stories overlap when de Becque and Lt. Cable go on a dangerous underground mission -- one of the few instances in the book in which war actually gets in the way of romance on this love-soaked island.

In an ideal world, South Pacific would be directed by someone who could stage its dramatic scenes to better effect and probe deeper into the mixture of attraction and revulsion in its two relationships -- not to mention the pedophilic hints of the Cable-Liat romance. This is not Lichtefeld's strength nor, it seems, his priority. Thanks to Douglas Paraschuk's robust set designs, unified and toned down by sliding bamboo frames, and David Boechler's vibrant costume colours, this South Pacific justifies its revival on the strength of its re-imagining of Polynesian culture as collective escapism -- for us as much as for the American navy.

This is also a musical with a rich score, sumptuously orchestrated by Berthold Carrière and lovingly sung by the cast. While, as an actor, Baerg is so wooden he could inflict grievous bodily harm if he fell on the wrong person, his operatic singing is glorious. Dale may try too hard to play the cockeyed optimism of Nellie, but you can count on her to deliver the romanticism of her songs with a touching beauty and clarity. Mackintosh continues his rise as the go-to musical-theatre leading man in Stratford while Bruce Dow, as the irrepressible Luther Billis, brings perfect comic relief with an added and welcome edge.

As a choreographer, Lichtefeld has a good ear for music. The fact that South Pacific is sung and danced better than it's acted suggests that, all talk of missed cultural opportunities notwithstanding, he's tilted the show on the right side of the musical-theatre equation. Grand as the scale of the production is, it's also a small pleasure. I don't know how that works, but it does. It's not the most satisfying critical approach, I know, but the words of Hammerstein are still ringing in my ears and I leave you with them: "Fools give you reasons. Wise men never try."

South Pacific continues at the Avon Theatre in Stratford, Ont., until October 28 (1-800-567-1600).