Sea cucumbers (Holothuroidea) are a morphologically diverse, ecologically important, and economically valued clade of echinoderms; however, the understanding of the overall systematics of the group remains controversial. Here, we present a phylogeny of extant Holothuroidea assessed with maximum parsimony, maximum likelihood, and Bayesian approaches using approximately 4.3 kb of mt- (COI, 16S, 12S) and nDNA (H3, 18S, 28S) sequences from 82 holothuroid terminals representing 23 of the 27 widely-accepted family-ranked taxa. Currently five holothuroid taxa of ordinal rank are accepted. We find that three of the five orders are non-monophyletic, and we revise the taxonomy of the groups accordingly. Apodida is sister to the rest of Holothuroidea, here considered Actinopoda. Within Actinopoda, Elasipodida in part is sister to the remaining Actinopoda. This latter clade, comprising holothuroids with respiratory trees, is now called Pneumonophora. The traditional Aspidochirotida is paraphyle...

Knowledge of phylogenetic relationships among species is fundamental to understanding basic patterns in evolution and underpins nearly all research programs in biology and paleontology. However, most methods of phylogenetic inference typically used by paleontologists do not accommodate the idiosyncrasies of fossil data and therefore do not take full advantage of the information provided by the fossil record. The advent of Bayesian “tip-dating” approaches to phylogeny estimation is especially promising for paleo-systematists because time-stamped comparative data can be combined with probabilistic models tailored to accommodate the study of fossil taxa. Under a Bayesian framework, the recently developed fossilized birth‒death process (FBD) provides a more realistic tree prior model for paleontological data that accounts for macroevolutionary dynamics, preservation, and sampling when inferring phylogenetic trees containing fossils. In addition, FBD tree prior also allows for the possibility of sampling ancestral morphotaxa. Although paleontologists are increasingly embracing probabilistic phylogenetic methods, these recent developments have not previously been applied to the deep-time invertebrate fossil record. Here, I examine phylogenetic relationships among Ordovician through Devonian crinoids using a Bayesian tip-dating approach. Results support several clades recognized in previous analyses sampling only Ordovician taxa, but also reveal instances where phylogenetic affinities are more complex and extensive revisions are necessary, particularly among the Cladida. The name Porocrinoidea is proposed for a well-supported clade of Ordovician ‘cyathocrine’ cladids and hybocrinids. The Eucladida is proposed as a clade name for the sister group of the Flexibilia herein comprised of cladids variously considered ‘cyathocrines’, ‘dendrocrines’, and/or ‘poteriocrines’ by other authors.

Echinoderms are a major group of invertebrate deuterostomes that have been an important component of marine ecosystems throughout the Phanerozoic. Their fossil record extends back to the Cambrian, when several disparate groups appear in different palaeocontinents at about the same time. Many of these early forms exhibit character combinations that differ radically from extant taxa, and thus their anatomy and phylogeny have long been controversial. Deciphering the earliest evolution of echinoderms therefore requires a detailed understanding of the morphology of Cambrian fossils, as well as the selection of an appropriate root and the identification of homologies for use in phylogenetic analysis. Based on the sister-group relationships and ontogeny of modern species and new fossil discoveries, we now know that the first echinoderms were bilaterally symmetrical, represented in the fossil record by Ctenoimbricata and some early ctenocystoids. The next branch in echinoderm phylogeny is represented by the asymmetrical cinctans and solutes, with an echinoderm-type ambulacral system originating in the more crownward of these groups (solutes). The first radial echinoderms are the helicoplacoids, which possess a triradial body plan with three ambulacra radiating from a lateral mouth. Helicocystoids represent the first pentaradial echinoderms and have the mouth facing upwards with five radiating recumbent ambulacra. Pentaradial echinoderms diversified rapidly from the beginning of their history, and the most significant differences between groups are recorded in the construction of the oral area and ambulacra, as well as the nature of their feeding appendages. Taken together, this provides a clear narrative of the early evolution of the echinoderm body plan.