1. Phylum Echinodermata Ex. Sea stars, sea cucumbers, feather stars, sea urchins, sand dollars

2. Phylum Echinodermata 4 main classes: Class Asteroidea Class Ophiuroidea Class Echinoidea Class Holothuroidea

3. Echinoderms: • Name means “spiny skin” • Sea stars, sea cucumbers, sea urchins, etc. • All marine • All found on the bottom of the sea

4. Characteristics Phylum Echinodermata: • Body type: pentamerous radial (body radially symmetrical in 5 parts or multiples of 5) • Body organization: 3 layers: endoderm, mesoderm, ectoderm • Body cavity: coelom • Ecological roles: – Food source – Predator – control populations – Recycle nutrients – Chemicals-anticancer, antiviral

5. Characteristic continued: • Digestive system: – Complete – mouth & anus • Reproduction: – Sexual: - dioecious – Asexual: regeneration – if lost an arm or guts

6. Characteristics continued: • Circulation: closed • Nervous system: – nerve cords – No brain – Tube feet sensory • Respiration: tube feet & skin gills - diffusion • Excretion: diffusion, tube feet • Habitat: water - ocean

7. Endoskeleton: • Internal skeleton found within the tissues • It is always covered by a thin layer of tissue • Spines and bumps give reference to their name which means “spiny-skinned”

8. Dermal Branchiae • Soft bumps on the body that absorb oxygen from the water

9. Water Vascular System: • Has a water vascular system for movement, & structure (internal skeleton = endoskeleton)

10. Water vascular system  network of canals which sea water circulates through = hydrostatic skeleton unique to Echinoderms

11. WATER VASCULAR SYSTEM OF A SEA STAR:  Madreporite/ sieve plate: water enters vascular system  Ring canal: surrounds mouth & leads to radial canals  Radial canals: 5 of them – one down each arm  Ampulla: muscular sac that controls tube feet by forcing water into it.  Tube feet: create suction to adhere to substrate  Movement, feeding ,excretion, respiration, sensory organ

12. Digestive System: • Sea urchins have a longer coiled intestine to allow time for the digestion of plant material • Sea cucumbers have a similar section to absorb nutrients from the sediment it ingests

13. Digestive System: • Sea and brittle stars can evert a portion of their stomach out of there mouth to engulf food • Digestive enzymes located in glands that extend into the arms

14. Regeneration/Autonomy: • The ability to grow lost or damaged body parts • Some times a severed arm can grow into a new organism if 1/5 of the central disc is present

15. Nervous System: • Limited knowledge on this aspect except for the presence of a nerve net • Ocelli – microscopic pigment spots on sea stars that can detect light and dark

18. Class Asteroidea • Includes: sea stars or starfish • Most have 5 arms from a central disk, though can have up to 50 • Each arm carries an equal share of organ systems

19. Class Asteroidea • Ambulacral grooves contain the tube feet on the arms

20. Class Asteroidea • Pedicellariae • Tiny pincer-like organs on the aboral side keep the surface clean • Most sea stars are predators of bivalves, snails, or other attached or slow moving animals

21. Class Ophiuroidea • Includes: Brittle Stars • Legs proportionally longer and thinner than sea starts • Allows for better movement • Organs in central disc • Tube feet lack suckers

22. Class Ophiuroidea • Eat organic matter and small animals they find on the bottom • Passed from tube foot to tube foot till it reaches the mouth

23. Class Echinoidea • Includes: Sea Urchins & Sand Dollars • Body structure forms a round, rigid body with movable spins and pedicellarie • Locomotion achieved by movable spines

24. Class Echinoidea • Body plan of sea stars repeated by moving arms upward and connecting them at the tips • Mouth is on the bottom, anus on the top • Spines: sharp, hollow and sometime contain venom

25. Plates: • 10 plates • Alternating abulacral (have openings for tube feet) and interambulacral (bumps for spines)

26. Class Echinoidea • The mouth has an intricate system of jaws and muscles called Aristotle’s Latern • Used to bite off algae and other bits of food from the bottom

27. Class Echinoidea • Heart Urchins and Sand Dollars are adapted for the soft bottom of the ocean • Flat bodies and short spines

34. Class Holothuroidea • Sea Cucumbers • Similar body plan to a sea urchin, just stretched out from mouth to anus • Lies on sides, oral and aboral surfaces are at the ends

36. Sea cucumber