1. Phylum Echinodermata Name: Score: Course/Year/Section: Prof: Kingdom: Animalia Phylum: Echinodermata Class: Asteroidea Order: Valvatida Family: Oreasteridae Genus: Protoreaster Species: linckii Scientific Name: Protoreaster linckii Common Name: Red-knobbed Description:  It has a temperature range of 75 to 83°F (24 - 28°C). Grows to about 12 inches (30 cm) in the wild and not suited for the reef aquarium as it consumes algae, anemones, gorgonians, soft corals, sponges, clams, urchins, tube worms, and even sleeping fish.  It has a thick, gray body with multiple bright red tubercles extending upward along each of its five arms. Red stripes connect these protrusions, giving its back the appearance of wires interconnecting in a grid-like fashion.  The Red-knobbed Starfish requires a large aquarium with ample supplies of live rock. A small specimen will eat algae. As it grows older, however, it is not reef compatible, as it will eat soft corals, sponges, tubeworms, clams, starfish, and other invertebrates. It should not be housed with Puffers. It is very sensitive to high levels of copper-based medications and will not tolerate high levels of nitrates.

2. Kingdom: Animalia Phylum: Echinodermata Class: Asteriodea Order: Valvatida Family: Oreasteridae Genus: Protoreaster Species: nodusus Scientific Name: Protoreaster nodosus Common Name: Horned Sea Star Description:  Large sea star, with five conical, short, thick arms. They feed on mollusks, worms, detritus and sponges. Length - 30cm; Depth - 5-40m  Sea Stars have remarkable regenerative powers, when attacked and damaged by predators they are able to grow new arms. They usually have five arms but have been found with 4 or 6 arms, this may be because more than one arm has been damaged at one time. Sometimes small parasitic limpets can be found on the underside of arms which can deform the arms.They possess a cleverly evolved arsenal of hydraulic tube feet connected to an elaborate water-vascular system that encircles the animal's mouth and extends via five radial canals down the center of each arm.Their mouth is underneath, but their prey is absorbed outside their mouths by forcing out their digestive organs from their stomach.Sea Stars are carnivores and feed on almost any food including mollusks, worms, detritus and each other. Some sea stars like the crown of thorns can be venomous.

3. Kingdom: Animalia Phylum: Echinodermata Class: Asteriodea Order: Paxillosida Family: Astropectinida Genus: Astropecten Species: polycanthus Scientific Name: Astropecten polycanthus Common Names: Sand shifting sea star Description:  The Sand Sifting Sea Star, at first glance, seems to be drably colored like most bottom dwellers. But closer inspection reveals a striking beauty and serenity to the alternating bands of brown and beige that dress this invertebrate's thick, spine-covered arms. Like other starfish, Astropecten polycanthus efficiently consumes mass amounts of detritus and uneaten foods. This nocturnally active member of the Astropectinidae family can move large amounts of sand as it burrows into the substrate in its search for food.  This peaceful omnivore will effectively clean even the largest home aquarium of detritus and left over food. Like other starfish, the Sand Sifting Sea Star will also consume small invertebrates, including shrimp, urchins, mollusks, bivalves, or other small sea stars. As such, the Sand Sifting Sea Star should be actively fed a varied diet consisting of natural food sources, especially in well- established marine aquariums. Otherwise, this voracious feeder will quickly clean your aquarium of detritus and then burrow into your substrate, starve, and eventually begin to decay.  To foster its feeding habits, the Sand Sifting Sea Star should be kept in aquariums with large, deep sand bottoms of several inches in depth. Since it is slower moving than most fish, the Sand Sifting Sea Star should not be housed with natural predators, including Puffers.

4. Kingdom: Animalia Phylum: Echinodermata Class: Ophiuroidea Order: Ophiurida Family: Ophiotrichidae Genus: Ophiocoma Species: Echinata Scientific Name: Ophiocoma echinata Common Names: Black brittle star Description:  Brittle stars or ophiuroids are echinoderms in the class Ophiuroidea closely related tostarfish. They crawl across the seafloor using their flexible arms for locomotion. The ophiuroids generally have five long slender, whip-like arms which may reach up to 60 centimetres (24 in) in length on the largest specimens. They are also known as serpent stars.  Ophiuroidea contains two large clades, Ophiurida (brittle stars) and Euryalida (basket stars). Many of the ophiuroids are rarely encountered in the relatively shallow depths normally visited by humans, but they are a diverse group. There are over 2,000 species of brittle stars living today. More than 1200 of these species are found in deep waters, greater than 200 metres deep.

5. Kingdom: Animalia Phylum: Echinodermata Class: Asteroidea Order: Valvatida Family: Ophidiasteridae Genus: Linckia Species: Guildingi Scientific Name: Linckia guildingi Common Name: Yellow sea star Description:  L. guildingi has a small disc and usually 5 (occasionally 4 or 6) long cylindrical arms. The upper surface appears smooth but is in fact rough to the touch with low, firm nodules. Though this starfish is often green, it comes in a range of colours including various shades of brown, blue and dull red. Kingdom: Animalia Phylum: Echinodermata Class: Echinodea Order: Echinoida Family: Strongylocentrotidae Genus: Strongylocentrotus Species: purpuratus Scientific Name:Echinoidea Common Names: Sea urchins Description:  Sea urchins or urchins, sometimes called sea hedgehogs, are small, spiny, globular animals which, with their close kin, such assand dollars, constitute the class Echinoidea of the echinoderm phylum. There are c. 950 species of echinoids inhabiting all oceans from the intertidal to 5000 meters deep.Their shell, or "test", is round and spiny, typically from 3 to 10 cm (1.2 to 3.9 in) across. Common colors include black and dull shades of green, olive, brown, purple, blue, and red. They move slowly, feeding mostly on algae. Sea otters, wolf eels, triggerfish, and other predators feed on them.