To some, she's the whole package: actor, animal rights advocate, pin-up girl. Pamela Anderson, B.C.-born and raised, is coming home to guest-star in a new TV series, Package Deal. Shooting its first season in Metro Vancouver, the original CITY-TV series, produced by Thunderbird Films, follows the escapades of three overly close brothers and the woman who comes between them (Julia Voth) when she falls in love with the youngest, Danny (Randal Edwards), a successful lawyer.

Ms. Anderson will play the part of a counselor to one of the brothers, Ryan (Jay Malone), a neurotic guy who's recently been dumped by his wife. Ms. Anderson will appear in three episodes, as the "off-beat therapist whose up-close-and-personal approach creates some unexpected results," according to a news release issued by CITY-TV on Tuesday. Her episodes will be shot here later this month.

Ms. Anderson, 45, was born in Ladysmith, B.C., and, after moving to Vancouver, was famously discovered at a B.C. Lions game when her image was flashed on the BC Place stadium screen. She became a Playboy playmate and then rose to mainstream fame on the 1990s TV series Baywatch. More recently, she's become a reality TV staple, with appearances on the Big Brother franchise, Dancing with the Stars and her own short-lived reality series, Pam: Girl on the Loose.

A vegetarian and animal rights activist, she is an outspoken member of PETA and has earned headlines with her protests against fur and KFC.

"Pamela's iconic star status and vibrant personality is an ideal addition to our cast," said Claire Freeland, director of original programming, Rogers Media, in the news release announcing Ms. Anderson's guest spot.

"Pamela Anderson has a great comic flair and is a perfect fit for the brilliant ensemble cast of Package Deal," added Thunderbird Films president Michael Shepard.

Package Deal, created by Emmy-nominated producer Andrew Orenstein (Malcolm in the Middle, 3rd Rock from the Sun) will air next year, likely in late winter or early spring.