This movie projects so much British nationalism into Ancient Rome it might as well be called Churchill and Cleopatra. Not only does Shaw's dialogue feel like poor Shakespeare emulation, but he even put an ancient British denizen, a druid with a Victorian attitude, in the story and made him nearly as sophisticated as Julius Caesar, himself ludicrously modern in his value system.

I'm not knocking the film for being inaccurate, historical films always are. However the changes here all feel like propaganda in nature, and never in service of a good story. The Romans, as English historical stand ins, are portrayed as the unquestionably superior culture. Julius Caesar and his advisors are constantly bemused or shocked at Egypt's quaint ways.…

The story about the making of CAESAR AND CLEOPATRA is more intriguing than the film itself. The runaway budget at the hands of an almost neophyte Director with an irrepressible Vision, a playwright (and also Screenwriter) of legendary proportions, the "inconvenience" of the Second World War forcing delays in filming (reportedly spiraling to nine months) and changes in location, the lavish salary given to Claude Rains, and ... tragically ... a miscarriage that would lead Vivien Leigh to a "very dark place" and hasten the end of her career.

Although the public was fascinated by it at the time, many Viewers today need no more than 20-minutes to figure out that the show just isn't going to work for them.…

Caesar and Cleopatra is beautiful but dull. The costumes are a marvel - such intricacy in fashion and design. There is a retentive attention to detail - the sand reportedly imported from Egypt to ensure correct tone and texture. This was the most expensive film made in England at the time. All this pomp whilst the world was at war. But the narrative is stage-bound. Despite the lofty themes of global power and Empire it somehow feels small and insular. The actors' outfits should not be the most interesting thing about the film.

This is surprising – as Gabriel Pascal’s previous rendition of Shaw’s Major Barbara is a wonderful film - a true British classic. But here the pacing is…