CategoriesObject typeTitleCaesar and Cleopatra (generic title)Materials and techniques

Charcoal, pencil, ink, wash, paint, gouache and watercolour on paper

Brief description

Design for Cleopatra's headdress designed by Oliver Messel ca.1945 for the film Caesar and Cleopatra, adapted from the play by George Bernard Shaw

Physical description

Costume design by Oliver Messel for Cleopatra's headdress in the Caesar and Cleopatra. A portrait sketch in ink, wash and gold paint with particular attention on the headdress.

Dimensions

Height: 37.8cm

Width: 25.1cm

Production typeDesignMarks and inscriptions

'CLEOPATRA 7 / Headdress / Achilles Surrender & Proclamation Scenes.' (Ink inscription on a label attached to the cellophane covering the sheet.)

'48' (Ink inscription on the reverse of the mounting board.)

'VICTORY NO 7.' (Ink inscription on the back of the board.)

Gallery labelCredit line

Acquired with the support of the National Lottery Heritage Fund, Art Fund and the Friends of the V&A

Object history

The film of George Bernard Shaw's play Caesar and Cleopatra, starring Claude Rains and Vivien Leigh, was directed by Gabriel Pascal and released in England in 1945. Messel designed the costumes and the set interiors. It was the only colour film which he designed.

Lord Snowdon, Oliver Messel's nephew, inherited Messel's remaining designs and artefacts (many designs were sold or given away during the artist's lifetime). The collection was briefly stored in a disused chapel in Kensington Palace before being placed on indefinite loan to the V&A Theatre Museum from 1981. The Oliver Messel Collection was purchased from Lord Snowdon in 2005 with the aid of the Heritage Lottery Fund, The Art Fund and the Friends of the V&A.

Production

Designed for the film of George Bernard Shaw's Caesar and Cleopatra, released in England in 1945.

Reason For Production: Commission

Summary

In 1944, designer Oliver Messel was released from his war duties in camouflage to work on the film Caesar and Cleopatra, adapted from George Bernard Shaw's play. Messel was responsible for the costumes and the interior design of the sets, bringing all his imagination and ingenuity to creating Roman and Egyptian costumes and interiors in the context of the mid 1940s. The film was the most expensive British film to date, costing over £1m, and brought a welcome sense of extravagance and colour into a drab post-war world. Surprisingly, given his sense of colour, he never worked on another colour film.

Vivien Leigh (1913-1967) played Cleopatra. Although a costume design is created to indicate the character the actor is playing, it is rare for a designer to indicate the make-up. Here, Messel has indicated the heavy kohl eye-make-up which immediately suggests 'Egyptian' to the audience, ensuring the correct overall look of the costume. Messel made the jewelled head-dress himself.

Oliver Messel (1904-1978) was Britain's leading theatre designer from the early 1930s to the mid 1950s, working in every aspect of entertainment - ballet, drama, film, musical, opera and revue - as well as in interior decoration and textile design. His lavish, painterly and romantic designs informed by period styles, were perfectly in tune with his times and earned him an international reputation. By 1960, however, Messel's style had become unfashionable, having no sympathy with the new 'kitchen sink' school of theatre. He increasingly concentrated on non-theatrical painting and designing and eventually retired to the Caribbean, where he began a new career designing and building highly idiosyncratic luxury villas.

Bibliographic reference

Pinkham, Roger (ed.) Oliver Messel: an exhibition held at the Theatre Museum, Victoria and Albert Museum, 22 June - 30 September 1983. London: Victoria and Albert Museum, 1983. 200p., ill ISBN 0905209508)

Other number

ROT 5987 - TM Rotation Number

Collection