All Saints, Middle Claydon, Buckinghamshire

The monument which takes up the entire south wall of the chancel was created by Ralph Verney in memory of his Father, Mother and Wife.

All three busts were modelled from paintings that hung in Claydon House.

the creation of the monument shows utter devotion and determination on the part of Ralph.

his wfie recently dead, and in exile facing complete financial ruin (debts of £6000 and estate sequestered), nothing more filled his thoughts than a memorial initially to his wife Mary, demonstrated by his constant letters to Alexander denton his wifes uncle to get in touch with a Lodon tomb maker to draw up some designs.

When he returned to England in 1653 he immediatly signed a contract with distinguished sculptor Edward Marshall (later Master Mason to the Crown), to make a monument for £130.

He even considered rebuilding the church to accomodate a larger monument. It took three and a half years until the monument was finally erected in 1653 and was unveiled to a gathering of Claydon freinds.

Edmund Verney (father of Ralph)

Born January 1590 son of Sir Edmund Verney and Mary Blakeney

He married Margaret Denton (14 Dec 1612 - 1641). She was the daughter of Sir Thomas Denton and together they had 10 children

Edmund was was knighted by king James in 1611

1612 - He became a gentleman of the Privy Chamber to Charles, Duke of Buckingham (Charles I)

1623 - Went with Charles and the Duke of Buckingham to Spain to court the Infanta Maria. there Edmund created many Spanish eneimies by punching a catholic priest whilst trying to keep him away from a dying englishman.

1624 - He was elected MP for Buckinghamshire.

1625 - He was appointed Knight Marshal for life, becaause of which he stayed at court until 1629.

Upon the outbreak of Civil War, Edmund immediatly chose to support his good friend the King. Much to his own heartache, his oldest son Ralph pledged for Parliament.

edmund became standard-bearer of the Royal Amry, and in this duty was killed at the Battle of Edgehill on the 23 Oct 1642.

His body was never recovered, only his gaunlet covered hand which had been hacked off because he was still grasping the standard in his charge.

This grim relic with his battle helmet hang high in the chancel.

Ralph Verney

Born Nov 1613

In 1629 he married Mary Blacknall (1616-1650), the daughter of John Blacknall of Hillesden and Jane Blagrave.

They had three sons and three daughters.

1640 - Ralph entered the Short Parliament and was re-elected MP for Aylesbury in November during the sitting of the Long Parliament.

1641 - He was not taker at the trial of Thomas Wentworth, 1st Earl of Stafford. He was knighted in March that year.

1643 - Althou he has declared for Parliament at the outbreak of the Civil War, he has refused to go as far as signing the Solemn League and Covenant, as a result he was forced into exile.

1646 - His assets were confiscated.

1650 - Ralph's wife, Mary dies whilst they are still in exile in Blois, France.

1653 - Ralph returned to England and was immediatly imprisoned wher he remained until 1656 when he was fined and released.

1660 - Things startered to improve fpr the Verneys at the restoration and Ralph was appointed a commissioner of Oyer and Terminer for Norfolk in july and Commissioner of Assessment in August serving Buckinghamshire.

At this time he was also a Justice of the Peace and Deputy Lieutenant for Bucks.

1661 - Charles II made him a Baronet of Middle Clayton.

1662 - Was made commissioner of Sewers for Bedfordshire and Commissioner of Loyal and Indigent Officies.

1675 - Nominated Commissioner of Recurants in Bucks.

1681 - He was re-elected as MP until 1690, where he spoke against the coronation of William of Orange to the English Throne.

1696 - died at the age of 82.

Banner Inscription:

Sacred to the memory of the ever honoured Sir Edmund Verney who was Kings Marshall 16 years and the standard bearer to Charles the first in that memorable Battle of Edgehill on the 23 of October 1642. Killed then in the two and fifetieth year of his age.

AND in honour of DAme Margaret his wife, eldest daughter of Sir Thomas denton of Hillesden knight by whome hee had six sonnes and six daughters. She dyed at London on ye Strand, and was buried here on ye 7th of Aprill 1641 in the 47 years of her age.

Tablet Inscription:

Also the perpetuall honour and memory of that most excellent and incomparable person Dame Mary sole daughter and heire of john Blacknall of Abingdon in ye county of Berkes esq and wife of Sir Raphe Verney (eldest sonne of the said Sir Edmund and Dame Margarett) by whome she has three sonnes and three daughters wherof only Edmund and John are living.

She deceased at Blois in france on the 10th day of May 1650 being the about the age of 34 yeares and was here interred on the 19th of Nov following, where her said husband at whos charge and by whose appointment this monument was erected intends to be buried.