CLEVELAND, June 22 /PRNewswire/ -- Honeywell (NYSE: HON) announced today a new rental program through its Novar division called FlexStart to help commercial national account customers benefit from smart-grid ready building controls and energy management systems technology.

With FlexStart, multi-site businesses rent – rather than purchase – Novar's Opus family of smart-grid ready building controls and energy management systems (EMS) technology to gain immediate savings without an up-front capital investment.

Energy consumption is a significant cost driver for multi-site businesses, such as retailers, restaurants, supermarkets, theaters, banks and other chain business operations. Novar's centralized monitoring facility and its industry-leading technology and energy management solutions enable these multi-site operations to optimize their energy consumption across their sites and drive overall cost savings.

"With Novar's FlexStart rental program, multi-site businesses can become cash-flow positive in month one," said Novar President Dean Lindstrom. "We developed the FlexStart rental program to help customers improve operations and reduce their energy spend while enjoying flexible payment terms with no up-front capital investment."

Businesses can enjoy a 20% reduction on their energy costs through the use of Novar's Opus technology. Using Novar Professional Services can further drive savings, by having a team of energy experts working around the clock ensuring every dollar of conservation is being achieved. Novar Professional Services can result in an additional 5-8% reduction in their energy spend, and have over 100% return on investment.

Novar's Opus Family of building control and EMS systems help national account operators with hundreds or thousands of facilities by providing a way of monitoring, controlling and managing how energy is consumed across their portfolio of sites – whether they are self managing from their own corporate headquarters, or engaging Novar to manage them from the Novar Operations Center (NOC). Customers use Opus to simultaneously manage heating, ventilation, air conditioning, lighting and refrigeration control, enforce corporate standards, and take advantage of financial incentives offered as part of Smart Grid utility programs that require the business to reduce electricity consumption on demand.

FlexStart offers a flexible, affordable means of immediately deploying Novar's Opus family of technology, which is capable of supporting utilities and Independent System Operator (ISO) initiatives such as time-of-day pricing and automated demand response (ADR).

"Novar is committed to helping our customers prepare for upcoming Smart Grid requirements such as being charged more during times of peak use, such as in the afternoon on a hot summer day," said Novar Vice President of Marketing David Haynes. "We offer a full range of energy management solutions to meet our customers' unique needs," said Haynes. "Customers can choose as much or as little as they need."

The FlexStart program is available for new installations and upgrades of existing building controls and energy management systems which include HVAC, lighting and refrigeration systems. With a wide breadth of programs, Novar enables multi-site businesses to tailor their energy management programs to their own unique energy and cost savings objectives. Under FlexStart, Novar also extends its full equipment warranty throughout the full term of the rental agreement, and customers may also realize tax benefits related to monthly rental payments under the program.

About Novar

Novar is part of Honeywell's Automation and Control Solutions group, a global leader in providing product and service solutions that improve efficiency and profitability, support regulatory compliance, and maintain safe, comfortable environments in homes, buildings and industry. Novar is the industry leader in multi-site energy management solutions. Novar delivers energy and operational management consulting, technology and services to support its clients' sustainability strategies and improve profitability. Its target markets include traditional retail chains, restaurants, theatres and other national and global multi-site applications. For more information, call 1-800-348-1235, e-mail [email protected] or visit www.novar.com.

About Honeywell

Honeywell (www.honeywell.com) is a Fortune 100 diversified technology and manufacturing leader, serving customers worldwide with aerospace products and services; control technologies for buildings, homes and industry; automotive products; turbochargers; and specialty materials. Based in Morris Township, N.J., Honeywell's shares are traded on the New York, London, and Chicago Stock Exchanges. For more news and information on Honeywell, please visit www.honeywellnow.com.

This release contains certain statements that may be deemed "forward-looking statements" within the meaning of Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. All statements, other than statements of historical fact, that address activities, events or developments that we or our management intends, expects, projects, believes or anticipates will or may occur in the future are forward-looking statements. Such statements are based upon certain assumptions and assessments made by our management in light of their experience and their perception of historical trends, current conditions, expected future developments and other factors they believe to be appropriate. The forward-looking statements included in this release are also subject to a number of material risks and uncertainties, including but not limited to economic, competitive, governmental, and technological factors affecting our operations, markets, products, services and prices. Such forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance, and actual results, developments and business decisions may differ from those envisaged by such forward-looking statements.

SOURCE Novar