Tank Girl, Anodder Oddyssey: Joyce Lives (and Dies) in Popular Culture

Thomas Vogler

Other Voices, v.1, n.2 (September 1998)

Copyright © 1998 by Thomas Vogler, all rights reserved; Tank Girl images Copyright © 1995 DC Comics

'Ulysses' conquers list of century's top works

... that sprawling, difficult, but uniquely original masterpiece by James Joyce, has been voted the finest English-language novel published this century by a jury of scholars and writers.

- Paul Lewis, The New York Times (July 20, 1998)

This downward movement is also inherent in all forms of popular- festive merriment and grotesque realism. Down, inside out, vice versa, upside down, such is the direction of all these movements. All of them thrust down, turn over, push headfirst, transfer top to bottom, and bottom to top, both in the literal sense of space, and in the metaphorical meaning of the image.

- Mikhail Bakhtin, Rabelais and his World

As we all know, Joyce's Ulysses is a comic novel that uses parallels with Homer's Odyssey as a significant element of its formal organization. In his famous 1923 review of the novel, T. S. Eliot called this a "mythical method," and identified it as an especially modern way of achieving form in the chaos of contemporary life, distinguishing it from the familiar literary practice of adding "allusions" as a form of enrichment to a work that could be imagined to exist without them. (1) Joyce and Eliot both extended the use of allusions to the point where there could be no articulate and coherent work without them, collapsing the opposition between work and allusion or text and supplement. Now, at the opposite end of the century, comes another fulfillment of Eliot's prediction that this was "a method others must pursue after Joyce." Like Ulysses and The Waste Land, Tank Girl: The Odyssey is structured by manipulating a continuous parallel between contemporaneity and antiquity. But this time the context is postmodern rather than modern, and Joyce himself has become part of that antiquity available for use. As the author who did most in the modern period to collapse the distinction between high art and popular culture, only to become elevated to the pinnacle of canonical twentieth-century literature, it is only fair that another collapse of the distinction has been effected using Joyce's work, this time from "below," as one of the most popular international comic series of the twentieth- century has joined its eponymous heroine Tank Girl with Joyce and Homer to create a four-part series. (2) Also remarkable are the wit and skill with which the project is accomplished, especially in the verbal dimension which is at times positively Joycean in its polysemous play with its polytropic heroine.

Tank Girl was nineteen years old at her birth on January 15, 1988, in a run-down bedsit in Worthington, a picturesque village on England's south coast where old-age pensioners go to die. Her parents were Jamie Hewlett and Alan Martin, who report that they consumed large amounts of cheap beer in an attempt to invent something radically different for the inaugural issue of a new magazine. Finally, on Thursday night, around 3:00 am, they came up with the idea for a female character, an aggro-skinhead woman from Australia (i.e. from "down under" in sexual, geographical, national, political, socioeconomic and cultural senses). Tank Girl was born just in time for the first issue of a magazine appropriately named Deadline, created by artists Steve Dillon and Brett Ewins to be a forum for new comic talent, and to publish the wild, the wacky, and the hitherto unpublishable. Tank Girl fulfilled their desires in all areas. (3) Her birth came a little over a year after the Prime Minister had posed for her famous photograph driving a tank, and it coincided with a momentous point in the Thatcherite era, with its relentless attempts to bring the press and media under tighter control. (4)

Starting in 1981 with The Broadcasting Act (prohibiting "as far as possible" anything that "offends against good taste and decency"), followed by the video nasties campaign that culminated in the Video Recordings Act of 1984, and the reactionary views of the Peacock Report on Television and the Government Green Paper on Radio (both supported by the Prime Minister), 1987 had already seen the Obscene Publications Bill (put forward by Tory MP Gerald Howarth in April) and the announcement by Home Secretary Hurd in October of plans to set up a Broadcasting Standards Council, all strongly supported by the ever-vigilant Mary Whitehouse, President of the National Viewers' and Listeners' Association. In this context we can see events like the BBC Channel 4 production of Tony Harrison's v. (where the poet takes on the persona of a graffiti-spraying obscene skinhead) and the launching of Tank Girl as a combined high-culture/popular-culture challenge to such attempts to restrain cultural production.

The comic was an immediate success and spread like a new wave of British imperialism to Spain, Italy, Germany, Scandinavia, Argentina, Brazil, Japan and the U.S. As Tank Girl t-shirts proliferated (including one designed for the clause 28 march against Thatcher's homo-phobic legislation), Wrangler Jeans bought the rights to use Tank Girl in their individual/anarchic image-making ad campaign of 1991, and Hewlit and Martin published two series where the (sort-of) plots turned on the desirability of Wranglers ("Once you can perceive how good it is to wear Wranglers, then you can know how good everything else is....Figure the mystery out for yourself Man, I'm going back on the road, just me and my Wranglers"). Fashion punk designer Vivienne Westwood lined up superstar model Sarah Stockbridge to "be" Tank Girl, and the result was fashion spreads in Elle, Time Out, Select, The Face, and Vogue, in an issue that cited her image as a crucial influence on the head-shaving, body-piercing, tattoo-bearing "Bad Girl Fashion" of the early 1990s. Meanwhile, the all-girl band Fuzzbox dressed as Tank Girl for publicity shots and the teenage cult following continued to spread.

In her short life Tank Girl has already had several periods of development. At the very beginning she is a pilot in Australia, working for some obscure Australian organization, for whom she undertakes a random series of missions. On one of these-an urgent assignment to deliver a colostomy bag to an aging Aussie president-she is attacked en route by a love-crazed monster. Delay causes the president to dump a load in his trousers at a large international trade conference. Tank Girl is declared a criminal, with a million-dollar bounty on her head. Following this, Tank Girl goes with her friends to live in the outback, fighting ninjas and monsters and trying to have a good time with her special friend and main sexual partner, a talking kangaroo named Booga. In 1989 a dramatic change occurred, when Tank Girl was moved somewhat against her will to London, for some heavy postmodernizing. In the second of those issues, "Force Ten to Ringagooma Bay," Tank Girl complains to Hewlett and Martin: " You old bastards! What's going on with this strip? What happened to all the violence and grog supping.... Are we gonna do this bloody comic or what?" / "This is supposed to be a state of the art comic for the post literate generation. I suggest you remove your finger from your arse and do something exciting!" The response is, "Sorry Tank Girl, we've had a slight change of mind" / "Ah, well now, yes. Erm, I'm a bit worried about us slipping down the comics lavatory. If we don't keep check on ourselves our work will end up looking like a piece of proverbial 'old dog poo', just like every other comic on the market...." What happens then is that Hewlett and Martin "resign from comics," and anything resembling a "series" disappears. The stories have no relation to each other, and no narrative closure. They just stop, drift, sometimes shift and get rewritten right in the middle. There are random spinoffs, with Sub Girl, Jet Girl and Booga each having an occasional separate strip; irrelevant but playful titles range from Jet Gurl in: Hairy Pussy to Fucked Up Afro Zombie Babes From Nowhere, with Jack Kerouac joining the fun in Blue Helmet 1 and 2.

The next significant stage in her career comes with Tank Girl's career in the movies. Hewlett and Martin resisted the idea at first, with Jamie calling the proposal "Rambo with tits," but they finally gave in. The movie was filmed June 21-Oct 15, 1994, the first ten days on White Sands Desert in New Mexico and the remainder in an abandoned mine near Tucson, Arizona. It was released March 31, 1995, in the U.S. and on June 16 (!) in the U.K. (5) The film is banal, stupid, and derivative. In its opening scene, a solitary figure (turns out to be Tank Girl) comes riding a water buffalo across a desert. This scene is burlesqued in TGO 2, as one of Tank Girl's male recruits named O'Why delivers a movie pitch to a horde of giant cannibalistic movie producers (The Lestrygonians, led by Lester Gonadian):

From black ... an undulating desert ... virgin sand, pregnant with possibilities ... / And from the distance ... a rider approaches ...

A rider. I like it.

A rider ... a dark stranger ... astride, would you believe, a shaggy water buffalo ... / A rider dressed in strange garb, a dystopian pastiche, salvaged from the ruins of a dead civilization. / The rider removes its face mask ... and reveals itself to be ... a woman. / Bleached blond shocks of hair, ingenious eyes, an expression on the lips that fibrillates between impish fun and profound sexual deviancy ...

Hey, is this a load of shit or is this a load of crap, I can't decide.... Pitch meeting over, loser.

Wait! It gets better! It gets better!

Not in this lifetime it don't.

AIEEEEEE!

As a post-movie series, coming at a particular moment in the history of its heroine, TGO reflects a crisis or turning-point in the counter-cultural purity of the comic, and it attempts to recoup some authenticity after what seemed a total sellout. The media exploitation theme is a large part of the sub-plot in which, while Tank Girl is away from Australia/Ithaca, the suitors are represented as media men courting Booga who becomes the Penelope/Molly character. The issue: will he sell out to the entertainment industry and start a career of his own, or will he stay his lovable feckless self, true to Tank Girl? The chief of the suitors is a big-time Hollywood "suit" named Tony the Blazer, resisted by Booga with various devices, including the need to "do a little sewing." Tank Girl is taunted by her mother as "Miss Super-Star lah-di-dah," and recognized by the "Sirens" as "that Aussie slacker chick they made a film about." At the beginning of TGO she is overweight and out of shape, under the control of the "gods of corpulence." When she finds out she can't fit into her tank, she's "a little geometrically embarrassed." Her interior monologue reflects the cause: "Looking back I realize how world-wide fame has gone to my head as well as to my stomach ... Things started to go wrong on the publicity tour for the movie of my life.... But for how long have I been stuck here at this calypso party? Listening to their stupid lyrics and chowing down with Keanu Reeves and Julia Roberts?" A voice-over narrator hints that her weight may be related to her diet: "Tank Girl eats with relish the inner organs of beasts and fowl and anything else that's put in front of her / Giblets, livers, kidneys, brains fly down her intestinal tract as though there were no tomorrow," and in true Tank Girl fashion she responds: "Hey, you're making me sound like a slob.... This is my story. I want to tell it / Hey, I'm talking to you, you filthy rotten modernist omniscient voice," blasting a shadowy profile that looks remarkably like James Joyce.

Tank Girl the movie is in fact not very good, though it has a few worthwhile moments. One of the striking differences between the movie and the comic is the move towards a representational mode of "realism" augmented by special effects, as opposed to the fantasy mode of a comic or animated film. One could say that the film is being true to the comic, by bringing it to life, fulfilling it on the screen, producing an effect as if such characters really existed. But this success also marks a failure, and a loss of fantasy effect. The result is a blurring of genre and media distinctions, the same kind of confusion that itself becomes the stuff of tragi-comedy in works like Don Quixote, or Madame Bovary. I'm not suggesting a knee- jerk obeisance to the rules of genre, but whatever gains there might be in postmodern promiscuity are inevitably accompanied by some definite losses. (6) There are a number of seemingly random moments in the Tank Girl movie when brief comic-book-style animated inserts appear, but these seem by their crude contrast only to enhance the "realism" of the filmic mode of representation, which is designed to make something essentially a comic book look as if it were a movie, manipulating realistic people and things in order to make them behave as though they were in a cartoon. But unlike movies like Independence Day and The Nutty Professor that do the same thing, there really is a comic book behind and before the movie Tank Girl. The basic nature of comics, like that of movie cartoons, commedia dell'arte, Satyr plays and the like, is crucially dependent on the fact that they do not attempt any significant degree of realism in their representations. In the last decade the movies have tended increasingly to collapse this distinction, giving us at times inappropriately realistic comics and fantasies, perhaps feeding the already feeble grasp on reality of many viewers. Almost half of Independence Day, the alien-invasion story which was the top-grossing movie of the 1996 summer season was 'filmed' inside a computer, in what are known as "digital special-effects shots," which combine simulated images against a "backplate" (a stock shot, such as a skyline in whatever configuration the director chooses. The technique is employed to make what is essentially a comic book look like a movie, manipulating realistic people and things in order to make them behave as though they were in a cartoon. This trend can be exaggerated parodically in a movie like Natural Born Killers, where the strongest kind of medium manipulation keeps changing into every possible kind of technique, producing a promiscuous concoction that for many viewers goes everywhere and does nothing. By contrast the media mapping of a movie like Roger Rabbit, with its strong visual distinction between "Toon Town" where the comic characters live, and the "real' world, articulates and sustains the differences.

Moviegoers in the 1930s and 1940s would almost always see a cartoon with what they called the "main feature." If they were lucky enough to go on a Saturday, they might see an installment in what was called a "serial." Both of these "extra features" were marked by episodic formal structure and a fantasy content that made them distinguishable from the cinema realism of the typical main feature. But the animation technique of the cartoon, with its ability to suspend the laws of material objects in time and space, was thereby distinct even from the serial episodes with their baroque fantasy plots and exotic mise-en- scénes. The movie Tank Girl plays with this difference between comic representation and realistic mimesis too, but tries to overcome it by being a filmed comic, with cartooned humans instead of animated simulations. Where Booga in the comic is a fantasy representation of a talking kangaroo, the "Rippers" in the movie are humans with false ears and snouts and tails.

Another way to come at this crucial distinction is to consider some classical precursors for the Booga/Ripper characters. When I look at the Rippers in the movie, and Booga in the comic, I am reminded of Pan, the hairy nature god who was commonly represented both in Egypt and Greece in ancient times under the symbolic form of a goat. Pan was half human and possessed an enormous phallus. His companions were humanoid goat creatures called satyrs. In Medieval times the satyr's goat-like body, cloven hoofs and tail were joined semiotically with the demons of hell, and Pan himself was transformed into the Prince of Incubi, ruler of the lesser demons and devils. In the Renaissance period, as tales of hairy human- like creatures came back to European ears from the wilds of other continents, they were connected with these early accounts under the rubric "homo sylvestris," or man of the woods. (7)

In the classical period in Greece, satyrs were honored with their own special scene of representation. We know now that the famous trilogies of the Greek tragedians were actually tetralogies, in which the fourth play (the end-of-the- day feature) was a satyr play, written by the same playwright and using instead of the tragic chorus of Old Men or Libation Bearers or Furies, a chorus of satyrs: half man, half beast, goat-footed, horse-eared, long-tailed. The satyr is ribald, drunken and salacious. His most splendid attribute is his enormous erect phallus, and his play, coming after the tragedy, returned the audience to earth, bringing them back from a metaphysical encounter with fate and the gods to a manifestation of what connects them to the beasts. His presence at the end of the tragic day contributes to a better understanding of the spirit of a Greek theatre which includes both, where the awed silence at the end of the tragic catharsis could be almost immediately followed by the lewd jingle of a satyr's tambourine. The satyr play is bawdy, gross, raucous, insubordinate, but it co-existed with tragedy in order to release the audience into a celebration undefeated by the tragic. (8)

Comics are a marginal genre too, but unlike the satyr play they do not share the same audience with serious literature. They exist in a reduced ratio, like animated cartoons to movies in the 1930s, or the comics in newspapers today, a segregated supplement to the "news." The animated film is also comparable to the comic book; with a very few exceptions it is a short thing which until recently the economics and critical establishment of the film industry have agreed to keep in obscurity. Animation is rarely considered worthy of serious critical attention, although this has not always been the case. The hot-house atmosphere of European and Russian modernism in the 1920s and early 1930s fostered collaboration and mutual inspiration between different art forms and film, including animation, was seen and discussed as part of that movement. But as the narrative fiction fi1m became the prevailing form of cinema around the world, and Hollywood grew to dominate economically and culturally in the post-war West, animation came to be defined by the Disney model, the cartoon. And following Disney's audacious gamble on the animated feature film, the cartoon was primarily identified as entertainment for children, a non-serious area for most film critics. Cartoons were also widely used for instructional and propaganda purposes, which further contributed to their lowly artistic status. (9)

If we seek a more theoretical understanding of these marginal works, we can find in Bakhtin some useful notions that help to explain how a late twentieth-century product like Tank Girl can embody all the major features of the Greek satyr performances, and can share those features with works by writers like Joyce and Rabelais. As Michael Holquist points out, Bakhtin's book on Carnival is "about the subversive openness of the Rabelaisian novel, but it is also a subversively open book itself," because its central concept of "grotesque realism" is a direct and specific inversion of the categories and artistic values invoked in the thirties to define Socialist Realism. (10) According to Bakhtin, "Rabelais' basic goal was to destroy the official picture of events.... He summoned all the resources of sober popular imagery in order to break up official lies and the narrow seriousness dictated by the ruling classes. Rabelais did not implicitly believe in what his time 'said and imagined about itself'; he strove to disclose its true meaning for the people" (439). Bakhtin's work emphasizes the predominant role in Rabelais played by a material bodily principle represented by exaggerated images of the body in connection with food, drink, elimination and sexual activity. He calls this "grotesque realism," and argues that it represents a profoundly positive emphasis, since the body is universal, panhuman in its representational scope, opposed to more limited and specific private and egotistic aspects of existence. As the ghost of Tank Girl's Mother says, "I know it sounds a little undignified. But ... we're born between piss and shit ... so we don't really have much to be proud about, do we?" The essential principle of grotesque realism is the lowering of all that is spiritual, ideal, and abstract, shifting focus and value to the material level, to the sphere of earth and body in an indissoluble unity. Its main stress is placed on those parts of the body that are open to and interactive with the outside world- the open mouth, the genital organs, the breasts, anus, nose-and on the effluvial intermixing of the body's inside and outside through acts of taking in (eating, drinking, sexual union) and discharge: flatulence, defecation, urination, ejaculation, menstrual blood, nasal discharge, sweat, tears. According to Bakhtin, Rabelais represents the rebirth of a mode of grotesque imagery that can be found in the mythology and in the archaic art of all peoples, including the Greeks and Romans of the preclassic period. It was during this period that the grotesque was expelled from official public art to live and develop in certain 'low' nonclassic areas. As Tony Harrison's Silenus puts it: "They set up a contest, rigged from the start, / to determine the future of 'high' and 'low' art. They had it all fixed that Apollo should win / and he ordered my brother to be flayed of his skin" (125).

Bakhtin places great importance on institutionalized language in his study, and notes that when activated the grotesque concept of the body generates oaths, curses and language of abuse rich with body imagery. It thus contributes to that conflicting multiplicity of languages which he associates with cultural health and calls "heteroglossia," as opposed to the monologism that most official cultures seek to enforce. His notions of dialogism and polyphony are closely related to the concepts of heteroglossia and carnivalization that constitute his visionary sense of language (whether written, spoken or internal monologue) as the rich field of an enormous variety of conflicting and variant languages, ranging from the literary and poetic through specialized jargons of all sorts to the subliterary, the vernacular, the obscene and primitive. Bakhtin represents the middle ages as an era of "monological" control and repression, not unlike the kind of official culture that dominant forces in Anglo-American politics were pushing for with renewed strength in the 1980s. He argues that Rabelais "dialogizes" that culture by producing the oppositional voice of "carnival" which has the effect of undermining authoritative utterance. The effect is not to replace a 'high' cultural and literary level of language with a 'low,' but to achieve a polyphonic range that combines all levels. This is also one of the striking features of TGO, where the display of language is even more varied than in earlier episodes. In TGO we find levels of diction that exhibit a Joycean range, from the esoteric, archaic and polysyllabic (words like "antipodean," "fibrillate," "hirsute," "incontinence," "phantasmagorical," "quinqueumvirated," "stigmata," "unfructuous") to the scatological and obscene ("bugger," "bullshit," "crap," "fart," "fuck," "hump," "pecker," "piss," "prick," "screw," "shit," "tits," "wankers"). These words are not simply laid out, but are humorously deployed, often mixed in the same sentence in violation of any code of linguistic propriety: "phantasmagorical piss-up," " retroussé sniffer," " Snot- rag of my loins," " Tank Whore whose turret knows no shame," " peerless rectal eructations ... farts that bring things back to life." In addition to some inaccurate Latin (ad altara Dei) there are Lenehanesque sprinklings of foreign words (Heimat, ingénue, retroussé) and a plethora of humorously ponderous phrases ("nonchalantly akimbo pose, " "post-prandial troyalism, " "palpably animate," " questionable pulchritude," " ineluctable modality," " omniscient voice, " "rocks of oblivion and the whirlpool of culture"). Joyce's bravura onomatopoeia in Ulysses (Hissss, Pwee, Tschink, Tschunk, Fff, Oo, Rrrrrrsss, Rrpr, Kraa, Kraandl, Prrprr, Pprrpffrrppffff, rrrsssstt awokwokawok) is challenged in TGO by an equally mouth-defying range of signifiers (Aarkk, Bhof, Crunk, Fwoor, Huargkk, Hyauk, Ptew, Riip, Scar-pah, Poaw). Although the graphic form of the comic is strikingly exploited in TGO, the graphic effects are subdued compared with the extravaganzas of the earlier London period. Instead, as if by contagion from Joyce, it is the language and the deployment of language effects in TGO that show the greatest creativity and similarity with Joyce's Ulysses.

Bakhtin's theory of carnival is also an example of "counter-narrative." Were I writing this for publication in the U.S., or for a cultural studies venue, I would be obligated here to indulge in some heroic rhetoric of cultural opposition, invoking concepts such as dominant constructions and effective dissidence from oppositional cultural sites, or marginal hegemonic subversion, or counter-hegemonic narrative transgression, and most of my readers would already have made up their minds either that effective counter-narrative is universal and inevitable or that it's absolutely impossible, invoking Adorno and the heirs of his theory of what he called the "consciousness industry." My lower-key notion is based on the rather commonplace observation that people seem to achieve an understanding of themselves and the world through narratives- narratives purveyed by parents, schoolteachers, newscasters, 'authorities,' and all the other authors of what we take to be sources of common sense. As Hayden White points out, such narratives mediate a world that "does not come to us already narrativized and coherent; the construction of narrativizing discourse serves the purpose of moralizing judgments." (11) They provide a version of reality whose acceptability is governed by convention and 'narrative necessity' rather than by empirical verification and logical requirements. On the individual level, our accounts of happenings in our own lives are eventually converted into more or less coherent autobiographies centered around what we like to call a self acting more or less purposefully in a social world. On the collective level Social realities are also worked out through narrative. Eventually a number of separate, individual stories get combined into a whole of some sort, variously called a 'culture' or a 'history' or, more loosely, a 'tradition.' Counternarratives are, in turn, the means by which individuals or groups seek to modify or contest that dominant reality and the network of assumptions that supports it.

Counter-narratives are not necessarily subversive; they often combine to produce a rich heteroglossia of narrative alternatives. Consider Batman, in many ways a counter- narrative-or counterpart narrative- to Superman. Where Superman is a creature of the daytime and the sky, akin to the sungod Apollo, Batman is nocturnal, rodential, feminized, companion of Hecate and the moon. There is a reversal of inside/outside, too: Superman is super at the core, but puts on wimpy externals to become mild-mannered Clark Kent. Batman is Bruce Wayne, human at the core, who dresses up to his role rather than strips down to it. But both Superman and Batman-along with Captain Marvel, Captain America, and all the other mysterious muscle-bound, masked mercurial tribe- can be identified as "recuperated" Satan figures, working for law and order. Robert Hughes traces their iconography in detail, and finds in them the "last flicker of Satanic omnipotence and Luciferian, if prognathous, beauty." (12) So in the U.S. in the late 1930s, Anti-Christ, the wonder-worker, went to work in the form of Superman for J. Edgar Hoover, defending democracy in what we might call a counter-counter-narrative. (13)

James Joyce's Ulysses is without doubt one of the most elaborate and intensive counter-narratives ever written-almost-in the English language. With its canonization as a great work of English Literature, it's easy to forget that much of the force of the novel is conspicuously hostile to the notion of high literature in general, and to English literature and the English language in particular. The book functions in many ways as an act of literary defiance, directed against a whole battery of artistic, social, historical assumptions and practices, so that its original value was in part the way it transcends and indeed proffers alternatives to received ideas as it defies them. TGO is like Ulysses, but in being truly like it, in being a counter-narrative, it is also counter to it

Joyce's introduction to the character of Odysseus came when he read Charles Lamb's Adventures of Ulysses at the age of twelve, and was inspired to choose Ulysses as the subject for an assigned essay on the topic "My Favorite Hero." Already, it would seem, the practitioner of "silence, exile and cunning" was drawn to the "Ulyssean" (defined in the OED as "resembling Ulysses in craft or deceit), anticipating the verdict he would deliver later, that "the whole structure of heroism is, and always was, a damned lie." (14) Joyce's choice of hero was indeed an odd and distinctly anti-heroic one by conventional standards, for the Odyssey, as a heroic quest for home and hearth and wife and family and faithful dog Argus is already in important ways an anti-heroic counter-narrative to The Iliad as war epic. As early as the fifth century Odysseus had become the target for a stinking chamber pot in Aeschylus's parodic satyr play The Bone Gatherers. Bakhtin points out that

[T]he figure of "comic Odysseus," a parodic travesty of his high epic and tragic image, was one of the most popular figures of satyr plays, of ancient Doric farce and pre-Aristophanic comedy, as well as of a whole series of minor comic epics, parodic speeches and disputes in which the comedy of ancient times was so rich (especially in southern Italy and Sicily). Characteristic here is that special role that the motif of madness played in the figure of the "comic Odysseus": Odysseus, as is well known, donned a clown's fool's cap (pileus) and harnessed his horse and ox to a plow, pretending to be mad in order to avoid participation in the war." (15)

A typical scholarly view of Odysseus as inadequate hero can be found in L. R. Lind's Introduction to his translation of Vergil's Aeneid:

Odysseus [is] impelled by motives which cannot be called noble. He "went unwillingly to the war" and shows little more than "a desire to return home after much fruitless fighting." But even here, says Lind, he is not "quite sincere in his declared intentions," going home "only after ten years of aimless wanderings which include long stays in places whose attractions seem to outweigh both revenge and homesickness. One cannot say that Odysseus is really trying all the time. 'Time out' is his frequent and characteristic response to difficult situations; before Troy, when Achilles is eager to go into battle, Odysseus urges that the fighters eat first and fight afterward....Odysseus is by no means a faithful husband, and his infidelities are, moreover, those of a callous voluptuary who has made a habit of taking his pleasure where he finds it. (16)

for Joyce and Tank Girl, these negative qualities might be much more appealing than their opposites. Note Lind's distaste for bodily functions; presumably his ideal hero would be a killing machine that never ate, slept or had sex. Lind's choice for a hero is the good Christian choice, pius Aeneus, the same that Dante had chosen to guide him through hell and purgatory. His dislike for Odysseus seems to be that he is having too much fun, and the wrong kind of fun. It is not too different from the early Christianity that Bakhtin claims condemned laughter. Bakhtin notes for example that Tertullian, Cyprian, and John Chrysostom preached against ancient spectacles and theater, especially against the mime and the mime's jests and laughter. John Chrysostom declared that jests and laughter are not from God but from the devil. Only permanent seriousness, remorse, and sorrow for his sins befit the Christian."

Odysseus had already started to get a bad reputation long before Christianity and its strictures against the flesh. Although he is represented as an admirable character in Sophocles' early play Ajax, a model of humane and civilized conduct, he is considered beneath contempt by Ajax himself and his followers. Some forty years later, in his Philoctetes, Sophocles presents an Odysseus closer to Ajax's view, a machiavellian operator who glibly lies to accomplish his goals, a coward, a knave, and an unsuccessful one at that, whose mission has to be completed by the god Herakles. By the time of Euripides' Hecuba, we have perhaps the most detestable portrait of Odysseus in the whole classical tradition, a man who resembled the unscrupulous politicians of the late fifth century BC, exhibiting all the attributes that Euripides detested in the contemporary political scene: argumentative, ungrateful, callous, chauvinistic. It was about the same time that Odysseus, along with Herakles, became a very popular figure for Greek comic writers, and a popular comic subject for visual artists as well, who took delight in representing burlesque versions of his adventures.

Joyce amplifies the anti-heroic potential by making his Odysseus figure a noncombative Irish Jew, who not only doesn't slaughter any suitors, but also considerately stays away from his house to provide the opportunity for his wife's infidelity. When he finally does get home, he rejects the Odyssean revenge and violence against the suitors. To make Odysseus Jewish in Ireland in 1904, was still a daring creative leap in an age of ugly ideologies where imperialism, racism, militarism and misogyny were raised to the level of secular religions as the ethical orthodoxies of the day. And to make him effeminate ("the new womanly man," as Mulligan calls him in Circe) was not only to violate the military imperative, but to make him even more authentically 'Jewish' in a world that increasingly linked Jews with women and blacks and orientals as genetically inferior beings.

To make Tank Girl a counter-hero/ine in 1988, only two years after Margaret Thatcher posed for her tank girl photograph, is to engage in a similar strategy of ideological confrontation, but it is not enough to have a hero gendered feminine who drives a tank. She must break every establishment rule for behavior from whatever gender, and defy all feminist protocols for politically correct feminism; and she must be presented in a comic that breaks all the conventions of the form. And when even those characteristics become commodified-first her semiotic "transgression" reduced to a desirable consumer item, a style of consumption, then aped by an even more extreme commercial debasement in the form of a movie-even more extreme measures are called for. In the usual critical view, high art renews itself by stooping to borrow from lower popular sources, advancing "through unfastidious cross-fertilization from obscure and popular genres." (17) Tank Girl's bold strategy in TGO is to invert this model, adopting a tactic of fastidious cross-fertilization from well- known literary masterpieces, with herself as offspring. The result is an inversion of the inversion, a creation that makes the line between high and low culture difficult to draw, and eliminates the kind of transgressivity that reinforces the opposition between high and low altogether, as did Joyce. (18)

To move now to some more specific observations on the TGO series, it should be emphasized that the Homeric Odyssey is included along with Joyce's text as material for parody and intertextual play. Where Joyce has Molly weave and unweave a web of unending 'text' (from textus, past participle of texere, to weave), Booga eludes his suitors by excusing himself to go do some sewing. Odysseus's faithful dog Argus becomes Tank Girl's pet Koala, also named Argus. Tank Girl and her crew actually visit the underground world of the dead, and the Sirens in TGO are closer to those in Homer, surrounded as Circe warns, by rotting piles of bones. But such "closeness" is infrequent and not really to the point in a work where the Telemachus figure is extrapolated even beyond Stephen Dedalus, to become a humanoid television set named Tele, who is "made not begotten, from bits of old televisions, computers, corpses of washed-up surfer boys." The name "Tele" keeps the "tele" (distant) from Telemachus, combining it through visual puns with the "tele" in television (giving him a suitable technology of "far-seeing") and homophonic puns with "make us" ("It's always the same. 'Make us this, 'Make us that.' / Tele is constantly at Booga's - - and Booga's foul Suitors' - - beck and call. / In fact, sometimes he could be mistaken for thinking that his name was Telemakeus."). The pun here deftly gestures towards the Joycean issue of "servitude," from Stephen's defiant "non serviam" to Bloom's echo of Leporello's "non voglio più servir." in Mozart's Don Giovanni. (19)

Like the names, the adventures of Tank Girl tend to be generated through the effects of an aleatory polysemy operating at the level of the signifier, rather than being generated through structural parallels with Joyce and Homer. Peter Milligan, the writer brought in for TGO, is a true "voyeur of the name," ("ici le voyeur de son nom, le voyeur en son nom, le voyeur depuis son nom,"), most happy when the accident of a name can generate a new plot situation with only trans-nominal similarity with Joyce or Homer. (20) For example, the "Wondering Rocks" (an episode not in Homer, since his Odysseus goes the other way) become the "wondering Ricks," characters who are twins, somewhat like Tweedledum & Tweedledee in Lewis Carroll. They clash too, but like siblings instead of like rocks. Among the most absurd is the Aeolus episode, where the "winds" of the windy city of Troy, transformed by Joyce into the "hot air" of Dublin discourse, become "farts that bring dead things back to life," the "flatutherapy" or "Resurrection Wind" that is the great life's work of Dr. Albert Einstein Olus, known as A. E. Olus. Thus we have "Aeolus," with a hint of AE (and AEIOU) together with "olus," suggestive of the Latin olere, to smell. (21) Eumaeus becomes Old Eugene Mouse, the barman at the Swineherd Inn, who persuades Tank Girl and her crew to dress like Charlie Chaplin (i.e. "debasement" in the guise of a movie tramp). "Circe" becomes "Sir Rupert Sir ... Otherwise known as Sir Sir," head of Swine Television, who speaks with an Australian accent ("G'day. I'm gonna make you blokes stinking rich.") and uses his wealth to animalize humans. The name of Tony the Blazer is an echo of Joyce's Blazes Boylan A suitor of Booga/Molly/Penelope, his status as a big-time producer also makes him a "suit" in contemporary slang. The "Tony" echoes Homer's Antínoös, who is the first suitor to die by Odysseus's bow, as Tony the Blazer is the first to die by the blow of Tank Girl's hand.

The finale of TGO thus differs radically from Joyce's pacific transformation of The Odyssey, but it also diverges from Homer, who submits his Odysseus to several books of patient abasement and careful planning before allowing him the catharsis of wholesale slaughter. Tank Girl's plan is formed instantaneously: "I've obviously got to be really cunning. So I thought we might use Tank to blow one of the walls of the house down, and then we can run in, setting fire to the furniture, smashing ornaments, and mutilating people." Where the extremely graphic violence in Homer has a dignified, almost ritualistic quality ("Like pipes his nostrils jetted / crimson runnels, a river of mortal red, / and one last kick upset his table / knocking the bread and meat to soak in dusty blood."), the ludicrous extremes of graphic violence in TGO become parodic, a simultaneous indulgence in and send up of violence-as- entertainment. (22) Tank Girl herself suggests the point when (her face splattered with blood, after blowing a gaping hole in the mid-section of a Calypso Singer) she says, "Gee, it's lucky that this outrageous violence is just a rib-tickling parody ... or we'd really be in trouble."

Many of the "adventures" are only obliquely hinted at in TGO (e.g. Nestor, Proteus, Scylla and Charybdis, Hades) while others are developed much more fully. One of the more semiotically complex and interesting ones is identified in the text as "Island of the Oxen of the Godson," starting with an inversion of the "Sungod" Helios and including an inversion of father/son from the Godfather (yet another movie allusion). The island (perhaps Sicily?) is run by a mafioso "Godson" named Giorgio, who stocks it with 'animals' that are humans dressed in animal costumes. Dismayed by the mistreatment of animals in the circus (visual hints of Fellini's Clowns in the graphics) he "decided that the Mafia should move into the holistic non-animal circus business," so in order to indulge his sentimental concern for the animals, he has forced these humans to undergo the mistreatment in their place. While Tank Girl is having a two-week sex marathon in the tank with O'Madagain, her crew starts eating the "animals," and the Mafiosi-grotesque caricatures of the movie caricatures- come in with guns blazing. Tank Girl wants to signal surrender, but her white handkerchief has "blood and snot all over it," so Rose-fingered Dawn offers a "white sanitary towel." This does indeed put an end to the combat, but not because the Mafiosi read it as a sign of surrender (i.e. as an arbitrary linguistic signifier). Instead, they read it as a motivated sign, from its metonymic relationship with the female body, and they flee in outraged disgust ("It's one thing slaughtering our pals who were frolicking around in animal suits, and then eating them ... but waving one of those things around in public!"). They are thus like self-righteous protectors of decency who allow endless acts of violence and crime but draw the line at sex, or like elected criminals in the U.S. who call for Law and Order ("Lawn ordure," as the deaf gardener with Matthew Arnold's face might say) for everyone but themselves. (23) Not all the adaptations are as successful and interesting as this one. Among the least successful is the version of Circe episode in TGO 4. In Joyce's novel this is by far the longest section, and one of the most spectacular and brilliant parts of the whole novel, taking off from the notion of a place where humans are turned into animals by enchantment or by their own darker passions, to exhibit an extravaganza of deviations from the norms of day-time Dublin behavior. But since this kind of deviation is already the norm in TGO, there is not really anywhere "else" the comic can go to produce the effect of difference-it would be like having a Toon Town within Toon Town in Roger Rabbit, or a Nighttown within the Nighttown in Ulysses.

In TGO the role of the gods is taken by Tank Girl's dead but constantly intervening mother, who appears at crucial times, rising high above the horizon like Goya's version of Saturn devouring his son, to affect the plot ex machina. She is also like Stephen Dedalus's mother in Ulysses, whose Chthonic off-stage presence is always in the back of Stephen's mind, ready to make an appearance, as she finally does in Circe when she "rises stark through the floor in leper grey.... Her face worn and noseless, green with grave mould ... a green rill of bile trickling from a side of her mouth" (24) It turns out that Tank Girl's mother (referred to as "Motherfather" at one point) is tormenting Tank Girl and her crew because she died before her husband. She wants him dead so he will have to join her in Hades, where she can torment him through eternity. At the beginning of TGO Tank Girl kills an "omniscient narrator" in the guise of James Joyce, as if taking literally one of Harold Bloom's Oedipal "revisionary ratios" in order to relieve anxieties of influence. At the end, in order to placate her mother, she chooses to kill her fictively "real" father, who turns out to be O'Hell (disguised from the beginning as one of her "recruits") in order to placate her mother. As she prepares to shoot him, she asks: "Why disguise yourself and hang around us?" He answers pathetically, "Isn't it obvious? You're the only decent thing I've ever created ... or am likely to create. / Any money or good times I'm going to have are only ever going to come from you, Tank Girl (BANG!) T-Tank Girl! Your own father! The man who made you! You ... you've killed me!" What are we to make of this pathetic death? Have Hewlett and Martin and Milligan slipped in "a portrait of the artist as an old man," anticipating the time when they will no longer be able to keep pace with the demand for constant renewal and variety? Or is it an allegory of a youth culture tired of adults who don't know how to have their own fun anymore, and insist on hanging around the younger generation? Or is it more specific, an allegory of the aging cultural critics so devastatingly portrayed by Paul Mann, who offer us "the tiny spectacle of aging intellectuals dressing in black to prowl festering galleries and clubs where, sometime before dawn, they will encounter the contemptuous gaze of their own children, and almost manage to elide that event when they finally produce their bilious reports, their chunks of cultural criticism?" (25) Earlier the youthful O'Madagain had suffered a similar exposure, when he "slipped on a pork chop" in Circe (Sir Sir's realm) to reveal that his good looks were the products of chemistry and prostheses. He too begs to be allowed to stay with the crew, but is dismissed out of hand: "Are you joking? You don't think we want a fat old balding shitter like you hanging around us / So long, loser."

After all the violence and all the phantasmagorical escapades, TGO ends tranquilly in bed, with Tank Girl telling Booga her feelings for him have "bloomed a little along the way," and suggesting they draw up "an exclusive contract, so we only work together." Booga asks to "seal it with a screw," but Tank Girl is too tired and tells him to play with himself instead. He does so as she drifts off to sleep, with a big smile on his face, saying: "yes I said yes I will yes," suggesting perhaps that he will have the contract drawn up. In Joyce's novel this final picture would be even funnier, since Leopold Bloom sleeps with his head at the foot of the bed, an upside-down hero and mate if there ever was one. But then if this is Australia, everything must already be upside-down, making it an ideal place to situate a new version of the counter-narrative

Tank girl is an enormously trendy consumer item among adolescents, and counter-hegemonic narrative transgression from marginal post-colonial sites is an equally trendy consumer item among leftish leaning academics and students. I would really like to believe that a product like Tank Girl can be a modern example of Bakhtin's carnival, and combine having fun with doing serious progressive cultural work. But can a comic book that contrives a plot so as to include an add for Wrangler jeans really be subversive? Is there any place in a culture industry that ranges from Homer to Joyce to Tank Girl for an effective counternarrative or counter- culture discourse? Paul Mann puts the case with what he calls a "brutal simplicity":

Every historical form of cultural and political revolt, transgression, opposition, and escape has turned out to be nothing more than a systemic function. The notion of recuperation has encountered a thousand alibis and counter-tropes but still constitutes the closest thing cultural study has to a natural law. Collage, antimelodic high-decibel music, antimasterpieces, romantic primitivism, drunkenness and drugs, renegade sexuality, criticism itself: it is amazing that a single radical claim can still be made for any of this, and entirely characteristic that it is. Every conceivable form of negation has been dialectically coordinated into the mechanism of progress.... This is not to say that the euphoric frenzy of the punk or skinhead is the sign of something new and vital: the energy released by the stupid underground is never anything more than an effect of its very morbidity. It is marketed as novelty, but that is not its truth. Nor will it ever constitute a base for opposition: it cannot be yoked to any program of reform, nor serve any longer the heroic myth of transgression. It is merely a symptom of order itself.

I suspect that some of the bitter cynicism in these remarks is the result of a passionate desire that this were not the case, and that is a desire I share. But the real "counter" in counter-culture may always turn out to be the counter in the store, on which you place your money, time after time, to buy basically the same commodities. No work can successfully resist the commodity status of marketing success, and the inevitable mainstreaming of counterculture, when the transformation of rebellion into money is the fundamental operation of our pop-cultural machinery and the commercialization of deviance has become the universal theme of American culture.

Author's Note:

An earlier version of this essay was given as an illustrated presentation to the "Homer and Popular Culture Conference" at Santa Cruz in November, 1995, and expanded versions were given at the "Re: Joyce" conference at Dundee in July, 1996 and the "Classical Joyce" International Conference at Rome in June, 1998. I am grateful to the organizers of those events, Mary-Kay Gamel, Julian Wolfreys, Cheryl Herr and R. B. Kershner, and indebted to the helpful discussions they generated.

Endnotes:

(1) See "Ulysses, Order, and Myth" in Selected Prose of T. S. Eliot. Ed. Frank Kermode (New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1975), 177.

(2) Jamie Hewlett and Alan Martin, Tank Girl: The Odyssey (New York: DC Comics, Deadlines Publications Limited, 1995). Peter Milligan is credited as writer, Jamie Hewlett as artist, Nathan Eyring as colorist and Annie Parkhouse as letterer. The series came out over a four- month period: No. 1 in June, No. 2 in July, No. 3 in August and No. 4 in September. References to the whole series will be identified in my text by TGO, and references to specific volumes by TGO plus the volume number (TGO 1, 2, 3 or 4).

(3) Much of this information was culled from an "Unauthorized Biography" of Tank Girl and other information that can be found at the Tank Girl web site < http://www.dos.qmw.ac.uk/~bob/stuff/tg/> run by Bob Rosenberg (bob@dcs.gmw.ac.uk).

(4)The photograph was taken while Thatcher was visiting British troops in West Germany. It was recently reprinted in Roy Strong, The Story of Britain (London, 1996) and in the Times Literary Supplement, September 20, 1996, p. 9. The very day Tank Girl came to life the Daily Mail announced that Tory MP David Sumberg was demanding an inquiry and filing a complaint to Education Secretary Kenneth Baker because "crude, obscene and offensive" poems by Tony Harrison had been required A-level reading for their 16-year-old daughter. This came after two months of public altercation prompted by the BBC Channel 4 broadcast of a video production of Harrison's poem v. (4 November 1987). Details of the Harrison BBC controversy can be found in Tony Harrison, v. (Newcastle upon Tyne, 1989), a special edition of the poem by Bloodaxe Books .