Life

How Can Men Help End Rape Culture? By Emulating Abraham.

As I read through the growing stream of #MeToo posts last week, I was among the many men unsure of how to respond. The experiences behind each post describing sexual harassment; some horrific, others horrifically commonplace, reflect a state of our culture that must reckon with how we allow men to treat women. Lest we…

Breaking News

John Kasich Jokes With Brooklyn Orthodox That He Prefers Abraham to Moses

John Kasich bantered with haredi Orthodox Jews about which biblical figure was most significant and other lessons from the Jewish Bible. The Ohio governor and one of three Republicans left vying for the party’s presidential nomination toured a Jewish book store in Borough Park, a Brooklyn neighborhood, Tuesday, Jewish Insider reported. New York State’s primary…

Israel News

Hiking the Path of Abraham Through Unseen Corners of West Bank

Bani Naim is a Palestinian village straight out of the Bible. Tradition has it that the beige hilltop hamlet is the site from which Abraham watched the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah. It is also supposedly the resting place of Lot, Abraham’s nephew in the Book of Genesis. On my hiking trip to the village…

Opinion

IDF Chief Rabbi: No Link to Temple Mount in Islam

The chief rabbi of the Israel Defense Forces, Brigadier General Rafi Peretz, said during a lecture to seminary students in early November that the Temple Mount has no legitimate religious significance in Islam and that Muslims “imagine” a religious bond to the site. When they pray, he said, they bow in the direction of Mecca…

Opinion

Abraham Goes ‘On Trial’ for Attempted Murder

The Binding of Isaac It’s a question that has puzzled believers, scholars and philosophers for millennia: Did Abraham really intend to kill his son Isaac? On November 16, Jewish New Yorkers had a chance to decide the question once and for all, when Abraham was put on trial for child endangerment and attempted second-degree murder….

Culture

The Secret Jewish History of Tax Day

Like it or not — and who among us actually likes it — come April 15, you will need to have filed your 2013 income tax return with the Internal Revenue Service. Perhaps one way to feel better about the painful and often inconvenient process is to recognize that it has roots in the biblical…

The Schmooze

Ranking ‘Pantheon’ of 6,000 Years of Jews

Well, rankings of the world’s most famous people from the past 6,000 years are in. Israeli-born actress Natalie Portman has beat out Ariel Sharon, Moses has an ever-so-slight lead over Muhammad and Jesus Christ is apparently the world’s number one Jew. The project, an endeavor of the Macro Connections group at MIT’s media lab, includes…

Culture

Joseph, First Diaspora Success Story

Miketz — At the End of Two Years Genesis 41:1–44:17 Because We Were Strangers Joseph is the archetype of the Diaspora Jewish success story. He is the first ever to make it big in the royal court. He is the first to understand what it means to live outside Israel, initially under duress but later…