Essendon, along with North Melbourne, are mourning the loss of club legend Barry Davis. (Diego Fedele/AAP PHOTOS)

Barry Davis, who has the rare distinction of top playing honours at two AFL clubs, has died aged 80.

Subscribe now for unlimited access .

or signup to continue reading

All articles from our website & app

The digital version of Today's Paper

Breaking news alerts direct to your inbox

Interactive Crosswords, Sudoku and Trivia

All articles from the other in your area

Davis was a premiership player, best and fairest winner and captain at Essendon and then North Melbourne in his 1961-75 playing career.

He is a life member at the two clubs, a member of their teams of the century and a 1997 inductee into the Australian Football Hall Of Fame.

He also coached the Bombers in 1978-80 before resigning and is credited with laying plenty of groundwork for his successor Kevin Sheedy, who broke their premiership drought in 1984.

Davis was a key figure in North's 1973 recruiting coup, when the Kangaroos took full advantage of the then-VFL's new 10-year rule.

Under the rule, players who had served their clubs for a decade could move to another team of their choice.

The Kangaroos swooped and recruited Davis from Essendon, as well as South Melbourne's John Rantall and Geelong key forward Doug Wade.

All were current or former captains at their previous clubs and the VFL scrapped the rule soon after.

Davis captained North to their inaugural 1975 premiership and then retired.

"Barry Davis was a brilliant defender and ruck rover who was one of the greats of the VFL in the 1960s and 1970s," AFL chief executive Andrew Dillon said in a tribute.

"A triple premiership player and five-time best and fairest winner across his career, he was also a regular state representative for Victoria and a hero to young fans at both of his clubs.

"Barry will be remembered as a pivotal player at both the Bombers and the Kangaroos and we send our sympathies to his family, many friends and past team mates."

Davis played 218 games for Essendon and played in their 1962 and '65 premiership teams.

He was a three-time best and fairest winner at the Bombers and captained them in 1970-71 as well as twice finishing runner-up in the Brownlow Medal.

"When Essendon people think of Barry, they will remember him both as a champion player and true gentleman," said Bombers chief executive Craig Vozzo.

Davis also played 11 games for Victoria.

Australian Associated Press

DAILY

Your morning news

Today's top stories curated by our news team. Also includes evening update.

WEEKLY

Sport

The latest news, results & expert analysis.

WEEKLY

Note from the Editor

Get the editor's insights: what's happening & why it matters.

WEEKLY

FootyHQ

Love footy? We've got all the action covered.

DAILY DURING OLYMPICS

The Olympic breakfast

Wake up to a tasty serving of overnight news and excitement from the 2024 Olympic Games in Paris.

WEEKLY

Explore Travel

Every Sunday explore destinations, deals, tips & travel writing to transport you around Australia and the globe.

WEEKDAYS

The Echidna

Sharp. Close to the ground. Digging deep. Your weekday morning newsletter on national affairs, politics and more.

TWICE WEEKLY

The Informer

Your essential national news digest: all the big issues on Wednesday and great reading every Saturday.

WEEKLY

Motoring

Get news, reviews and expert insights every Thursday from CarExpert, ACM's exclusive motoring partner.

TWICE WEEKLY

Voice of Real Australia

Get real, Australia! Let the ACM network's editors and journalists bring you news and views from all over.

AS IT HAPPENS

Breaking news alert

Be the first to know when news breaks.

DAILY

Today's Paper Alert

Your digital replica of Today's Paper. Ready to read from 5am!

DAILY

Your favourite puzzles

Test your skills with interactive crosswords, sudoku & trivia. Fresh daily!

Advertisement

Ad

Advertisement

Ad