The University of Ostrava (UO) is a public research university educating nearly 9,000 students in six faculties. Our Faculty of Science, Faculty of Arts, Faculty of Fine Arts, Faculty of Medicine, Faculty of Social Studies, and Faculty of Education offer a wide variety of disciplines and unconventional combinations of majors.

As a dynamic and intellectually challenging modern institution the University of Ostrava provides an international environment in which to study. Our campus is spread primarily throughout the old city centre providing a stimulating environment to contemplate the living arts and sciences. Teaching at UO is research-driven, and its programmes are often taught by active researchers.

The university is proud to retain lecturers, professors and researchers that are leading figures in their fields of expertise whom are scientists and inspirational and open-minded personalities with a vivid sense of creativity.

The small size of the university and its relative youth (founded in 1991) allows for a strongly individual approach to our students and flexible reactions to the needs of a modern society and labour market. The university offers high quality education and many possibilities for those who wish to fulfil their visions: whether in language study, founding a student organisation, or gaining practical experience. The university actively searches for opportunities for students to raise their qualifications and help them commence their careers.

The University of Ostrava has established cooperation with several local organisations (such as a local studio of the public Czech Television) that provide students with valuable work experience. Community engagement is an integral part of the university’s mission of education and research. The UO and its faculties, student organisations and scientific institutes establish and promote hundreds of public events every year; which include free workshops, lectures, seminars, experiential events, scientific adventures, charitable events, international gatherings, sporting and cultural events, art exhibitions, happenings, alumni reunions, concerts, and theatre plays.

The University of Ostrava is an essential part of the city and its social life, and continues to cooperate with a steadily increasing number of cultural organisations and local institutions.

Our application period is from the 1st of November through the end of February for undergraduate and master’s degrees offered in the following academic year. PhD candidates have different application dates which depend on the faculty.

You will be required to pay an application fee in order to have your application processed. Instructions on how to pay the fee are provided at the end of the application.Your application will be processed within the Study Department of the Faculty at which you wish to study. The Study Department will follow up with you regarding entrance exams, additional documentation and notification of acceptance.

Applicants whose previous education is outside the Czech Republic will need to have their academic qualifications evaluated for equivalency to the Czech education system. This process is known as nostrification and ought to be initiated as soon as possible.

Degree seeking students with academic qualifications earned outside the Czech Republic are required to verify their previous education as part of the application process to be a student in the Czech Republic.

This process is known as nostrification and results in the evaluation and recognition of your prior education.

If you intend to apply for a bachelor’s degree and only have completed your Secondary Education, then you must seek nostrification through our local regional authority within the Czech Republic.

The University of Ostrava’s Rectorate is permitted to evaluate foreign qualifications earned at the university level. However, the qualification you earned must be related to a degree offered by the University of Ostrava, otherwise, you would need to seek recognition at a different Czech university.

University of Ostrava offers various exchange opportunities both for domestic and international students as well as for academic and non-academic staff from all around the world.

Students can choose from a wide range of study mobility programmes. Academic or non-academic staff may accentuate teaching, research, or training.If you are thinking about a mobility programme and would like to spend one or two semesters abroad try one of the two main study exchange options.

The University of Ostrava is striving to ensure a comparable European level of quality in its degree programs, as evidenced by the fact that it holds the DS Label and ECTS Label certificates.

It regularly extends the range of study programs and subjects in a foreign language (mainly in English). The Faculty of Social Studies also carries out a joint study program, in cooperation with the Fachhochschlue Campus Wien and the University of Trnava, in the field of management of social work services in the follow-up Master's degree program. The program of Physiotherapy in the Italian language is realized at a foreign branch in Switzerland, where about 180 self-paying students study.

The aim of the University of Ostrava is to create an international academic environment and to increase the number of mobility students and academic staff and to promote cooperation with other universities and research institutes in the Czech Republic and abroad, in order to exchange experience and share education, research and development capacities.