The University of Ostrava (UO) is a public research university educating nearly 9,000 students in six faculties. Our Faculty of Science, Faculty of Arts, Faculty of Fine Arts and Music, Faculty of Medicine, Faculty of Social Studies, and Faculty of Education offer a wide variety of disciplines and unconventional combinations of majors.

As a dynamic and intellectually challenging modern institution the University of Ostrava provides an international environment in which to study. Our campus is spread primarily throughout the old city centre providing a stimulating environment to contemplate the living arts and sciences. Teaching at UO is research-driven, and its programmes are often taught by active researchers.

The university is proud to retain lecturers, professors and researchers that are leading figures in their fields of expertise whom are scientists and inspirational and open-minded personalities with a vivid sense of creativity.

The small size of the university and its relative youth (founded in 1991) allows for a strongly individual approach to our students and flexible reactions to the needs of a modern society and labour market. The university offers high quality education and many possibilities for those who wish to fulfil their visions: whether in language study, founding a student organisation, or gaining practical experience. The university actively searches for opportunities for students to raise their qualifications and help them commence their careers.

The University of Ostrava has established cooperation with several local organisations (such as a local studio of the public Czech Television) that provide students with valuable work experience. Community engagement is an integral part of the university’s mission of education and research. The UO and its faculties, student organisations and scientific institutes establish and promote hundreds of public events every year; which include free workshops, lectures, seminars, experiential events, scientific adventures, charitable events, international gatherings, sporting and cultural events, art exhibitions, happenings, alumni reunions, concerts, and theatre plays.

The University of Ostrava is an essential part of the city and its social life, and continues to cooperate with a steadily increasing number of cultural organisations and local institutions. Read more about the UO's community engagement role below at the “UO @live” section.

Updated: 03. 04. 2020