The University of Ostrava is a dynamic educational institution with a wide range of academic opportunities within the humanities and fine arts, social and natural sciences, and health and education fields. Our six faculties are filled with leading figures in their respective fields, who are not only scientists, but also inspirational and open-minded personalities with a vivid sense of creativity. The University of Ostrava serves nearly 10,000 students with a strongly individual approach and proactively adapts to the needs of society and the labor market. In addition to education and research, our university is actively involved in the community; the faculties, student organizations and scientific institutes promote hundreds of public events a year including, open workshops, lectures, and seminars, as well as experiential events, scientific adventures, international gatherings, art exhibitions, concerts, and theatre plays. Once known as the "Steel Heart of Czechoslovakia", our industrial heritage makes for a dramatic backdrop in which to study. The city of our university's namesake has transformed into a modern and vibrant place with our campus spread throughout the historical city center providing students a stimulating environment to contemplate the arts and sciences.

The University of Ostrava is a dynamic educational institution with a wide range of academic opportunities within the humanities and fine arts, social and natural sciences, and health and education fields. Our six faculties are filled with leading figures in their respective fields, who are not only scientists, but also inspirational and open-minded personalities with a vivid sense of creativity. The University of Ostrava serves nearly 10,000 students with a strongly individual approach and proactively adapts to the needs of society and the labor market. In addition to education and research, our university is actively involved in the community; the faculties, student organizations and scientific institutes promote hundreds of public events a year including, open workshops, lectures, and seminars, as well as experiential events, scientific adventures, international gatherings, art exhibitions, concerts, and theatre plays. Once known as the "Steel Heart of Czechoslovakia", our industrial heritage makes for a dramatic backdrop in which to study. The city of our university's namesake has transformed into a modern and vibrant place with our campus spread throughout the historical city center providing students a stimulating environment to contemplate the arts and sciences.

One of the important factors when considering a master's degree is the cost of study. Luckily, there are many options available to help students fund their master's programme. Download your copy of the Scholarship Guide to find out which scholarships from around the world could be available to you, and how to apply for them.

In this guide you will find:

Where to look for scholarship opportunities

How to apply to scholarships relevant to you

A list of available scholarships around the world

A scholarship application checklist

Download Scholarship Guide