With Bruce Willis’ health declining, his ex-wife Demi Moore shows a solid front, as she and Willis’ new wife, Emma Heming Willis, make efforts to bind together as a blended family.

The ‘Die Hard’ actor and the ‘Ghost’ actress got married in 1987 after meeting at the ‘Stakeout’ movie premier. The couple had three children after they got married. Rumer was born in 1988, Scout in 1991, and Tallulah in 1994.

The 67-year-old Hollywood tough guy and Moore separated in 1998 and in 2000, they decided to go through with a divorce. There were no frills in the proceedings, as Willis and Moore reportedly divorced the same day they filed.

Willis wonders what went wrong

Later in the same year, Willis lamented that he didn’t know what went wrong to end the marriage.

“I still love Demi,” he told Rolling Stone. “We’re very close.”

“We have three children whom we will continue to raise together, and we’re probably as close now as we ever were,” Willis explained. “We realize we have a lifelong commitment to our kids.”

“Our friendship continues. The institution has been set aside … It’s difficult to live your life and marriage under a magnifying glass, which is what happens to movie star couples.”

Willis and Moore as co-parents

Willis and Moore have apparently found a way to work through their issues and stay good friends, as they raised their girls into adulthood, and when tough times hit — and even when times are good it seems — they are a tight-knit family.

The Willis/Moore ladies released a statement Thursday that the notorious ‘Die Hard’ actor is suffering from dementia.

The announcement comes less than a year after Willis announced his retirement from the big screen in March 2020 due to an aphasia diagnosis.

The family that stays together

The family all still congregate together, including Bruce Willis’ new wife, actress Emma Heming Willis.

Heming Willis has made a pointed effort to include Moore in family events including birthdays, holidays, and other parties.

Further, it was the five Willis/Moore women who penned a joint statement “In Love and Gratitude” to friends and fans who have supported the family in this hard time.

On Father’s Day, Moore wrote a tribute to her children’s father on Instagram, posting a photo of their whole blended family together.

“Happy Father’s Day, Bruce! Your kids are so lucky to have you,” Moore wrote in the caption.