Reviews and recommendations are unbiased and products are independently selected. Postmedia may earn an affiliate commission from purchases made through links on this page.

Article content

Disco singer Donna Summer has died of cancer at the age of 63. Summer had been living in Englewood, Fla., with her husband Bruce Sudano at the time of her death.

Summer’s family issued a statement, saying she died Thursday morning and that they “are at peace celebrating her extraordinary life and her continued legacy.”

We apologize, but this video has failed to load.

Try refreshing your browser, or

tap here to see other videos from our team.

Donna Summer dead at 63 Back to video

“Words truly can’t express how much we appreciate your prayers and love for our family at this sensitive time,” the statement read.

Advertisement 2

Story continues below

This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

THIS CONTENT IS RESERVED FOR SUBSCRIBERS

Enjoy the latest local, national and international news.

Exclusive articles by Conrad Black, Barbara Kay and others. Plus, special edition NP Platformed and First Reading newsletters and virtual events.

Unlimited online access to National Post and 15 news sites with one account.

National Post ePaper, an electronic replica of the print edition to view on any device, share and comment on.

Daily puzzles including the New York Times Crossword.

Support local journalism.

SUBSCRIBE FOR MORE ARTICLES

Enjoy the latest local, national and international news.

Exclusive articles by Conrad Black, Barbara Kay and others. Plus, special edition NP Platformed and First Reading newsletters and virtual events.

Unlimited online access to National Post and 15 news sites with one account.

National Post ePaper, an electronic replica of the print edition to view on any device, share and comment on.

Daily puzzles including the New York Times Crossword.

Support local journalism.

REGISTER / SIGN IN TO UNLOCK MORE ARTICLES

Create an account or sign in to continue with your reading experience.

Access articles from across Canada with one account.

Share your thoughts and join the conversation in the comments.

Enjoy additional articles per month.

Get email updates from your favourite authors.

Don't have an account? Create Account

or

Article content

[np-related]

Harvey Levin of TMZ is reporting on his Twitter account that Summer was suffering from lung cancer, allegedly developed after the singer inhaled toxic dust particles following the 9/11 terrorist attacks on New York City.

Summer came to prominence just as disco was burgeoning, and came to define the era with a string of No. 1 hits and her beauty queen looks. But unlike some other stars of disco who faded as the music became less popular, she was able to grow beyond it and later segued to a pop-rock sound.

Known for her 1970s disco standards Last Dance, Hot Stuff and Bad Girls, Summer won five Grammy Awards over the course of her career.

In the 1980s, she released the hits She Works Hard for the Money and This Time I Know It’s for Real.

Born on New Year’s Eve, 1948, as LaDonna Adrian Gaines just outside of Boston to devout Christian parents, Summer was one of seven children.

Her singing career began in the church, and she often recounted the early influence of her mother singing to her around the house, or sitting her down to listen to classical music if she was misbehaving. That early understanding of the power of music to soothe and change one’s mood would come to colour the young woman’s dreams of becoming a singer.

Advertisement 3

Story continues below

This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

Article content

At 18, Summer left home for Broadway, where she’d audition for Hair. She’d win a part when the musical went on the road to Germany, and there she’d meet the career-launching producer Giorgio Moroder. After early successes in Europe, he’d help launch her solo career back in the U.S. with Love to Love You Baby in 1975. The song would hit No. 2 on the Billboard charts the next year.

Summer was the mother of two daughters with Sudano, whom she married in the 1980s.

She released her last album, Crayons, in 2008. It was her first full studio album in 17 years. She also performed on American Idol that year with its top female contestants.

TMZ went on to report that the singer, who many considered the “Queen of Disco,” was apparently working on a new album.

Here’s a video of one of Summer’s classic tracks. Summer said in a 2008 interview with ABC’s Nightline that she found in the inspiration for the song from an elderly woman working as a bathroom attendant at the Grammy Awards. The song would become an anthem for women’s rights.

Soon after the release of that massive hit song, Summer became a born-again Christian and faced controversy when she was accused of making anti-gay comments in relation to the AIDS epidemic. Summer denied making the comments, but was the target of a boycott.

Advertisement 4

Story continues below

This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

Article content

Still, even as disco went out of fashion she remained a fixture in dance clubs, endlessly sampled and remixed into contemporary dance hits.

Reaction from the music and entertainment worlds is starting to filter in over Twitter to the singer’s death. Here’s a sampling:

World renowned DJ and producer A-Trak:

http://twitter.com/#!/atrak/status/203155805237817346

Red Hot Chili Peppers bassist, Flea:

http://twitter.com/#!/flea333/status/203156745881788416

English electropop stars La Roux:

http://twitter.com/#!/larouxofficial/status/203159009224695808

Working class TV show legend Roseanne Barr:

http://twitter.com/#!/TheRealRoseanne/status/203159953387700226

Neil Patrick Harris (or Doogie, as he was known during the years of Summer’s biggest hits):

http://twitter.com/#!/ActuallyNPH/status/203159535882477569

With files from The Associated Press

Article content

Share this article in your social network

Latest from Shopping Essentials