By Peter Fish

March 24, 2021

The Scottsdale Football Club held a well-attended reunion for past players, officials and supporters on Saturday but those in attendance were saddened to hear of the deaths of two former players – Billy Burns and Arthur Dilworth.

Arthur Dilworth, born in 1932, began playing for the club in the 1950s, and represented the club for more than 12 years finishing up in Bob Wilson’s 1969 team, just a year before Burns arrived.

Dilworth’s period with the club was interspersed by a couple of years working and playing at Rosebery, and he later coached Branxholm to a premiership in 1970.

One Branxholm team mate recalled him as a good old fashioned defender with a prodigious drop kick.

“And he was tough. He took out Barry Whish-Wilson in that 1970 NEFU grand final, and that was a crucial factor behind us winning,” he said.

Arthur is acknowledged as one of the best eight ball players in the North-East and he also became very proficient at lawn bowls and golf.

The diminutive Billy Burns, born in 1947, was recruited by former Brunswick team mate Bob Wilson in 1970 and for six years he became a much-admired member of the club.

Skilled on both sides of his body, he was a prolific goal kicker and enjoyed nothing more than provoking the North Launceston supporters especially at York Park where the Swampy ladies were always ready to trade insults over the fence with their most despised opponent.

In 1971 Scottsdale qualified for its fifth grand final in seven years, and cruised to victory, crushing City-South by 93 points.

Burns created history by booting nine goals in that match, a feat that has never been matched.

The Examiner’s football scribe at the time Tony Benneworth wrote, “Burns made a joke of City’s fullback line by slamming through nine goals straight, five of which were kicked after he soared high to pull in spectacular marks – and he is only 5ft 6in high.”

Burns coached the club’s Under 19 team, and his time at the club concluded when he led the Reserves to a NTFA premiership in 1976 as a playing coach. Fittingly it was against North Launceston.

He played in three premiership teams – 1970, 1971 and 1973.

Coincidentally both Burns and Dilworth worked for Hydro Tasmania when they lived in Scottsdale.

Club president Cameron Moore said the club mourned the loss of two of its past players.

“Both Arthur and Billy are remembered as great servants of the club, and we acknowledge their passing, and send condolences to their families,” he said.