This book analyzes devolution as it affects the English Regions, working from the perspective of uneven development, and drawing on the rich tradition of regional geography. Currently, London is the power centre ruling over the other English regions. The first part of the book looks at how this regional structure has arisen, and the theories that can be used to analyze it. The contributors discuss the nature of regional problems and governance, the institutions involved in regional governance and regional approaches to economic development.

The second part of the book devotes a chapter to each English region, examining each region’s unique characteristics, and the opportunities created for it by devolution. By looking carefully at the regions, this part of the book sheds light on the question of whether Regional governance benefits the regions, or simply rescales governance to introduce another layer of bureaucracy.

Biography

Irene Hardill is Professor of Economic Geography at the Nottingham Trent University Graduate School, Business, Law and Social Sciences, and is currently Secretary and Vice Chair of the Regional Studies Association. She has a long standing research interest in the meaning of ‘work’ (paid and unpaid) in its broadest sense to individuals, households and communities.

Dr Paul Benneworth is a Research Councils UK Academic Fellow in Territorial Governance at the Centre for Urban and Regional Development Studies, University of Newcastle upon Tyne, and a visiting fellow at the Institute for Governance Studies, University of Twente, the Netherlands.

Mark Baker is a Senior Lecturer in Planning Policy & Practice and the current Head of Planning and Landscape within the School of Environment and Development at Manchester University. He is a chartered town planner with previous professional planning experience in UK local and central government. His teaching and research interests focus on the operation of the UK planning system and, especially, regional and strategic planning.

Leslie Budd is Reader in Social Enterprise at the Open University Business School at the Open University. He is an economist who has written widely on the relationship between regional economic development and growth and international financial markets. He has worked at a number of universities and research centres in the UK, France and Germany. Leslie is currently Chair of the Regional Studies Association and was born in London where he still lives.