From winning India’s first Grand Slam to doing it 13 times over, India’s Davis Cup Captain and former tennis player Padma Shri Mahesh Bhupathi launches his first academy in Goa at Gera’s River of Joy

Dominating the tennis court for more than 20 years beginning from the late 90s, ace player Mahesh Bhupathi is credited with revolutionising tennis in India with his counterpart Leander Paes.

One of India’s greatest sports icons, Bhupathi was born in Tamil Nadu in 1974 and started playing tennis at seven, not knowing that the sport would change his life forever. His father was his first coach. Following successful stints at various tournaments, he turned pro in 1995.

Within two years, he managed to do the unimaginable. In 1997, he brought home India’s first ever Grand Slam in mixed doubles playing alongside Japan’s Rika Hiraki. And thus began the journey of this young Indian tennis player who set a benchmark for the sport in India and was unstoppable.

Tennis in general teaches a lot in life: to win, lose, deal with losses and rebound from losses; there are a lot of good things from sports. This is why I started MBTA.

He went on to win 13 Grand Slams in doubles and mixed doubles; interestingly, eight of which were in mixed doubles alongside seven different partners. He showed his true prowess in mixed doubles, many believed.

As a matter of fact, Bhupathi is regarded as the best mixed doubles player to grace the Grand Slams, according to some of the best in the sport. After giving the world more than 20 years of impeccable intense tennis, he announced his retirement in 2016. But, he has not given up on tennis and is dedicated to promoting the sport through the Mahesh Bhupathi Tennis Academy (MBTA), where young promising players get trained under the guidance of the best.

The Padma Shri awardee was recently in Goa to launch his first academy in the state at Gera Developers’ ChildCentric Homes.

Goa’s love for sports is an open secret – be it football, cricket, badminton, etc. Young Goans have made us all proud by representing the country in various sports on international platforms and winning accolades. With the Mahesh Bhupathi Tennis Academy at Gera’s River of Joy, the opportunities are now easily accessible for young tennis players of the state.

VIVA GOA talks to the Davis Cup Captain for India about Gera’s award-winning concept and his first tennis academy in Goa.

What attracted you to tennis?

I have been playing since I was seven years old. My dad put me into tennis at a very early age and it has been a way of life for me ever since. Although today it has become life.

What was your vision behind the Mahesh Bhupathi Tennis Academy (MBTA)?

For me, I personally wanted to put tennis rackets in as many children’s hands as I could. Tennis in general teaches a lot in life: to win, lose, deal with losses and rebound from losses; there are a lot of good learnings from sports. This is why I started MBTA.

How do you think Gera’s River of Joy project aligns with the vision of Mahesh Bhupathi Tennis Academy forward?

Tennis – although a popular sport in the county – is not very easily accessible, as in most places you have to be a member of a club to be able to play the sport. This comes at a certain cost or there is a membership list that takes years to attain. With its River of Joy project, Gera is making the sport a lot more accessible to families and children, which from a sports perspective adds to the growth of sports in the country.

What do you feel about the concept of Child Centric Homes by Gera?

I think what they are doing is unique. They are bringing tennis along with other sports and activities spearheaded by experts to the doorstep of the residents. From a parent’s perspective, I know how complicated it can be to manage your child’s extracurricular activities owing to your hectic schedules. But with all these facilities at your doorstep, that in itself is a huge advantage.

You already play a major role in a similar collaboration with Gera at their Song of Joy project in Pune. How has the experience been?

We have just begun and are slowly building on the interest among the children. The response has been great so far. It is nice to see the enthusiasm and liking for the game.

How will your academy go about coaching young residents at this new project?

Firstly, we want the children to enjoy the sport, which is our main aim. From there on we will build on their skills.

Why doesn’t Mahesh Bhupathi try to be the ‘coach Gopichand’ of tennis?

I don’t coach because I cannot give 10 straight hours on the court. Maybe that’s why.

After Leander Paes and you, there are very few Indians who have made it to the higher rankings of world tennis. What could the reasons be?

Like the US, Argentina, France, Spain and other European countries that have 10-15 players competing every year, tennis is not in the DNA of Indians which makes it difficult for us to churn out Grand Slam champions every year. Having said that, we still have players like Sania Mirza and Rohan Bopanna bringing Grand Slams. Before Leander and I, no one won the Grand Slam for India 100 years ago. But things have changed over the past 25 years. We have to pray for a miracle until the sport gets into our DNAs.

Do you have any plans to open a standalone academy for Goans anytime soon?

Not really. We have a state-of-the-art academy in Bangalore which is our flagship for more than a decade now. This is where advance-level players go if they are good enough. Besides, Goa is a new market for us. We have ventured into this new market with a unique partner. It is exciting considering the captive audience.

(The interview first appeared in Viva Goa Lifestyle Magazine)