Smart bear

An amazing, chess-loving pet.

NIC’s Café

Conor McGregor, another boxer that loves our game, and scantily-clad ladies (playing chess) that got a Tory MP in trouble.

Your Move

The World Champion’s manners. And a letter from Prague by David Navara.

The strongest tournament ever

How high does Altibox Norway Chess 2017 reach on the list?

Fair & Square

Does Madeleine Albright agree that international relations is like a game of chess?

Clash of the Titans

Norway Chess celebrated five years of top-flight chess in Stavanger with a stunning line-up replete with today’s stars. Levon Aronian stole the World Champion’s limelight when he defeated him in a game for the ages to claim one of his finest victories.

Celeb64: Heath Ledger

Interview: Levon Aronian

A lively, at times philosophical talk about Magnus, Tal, Bruckner, Yerevan, San Sebastian and the other good things in life.

Judit Polgar’s column

On Peter Leko, a most reliable force on the first board of the Hungarian team.

Deep thinking?

Jonathan Rowson wrote an enthralling review of Garry Kasparov’s masterful new book on his matches against the computer and the future of AI.

Grand Chess Tour de France

Magnus Carlsen won the first leg of the GCT, but the World Champion needed a tiebreak after local hero Maxime Vachier-Lagrave went on the rampage in the blitz.

Maximize Your Tactics

Find the right moves.

Short Stories

Nigel Short visited the Cayman Islands, where a fine chess seed seems to have fallen on fertile soil.

Magnus reloaded

Hot on the heels of his Paris triumph, the World Champion also claimed the Your Next Move leg of the GCT in Leuven.

SOS: the Simple Scotch

An effective weapon against a venerable opening.

China wins World Teams

Without losing a single game, China defended their title in Khanty-Mansiysk. A report by the one and only Adhiban Baskaran.

Chess Pattern Recognition

Silently sacking the exchange.

Sadler on Books

'What makes a really good book?’

Matlakov European Champion

Jan Timman takes a look at the top-finishers in Minsk.