Natalia Shulzhenko

Partner, Belarus

Natalia joined the company’s Minsk office in 2009. She is in charge of the services offered by SCHNEIDER GROUP in Belarus: accounting outsourcing, financial, tax and legal consulting, compliance, interim management as well as business setup and manufacturing localisation. Natalia has extensive experience in accounting, financial and management reporting, taxation of subsidiaries of international companies and foreign representative offices in Belarus. Natalia actively contributes to the professional community, presenting at various conferences and seminars. Prior to joining SCHNEIDER GROUP, Natalia worked as chief accountant for international companies in manufacturing, energy, construction and professional services industries. She has over 20 years of professional experience. Natalia graduated from the Moscow State University of Economics, Statistics and Informatics with a degree in Accounting, Analysis and Audit. She is a certified expert in International Financial Reporting (DipIFR RUS) and a member of the Association of Chartered Certified Accountants (ACCA). Natalia speaks Russian, Belarusian and English.

Sergey Odintsov

Head of Legal & Tax Practice

Belarus

Sergey provides legal and tax advice to Belarusian and international businesses. He focuses on corporate and commercial law, taxation, business setup and restructuring, as well as investment projects and supports company clients in mergers and acquisitions. Prior to joining SCHNEIDER GROUP, Sergey worked for one of the Big Four companies in Belarus, where he gained significant experience in legal advice for clients in various industries, including construction, oil and gas, logistics and transportation, retail, pharmaceuticals and IT. Since 2006, Sergey has been collaborating with the International Finance Corporation (IFC) and the World Bank on the “Doing Business in...” project. Sergey has more than 15 years of professional experience. He is a licensed lawyer and tax consultant. Sergey speaks Russian, Belarusian and English.

Natalia Zolotaya

BD & Talent Lead

Belarus

Natalia started working for the company in 2019. She is in charge of both internal and external HR projects, including talent acquisition, personnel training, and development. Prior to joining SCHNEIDER GROUP, Natalia spent 15 years with an international automotive company, an importer of German Volkswagen Group in Belarus, where she was in charge of business development, procurement, and international contracts. She has gained extensive experience with international projects in product management and personnel training. Natalia actively contributes to the professional community and business associations, being a regular speaker at seminars and conferences. She is a graduate in Business Administration, HR and Management and completed an additional training programme for executives by BMWi (Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Climate Action) in collaboration with Internationale Weiterbildung und Entwicklung GmbH and Belarusian State University School of Business and Technology Management. Natalia is an ICU- certified business coach. Natalia speaks Russian, German and English.

Sergey Akulich

Accounting Project Lead

Sergey joined SCHNEIDER GROUP in 2018. He is responsible for projects in accounting and taxation and advises company clients on accounting and management reporting setup, business process efficiency assessment and operational risks identification. Prior to SCHNEIDER GROUP, Sergey worked as chief accountant at industrial and agricultural enterprises and manufacturing and construction companies for over 10 years. Sergey has a degree in Economics and Enterprise Management and constantly improves his accounting and tax qualifications.

Nikolay Golaydo

1C Architect, Belarus

Nikolay joined the company’s Minsk office in 2014 as senior programmer. He is now holding the position of 1C architect. Nikolay specialises in design and support of information systems based on the Russian 1C platform: analysis of the requirements to the information system, design, IT architecture setup and performance optimisation (servers, database management systems, exchange interfaces with other information systems), setup of distributed databases / data exchange interfaces, configuration of data exchange mechanisms. He is responsible for diagnostics and analysis of technical issues during 1C implementation projects, program code and information system performance optimisation. Nikolay has deep knowledge n accounting, tax, and payroll calculation. He has over 12 years of professional experience. He earned a degree in Automated Data Processing Systems from the Belarusian-Russian University (Mogilev).