“Impressive... leavened by a wonderful imagistic sensibility.”

“Drawing on the language of cinema and oral history, Mendoza debuts with a beguiling and enticing fever dream of sex and violence in the Mexican desert... Mendoza’s depictions of her troubled characters’ inner lives are as indelible as her monstrous visions. This is impossible to put down.”

“I loved the churning gyre of Fury, an enigmatic and audacious novel that proves the truest stories aren't told, they're repeated.”

“An amazing, hypnotic and beautiful novel, like contemplating the desert.”

“Fury has the poetic and savage force of the desert. Its pages are full of tenderness, fear, and a persuasive, rhythmic prose with unforgettable images. It deals with the violence of desire that turns us into drooling, howling dogs that bite, but also with love amidst hostility and neglect. That makes it an unsettling and, at the same time, profoundly moving novel.”

“There is something timeless about Clyo Mendoza’s Fury. It has the music of Scheherazade’s stories, and it tells of an ageless desert and an ageless violence that gives birth to itself with every new generation. It touched upon an open wound in Mexico, and I’m sure that readers everywhere will be enthralled by its power.”

“By tracing the genealogical tree that intertwines the fates of Juan and Lázaro, eternal soldiers in a phantasmagoric limbo of the Mexican Revolution, and a handful of women, whose bodies and loves mutate though they remain as powerful as vengeance, Clyo Mendoza introduces us to dozens of stories of sex, hatred, abandonment, and magic, narrated and deformed by the potent oral traditions that influence the language she conjures to render the ghosts real; it is the hallucinatory and brutal language of the desert.”

“A whirlwind of a novel that sucks the reader in from the opening lines”

“I kept thinking of Kathy Acker as I read Clyo Mendoza's brilliant fever dream of a novel, Fury, but also of Juan Rulfo and Alejandro Jodorowsky. It's weird, gorgeous, shocking and gentle, more or less all at once, and Christina MacSweeney's translation brings it burning across into English with tremendous aplomb.”

“Reading Fury felt like being submerged in a whirlpool of haunting myths, fever dreams, and viscerally real violence—all circling a vortex of damnation. Both bold and exquisite, it’s a remarkable debut novel and one I’ll surely be thinking about for years to come.”

“A stunning debut novel delivered in short chapters with writing that goes from raw to endearing in a flash. This dreamscape of love, death, lust, suffering and eroticism is filled with plot twists and reveals at a relentless pace all the way to the end. It's a dark world in which social structures seem to have collapsed.”

“I found myself audibly gasping and missing train stops. Fury is storytelling at its finest, the kind of book that immerses you completely.”

“A spellbinding tale of the desert and violence and love and grief and the desert and delirium and suffering and echoes and the desert, Clyo Mendoza’s Fury is an extraordinary work of unforgettable fiction. The Mexican poet and author’s debut novel is swarming with striking imagery and a prose so ensorcelling and incantatory that it renders the reader rapt. Mendoza’s plotting, her effortless narrative entwining, the conjured voices peopling her bold tale — each are simply remarkable. Fury pulsates with a wrenching rhythm, an ineluctable song that dazzles, disorients, and destroys. Fury is a masterful story and Mendoza is a commanding storyteller.”