Brookfield, Wis., March 8, 2010 - Fiserv, Inc. (NASDAQ: FISV), the leading global provider of financial services technology solutions, today announced that technology industry veteran Chris Capdevila has joined the company as vice president of Product Management and Strategy for Risk and Compliance Solutions.

Capdevila comes to Fiserv from Oracle Corporation, where he served as vice president of GRC Strategy responsible for driving the strategic direction and roadmap for Oracle's Governance, Risk and Compliance applications. Prior to joining Oracle, Capdevila was the chief executive officer of Logical Apps, which he co-founded in 2000. Logical Apps was acquired by Oracle in November 2007, and the Logical Apps portfolio of automated controls solutions now serve as the core backbone of Oracle's comprehensive offerings in the Governance, Risk and Compliance applications market. Prior to Logical Apps, Chris was a senior management consultant with Price Waterhouse for several years, servicing Fortune 500 companies.

"Chris is a tremendous addition to our risk management solutions leadership team at Fiserv and will play a critical role in moving our product strategy forward to address the needs of our dynamic market, which is evolving from point solutions to more integrated risk solutions, coupled with increasing regulatory complexity," said John Filby, president of Risk and Compliance Solutions at Fiserv. "Chris has a rich history when it comes to understanding customer needs across the breadth of a market and translating them into compelling solutions that stand the test of time."

Capdevila has more than 25 years of experience in technology and financial services and was named "Software Entrepreneur of the Year" by the Software Council in 2005 for his contributions to the Southern California software industry. He is frequently sought out as an advisor and speaker on risk, security and controls best practices.

Capdevila graduated Summa Cum Laude from the University of California-Los Angeles with a Bachelor of Science degree in Economics.

About Fiserv

Fiserv, Inc. (NASDAQ: FISV) is the leading global provider of information management and electronic commerce systems for the financial services industry, driving innovation that transforms experiences for financial institutions and their customers. Ranked No. 1 on the FinTech 100 survey of top technology partners to the financial services industry, Fiserv celebrated its 25th year in 2009. For more information, visit www.fiserv.com.

Media Relations:

Julie Nixon

Public Relations Manager

Financial Institution Services

Fiserv, Inc.

678-375-3744

julie.nixon@fiserv.com