Texas-based EMC Mortgage Corp., subsidiary of the Bear Stearns Cos. Inc., plans to employ about 250 customer service and default operations professionals in the second office the company will open in May in Irvine.

Initially, the new office will serve as an operations center for customer service and default management, according to John Vella, the firm’s president and chief executive.

Interested candidates may apply online at emcmortgagecorp.com.

IN OTHER BUSINESS NEWS:

OC Money Club to launch

OC Money Club’s inaugural event is 5-9 p.m. March 13 at Fox Sports Grill at the Irvine Spectrum Center, 31 Fortune Drive, Irvine.

The OC Money Club seeks to guide people through the process of wealth creation and financial freedom. The club will create a community of like-minded individuals that fosters a support system for one another. The launch event will include speakers DC Cordova, CEO and co-founder of Excellerated Business Schools/Money & You programs; and Nancy Dana, professional business coach, trainer and real estate investor.

Info: 949-681-3797 or www.theocmoneyclub.com.

LogicalApps buys Integra

LogicalApps, an Irvine provider of embedded governance software, acquired the Integra product line from New York-based provider of data management solutions Applimation, which will help LogicalApps solidify its coverage of the Oracle market.

“This acquisition helps us accelerate availability of the leading embedded governance solutions across an array of enterprise resource planning platforms,” said Chris Capdevila, founding chief executive of LogicalApps. The acquisition includes Integra intellectual property, customer licenses and support contracts, and key employees. The terms of the cash transaction was not disclosed.

FS laser sales drive IntraLase profits

IntraLase Corp., which makes eye surgery lasers, said last week that its fourth-quarter profit surged on sales of its IntraLase FS laser and a big tax benefit.

The Irvine-based company earned $12.5 million, compared with a profit of $3.8 million during the same period a year prior. Revenue jumped 37 percent to $37.4 million.

IntraLase said a one-time tax benefit of $11.1 million from the release of the company’s deferred tax valuation allowance helped lift net income. The company also either sold or leased 56 FS lasers, setting a quarter record.

For the full year, it earned $24.3 million, compared with a profit of $9.5 million in 2005. Revenue rose to $131.9 million from $94.4 million.

Standard Pacific’s orders fall 19 percent

Irvine’s Standard Pacific Corp. said last week that net new-home orders for the first two months of the year fell 19 percent, hurt by weakness in Florida and Arizona, two markets hit hard by the national housing slump.

Standard Pacific used what it called aggressive pricing – deep discounts or incentives – to wring a 40 percent increase in orders in California.

The company’s cancellation rate in January and February fell to 24 percent from 26 percent a year ago, but rose in Arizona and Florida. The rate in the fourth quarter was 43 percent.