1.

Be Still and Cool 01:47

"Be still and cool in Thy own mind and spirit, from thy own thoughts, and then thou wilt feel the principle of God to turn thy mind to the Lord God, whereby thou wilt receive God’s strength and power from whence life comes, to allay all blusterings, storms, and tempests." -George Fox, 1658

2.

This Present Time 01:41

"Ye have no time but this present time, therefore prize your time, for your soul’s sake." -George Fox, 1652

3.

Keep Within 01:41

"Keep within. And when they say, ‘Look here or look there is Christ, go not forth, for Christ is within you. And those who try to draw your minds away from the teaching inside you, are opposed to Christ. For the measure’s within, and the light of God is within, and the pearl is within, though hidden." -George Fox, 1652

4.

"Art thou in the Darkness? Mind it not, for if thou dost it will feed thee more. But stand still, and act not, and wait in patience, Till Light arises out of Darkness and leads thee." - James Nayler (1659)

5.

Stand still in that which is pure, after ye see yourselves, and then mercy comes in. After thou seest thy thoughts and temptations, do not think, but submit, and then power comes in. Stand still in that which shows and discovers, and there doth strength immediately come. And stand still in the light, and submit to it, and the other will be hushed and gone, and then contentment comes. -George Fox, 1652

6.

Thy Presence Forever 02:19

Lord, give me and mine the comfortable Enjoyment of thy presence forever, and then try us as thou pleasest: Thy preserving Power is all that I desire of thee, and unto it I commit all, and with thee I leave all; for thou art worthy to dispose of all; and then would Life flow in like a River, to the comforting and strengthening of Soul and Body," -Joan Vokins, 1691

7.

"Give over thine own willing, give over thine own running, give over thine own desiring to know or be anything, and sink down to the seed, which God sows in thy heart, and let that be in thee and grow in thee and breathe in thee and act in thee, and thou shalt find by sweet experience that the Lord knows that and loves and own that, and will lead it to the inheritance of life, which is God's portion." -Isaac Penington, 1681

8.

Oh, love Truth and its testimony, whether its witness be to you or against you. Love it, that into my Mother's house you all may come, and into the chamber of Her that conceived me, where you may embrace and be embraced of my dearly beloved one. Love is His name, Love is His nature, and Love is His life. -Sarah Blackborow, 1658

9.

I saw that there was an ocean of darkness and death, but an infinite ocean of light and love, which flowed over the ocean of darkness. In that, I also saw the infinite love of God, and I had great openings. -George Fox, 1647

10.

"They that love beyond the world cannot be separated by it. Death cannot kill what never dies, nor can spirits ever be divided that love and live in the same Divine Principle, the root and reward of their friendship." -William Penn, 1660

11.

Truth Is One 01:10

"Truth is one and the same always, though ages and generations pass away, and one generation goes and another comes, yet the word and power and spirit of the Living God endures forever, and is the same and never changes." -Margaret Fell, 1660

12.

"Mind that which is eternal, which gathers your hearts together up to the Lord, and lets you see that ye are written in one another's heart." -George Fox, 1653

13.

Our Life Is Love 01:29

"Our life is love, our life is peace, our life is tenderness and bearing with each other, and forgiving one another and not laying accusations one against another; but praying for each other and helping each other up with a tender hand." -Isaac Penington, 1667

14.

"Let not the sons and daughters, nor the handmaids, be stopped in their prophesying, nor the young men in their visions, nor the old men in their dreams... So every one may improve their talents, every one exercise their gifts, and everyone speak as the Spirit gives them utterance... So that all plants may bud and bring forth fruit to the glory of God." -George Fox, 1657

15.

"And may not the Spirit of Christ speak in the female as well as in the male? Who is it that dare limit the Holy One of Israel? For the Light is the same in the male and in the female, and it cometh from Christ... And who is it that dare stop Christ's mouth?" -George Fox, 1657

16.

All Meet Together 01:41

"All meet together everywhere, and in your meetings wait upon the Lord. And take heed of forming words, but mind the Power, and know that which is Eternal, which will keep you all in unity, walking in the Spirit, and will let you see the Lord near you and among you." -George Fox, 1653

17.

We Are A People 01:11

"We are a people that follow after those things that make for peace, love and unity. It is our desire that others' feet may walk in the same. We do deny and bear our testimony against all strife and wars and contention." -Margaret Fell, 1660

18.

Be Patterns, Be Examples 01:51

"Be patterns, be examples, in all countries, places, islands, nations, wherever you come; that your carriage and life may preach among all sorts of people and to them; then you will come to walk cheerfully over the world, answering that of God in everyone; whereby in them ye may be a blessing, and make the witness of God in them to bless you." -George Fox, 1656

"It would go a great way to caution and direct people in their use of the world, if we understood more about the creation of it. For who could we find the confidence to abuse it, while we should see the Great Creator stare us in the face, in all and every part thereof?" -William Penn, 1693

20.

Peace Requires Justice 01:20

21.

Seeds of War 01:50

22.