Celebrations for the 400th anniversary of the birth of Quaker co-founder George Fox will take place throughout 2024. Many of these events can be joined online, from around the world. Find out more.

If you are organising an event to mark the occasion, please let us know by emailing us.

Events

For more information and registration, please click on the name of the event.

George Fox’s Australian Birthday Party

Australia Yearly Meeting

12 July 2024, 16:30 AEST (UTC+10 – find my local time)

A birthday party on the Friday of Australia Yearly Meeting in July, featuring a speaker and a large cake to share. Click the link above for a draft timetable of the yearly meeting. Email David Tehr for more information.

Meeting for Worship and picnic

Clevedon Local Meeting, UK

13 July 2024, 12:00 BST

A Meeting for Worship followed by a picnic in the gardens of the historic Claverham Meeting House for F/friends who attend local Meetings in North Somerset Area. Friends from neighbouring areas are very welcome to attend. Email Russell Richards for more information.

George Fox: the Quaker Peace Testimony

Online, 13 July 2024, 16:00-17:30 BST

Douglas Gwyn has written a number of books on historical Quaker theology. In this session, Douglas Gwyn will look at George Fox and the Quaker peace testimony.

Bring and Share Lunch and Songs

Alton Meeting House, UK

13 July 2024

Hampshire and the Islands Area Meeting will be holding an Area Business Meeting followed by a bring and share lunch and celebration of George Fox’s 400th birthday. We will be looking at some of his writings and considering their relevance for us today. This will be followed by singing the George Fox song.

Birthday Celebration

Peterborough Meeting House, UK

13 July 2024

Cambridgeshire (UK) Area Meeting will be celebrating George Fox’s 400th birthday with an all-age gathering of local Quakers at Peterborough Meeting House on Saturday 13th July, including local visits, worship, food, singing, dancing – and birthday cake!

Celebration at Sudbury Meeting House

13 July 2024, 13.00-17.00 BST

Concert: War and Peace in Music (‘Song of the Birds’ by Pablo Casals, ‘Sonata La Guerra’ by J.P. von Westhoff, ‘Ferdinand the Bull’ by Alan Ridout, with Natasha Holmes – cello, Pavlo Beznosiuk – violin), a Strawberry Cream Tea, and Circle Dancing led by experienced dance teacher Robin Hart, from the Friendship Dancers.

Fox 400 Pilgrimage and concert

Selly Oak Meeting House, UK

14 July 2024, 13:00-18:30 BST

Central England Quakers in collaboration with Churches Together in Birmingham are planning a pilgrimage to mark the 400th anniversary of the birth of George Fox. The event is free but registering in advance will help with planning. Please register here.

Meet at Selly Oak Meeting House (930 Bristol Road, Selly Oak, Birmingham, B29 6NB) at 13:00 or arrive from 12:00 and bring a packed lunch to eat in the beautiful garden or inside. Walk between Selly Oak Meeting House, Bournville Boating lake and Bournville Meeting House, with activities for learning and reflection at each location. Finish back at Selly Oak Meeting House for closing worship, with tea at 16:00 and concert from 17:00 to around 18.30. All ages welcome.

George Fox Birthday Celebration

Worcester Friends Meeting House, Worcester, Massachusetts, USA

14 July 2024, 9:30 EDT

Worcester Friends Meeting will celebrate the 400th anniversary of George Fox’s birth with a potluck lunch and birthday cake, followed by videos about his life, a discussion of his legacy and singing. All are welcome. 9:30 worship, 10:45 lunch & celebration (EDT).

A Week of Celebration of the lives of Margaret Fell & George Fox at Swarthmoor Hall

Swarthmoor Hall, Ulverston, UK

15 – 20 July 2024

A week-long celebration of the lives of George Fox and Margaret Fell and to explore how Quakerism is relevant to the world we live in today. The programme will include family activities, talks and guided tours of Swarthmoor Hall. See a poster with more information here.

Exhibition about the life of George Fox

Clevedon Local Meeting, UK

20 July 2024, 10:00-16:00 BST

Everyone welcome to Clevedon Meeting House. A short video about George Fox’s early ministry will be shown and refreshments served in the garden. Email Russell Richards for more information.

George Fox 400: A Day of Celebration

New Earswick Folk Hall and Meeting House, UK

20 July 2024, 10:00-16:00 BST

A celebration of the 400th anniversary of the birth of George Fox, one of the leading founders of Quakerism.

Children & Young People: from 10:00 in the Folk Hall

Celebration lunch & cake: 12:30 in the Meeting House

Exhibition: from 13:00-16:00 in the Folk Hall

Concluding Reflections: from 15:30-16:00 in the Meeting House

Quaker Walk, Plays, Poetry and Worship (contact Val Brittin) Worcester Meeting House, UK

20 July 2024 13:00-17:00 BST

The Worcester Quaker Walk sets off from the Meeting House at 1.30 taking about 2 hours, visiting the sites of Quaker worship and activity since the 17th century, with an illustrated booklet to buy on the day. Number limited to 15.

The Meeting House and beautiful garden will be open to look around, have some refreshments, find out more about the building and Quakers and see a copy of the letter sent by George Fox whilst in Worcester Gaol. There will be two plays about George Fox and Quaker history, music, and a spiritual poetry session as well as Meeting for Worship.

George Fox 400 Celebration

Wells-next-the-Sea Meeting, Norfolk, UK

28 July, 13.30 BST

The Meeting House will be open from 1.30 pm. We will have an exhibition in the front room and a running tape of songs from the Quaker Song Book plus a ten minute video about the Quaker Tapestry. At 3.00pm we will listen to The Fire and the Hammer a Quaker Cantata with music by Tony Biggin words selected by Alec Davison from Fox’s Journal. And after that a very splendid tea around 4.30pm! We’d be so pleased to welcome Friends from across the Quaker Area Meeting as well as our Wells Churches Together friends.

Birthday Party at Yearly Meeting

London, UK

28 July

A Celebration on the Sunday of Yearly Meeting, incorporating games, crafts, and singing of the Ballad of George Fox and songs from the World Quaker Songbook. Register for Yearly Meeting to take part.

World Plenary Meeting

Friends World Committee for Consultation

5-12 August 2024

South Africa and online

Join Friends from 100+ Yearly Meetings and groups for a celebration of George Fox’s Birthday led by Earlham College Dean Gretchen Castle.

George Fox: nontheist Quaker perspectives

Online. 10 August, 16:00-17:30 BST

David Boulton and Tim Regan of the Nontheist Friends Network will explore what George Fox means to modern Liberal Quakers who are humanists, or who adopt a non-realist understanding of God, and regard religion as a human creation.

Foxsteps on the Crag: Pardshaw Past, Present and Future

Pardshaw Quaker Centre, 25 August, 11:00-16:00 BST

A Meeting for Worship, readings, appeal launch, picnic and open afternoon at Pardshaw Quaker Centre. How did the Truth come to Pardshaw from 1653? – with words of the first Publishers of Truth and George Fox. What foundation was made from 1672 at Cumberland’s earliest Meeting?

What future for such “Storied Ground”?

George Fox and the Irish Quaker Tradition, 1624-2024

Lexicon Library, Dun Laoghaire, Ireland.

Throughout September

Friends Historical Library Dublin presents an exhibition showcasing the development of Quakerism in Ireland from the seventeenth century to the present.

George Fox: a universalist Quaker perspective

Online, 7 September, 16:00-17:30 BST

Rex Ambler was a lecturer in theology at Birmingham University for over thirty years, and is retired. He now works mostly with Friends, teaching ‘Quaker meditation’ and helping people set up their own ‘light groups’ to practice it. In this session, Rex Ambler will look at George Fox from a universalist Quaker perspective.

George Fox’s 400th birthday party

Friends United Meeting

Friday 13 September

More information to follow.

George Fox after 400 years

Glenthorne Quaker Centre, UK

Friday 13 – Sunday 15 September

This course, led by Rex Ambler, will focus on Rex’s anthology of George Fox, Truth of the Heart, published by Quaker Books.

In Fox’s Footsteps: 1652 Country Quaker Pilgrimage (German-speaking)

Monday 16 September – Friday 20 September

This is a repeat of the same pilgrimage in June, but German-speaking.

George Fox Film

Barnt Green and Redditch Meeting

29 September 2024, 14.00 BST

A screening of the George Fox film made by the Quaker Tapestry Museum. The Meeting House has full cinema facilities with stereophonic sound. It will be followed by a talk for newcomers about Quakers.

George Fox around the world

Bunhill Fields Friends Meeting

29 September 2024

An exploration of the ways different aspects of George Fox’s legacy are continued by different Quaker groups around the world, with FWCC General Secretary Tim Gee.

The Start of the Quaker Way: Fox 400

4 October – 24 October 2024. There are live Zoom sessions on Thursdays 10th, 17th and 24th October at 19:00-20:30 (BST).

Explore the beginnings of the Quaker movement and how the summer of 1652 proved pivotal for the start of the Quaker movement. The course is based around a series of films and discussion topics with the option of live discussion with the tutor each week.

George Fox: an ecological Quaker perspective

Online. 5 October, 16:00-17:30 BST

Cherice Bock is a recorded Quaker minister. She sees environmental concerns as this generation’s most pressing social justice issue. In this session, Cherice Bock will consider George Fox from an ecological perspective.

8th All-India Friends’ Gathering and George Fox’s 400th Birthday Celebration

Rasulia Hoshangabad (renamed Narmadapuram)

9-13 October 2024

George Fox: global Quaker perspectives

Online. 9 November, 16:00-17:30 (GMT)

This single live session will feature Emma Condori Mamani who is a member of Santidad (Holiness) Yearly Meeting in Bolivia, Alfred Wasike who is a member of the Uganda Friends Church, and Nim Njuguna who has been active among Friends in both Britain and Kenya.

George Fox: an African-American Indigenous Quaker perspective

Online. 23 November, 16:00-17:30 (GMT)

Vanessa Julye serves as the Coordinator of the Ministry on Racism with Friends General Conference, based in Philadelphia, where she is a member of Central Philadelphia Friends Meeting. In this session Vanessa Julye will offer an African-American Indigenous perspective on Fox.

Ongoing projects

A special exhibition at the Quaker Tapestry museum in England. This exhibition showcases the story of George Fox and the development of Quakerism, featuring contributions from Friends House and Swarthmoor Hall, along with reproductions from the state papers at the national archives.

Fox@400 – Quaker Arts Network

On the occasion of the fourth centenary of George Fox’s birth, the Quaker Arts Network, along with the Children’s and Young People’s Committee of Quaker Life, invite creative Friends, Quaker groups and Children’s Meetings to contribute all manner of short films in celebration of this special milestone.

Children’s drawing competition

Friends Church El Salvador invites Friends across Latin America to take part in a drawing competition focused on the theme of George Fox at 400. The categories are ages of 4-6 years old, 7-10 years old and 11-15 years old. Register by clicking here and direct any questions to [email protected]

Past events:

Celebration for 400th Birthday of George Fox

Columbia Friends Meeting, South Carolina, USA

7 January 2024 at 10:00

The first part of the programme will follow the unprogrammed tradition of Friends’ Meetings with 30 minutes of prayerful silence.

Young Friends will then present a programme highlighting the life and legacy of George Fox followed by a 17th century birthday cake and lunch—which Columbia Friends will provide. Guests from Columbia Interfaith Partners of South Carolina are welcome, during this month of Interfaith Harmony. Attendance can be in-person or online via Zoom. Please register by email.

Spring Social

South Belfast Preparative Meeting

24 February 2024 at 18:00 (GMT)

A potluck meal and quiz to raise money for Quaker Service (Quaker Service is a charity in Northern Ireland providing services in the community for families and prisoners), incorporating George Fox’s 400 anniversary themes into the quiz, and possibly the potluck. This event is free, but it is hoped those attending will feel led to assist with fundraising on the night.

Exhibition

Alfreton Library, Derbyshire

1-31 March 2024

There are 3 small glass cases exhibiting items in the library – a short history, mention of local miracles (Mansfield); the Mansfield Quaker trail and some books including the Journal of George Fox, Faith and Practice, and some historic books from Chesterfield LM including “The great case against tithes”

In conjunction with this there will be an open Meeting for Worship on March 20th at 10.30am in Alfreton Christian Centre.

George Fox and Early Quaker Culture

Glenthorne Quaker Guesthouse

26-28 April 2024

George Fox was a key leader of the early Quaker movement but how did he create such a powerful Quaker culture? What were the hallmarks of the early Quaker faith and practice? Why was he so successful?

Happy Birthday George Fox

Cambridge Friends Meeting

5 May 2024

A presentation by Paul Anderson (George Fox University) exploring the theme “Valiant for the Truth – then and now”.

Margaret Fell, Mother of Quakerism

Cambridge Friends Meeting

6 May 2024

A presentation by Janet Scott exploring the history-changing contribution of Margaret Fell’s legacy and her most well-known written work “Women’s Speaking Justified”.

A Ramble with Fox in Mind

Brigflatts Quaker Meeting

11 May 2024, 10.00 BST

A walk from Fox’s Pulpit on Firbank Fell to Sedbergh town passing Drawell Farm at Bramaskew. From Sedbergh there will be an option to walk the last 2 miles to Brigflatts for refreshments.

Hartshill is the nearest Quaker meeting to the village of Fenny Drayton where George Fox was born. The meeting will showcase George Fox and Hartshill Quaker heritage displays and share creative work exploring the legacy of Fox.

“William Penn: Enigmatic Quaker, Founding Father” by J. William Frost (virtual event)

29 May 2024, 12:00 (ET (find my local time)

A virtual talk on William Penn and his connections to George Fox. The event is free but registration is required at the above link.

Ann Banks talks about: Who are the Quakers now, where did they come from, what do they do – their worship, their actions and why do they do what they do. The backdrop for the talk will be a display in the Level 2 Atrium featuring rare books from the Quaker Historical Collection, including a 1694 first edition of George Fox’s Journal. The display will run from 5 June until 31 July.

Experiment with Light, a Quaker Spiritual Practice

Experiment with Light, online

A meditative process of listening prayer, based on the writings of George Fox. Quakers from Britain Yearly Meeting will guide this process, explaining how it arose from a study of George Fox’s writings, and has become a spiritual practice used around the world. This event is free of charge.

We will take about 1 hour 45 minutes, including a brief introduction; then the guided practice, time for individual reflection, and time for worship sharing. Many people find it useful to have writing or drawing materials handy as part of this practice. We have to limit numbers, so it will be first come first served.

A website is available if you wish to find out more in advance. https://experiment-with-light. org.uk/

This event will be repeated three times, to be accessible for different time zones: