Specialized Films (UK)

Specialised Films (UK Film Council) UK's version of "arthouse fare" [PDF]

The UK market, in common with most others around the world, is generally driven by mainstream, US studio-originated material. In such a context, specialised films offer audiences a different experience of cinema. Such films are often characterised by an innovative cinematic style and by an engagement with challenging subject matter. As such, specialised films will challenge and educate audiences of all ages and backgrounds.

The UK Film Council’s definition of ‘specialised’ in this context, therefore, is quite broad and relates to those films that do not sit easily within a mainstream and highly commercial genre. [..]

If it is a documentary, or in a foreign language (non-English) it becomes "arthouse-fare" (even if it is considered "mainstream" on their domestic market), as well as repertoire re-releases.

Examples of movies that need the aid of the UKFC because their appeal is too obscur : 127 Hours (Hollywood mainstream); The King's Speech (British blockbuster); Black Swan (Hollywood mainstream); Rien à déclaré (French blockbuster); True Grit (American mainstream); Potiche (French mainstream); Adèle Blanc Sec (French blockbuster); Justin Bieber: Never Say... 3D (Hollywood mainstream); Troll Hunter (Finland mainstream); Elite Squad 2 (Brazil mainstream genre); LOL (French blockbuster); The Greatest Movie Ever Sold (mainstream documentary); Midnight in Paris (mainstream star vehicule); Ra. One (Bollywood mainstream); Hugo (Hollywood blockbuster); The Help (Hollywood mainstream); The Lady (British mainstream); The Artist (French blockbuster)...

When the subsidies money is wasted on this kind of commercial spectacles, no wonder than there is not enough money and interest left for the real "artfilms", those which subject is not mainstream and with a serious film form (like Uncle Boonmee, Pina or Le Quattro Volte)

2010 UK Facts in focus

355 specialised films were released (64% of the total) earning £66.2 million (6.5% of the

total gross BO)

Films in 29 different languages (including English) were released

199 foreign language films made up 36% of total releases, but shared just 3% box office

47 Hindi films were released, with My Name is Khan and Dabangg being the two most popular

58 documentary films were released, accounting for 10% of releases but only 0.2% of the gross BO

28 classic and archive films were re-released (5% of the total), accounting for 0.4% of the BO

Foreign language films

Films in 29 different languages (including English) were released in the UK and Republic of Ireland in 2010, compared with 28 in 2009 (Table 5.2). Hindi was again the top non-English language at the box office, with a 1% share of revenues, followed by French (0.5%) and Swedish (0.4%).

The 28 foreign languages were spread over 199 releases in the UK and Republic of Ireland (36% of all releases, up four percentage points since 2009), earning £30 million at the box office (Table 5.3). This represented 3% of the total UK gross box office for 2010, up from 2% in 2009.

Films in European languages other than English earned 1.6% of the gross box office from 15.6% of releases and South Asian subcontinent languages shared 1.4% of the box office from 14% of releases (Table 5.4). Taken together, foreign language films played on average at only 19 sites at their widest point of release (up from 18 in 2009) compared with an average of 169 for English language releases.

Rural Cinemas initiative :

Rural cinema in this sense means film screenings in rural areas, normally in non-traditional venues such as village and town halls, arts centres and other community spaces. It encompasses film societies, film clubs, mobile cinemas and community cinemas. The UK Film Council allocated £1.2 million of Lottery funding to the Rural Cinema Pilot Scheme to be carried out in three rural areas identified as being particularly underscreened

Related :

BFI - Statistical Yearbook 2011

“And I felt quite posh!” Art-house cinema and the absent audience – the exclusions of choice (Ailsa Hollinshead; Participations; #202; Nov 2011) [PDF]

Admission shares by film nationality (2009) / Market shares (2002-09) / UK admissions (1935-2009)

Languages of releases (2009) [table] / Foreign languages (2002-09) [table]

Understanding "artfilms" (France)

Cultural Diversity Awareness (series)

Foreign-friendly audiences