The Film Council was launched in 2000

As the Film Council approaches its third birthday, BBC News Online looks at the highs and lows of the film body and its affiliates.

2003

21 February: Campaign to prevent cuts to the British Film Institute's (BFI) regional programme unit is launched.

19 February: The British film industry is given a stark warning by Film Council chairman Alan Parker that it needs "radical re-invention" if it is to be a major force in global cinema.

The Evening Standard's Alexander Walker, a long-standing critic of the current scheme of funding films with public money, calls the speech an admission of failure.

18 February: Film producer and studio executive Sandy Lieberson was named as London's first movie tsar, with the brief to encourage movie making in London.

2002

4 January: Figures from the Film Council showed £566.8m was spent on making films in the UK in 2002.

10 January: Oscar-winning director Anthony Minghella was appointed the new head of the British Film Institute, taking over from Joan Bakewell who led the BFI since 1999.

Gosford Park was backed by the council

4 December: Foreign film investment in the UK started to recover after a disastrous 12 months in 2001, said the Arts Council.

25 October: The Film Council said the industry would recover after the number of films produced in the UK fell by 40%.

26 June: Film director Sir Alan Parker agreed to another two years as chairman of the UK's Film Council.

20 February: The Film Council was accused of "cronyism" by the Conservatives, after it gave lottery grants worth £23m to companies in which six of its directors have an interest.

4 January: The Film Council denied reports that its grant towards a film about the 1972 Bloody Sunday killings went to TV company Granada.

2001

12 October: BBC Two struck a deal with the Film Council to fund more films.

Bloody Sunday received international plaudits

29 August: The Film Council blamed a decline in the fortunes of the UK film industry on the threat of a Hollywood strike earlier in the year.

19 July: The Film Council made its first round of single-project development awards, intended to help quality scripts move to production.

27 June: The Film Council launched a plan to boost regional film-making in England.

5 March:The Film Council announced the first seven film projects to receive funding for production, including a movie about the Bloody Sunday shootings in Northern Ireland in 1972.

12 March: The Film Council announced the appointment of a full-time executive to encourage Black and Asian film-making in the UK.

3 January: Only one of the 11 films released and funded through National Lottery money made a profit.

2000

29 November: The Film Council announced a £6m fund for the English film industry.

1 October: The Film Council officialy took over sole responsibility for the public funding of films replacing organisations like the Arts Council and the British Film Institute.

2 May: The Film Council was launched by the government, with £22m a year to develop and promote the British film industry.