New York Yankees games will continue to be broadcast on Yankees Entertainment and Sports Network (YES) until 2042, following confirmation that News Corporation has acquired 49 per cent of YES from Yankees Global Enterprises.

The media rights agreement is subject to the approval of Major League Baseball, while the investment in YES by News Corp is expected to close by the end of the year.

News Corp has also acquired the right to raise its stake in YES, which is available in nine million homes and also broadcasts Brooklyn Nets basketball games, to 80 per cent in three years time.

YES, which has an existing contract to broadcast Yankee games for another decade, currently pays the Yankees some US$85 million per year, plus a four per cent annual escalator.

Yankees renew radio broadcast partnership

Yankees sign new sponsor for 2012 MLB season

According to the New York Times, News Corporation has extended the Yankees' broadcast contract with YES by activating three existing five year options in the current deal and adding a further five years, taking the deal from 2022 to 2042. The report said News Corporation will pay US$420 million to the Yankees to do so, effectively a payment above and beyond the rights fee to lock the team to the network for the long-term.

“We are excited to have News Corporation as a partner,” said Hal Steinbrenner, the chairman of Yankee Global Enterprises. “Its stature and acumen in sports broadcasting on a global scale is unmatched.

“The Steinbrenner family expects to have a continuing, long-term ownership stake in the YES Network, and we will continue our yearly commitment of fielding a championship caliber team for decades to come.”

News Corporation's deputy chief operating officer James Murdoch, the son of Rupert, added: “Partnering upstream with rights holders is even more important today in the dynamic media marketplace in which we compete.

“This is a tremendous opportunity to enhance News Corporation's industry-leading portfolio of sports properties, while also strategically re-entering the New York market.”

News Corporation already owns 19 regional sports networks across the United States and is preparing to re-brand the Fox-owned Speed Channel as Fox Sports 1 as part of an assault on ESPN's historical dominance of the 24-hour sports network space.

20 years N/A 420000000 YES – NY Yankees