Carpathia, officially the Kingdom of Carpathia, previously a principality, was a state of Karnia-Ruthenia claiming approximately one square kilometer of territory at the border of Ukraine and Romania, its capital is Alexandrești. Became independent after the signature of the Treaty of Leige.

History[edit | edit source]

An absolute monarchy since its foundation on 24 October 2015[1], was a self-declared independent sovereign state, commonly referred to as a micronation by external observers, claiming lands on the border of Ukraine and Romania and at the moment of its foundation, under the leadership of Their Royal Highnesses, the Co-Domnitori Alexander XII and Oscar I.

The Principality of the Carpathia was a micronation, an international cultural project dedicated to preserving Romanian customs, culture and traditions and being a place for people interested in monarchism in general[2].

On 09 July 2016, the Household of Their Royal Highnesses the Co-Domnitori Alexander XII and Oscar I, has announced that the Domnitor Oscar abdicated from the Princely throne of the Carpathia leaving the throne solely to Alexander XII. This was done as a part of the Treaty of Alexandrești, between the two co-Domnitori, by which Carpathia would become a constituent state of the Karno-Ruthenian Empire[3].

On 10 October 2016, Domnitor Alexander XII of Carpathia informed the Emperor-King the desire to secede the principality from the Empire. The request was accepted and made official by the Imperial Decree n. 049-2016. The principality, from that date until the fall of the Empire of Pavlov on 12 May 2017[4], was part of that Empire and, from this date to 21 June 2017, the principality was virtually without government, but nominally under the control of the Government of Hasanistan.

As Karnia-Ruthenia and Pavlov became rival nations until Pavlov's fall, a law that made Pavlovians personas non gratas remained valid, and the Hasanistani Government broke diplomatic relations with Karnia-Ruthenia to force the Emperor-King to review the decree. At first, the Emperor lamented the rupture of diplomatic relations, but understood the motives and would not revoke the decree. However, the Hasanistani Government reported that this was a measure to draw attention to the problem, which was harshly criticized by the Imperial Government for being an extreme measure. Since then, the Hasanistani Government, the former Domnitor of Carpathia and the Grand Duke of Letzembourg have sealed an agreement to resolve the impasse.

With the connivance of the Emperor-King Oscar of Karnia-Ruthenia, also a Domnitor deposed the previous year, Christian of Letzembourg contacted the then Domnitor Alexander XII to reunite the principality to the Empire. The result of these negotiations is the Treaty of Gretzenmarcher, signed by both on 22 June 2017, which incorporated the Carpathia to the Empire after Alexander XII abdicate in favor of Christian of Letzembourg. The cession of Carpathia was seen as a goodwill sample from the Hasanistani Government which was accepted with relief by the Empire, which in addition to expanding, solved a serious diplomatic issue.

On 2 August 2017, during the celebrations of the Empire's Day in Karnia-Ruthenia, the principality was elevated to a kingdom by Emperor-King Oscar, former Domnitor of Carpathia.

By 2021, Pavlovian and Karno-Ruthenian government was again in good terms and once again, Carpathia became independent, this time in friendly terms and to join the restored Pavlovian Empire as socii state. The independence was recognized with the signature of the Treaty of Leige.

Government of Carpathia[edit | edit source]

The King was the symbolic head state of Carpathia, holding royal powers, under the terms of the Imperial Constitution of Karnia-Ruthenia. Such powers included to present and sign bills to become laws, to confer awards and decorations and appoint members of the Royal government.

Media[edit | edit source]

In February 2018, the official news outlet of the Kingdom of Carpathia was introduced under the name Carpathia Daily. Carpathia Daily was created by Christian Newton, for the purpose of sharing local news and events taking place in both Carpathia and Letzembourg.

National colors and symbols[edit | edit source]

National Flag

from 24 October 2015 until 12 July 2016

National Coat of Arms

from 24 October 2015 until 12 July 2016

National Flag

from 12 July 2016 until 22 June 2017

National Coat of Arms

from 12 July 2016 until 22 June 2017

National Flag

from 22 June 2017

National Coat of Arms

from 22 June 2017

Carpatho-Horvatian Language[edit | edit source]

In January of 2018, the Carpatho-Horvatian language was presented to the Emperor-King Oscar of Karnia-Ruthenia, by King Christian I. Carpatho-Horvatian was a Slavic-based language, including various elements from Serbo-Croatian and Russian.

The name Carpatho-Horvatian came from names of Carpathia, and Horvatia, another crown territory of the Karno-Ruthenian Empire. Carpatho-Horvatian was created to be used in both Carpathia and Horvatia, as the two Kingdoms were heavily Slavic-based in both culture, and territorial claims.

Carpatho-Horvatian could be written using both the Latin alphabet and a modified form of the Cyrillic script.

[edit | edit source]

Official website

Official Facebook page

See also[edit | edit source]

Karnia-Ruthenia