The city of Khust is located near the confluence of the River Rika with the Tisza at a distance of 112 kilometers from the regional center. The Uzhgorod-Solotvyno railway and the Uzhhorod-Rakhiv. The population of Khust is about thirty thousand people.

There is a version that the name of the city of Khust is an abbreviation of the names of the crown cities of Maramoros county, namely: Gossumese – Dovge Pole – Kampolung (now in Romania) – “G”; Uyshk – Vyshkovo – “U”; Sigit – Sigetul Marmatiei (now in Romania) – “C”; Techo – Tyachiv – “T”. Thus, the first letters of the names of these cities gave the name to the city of GUST, which was later transformed into Khust.

Khust as a fortified settlement already existed in the X-XI centuries. The city was repeatedly attacked by various conquerors: in the 13th century by Tatar-Mongols, in the 16th-18th centuries by Turks and Crimean Tatars. In 1281-1321, Khust was part of the Galicia-Volyn Kingdom. In 1329, it became a crown city. Since 1511, Khust became the property of Tibor Pereni, who was given the city by the Hungarian king Vladislav II. In 1526, Hust became part of the Transylvanian principality and during the 16th and 17th centuries became the arena of struggle between Transylvania and the Austrian monarchy. During the war of 1703-1711, it became a stronghold of the Hungarian national liberation war led by Ferenc II Rakocza.

At the end of the 18th and 19th centuries, Khust was a large economic, trade and cultural center of the region. After the collapse of Austria-Hungary, the townspeople expressed their support for the reunification of Transcarpathia with Ukraine, which was supported at the People’s Congress committees on January 21, 1919. After November 2, 1938, Khust became the capital of first autonomous Subcarpathian Rus, and later of independent Carpathian Ukraine. On March 15, 1939, it was occupied by the troops of Hortist Hungary, who liquidated the independent state proclaimed by Augustyn Voloshyn. On October 24, 1944, the city was liberated from the fascists by the troops of the 4th Ukrainian Front. Since 1946, Khust became the district center of Zakarpattia Oblast.

In the 1980s, there were 12 schools, a forestry school, a medical and vocational school, a furniture factory, a shoe and felt factory, a brick factory, a bread, butter and m meat processing plants, other enterprises. In Soviet times, Khust was famous for its felt factory, hats from which were worn even by the general secretaries of the USSR.

Since 1998, Khust has become a city of regional significance.

The exact date of the appearance of the city of Khust is unknown, but it is known for sure that this event took place almost 1000 years ago. Very often, when we want to learn something about the past, but there are no written sources, to some extent legends can replace them.

According to one of them, Hust owes its name to the prince of darkness himself. As the old-timers tell, once an unclean person wanted to return to the sinful land and leave his native hell. Having accelerated well, he tried with all his might to punch the ground in the middle of the plain with his head. He managed to get out almost completely, but unfortunately for him, he could not pull the end of his tail out of the ground. Despite all his efforts and efforts, nothing good came of his intention. Out of desperation, he decided to return to hell. However, the cursed tail did not move. From his desperate movements underground, high hills and mountains rose on the surface. With his last strength, the devil managed to return to hell, but a piece of his tail remained in the ground. When this happened, the evil one shouted “Yoi my tail!” – and the valley echoed: “hust-hust-hust”. Since then, the city, which soon arose at the foot of the young Carpathians, is called Khust.

According to another legend, the city owes its name to the word “handkerchief”. Old-timers say that in ancient times, the guards of the local castle and the surrounding watchtowers sent signals of danger when the Tatar troops approached, waving the appropriate gestures with a red signal handkerchief.

According to the third version, long ago, the city was surrounded by very dense forests, and “khust” is a derivative of thick.

A tour of Khust sights should begin with the church of St. Elizabeth, which is located at the intersection of Constitution and Karpatska Sich streets. The Reformed church of the 13th-14th centuries consists of three parts: an independent tower, a nave and an organically united apse. The walls of the temple are decorated with Gothic windows. During the restoration in 2005, interesting frescoes of the 15th century depicting knights in armor were found inside the temple. A similar church of the 13th-14th centuries was preserved in the village of Vyshkovo, Khust district.

From the Elizaveta Church, it is worth walking along Karpatska Sich Street in the direction of the Roman Catholic Church of St. Anna, which is located at the intersection with Koryatovycha Street. At the end of the 18th century, building materials from the Khust castle destroyed by fire were used for its construction.

Without changing the direction, you should walk a few more meters and turn left, continuing your walk along Repina Street. This is a kind of passage, on both sides of which there are counters of street vendors, showcases of cafes and small shops. The variety of colors and the turbulent flow of pedestrians create a feeling of the East. It grows when you go to Independence Square, which has been transformed into a city bazaar. The oriental flavor of the market is given by the golden domes of the Orthodox church.

Turn left on the square and after a few meters you can see the building Kabbalistic synagogues.At the beginning of the 20th century, a large Jewish community lived in the city. In the spring of 1944, when the fascists took Jews to concentration camps, they brought their spiritual literature to be stored in the synagogue building. Several hundred Jews who were lucky enough to survive and return home took their books back. After Khrushchev’s “thaw”, emigrating, they and their children again brought Talmuds to the synagogue, where the books are still kept. The Khust Synagogue impresses with its wealth, excellent condition of interior decoration, ornaments and furniture. In Soviet times, the building remained untouched. Fortunately, it was never converted into a warehouse or a gym in those days. This synagogue is active, it resumed its activities in 2000.

Nearby is the so-called Czech quarter, which was built at the beginning of the 20th century by Czech colonists. It consists of elegant houses with roofs covered with red tiles.

From the synagogue, the tour should continue in the same direction to the intersection, where you should turn left onto Constitution Street. At the end of it, you can see the already familiar Reformed church. From its walls, you should turn right, cross the road, and then walk along the street of the 900th anniversary of Khusta in the direction of Zamkova Gora. At the intersection with Pirogov Street, you can see the building of the City Council. It was in this building that the independence of Carpathian Ukraine was proclaimed in March 1939.

Further on, you should cross the Khustets River, after which you can start climbing to the left along the paved road through the city cemetery, to the walls of the Khust castle. After enjoying the panorama of the city and the views of the Rika and Tisza river valleys from the observation deck on the top of the mountain, you can go down the same road to the city. The ascent to the Castle Hill and the descent from it will take no more than an hour. The height difference is about 150 meters. The entire walk around the city will last a maximum of two hours.

If you are hungry, the best place in the city of Khust where you can satisfy your hunger is the restaurant “V&P Esthetic”. In the V&P restaurant, you can taste Transcarpathian and European cuisine. A special gastronomic asset is Khust goose, the recipe for which dates back to the 18th century. To fully reproduce the taste, this bird is grown on an eco-farm. This is how the restaurant tries to popularize goose as an extremely tasty dish that deserves to be a decoration of any table. In addition, the restaurant has its own smokehouse, where meat delicacies are made: basturma, pancetta, crispy bacon and other delicacies. Juicy home-made sausages, to which the restaurant makes its own original sauces, deserve special attention. Recalling the history, it is worth saying that there was a water mill at the place of “V&P” at one time, to which residents from all the surrounding areas gathered to grind flour. Those times have already passed, and the place, created to give a feeling of abundance and confidence, has not lost its magic. By the way, you can strengthen it – magic, by tasting branded liqueurs! Today, the restaurant revives traditions in its own way, baking fragrant bread and cookies, and also makes homemade noodles, which it treats the restaurant’s guests. Also, their own traditions are created: 20 years ago, beer was already brewed here, and it is nice that this tradition was revived in 2018! Since then, the restaurant proudly presents V&P’s signature beer – Vashe Pіvo. The prices in the restaurant are moderate, and the service is at the highest level.

Focus and Huston are also popular restaurants in Khust. In the restaurant “Focus” you will find a stylish hall decorated in wooden tones, with a dance floor and a small bar. Through the exit from the restaurant, you can get to the summer playground with fountains, a small gazebo, a paved stone fence and an imitation of a mountain stream.

Restaurant “Huston” is Italian cuisine and an incredible atmosphere that will make you fall in love at first sight. The combination of classic solutions and the unique style of Andy Warhol, a native of Transcarpathia, inspires everyone who becomes a part of HUSTON life.