Michael Jackson’s humanitarian background commences during his early years, when, out of his daily earnings as a Jackson – 5 lead member, he would purchase ice-cream and chewing gum for children in his neighbourhood, according to both himself and members of his family.

The Early Years:

The Jackson Five’s June 1970 concert at the Los Angeles Forum in California, the group returns to the stage, at Cobo Arena in Detroit, Michigan as part of a star-studded tribute to boxer Joe Louis. By 1970, the ‘Brown Bomber’ was broke and ailing, and the organizing committee hopes to raise 100,000 dollars to help him defray hospital costs. Comedians Bill Cosby and Redd Foxx, and music artists Billy Ekstine, Mahalia Jackson, B. B. King, the Four Tops and the Jackson 5 entertain crowd of 12,000 spectators on August 12. Louis himself is too ill to attend, although a vacant chair is left in front in his honour. Berry Gordy, himself a former boxer, serves as the Honorary Chair for the event and is probably responsible for getting the Jackson Five to perform for the gig.

On January 31, 1971, the Jackson 5 returned to their home county, Gary, Indiana, to play two benefit concerts for Mayor Richard G. Hatcher’s re-election campaign at Westside High School. A ceremony is held outside their former home at 2300 Jackson Street.

Approximately in 1972, Michael Jackson and the Jackson 5 visit the Children’s Heart Hospital in Philadelphia County, PA., the singer also being seen signing pictures and autographs for the children therein.

In early 1972, the Jackson 5 and The Supremes are the headliners performing a benefit concert, the first annual 'Martin Luther King Jr. Birthday Concert' in Atlanta, Georgia, helping to raise the start-up funds for the "Martin Luther King Jr. Center for Social Change" in Atlanta.

On September 30, 1972, the Jackson 5, and a variety of entertainers perform for "Save The Children", a film theme of the 1972 "Black Exposition" and conducted by "Operation PUSH" ("People To Save Humanity") in the International Amphitheater of Chicago, the event highlighting, among musical acts, footage of the city’s black population, their churches, schools, slums and playgrounds, and promoting the hope for an improved future, benefiting the children of Chicago, Illinois.

On November 18, 1972, Michael Jackson and the Jackson 5 perform at an NAACP fund-raising dinner at Hollywood, Palladium, California, at the 6th annual Black Image Awards. The NAACP is the National Association For The Advancement Of Colored People, one of the oldest and most influential civil rights organizations in the United States.

On December 9, 1972, Michael J. and the Jackson 5 make an appearance in the Watts Christmas Parade in Los Angeles, California, and they serve as honorary chairmen. The parade is televised the following day on KTLA.

On December 23, 1972, in Los Angeles, California, the 14-year old singer and the Jackson 5, dressed as Santas, make their appearance at a Christmas party held at the Pacific Townclub, to visit and offer presents - on behalf of their record company, Motown - to 700 (according to some sources, others reporting a number of 400) underprivileged children. In an article, titled“The Jackson 5 Really Changed!”, the writer points out that “the first time the J-5 did a benefit at a children’s hospital, Michael came home and cried all night at the memory of all those sick children lying in beds, some not even able to move their hands to clap. That is when he became actively involved in communicating with these kids. He corresponds with youngsters his own age in hospitals all over the country. These are not letters dictated to a secretary by a superstar, but letters written in Michael’s own hand during breaks in recording or rehearsing or even in school.”

On December 24, 1972, the Jackson 5 perform Christmas songs during a benefit concert at the "Foundation for the Junior Blind" in Los Angeles, California, for 1000 visually impaired children, 400 of which attending the benefit party. On his thoughts about the event, Michael Jackson declares: "You know, really, this is what Christmas is all about - giving."

On March 7, 1973, young Michael Jackson visits the bedside of 6-year old Leslie Robinette - suffering from from aplastic anemia caused by the genetic disease fanconi anemia – at the Seattle Children’s Hospital - then The Children's Orthopedic Hospital and Medical Center. Robinette received a bone marrow transplant, and was one of the youngest to ever have the procedure. She went through chemotherapy, radiation, an ever-changing plethora of medications and was kept in isolation for three months; her state of health was precarious, the doctors saying, after she was dismissed from the hospital, that she might live 10 years. “I was sitting in my room looking out the window, ironically listening to 'Looking Through the Window' by the Jackson 5, when I heard all the nurses going wild and carrying on”, Robinette declares 26 years later. Coincidentally, the Jackson 5 were there.“They asked me which one I wanted to see, and I said I wanted to see Michael - he was the cute one”, she says, laughing. She describes teenage Jackson as shy, but kind and sincere, signing an autographer for her, holding her hand and asking about her state. “I would never say that he saved her life - that's crazy - but he gave her back a little of her will to live because she had lost it”, Trine Robinette, Leslie’s sister adds. Leslie eventually did improve, and her family returned to their farm in Greeneville, Tenn., where she still lives with her parents. 11 years later, Leslie met Jackson again, while he was on tour in Knoxville with his brothers, where she received free tickets, then went backstage to meet the Jackson clan. "I asked him if he remembered me, and he said yes. We talked about my singing in chorus and how I was getting my back brace off soon”, Robinette says. Jackson then told his security detail that she was his guest, so she got to watch the third show from a raised VIP platform, seated right next to Jackson's mother, Katherine. Still struggling with her disease, she is less than 4 feet tall and weighs about 60 pounds, but she is now 42 and is involved in North American Riding for the Handicapped Association and currently is training to become an instructor. "I've always felt that Michael and I were kind of kindred spirits, because we both grew up not being able to really go anywhere or do anything normal kids do”, Robinette says, adding that she hopes people will remember Michael Jackson for his good deeds and music.

On August 16, 1973, Michael Jackson and the Jackson 5 perform in a benefit gig at St. Paul Civic Center Arena in Minnesota, with proceeds of the concert being funneled to the Afro-American Music Opportunities Association (AAMOA). AAMOA, based in the Twin Cities, promotes Black Music and assists Black composers and musicians worldwide.

On January 29, 1974, the Jackson 5 start their one-week tour in Dakar, Senegal for their first African tour, where they perform concerts, attend representations from several African dancers, visit the humble dwelling places of some inhabitants there, and also pose for pictures with and sign autographs for them, among sightseeing and shopping experiences. They also hold a press conference with a Senegalese radio, and visit Goree Island.

On August 17, 1974, the Jackson 5 perform at the World Expo/Expo ‘74 in Spokane (Washington). Expo '74 was an environmentally themed world's fair, which ran from May 4 to November 3, 1974. Spokane was the smallest city to host a world's fair, until Knoxville, Tennessee held the 1982 World's Fair eight years later. The theme for Expo '74 was “Celebrating Tomorrow's Fresh New Environment.” The fair had 5,2 million visitors and was considered a success, nearly breaking even, revitalizing the blighted urban core, and pumping an estimated 150 million dollars into the local economy and surrounding region.

The Jackson 5 attend The Tournament of Roses Parade in 1974. Better known as the Rose Parade, it is "America's New Year Celebration", a festival of flower-covered floats, marching bands, equestrians and a college football game on New Year's Day, produced by the non-profit ‘Pasadena Tournament of Roses Association’.

In 1977, The Jacksons (as they would be known since 1975) visit the impoverished areas of Trinidad, Port-au-Spain, namely the economically deprived inhabitants, not afford to attend a Jacksons’ concert. Michael Jackson enters their cardboard–stone houses and visits and greets the Catholic – school girls therein. The mentioned year finds The Jacksons competing with other teams of entertainers in the "Rock ‘N’ Roll Sports Classics" special program; being joined in their East team by affiliated show business members, they are awarded as first–place winners of the competition with a set of 20,000 dollars, a charitable contribution funnelled to the University of California, U.S.A.

On May 17, 1977, the Jacksons flow to Glasgow, Scotland for a command performance for Queen Elizabeth II, with proceeds of the show going to the Silver Jubilee Fund. The Fund was established in 1977 to commemorate the Queen’s Silver Jubilee, and its purpose is to enable a small number of senior students in Cumbria’s schools and colleges to undertake work experience projects of academic nature overseas, connected to industry, service to the community, the arts, sport etc.

Michael Jackson is seen signing autographs prior to a benefit show he attended at the Shubert Theatre in Los Angeles, California,in October 1978.

In January 1979, the singer donates a number of books, including J.M Barrie's "Peter Pan", to the "Chicago Public Library’s Young Adult Section", and, on the occasion of a library project, "Boogie To The Book Beat", he delivers a speech on the importance of reading.

In 1979,"The Black Linkage For Adoptive Children" hosts a charity event during which the Jacksons’ costumes from their 1979 Destiny Tour were auditioned off to the highest bidder; Michael Jackson’s costume garnered 575,00 dollars, the highest price from an impersonator who performed in an outfit that night for a gig.

In 1979, the entertainer participates in a fundraiser organised by American actress, writer and activist, Jane Fonda.

In 1980, Michael Jackson performs the song “Rock With You” at “Because We Care”, a UNICEF Charity Gala held at Nassau Veterans Memorial Coliseum in Uniondale, New York. "Thank you. Thank you very much. Thank you very much, not only for your applause but thank you for caring; and I’m very happy to be here. I love you all. Thank you”, he says to the audience after completing his performance.

The 1980's

Around 1980, while touring in Philadelphia, Michael Jackson and The Jacksons visit the local Children’s Hospital, the group also made other relief appearances during their tours.

On July 22, 1981, The Jacksons give a special benefit concert for the "Atlanta Children’s Foundation" at the Omni Auditorium in Atlanta, Georgia, and raise 100,000 dollars for the charity, subsequently to lengthy episodes of Black youth disappearances and murders in the mentioned city. Speaking on behalf of himself and his brothers, Michael Jackson reveals, "We Are doing this because we care". LeBaron Taylor, vise president and general manager of Divisional Affairs for CBS Records, distributor of Epic Efforts for whom the Jacksons record, and coordinator of the special event comments, "We are pleased that The Jacksons have scheduled this special performance for such a worthy cause [...]".

* During the years of residing at Hayvenhurst mansion with his family, Michael Jackson accepts a large number of children’s requests to visit him there through foundations such as "Make A Wish", most of these visits not being publicized, sister La Toya Jackson confirms in her 1991 autobiography, as well as the singer himself. The young visitors would be treated to screenings, sweets to their preference from the residence’s Candy Store, to petting the exotic pets of his menagerie, to arcade and video - game playing and the like.

In July, 1982, Jackson attends the City of Hope Spirit of Life Awards Dinner, producer Quincy Jones being honoured with a ‘Spirit of Life’ award that evening. ‘City of Hope’ is an organization recognized worldwide for its compassionate patient care, innovative science and translational research, which rapidly turns laboratory breakthroughs into promising new therapies. For nearly 100 years, City of Hope’s pioneering research has brought the world closer to cures for many life-threatening diseases, from cancer to diabetes.

In 1982, singer Donna Summer covers world-anthem "State Of Independence" on her album, “Donna Summer” produced by Quincy Jones. Summer's version of the song features an all-star choir including Michael Jackson, Brenda Russell, James Ingram, Dionne Warwick, Kenny Loggins, Michael McDonald, Lionel Richie, Christopher Cross, Dyan Cannon and Stevie Wonder. This song was originally written and recorded by Jon Anderson and Vangelis for their 1981 album, The Friends Of Mr Cairo. It was cited by Quincy Jones as being the precursor to and inspiration for the 1985 'We are the world', written by Michael Jackson and Lionel Richie, and thematically, it is a spiritually-driven song about universal love, peace, and unity unfolding under God’s guiding truth.

Decades ago (the beginning of the ‘80’s, presumably), Lidia Knight, a 10-year-old disadvantaged girl from the Dominican Republic, receives her first pair of new shoes on behalf of a project sponsored by Michael Jackson. The project’s volunteers came to her village to measure the children’s feet, and then returned with brand-new made shoes for them, including a pair of socks, a backpack full of school supplies and a small boombox that played Jackson's music. From then on, Lidia's life became different and her school classes better, thanks to new paper and crayons. "(Michael Jackson) inspired me to dream, when I didn't think I was allowed to do it. I wasn't taught to dream," says Lidia. "I'm thankful that I'm at a place in my life now where I can better myself ... and I don't think God has brought me here to just stop.” Lidia currently works as a waitress, is a mother and will start her second year of college this autumn at the Cape Girardeau Partnership for Higher Education. Her mother and brother now live in New York, and her older brother and two sisters still live in the Dominican Republic, where poverty is still very much a harsh reality. To learn more about Lidia’s troubled life and formative background, go tohttp://www.semissourian.com/story/1748399.html and read her heart-striking story.

On January 27, 1984, Michael Jackson suffers burns on the back of his head while filming the said commercial with his brothers for the Pepsi Corporation. The magnesium smoke bombs used for the commercial are to blame, being only two feet away from either side of the singer’s head. A spark from one of the bombs set his hair alight and resulted in second and third-degree burns on his scalp. As a result of the unfortunate incident and news coverage, both Pepsi and Jackson’s sales soar. Two subsequent Pepsi commercials debuted at the Grammy awards ceremony in 1984. Jackson does not sue Pepsi, instead donates the entire earnings in damages from the sponsor - 1,5, million dollars – to a centre named after the singer, “The Michael Jackson Burn Center For Children”.

On April 9, 1984, through the auspices of the "Brass Ring Society", an organization which fulfils the wishes of terminally ill children, he welcomes 14-year-old, David Smithee, to his mansion, the boy suffering from cystic fibrosis, as a result, granting his last wish. During the afternoon visit at Jackson's Encino, California home, the boy watches a movie with Jackson in his home theater, plays video games and learns how to moonwalk from the star. Of the video games, David later tells a Tulsa Tribune reporter, "I played two games with him and beat him both times.”The visit was topped off with Jackson giving David the red leather jacket he had worn in the "Beat It" video and a beaded glove he had worn to the American Music Awards, where he collected eight awards. 7 weeks after, however, Smithee unhappily passes away. Michael Jackson will remember the boy by dedicating the Jacksons' 'Victory' album in his honor.

On April 14, 1984, Jackson equips a 19 – bed unit at "Mount Sinai Medical Center", a division of the "T.J. Martell Foundation for Leukemia and Cancer Research" and attends a dinner event organized by the said foundation. That day, he also poses for a picture with young David Smithee, which will, unfortunately, pass away a month later.

In 1984, he engages in supporting the "National Campaign Against Teenage Drunk Driving", a campaign addressing the perils of alcohol use resulting in car accidents, and/or life loss. In May, he is asked to donate the song "Beat It" for anti-drink driving advertisements

In June, 1984, the entertainer meets with other supporters of the “Camp Goodtimes”, a non-profit organization founded by parents of children with cancer, in Malibu, Los Angeles, such as O.J. Simpson, Dustin Hoffman, David Soul, Neil Diamond and Richard Chamberlain. The first Camp Goodtimes event will be held in Vashon Island at Camp Sealth, August 1984. Ninety-three children, cancer patients and siblings attended and twenty-five American Cancer Society volunteers, who staffed the camp along with the summer staff at Camp Sealth.

On July 5, 1984, on the occasion of a Jacksons’ press conference at a former restaurant in New York, USA, "Tavern on the Green", Michael Jackson announces that his Victory – tour share of proceeds is to entirely cover three charitable organizations: "The United Negro College Fund", "Camp Good Times" and "T.J. Martel Foundation". Furthermore, at each gig, 500 places are reserved for invalids and hospital patients, taken on stretchers into the stadiums.

One night in Dallas, Texas (presumably during the Jacksons’ Victory Tour concerts from July 13 to July 15, 1984), Michael Jackson receives a 9-year-old boy with a brain tumour and spinal cancer. The boy is rushed to Jackson’s room on a stretcher.

As the July 23, 1984 issue of JET magazine reports, NAACP Executive Director, Benjamin Hooks, announced on July 4 that the Jackson family have agreed to let the civil rights organization register potential voters outside the stadiums at their summer (Victory tour) concerts. Hooks also declared that the family has endorsed the program and will serve as national co-chairmen for the National Voter Registration Drive project. Registration booths would be set up outside Arrowhead Stadium in Kansas City, the venue of the tour's opening concert.

In 1984, the group donates 1200 tickets, valued at 39,000 dollars, to a number of disadvantaged children, subsequently to a performance at Texas Stadium in Dallas, Texas. In addition, they are performing for eight children suffering from incurable illnesses in Jacksonville, Florida, where Michael Jackson grants the wish of 14-year old Malanda Cooper in Miami, Florida, paralyzed in a car accident, visiting her backstage and presenting her with a tape of his Victory tour concerts and a jacket worn by the singer during the concerts. The group also performs for 700 other underprivileged people during another performance. Furthermore, they enable the transportation of 40 children from the "Thelma Marshall Children's Home" for orphans, foster and abandoned children, - The Hoosier Boys Home and the Donzels Work Study Program for high school students working toward a college education to Detroit, Michigan for a performance there. The selfsame year, Michael Jackson meets and supports a moribund young patient by offering his black sequined glove and leather jacket to him.

On December 13, 1984, he visits the unit for burn victims at "Brotman Memorial Hospital" in Los Angeles, him having been admitted there previously for head injuries, derived from the stage pyrotechnics incident during filming the commercial forPepsi along with his brothers. Among the victims, he meets 23-year old mechanic, Keith Perry, burned over 90 percent of his body in a car crash. The surgeons declare that Jackson’s visit at Perry’s bedside was the main reason he had pulled through: "Michael encouraged him, talking to him for hours", says Los Angeles hospital spokesman, Judy Davis.

1984 is the year when the United Negro College Fund establishes the 'Michael Jackson Scholars' program while the singer is on tour with his brothers.

On January 28, 1985, Michael Jackson arrives at A&M Lion Share Studios, Los Angeles, California to record with a variety of American singers the highly successful benefit anthem, "We Are The World" (co-written with singer Lionel Richie), grossing a total of more than 60 million dollars for the most severe famine – stricken African countries. Among the long list of other performers are Harry Belafonte, Ray Charles, Bob Dylan, Stevie Wonder, Diana Ross, Tina Turner, James Ingram, Bob Geldoff, Jackie, La Toys, Marlon, Randy and Tito Jackson, Al Jarreau, Billy Joel, Cyndi Lauper, Bette Midler, Willie Nelson, Steve Perry, The Pointer Sisters, Smokey Robinson, Kenny Rogers, Paul Simon, Bruce Springsteen, Dionne Warwick etc. The recording session begins at 9:00 p.m. and lasts the entire night. Jackson doesn’t leave until 8:00 a.m. the next morning. “We Are The World – The Video Event” will become the ninth best-selling video cassette of 1985. The song itself will be released on March 7, 1985 to be selling approximately 800,000 copies in its first three days of release. By 1986, the song will have sold in excess of 7,5 million copies and raised 8 million dollars for famine relief.

In 1985, for the “Hands Across America” project, which follows the USA For Africa one, Jackson favours the use of “We Are The World”. He has been outvoted by the other board members and a new song was specially written for the event, “Hands Across America”, with “We Are The World” as the B-side, though the song won’t achieve nearly the amount of success “We Are The World” has. A second version of “We Are The World” will be produced by George Duke, with children singing the lyrics. Jackson has always preferred this version to the USA For Africa one, considering that the song was "meant" to be sung by children.

On March 29, 1985, the singer visits the Royal London Hospital, it being his second visit there in two years. Jackson also views the remains of Joseph Carey Merrick - the Elephant Man - , sometimes incorrectly referred to as John Merrick. He became well known in London society after he went to live at the London Hospital. Merrick died in 1890, at the age of 27. Following his hospital visit, Jackson attends an evening party and reception afterwards in his honour, CBS Records presenting him with a platinum wall-mounted plaque.

On July 30, 1985, Michael Jackson severely sprains his right hand during the filming of 3-D fantasy musical, ‘Captain EO’. He is treated at the ‘Brotman Memorial Hospital’ where he also visits a sick fan, confined to her wheelchair.

In 1985, he attends a charity Australian Telethon in Perth. He also makes a brief speech outdoors, before a crowd of fans. In August 1985, after his appearance on the Telethon, he visits the ‘Princess Margaret Children’s Hospital’ in Perth, which benefits the hospital’s children. He chats with children there and their parents and poses for pictures. On October 21, 1985, while in Perth, he also visits the animals from the “Cohuna Wildlife Sanctuary”, and is photographed with a Koala bear in his arms, being fed leaves.

An animal advocate also, the singer rescues a chimpanzee (that would become his pet animal) from a cancer research facility in Texas, U.S. in 1986, and would, moreover, house other endangered species of animals as part of his menageries from both Hayvenhurst and Neverland ranches throughout the years. Jackson is said to have first seen soon-to-be pet chimpanzee, Bubbles, in American film comedy, “Back To School”.

On February 28, 1986, he telephones and invites 14-year-old Donna Ashlock from California - convalescing after a heart transplant - over to "Hayvenhurst" mansion in Encino, there dining and watching a film with the young patient, the actual visit taking place on March, 8. That same year, he invites 12-year-old Danielle Finmark (attending "Camp Ronald McDonald for Good Times", an organization for children with cancer) to the ranch, where she tours the residence, visits his menagerie, has lunch with Jackson and watches the movie "Short Circuit" with him, according to Finmark.

In the afore – mentioned year (1986), he establishes the "Michael Jackson UNCF Endowed Scholarship Fund", a foundation then estimated at 1,5 million dollars, aiming to boost youth education, specialization in art performances and communication. The company’s funds would be a yearly supply for the African-American students attending a "UNCF" college or university. That year, the fund had provided 97 scholarship awards and enrolled scholars in nearly all of UNCF’s 42 schools, it was reported.

“Michael’s Pets”, a collection of stuffed animals made in the likeness of Jackson’s own pets is marketed in October, 1986. The singer was “very instrumental in the designing of the toys” and “in how it should be programmed”, according to Bob Michaelson, who helped develop the line with Jackson. The stuffed pets are ten in number, namely Cool Bear, based on the singer himself, Jabbar the giraffe, Louie the llama, Muscles the snake, Bubbles the chimpanzee, Uncle Tookie the frog, Spanky, a white dog, Mr. Bill, another dog, Suzy the rabbit, and Jeannine the ostrich. The singer requests that one dollar out of each purchase from the "Michael’s Pets" set be placed aside for a children’s organization.

On September 10, 1987, on a stop from his Bad Tour concerts,Michael Jackson visits the Korakuen Amusement Park in Tokyo, Japan, and the Disneyland Tokyo the following day.

In September 1987, Michael Jackson donates 20,000 dollars to a family in Japan, for their 5-year-old kidnapped and murdered son, Yoshiaki Hagiwara, in memory of whom the singer says a few words while on stage in Yokohama, Japan, on the second leg of his Bad World Tour. He also dedicates the Tour to the late youth. Furthermore, on September 13, he displays his support for a campaign against racism, as well as towards "NAACP"s mission to help arrest prejudiced conduct against black artists.

In October 1987, he gives away 30 personal items and memorabilia such as t-shirts, sunglasses or a windbreaker for an auction addressing "UNESCO", the proceeds of which were invested into awareness raising and helping educate children in developing countries.

On November 13, 1987, Michael Jackson meets 4-year-old wounded Angela Darlington and her mother, Helen, in Melbourne Children’s Hospital during a stop from his BADconcertthereat the Olympic Park Stadium. The mother has this to say on the visit 21 years later: “My daughter, Angela, was in the hospital with head injuries after being hit by a car. One day we were told by the nurses that Michael Jackson was coming to visit. We had to keep it a secret, so the hospital wasn’t overwhelmed with fans. There was a big flurry, as his assistants handed out T-shirts and signed copies of his Bad album to everyone on the ward. Then he just walked around and talked to the patients. […] I said hello. He said he was pleased to meet me. I was gobsmacked. He was very gentle and seemed shy. I got the sense he had a deep love for children, especially those who’d been hurt. Then he crouched down and said ‘Hello, Angela’. She couldn’t talk, because she’d just come out of a coma, but she started smiling. After that day, she started to get better. I think of him as an inspiration. We’d been having a terrible time – Angela was in the hospital and I’d been ringing Lifeline to keep myself together, but he was a total inspiration for the whole ward. I thought: ‘Thank God for sending him’. He just had a presence about him – this great empathy with people who needed to get better. Now, Angela is 25, at university and full of life. There was another boy on the ward who was about 15 and was a huge fan. After Michael’s visit, he started getting better too. His mom thought it was a miracle. I believe many of the children got better after meeting him. I think people should know about this side of Michael. I’ve never believed he was anything but a good person.”

On November 18, 1987, he visits the Sydney Children’s Hospital in Randwick, Australia. Natasha Lang, mother of a child committed in the hospital at the time, offers her account of his visit there years later: “[…] I will never forget that day as long as I live, when Michael came to the hospital with an abundance of stuffed animal toys, so generously given, to all the children in the children’s ward. He went around the ward and visited each child personally and quietly spoke words of comfort to them and I will never forget the delight of these children, the medical staff and the parents who visited on that day. My son now is a grown man and I wish to share this photograph with the whole world because it shows Michael’s selfless and generous nature. My son, unfortunately, lost his eye in a school accident that week and, as you can imagine, it was a real tragedy for the whole family, but that day he gave us all some joy, great pleasure and an abundance of happiness.”

World-conscious single, “Man In The Mirror” (written by Siedah Garrett and Glen Ballard), is released on January 9, 1988, and is the fourth consecutive number-1 single off album BAD. It was recorded with The Andre Crouch Choir. The song is described as Jackson going “a step further" and offering "a straightforward homily of personal commitment”, which can be seen in the lyrics: “I'm starting with the man in the mirror/I'm asking him to change his ways/And no message could have been clearer/If you wanna make the world a better place/Take a look at yourself and then make a change.” The videoclip features shots of starving children, and homeless people, intermixed with shots of individuals that have made contributions towards helping them: Bob Geldoff, organizer of Band Aid and Live AID for the relief of famine victims, Willie Nelson, organizer of Farm Aid benefiting farmers, shots of Mahatma Gandhi, Mother Theresa, Dr Martin Luther King, Bishop Desmond Tutu, President Reagan with Soviet leader, Mikhail Gorbachov. Other notable people appearing include Raúl Alfonsín, Lech Wałęsa, Anwar El Sadat, Menachem Begin, Jimmy Carter, Rosa Parks, Pieter Willem Botha, and Adolf Hitler. Tragic events such as the Iranian hostage crisis, John Fitzegerald and Robert Kennedy’s assassinations, and King’s, and John Lennon’s are combined with a more joyful occurrence, the rescue of Jessica McClure from a well in Midland, Texas. Jackson is featured in only a brief shot, raising his arms and giving the peace sign, surrounded by a crowd of children while on tour in Japan. “Man In The Mirror” peaks at number 1 in the United States soon afterwards. It is one of Jackson's most critically acclaimed songs, topping the Billboard Hot 100 charts for two weeks. The song reaches number 8 in the UK Singles Charts in 1988, but in 2009, following the news of his passing, the song will peak at number two.

In January, 1988, one of his Bad Tour concert proceeds in Los Angeles are funneled to "Childhelp USA", the largest organization against child abuse.

In February, 1988, the singer’s (inspirational) song, "Man in the Mirror", in partnership with "Camp Ronald McDonald", provides the cancer-plagued children of "Good Times" with its royalties.

On February 24, 1988, two-year old cancer patient, Allan Bufford, held by his mother, Brenda, meets his favorite entertainer backstage in Kansas City, Missouri on occasion of Jackson’s US leg of his first solo world tour, the Bad Tour. The ill boy obtained his doctor’s permission to attend the sold-out show.

On March 1, 1988, (on occasion of the United Negro College Fund's 44th dinner) at a press conference organized by his sponsor, Pepsi, in Manhattan, N.Y., he offers UNCF’s President and CEO, Christopher Edley a check for 600,000 dollars, the entire grossings from his private sold-out benefit concert held at Madison Square Garden in New York City (for the 42 UNCF institutions, including Fisk University), making him one of "UNCF"s most significant donators. The event featured children reading their dreams and wishes as Jackson looks on.

In the spring of 1988, Michael Jackson moves out of his home in Encino, California, which he has shared with his parents, brother Randy, and sisters La Toya and Janet since approximately 1971. He purchases a 2,800-acre ranch in Los Olivos, California in March for the reported price of 28 million dollars, while other sources say it was closer to 17 million. Previously called 'Sycamore Ranch', it was spotted by Jackson 5 years before, when he filmed a music video for "Say, Say, Say" with Paul McCartney. The grounds of this ranch consist of a mansion, guest house, tennis courts, lakes, streams, thousands of oak trees and a large space for his menagerie. The house will become an more or less official non-profit organization housing disadvantaged children and their families for over 17 years. Shortly before purchasing his new home, his Encino house was used for an auction of artwork, the 2 million-dollar proceeds from the auction going to the “South African Council of Churches” for housing, clothing and medical supplies. The auction is hosted by actress Whoopi Goldberg; Jackson was not at home at the time.

On March 15, 1988, at his new mansion, Michael Jackson hosts benefits for Saint Vincent’s Residence. Saint Vincent’s Residence is one of the charity organizations from the Catholic Community Services of Northern Nevada, which offers 28 studio apartments and 25 rooms at affordable weekly rates for low-income and special needs individuals and families. Its mission statement reads: “With food, clothing, shelter and a helping hand, Catholic Community Services brings hope to all people in order to build spirit and self-reliance within them and within our community.”

In April, 1988, Jackson gives away free-of-charge tickets for three concerts in Atlanta, Georgia to the "Make A Wish Foundation".

On May 22, 1988, he visits the Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital in Rome, Italy, where he signs autographed pictures and delivers sweets, records and moral comfort to the ill children, among whom 13-year old heart-transplant patient, Nunzia Glaccio. Jackson signs a check for 100,000 pounds to the hospital for leukaemia research. While in Rome for his Bad Tour, he also visits the Sistine Chapel, the Vatican City, Saint Peter’s Cathedral, and other significant places.

On June 19, 1988, Michael Jackson is performing a concert during Bad World Tour at the Reichstag Building in Berlin, West Germany, before an audience of 50,000 people. Over 3,000 East Germans gather at the Berlin Wall to listen to Jackson performing on the other side of the Wall in West Berlin. The entertainer decided to perform at Reichstag to send out a message of peace and unity. The Berlin Wall was a barrier constructed by the German Democratic Republic between East Berlin and West Berlin which ran just behind Reichstag, from August 13, 1961, this completely cutting off West Berlin from surrounding East Germany and from East Berlin. The barrier included guard towers placed along large concrete walls, which circumscribed the death strip that contained anti-vehicle trenches, fakir beds and other defenses. The fall of the Wall started on the evening of November 9, 1989, and was the first step toward German reunification, which was formally concluded onOctober 3, 1990. Michael Jackson wrote a poem dedicated to this historic episode for his 1992 book, “Dancing The Dream”,titled simply: “Berlin 1989”.

In 1988, Jackson’s signed fedora is given away on the occasion of a music celebrity auction advantaging the "T.J. Martell Foundation for Leukemia, Cancer and AIDS Research", the hat being sold for over 4,000 dollars.

On July 16, 1988, he meets Prince Charles and Princess Diana of Wales before his third "Bad" concert at Wembley Stadium, London, and presents a check for 150,000 dollars/300,000 pounds for the "Prince’s Trust" (an organization addressing disadvantaged children), as well as one for 100,000 pounds for the "Great Ormond Street Children’s Hospital" in the U.K.Jackson also presents the royal couple gives with Bad Tour jackets for sons Prince William and Prince Harry; he also presents them with a framed set of cassettes and compact discs of solo albums “Off The Wall”, “Thriller” and “Bad”. “I was so excited at meeting the royal couple. I’m very very happy that they came to watch me perform. I thought the Princess was just wonderful.”, says the singer following the meeting. Originally, Jackson did not wish to perform “Dirty Diana” in order to not offend the Princess who bears the name, but she told him that is one of her favourite songs and that he should perform it, which the singer eventually does.

On July 20, 1988, he returns to meet with critically ill children and their parents at the "Great Ormond Street Children’s Hospital", where he spends longer time with the less critical patients, reserving words of comfort to them, reading them stories and delivering presents, including albums, signed photos and T-shirts. He associates himself with the "Wishing Well Fund" for sponsoring the contruction of a novel unit, as part of the "Hospital for Sick Children" in Great Ormond Street, London, England. Notably, 9-year old Neil Clark, having undergone live-saving surgery to remove a brain tumour – and originally not scheduled to see the popstar – is visited by the singer, the boy’s father declaring with gratitude that the visit "cheered my son up". 4-year-old Joanne Doeffer, having undergone a throat operation and breathing through a special tube, was visited by the star, the meet-and-greet prompting her to struggle and say "Thriller" to a delighted Jackson. In the evening, a banquet is held in his honor at the Guildhall.

In July 1988, on the occasion of a ceremony honouring the singer in England, Jackson is accompanied by 10-year-old Jimmy Safechuck, a young American fan he had taken under his wing, Safechuck also appears in one of Jackson's commercials withPepsi. At Hamley’s in London, the world’s largest toy store, he shops with Safechuck and purchases computer games, over twenty dolls and teddy bears, and six puppets: three Stevie Wonder ones and three of himself. He also expresses a wish to purchase a carnival for the backyard of his ranch, offering 2 million dollars to John Carter’s Steam Fair; however, Carter will not prove interested in selling it, thus Jackson’s offer is declined.

On his 30th birthday in 1988, on August 29, he delivers a concert to the "Give For Life" charity in Roundhay Park, Leeds, England, where 90,000 admirers sing to him "Happy Birthday". The benefit concert’s 130,000-dollar grossing will favour immunization programs for 40,000 children. He also presents a check for 65,000 pounds to the mentioned charity organization.

Michael Jackson lends his song, “Beat It”, for use in a Flinstone Kids cartoon special encouraging children to avoid drugs. “The Flinstone Kids” airs in September 1988. In it, little Fred, Barney, Wilma and Betty work odd jobs to earn money for tickets to a Michael Jackon concert. They finally make it to the concert and see Michael Jackstone singing new lyrics to “Beat It” about the unnecessary use of drugs: “They told the girl / Why don’t you step over here? / You wanna be cool, / Take a look in here. / They wanna do drugs / And their words are really clear, / So beat it! / You don’t need it! (Say no!) / You don’t need friends / Doing things that are wrong, / There are lots of kids like you / Who are cool and strong, / It might be kinda tough, / But you can move along, / So beat it! And say it ain’t fair, /Don’t mean it! / Don’t need it! / Just say no to drugs! / Defeat it! Have a life that’s happy, / A future that’s bright, /You make it happen,/ Drugs are wrong / And you’re right./ Just beat it! / Just beat it! (Say no!) / And defeat it! / Now, Moms and Dads. / You ought to listen to me: / To be a kid today, / It ain’t easy. /Just make your home and family / A loving place to be. / So beat it! Send it riding a wave!” Sister La Toya also contributes to the special with “Just Say No” from her album, “LaToya”.

On October 23, 1988, the performer signs a check for 125,000 dollars, to Mr. Esther Edwards and Motown founder, Mr. Berry Gordy, finance sustaining the maintenance of the "Motown Museum Historical Foundation" in Detroit, Michigan, the highest amount of money donated up until that time to the museum; Jackson also donates a black fedora, one of his rhinestone gloves and a stage costume dating from 1972.

Later that year, Jacksongives permission to ITV Telethon, disseminates 4000 Michael Jackson concert tickets to the "Hospital for Sick Children" in Great Ormond Street, London, tickets valued at 200,000 pounds; the entertainer, accompanied by a number of patients, visits the institution and the children admitted therein, as well as reads a story to the less affected patients, comforts them verbally, poses for pictures and hands out dozens of presents to them.

In December 1988, he visits 12-year-old David Rothenburg (who later will change his name to Dave Dave), doused with kerosene and severely burned 5 years before by his father during a custody conflict; the boy had suffered an estimated 50 reconstructive operations, yet, remained disfigured. Afterwards, the singer visits the injured youth more times and pays for the necessary further operatory interventions.

On January 10, 1989, at the completion of his Bad tour, the "Children’s Wish Foundation", in association with Jackson, donate 100 tickets to critically ill children for each concert.

* During his Bad World Tour (as well as other tours of his), he is joined backstage prior to his concerts by children with illnesses from the respective local areas of his performances, with whom the entertainer would pose for pictures and sign autographs too, often, the singer spending time purchasing and assembling playthings he would personally deliver to them the following day, according to Seth Riggs, Jackson's vocal coach. Jackson invites underprivileged children to watch him perform, and contributes to hospitals, orphanages, and other charities. At every Bad Tour concert, he makes sure that 400 tickets are being reserved for underprivileged children. These tickets will be distributed across hospitals, orphanages and charities. Jackson also donates concert takings to multiple causes. He also brings out several children on stage to dance at the end of each Bad Tour concert. They are usually chosen at each stop from local hospitals or charitable organizations, such as “Make A Wish Foundation”. Then he joins in, dancing like them. While in Los Angeles, California, he also brings young Jimmy Safechuck on stage.

On February 7, 1989, Michael Jackson visits each classroom from the "Cleveland Elementary School" in Stockton, California, the parents of the children at the nearby Central United Methodist Church, as well as the children checked in the hospital, 3 weeks after a gunman had fired 100 bullets into a playground, then committing suicide. 5 children were murdered and 39 injured during the attack. The pop star arrives to comfort the surviving children by giving them the confidence to view the world more positively subsequently to the traumatic experience. 8-year-old Thahn Tran, who had lost his younger brother during the massacre, speaks about the effect Jackson’s visit had on him: "I didn’t want to go back to school, but Michael made it all right again. If he goes there, it must be safe. Michael is my friend and I’m very glad.", sharing the sentiments of other children there, according to Diane Batres, a counsellor from the district support unit. In addition to making another visit to the nearby church hosting the injured ones from the attack and the parents of the dead – to whom he offers words of sympathy, signs plaster casts on the wounded youngsters’ legs, while chatting and joking to them -, he makes another stop at the "San Joaquin General Hospital", and talks to two wounded children under treatment there. 7-year-old Alice Montejano says, while raising her autographed picture: "I’m not frightened about going back to school now, because Michael will keep all of those bad men away". Afterwards, Michael Jackson says the following to the children in the mentioned hospital: "You are very brave. When you are better, perhaps you will come and visit my private zoo." Vice-Mayor of Stockton, Ron Coale, has this to declare on Jackson’s goodwill visits: "Words cannot say how much turmoil this town had been through over the past few months. Michael Jackson’s visit has helped us to try and overcome it a little."

On March 5, 1989, he invites 200 disadvantaged children from "Saint Vincent’s Home for Dysfunctional Children" and "Big Brothers and Big Sisters Programs" to visit the Circus Vargas in Santa Barbara, California, with him, after which he welcomes them to his newly constructed mansion at the time, Neverland, showing them around, as well as introducing them to his private zoological garden.

He contributes to the creation of a new California Raisin commercial which first airs in theatres in July 1989, and on TV in September, and it features claymation of Michael Jackson. The claymation dreams of being ‘Michael Raisin’, who performs “I Heard It Through The Grapevine”, by Marvin Gaye. His singing voice isn’t used in the ad, because of his exclusive contract with Pepsi at the time, but his speaking voice can be heard at its end. The singer acts as a model for the claymation figure and contributes to the creation of six other backup raisins and their personalities. He receives 25,000 dollars for his contribution to the ads, which he donates to charity.

On November 13, 1989, Jackson performs the song "You Were There" (that he wrote with Buz Kohan) for singer-entertainer Sammy Davis Jr., for the first and only time, at the 'Sammy Davis Jr. 60th Anniversary TV Special', the event’s funds advantaging the "United Negro College Fund"; for the show's all-star finale, Jackson accompanies Ella Firzgerald and Eddie Murphy on stage. The reaction to Jackson's simple, yet intense performance earns him a nomination for an Emmy award. On the same date, he is reported to have hosted 50 children from "Maclaren Hall" and "Make A Wish Foundation" at his residence, while, via the "Wishes Granted"charity, 4-year-old Darian Pagan, suffering from leukaemia, is granted the wish to meet the singer and is, additionally, invited to watch a performance by a group of Canadian acrobats with him.

On December 19, 1989, the entertainer visits the F.A.O Schwartz toy store in Manhattan, New York to purchase Christmas gifts for himself as well as for children. He then goes to Radio City Music Hall accompanied by several children to view the 'Christmas Spectacular', an annual musical stage show, featuring over 140 performers, lavish sets and costumes and an original musical score.

On December 28, 1989, young HIV victim and activist Ryan White befriends the entertainer, and shares a holiday with him at Neverland Ranch at the singer’s invitation. Following the youth’s swift disappearance, Michael Jackson dedicates song "Gone Too Soon" (from his 1990 "Dangerous" album, composition also performed in loving memory of late Princess of Wales in 1997) and the poem: "Ryan White" (from his book, "Dancing The Dream") to him.

The 1990's:

On January 6, 1990, he organizes a festivity for 82 deprived children at his residence via "Childhelp USA", who are offered a tour of the ranch, games to play, a barbeque for a meal and a film representation to watch: "The Little Mermaid" and "Back To The Future II".

On April 4, 1990, while in Washington to receive a humanitarian award on behalf of President Bush, he visits the capitol Children's Museum there; he plays with exhibits and enjoys being surrounded by children. On April 5, following his award reception, he is a guest of honour at the Children's Museum fund-raising reception at the historic Merrywood Estate, McLean.

In July 1990, he invites 45 critically ill children from the Project "Dream Street", from Los Angeles to Neverland, where they are treated to a tour of his ranch, a meal and a film. The Dream Street program is an organization for children with life-threatening illnesses.

On August 18, 1990, he welcomes 130 children from the "YMCA" summer program in Los Angeles and Santa Barbara, treating them to a barbeque meal, video games, a free pair of footgear and the permission to visit his private zoo and watch films.

On September 12, 1990, Michael Jackson attends a ‘City Of Hope’ Gala honouring CBS' Record Division President at the time, Tommy Mottola.

In November 1990, Michael Jackson invites British lung cancer victim, John Brown, to visit him to his Neverland Ranch in America. The 14-year-old jets to Los Angeles, California with their sister Michelle. The trip is arranged by “The make A Wish Foundation”. Mother of two, Michelle, has written to them when John was told there was nothing that doctors could do. On the arrangement: “It’s wonderful. This is a fantastic, kind-hearted act. John can’t believe it. Michael is his favourite pop star.”, his sister says. “It’s just in time for John. He knows he is dying and he probably has weeks left rather than months. He’s such a brave lad.”

In 1991, he organizes and hosts a "Chimpanzee Tea Party", for the benefit of Jane Goodall’s ape research institute. On May 6, 1991, he also attends Mrs Goodall’s "International Tribute Benefit".

On June 1, 1991, The Temptations' group member, David Ruffin, dies of a drug overdose. Because it has been found that Ruffin was peniniless, Jackson contacts Swanson Funeral Home in Detroit and makes arrangements to cover a large portion of the funeral costs. He also sends a heart-shaped arrangement of carnations to the New Bethel Baptist Church in Detroit with the note, "With Love, from Michael Jackson". Jackson was a big admirer of The Temptations. He would not attend the funeral ceremony to not divert attention from it.

On July 26, 1991, Jackson visits the "Community Youth Sports & Arts Foundation" in Los Angeles, California, (a charity addressing drug abuse problems and approaching relief programs for families with gang members), talks to the children there, offers them financial support and a wide-screen television set. He attends the event along with child star and friend, Emmanuel Lewis.

In December 1991, the entertainer’s company in Los Angeles, California, "MJJ Productions", donate 200 turkey dinners to a number of destitute families.

Before heading for a two-week venture in Africa, the singer pays a visit to a storage facility in Oxnard, California, where a sequined glove of his will sells for 1,000 dollars. Before the auction, he meets with four children, to whom he sings "Man In The Mirror" since one child didn't believe it was truly Jackson singing.

On February 3, 1992, he informs on the creation of "Heal The World Foundation" during a press conference at the

New York Radio City Music Hall, the mission of the foundation is to provide rescue to worldwide children; protection against abuse; caregiving; deliver medicines for children and fight world hunger, as well as to convey an awareness of children’s rights and necessities, and improve world’s living standards.

Between February 11 and February 18, 1992 - and on occasion of Black History Month - the artist tours 30,000 miles of the African continent in 11 days (covering Gabon, The Ivory Coast, Tanzania, Kenya and Libreville), where he visits medical centers, schools, churches, children’s housings and educational NGO’s for disabled children. He phones his ranch daily, however, to make sure his property and animals are unaffected by the storms and floods in California at the time. He is reportedly interested in making a film, "Return To Africa", for his own video library. While in Gabon, President El Hadj Omar BongoOndimba declares that “the return of Michael Jackson (to Africa) fits into the tradition of the abolition of time and the integration of space. His music made us feel that he’s never really been away”. In return for the honours received by the entertainer in Gabon, he presents President Bongo with the album Jackson was awarded when he was named ‘Artist of the Decade for the Eighties’. The President’s grandchildren, Christopher, Neata and Malika join some one thousand children, including the singer’s friend, Brett Barnes at a party given by Jackson back at the Intercontinental Hotel. He also gives an interview while in London regarding his visit and more for May's issue of "Ebony" magazine, confessing towards the end, "You know, that's the most I've said in eight years... You know I don't give interviews. That's because I know you and I trust you. You're the only one I trust to give interviews to."

On June 27, 1992, Michael J. kicks off his Dangerous World Tour in Munich, Germany. The show features special effects by David Copperfield, a strategically built stage, special lighting and pyrotechnics, new and original choreography and notable costumes. It took two 747 jets to transport the equipment from country to country.

On May 1, 1992, after being rewarded with another "Point of Light" award by President George Bush Sr., the singer visits 7-year-old Raynal Pope - other sources at the time, such as Associated Press, reporting that the girl's name was actually Raynelle Tucker, severely injured by four dogs March 21 in District Heights, Maryland. He spends forty-five minutes with the young girl, her younger sister, Myjan, and two of their cousins; they play hide-and-seek, wrestle and dance, after which Jackson poses for pictures and autographs a Beat It jacket.

On May 6, 1992, he pays expenses for young Ramon Sanchez’s funeral, mortuary and cemetery costs and a headstone, illustrating how he is a "point of light" and that each person can help a dispriviliged someone. 9-year-old Sanchez was killed during the Rodney King violent riots in California, while in his kitchen having a glass of milk. His parents couldn't afford to bury him, hence Jackson's aid. The Sanchez family later have the opportunity to thank the singer in the flesh, being arranged for them to visit a studio in Culver City, where he was filming a Pepsi ad. Through a translator, the mother of Ramon tells Jackson that "Ramon was one of your biggest fans. You have helped to make a very tragic time for us more bearable. Your involvement was a pleasant surprise, and we are eternally grateful."

In June 1992, Jackson attends a Soccer Charity match held in Italy, after which he will receive funds on behalf of Nazionale Italiana Cantanti for his Heal The World Foundation.

On June 26, 1992, a day before the first leg of his Dangerous Tour, Michael Jackson donates 40,000 DM (20,000 pounds) to then Mayor of Munich, Mr. Georg Kronawitter, as a relief for the needy children residing in the urban areas. On June 29, he visits the "Sophia Children’s Hospital" in Rotterdam, The Netherlands, publicly signing a check for 100,000 pounds for the institution's "Michael Jackson Playroom"; the singer is also presented with a check for the Heal The World Foundation.

In July 1992, the performer financed "La Partita del Cuore" ("The Heart Match") in Rome, Italy with L. 821,477,296, and children’s foundations in Estonia and Latvia with 120,000 DM.

On July 25, 1992, while on tour in Dublin, Ireland, he announces a donation of 400,000 pounds, out of his concert earnings, to various charities there - some reports solely mentioning the 'British Children Charity'. A delay provoked by a malfunction before his Dangerous Tour concert in Leeds, UK, leads to the singer being fined by a national council with 60,000 pounds, that are paid by Jackson to a music charity fund.

On July 29, 1992, via his helicopter, the entertainer fetches characters Mickey and Minnie Mouse from Euro-Disney, Paris, to the "Queen Elizabeth Hospital for Children" in Haggerston Park, London, and distributes toys to the ill children there. While in London, he visits again one of his favourite comedy actors, Benny Hiil, at a hospital where he was interred for cardiac problems. Hill dies, however, a few weeks after, and Jackson releases a statement to the press on the set of his video for "Jam": "The world is suffering the great loss of a great talent".

Eric Herminie, a fan of Jackson’s, threatens to jump off the roof opposite the Dorchester Hotel, where the entertainer is staying on his Dangerous Tour concert in London, Britain. “It was worth it.”, Herminie says. “He was fabulous on the phone. I talked for quite a while with him. He sounded like a very warm person. He told me not to do it again - to stay together. Of course, I am going to. He basically saved my life. If he hadn’t come out, I obviously would have jumped.”

On July 31, 1992, before performing in his second concert at the Wembley Stadium in Great Britain, he financially (re)acknowledges the "Prince’s Trust" with a 350,000-pound check. The very year, the first "Heal The World European Children’s Congress" is established in England, the occasion of which 84 children, aged between 8 and 16, gathered to discuss global issues of imminent interest and their possible solutions. Despite being down with laryngitis, the artist also participates at"Regent’s College" for several hours.

On August 16, 1992, backstage in Leeds, England, he meets with 6-year-old Nicholas Killen, left visually impaired after a cancer procedure.

In September, 1992, Michael Jackson presents the Queen of Spain’s charity with a sum of 1,000,000 pesetas.

On September 30, 1992, Jackson visits the "Leaganul De Copii Sfanta Ecaterina" care facility and its children, in Bucharest, Romania, before his "Dangerous" tour concert on October 1. He spends quite a large amount of time in the orphanage, where 5-year old Alice, whose mother was an employee at the facility, gives to a gracious Jackson a drawing and photo album created by the home's children, which he patiently browses. Before his concert, he officially launches the Heal The World Foundation in presence of then Prime Minister, Theodor Stolojan, and discusses HTWF’s tenets in a press conference, before which a group of children sing "Heal The World" to him. He also finances a playground for 500 homeless children there via Playday, in the amount of 10,000 dollars, and inaugurated by then Romanian President, Ion Iliescu. A portion of the proceeds from this concert is reported to have been directed to the Serbian refugees at the time. During his stay in Bucharest, he also takes time to visit the Snagov Monastery, built by Vlad Tepes, the so-called Dracula; he requests privacy, and spends 6 hours inside, reportedly, in order to pray and explore the building, but on exiting, agrees to sign an autograph for one of the female journalists waiting outside. Jackson contributes 100,000 dollars for the said monastery.

Michael Jackson, along with other celebrities of colour, contributes to the financing of director Spike Lee's 1992 film, "Malcolm X", a biographical film (released on November 18) about the African-American minister, human rights activist and black nationalist, Malcolm X. The public speaker was shot dead by three men hired by Nation of Islam, while speaking to a meeting of Afro-American Unity, on 'grounds' of the activists leaving the Nation in favour of Sunni Islam, but particularly of race equality and human rights. The story of the film is based on "The Autobiography of Malcolm X" as told to African-American writer, Alex Haley. Actor Denzel Washington will be nominated for an Academy Award For Best Actor for his role as Malcolm X.

On October 1, 1992, Jackson chooses a concert in Bucharest, Romania for worldwide television broadcast, the country being known for the large number of children’s housings.

On November 24, 1992, inside a hangar at "John F. Kennedy Airport" in New York, Michael Jackson monitors the loading of 43 tons of medical supplies, blankets, shoes and winter clothing onto a cargo jet bound for the children of Sarajevo, a war-torn zone in the former Yugoslavia. The Heal The World Foundation teams up with "AmeriCares" to fly the 2.1 million-dollar worth of aid to Sarajevo for distribution by the United Nations. The aid is reported to have been also addressed to the Serbians, Croatians and Muslims in need.

On November 25, 1992, Michael Jackson grants the wish of young David Sonnet, whom he meets via the Make A Wish Foundation, the boy being invited to go along with other children from the foundation to Jackson’s Neverland Ranch. Sonnet suffered a brain aneurysm at the tender age of 8, leaving him only able to function through a communication device, it helping him convey his thoughts through a specialized computer. Young David had received a ‘Beat It’ jacket from a local charity in a West Palm Beach, Florida, which he wore for his special encounter. Jackson notices it and says “I see you have my jacket on’.Among the activities David did together with his mother at Neverland, he held Bubbles, Jackson’s monkey, rode the Octopus, the merry-go-round and other activities suchlike. Because Sonnet was unable to talk or walk, the two shared an “I Love You” in sign language. A visibly emotional Jackson receives a stuffed lion and a picture of himself from the youngster and tells the boy he would keep his photo in his room. Before this encounter, David Sonnet had written to Jackson on various occasions as a show of support, and the entertainer would write back and include photos and other personal mementos. A hat of his featured in this auction from West Palm Beach was gifted from Jackson to Sonnet, while Sonnet sent a thank you card to the singer, inclusing a wedding card when he married Lisa Marie Presley in 1994. Both times Jackson responded with a signed letter and salutation. According to Debbie Sonnet, David’s mother, Jackson’s music did help him recover of a coma his recovery room was decorated with numerous Jackson photos and his music was played at all times. Sonnet passed away on July 26, 2004.

On December 26, 1992, the singer acknowledges the merits of the "United Negro College Fund", by virtue of which the"Michael Jackson Scholarship Program" had enabled over 200 young men and women to receive qualified education up until that time. Jackson contributes a taped performance of "Heal The World" to Lou Rawls' UNCF telethon, taken from a "Dangerous"concert mixed with footage of Jackson during his journey in Africa.

In 1992, he attends the ‘Milken Family Foundation National Educator Awards’, performs ‘Heal The World’ on stage with a large group of children and makes a brief speech. The Milken Family Foundation is a private foundation established by Lowell Milken and Michael Milken in 1982, with the mission to support education and medical research.

In 1992, Michael Jackson recites via phone to Ryan White’s mother, Jeannie, a part of the poem ("Ryan White") he wrote for the late young activist and friend, during her appearance at the Maury Povich US TV Show. Mrs. White talks about her deceased son and his friendship with the entertainer.

On January 18, 1993, he joins Diana Ross, Stevie Wonder, Aretha Franklin, Michael Bolton, Dionne Warwick, Kenny Rogers and various other artists, including a choir of children, all conducted by Quincy Jones, on the steps of the Lincoln Memorial in Washington, D.C. to sing “We Are The World” for a preinaugural celebration of then incoming President Bill Clinton. The new first family, including daughter Chelsea Clinton, later joins Jackson and the other stars on stage. His appearance at the event was unscheduled. Jackson stays at the Madison Hotel and his only requests are for clothes pressing service and strawberry ice cream. “An American Reunion: The 52nd Presidential Inaugural Gala” takes place a day later - January 19 - at the US Air Arena in Landover, Maryland. Jackson first addresses President elect Clinton on the need for and importance of increased funding for AIDS cure research, then sings “Gone Too Soon” - in memory of his friend, late activist, Ryan White, and “Heal The World”, accompanied by a large group of children. He dedicates the song to "all the children of the world". He then joins the other performers at the event, including Barbra Streisand, Aretha Franklin, Chuck Berry, Elton John and Barry Manilow, for a finale led by reunited music group, Fleetwood Mac, singing one of their songs, the optimistic “Don’t Stop (Thinking About Tomorrow)”, a song about living daily life in positivity, discarding past negativity.

In January, 1993, Jackson is involved in the creation of a new version of the video for “Man In The Mirror” - “Portrait Of Change” - which is shown on MTV, with footage of the Presidential campaign and some of the areas needing the most changes: poverty, homelessness and the environment.

On January 26, 1993, at a press conference held at Century Plaza Hotel in Los Angeles, a novel U.S. Children’s Relief Initiative,"Heal L.A.", is announced by Jackson, a collaborative effort sustained by "Cities in Schools", "Big Brothers/Big Sisters", "BEST Foundation", "Watta Health Foundation", and "Partnership for a Drug-Free America", with the mission to battle urban-area troubles and those of their young denizens through instructive programs featuring AIDS prevention, a substance-free living, as well as counselling and immunization campaigns.

On January 31, 1993, Michael Jackson performs at the Rose Bowl in Pasadena, California for Superbowl XXVII’s halftime of Dallas' 52-17 trouncing of Buffalo, this raising NBC's halftime rating higher than the Super Bowl action before it. Unlike many previous years, he was the only performer in the entire halftime show and his set included message-oriented songs such as"Jam" (with the beginning of "Why You Wanna Trip On Me"), "Billie Jean" and "Black or White". The finale featured a video montage showing Jackson participating in various humanitarian efforts around the world, and a choir of 3,500 local Los Angeles area children singing "We Are The World", later joining Jackson as he sings his single, "Heal the World". A giant inflatable Globe also rises on the center of the stage, as is the case with each Dangerous and later HIStory concert. The foundation’s initiative,“Heal L.A.” is launched in conjuction with his appearance at Superbowl XXVII. The NFL pays performers only for their expenses, but it donated 100,000 dollars to Jackson's ‘Heal the World Foundation’, named for one of the songs he sang at halftime. Radio City’s Music Hall marketing and special events expert, Arlen Kantarian, declares shortly after the singer’s demise that he recalls Jackson pushing to sing newer songs from his then newly released "Dangerous" album, as opposed to older songs like "Billie Jean" and "Black or White." According to Kantarian, Jackson said, "'Billie Jean's' just a tune; it doesn't mean anything,'" and "It's a new world; this has to be about 'Heal the World.'"

In February, 1993, the entertainer sends his condolences to the parents of two-year-old James Bulger, then murdered in Liverpool, Merseyside by 2 older minors.

In February, 1993, in association with "Sega", "HTW" distributes over 108,000 dollars of computer games and equipment to children’s hospitals, housings and charities in the U.K.

In March, 1993, it is announced that Michael Jackson has formed an independent film company dedicated to producing uplifting movies. Michael Jackson Productions, Inc., will donate a share of its profits to the singer’s Heal The World Foundation. Another project Jackson is reported to be involved in, also dedicated to children, is a plan to form an entertainment and educational cable television network. Jackson was partners in the venture with former junk bond king, Michael Milken.

In 1993, Michael Jackson tops a list of the music industry’s Who’s Who participating on comedy actor and occasional singer Eddie Murphy’s third musical album, ‘Love’s Alright’, “JET”’s April 23 issue reveals. A variety of charities will benefit from proceeds from the sales of the Murphy-written single, ‘Yeah’, and it features voices as Michael and Janet Jackson, Paul McCartney, Julio Iglesias, Luther Vandross or Garth Brooks. The single’s proceeds would be funneled through Murphy’s “Yeah Foundation”, which he founded soon after the single had been recorded. Eddie Murphy’s album, ‘Love’s Alright’, also features a duet between himself and Michael Jackson, titled “Whatzupwitu”, the video for this song being released that year. The song, featuring the Boys Choir of Harlem, bears the message that man and the world are God’s creations and He is the overseer of all, both good and evil, and the video is a light-hearted look at Murphy and Jackson singing and dancing against a backdrop of blue skies, clouds, hearts, birds and flowers. Jackson, who featured Murphy in his “Remember The Time” short film, agreed to be a part of the two mentioned projects.

On April 26, 1993, as part of his "Heal L.A." tour, Jackson pays an unannounced visit to the "Watta Health Foundation" and two school centers from "Los Angeles South Central", where he engages in discussions with the children and the service staff providers of the immunization, mentoring and drug-abuse prevention programs. He also poses for pictures with the children in need of the mentioned programs, and embraces them. Jackson's "Heal L.A." and "Heal The World Foundation" will provide much needed funding to many inner-city organizations, including to the "El Santo Nino Center" on East 23rd Street, where the singer meets with the children later in the afternoon. His final stop that day is the "Horusman Middle School", where he listens to children boasting of a special mentoring program.

On May 5, 1993, former American President, Mr. Jimmy Carter, and Michael Jackson, then chairmen of the "Heal Our Children/Heal The World" initiative, visit Atlanta, Georgia to promote their "Atlanta Project Immunization Drive", sponsored by"Turner Broadcasting System, Inc.", "Ronald McDonald Children's Charities" etc., and commissioned to increase the number of children benefiting from local immunization services to over 17,000, by means of a family health care system.

In June, 1993, he announces that "HTW"s total earnings of 1,25 million dollars, along with his entire "Super Bowl XXVII"proceeds from that year will be funneled to "Heal L.A." to the children having suffered from the Los Angeles’ riots at the time. In the same month, he invites 100 children at his home from "Challengers Boys" and "Girls Clubs" in Los Angeles. The Big Brothers of Los Angeles give Jackson a rocking chair made by a woman who made them for President Kennedy and the Pope. Another group of children visiting the ranch get a sneak peak preview of “Tom & Jerry: The Movie”. The film wasn't scheduled to begin running in theaters until July 30, but the artist received an advance copy from Joseph Barbera.

On June 10, 1993, Michael Jackson attends an afternoon rally at a middle school in Los Angeles, California, to launch a newDAREPLUS (‘Play and Learn Under Supervision’) program for the school, an initiative educating children on the perils of substance abuse and gang memberships/grouping. Jackson was a member of the Board of Directors of DARE (‘Drug Abuse Resistance Education’) and he was presented with a t-shirt for which he said: “Thank you very much. I love you all. Thank you.”

On June 18, 1993, he pays a visit to a hospital in Washington, D.C. for several hours, speaks to the children and plays chess with them.

“Together For Our Children”, a syndicated special, begins airing in June, 1993. The special was put together to help raise funds for children immunization. Jackson lends a performance of "Jam" from London's Wembley Stadium to be included in the special.

In early July, Jackson sends Mallory Cyr, an eight year old girl suffering from a rare intestinal disorder, a check and a promise to call. He has responded to a letter writing campaign conducted by school children in Sabattus, Maine. Jackson's note reads,"I am sending you all my loving and caring, Mallory, along with the enclosed gift, which I hope will help nourish you and keep you strong."

In August, 1993, "HTW" partners with "Pepsi-Cola Thailand" to endow 40,000 dollars to the "Crown Princess Maha Chakri Sirindhorn's" foundation and to the Rural School Children and Youth Development Fund, as a sponsorship for school meal programs in the villages of Thailand. In the same month, new ambulances reach "Contacts One Independent Living Center for Children" in Moscow, Russia and the "Hospital de Niños Dr. Ricardo Gutierrez" in Buenos Aires, Argentina.

The Dangerous tour's next stop was Fukuoka, Japan. Jackson arrives in Fukuoka on September 7 and performs 2 concerts there. He also visits a school affiliated to a U.S. naval base there. At his September 10th concert in Japan, there is also one special fan who got to see Jackson perform. The artist has flown a terminally ill Dutch boy, 15-year-old Martijn Hendricksen, and his two brothers to Japan via “Make A Wish Foundation”. They were driven in a twenty three foot gold limousine to Amsterdam airport to meet with the entertainer and see the concert.

On September 13, 1993, while on his Dangerous tour in Moscow, Russia, for his concert there, he goes shopping in Moscow and toured the Kremlin Museum and armoury. On September 15, he postpones his flight out of Moscow, instead goes to visit a hospital for mentally challenged children there, who rejoice at seeing him and fight for his attention. One of his aides says that the singer has asked for one of the children to be flown to America for care and treatment which Jackson will pay for. The singer holds a few children in his arms and on his lap, comforts and plays with them and wishes to entertain them: “I’d like to sing with them. We all know a song together”, he says, visibly emotional. He also visits children in a nearby orphanage, who will sing a song to him in Russian, turning him – the ultimate performer, into an attentive spectator.

On September 20, 1993, during his stay in Tel Aviv, Israel, Jackson visits ill patients at a hospital, speaks to and passes toys to them, and waves to an extensive congregation of admirers from his hotel balcony and throws down pieces of memorabilia to them. He also visits the Tsirn Army Base there. Meantime, Jackson’s associate, "Pepsi", warrants 160,000 dollars for the "Gandhi Foundation for Children", resulting from the singer’s concerts in New Delhi, India.

Earlier in October 1993, Jackson's thirty-five-year-old cousin, Tony Jackson, dies in a car accident. While he was not able to return home for the funeral (being on tour in Mexico, and having been performed surgery on an abscessed tooth), he pays all of the funeral expenses.

In October, 1993, grants totaling in 100,000 dollars are distributed to the "Children's Defense Fund"; "Children's Diabetes Foundation"; "Atlanta Project", and "Boys and Girl Clubs" in Newark, New Jersey, to further the provision of health services for children.

In Buenos Aires, Argentina, October, 1993, the entertainer donates thousands of tickets to his October 6 Dangerous concert to ill, needy and disadvantaged children.

From October 15 to 17, 1993, he is Brazil for two History concerts in Sao Paolo. In Rio de Janeiro, he donates thousands of tickets to the gigs for underprivileged children and visits a hospital, including one of his fans checked in it. At the time, concert promoter Dodi Sirena recalls a "sensitive" artist who asked for an amusement park to be reserved for his use, then invited children from the poorest public schools. "He displayed great concern for everything in the country, with poverty, with street children," Sirena says. 2 years later, he would film in Rio de Janeiro, in the Dona Marta slum. “This process to make Dona Marta better started with Michael Jackson,” press liaison for Rio’s office of tourism, Claudia Silva says. “Now it's a safe favela. There are no drug dealers anymore, and there's a massive social project. But all the attention started with Michael Jackson.”

On October 28, 1993, Michael Jackson enables 5000 deprived children in Mexico to visit "El Nuevo Reino Aventura Park", home of whale Keiko. In the same month, Jackson passes thousands of concert tickets to the necessitous children of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, and provides thousands of such children with another set of tickets in Buenos Aires, Argentina.

On November 5, 1993, he attends a children’s festivity at "Hard Rock Cafe" in Mexico City, dedicated to the homeless ones from the "Tere Alarcon" orphanage.

In December, 1993, "HTWF", in association with "Gorbachev Foundation USA", renders 60,000 vaccine doses to the impoverished children of Tbilisi, Georgia.

On December 16, 1993, Michael Jackson and "HTWF" offer support to U.K.’s "Operation Christmas Child", the organization’s children airlifting over 100,000 (other sources state 30,000) of 'shoebox gifts' of toys, sweets, school items, photographs, letters and the like to the children in Sarajevo, Bosnia-Herzegovina.

In 1994, Michael Jackson presents 500,000 dollars to the "Elisabeth Taylor’s AIDS Foundation".

In early 1994, Jackson has reportedly resurrected an earlier project. He was to have contributed a song to the Adams Family Values soundtrack. That song, "Is This Scary", is now being finished along with an extended length video. The video, financed by the artist, was said to cost 6 million dollars.

On January 7, 1994, the pop star organizes, on occasion of Martin Luther King Jr.’s birthday, a gala for 100 needy children at his Neverland residence. Meanwhile, "HTWF", with partners "Unihealth" and "Los Angeles Immunization Coalition", disseminate vaccines to the homeless children in Los Angeles, beggared by a damaging earthquake in the area. Moreover, the singer’s"HTWF", along with "Discovery Playthings", hands hundreds of toys to children attending an immunization drive. "Heal L.A.",additionally, donates more than 85,000 dollars to the "Al Wooten Jr. Heritage Center", "Casa Rutilio Grande", "Clinica Para Las Americas", "Families in New Directions", "Meeting Each Need With Dignity", "Proyecto Esperanza", "Pueblo Nuevo", and "Vaughn Street Family Center" sheltering the victims of the Los Angeles and San Fernando Valley earthquake. Associated with "General Electric", "Lever Brothers" and "Surf Wash", "HTWF" deliver washers, dryers and soap to 25 NGO’s, as well as free laundry services, all for the earthquake-stricken people, in addition, along with "Heal L.A." and "Salvation Army", 400 homeless people and their children are invited to spend a day at "Universal Studios". Michael Jackson and his residence are also hosts to 100 children from the "Community Youth Sports and Arts Foundation" in Los Angeles, whom he speaks and plays with, poses for pictures and signs autographs; the children, moreover, watch film "Beethoven's 2nd" with him in his amusement park, and visit his private zoo.

In 1994, 500, 000 dollars in earnings derived from "The Jackson Family Honors" event held at the MGM Grand Garden Arena in Las Vegas, Nevada are pledged to several charities not controlled by the Jacksons, such as an entertainment industry earthquake relief fund, Friends of Conservation, and the Library of Congress - American Popular Music Program. Television broadcast fees and ticket revenues of the gala were estimated at 6 million dollars. The remaining 5.5 million dollars are said to be funneled to "Family Caring for Families", a then-recent Jackson family NGO. At the mentioned gala fundraiser and tribute to actress, Elizabeth Taylor and music mogul, Berry Gordy, Michael Jackson joins members of his family and other artists, such as Elizabeth Taylor, Celine Dion, Bruce Hornsby, Gladys Knight and Dionne Warwick to perform "If You Only Believe", a relief anthem speaking about the blessings of life, regardless of its inevitable perils. The entertainer originally has not wished to be present at the event, only a couple of months before being discharged from a facility where he recuperated following the 1993 false allegations that took a hold on him, but relents to his family's wishes. He takes the stage to present Gordy and Taylor with their honors, after which the two of them each say their speech of support towards Jackson, Gordy stressing, "Michael, I believed in you when you were 9, and I'll never stop believing in you!", after which he embraces a gracious Jackson. The Honors were broadcasted on NBC three days after the taping, on February 22, 1994.

In the summer of 1994, "HTWF", in partnership with Los Angeles Unified School District, "I Have A Dream Foundation", "Best Buddies", "Overcoming Obstacles" and "California One To One", provides 2000 children with tickets to see singer Janet Jackson, the L.A. Laker Jam and The Beach Boys in concert; in the fall of the same year, "Heal L.A." funds implementation of the Los Angeles Team Mentoring Program in six Los Angeles Unified School District Middle Schools, from the South Central Los Angeles and the Pico Union Districts, reaching over 1,000 young people, and utilizing 300 volunteers.

On June 23, 1994, the singer visits Cab Calloway in a New York Hospital. Cabell "Cab" Calloway III (December 25, 1907 – November 18, 1994) was an American jazz singer and bandleader, and in May, 1994 suffered a stroke leading to his passing six months later.

On August 6, 1994, Jackson and then wife, Lisa Marie Presley, visit two children’s facilities in Budapest, Hungary: the Heim Pal Hospital For Children and the Bethesda Hospital, while shooting the Communist-themed video for the HIStory album. The singer distributes an estimated 2,600 toys to the afflicted young patients, while "HTWF", along with partners "Toys 'R' Us" and "AmeriCares", distribute 20,000-dollar-worth toys, food and provisions suchlike therein. Author of "Michael Jackson – The Visual Documentary", Adrian Grant, also present at the facilities, remembers a highlight of this event 10 years later in an interview for a fan magazine: "During the visit, the most amazing thing happened, when Michael brought a smile on the face of a dying 8-year old girl who had lain motionless and silent for weeks. […] [She] reached out and touched Michael’s hand. It was great to see the positive effect Michael’s superstar status could have on a person. […]", says Grant. Jackson also offers to purchase a respiratory machine for the Bethesda Hospital.

On August 21, 1994, the Jacksons, minus Randy, perform at a U.K. Scientology fund-raiser, “For The Children Of The World.” It remains unclear whether Michael J. attended the event, although his then wife was and still is a devout member of the controversial Church of Scientology.

In 1994, Michael Jackson and Lisa Marie Presley visit almost each room in the St. Jude Hospital in downtown Memphis, Tennessee. He hands out toys and signs autographs to the ill children, then stops to chat with some of them. 10-year old leukemia patient, Kristen Sidman (sp) is one of them, whom he tells, while stroking her head, “You are going to get better…”,then adds, “She’s shy as I am – (I) can’t believe it”.

In March, 1995, Michael Jackson and "HTWF" provide specialized treatment to 4-year-old patient, Bela Farkas, who was abandoned by his mother and in need of a liver transplant, the singer, together with then-wife, Lisa Presley, also visiting and befriending the boy a year before at the "Bethesda Children's Hospital" in Budapest, Hungary, Jackson paying for the ultimately successful surgery expenses and care. The estimated cost for the transplant was 120,000 dollars. He also meets a girl admirer from Krusevac, Serbia, backstage, following his concert in Budapest, and empathizes on the struggles of Serbian people, praising their history to her.

* At a children’s hospital (name not specified, possibly the Bethesda Children’s Hospital…?), accompanied by then wife, Lisa Marie Presley, he donates 60,000 dollars for financing the surgery a little dying boy, according to the first issue of “Michael Jackson – Music Fans Special”.

On March 3, 1995, Michael Jackson attends two-year old (murdered) Craig Fleming’s memorial service, pays his surviving brother’s medical costs, establishes a trust fund in benefit of the latter, as well as dedicates song "Childhood" from his "HIStory"album in his memory. He also involves himself in founding the "Community School/Safety Havens Initiative", with the purpose of creating a secure environment for the L.A. students, families and residents, and consisting in after-school activities, namely computer instruction, languages, mathematics and sports. In the mentioned year, "HTWF" brings forth entertainment figures to support "Heal L.A."s initiatives, such as pop/rap singers Kriss Kross (who visit patients at the "George C. Page Children's Hospital Community Health Center", in support of Heal L.A. Immunization Initiative), Raven-Symone and Bryton McClure (who visit students at Bancroft Middle School, in support of Heal L.A. Mentoring Initiative).

In 1995, "HTWF" and "International Rescue Committee" ship two pallets of toys to children in war-torn Bosnia-Herzegovina. The singer further supports the rescue and release of caged dolphins by addressing a plea to authorities concerning proper legal approach on the dolphins’ life standards from zoos and parks. In the meantime, "Heal L.A." continues to support the"Community School/Safety Havens Initiative" by including over 1200 more families to the curriculum and extending its timetable.

On April 18, 1995, "HTWF", "Permanent Charities" and "EC2000" finance transportation facilities for 46 children from 18 countries to attend the "World Congress of Children" ("WCC") held at Neverland, a 3-day seminar and leadership preparation tackling children’s critical issues, such as reports on Switzerland’s child rights, the solutions being submitted by "HTWF" and"WWC" for the "World Summit of Children", during the United Nations’ Golden Jubilee in California. Jackson and his wife at the time, Lisa Presley, welcome the children to the residence. Additionally, "HTW" and "International Rescue Committee" channel 2 boxes of toys to the war regions of Bosnia-Herzegovina, while, along with "WCC" and "Children's Torch of Hope", convey "WCC"s mission and statement across the U.S. at over 30 events.

Travis Thomas, a 5-year old boy who suffers from cystic fibrosis, wished to meet the entertainer, the issue number 2 of History Magazine reveals in 1995; his wish comes true in June through Jackson and the Make A Wish Foundation, a non-profit group that fulfills the dreams of children suffering from fatal illnesses and which Jackson would support for many years. Travis and his family, along with 20 other seriously ill children, spent a weekend at Jackson’s Neverland Ranch and were allowed to roam around the compound’s private amusement park. “The love this man has on his face when he is with these special children is unbelievable. He is one of the kindest and most gentle men I have ever met’, Travis’ mother says. “One evening, we were watching TV and Travis hadn’t eaten for a couple of days. He was on TV”, Thomas recalls, “and we came across the American Music Awards and Michael Jackson… Travis sat up and wanted to eat… He said, ‘I love Michael Jackson, Mama!”.

Minister Louis Farrakhan reveals, for the first time, during a public lecture in Chicago, July 26, 2009,that the entertainer quietly donated 100,000 dollars to the historic ‘Million Man March’ from October 16, 1995. ‘The Million Man March’ was a gathering of social activists, en masse, held in Washington, D.C.. Under the leadership of Nation of Islam head, Louis Farrakhan, African American men from across the United States converged on Washington in an effort to “convey to the world a vastly different picture of the Black male” and to unite in self-help and self-defense against economic and social ills plaguing the African American minority/community.

In December 1995, "HTWF" and the youth ambassadors of "WCC" address a statement to the "Guardians of the Future" monument in Mexico City, co-sponsored by "EC2000", "Terra Christa Communications", "UNICEF", the mayor’s office in Mexico City and the "Coalition for Children of the Earth".

In 1995, singer, dancer, and choreographer Michael Jackson rehearses for what would have been a concert with “just the man, just the moves, just the music”, a special due for the cable network, HBO, and titled “Michael Jackson: One Night Only”. On August 17, 1995, on the occasion of a live-chat interview with his fans (Simulchat), he announces the existence of this project: “I’m doing an HBO special, and it’s intimate. It’s close-up. It will allow me to do things I’ve never done before.” Jackson also rehearsed a special pantomime number for the show with internationally acclaimed French actor and mime, Marcel Marceau and planned to accompany this act with song, “Childhood”, and had other 25 songs planned or performing, notably "Black Or White", "Dangerous", "Smile" and "You Are Not Alone". The concert was set to be aired on Sunday, December 10, 1995, 8 p.m.,at New York’s historic Beacon Theater, but it was cancelled because Jackson had collapsed on December 6, while rehearsing for this special due to a severe case of gastro-enteritis, dehydration and electrolyte imbalances and was rushed to Beth Israel Medical Center in New York where he remained hospitalized until December 13. William Alleyne II, the artist’s doctor for almost two weeks at the time, speaks for the first time since Jackson’s life-threatening experience, a month after his untimely demise fourteen years after: “Mr Jackson was in critical condition, Alleyne says. He was dehydrated. He had low blood pressure. He had a rapid heart rate. He was near death. […] Michael Jackson was unconscious when he arrived. I had to make that clear.” Alleyne adds that he found no immune system problems and no drugs while examining Jackson and, eventually, he was stabilized. “Michael Jackson was the most soft-spoken, least demanding guy you would ever be want to meet, Alleyne says. Everything he said was a whisper. His biggest concern was could he perform.” Alleyne advised the singer against it. Near the end of Jackson's hospital stay, he asked Alleyne if he could visit other patients in intensive care. Jackson met one lady, gave her an autographed picture after he prayed with her, and the lady told Alleyne, ‘I can die now; I prayed with Michael Jackson’. “I told Mr Jackson maybe visiting with people who had suffered heart attacks or other serious problems wasn't such a good idea.” Before Alleyne left the hotel that day, Alleyne recalls Jackson telling him: “Thank you for saving my life”. Then Jackson told Alleyne he understood how difficult it had been for a black man to get to such a distinguished position within the medical world, and that Alleyne's accomplishments were inspiring to Jackson. “It was very touching, Alleyne says. I will never forget that. That to this day he is so loved comes as no surprise to me. He was very gracious and kind”, Jackson’s former doctor adds. The “One Night Only” show was put on hold and soon after Jackson’s hospitalization, his then-wife, Lisa Marie Presley, would file for divorce. Asked about a possible reschedule by a fan during a VH-1 interview in 1996, the artist said there were plans for the concert to still happen in South Africa. The show would, however, not be rescheduled indefinitely.

In 1995, all proceeds from the sales of two French perfumes, "Mystique de Michael Jackson" and "Legende de Michael Jackson", named after the singer, go to charity.

In February, 1996, "HTWF/WCC" youth ambassadors from Mexico exhibit a model for sustainability to the U.N. Habitat II Prep. Committee; later on, the 2 NGO’s attend "Children First: A Global Forum" in Atlanta, Georgia, an event hosted by former President, Mr Jimmy Carter, Mrs Rosalynn Carter, "Carter Center", and "Task Force for Child Survival", and co-financed by"Rockefeller Foundation", "Annie E. Casey Foundation", "World Bank" and "Heal the World", gathering 360 representatives from 100 countries to discuss strategies on the improvement and development of children’s lives. "HTW" and "WCC" also assist the "Spectrum of Light Youth Conference" in Washington, D.C., with the intention to create new collaborations benefiting a sustainable society in a thriving environment.

On June 21, 1996, Michael Jackson donates his four-time platinum "HIStory (...)" C.D. to the Dunblane appeal in Sevenoaks, U.K.

Prior to starting off the HIStory World Tour, Michael Jackson performs a free-of-charge concert at the Disney-themed Jerudong Park Amphitheatre in Bandar Seri Begawan, Brunei, on July 16, 1996, attended by 60,000 people. The 2-hour show was in celebration of the 50th birthday of Hassanal Bolkiah, the Sultan of Brunei, and was attended by the Brunei royal family, except the Sultan himself.

Starting with July 18, 1996, Jackson visits South Africa for a few days and arrives in Johannesburg, where he attends a private birthday for then President Nelson Mandela on the mentioned date. Mandela invites an estimated 2000 children to the party and poses with the singer before cutting a birthday cake for his 78th birthday at Hilton College in Kwazulu-Natal. Jackson has taken time off from touring, to visit South Africa where he also reveals he is writing a song about him. Mandela, stepping out onto a patio to greet the media, turns to Jackson and says, “I can see who is the world leader. I have never seen so many journalists!” While in South Africa, Jackson also visits the black township of Soweto, where he lays a wreath of flowers at the memorial to honour the youngsters who were shot dead by South Africa’s security forces during the 1976 Apartheid riots and renders a bouquet of white roses, carnations and lilies in remembrance of 11-year-old leukaemia victim, Jaymee Bowen. Meanwhile, the highest bid for a Neverland visit on behalf of the star is obtained at the “Cities in School” celebrity auction and, with the aid of radio “KIIS-FM” in Los Angeles, 115,000 dollars are delivered to school pupils.

Michael Jackson returns to Budapest, Hungary in July 22, 23, 1996, to meet with now healthy Bela Farkas at the Bethesda Hospital, as well as other young patients in the hospital. Farkas was diagnosed with liver failure two years before and was in need of a transplant, the arrangements for which having been made by the entertainer a year before. He also visits the Hungarian Parliament and attends a children’s show in the Nep Stadium, where he interacts with children and holds some in his arms.

In September 1996, the artist is guest of honour at "Hope", the first sports festivity for underprivileged children, where 3000 children and 600 volunteers participated.

On September 6, 1996, in Prague, the Czech Republic, he visits the city, sorties to hospitals and orphanages to see ailing children and hand out presents, including a video recorder to one children’s home. He also meets with President at the time, Vaclav Havel, in the capital’s spectacular old castle and shows him around the presidential offices.

On September 13, in Bucharest, Romania, he gives away toys and sweets to and plays with children from the "Leaganul De Copii Sfanta Ecaterina" state home, which he also visited back in 1992, and which he also acknowledges with 35 million Lei (1 million dollars). Jackson visits a children's hospital as well, where he plays with the toddlers there. On arriving in Bucharest, on September 12, he, alongside the Cascio family children, kneels before a monument - a cross in University Square dedicated to the victims of the 1989 Romanian revolution and lays flowers. He also is a guest at the Parliament Palace where children are giving performances for him, including "Heal the World", to which Jackson sings along. During many of his tour stops, Jackson takes time to tour the city and sightsee the famous architecture there.

On October 1, 1996, he donates earnings from one of his concerts in Tunisia to the "National Solidarity Fund", charity dedicated to fighting poverty. On October 3, in Amsterdam, the Netherlands, he visits hospitals "Ronald McDonald House" and"AMC", interacts with the patients and distributes toys and other presents to them. A unit from one of the hospitals (for parents who want to be with their children) is named after Jackson. That month, Jackson also visits a facility for challenged children in Kaoshiung, Taiwan, and offers 2000 free concert tickets to them.

On November 1, 1996, Jackson donates most of the proceeds from the HIStory concert in Bombay, India to the poor and destitute. The superstar flew in to India in a private jet. Sabbas Joseph, director of Wizcraft, the event management agency that had the airport shut down on his arrival recalls 14 years later: “Michael met the CM and Raj Thackeray. This was followed by an aarti by Sonali Bendre. As he was walking out, a strange incident occurred. A child fell down and Jackson immediately glided over and picked him up. He held him and hugged him with such care like he was the child’s mother.”, recounts Sabbas. “The (1993) allegations seemed all wrong. Michael even shot with 100 children in India for a calendar that he was producing”, he continues. On his way from the airport, he stopped the car several times to dance with the poor. Sabbas adds that Jackson was even willing to postpone his visit for a day or two in India to meet Mother Teresa. But that didn’t work out. Viraf Sarkari, co-director at Wizcraft, recalls that all the celebrities and industrialists wanted to meet him. “We arranged meet-and-greet sessions with him. Michael kept all his commitments. He was a gentle person and met everyone respectfully.” Sabbas echoes the sentiment that Jackson was the easiest international artiste to work with, as he was very humble and the staff very professional. Both directors acknowledge that Jackson had a great spiritual connection with India. Viraf says, “We first met him in Los Angeles to confirm the concert. We were told he is very keen on performing in India. We’d presented him with a Ganesha, a Nataraj and a sherwani. And without requiring any explanation, he said, “Yes, that’s Ganesha, the god of luck.” Even when Bal Thackeray presented a silver statue of Nataraj to Jackson, the star didn’t need the politician’s explanation and said, “Yes, I know, that’s the god of dance and art.” More recountings on the visitors coming from Times of India are as follows: on his arrival in India on October 31, Sonali Bendre, clad in traditional Maharashtrian (Indian State – Maharashtra) nine-yard saree, performs the aarti and tilak for the singer at the airport, him being taken up with the ceremony. When being driven out of the air port in his 20-car motorcade, he stops his Toyota, removes himself from his security guards and steps out to meet the urchins lined up along the highway to catch a glimpse of him. He picks up several children, whom he hugs and kisses. He then spends 