Worksheets /People /Musicians /Michael Jackson Facts & Worksheets

Not ready to purchase a subscription? Click to download the free sample version Download sample

Table of Contents

Michael Joseph Jackson was an American dancer, singer, and songwriter. His nickname was the “King of Pop.” He is most well-known as Michael Jackson.

See the fact file below for more information on the Michael Jackson or alternatively, you can download our 26-page Michael Jackson worksheet pack to utilise within the classroom or home environment.

Key Facts & Information

Early Life

Michael Jackson was born in the city of Gary, Indiana, which is a part of the Chicago metropolitan area.

Michael Jackson was born on August 29, 1958.

Among the ten children in the Jackson family, Michael Jackson was the eighth.

Michael Jackson’s mother’s name was Katherine Esther Jackson. His father’s name was Joseph Walter “Joe” Jackson.

The Jackson family became devout Jehovah’s witnesses because of Michael Jackson’s mother.

Michael Jackson joined his siblings in a band formed by their father in 1964.

Their band’s name was changed from the Jackson Brothers to the Jackson 5 in 1965.

The Jackson 5 won a major local talent show in 1966 with Michael Jackson performing the dance to Robert Parker’s hit “Barefootin’” and singing lead to The Temptations’ hit “My Girl.”

In 1966 to 1968, the Jackson 5 traveled all over the Midwest to perform in clubs and cocktail lounges.

The Jackson 5 recorded their first single in 1968, entitled “Big Boy.”

In May 1994, Michael Jackson married the daughter of Elvis Presley, Lisa Marie Presley. They divorced less than two years later.

During the HIStory World tour (September 1996 to October 1997), Michael Jackson married his close friend Deborah Jeanne Rowe, with whom he had two children. They divorced in 1999.

Music and Pop Culture

Michael Jackson developed into a solo performer in the 1970s.

When he was in New York, he got exposed to hip hop music which influenced his beatboxing. This influenced his future tracks, such as “Working Day and Night.”

Michael Jackson broke his nose during a complicated dance routine, so he had to undergo rhinoplasty which was not a success. It gave him difficulties in breathing that affected his career. He underwent another rhinoplasty with a different doctor.

In 1979, Michael Jackson was recognized as a solo performer with his fifth solo album entitled Off the Wall. This album produced four top 10 hits in the US. It ranked number three on the Billboard 200. It has sold more than 20 million copies internationally.

Michael Jackson reached the highest royalty rate in the industry of music in the year 1980.

In 1982, Michael Jackson became more successful with his sixth album entitled Thriller, which earned him seven Grammys and eight awards in the American Music Awards which included the Award of Merit. He was the youngest to win this award.

In 1983, it became the top-selling album internationally, which sold 66 million copies. It was the first album to have seven Billboard Hot 100 top 10 singles, which included “Beat It.” In 1983, it was awarded Album of the Year and Beat It was awarded Record of the Year.

Michael Jackson rejoined with his brothers for a performance at Pasadena Civic Auditorium on March 25, 1983, with an audience of approximately 47 million people. He performed his solo performance of “Billie Jean”, which got his first nomination for an Emmy.

During a concert sponsored by Pepsi in 1984, pyrotechnics burned Michael Jackson’s hair accidentally which caused second degree burns to his scalp. He underwent a surgery for that and another rhinoplasty.

Michael Jackson did a victory tour with his brothers, which was the last tour he did with them.

In 1985, he released the song “We Are the World”, which earned $63 million that helped in the relief of famine. It was one of the best-selling songs of all time. It was awarded four Grammys in 1985 as well as Song of the Year.

In 1987, Michael Jackson’s album entitled Bad was released. By 2012, this album had sold approximately 45 million copies internationally.

Michael Jackson released his eighth album entitled Dangerous in 1991 which featured the famous single “Black or White” and the most successful song in UK and parts of Europe featured on the album, called “Heal the World.”

Michael Jackson incorporated many genres in his music, including pop, soul, rhythm and blues, funk, rock, disco, post-disco, dance-pop, and new jack swing.

As an artist and known songwriter, Michael Jackson didn’t actually write his songs, but he dictated them to a sound recorder.

As a music composer, he didn’t use instruments, but he beatboxed and imitated the instruments through his vocal chords.

From 1971 to 1975, Michael Jackson’s voice changed from boy soprano to high tenor.

In 1973, Michael Jackson began using the so-called “vocal hiccup” technique.

Michael Jackson was dubbed the king of music videos.

Michael Jackson’s Thriller choreography became a part of global pop culture. It has been copied everywhere in the world from Indian films to Philippines’ prisons.

Michael Jackson tried out the anti-gravity lean in his video Smooth Criminal in which a special shoe was made for him to do the move at a live show.

In 1990, Michael Jackson was awarded with the MTV Video Vanguard Artist of the Decade Award.

Michael Jackson released his multi-disc album entitled HIStory: Past, Present and Future, Book I in June 1995, which included the songs “Scream/Childhood”, for which he collaborated with his sister, and the Guinness World Record holder “You Are Not Alone.”

Michael Jackson collaborated with Teddy Riley and Rodney Jerkins to release his tenth album entitled Invincible between October 1997 to September 2001.

Michael Jackson was awarded Artist of the Century on his 22nd American Music Award on January 22, 2002.

In 2009, Michael Jackson released his song entitled This Is It, which he had co-written with Paul Anka in the 1980s.

Michael Jackson’s video “Ghosts” is the longest music video recorded, lasting 39 minutes 31 seconds.

Scream’s music video is one of Michael’s Jackson’s most highly praised. It is the most expensive video ever made, with a huge expense of $7 million.

The music video “You Rock My World”, which is thirteen and a half minutes long, was awarded NAACP Image Award for Outstanding Music Video in 2002.

Other Achievements

Michael Jackson had his first public performance when he was 5 years old. He sang the song “Climb Every Mountain.”

“Billie Jean” is the first song by a black artist played on MTV.

In 1978, Michael Jackson’s career in film started when he moved to New York City and starred as the Scarecrow in The Wiz, which was a musical directed by Sidney Lumet. The musical was a box office flop.

In 1983, Motown was a big success. Michael Jackson performed “Billie Jean” and danced his popular move called “The Moonwalk” in front of approximately 47 million people.

In 1984, Michael Jackson was acknowledged for his charity work that helped people beat alcohol and drug abuse.

Michael Jackson was awarded with 23 Guinness World Records, 13 Grammys, and 26 American Music Awards, all of which made him The Most Awarded Artist.

Death and Legacy

In 1984, Michael Jackson was diagnosed with vitiligo, which is a skin condition resulting in white patches on the skin. He also had lupus according to J. Randy Taraborrelli’s biography.

Before Michael Jackson died, he rehearsed for his biggest comeback with around 50 shows in London alone.

Michael Jackson died on June 25, 2009, at his house in North Carolwood Drive, Holmby Hills due to acute propofol and benzodiazepine intoxication which resulted in cardiac arrest.

Michael Jackson prepared the way for modern pop music.

Michael Jackson’s work unceasingly made an impact on many artists of different music genres. He is acknowledged as the Most Successful Entertainer of All Time by Guinness World Records.

Time magazine’s pop commentator Jay Cocks recorded that “Jackson is the biggest thing since the Beatles. He is the hottest single phenomenon since Elvis Presley. He just may be the most popular black singer ever.”

In 1990, Vanity Fair stated that Jackson was the most popular artist in show business history.

Daily Telegraph writer Tom Utley outlined Jackson as “extremely important” and a “genius” in 2003.

Motown founder Berry Gordy declared Jackson “the greatest entertainer that ever lived” at Michael Jackson’s funeral service on July 7, 2009.

Michael Jackson Worksheets

This is a fantastic bundle which includes everything you need to know about Michael Jackson across 26 in-depth pages. These are ready-to-use Michael Jackson worksheets that are perfect for teaching students about Michael Joseph Jackson who was an American dancer, singer, and songwriter. His nickname was the “King of Pop.” He is most well-known as Michael Jackson.

Complete List Of Included Worksheets

Michael Jackson Facts

Little Michael

King of Pop

Jackson Discography

This Award Goes To…

Health In Danger

Lasting Legacy

Family of Talent

Michael Said

King of Music Videos

The MJ Gallery

Link/cite this page

If you reference any of the content on this page on your own website, please use the code below to cite this page as the original source.

Link will appear as Michael Jackson Facts & Worksheets: https://kidskonnect.com - KidsKonnect, November 14, 2018

Use With Any Curriculum

These worksheets have been specifically designed for use with any international curriculum. You can use these worksheets as-is, or edit them using Google Slides to make them more specific to your own student ability levels and curriculum standards.