Bill Johnson | Evangelism in Its Purest Form is an Overflow of Worship | September 22, 2023 Evening Session

Bill Johnson emphasizes the importance of remaining thankful to God even in tough circumstances and shares how even the toughest circumstances can be used to create something beautiful for God’s...

Bill Johnson | I will Be with You Always | September 22, 2023 Mornings Session Part 1

Bill Johnson speaks about how God will honor us if we first use our influence to bring honor to Him. ...

Revelation Knowledge and Healing / Power and Authority

Todd Bentley discusses healing. He prayers for people with certain illnesses, and also anoints cloths for people to take to the sick.

Bill Johnson talks about stewarding what you’ve been given and it will increase. Whatever it is that we host, that’s what will be released in the atmosphere where we walk. We have been given the privilege to host the Lord.

Released Into Service

Bill Johnson speaks about religion and how it teaches you that you have to become something to get given gifts. He says that grace creates an environment where everything can be healed while religion creates an environment where everything stays hidden below the surface. Jesus came to save us, not to destroy us.

Taking and Receiving

Finding the Tree of Life

Bill Johnson teaches us to dream big. He explains the importance of hope.

Bill declares over us "everyone gets an inheritance". Robin McMillan shares his testimony about sanction.

Click HERE to purchase CD, DVD, and MP3 media sets from this conference.

Culture For Miracles

Brian and Jenn Johnson lead worship with the songs "Love Never Fails" "You Are Good" and "Show Me Your Face." Bill Johnson shares a message on how we can become a transformed culture that brings an atmosphere of miraculous to the world.

A Culture of Miracles

Bill Johnson gives practical teaching and examples of a "miracle culture". He encourages us to have a culture of honor.

Bill prays specifically for those with head trauma, cancer, and cartilage problem in knees.

Click HERE to purchase CD, DVD, and MP3 media sets from this conference.

"Appetite for the Kingdom"

Taken from our recent, Great Awakening Conference, Bill Johnson speaks on how it is natural for Christians to have an appetite for the Kingdom and how it's in our nature to, "take violently by force" the promises God has given us.