We envision a world where all people have access to quality-assured sexual and reproductive health medicines and technologies

Drug drought in maternal health: analysis of 20 years of medicines highlights urgent need for public-private partnerships to accelerate R&D

For several serious maternal health issues, it is unlikely that there will be any new, game changing drugs before the end of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) era. Concept Foundation, Policy Cures Research and Burnet Institute mapped all medicines for five...

The PEARLS Trial: Training rolled out in Ghana to support screening of women at risk of pre-eclampsia

On World Pre-Eclampsia Day, we highlight progress of the PEARLS Trial, the largest ever study on the use of aspirin to prevent pre-eclampsia, and the first-ever study to quantitatively investigate whether the use of aspirin may increase the risk of excessive bleeding...

DIAGNOSIS IN THE DARK: Report reveals need for diagnostics R&D for pre-eclampsia and other pregnancy conditions

While pre-eclampsia* is a leading cause of maternal and neonatal morbidity and mortality, the capability to diagnose pre-eclampsia is still limited. Concept Foundation, Policy Cures Research and Burnet Institute have mapped the R&D of diagnostics for pre-eclampsia...

Concept Foundation is hiring!

Concept Foundation is hiring! As we are expanding our activities in pharmaceutical manufacturing technical support, we are recruiting additional experts to join our global consulting network. Assignments will be primarily in low and middle-income countries and involve...

Concept Foundation partners with CEMAG Care and The ACME Laboratories Ltd. to increase access to quality-assured abortion medicines

Concept Foundation is delighted to announce a new partnership with CEMAG Care and The ACME Laboratories Ltd. Together, we will develop, manufacture and supply quality-assured abortion medicines, with the aim of making safe and effective abortion care more widely...

An age-old problem with a need for renewed attention: new report calls for innovative R&D to tackle iron deficiency anaemia during pregnancy

Maternal anaemia* continues to be a significant cause of morbidity and mortality, with efforts over the past two decades making a minimal dent on this age-old problem. Since 2000, the global prevalence of anaemia in pregnant women has dropped only slightly – and the...

PREVENTION & TREATMENT OF POSTPARTUM HAEMORRHAGE

Explore our work on reducing maternal mortality and morbidity as a result of postpartum haemorrhage (PPH) in high burden countries.

PREVENTION OF UNINTENDED PREGNANCY

A new concept that could provide a novel alternative option to women wishing to prevent unintended pregnancy.

ACCELERATING INNOVATION FOR MOTHERS (AIM)

Accelerating development and introduction of innovative products for pregnancy-specific conditions through global partnerships.

Concept Foundation is an international not for profit organization, working on improving access to sexual and reproductive health medicines and technologies in low- and middle-income countries worldwide.

Founded in 1989, we operate under a collaboration agreement with the World Health Organization to promote the availability of sexual and reproductive health products at affordable prices, and their safe and effective use in low-resource settings.

PHOTO: JOUIA, WHO NOW TAKES CARE OF HER NEPHEW AFTER LOSING HER SISTER TO PPH, KAMPALA, UGANDA

CREDIT: JONI KABANA

Concept Foundation is an international not for profit organization, working on improving access to sexual and reproductive health medicines and technologies in low- and middle-income countries worldwide.

Founded in 1989, we operate under a collaboration agreement with the World Health Organization to promote the availability of sexual and reproductive health products at affordable prices, and their safe and effective use in low-resource settings.

PHOTO: JOUIA, WHO NOW TAKE CARES OF HER NEPHEW AFTER LOSING HER SISTER TO PPH, KAMPALA, UGANDA

CREDIT: JONI KABANA