Board of Directors

The Jack Creek Preserve Foundation is governed by the Board of Directors, who is dedicated to the mission of Protecting wildlife in wild country by supporting healthy habitats, hunting, and conservation education. The board members’ expertise offers supervision and guidance to implement the Foundation's mission and objectives and oversees the disbursement of the Foundation's funds. As of April 2024, the Foundation has 15 board members. The board meets quarterly and may have special meetings if the need arises. Board members participate in one or more committees based on their knowledge, skills, and abilities which meet as needed to discuss and make certain decisions and provide guidance to the board on these matters for formal voting, if needed.

ADVISORY BOARD

Megan Clark, Eastern New Mexico University, Peyton, CO

Passionate about conservation of our beautiful wild animals and their habitats. Wants to do her part in expressing the importance of conservation to young people. Interests include hunting, fishing, country swing dancing, rodeo, spending time with friends and family, adventures, traveling, animals, and more.

Michael Fossel, Telocyte LLC, Ada, MI

PhD and MD from Stanford University, professor of medicine for 27 years, author of several books and textbooks on medicine and IT. President and Founder of Telocyte LLC, a biotech company targeting Alzheimer’s disease.

Pieter Fossel, Hydrosat Inc, Washington DC

Founder at Hydrosat Inc.

Marc Glines, Madison County Justice of the Peace, Ennis, MT

B.S. and M.S. from Michigan State University. Law Enforcement Ranger with the National Park Service in Mt Rainier, Glacier, Everglades, and Yellowstone National Parks. 20 years as a Montana Game Warden, 4 years as the Security Director for Moonlight Basin, and 10 years as the Manager for Ennis True Value.

Robin Hompesch, Retired Bozeman High School Teacher, Bozeman, MT

Wildlife Biology degree from University of Montana, worked for four years at the Montana Wildlife Research Unit, spent three winters doing radio-telemetry on mountain lions in western Montana, and has taught science to middle and high school students for a total of 34 years; the last 25 years at Bozeman High School. Robin is also Jack Creek Preserve Foundation’s Conservation Field School Program Director.