Building Community One Hello At A Time

Whether it’s seeing a warm smile at lunch, or having someone hold the door for you at the end of the day, small acts of recognition, kindness and appreciation can change the atmosphere of a school. We’re a group of community volunteers focused on connecting with K-12 students in our schools. We help create a culture of care, compassion, and inclusion in our schools so that all students feel welcome, acknowledged and connected.

learn more

Success for all children: at home, at school, and in life.

THRIVE's mission is for all children to have the opportunity to grow, succeed, and become valuable members of our community. Locally grown, nationally known; Thrive's programs have been developed right here in Bozeman to meet the needs of the families who call our valley home. Whether you are sixteen and pregnant or a seasoned parent raising high schoolers, we pride ourselves in providing quality, evidence-based programs - for all families - that are proven to get results.

learn more

ABCDino Academy at the Hawks Nest

At ABCDino Academy, we are dedicated to fostering a dynamic and enriching learning environment that empowers students to thrive academically, creatively, and socially. Our commitment to excellence, innovation, and personalized education sets us apart as a leader in early childhood education.

ABCDino Academy believes in the power of community. We actively engage with parents, students, and the broader community to create a collaborative and supportive network that enhances the educational experience.

ABCDino Academy operates in the Hawks' Nest at Bozeman High School serving families with children from 6 weeks through 5 years old; Monday- Friday from 7:30am-5:30pm.

Whether you are a student, parent, or educator, ABCDino Academy invites you to join us in our journey of learning, discovery, and growth. Together, let's shape a future where knowledge knows no bounds.

learn more

Greater Gallatin United Way - kidsLINK

We offer working families before and after school programming for their children that is as safe as possible for students, staff, and families. The program provides a safe, caring environment that allows for nutritious snacks, outdoor play, quiet time and homework assistance, and various enrichment programs. The kidsLINK Afterschool staff is trained in various curricula, social-emotional learning, conflict resolution, health, well-being, academic enrichment, and STEM/STEAM. We strive to support students in multiple ways, encouraging them to find their spark in learning and expression. Programs take place on the school grounds directly after school until 5:45 pm.

learn more

Carefully Selected, Specifically Trained, and Properly Equipped

The SRO program reflects a community partnership between the Bozeman Police Department and Bozeman Public Schools to ensure that our schools are safe, secure, and orderly learning environments. The School Based Law Enforcement concept is the placement of an experienced law enforcement professional in the High Schools, Middle Schools and Elementary Schools with the following goals.

Creating and maintaining safe, secure and orderly learning environments for students, teachers and staff.

Establish a trusting channel of communication with the students, parents, and teachers .

Serve as a positive role model to instill in student's good moral standards, good judgement and discretion, respect for other students, and a sincere concern for the school community.

Promote citizen awareness of the law to enable students to become better informed and effective citizens, while empowering students with the knowledge of law enforcement efforts and obligations regarding enforcement as well as consequences for violations of the law.

Serve as a confidential source of counseling for students and parents concerning problems they face as well as providing information on community resources available to them.

The SRO should be looked at as a resource to which the school community can turn. As such, the SRO fulfills three roles by using a triad approach. The officer acts as a law enforcement officer, an informal counselor, and a law-related presenter. As a law enforcement officer, the primary purpose is to "keep the peace." As a informal counselor, the officer provides resource guidance to students, parents, teachers, staff, and act as a link to support services both inside and outside the school. As a law-related presenter, the officer will share special law enforcement expertise by presentations in the classroom to promote a better understanding of our laws. Furthermore, the SRO also serves as positive role model for the students on campus during school hours and off campus at extracurricular activities.

To learn more about the SRO program contact SRO Sergeant, Scott McCormick:

email: scott.mccormick@bsd7.org

office: (406) 582-2957

www.bozemanpolice.com