We Provide Foundation & Concrete Repair in Bozeman, MT

Your local structural and foundation repair company in Bozeman, MT is Yellowstone Structural Systems

Foundation problems only get worse and more expensive to fix over time. We offer proven solutions to help Bozeman homeowners fix their foundation and concrete problems. Whether you have issues with your home’s foundation or a concrete slab, our goal is to provide a permanent fix so you have peace of mind.

For an inspection and cost estimate in Bozeman, MT, contact your local Supportworks contractor today.

Structural & Concrete Repair Services offered in Bozeman:

Foundation Settlement Repair

Foundation Crack Repair

Bowing Wall Repair

Sagging Floor Repair

Uneven Concrete Leveling

Concrete Crack Repair

Structural & Foundation Repair in Bozeman

Foundation problems can cause symptoms throughout your home. Some of the signs of foundation failure are obvious, such as foundation cracks, but there are other symptoms that you might not realize are caused by foundation problems. If you notice any of these symptoms in your home, it’s best to have your foundation inspected by a Bozeman foundation repair professional as soon as possible.

Foundation Problem Signs:

Cracked Brick/Stucco - Stair-step cracks in exterior foundation walls.

Bowing Walls - Concrete wall leaning in at the top.

Shearing Walls - Inward movement of the bottom of the block wall.

Ceiling Gaps - Space between the ceiling and the interior wall.

Sagging Floors - Sloping floors or gap between the floor and the interior wall.

Chimney Separation - Chimney separating from the house.

Concrete Repair in Bozeman

Concrete is prone to cracking and sinking. A cracked and sunken driveway, walkway, or patio not only looks bad, but it can also be a tripping hazard for your family and your guests. Plus, water can pool in the areas that have sunk.

The good news is most concrete can be permanently leveled and repaired without having to replace it. We offer a proven Concrete Protection System to help Bozeman homeowners quickly restore the concrete around their home.

Concrete Solutions:

Lift and level concrete slabs

Seal concrete cracks and joints

Seal concrete surfaces to protect against pitting, flaking, and staining

Resurface concrete to restore its look and function

Why More Bozeman Homeowners Choose Us: