Sreelekha Mitra is a West Bengal glamorous actress of TV and movie. Once upon a time, she was a hot favorite actress in the Kolkata film industry, now she is a judge of the most popular comedy show Mirakkel on Zee TV. Sreelekha seems to be more glamorous even after a long period of her career.

Sreelekha Mitra Early Life:

Sreelekha Mitra was born on August 30, 1971, in Kolkata, India. Mitra was particularly passionate about the small screen at an early career. The glamorous actress stepped into the media arena in the early 1990s. She comes to the timeline around the media world acting in some television advertisements.

Sreelekha Mitra Career:

Sreelekha Mitra started her career with the small screen in the media industry of West Bengal. She made debut in the media industry with a television advertisement of Lays with Saif Ali Khan. After four years break, Sreelekha acted in another popular advertisement with Amir Khan for Coca-Cola. After the admired advertisement, she got a chance for her debut film in 1996. In the year, the actress made her debut in the film industry with the movie Sei Raat.

After did the movie, she never looked back in a career. In 1998, Sreelekha acted in the blockbuster movie ‘Hothat Bristi’, Bangladeshi actor Ferdous Ahmed is the protagonist in the movie, it created a fierce stir in the box office. In the same year, she also acted in another blockbuster movie ‘Baba Keno Chakar’. In her long career, Sreelekha acted in various movies such as Ashchorjyo Prodeep, Hello Kolkata, Nirbhoya, and Chaar. She got Filmfare Award for Best Actress nomination for supporting role in the movie Ashchorjyo Prodeep. Ek Mutho Chobi and Tolly Lights these movies assemble the hot scenes of Sreelekha Mitra.

Sreelekha Mitra Personal Life:

Sreelekha Mitra, the West Bengal nice-looking actress, still now an evergreen even after passed a long period in a career. The actress is very much unbolting minded about her life and sex. The actress has lots of fans whose fantasize her very much, she enjoys it. She thinks that, if the fan does not dream of about her at night, then it is my failure as an actress. Sreelekha married to Shiladitya Sanyal by her choice, but the couple divorced, now she maintains single life. She has no plan to re-marry anyone.

Sreelekha Mitra Personal Profile:

Full name: Sreelekha Mitra

Nickname:Sreelekha

Birth date: August 30, 1971

Birthplace: Kolkata, India

Occupation:Actress, Model

Religion: Hinduism

Years active:N/A

Spouse (s):Shiladitya Sanyal

Zodiac sign:Virgo

Sreelekha Mitra Height Weight and Body Measurement: