About AVS

As an interdisciplinary, professional Society, AVS supports networking among academic, industrial, government, and consulting professionals involved in a variety of disciplines - chemistry, physics, biology, mathematics, all engineering disciplines, business, sales, etc. through common interests related to the basic science, technology development, and commercialization of materials, interfaces, and processing area.

Each year, AVS hosts local and international meetings, publishes four journals, honors member through its awards and recognition program, provides training, and offers career services.

Founded in 1953, AVS is organized into technical divisions and technical groups that encompass a range of established as well as emerging science and technology areas. There are also regional chapters, international chapters and affiliates, and student chapters that promote communication and networking for professionals and students within a geographical region. AVS is comprised of approximately 4,500 members worldwide.

AVS Vision

The American Vacuum Society endeavors to be the premier organization specializing in understanding and applying the science and technology of materials, interfaces and processing with outstanding benefits for members.

AVS Mission

The American Vacuum Society is an international community of scientists, engineers and instrument manufacturers, which strives to promote research and communicate knowledge in the important areas of surface, interface, vacuum, and thin film science/technology for the advancement of humankind.

Exhibits

The Exhibit comprises an extensive display of tools, equipment and services for Surface Science; Biomaterial Interfaces; Electronic Materials & Photonics; Magnetic Interfaces; Manufacturing Science; MEMS/NEMS; Nanoscience; Thin Film; Plasma Science; Vacuum Technology and professional literature, educational material, career services and publications from numerous publishers.

Each year, the technical symposium expands into new and exciting technical disciplines which bring new exhibitors showing new technology and research methods. The continuously expanding technical program consistently keeps our Symposium fresh and exciting for exhibitors and attendees alike. The exhibits will be open from Tuesday morning until Thursday afternoon (October 22-24, 2019).

All AVS 66 registrants are invited to attend Tuesday-Thursday. In addition, consultants, engineers, biologists, chemists, physicists, purchasing professionals, scientists, students, technicians, and exhibitor staff working or studying in the fields of applied surface science, biomaterial interfaces, electronic materials and photonics, magnetic interfaces, manufacturing science, MEMS/NEMS, nanoscience, thin film, plasma science, surface science, or vacuum technology are welcome to pre-register for the AVS Exhibition for FREE.

General Sponsors

AVS wishes to express sincerest appreciation to the following companies/organizations for their donations in support of the technical divisions/groups at the AVS 66th International Symposium & Exhibition.

Symposium Introduction

The AVS International Symposium and Exhibition addresses cutting-edge issues associated with materials, processing, and interfaces in the research and manufacturing communities.

The weeklong Symposium fosters a multidisciplinary environment that cuts across traditional boundaries between disciplines, featuring papers from AVS technical divisions, technology groups, and focus topics on emerging technologies.

The equipment exhibition is one of the largest in the world and provides an opportunity to view the latest products and services offered by 200+ participating companies. More than 2,000 scientists and engineers gather from around the world to attend.

Source : Event Website