Matthew R. Linford, Ph.D., a professor of analytical chemistry at BYU, has been awarded the honor of being a Fellow of the American Vacuum Society. This award is meant to recognize members of the society who have made sustained and outstanding technical contributions in areas of interest to AVS.

“I’m honored to receive this award,” Linford said. “I think that it’s not only good for me, but also for BYU and for my research group, and I’m just really grateful to be on the list of recipients.”

The American Vacuum Society (also known as AVS) is an interdisciplinary and professional society that supports networking among academic, industrial, government and consulting professionals involved in a variety of disciplines. These disciplines include, but are not limited to, chemistry, physics, biology, mathematics, all engineering disciplines, business, and sales. AVS was founded in 1953 and currently is comprised of approximately 4,500 members worldwide.

“AVS is one of the really important societies in the areas of thin films, surfaces, nanotechnology and material characterization,” Linford said. “We work in these areas so it’s an important society for us. I attend their main meeting almost every year and often bring one or more students with me. This year I’ll attend with two graduate students and an undergraduate student.”

This award from AVS is not something that is easy to obtain. In order to even be nominated for the award, the nominee must have made sustained and outstanding scientific and technical contributions in research, engineering, technical advancement, academic education or managerial leadership for at least ten years. Because of this, those who receive the award are usually considered to be the brightest and most experienced in their field.

“When you have your name on that list [of recipients], it’s a stamp of approval on the work that you’ve done and are doing,” Linford said. “It’s just very nice to see that coming from my colleagues.”

For the rest of the story, visit the chemistry website.