This chapter analyses how writing and writing development has been and currently is prescribed and enacted in the curriculum for Danish as a subject (L1) in Years 1–9. Highlighting historical points of impact for writing in curricula from the early–nineteenth century through frequent reforms in the twentieth and twenty-first centuries, we focus empirically on the 2014 ruling curricular document Common Standards and auxiliary documents framing writing assessment at the school-leaving exam, as well as empirical classroom studies. Analyses of steering documents indicate that there has been an unprecedented push towards outcome-based and competence-oriented writing curricula. Following Ivanič&#39;s Discourses of Writing (DoW) framework, process writing is found to be the most dominant discourse from Grades 1–7. The analysis of the enacted writing curriculum, which focuses on empirical studies from 2009 until now, reveals that the enacted curriculum is misaligned with the prescriptive cu...

In recent decades, several Scandinavian research projects have had an explicit focus on how technology intervenes in L1 (or so-called Mother Tongue Education) practices in Swedish, Norwegian and Danish educational contexts, and how this may impact on understanding of the subject. There is currently no systematic overview of the documented possibilities and challenges related to the use of technology in L1. At the same time, there is terminological confusion in use of ‘technology’ and related concepts in L1. Finally, there is a general lack of critical reflection on the relation between technological developments, political rhetoric, and the development of L1 teaching and learning as a social practice related to specific contexts and actors. Thus, the paper attempts to answer three interrelated research questions: 1) what do we mean when we talk about ‘technology’ in L1?; 2) based on a systematic review of empirical studies, what characterizes the research field?; and 3) for discussi...

In recent decades, several Scandinavian research projects have had an explicit focus on how technology intervenes in L1 (or so-called Mother Tongue Education) practices in Swedish, Norwegian and Danish educational contexts, and how this may impact on understanding of the subject. There is currently no systematic overview of the documented possibilities and challenges related to the use of technology in L1. At the same time, there is terminological confusion in use of ‘technology’ and related concepts in L1. Finally, there is a general lack of critical reflection on the relation between technological developments, political rhetoric, and the development of L1 teaching and learning as a social practice related to specific contexts and actors. Thus, the paper attempts to answer three interrelated research questions: 1) what do we mean when we talk about ‘technology’ in L1?; 2) based on a systematic review of empirical studies, what characterizes the research field?; and 3) for discussion, which broader implications does the review suggest for a rethinking of L1 in terms of practice and research? Introducing the notion of educational boundary objects, a theoretical framework is developed, which suggests four metaphors for understanding technology within L1: as a tool, as media, as socialization, and as literacy practices. These are found useful for analyzing and comparing both theoretical perspectives and empirical research on L1. A key finding of the study is that, although the included research is characterized by a large degree of diversity, the conceptualization of technology as media is a dominating approach which downplays aesthetic, critical and tool-oriented perspectives. Another finding is the large number of studies that focus on student practices within L1 and the relationship to out-of-school literacy practices. A final finding is the emphasis on teacher uncertainty regarding how and why to integrate technology within existing paradigms of the subject. This calls for further research on how technology may be justified in L1 practice, including various forms of teacher education.

Religion education (RE) in the public school in Denmark, as in many countries, is often subject to political, public and professional debate, relating not only to different ideas about RE’s potential contribution to Allgemeinbildung, religious and/or moral formation and citizenship education, but also to reactions or responses to what is perceived as challenges posed by supranational processes such as globalization, individualization, and migration, including a new and growing Muslim presence. Based on an academic Study of Religions approach, defined in contrast to confessional RE, the article outlines relevant political processes and political, public and professional debates on RE, and analyzes the way they have set their mark in past and present Danish education legislation, national curricula and guidelines issued by the state for RE and for the training of RE teachers. Whereas a study-of-religions approach has long been seen as a ‘natural’ framework for RE in the upper-secondar...

This paper investigates issues of voice and narrative in L1 writing. Three branches of research are initially discussed: research on narratives as resources for identity work, research on writer identity and voice as an essential aspect of identity, and research on Bildung in L1 writing. Subsequently, two empirical investigations of L1 writing in a Danish upper secondary school are presented. The first study is based on longitudinal interview data and analyses one student’s experience as an L1 writer in the transition from lower secondary to upper secondary school. A high-achieving student in lower secondary L1, she found that her previous writing strategies were not rewarded in upper secondary school. In the second empirical study, two upper-secondary exam papers are investigated, with a focus on their approaches to exam genres and their use of narrative resources to address issues of voice and identity. In the first paper, the student writer is provoked by the text material to att...

Didaktik and Curriculum in Ongoing Dialogue revives the dialogue between the continental European Didaktik tradition and the Anglo-Saxon tradition of curriculum. It highlights important research findings that bridge cultural differences and argues for a mutual exchange and understanding of ideas. Through analyses of shared conditions and cultural differences, the book invites a critical stance and continued dialogue on issues of significant importance for the current and future education of children and young people. It combines research at empirical, conceptual, and theoretical levels to shed light on the similarities between the Didaktik and Anglo-Saxon educational traditions, calling for a comprehensive understanding of teaching and a renewed focus on content and knowledge. Addressing theoretical issues within contemporary educational scholarship, the book will be of great interest to academics, researchers, and postgraduate students in the fields of curriculum studies, education theory, and comparative education.