I love everything about Danskbureauet. From kind people responding quickly all my emails, with questions about the course, to our amazing teacher, book and the structure of the course, its intensity and a fact we were only 8 students at class. I cannot imagine learning so much if we were 20 students in class like they are in other language schools. Also I really appreciated we didn’t play games and we didn’t waste time on “talk to your classmate and give each other feedback” exercises. All the feedback was coming straightly from our teacher, which was great. Time was always flying during our classes, even though they were actually long. I can see a progress and I would love to continue with Danskbureauet if my schedule allows it in the future.

“Through Danskbureauet’s teaching I improved my Danish pronunciation. My teacher was really good at explaining and coach me to make the Danish sounds which can be hard for an English native speaker as myself. At the same time, she made it fun and motivating to speak Danish”

“I want to thank Danskbureauet for your support and help. I am been incredibly happy for our corporation and I am still impressed that I was able to pass ‘Studieprøven’ with such good grades. I would never have achieved such a victory without your professionalism. Thank you so much!”

I’ve decided to write you a small note, thanking you for your help. I enjoyed being taught by you immensely; you are an excellent teacher and have inspired me to continue learning with an open and positive mind. I appreciate all your hard work, it’s meant so much to me. Once again, thank you so much for your time, expertise and patience!

“I have been very happy with the courses and with my professional teacher. I had some Danish lessons before at another place but the outcome was not very good. This time I felt that my teacher was looking at my needs and level and created the perfect setup to improve my Danish.”

“I took an intensive private Danish course at Danskbureauet. Ea is a fantastic teacher, and the course was precisely tailored to my needs. After just one month of high-paced learning, people stopped switching over to English when I tried to communicate in Danish with them. Three years on, and I still happily recommend Danskbureauet when someone asks where I’ve learned Danish so well. The best investment I’ve ever made! :)”