Happy Solstice everyone! So lately I’ve been doing research and looking up bands that I see everywhere but haven’t actually ever listened to, most of which I’m finding happen to be from Finland. One of these bands is Horna, and I’ve decided to pay them a little bit of attention because they have actually been in the States recently. They didn’t make it to the Midwest, but the fact that they were even on our soil makes me happy. Maybe they’ll come back.

[Some old-school Horna]

Horna, which means “Hell” in Finnish, got their start in 1993, with founding members Shatraug and Moredhel. Their first album (according to their MySpace. Encyclopedia Metallum has it listed as a demo, and I’m still pretty new to Horna), Hiidentorni, was released in 1996 after they cemented the rest of the lineup. Like many black metal bands, Horna’s been through a lot of lineup changes, and the current lineup features Spellgoth on vocals, Vainaja on drums, Qraken on bass, and Infection and founding member Shatraug on guitars. Incidentally, Shatraug is also in Behexen and Sargeist, Vainaja is in Sargeist, and Infection used to be in Behexen. All of this just makes stronger my belief that the entire Finnish black metal scene is made up of the same six or seven people.

[Behexen]

[Sargeist]

I’m really glad I decided to look up Horna, because they play a really interesting brand of black metal. Their MySpace describes their music as “Metal/Gospel/Religious,” which is awesome. I don’t know how much it has to do with gospel musically, they do utilize some really interesting musical patterns that you don’t hear often, and they also structure a lot of their music around brighter chords.

The strange and upbeat musical patterns may have links to Finnish folk music, which Horna have covered as well. Although they are not a folk metal band, this song did end up on one of their albums:

[With pictures of Finland. At least one humppa-inspired song is required for you to be a proper Finnish metal band.]

Although their last full-length release was in 2008 (Sanojesi Äärelle), Horna have not been just twiddling their thumbs. Last year they released an EP called Adventus Satanae, which does not seem to be out in the U.S. yet (although maybe I just can’t find it). In fact, they don’t seem to do much kicking back at all; Horna has released since 1998 7 full-length albums, 10 EPs, 3 compilations, 2 live albums, and have been featured on 15 splits. That, my friends, is A LOT of Horna. Which is awesome.

[Horna live at Maryland Death Fest this year]

*Most* of Horna’s music is in Finnish, which I appreciate as one of those languages I will probably never be able to comprehend (apparently it is one of the hardest languages for native English speakers to learn?). Fortunately for those of us who don’t speak Finnish, music is the universal language, and black metal has some pretty universal themes: Satanism, the occult, etc. Horna’s got this all covered, and they do it in an original way.

[Another clip of Horna live. The sound is much better on this one]

So give Horna a listen (if you haven’t already. Like I said, they are one of those bands I researched initially because I felt silly for not knowing them). For more information, and for where I gleaned mine, they have a MySpace (http://www.myspace.com/thetruehorna), a Facebook (http://www.facebook.com/pages/Horna-Official/194755433889352), and their official website, www.horna666.com.

Until next time…

-Hagalaz