Over the past few days the Portland Trail Blazers have been one of the most active teams in the NBA. That trend continued through the NBA Draft.

With the 23rd overall pick the Portland Trail Blazers selected Rondae Hollis-Jefferson out of the University of Arizona. At first glance this seemed like a great move by the franchise considering they needed another perimeter defender since they shipped out Nicolas Batum. But a couple of hours after drafting Hollis-Jefferson they packaged him in a deal that sent him and Steve Blake to the Brooklyn Nets for Mason Plumlee and Pat Connaughton.

There's no doubt that this move will pay off for the Blazers in the long run.

Plumlee, 25, is an athletic center that has a Gold Medal to his name. He spent the summer of 2014 with the United States national team that competed FIBA Basketball World Cup. This was a good pickup for the Blazers because they needed to get more athletic down low. Although Plumlee is still developing he has intangibles, such as size and athleticism that will prove to be an asset for the Blazers. He’s also just 25, so he has plenty of time to get better.

The other player that the Blazers received in this trade was the #41 pick, Pat Connaughton. Connaughton was considered a second round steal for the Blazers. In college he was known as an athletic spot up shooter who is an above average rebounder for his position. At the NBA Draft Combine he had the highest vertical leap at 44 inches. There’s no doubt that his skillset fits in with the way that the Blazers want to play.

The craziness of draft night didn’t stop there.

Portland was able to execute a trade with the Utah Jazz for Spanish forward, Daniel Diez. The best part is the team didn’t give up any players to get Diez, only cash considerations. Diez plays professionally in Europe for Gipuzkoa Basket in the Spanish ACB League. Although he has plenty of potential there’s a chance the Blazers choose to keep in in Europe for a little while longer in order to develop his all-around game.

On draft night many analysts stated that this was a rebuilding move for the Blazers in preparation for life after Aldridge. Blazers GM, Neil Olshey, held a press conference later that night stating that Aldridge hasn’t told anybody within the organization that he’s leaving. Olshey even went as far to say that he spoke with Aldridge earlier that day and that he wanted him to tell the media that those rumors are not true.

If Aldridge decides to stay, it seems as though he will be returning to a team that is drastically different than last year’s squad.

Related Slideshow: Oregon’s Most Devastating Sports Injuries

Related Articles

For Some Blazers, Fate Rests on Faith

Blazers’ Season Ends Despite C.J. McCollum’s Historic Night

LaMarcus Aldridge Likely Leaving the Portland Trail Blazers

The Trail Blazers’ Offseason Plans

The Blazers’ Most Important Win of the Season

Why The Blazers Should Offer Jimmy Butler a Max Deal

Enjoy this post? Share it with others.