PITTSBURGH (AP) — The debate raging in city art circles these days revolves around a young hoofer who made it big, dancing and singing in the rain.

Gene Kelly's name may not mean much to younger audiences, but to their parents and grandparents, he was a consummate song-and-dance man, right up there with Fred Astaire. He was a filmmaker, choreographer and international icon.

As a native of Pittsburgh, it's only natural folks would want to erect a statue for Kelly, who died in 1996 at the age of 83.

But some of the debate over where the statue should go and what it should look like has become biting and personal, with the aesthetic campaign being waged in private conversations and in newspaper editorials and letters.

Some say the proposed statue, a 14-foot-high rendition of Kelly as Don Lockwood hanging from a lamppost during the signature song-and-dance of his 1952 classic "Singin' in the Rain," belongs on a traffic island at the western entrance to the city near Point State Park. Others argue the statue, to be created by sculptor Susan Wagner, belongs in Pittsburgh's Cultural District.

Others just say it better look good.

Thomas Sokolowski, director of The Andy Warhol Museum (who was also from Pittsburgh), wrote a letter to the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette last month that the proposed statue "comes closer to the lumbering footfalls of Fantasia's hippo ballerinas than the grace of Mr. Kelly."

Sokolowski also said if plans to put the statue near Point State Park are approved, the first thing visitors may see is "what I regard as a fourth-rate amateur bowling league trophy."

Ouch.

The letter touched off a spate of responses defending Wagner's work and denouncing Sokolowski's remarks. Wagner created the statues of Pirates greats Roberto Clemente and Willie Stargell outside PNC Park.

One letter writer said Sokolowski's comments were "vague, subjective and mean-spirited." Another said they came "from the director of a museum dedicated to a man who made a living copying the labels of soup cans."

Meanwhile, questions remain as to where the Gene Kelly Statue Committee, a group which came together in the last few years, should put it.

City council has approved the transfer of a traffic island to the Western Pennsylvania Conservancy, with the intention that the group would clear the way for the statue to be placed on the highly visible plot near Point State Park.

Aviva Radbord, a committee member, said the site has been determined and that it's now time to start raising the $500,000 needed to erect it.

But that has done little to quiet critics who say the piece belongs elsewhere, perhaps outside a new high school for the arts, or somewhere else in Pittsburgh's Cultural District — near the city's theaters and performing arts venues.

Richard Armstrong, the Henry J. Heinz II director of the Carnegie Museum of Art, says a traffic island doesn't afford enough access for pedestrians.

"It would be something you'd pass by without recognizing anything about it," Armstrong said. "(The planned location) just seems silly."

Perry Jubelirer, a 76-year-old former dancer who studied with Kelly as a boy in Pittsburgh, agrees, saying people may not be able to reach the statue easily enough.

Regardless of where the statue ends up or how it looks, Kevin McMahon, the new president of the Pittsburgh Cultural Trust, said he's happy people in Pittsburgh at least are engaging in a spirited debate over something other than the Steelers' playoff chances. To argue so over a statue, he said, "is a great sign for the city" and its arts community.

Sokolowski, for his part, said his remarks were intended only to ensure the city doesn't simply erect a sentimental remembrance. Public works of art, he warned, need to be something generations revere, not "look and say, 'yuck."'

Jubelirer just said he hopes the statue does justice to Kelly.

"Gene had a wonderful smile," he said. "I want them to get up and see that smile."