Esri partners have developed solutions and services that use GIS to help nonprofits improve the supply of clean water; national agencies more rapidly respond to disasters; and help governments streamline operations, saving time and money

.Digital Assessor Maps Improve Efficiency and Accuracy

In 2015, San Mateo County’s Office of the Assessor-County Clerk-Recorder and Elections (ACRE) created a strategic plan to foster a GIS environment focused on reducing redundant efforts, creating more accurate information, and increasing citizen engagement and transparency.

ACRE is the largest consolidated department in the State of California. It combines the constitutional office of the assessor with other constitutionally mandated functions of the clerk-recorder and elections to serve 770,000 residents in 20 cities and 70 jurisdictions. ACRE has a reputation for investing in GIS and technology to find ways to gain efficiency and reduce waste.

San Mateo County hired Bruce Harris & Associates to remap the county’s 230,000 parcels, replacing a 20-year-old legacy GIS.

With that vision in mind, San Mateo County contacted Bruce Harris & Associates (BHA), a company specializing in GIS mapping and providing GIS solutions to local government agencies. In 2017, San Mateo County hired BHA to remap the county’s 230,000 parcels, replacing a 20-year-old legacy GIS. Working with the county, BHA consolidated multiple databases and redrew parcels from source materials to eliminate redundancies and greatly improve accuracy. Parcels were delivered in the ArcGIS Parcel Fabric data model on time and within budget.

ACRE can now digitally produce all assessor maps, eliminating the time-consuming hand-drawing process previously used and providing an immediate return on investment (ROI). With this foundation in place, ACRE is now completely aligned to take advantage of ArcGIS as well as the portal infrastructure put in place by the Information Systems Department (ISD).

The county has already used this technology to support response to recent fires and assist work-from-home efforts to ensure business continuity during the COVID-19 pandemic. The county’s strategic plan can now be accomplished using Esri’s applications for local government. ACRE’s investment in GIS and its trust in BHA resulted in a successful project that will continue providing benefits to the county for years to come.