In ''The Devil's Own,'' Brad Pitt plays an Irish Republican Army operative who flees Belfast and comes to live in Staten Island. He is supposed to be incognito, but he sure is hard to miss. Mr. Pitt moves through this unexpectedly solid thriller with dazzling confidence, showing off all the star power that he usually works overtime to hide. With a temporary goodbye to bad haircuts and grunge affectations, he gives a first-rate, madly photogenic performance that will win him new respect along with fluttery fan-club adulation.

Like the young Robert Redford, whom he resembles more than ever, Mr. Pitt shows the acute awareness of his effect on others that is a mark of stellar authority. It's also a quality he shares with Harrison Ford, who does a fine, terse job of playing his father figure, an admirably decent and substantial blue-collar family man.

In ''The Devil's Own,'' directed by Alan J. Pakula in a thoughtful urban style that recalls the vintage New York stories of Sidney Lumet, Mr. Pitt is the supernova to Harrison Ford's seasoned pro. It could be argued that they exist in separate, semi-related movies. But it could also be said that, should the viewer choose not to be an absolute stickler about plot coherence, ''The Devil's Own'' delivers two traffic-stopping star turns for the price of one.

Mr. Ford plays Tom O'Meara, the New York police sergeant with whom Mr. Pitt's Rory Devaney comes to stay. When Tom accepts Rory as a boarder living in his basement, he has no idea that Rory is actually a terrorist named Frankie McGuire. Nor does Tom realize that the younger man's idea of a commitment to peace in Northern Ireland means trying to send home a shipload of Stinger missiles. The film's politics are willfully hazy about violence and accountability.

''The Devil's Own'' is that rare film whose press notes include a nine-page history lesson titled ''About the Conflict in Northern Ireland.'' But talk about this film and ''the Troubles'' is sure to hit closer to home. Publicly disparaged initially by Mr. Pitt (who was later apologetic) and plagued by rumors of insane expenses and half-baked screenwriting, ''The Devil's Own'' certainly tracks more smoothly than might have been expected. Only in the latter half of this story, after getting it off to a brisk and involving first hour, does Mr. Pakula show the strains of the directorial diplomacy this project required.

Handsomely photographed by Gordon Willis in solemn, brooding style, this thriller spends an enjoyably long time simply letting Rory and Tom get acquainted. Tom and his wife (Margaret Colin) warmly welcome Rory, and their young daughters are delighted to have him around. Meanwhile, Rory lays plans for buying the missiles from a godfatherly munitions dealer (Treat Williams) and has a tiny flirtation with the sister of an old friend. Played by the striking Natascha McElhone, who made a memorable impression as Francoise Gilot in ''Surviving Picasso,'' she is just a generic girlfriend character who comes and goes at the screenplay's whim.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access. If you are in Reader mode please exit and log into your Times account, or subscribe for all of The Times.

Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.