Sunday, November 29, 1992 Page: 1B/8B QUICK WORDS: MUSTO

PORTRAIT OF A FAMILY — The Musto clan gathered in 1953 when Raphael Musto,

now a state senator, married. From left, standing, mother Rose Musto, sons

Joseph, and attorney vying for an appointment as Luzerne County Judge; Biagio,

an official with the state Department of Education; James, a teacher in

Scranton; John, a manager of a local restaurant; Frances, the bride; Raphael;

Gerard, superintendent of Pittston Area Schools; and father, James, a state

representative for 10 consecutive terms. Seated from left are sisters

Antoinette and Louise.

PHOTO

TIMES LEADER/DON CAREY

Joe Musto

Vying for judgeship

FILE PHOTO

MEANS OF SUPPORT — The Musto family store on Bryden Street in Pittston

Township is where Joe Musto and his seven siblings worked. The store, a

community fixture for decades, closed in the mid-70s.

***********************************

By DAWN SHURMAITIS

Times Leader Staff Writer he father — James Musto — was a scrapper who

spent his youth in the coal mines before breaking a Republican stronghold in

the former 3rd Legislative District to take his place in the state House.

The sons — second-generation Italian-Americans, Pittston Township born and

bred — all worked in the family store, butchering meat, delivering groceries,

stocking shelves, before entering college.

All six became successes, in business, politics, education.

Raphael Musto followed his father’s lead, and is now an influential state

senator. Biagio is an official with the state Department of Education, Gerard

is a school superintendent. John is the manager of a local restaurant. And

James is a teacher in Scranton.

Son number five — Joseph J., a respected attorney for 24 years — aspires

to become Luzerne County’s newest judge.

Some say it’s more than a hope, it’s a wrap.

With his brother’s powerful political connections, Musto, they say, has the

judgeship sewn up: Gov. Robert Casey, a Democrat, will appoint him to the open

spot on the bench, the Democratic-controlled Senate will vote to confirm him

and the Musto legacy will continue.

And rightly so, say Musto supporters.

“It hurts me when I read he’s going to be a judge just because his brother

is a senator,” says Mae McHugh, who’s known Joe Musto since he was a boy

delivering groceries to her house on Bryden Street.

“Those kids came up. They didn’t have special clothes, special schools.

There were no cars at 16. That home was no castle. They were never big shots.

“If there’s any justice that man will be judge. And that’s the truth as God

is my judge.”

Even his political opponents say Joe Musto, age 49, has the right stuff to

become judge, brother or no brother.

“A lot of people are going to cry because of Ray Musto’s position. But

that’s just politics,” says Luzerne County Commissioner Jim Phillips, who was

accused of nepotism when his son was appointed county solicitor.

“I think Joe Musto is a highly qualified person and would make an excellent

judge.

“And I’m a Republican.”

The judge lineup

When Judge Bernard Brominski retired in October, he left a void on the

county bench five local lawyers are vying to fill.

One of those men must get the nod from the governor and then capture a

two-thirds majority vote of the Senate, which doesn’t reconvene until Jan. 5.

Whoever is appointed would serve until January 1994. In the interim, an

election for the 10-year term would be held. Historically, the appointed judge

wins the nomination in May as well as the November election.

Besides Joe Musto, the Special Trial Court Nominating Commission two weeks

ago interviewed attorneys Charles Bufalino, Michael Conahan, Joe Giovannini

and Tom Makowski for the job, which pays $80,000 and could rise to $99,500 if

a bill proposing a salary hike is passed.

Fulfilling the dream

For Musto, a partner with Rosenn, Jenkins & Greenwald, the largest law firm

in Northeastern Pennsylvania, even $80,000 would mean a substantial pay cut.

But, he says, “money isn’t everything.”

To Musto, a judgeship represents the pinnacle of his profession. It would

also mean the fulfillment of his father’s dream.

“My father was in awe of the legal system,” says Musto. “He looked up to

the law. He wanted me to go to law school and be a lawyer.”

In 1969, when Musto brought his soon-to-be wife home to meet the family she

gained his father’s instant approval as soon as he learned she too was a

lawyer.

“He opened his eyes, smiled and that was it,” says Musto. “He was happy.”

Musto met his wife when both worked as assistant district attorneys in the

Philadelphia D.A.’s office. Today, Fortunata Musto works part-time as a

domestic relations master in Luzerne County Court. She presides over judicial

hearings to determine support payments.

Musto says should he be appointed or elected, his wife will keep her job.

There is no conflict, he says, because only Orphans Court Judge Chester

Muroski would preside over any of his wife’s cases.

If a conflict did arise, Musto would recuse himself from the case.

The normally soft-spoken Musto — whose many admirers often use the term

“helluva nice guy” to describe him — grows visibly impassioned when

discussing his famous brother and suggestions his nomination is a lock because

of the senator’s influence.

“I felt confident I could submit my qualifications to anybody: the

committee, the governor, the Senate,” he says. “The fact that I am related to

a state senator is not relevant, not applicable.”

The criticism levied against him is, to Musto, “unfair. I shouldn’t be

disadvantaged because a member of my family is in an elected position.

“I understand what people are saying. And I am very proud of what my

brother has done. He’s been an excellent senator and he works hard for his

constituents.

“But I’m not doing this for him. I’m doing this for me, for what I’ve done,

for my qualifications.”

Joe Musto’s background

A distinguished law school student who graduated first in his senior class,

Musto served as law clerk to a Dauphin County and a Supreme Court judge. In

1969, he returned home to become an associate and later partner in the

Bedford, Waller, Griffith, Darling & Mitchell law firm. Before moving to his

present firm, Musto was a principal with Griffith, Aponick & Musto.

Musto has appeared in court in Luzerne, Wyoming, Lackawanna, Monroe and

Schuylkill counties as well as in the federal court of the Middle District. By

his own estimates he’s argued approximately 200 jury trials and appeared in

court more than 1,000 times. His primary duties in his law firm’s litigation

department are in the area of insurance defense.

Following in his father’s footsteps (James Musto’s proudest achievement was

passage of the monthly Black Lung benefits for afflicted miners), Musto has

handled numerous black lung cases, as well as Social Security and workmen’s

compensation cases.

Solicitor of the Pittston Area Schools since 1973, the same district where

his brother Gerard is superintendent, Musto also serves as assistant county

solicitor.

“Law is so exciting,” says Musto. “I’ve had cases where I’ve had to learn

about medicine, physics, engineering. It’s fascinating to be able to put all

that information together.

“It’s very challenging and very rewarding.”

Musto is confident he would be a “competent, fair and impartial judge” —

the same words supporters use to describe his qualifications.

Even if he isn’t appointed judge, Musto says he will “seriously consider”

running for election. It won’t be his first taste of politics.

One way or another, Musto has been involved in politics since he was 5 —

when his father first won election to the state House. He was heavily involved

with his brother’s first run for the state House in 1971, his congressional

race in 1980 and all of his subsequent races for senator.

In 1976, Musto himself won election to the county’s seven-member government

study commission.

“I’m not fearful of entering politics,” says Musto. “In fact, I’m excited

about it.”

Senator Musto — the family patriarch since his father’s death in 1971 —

says he’s worried his relationship and his position will become a campaign

issue should his brother win the appointment.

“I’m a chain around his neck,” he says. “If I wasn’t a senator, he’d have

smooth sailing. He doesn’t need me to be a judge. He’s the candidate, he’s the

one who has to go before the people.

But no worry, says Ray Musto, “We come from good stock.”

The family history

Rose Frushon Musto, now 86, still lives in the Musto family home on Bryden

Street in Pittston Township, where the clan (including 30 grandchildren and

great-grandchildren) continues to gather on holidays and weekends.

A native of the Old Boston section of Exeter, she met her husband in the

neighborhood between Cork Lane and Browntown where he grew up.

Married in 1921, Rose Musto has lived to see her husband and her sons all

rise to prominence. It wasn’t an easy life.

After spending his teens in the mines, James Musto battled with the mining

companies, and lost his livelihood.

“It was a very difficult time for us,” says Musto of his father’s labor

efforts. “He took on the coal company and he was blackballed. But he took it

to the grave with him, his concern for miners.”

Banned from the mines, James Musto turned to business, opening a barbershop

and a grocery store.

Working in the family store was family law. And no one broke the law.

“We all did it,” says Joe Musto. “It was a way to support the family. We

didn’t have a lot of money. But that little store put food on the table.

“It was an interesting job. It helped me be more outgoing. It was the

school of life.”

James Musto, first elected a Pittston Township school director in 1937,

went on to serve 10 consecutive terms in the state House of Representatives.

When he died, the Speaker of the House said, “An effective voice,

especially for the coal unions, has been stilled.”

To visit his mom, Joe Musto needs only to drive about a mile from his

two-story home in Pittston where he lives with his wife and two children:

Laura, 18, a student at King’s College and an aspiring writer, and Robby, 12,

a student at Pittston Area Middle School.

As a parent, Musto hopes he’s instilled the same “good old-fashioned values

of honesty and hard work” in his children that his father instilled in him.

Joe was child number seven. Ray, Louise, James Jr., Antoinette, Gerard,

Biagio came before and John came after. The six boys shared one bedroom, the

two girls and the parents the other two.

Today, Musto works in a seventh-floor corner office with a commanding view

of the Susquehanna River and the Market Street Bridge. A large framed photo of

The Three Stooges — a favorite of Musto and his son — dominates one wall.

Along another wall hangs a framed piece of torn shirt — the same shirt

Musto wore during his first solo airplane flight in 1984.

“It was something I always wanted to do,” he says of his pilot’s license.

“Finally, I did.”