James A. Musto, Jr., 88, of Pittston Township, passed away Friday, December 18, 2020, in Hospice of the Sacred Heart Inpatient Unit, Dunmore.

Born in Pittston Township on March 31, 1932, he was the son of the late Honorable James A. Musto Sr. and Rose Frushon Musto.

He was a graduate of Pittston Township High School. In 1947-1948, James was a young student athlete for the Pittston Township Mighty Mights. He was an all-scholastic guard. After his senior season, he was voted to the All Star Team and was unanimously elected team captain.

James was a military veteran and photographer in the US Army. He served in San Antonio, Texas. He was a life member of the Pittston Township Fire Department.

In 1963, he graduated from Wilkes College with a BS in Commerce and Finance. He was a distributor for Vaughn’s Bakery and his route was in Scranton. He was the athletic director for South Catholic High School. A teacher in the Scranton Diocese for 30 plus years and ran the cafeteria as well. While working for the Scranton Diocese,

he formed and organized The Union for Lay People in the Catholic Diocese. He ran the family grocery store, Musto's Market. He also held the position of Pittston Township Supervisor. He was an internal revenue service agent. He was a principal and a very influential part in helping to form Musto Tax and Insurance Services. He directed the tax division.

In addition to his parents, he was preceded by his wife Gertrude Grace Bertolone Musto on November 27, 2020; brothers Raphael J. Musto, Gerard Musto; sisters Louise Francioso and Antoinette Deeb; brother-in-law, Paul Deeb and sister-in-law Philomae Musto.

Surviving are his children, Raphael A. Musto and his wife Janet, Bear Creek Township; Rose Mumme and her husband Paul, Texas; and James A. Musto III, Pittston Township; grandchildren, Jessica and her husband Shane Howell, Gina Marie and her husband Nick Altieri, Raphael A. Musto, Jr.; Raymond Mumme; and Sarah and her husband Shawn Guice; great-grandson Logan James Altieri; brothers Biagio Musto and his wife Carol, Joseph J. Musto and his wife Fortunata and John Musto; sisters-in-law, Domenica Musto and Frances Musto; brother-in-law, James Francioso; numerous nieces and nephews.

Funeral services will be private and at the convenience of the family with interment in St. Rocco’s Cemetery, Pittston Township.In lieu of flowers, donations may be made to St. Ann’s Basilica, 1233 St. Ann Street, Scranton, PA 18504 or to St. Joseph Marello Parish, 237 William Street, Pittston. Arrangements are entrusted to Adonizio Funeral Home, LLC, 251 William Street, Pittston.