The surname Musto was first found in Cambridgeshire where "William Muschet held of the Bishop of Ely in 1165. Later, he was Sheriff of Cambridgeshire 2 Richard I., as was William 'filius John Muschet' 6,9,11 and 12 Edward III.

Muschetts, a small manor still held under the Bishop of Ely, retains their name. Adam de Muschet, about 1240, held under Robert de Waledom at Great Peatling in Leicestershire. John Musket was Lord of Heccecomb, Somersetshire, in 1316. Robert Muschett of Gloucestershire and Hertfordshire, Ralph Muskett of Hertfordshire only, in the time of Edward I. At the same date 'Dominus William Muschett' was a considerable proprietor in Kent, and held land in Huntingdonshire. Roger Mushett gave some land at Benney to the Preceptory of Temple Rothley. In Dorsetshire, John Muskett held in Winterborne- St. Martin 20 Ed. III." 2

"The name occurs in Scotland from a very early period, but was there used as a familiar form of Montfichet. 'The corruption of names, arising from a tendency to abbreviate, and to adopt leading sounds, is conspicuous in the following instances, some of which occur in the Ragman Roll' " 2

Robert Osketell Muschet was listed in the Pipe Rolls of Suffolk in 1177 and later William Musket was found the Feet of Fines for Norfolk c. 1210. Later again, William Mouchet was found in the Subsidy Rolls for Cambridgeshire in 1327. 3

Musto Spelling Variations

Anglo-Norman names are characterized by a multitude of spelling variations. When the Normans became the ruling people of England in the 11th century, they introduced a new language into a society where the main languages of Old and later Middle English had no definite spelling rules. These languages were more often spoken than written, so they blended freely with one another. Contributing to this mixing of tongues was the fact that medieval scribes spelled words according to sound, ensuring that a person's name would appear differently in nearly every document in which it was recorded. The name has been spelled Musket, Muscat, Muscet, Muskett, Muskatt, Muskat, Muskot, Muskott, Mousket, Mouskett, Mouskette, Mousquette, Muskit, Muskitt and many more.