David Herbert and Kevin Scott have spent a long time making sure they have the right ingredients for a firm that will outlast them.

Although it has taken years to put together the ingredients, David Herbert and Kevin Scott feel they finally have the recipe for succession.

Their firm, Herbert Scott, is based in the historic town of Lewes in Sussex, where it occupies a listed building with a Georgian façade, which Herbert believes could disguise a much older building.

Scott says the partners’ original vision for the firm, which they started in 1996, was of an entity that could survive without them.

‘We sat on the downs, looked over the town and said we wanted to create a business that would outlast us. But we had no idea what that meant. It has taken a long time to figure it out. Many businesses are established by technicians, not entrepreneurs, and we were definitely technicians.

‘We had no management skills, no idea about how to manage premises, IT and so on. So we learnt it all ourselves. It has taken us all these years to realise we need to have other people in the firm with those skills. In the next 10 years, or quicker, we will have a business that can run independently of us.’

Rather than seeing clients, Scott believes the directors’ roles should be concerned with strategy and marketing. Though still small, with five employees, the firm recently recruited operations manager Angela Honey, who has technical advice skills, a degree in business management and experience running an IFA practice.

Herbert says: ‘IFAs are traditionally flat businesses with few tiers. You have to build the triangle and bring in management so the owners aren’t doing the business.’

Lessons from law firms

Herbert and Scott believe IFAs should be more like large law firms. ‘Small firms can’t create a succession plan. Lawyers have started polarising into the large firms and smaller ones that specialise in conveyance, for example,’ says Scott.

‘Our profession hasn’t done that yet for two reasons. We come from a sales background, so clients are seen as "my clients", not the firm’s. How do you retire from that?’

The second reason, he says, is that networks mislead advisers by making them feel like they are running their own business when in reality it all belongs to the network. ‘Also for years the networks have been spinning the yarn [that you can] obtain economies of scale while retaining [business] independence. They have delayed the process by 20 years,’ he says. ‘Most people have wised up and realised that networks just take your money.

‘In the next 15 to 20 years, the best advisers will get together and form large firms. Those who would rather be in control will still work from their back bedroom as restricted niche players.’

DAVID HERBERT CV

CAREER

1996 - present Herbert Scott, director

1987 - 1996 Abbey Life, senior financial adviser

1986 - 1987 Porchester Group, financial consultant

1983 - 1986 Graduate civil engineer

PROFESSIONAL MEMBERSHIPS/QUALIFICATIONS

Chartered financial planner

Fellow of the Personal Finance Society

BSc (Hons) Civil Engineering

Learning to run a business

With only three advisers, including Herbert and Scott, the firm is still at the start of this process. It was not until they hired business coaching consultants Shirlaws, six years ago, that the two men started to appreciate the importance of delegation and trusting others.

‘Accepting that you don’t know everything is important,’ says Herbert. ‘You have to force yourself to step back. After 17 years we are still here when others have disappeared under heaps of regulation. It is only because we were determined to build a succession business that we forced ourselves to spend time with management consultants, read books and attend business seminars.’

Scott takes up the story. ‘Neither of us has been trained in how to build a business. Just like the rest of the profession, we were focused on acquiring professional qualifications, which made us fantastic technicians.

‘Shirlaws taught us that all business owners want the same three things – equity, income and control – and the shape of your business is determined by how they are prioritised. We agreed [that we wanted them in] that order.’

A tipping point came later when they read The E-Myth Revisited by Michael Gerber.

Herbert says this taught them that ‘you don’t have a business if you make all the pies. You need more relationship managers, people who can operate as we do, highly qualified and able to recognise the holistic needs of a client and build a financial planning strategy.’

Focusing on niches

Another change over the past few years has been to focus on higher-net-worth clients. One of the ways they have achieved this is to build niches in the areas of court-of-protection clients and in advising trustees. Scott has the Society of Trust and Estate Practitioners (Step) diploma and sits on the Brighton Step committee.

Recent changes include bringing financial planning and Voyant cashflow modelling software to the forefront of their proposition. This year, they started offering their own model portfolios (see box) as an alternative to bought-in portfolios and discretionary fund managers (DFMs). They also changed their initial and ongoing investment charges from 3% plus 0.5% to 1% plus 1%.

Having experienced the value of using a consultant, Herbert Scott also now uses Mode, which combines expertise in management, investment and entrepreneurism, and takes equity in the firm in return for a long-term partnership aimed at business growth. It sounds expensive for such a small firm but Herbert says the cost is not the main concern. ‘We spend money on things that bring value and Mode pays for itself in spades,’ he says.

Scott says: ‘There are hardly any differences between my skills and David’s. Mode brings a broad range of skills into our management structure.’

KEVIN SCOTT CV

CAREER

1996 - present Herbert Scott, director

1990 - 1996 Abbey Life, senior financial adviser

1981 - 1990 NatWest Bank

PROFESSIONAL MEMBERSHIPS/QUALIFICATIONS

Chartered financial planner

Fellow of the Personal Finance Society

Registered trust and estate practitioner

Associate of the Chartered Institute of Bankers

Growing income

Income fell in 2012 due to the move away from initial charging, but the firm is projecting robust growth in 2013 and is looking for a paraplanner to support that.

‘We have an extra adviser and investment director Tracey Payne, who we recruited in January,’ says Scott. ‘Also, bringing our focus onto financial planning has increased our standing with law firms that are introducing more and better clients to us. The public and the lawyers we work with are starting to understand the retail distribution review. It is all filtering through to those firms that have not resisted the change.

‘Some of our increased turnover will be from moving people from DFMs, where total charges can be as high as 3% a year, of which we were getting 0.5%, to our new investment proposition where the total charge might be 1.7% but we are getting 1%.’

Herbert says: ‘There are fewer IFAs out there, and we have noticed an upturn in the volume and quality of leads we get from [online adviser directory] Unbiased, for example, as people turn away or are turned away from the banks.’

Click here for more pictures

Bringing investment in-house and bulking up capacity

Herbert Scott launched its own model portfolios in June this year. Previously its main proposition comprised off-the-shelf portfolios from Old Broad Street Research (OBSR) for smaller clients and discretionary fund managers (DFM) for larger ones.

Scott says: ‘Two and a half years ago, a client asked me who the fund manager worked for: for him or for themselves? It made me think that billions of pounds are charged in fees, but what value did the clients get for that? I realised that, regardless of their skills and experience, discretionary managers are human beings and are going to make an equal amount of bad investment decisions as good ones. So we looked at the passive space and started to think about structuring our own portfolios.’

The new portfolios are not exclusively passive, but the only active fund in the firm’s portfolios is Fidelity Global Inflation-Linked Bond. Herbert and Scott stress that they do not start from a passive fund list. Research starts with the whole fund universe but because costs matter so much, many active funds tend to be filtered out early in the selection process.

Capacity to deliver ideas

In creating the portfolios, Herbert and Scott say they realised they needed more capacity to deliver their ideas, so they recruited Tracey Payne from Thesis Asset Management and took on non-executive director Tim Hale of Albion Strategic Consulting to help them deliver the new proposition.

They anticipate that up to 90% of clients will be in the new portfolios within two years.

‘We won’t move everything. The client has to have a choice,’ says Scott. ‘There might be tax issues, such as capital gains, in a portfolio and then a DFM would be retained; or there might be ethical considerations or other personal preferences that we can’t deliver. And we have to retain our independent stance. One solution isn’t right for everyone.’

Herbert says: ‘Because the proposition will not be appropriate for every client, Herbert Scott plans to continue its good relationships built with DFMs, including Quilter Cheviot, Rathbones, Brewin Dolphin and Thesis.’

Herbert Scott’s new portfolio total expense ratios average 0.4% excluding wrap and adviser charge. This compares to around 2% for DFMs excluding adviser charge.

Team building

Herbert and Scott are keen to foster teamwork and engagement with employees. Corporate days out are among the activities they organise. They let staff choose the themes.

One of these was a cookery day. Herbert says: ‘We were in our pinnies with the Herbert Scott logo on. It was great fun. Everyone rose to the humour of it.’ Other days have included lunch in the French seaside town Le Touquet, Goodwood horse races, clay pigeon shooting and go-karting.

Herbert and Scott have split ownership of the business evenly, with a 50-50 share of the firm, and want to offer enticing slices of equity to employees in future. Scott says: ‘We like the model that lawyers have of salaried partners, junior partners and then the chance to become an equity partner.’

Ingredients for team building: Tracey Payne, investment director; Jennie Lancaster, administrator; Angela Honey, office manager; Claire Hudson, paraplanner; Kevin Scott, director; David Herbert, director; and Tracey Underwood, ModeFP

Expansion plans

Over the next two years, Scott and Herbert want to grow the number of advisers to five and continue to recruit more support staff.

‘We can fit four paraplanners, five advisers and four administrative staff in this building,’ says Scott. ‘Once we get to that point, we could have an office in another town.

‘We would look for chartered financial planners in a destination town in West Sussex, Surrey or London. We have talked about merging before, but it is very difficult because most IFAs’ priorities are the wrong way round: they want control first, then income, then equity [rather than the other way around]. We have wasted hours in the past talking to potential merger candidates about what the name of the business would be, because they think control is more important.

‘Like the large law firms, we want partners coming through. Delivering something that can operate independently of the owners will make it more attractive to a purchaser. But we want a succession strategy; we don’t want to turn the light off,’ he says.

Shared dream

Scott says he is a ‘fully subscribed member of the mid-life crisis club’, having recently bought a Harley Davidson motorbike, and plays bass guitar in a punk-rock band called The Kondoms. Herbert’s hobby is walking and he is due to climb Kilimanjaro shortly.

Scott says he does the thinking, while Herbert ‘displays the feelings’. This description comes from a discussion with Shirlaws about there being three types of communicators who ‘think, feel or know’, and that understanding what type others are facilitates communication.

This is part of a much wider improvement of awareness, says Herbert. He says more open communication has helped him let go of the deep emotions that led to the need to control, and has helped the business move towards the pair’s dream of sustainability.

Five top tips