Newhurst is a small through station on the Victoria Coast Line with services to Ashdean, Fayre, Freston Junction, Leaton, Norrington, Syde-On-Sea, Mill Bridge and Russell Lane. Services are currently operated by Regional.

Description[]

Newhurst has one through platform going towards Syde-On-Sea station and features some bike racks, a payphone, some network maps, four ticket booths and a car park. The tracks at platform 2 have been removed. The station has step free access on the footbridge and the entrance, but there is no way to access the platform without using stairs, unless you take the East Entrance of the station, located behind the footbridge and on the road under the low bridge.

Before 1.3.1, the tracks leading from Victoria Docks to here used to be double track line instead of the current single track line, there are multiple hints along the now single line track that indicates that it used to be double.

Layout[]

1 Regional services to Ashdean, Fayre, Freston Junction, Leaton, Norrington, Mill Bridge, Syde-On-Sea and Russell Lane. <</>> == Abandoned platform 2

Services[]

Newhurst is served by Regional services to Ashdean, Fayre, Freston Junction, Leaton, Norrington, Syde-on-Sea, Mill Bridge and Russell Lane.

Preceding Station British Railway Following Station Victoria Docks Regional

Victoria Coast Line Syde-On-Sea

Trivia[]

This station was where the community first saw the 1.1.0 map in a sneak peek.

Prior to 1.3.1, if the player used freecam and looked at Platform 1 from above, they can see letters made of grass saying "NEWHURST"

Newhurst was significantly downsized in 1.3.1, having one platform removed and another abandoned. The station was made into a through station rather than a terminus.

The station was a terminus and also served by Intercity and Shuttle prior to the update.

There is a low passing bridge between Victoria Docks and Newhurst with a small disused piece of track.

West of the station there is a tiny piece of platform. This is most likely to be a reference to the abandoned Bishopstone Beach Halt station, located between Newhaven Harbour station and Bishopstone station in real life.

This station is based on Bishopstone in real life.[1]

The station building, however, is more modern than at the real station.

The station building prior to 1.3.1 was based on Seaford.

This is the 3rd station in the game to have a help-point, The other two being Rowton and Union Street.

This is the 1st non-limited services single platform station in the game.

Gallery[]