Dear Department for Transport,

Please could you answer some questions for me concerning Newhaven Marine Railway station in Sussex (responsible TOC: Southern Railway Ltd) and the stretch of line between Newhaven Harbour Junction and Newhaven Marine station - expressed in railway mileages (from London Bridge) as 56.55 miles (Newhaven Harbour junction) to 56.67 miles (Newhaven Marine Station).

1 - is this railway station considered part of the operational railway network?

2 - if no to Q1, what date did it close, and what form of cessation process was followed

3 - if yes to Q1, which TOC is responsible for providing the minimum level of service at this station?

4 - is there a proposal to formally withdraw the service at this station under sections 22-31 of the Railways Act 2005?

5 - are you aware that Southern Railway Ltd have one train per day that is booked to call at Newhaven Marine (Monday to Friday evening) - but that from August 2006 they stopped this train conveying passengers from Newhaven Harbour (platform 1) to Newhaven Marine and from Newhaven Marine back to Newhaven Harbour (platform 2), due to the condition of the roof/canopy at Newhaven Marine station. I further understand that Southern Railway Ltd provide a taxi for passengers.

6 - Please could you confirm the timings and headcode of these Empty Coaching Stock trains. I believe it is 5F28 19:55 Newhaven Harbour platform 1 - Newhaven Marine (arrive 19:57) and 5F30 20:15 Newhaven Marine - Brighton station (arrive 20:51) which passes Newhaven Harbour platform 2 at 20:16 and pauses in Lewes station platform 4 from 20:32 to 20:36.

7 - please could you advise the cost of single and return tickets Newhaven Harbour to Newhaven Marine and also Lewes to Newhaven Marine, and advise where such tickets may be purchased from.

8 - do you acknowledge that the roof/canopy at Newhaven Marine station was totally removed in mid 2008?

9 - when Empty Coaching Stock trains use the platform at Newhaven Marine to reverse (that is, to return towards Lewes, whether operating the one empty train per day mentioned above, or other ad hoc ECS movements) what guidance, instruction or Health & Safety Risk Assessment do Southern Railway Ltd give their traincrew about walking along the platform surface to change ends.

10 - do you agree that (subject to risk assessment of the platform and its condition) the ghost train may now pick up/set down passengers at Newhaven Marine Station given that the main hazard (the roof) has been removed completely?.

11 - if other valid concerns over the structure of the platform at Newhaven Marine station are identified, do you agree that it is acceptable for passengers to be able to travel Newhaven Town to Newhaven Town - i.e. remaining inside the train while it pauses at Newhaven Marine station.

12 - do you agree that the method of operation as proposed in question 11 is the minimum service provision (once a week) that satisfies the requirement of the Railway Regulation Act 1844 (as amended/superceded)? If not, please advise precisely what the DfT believes in the minimum provision and the acceptable ways for this to be effected.

Yours faithfully,

Mr Fairchild