Lacuna Coil are an Italian metal band from Milan, they formed in 1994. Consisting of Andrea Ferro (male vocals), Cristina Scabbia (female vocals), Marco Coti Zelati (bas, keyboard, guitars, songwriting), Ryan Blake Folden (drums) and Diego Cavallotti (guiatrs). Initially they were much inspired by gothic imagery and music and were known for composing dual male/female harmonies. However, with this album they have gone to a ‘heavier and darker sound’ (Ferro – Bladdermouth.net). The album is based on the concept of an asylum near Milan where the patients tell stories of their experiences, describing insanity.

‘House of Shame’ the opening track has a heavier nu-metal feel intro to it. Starting with Andrea’s roaring vocals, it is a powerful starting track which sets up for an amazing album. Cristina’s lilting vocals perfectly lift the song to new heights and really demonstrate her amazing vocal abilities.

The album title track ‘Delirium’ starts with a fantastic guitar rift which leads to Cristina’s soaring vocals. ‘Lost in confusion, I hear the silence’ perfectly sums up the feeling of insanity and loss of the asylum patients. Whilst few people listening to this album will have been in that position, this feeling will be familiar to a lot of people.

‘Downfall’ explodes with a powerful intro before Cristina quietly introduces us to the theme of the song of feeling down and having no escape. Andrea’s backing vocals add depth to the singing behind Cristina. It is a song about vulnerability.

‘Tick tock tick tock, coming back, this time jump on board, there is room for many more’, an eerie intro brought to you by children’s voices before Andrea’s heavy vocals ‘take me for a ride’. Track six ‘Take Me Home’ is truly creepy, it personifies everything we imagine about an insane asylum. Room for many more? This song has me picturing every horror movie where an insane asylum centres, it makes the hairs on the back of my neck stand up. It also makes my over active imagination wish I wasn’t home alone writing this review!

As the album continues I am reminded how great Lacuna Coil are, especially when they push the limits of their ‘normal’. I hadn’t listen to Lacuna Coil in many years, but when the opportunity to review this album presented it’s self I jumped at the chance to relive the music of my teens and twenties. Whilst this album wasn’t so much a chance to relive the music as I expected, emotionally it reminded me of what we sometimes have to come through and how to come out fighting on the other side. All these years on I still love Cristina’s voice and this album finally showcased Andrea’s vocal talents. Lacuna Coil I commend you for this album.

Track list:

1. The House of Shame

2. Broken Things

3. Delirium

4. Blood, Tears, Dust

5. Downfall

6. Take Me Home

7. You Love Me ‘Cause I Hate You

8. Ghost in the Mist

9. My Demons

10. Claustrophobia

11. Ultima Radio

Delirium is out on May 27th

Header photo by Enzo Mazzeo

Lacuna Coil: official | facebook | twitter | tumblr | soundcloud | youtube