Ferro’s Success by Aiming High at @cubaunderthestars

Cuba Under the Stars has become the best and most pertinent option for musical theater entertainment during the holiday season.

Andrea Ferro captures her work with a majestic musical theater production presenting a beautiful love story, told through Cuban nostalgia, which amalgamate the magic of the island’s performing arts and gastronomy. The story takes place in a magical setting that integrates itself into the outdoor space. The only dinner and musical theatrical outside show in the country that everyone is talking about.

Andrea Ferro’s theatrical experience includes Farhad Or The Secret Of Being directed by Nilo Cruz, Little Women, The Dreams of Anne Frank and Les Miserables, among others. Andrea began performing at the age of 14 where she made her debut at the Area Stage Conservatory in Miami. During her 4 years with the company, she did 9 musicals. Some credits include, Little Women (Jo March), Les Miserables (Eponine), Sweeney Todd (Tobias), Into The Woods (The Witch) and her professional debut in The Dreams Of Anne Frank (Anne Frank). At the age of 17, she moved to New York City to continue training at The Atlantic Acting School (a studio of NYU’s Tisch program).

During the two-hour production of CUBA Under the Stars, musical numbers range from Cuban classics and original compositions by Cuban artists, including GRAMMY, Latin GRAMMY and Emmy Award winner Albita Rodriguez, singer, songwriter and fellow Latin GRAMMY Award winner Amaury Gutiérrez, Salsa and Guaracha performer Luis Bofill, and singer, actress and dancer Grethel Ortiz, recognized for her participation in Que Pasa USA? Today and Celia Cruz: The Musical.

The orchestra, composed of 18 musicians, is under the musical direction of Marlene Urbay, Founder and Music Director of the Florida Chamber Orchestra (1995) and former Music Director of the National Ballet of Cuba. Produced and directed by Peter Regalado and Miguel Ferro.

Andrea has prepared herself to aim high. She studied classical such as Shakespeare and Chekhov as well as the contemporary playwrights. After graduating from the prestigious program, she was offered the role of Trini in the Pulitzer Prize winning playwright Nilo Cruz’s play Baño De Luna (Arca Images). This show would also be her debut in a Spanish speaking production. Following that production, she continued to work with Nilo by performing his monologue Farhad Or The Secret Of Being (Farhad). This production was a 45 Minutes monologue with 4 songs incorporated into the text. It was a beautiful experience that she later went on to reprise the role three more times. Later, she went back to NYC to become a Teaching Artist with the Atlantic Acting School. Also doing a musical at their Off Broadway theater, Last Stop On Market Street (Atlantic Theater Co.) Afterwards she worked with Columbia University’s Lenfest Center For The Arts where she performed in Charles Mee Big Love (Lydia) as the title role. Congratulations!

If you are visiting Miami either for the first time or a frequent visitor, don’t forget to check out this amazing sensorial experience.