Russia is building a $40 million complex for acrobatic rock 'n' roll, a niche sport in which President Vladimir Putin's daughter is a leading dancer and has a senior role for development, a review of public documents has shown.

The Zhavoronki Acrobatic Rock 'n' Roll Centre will be built on the western outskirts of Moscow at a cost of 1.9 billion rubles ($4.2 million), according to state tender documents available online, and will be funded by the municipal government.

It will be the only specialised facility in the world for the sport, according to governing body the World Rock 'n' Roll Confederation (WRRC).

The money being invested dwarfs that spent on some other, bigger, sports in Russia such as archery and biathlon.

The complex is being built for the Moscow City Khamovniki state sports and dance school, where Katerina Tikhonova, Mr Putin's daughter, trained in acrobatic rock 'n' roll and for which she competed several times until 2014.

The 30-year-old is a top Russian acrobatic rock'n'roll dancer, a vice president at the WRRC, and also a senior official in the sport's national federation, chairing its international committee and committee for Russian regional development.

Her former dance coach heads the Khamovniki school.

There is no evidence the Kremlin or Ms Tikhonova had any influence over the Moscow city government's decision to build the complex.

Ms Tikhonova, the Moscow city sports department and the Russian Federation of Acrobatic Rock 'n' Roll did not respond to repeated requests for comment about Ms Tikhonova's role in the project or its expense.

The Moscow city construction department said the complex was part of a wider program of state-funded sports facilities that were important for the city.

"Moscow attaches great importance to building sports facilities. Over the past five years in Moscow the number of new sports facilities being brought on-stream has effectively doubled," the department said in a statement.

Popular sports miss out on funding

Around 9,000 people actively participate in acrobatic rock 'n' roll in Russia and organisers aim to add another 3,000 people by 2020, according to the national federation.

By comparison, more than 22,000 people actively participate in archery in Russia but only $21 million rubles of state money will be spent developing the sport this year, according to the Russian Archery Federation.

The federation said there was no specialised centre of any kind in the country for archery, a sport in which Russia won a silver medal at the Rio Olympics in August.

Around 19,000 people participate in biathlon in Russia, according to the Russian Biathlon Union, but the body does not receive any state funding.

The general secretary of the sport's WRRC global body, Kresimir Bosnar, said he was surprised by the amount of money Russia was spending on the centre.

"I don't see any reason why to do it. Especially not in Russia" given the low participation numbers, he said, adding that the Slovenian-based WRRC had no connection to the project.

"Rock'n'roll acrobatic is a quite specific sport, it is an individual sport based on couples, it is not a mass sport. So you cannot expect that you will have millions of people dancing acrobatic rock'n'roll in the future."

Lubov Sobol, an opposition politician in Moscow and prominent anti-corruption campaigner, said the centre was being built so Tikhonova could run it.

"It seems obvious that there is a political story here," she said about the documents, without providing any specific evidence of political influence.

What does the new niche facility include?

The documents show plans for a 1.3-hectare complex with a gymnasium, trampoline hall, 25-metre swimming pool, and competition space with seating for up to 2,000 people.

There will also be accommodation facilities for 300 people as well as a conference hall and lecture theatre. "Rock 'n' Roll" is written on the side of the main building in large white letters.

Construction firm Magnum, the contractor chosen to build the centre, will also be required to complete a number of "beautification projects", including a network of running and walking paths and a helicopter landing pad. Work will begin this month and is due to be completed by September 2018.