Columns share an author's personal perspective and are often based on facts in the newspaper's reporting.

And so this is Christmas. And what have we done?

I reflect on those two simple lines every December.

It was 40 years ago this month that the world lost John Lennon.

To mark the anniversary, a slew of new Lennon books were released this year.

Lennon died in 1980, before I was born. People under 50 probably don’t remember him alive, though we all know his music and his legend.

On this weekend before Christmas (or xmas) I want to focus on Lennon.

Because this was a year we needed him — specifically the word he tried to spread.

The word was Peace.

(War is over if you want it.)

These last 12 months felt like 12 years in this country.

And while Lennon was a complicated guy to say the least, there is so much we can learn from his songs, and the message he so popularly stood for.

There are, of course, many books on Lennon — many more on The Beatles. But here are a few new releases, and older best-bets.

Happy xmas. (War is over if you want it.)

I love “The Search for John Lennon: The Life, Loves, and Death of a Rock Star,” by Lesley-Ann Jones.

On this 40th anniversary, she sums up so beautifully: “Forty years in a lifetime. It was to John&mldr; It feels like time to retrace him&mldr; John said a lot of thing in his crammed, contradictory half-life. He went back on his words, re-writing his own history and thought processes constantly. His propensity for doing so confounds the chronicler as surely as the conflicting accounts and shifting recollections of those close to him&mldr; Keep ‘em guessing is so John.”

A gorgeously written, fascinating examination of the late artist’s many angles and layers.

“The Last Days of John Lennon,” by James Patterson, with Casey Sherman and Dave Wedge, released Dec. 7— a day before the 40th anniversary of Lennon’s death. It’s already an Amazon bestseller.

You’ll recognize all these names: Patterson is, of course, a hugely popular thriller writer. He teamed up with New York Times bestselling authors Wedge and Sherman, a Hyannis native. The Cape Cod native is also coauthor of “The Finest Hours,” among other books. Sherman and Wedge co-wrote “Boston Strong: A City's Triumph over Tragedy,” among others. The three bring their true-crime/thriller talents to use here.

For an examination into 1969, look for “John Lennon, Yoko Ono and the Year Canada Was Cool,” by Greg Marquis.

According to the publisher’s synopsis: In 1969, at the height of their popularity, John and Yoko headed to Canada and staged a bed-in for peace at an upscale downtown Montreal hotel. The classic "Give Peace A Chance" was recorded there. Three months later they were back in Canada with Eric Clapton and friends to play a Toronto festival. Later they met the Prime Minister in Ottawa. Recounting the story of these events, historian Greg Marquis offers a unique portrayal of Canada in the late ‘60s.

And for an examination into 1980, check "John Lennon, 1980: The Last Days in the Life,” by Beatles historian Kenneth Womack. Fans might also be interested in Womack’s “Solid State: The Story of ‘Abbey Road’ and the End of the Beatles.” (2019)

“The Complete John Lennon Songs: All the Songs. All the Stories. All the Lyrics. 1970―80,” by Paul Du Noyer is part of the “Stories Behind the Songs” series — a comprehensive and fascinating look at Lennon’s tremendous solo lyrics of that decade, and the stories behind them.

Philip Norman’s New York Times bestseller released in ’08, but it’s worth the read if you missed it: “John Lennon: The Life.” A masterful biography from a Beatles historian, chronicling the powerful short life of Lennon, with interviews with Paul McCartney, Sean Lennon, Yoko Ono and others.

In a similar vein, we have Ray Connolly’s “Being John Lennon: A Restless Life,” (2018.)

As the synopsis describes: “How did it feel to have one of the most recognizable singing voices in the world, but to dislike it so much he always wanted to disguise it? Being John Lennon is not about the whitewashed Prince of Peace of Imagine legend—because that was only a small part of him. The John Lennon depicted in these pages is a much more kaleidoscopic figure, sometimes almost a collision of different characters.”

Introduce kids with “John Lennon,” by Maria Isabel Sanchez Vegara, illustrated by Octavia Bromell. Part of the “Little People, BIG DREAMS” series, this just released on the 40th anniversary of Lennon’s death, Dec. 8, and is already an Amazon bestseller.

I’ll leave you with this gem: “Imagine,” words by John Lennon, illustrated by Jean Jullien. Published in partnership with Amnesty International, and with a forward by Yoko Ono, kids follow a pigeon’s journey to spread the message: Peace.

“You may say I'm a dreamer, but I'm not the only one. I hope someday you'll join us, and the world will be as one.”

Lauren Daley is a freelance writer and columnist. Contact her at ldaley33@gmail.com. Follow her at https://www.facebook.com/daley.writer She tweets @laurendaley1.

Get the news delivered to your inbox. Sign up for our Newsletters: Morning, afternoon, sports, entertainment and breaking news.