Tom Barbash, an award-winning novelist and Mill Valley resident who also teaches writing at Oakland’s California College of the Arts, often cautions his students: “Think carefully about where you want to be for the next few years of your life in your fictional world. That’s where you’ll be spending all your time, so you might as well enjoy it.”

For his latest novel,“The Dakota Winters” (336 pages, Ecco, $26.99), Barbash took his own advice, settling in for a good stay — figuratively, of course — at the Dakota, the real-life, historic, exclusive apartment building in the Upper West Side of Manhattan, long home to the famous and well-heeled (think Boris Karloff, Joe Namath, Lauren Bacall, Rudolf Nureyev, John Lennon, Yoko Ono).

Having grown up just blocks from the mysterious Dakota with its looming haunted-house gables and dormer windows (it was even used as the backdrop in “Rosemary’s Baby,” and it’s where John Lennon was murdered in 1980), Barbash was eager to explore the realm, imagining the celebs’ tony parties but also their everyday interactions. What was it like to know one of the Beatles as merely the guy down the hall?

To do that, Barbash, the author of the award-winning “The Last Good Chance,” moved the fictional Winters family into the Dakota. Buddy Winters is a famous, sophisticated, late-night talk show host, a la Dick Cavett. But unlike Cavett, Buddy has imploded on-air in a nervous breakdown and yearns for a comeback. He’s always “on,” testing out jokes even over the dinner table. His eldest son, Anton, is just home from a Peace Corps stint and a near-death bout with malaria. While recovering, he finds himself swept up in his father’s mission to revive his career, but Anton also wants to forge his own path.

The book spans the months from late 1979 through 1980, leading up to Lennon’s death. Along the way, Anton helps out on the foundering political campaign of his mom’s friend’s husband – oh yeah, it’s Teddy Kennedy. He gets a job as a busboy at the Park Tavern (Anton, not Kennedy), hits the nightclubs, has a romance and somehow gets involved in a whale of a seagoing voyage with Lennon and … more on that in a sec.

It’s a rollicking good time to rub vicarious imaginary elbows with all the celebrities in the book and explore that transformative year. And Barbash had a great time “living” there.

“All the backstage show-business stuff, the celebrity thing — I think people are really getting a kick out of that aspect, and I did, too,” Barbash says. “It really ended up being immersive for me, the fun of getting out of 2018 and jumping into another time.”

Part of that fun came from reliving his own history. He grew up in New York in the ’70s and remembers much of life back then, even what movies were playing in theaters, what bands were in the clubs. For research, “I was spending nearly every day there, almost as if I was really physically there when I was writing it,” he says. “I had access to the New York Times archive, so I’d scour the pages every day – kind of like Buddy and his family would have done, going through the paper and having discussions on current events so Buddy could work them into his routine.”

Indeed, the book is a rich cultural snapshot of the world, with references to nearly every event, large and small, from that period – from the Iran hostage crisis and Soviets invading Afghanistan to the Winter Olympics in Lake Placid, Larry Holmes taking down a “comeback” Muhammad Ali, “M*A*S*H” on TV and the pirate thriller “The Fog” in theaters.

Possibly the most delightful aspect is getting to know John Lennon, exploring what he might have been like just as a neighbor and friend. To this end, Barbash delved into biographies, including a book written by Lennon’s personal assistant about the last year of his life.

“So much of that last year was about remembering his own farther, a merchant seaman, and dreaming about his father out on the sea,” Barbash says. “I read the books he was reading at the time, looked into the diets he was trying, read his letters, watched a lot of YouTube videos of him to get his speech down.”

Barbash takes us on Lennon’s life-changing sailing voyage to Bermuda — something that really happened — in which he and his crew barely survive a killer storm, all with Lennon at the helm, belting out naughty Liverpool chanteys at the top of his lungs.

“I love picturing him that way, laughing and singing at the storm,” Barbash says. “There was a freedom he found out in this place where he wasn’t a celebrity. He was just John.”

In the book, Anton goes along on this voyage, bonds with Lennon and gets him to agree to appear on Buddy’s comeback TV show, hinting at a possible Beatles reunion, which would have been a coup for Buddy and the world of Beatles fans.

“As I was writing that part, I began to see how plausible it was, that they really probably would have gotten together again eventually,” he says. “That was one of two leftover dreams of the ’60s – another Kennedy presidency and the Beatles getting back together. Some of the big symbols of that period. Then, of course, we know what happened to John.”

So what’s the takeaway … is this about second chances? Comebacks? Not just for Buddy and Anton, but even for Kennedy, Lennon, Ali? Or is it a tale of finding one’s own path? The spotlight of fame? All of the above?

“What’s been kind of rewarding is that a lot of readers have taken away something different,” he says. “One saw it as a cautionary tale about longing for fame; one thought it was all about fathers and sons; one saw it as a city in transition.

“That was the fun, threading all that through the book,” he says. “I like the idea of second acts, of trying to re-create something that’s maybe had its day. There’s a quote from Melville in the beginning of the book that basically says you don’t get to choose when your dream lives or dies. It just happens.”

IF YOU GO

What: Friday Afternoon Author Series with Tom Barbash

When: 1 to 2:30 p.m. March 29

Where: William Keith Room, College of Marin Library, 835 College Ave., Kentfield

Admission: Free