Movie finder Release calendar New releases Coming soon Reviews User reviews Search

Directed by George King

Sweeney Todd:

The Demon Barber

of Fleet Street 1936

Not rated

76 MIN

Overview Releases Reviews Cast crew Screenshots Movie Codes Products News Forum

Horror

Drama

Release date Sep 29, 1939

Sep 29, 1939

Country UK LanguageEnglish Runtime76 minRatedNot ratedTechnical details 1.37:1

Movie plot tags

In the Nineteenth Century, in London, the barber Sweeney Todd invites lonely and wealthy costumers in the port to his barbershop on the nearby Fleet Street and murders them to take their money, while his associate Mrs. Lovatt and owner of a bakery below is barbershop gets rid off the bodies. Sweeney uses his fortune to help the fleet owner Stephen Oakley with the intention to force his daughter Joanna to marry him. However, the beloved Joanna's boyfriend Mark Ingerstreet returns rich from his last voyage and Sweeney decides to kill him and steal his fortune in pearl, making Mrs. Lovatt ...(more)

In the Nineteenth Century, in London, the barber Sweeney Todd invites lonely and wealthy costumers in the port to his barbershop on the nearby Fleet Street and murders them to take their money, while his associate Mrs. Lovatt and owner of a bakery below is barbershop gets rid off the bodies. Sweeney uses his fortune to help the fleet owner Stephen Oakley with the intention to force his daughter Joanna to marry him. However, the beloved Joanna's boyfriend Mark Ingerstreet returns rich from his last voyage and Sweeney decides to kill him and steal his fortune in pearl, making Mrs. Lovatt jealous with the situation... (less)

Director: George King

Writers: George Dibdin-Pitt, Frederick Hayward, H.F. Maltby

Starring: Tod Slaughter, Stella Rho, John Singer, Eve Lister, Bruce Seton, D.J. Williams

Composer: Eric Ansell

» See full cast & crew

Blu-ray reviews

359

Blu-ray

collections

46

DVD

collections

Similar titles you might also like

What is this?

Use the thumbs up and thumbs down icons to agree or disagree that the title is similar to Sweeney Todd: The Demon Barber of Fleet Street. You can also suggest completely new similar titles to Sweeney Todd: The Demon Barber of Fleet Street in the search box below.

Show more titles »« Show less titles

Similar titles suggested by members