This page is similar in name or subject to other pages.

See also Sweeney Todd for a complete list of references to clarify differences between these closely named or closely related articles.

Sweeney Todd: The Demon Barber of Fleet Street Credits Title: Sweeney Todd: The Demon Barber of Fleet Street Directed by: George King Written by: Frederick Hayward

H.F. Maltby Music by: Eric Ansell Cinematography: Jack Parker Edited by: John Seabourne Production Distributors: George King Productions Released: March, 1936 Rating: Unrated Running time: 76 min. Country: UK Language: English Navigation Previous: — Next: —

Sweeney Todd: The Demon Barber of Fleet Street is a British feature film of the horror genre. It was directed by George King with a screenplay written by Frederick Hayward. Additional dialogue was provided by H.F. Maltby. It is based on a series of 19th century Penny Dreadful stories, but is more widely recognized in many markets for its stage play adaptation in 1973, the Stephen Sondheim musical in 1979, and more recently, the big-budget feature film directed by Tim Burton in 2007 starring Johnny Depp. The original film treatment of the story starred Tod Slaughter in the eponymous role of Sweeney Todd, with Stella Rho as the female lead, Mrs. Lovatt. The film was produced by MGM and George King Productions and premiered in the United Kingdom in March of 1936.

Plot[]

Cast[]

Actor Role Tod Slaughter Sweeney Todd, Benjamin Barker Stella Rho Mrs. Lovatt John Singer Tobias Eve Lister Johanna Bruce Seton Mark D.J. Williams Stephen Oakley Davina Craig Nan Jerry Verno Pearley Ben Souten Beadle Billy Holland Mister Parsons Norman Pierce Mister Findlay Aubrey Mallalieu Trader Paterson

Notes & Trivia[]

This film is alternatively known as just The Demon Barber of Fleet Street.

The movie was shot at Shepperton Studios in Surrey, England. [1]

This film first premiered in the United States in New York City, New York on September 29th, 1939.

Composer Eric Ansell is uncredited for his participation in this film.

Film editor John Seabourne, Sr. is credited as just John Seabourne in this film.

Actor John Singer is credited as Johnny Singer in this film.

Actor Graham Soutten is credited as Ben Souten in this film.

Sweeney Todd: The Demon Barber of Fleet Street is George King's twenty-seventh feature film as a director.

This is actor Tod Slaughter's second film role and his first work in the horror genre. It is also the first of several films that he will make with director George King.

There are a total of twelve credited cast members in this film, not counting extras.

Actor Ben Williams, who plays Captain Stephenson, is uncredited for his participation in this film.

This is the first horror film work for actor Norman Pierce. He is also known for his work in films such as The Brides of Dracula in 1960, where he played Johann the landlord, and Doctor Dracula in 1978, where he played Sir Stephen.

Recommendations[]

Sweeney Todd: The Demon Barber of Fleet Street (2007)

[]

Sweeney Todd: The Demon Barber of Fleet Street at Wikipedia

Sweeney Todd: The Demon Barber of Fleet Street at the Sweeney Todd Wiki