Omio, Europe’s leading booking platform for multi-modal travel has acquired Rome2rio Pty Ltd, bolstering its transportation discovery and planning capabilities and taking an important first step towards a global offering.

Based in Melbourne, Australia, Rome2rio enables consumers to search and discover transportation options anywhere in the world across 10 million locations, providing results for more than 5,000 train, bus, flight, ferry and intra-city public transportation operators. It was founded in 2010 and today has more than 18 million users per month.

While they will remain separate brands, both companies will collaborate to create new and better experiences, combining Rome2rio’s impressive end-to-end journey planning offer with extensive transport inventory bookable with Omio.

Rome2rio’s product complements the Omio booking platform in Europe, and supports the ambitions Omio has to grow into new geographies. Together, the two brands will cover the user journey from the moment a consumer begins exploring which destination to visit, right through the booking experience and after they’ve started their journey.

Financial details of the transaction were not disclosed.

Naren Shaam, CEO and founder of Omio, said: “We are excited to welcome the Rome2rio team to Omio. They have built a great product with innovative tech and delivered impressive growth. Together, our two brands will reach half a billion users every year and offer access to thousands of transportation operators globally, helping us deliver our vision to solve consumer travel globally.”

Michael Cameron, CEO and co-founder of Rome2rio, said: “Joining forces with Omio is a natural extension of our existing product experience. We have spent almost a decade refining our ability to help users figure out how to get from one corner of the globe to another. Now, with Omio, Rome2rio customers will be able to book tickets with more transport providers than ever before and receive support throughout their journey.

“Rome2rio and Omio share a vision of creating simple, intuitive multi-modal transport products for our users. As a team, we are excited about the opportunity to work with Omio, integrate our technologies, and leverage each other’s expertise to scale even more quickly.”

Originally called GoEuro, Omio was founded by Naren Shaam in Berlin in 2013. Its re-brand this year to become Omio marked the next phase of the company’s expansion strategy as it aims to become a global brand. Today, Omio has an average of 27 million monthly users, with 18 million app downloads to date and more than 800 partnerships with transportation providers.