Listen to This Episode!

Heading to the birthplace of George W. Bush, Deep in the Heart of…Yale University’s leafy campus in New Haven Connecticut! Surprised? Bush downplayed his roots, but we will learn about his childhood, education, and turn to politics, as well as his birthplace and childhood home!

Yale New Haven Hospital, birthplace of George W. Bush!

New York Times article on George W. Bush’s birthplace and (lack of ) recognition.

George W Bush Childhood Home in Midland, Texas, website.

Be sure to check out the “Visiting the Presidents” George W Bush Episode from Season 2, “George W Bush and Crawford”!

From My June 2019 Visit!

From My May 2021 Visit to the George W Bush Childhood Home!

George W Bush Birthplace: 800 Howard Ave, New Haven, Connecticut.

Check Out the Most Recent Episodes!

S3 E10 John Tyler's Tomb – Visiting the Presidents

"Doctor, I am going. Perhaps it is best.” Our First President to die in a foreign country, John Tyler, 10th President of the United States.! Learn about his tumultuous post-Presidency; his illness and death; his funeral, burial, and commemorations, plus his controversial gravesite!Check out the website at VisitingthePresidents.com for visual aids, links, past episodes, recommended reading, and other information!Episode Page:Season 1&apos;s John Tyler Episode-"John Tyler and Greenway Plantation" on his birthplace!Season 2&apos;s John Tyler Episode-"John Tyler and Sherwood Forest" on his home!Support the Show.Visit the social media on Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram!

S3 E10 John Tyler's Tomb 45:01

BONUS! How I Spent My Christmas Break with Presidential Travels 2024! 21:30

S3 E9 William Henry Harrison's Tomb 49:49

S3 E8 Martin Van Buren's Tomb 49:07

S3 E7 Andrew Jackson's Tomb 53:53

Recommended Reading for George W Bush

Share this:

Like Loading...

Related

Published by visitingthepresidents

I'm a Professor of History at Central Arizona College and someone who loves history and travel; my new blog will combine those interests! View more posts