See other formats

LI B HARY OF THE U N IVERSITY OF 1LLI NOIS NT7h mm y/cj^^c ^t^^^L ^-Z3— 6 /?/'<?*. <rr & 2*. ^w^. ;<5 ^ook on or before the ^arnnprl below. A 11 overdue Digitized by the Internet Archive in 2012 with funding from University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign http://www.archive.org/details/historyofnorwegiOOnorl HISTORY OF THE NORWEGIAN PEOPLE IN AMERICA BY OLAF MORGAN NORLIE PROFESSOR OF PSYCHOLOGY, LUTHER COLLEGE, DECORA H, IOWA 'AMERICANS ALL" MINNEAPOLIS, MINN. AUGSBURG PUBLISHING HOUSE 1 9 2- 5 Copyrighted 192J, by AUGSBURG PUBLISHING HOUSE MINNEAPOLIS MINN. Printed in U. S. A. V /v I I >~ AMERICA, MY COUNTRY THE NEW NATIONAL ANTHEM 1. A -mer-i-ca, my coun-try, I come at thy call, I plighl thee my troth and I give thee my all; In 2. A - mer-i-ca, my coun-try , brate tool? gare thee birth.They yearned for a ha - ven of f ree-dom on earth ; And 3. A - mer-i-ca, my coun-try, now ccme is thy hour,- The Lord of hosts counts oo thy courage and pow'r; Ha- St ^'J IJ^P^^^^JJ^ ;,| peace or in war I am wed to thy weal — I'll car - ry thy flag thru the fire and the steel. Un- when thy proud flag to the winds was un-furled, There came to thy shores the oppressed of the world. Thy man - i - ty pleads for the strength of thy hand, Lest lib - er - ty per - ish on sea and on land. Thou fe^H J'Jlr nlFT—ErfV^ jjiJ^^ 'P 6ul - lied it floats o'er our peace-loving race, On sea nor on land shall it auf - fer dis-grace; In milk and thy hon - ey flow free- ly for all— Who takes of thy boun-ty shall come at thy call; Who guard-ian of f ree-dom, thou keep-er of right. When lib - er-ty bleeds we may trust in thy might; Di- re//. - c • cresc. ^ a tempo. mi J'.j»j ju^r^j'jijpcjT^^^i rev-'rence I kneel at sweet lib - er-ty's shrine: A-mer- i - ca, my coun-try, com-mand, I am thine, quaffs of thy rec- tar of f ree-dom shall'say: A-mcr-i - ca, my coun-try, com-mand, I o - bey. vine right of kings or our f ree-dom must fall— A-ner- i - ca, my country, I come at thy call. * ^NiN^?7^l%^a A - mer - i - ca, my coun-try, I an-ower thy call, That freedom may live and that tyrants may fall; I owe thee my all, and my all will I give — I do and I die that A-mer- i - ca may live m 4=^ te^fesigii ^m W& ^P cresc. f a tc\mpo. •'■* * * t a f W mm mm. P5 Conright 1017 by Rtd Wing Daily Rtpublican, Rtd H'int. Minn. (By Jens K. Grondahl, editor, born in Norway). TO NORWAY Thou land of our sires, where the northlight is gleaming In frostbitten, quivering ray,— And yet where the balmiest sunshine is beaming Its glories by night and by day, — Where mermaid and n0ck in the billows are dreaming Or charmingly chanting their lay, — Old Norway, thou mother of song, Our tenderest mother so long, — ■ Some never have met you, Yet cannot forget you, And therefore they greet you in song ! In song, in song, in heartiest song, We greet mother Norway in song ! Thou land that with continents bravely art vying In all that is noblest and best, — Whose banner of freedom as proudly is flying As that of the Queen of the West — Thou land where our fathers and mothers are lying In slumbering grave-yards at rest, — Old Norway, — in right or in wrong — You were our dear mother so long; Some here never met you, Yet cannot forget you, And therefore they greet you in song! In song, in song, American song, We greet mother Norway in song ! (By Knut Martin 0. Teigen, M.D., Ph.D., born in America). PREFACE At the Second General Convention of the Norwegian Luther- an Church of America held in St. Paul, Minnesota, June 8-15, 1923, a resolution was adopted providing for the proper cele- bration of the centennial of the sailing of the sloop, "Restaura- tionen," from Stavanger, Norway, July the Fourth, 1925, with fifty-two emigrants on board, constituting the first contingent of the nineteenth century emigrations to America. The President, the Right Rev. H. G. Stub, D. D., was authorized to appoint a committee of five members to make arrangements for the cen- tennial celebration to be held in the summer of 1925. The Pres- ident appointed the following Centennial Committee : Rev. George Taylor Rygh, Chairman; Rev. R. Malmin, Secretary; Rev. C. S. B. Hoel, Treasurer; Rev. O. S. Reigstad, Professor G. M. Bruce. The Committee was given three definite instructions, as fol- lows : (a) to make provision for the universal and simultaneous celebration of the centennial in all the parishes of the Church throughout the United States and Canada; (b) to secure the production of a centennial cantata; (c) to provide for the pub- lication of a scholarly, comprehensive and authoritative history of the Norwegian people in America. The present volume by Professor O. M. Norlie is the result of the effort of the Com- mittee to meet the third item in its instructions. Dr. Norlie is a prolific author, having a large number of books, pamphlets and brochures to his credit. He is well known as a Church statistician and as an authority on data connected with the Lutheran Church in America. Among the numerous degrees conferred upon him by various institutions of learning may be mentioned the following: Ph.D., Pd.D., S.T.D., Litt.D. Dr. Norlie is as modest and unassuming as he is scholarly and studious. A few of his best known works are: The Open Bible, Elementary Christian Psychology, Principles of Expressive Reading, The School Calendar, 1824-1924. The present His- tory is the product of a lifetime of research, giving ample evidence cf the author's untiring energy and painstaking accuracy. It will prove a mine of information, from which future historians of America will produce many nuggets of his- toric worth. His elucidation of the discovery of America by the Norsemen is quite enough to determine the opening chapters of any future history of our country worthy of the name. 6 Norwegian People in America Dr. Norlie has for all time fixed the place of the Norwegian element in the making of the American nation, than which no other component holds a worthier place. For good citizenship, industry, thrift, enlightenment, and character, the Norwegian element ranks second to none, and this History is the demonstra- tion of that fact. In peace and war, the American of Norwegian ancestry knows but one loyalty, loyalty to the principles and ideals of America. The Church Committee is proud to have had some little share in the production of this History by Dr. Norlie. It desires, how- ever, to make clear that the volume is the sole work of the author whose name is attached to it. We believe that it will prove a not- able contribution to the history of our beloved country. The Centennial Committee of the Norwegian Lutheran Church of America. ACKNOWLEDGMENT The author is under great obligations to a great number of people who have aided him in making this book and wishes hereby to express to them his sincere thanks : 1. The Centennial Committee. 2. President Calvin Coolidge, Governor General Lord Byng and Kinjg Haakon VII, who sent greetings to the Norse- Americans in honor of their Centennial. 3. T. T. Colwick, Norse, Texas; Jacob Olson, Clifton, Texas ; Ivan Doseff , artist, St. Paul, Minn., for making the crayon drawing of Cleng Peerson, said to be the only por- trait of Clerijg ever made. 4. The Sloopers, especially Georgiana Larson, Rochester, N. Y. ; Inger M. Johnson, Detroit, Mich. ; John L. Atwater, Jane Sara Atwater and Mabel Truesdell, Chicago, 111. ; Caro- line C. Bower, Sheridan, 111. ; Daniel Rosdail and Emily Fru- land, Norway, 111. ; Jacob Rosdail, Sr., Norway, Iowa ; B. F. Stangland, Morton, N. Y. ; Mettie Larson and Malinda Larson, Marseilles, 111. ; and Emily Jane Raymond, Hollywood, Cal., for important information, photographs, books and relics from the Sloop. Also Mrs. Anna D. Parker, Kendall, N. Y., and Lieut. Joseph M. Johnson, relatives of Ole Johnson; Capt. Louis Larson, Chicago, relative of Lars Larson ; Rev. Helmer T. Haagenson, Seneca, 111., Fox River pastor, who helped to catalog the Sloopers. 5. Dr. Oscar L. Olson, president of Luther College, De- corah, la.; Edith Hexom, artist, Decorah ; Prof. J. J. Sk0r- dalsvold, proofreader, Minneapolis ; A. M. Sundheim, pub- lisher, Minneapolis ; Hon. G. N. Haugen, congressman, North- wood, la. ; Hon. O. J. Kvale, congressman, Benson, Minn. ; Hon. H. H. Bryn, minister from Norway, Washington, D. C. ; Dr. E. A. Ross, author of "The Old World in the New/' Madison, Wis. ; The Century Co., publishers of Ross' book, New York ; John Anderson Pub. Co., Chicago ; B. Anundsen Pub. Co., Decorah ; Normanden Pub. Co., Grand Forks, N. Dak. ; United States Census Bureau ; Rev. J. M. Hestenes and Mrs. Ellen Runden, Waterford, Wis. ; American Scandinavian Foundation and Henry Holt, New York; G. B. Joergensen, Stanwood, Wash. ; J. S. Illeck, Harrisburg, Pa. ; R. H. Coats, Ottawa, Can. ; B. I. Jenson, Toano, Va. ; Th. Johannesen, Portland, Ore. ; Wm. H. E. Ludwig, Springdale, Ark. ; Cora Bangerter, Los Angeles, Cal.; Dr. Knut Gjerset, Decorah, la.; all of whom have assisted in various ways. 6. A long list of others, including presidents of institutions and associations, secretaries, authors, editors and publishers. O. M. Norlie. THE WHITE HOUSE WASHINGTON December 23, 1924.. My dear Mr. Norlie: Honorable Gilbert N. Haugen has been good enough to hand mo your letter regarding the centennial observ- ance, which is to be held in 1925, .by the American community of Norwegian descent in celebration of a century of Norwegian immigration to this country. It was particularly pleasing to learn that an adequate history of Norwegian people and their deecen- dants in this country is being prepared, for it will be of great interest and value, illuminating one of the important phases of the national development. The Norwegians who have in such great numbers caet in their lot with our country have represented one of the most important elements in the national community. Springing from the race which made the first conquest of the unknown Atlantic, they have borne a great part in the settlement and growth of many among the states in the union. By habit and tradition as lovers of freedom, they have been readily assimilated into the body of American citizenry, because they have so fully under- stood and sympathized with our institutions of liberty and equal opportunity. They have given generously to every department of national advancement, and I am gratified to know that a fitting observance of this centennial year is to be held» Very truly yours, Mr. 0. M. Norlie, Decorah, Iowa. CALVIN COOLIDGE President of the United States Government House Ottawa In connection with the celebration of the Boree-American Centennial in June next, I desire to send my personal greetings to all the Norwegian people who have settled and are living in the Dominion of Canada. I heartily wish them continued prosperity and success. ^^k' <f/a**J< a. LORD BYNG OF VIMY G. C. B., G. C. M. G., M. V. O., Governor General and Commander in Chief of the Dominion of Canada ^> HAAKON VII King of Norway " 'Mong the rocks by the North Sea's blue waters" Chapter I THE NORWEGIANS 1. The Home Land Norway has been the homeland of the Norwegians for two thousand years or more. It is a wonderful little land, beautiful and beloved, illustrious in story and song. Norway forms the northwestern part of the Scandinavian peninsula. It lies as far north as Labrador and Greenland, as Alaska and Siberia. It extends from 57° 59' Location N. Lat. (at Mandal) to 71°11' N. Lat. (at North Cape), a difference in latitude of over 13 degrees, equal to that between San Diego and Seattle, between New Orleans and Decorah, between Palm Beach and New York. East and west, the country extends from 4° 30' E. Long, (at Utvser, in Sognefjord) to 31°11' E. Long, (at Norno, near Vardo). The area is only 124,495 sq. miles. Norway is, then, three- fourths the size of Sweden and eight times that of Denmark. It is a trifle larger than the British Isles, but Size and Shape the British Isles have 18 times as large a population. Norway is twice as large as New England, one-half as large as Texas. It is nearly as large as Min- nesota and Iowa combined, but has less than one-half the popu- lation of these two states. Its length from Lindesnes to Vardo is 1100 miles in a straight line, but along the coast round the outer belt of rocks the distance is 1700 miles. The entire shore line, including the fjords in and 16 Nerwegian People in America Relative Size and Position of Norway (if moved 1200 farther west) out, is 12,000 miles, a line that would stretch half way around the globe. Its width in the south is about 250 miles; in the north, 60 miles, often less. At Rombaken, at the head of Vestf jorden, the width is only five miles. It will thus be seen that Norway, as a whole, is a long, narrow coast-country on the North Atlantic. It looks on the map like a big bag slung over the shoulders of Sweden. It is fringed along the coast by countless rocky islands that resemble a vast flock of sea birds flitting along the shore. Norway is a land of mountains, with majestic, snow-covered tops rising 6,000 to 8,000 feet in places. Its glaciers are the largest in Europe. Jostedalsbrae, for exam- Surface ple, is 330 sq. miles in extent, while the mightiest glaciers of Switzerland are only 20 sq. miles. The mountains of Norway comprise 65 per cent of the whole land. Another 21 per cent is occupied by heavy for- The Norwegians 17 ests, and 4 per cent is occupied by marshland and lakes. Hence, only 10 per cent of the land is habitable; only 3 per cent is arable; only 1 per cent is tilled. It might seem that nothing would grow and nobody would care to live in a land so far north. But such is not the case. The climate, indeed, is bracing, but not impossi- Climate ble. In the same latitude in which Franklin, the explorer, lost his life in the Arctic regions of America, and in which lies the inhospitable plains of frozen Siberia, the waters of the fjords of Norway never freeze except at their upper ends. "One would expect," says John L. Stoddard, "the climate of Norway to be that of Greenland; but Nature saves it, as a habitation for the race, by sending thither the mysterious Gulf Stream, which crosses the Atlantic for 5,000 miles, and, although far spent on that distant shore, fulfills its mission, transforming, by its warm breath, an otherwise barren region to a fertile land." The mean temperature of Norway, therefore, is somewhat like that of the northern half of the United States and the southern provinces of Canada, and the vegetation Vegetation 0f Norway is rich for so northern a region. The Norway pine, cited by Milton in his "Paradise Lost," is the most common forest tree. Oaks, birches, elms, beeches, and other trees also abound in places. The apple tree, the plum and the cherry occur far north of Trondhjem, while currants, marsh berries, gooseberries and strawberries thrive as far north as the North Cape. Wheat, rye, barley, oats and potatoes are successfully cultivated in the lower valleys. It is a cur- ious fact that barley takes the same time (90 days) to ripen at Al- ten (70° N. Lat.) as at Oslo (60°) and in southern France (45°). The reason for this is, that the summer days are so much longer farther north. At Alten the sun does not set at all during the summer months. Norway is the Land of the Midnight Sun. Although only 3 per cent of the land can at present be cul- tivated, farming is, nevertheless, the chief occupation of the people, nearly one-half of the population (48.65 per Other Resources cent) being dependent upon agriculture for their support. The land is rich also in other resources. There are rich mineral deposits in the mountains and unlimited power in the many mountain streams and water- falls. God has richly provided the land with the necessities of life. He never forgets anything. He remembers the lilies of the field and notes the sparrow's fall. He has given the Norwegians houses and homes, food and fuel aplenty. The forests furnish timber 18 Nonvegian People in America for home-building and ship-building and wood for fuel. There are peat bogs providing fuel, and coal is mined in Svalbard (Spitz- bergen before 1925). The great fishing banks, particularly at Lofoten, annually yield millions of pounds of cod fish, herring, lobsters and seal. The maritime trade dates back to the piratical Vikings, and the commercial fleet of Norway today in absolute tonnage ranks next to those of Great Britain and the United States, and in relative tonnage (per capita) is far in the lead of all the nations of the earth. Why should not Norwegians everywhere love Norway? It is a land of marvellous beauty, rivalling Switzerland as the sum- mer resort of Europe and the playground Natural Scenery 0f the world. Travelers never tire of sound- ing its praises. J. B. Putnam, for instance, writes : "A traveler may here find the grandest of snow-covered mountains, from which tumble innumerable waterfalls of striking beauty, the most charming stretches of fjords or inland seas, the wildest and most desolate of fields, a wealth of color which in its intense brilliancy can scarcely be matched in any other part of the world, and a kindly-hearted and supremely honest people." No one has perhaps more fully appreciated the grandeur of Norway and its people than the poets, and their verses outlive the bravest deeds of men. Listen a moment to Ole Vig when he tunes his harp and sings : Of all the lands in the East or West I love my own native land the best ; Its rocky towers And leafy bowers My heart arrest. Alone in Norseland spite darkness 'tis That sunlight reaches its highest bliss. There eve reposes 'Mong dawn's red roses, And gets a kiss. We therefore join sympathetically with BjoYnson in his pa- triotic hymn: Yes, we love with fond devotion Norway's mountain domes, Rising storm-lashed o'er the ocean, With their thousand homes ; Love our country while we're bending Thoughts to fathers grand, And to saga-night that's sending Dreams upon our land. The Norwegians 19 2. The People By far the greater part (98.5 per cent) of the population of Norway is of Teutonic, or Germanic, origin. The remainder (1.5%) consists mainly of Lapps and Finns. How long the Nor- wegians have lived in Norway it is impossible to say with any cer- tainty. The history of Norway stretches back only about 1100 years — to 800 A. D. Previous to that date, in the prehistoric era, the Scandinavian North is at times given a passing notice by the historians and geographers of Greece and Rome. The earliest mention of Norway is perhaps that of Pythias, an enter- prising Greek explorer, who visited the land and called it Thule. Hence the name Ultima Thule in ancient times meant the lands to the Farthest North. The name Norway (Norvegr, the North Way) seems not to have been in use before the historic era. The Norwegians are, then. Teutons. The Teutons are des- cendants from Japheth, one of the three sons of Noah. Noah once made a prophecy that God would en- Race large Japheth, and Japheth should dwell in the tents of Shem, and Canaan (Ham) should be his servant. This prophecy is one of the most far-reaching and important facts in history, for it has been in fulfillment until this day. Japheth has been enlarged. For example, at the present time his descendants own about 90 per cent of the land area of the earth, and they profess Christianity, the faith once delivered to the Jews, descendants of Shem. For 3,000 years the Japhetics have been the dominant race of the world. For 1500 years the Teutons have been the most progressive of the Japhetics. At the present date, the Teutonic peoples — the English and Americans, the Germans and Hollanders, the Danes, Swedes, Icelanders and Norwegians — control about 35 per cent of the earth's land surface. The Norwegians are Teutons, of the same blood as Danes and Swedes, as Englishmen and Germans. Physically, the Norwegians are the most typical of the Teu- tons. Anthropological investigations have been made of all the principal nationalities. It has been shown that Physical the Norwegians are the tallest of all Europeans Characteristics and in breadth of chest they are excelled by none. Scandinavians, and with them Norweg- ians, are found to be the fairest among the so-called white races, since fully 85 per cent of them have light complexions, with light hair and blue eyes. Only 71 per cent of the English and the Ger- mans are fair-skinned and light-haired. Of the French, 55 per cent have a dark complexion ; of the Italians, 78 per cent are dark. The Norwegians are physically as well as otherwise a strong and hardy race. " A Hardy Norseman," Edna Lyell calls her 20 Norwegian People in America Norwegian hero. "Any nation," says Samuel J. Beckett, "might well envy the people of Norway with their upright, manly bearing and their fair complexions and blue eyes. This simple, honest, hospitable people are the modern descendants of those victorious Vikings who ravaged the coasts of Britain and later settled there — bringing with them that love of freedom which these men of the North have ever considered their most cherished posses- sion. The progress made during the last fifty years is nothing short of wonderful; in it is found national spirit at its best, sing- ularly united and advanced, and producing as fine a race, both physically and intellectually, as is found in any country." Com- pared with other countries, the number of old people in Norway is very great, exceeded by only a few countries, as, for instance, Sweden and France. The average age in Norway is 50 years, but for Italy it is only 35. The Norwegians are distinguished for their intelligence and literacy. The Icelandic saga "Heimskringla," the history of the kings of Norway, says that Odin, the god Intellectual Traits 0f wisdom, the highest god of the Norsemen, and the chief who led the Teutonic tribes from Asia into Europe, taught his people the science of war and the art of writing. Already at the dawn of the historic era the Norwegians were far advanced in civilization. They have ever since kept pace with the educational progress of their day and age. Today Norway shares with Denmark and Sweden the honor of being the most literate country in the world. A sur- prisingly large number of Norwegians are engaged in intellectual pursuits and win for Norway a fame quite out of proportion to the population. Norway has a smaller population than Iowa, but so far Iowa has not produced any Ibsens, Bjornsons, Gar- borgs and Lies, nor any Ole Bulls or Edvard Griegs, or Kjerulfs or Nordraaks. One-third of the engineers that built the Panama Canal are said to have been Norwegians. There is no occupation in which Norwegian brain and brawn are not employed. Throughout all the ages the typical Norwegian has been up- right and honest and clean. He has loved righteousness and truth and morality. He has been conscientiously Moral Character trying to obey his native sense of right and the laws of the land. He does not laugh at vice. There are exceptions to the rule, of course, but these exceptions are notably few and far between. On this point com- parisons are not odious as far as the Norwegians are concerned. The United States, for example, in the period 1891-1895 had no less than 39,612 murders and homicides, one murder to every 6,600 people. During the same period Norway had only 38 mur- The Norwegians 21' ders, one murder to 266,600 people. There are 40 times as many murders per capita in the United States as in Norway. There were only 10 robberies in Norway in five years. Norway con- sumes less intoxicating liquors than any other country except Finland. The modern Viking is a temperate man, temperate in all things. The Norwegian character is deeply religious. His religion in ancient times is that outlined in Norse mythology, a very sturdy sort of religion, with many noble ideals, pre- Religion cepts and examples. The Norwegians had this religion in common with other Teutons, and kept it no doubt at a higher level than any other Teutonic tribe. At any rate, they were the last of the Teutonic peoples to put aside the religion of Odin and Thor and to accept Christianity, and they preserved in the Icelandic literature the best and fullest account of the religion of the ancient Teutons. As soon as the Norwegian accepted the Christian faith, he took it as seriously as he had taken the old Asa faith, as the old Norse religion is called. For 500 years Norway was a Roman Catholic country and main- tained a very high type of Catholicism. Witness, for example, the religious zeal of King Olaf in trying to make his people Chris- tians. Olaf here the cross erected While his blood he shed. Witness also the bold defiance of King Sverre, when he and his people were excommunicated by Pope Innocent III. He promptly told the Catholic hierarchs that the Norwegian people were politically and religiously independent of any and every foreign tyrant. Sverre's word the land protected 'Gainst the Roman dread. During the 400 years that Norway has been a Lutheran land, it has been notably steadfast in its loyalty to the Lutheran con- fessions. True, it has been under the influence of larger move- ments in the world of thought, and has suffered from the inroads of rationalism, sectarianism and indifferentism. Nevertheless, the people as a whole have been God-fearing and church-going, with a profound respect for the Word of God and the Christian Church. "High up stands the Church in the thoughts of the Norwegian peasant." Like a city set on a hill that can not be hid. Norway has had religious reformers of note, giants in the land. Such was, for example, Hans Nielsen Hauge (1771-1824), the peasant lay preacher that awoke Norway from a rationalistic sleep and brought in a new day of Christian living, with political, social, industrial 22 Norwegian People in Awerica and intellectual progress in its train. At present 99 per cent of the Norwegian population is Lutheran. The Norwegian has always been tolerant in religious matters, as in all matters of conscience and personal freedom. He has not been willing to force anybody to accept his views, even though he himself has been willing to give his life for the faith that is in him. There was a time when the Norwegians were very warlike ; when, as Tacitus says of their kinsmen, the Germans : "They deemed it a disgrace to acquire by sweat Social Qualities what they might obtain by blood." In those days, the Norsemen, or Northmen, as they were also called, went on long viking raids into the neighboring lands, plundering and killing. The English chroniclers describe them as stinging wasps and savage wolves. The French monks prayed daily to God to deliver them from the fury of the North- men. But the modern Norwegian is different. He is probably not a bit less brave than his warlike ancestor. He has been temper- ed by Christianity and made to see that it is the meek that shall in- herit the earth and that peacemakers shall be called the children of God. Norway has not had a war for over 100 years. When war clouds threatened in 1814, the brave Norwegians went to church and prayed for peace, and they got peace, and independence along with it. When war was imminent again, in 1905, the coun- try was again on its knees in prayer before the Throne of Grace, and war was again averted, resulting in the separation of Sweden and Norway, without a drop of blood having been shed. Besides being naturally warlike and yet peace-loving, the Norwegians have many noteworthy emotional traits. They have a feeling of rever- ence for womanhood. Woman is man's equal. She has full suf- frage, and Norway was the first land in the world to grant women the right to vote and hold office. The wife is the queen of the home. The Norwegian home is well provided with children, the average being 4.7, the greatest in Europe. Cruelty, desertion and divorce occur very seldom in Norway. The Norwegian is tender and true, faithful unto death, as in "Njaal's Saga." Njaal was besieged by his enemies, who threatened to burn him up in his house. They informed him that his wife would be spared and ordered her to come out. But she said no. She had stayed by him throughout a long life and therefore she would stay by him to the end. So the old couple, with their grandchild between them, lay down on their bed and were consumed by the flames. The Norwegians are a race of workers. They all learn to work in Norway and all are set to work who are physically and mentally able. They are willing to work and rejoice Industry jn their task. About 56 per cent are en- gaged in farming and fishing ; about 24 per cent are engaged in manufacturing; 15 per cent in trade and trans- The Norwegians 23 portation, including shipping ; and 5 per cent are occupied with in- tellectual work. Formerly, they preferred the outdoor life and occupations that called for the exercise of strength, courage and endurance ; but with the growth of the cities and the demand for manufactures, they have taken to mechanical and intellectual pur- suits. There are few who are very rich, and few very poor. The pauper class represents only 1.2 per cent of the population; only 2.9 per cent of the population are independently rich. Nor- way is the most thinly settled land in Europe, having only 18 to the square mile. This is due in part to the fact that only 10 per cent of the land is habitable and also to the fact that the popula- tion is constantly drained through a large emigration of young people. But, in spite of such fearful handicaps the tendency of the Norwegian people is upward, socially and industrially, in culture and in wealth. Speaking of this, Curtis remarks : "The population of the kingdom not only holds its own, but shows a slight increase, which seems remarkable because of the continual drain of young, able-bodied men and women who have removed to our western states. In all public movements, in all social, intellectual and com- mercial activities, in art, science and literature, in wealth and pros- perity, Norway stands abreast of the most advanced nations of Europe ; but its progress is not won without greater effort than any other people put forth and the application of thrift and industry elsewhere unknown, but which is required in a climate so bleak and inhospitable and by a soil so wild and rocky. None but a race like the Norsemen could have kept a foothold here, but as I have suggested, this constant struggle against nature has been the strongest factor in framing the character of the Norwegian." Politically, the typical Norwegian is an ardent champion of democracy and personal independence. "He would endure the rigid climate of the North, the burning sun Political Aspects 0f the South. He would sleep beneath no other roof than the arch of heaven, use bark for bread, drink rain-water as a beverage, make the forest his habitation, and have the wild beasts for his companions. But he would never give up one inch of his rights as a free man. The people of classical countries were free men, because they belonged to a powerful and free state ; they boasted of their citizenship. The Northman was a free man because he was a man — he boasted of himself and the deeds he performed." This passion for free- dom runs throughout Norwegian history. It accounts for the exodus of the Norwegians to Iceland and Normandy. It accounts for the fact that Norway has really never had any nobility. The Norwegians were the last people in Europe to submit to the Catho- lic yoke and the first to throw it off. Kings were kings by grace. 24 Norwegian People in America In the saga days, if the crops failed or bad weather destroyed the herds, sometimes the peasants sacrificed their king to the gods. In modern days the king is expected to sacrifice himself as the servant of his people. For over 400 years Norway was a province of Denmark and suffered many humiliations. Still, the desire for freedom was never extinguished and the spirit of independence was never quenched. There came a day, in 1814, when Norway drew its sword against all Europe and demanded national indepen- dence. Norwegian Vikings had in years past settled in England and had established law and order there, with Magna Charta and the Bill of Rights. From the Norwegian sections of England had come the deep protests against the English kings and their mis- rule. From these parts of the land are the Pilgrim Fathers who came to settle the American shores and the ancestors of George Washington, who, according to Albert Welles' "Pedigree and History of the Washington Family," had at one time, for 300 years, lived in Norway before moving to England. Norwegian Vikings had likewise established strong governments in other lands — in Iceland, France, Russia, etc. In short, the Norwegians have been political and religious Protestants; they have been exponents of individual freedom and constitutional rights. Henrik Anker Bjer- regaard sings in his "Sons of Norway" : Pride of the Norsemen, the temple of freedom Stands like a rock where the stormy wind breaks, Tempests howl 'round it, but little he'll heed them ; Freely he thinks, and as freely he speaks. Birds in their motion, Waves of the ocean, Poorly can rival his Liberty's voice; Yet he obeys, with a willing devotion, Laws of his making and kings of his choice. The Norwegians resemble the other Teutonic peoples in lan- guage as well as in looks, original religion, customs, laws, etc. Somewhere, away back in time, the Teutons Language were no doubt one people, living together and speaking the same language. Even now Danes, Norwegians and Swedes can easily converse together without learning one another's language. A thousand years ago the Anglo-Saxons and the Northmen talked together without interpreters. Says "Gunnlaug's Saga" : "In those days was the same language in England as in Norway and Denmark ; but the speech changed when William the Bastard conquered England." The Old Norse, still spoken in Iceland in its old-time purity, with only slight modifications, is the purest of the Teutonic lan- guages, freest from admixture with other languages. The Old Norse is still pretty strong in some of the Norwegian dialects and in the Norwegian "landsmaal." Modern Norwegian, a dialect of The Norwegians 25 Danish, is almost entirely a Teutonic language. In this it is unlike English, which has borrowed so much from the French, Latin and Greek. But it has thousands of words almost identical with the English, and is like the English simple in its sentence structure and analytical in character. Norwegians readily learn to use the English language. They are good linguists, and a large per cent of the people of Norway speak English as well as German and other languages. A nation's culture is measured in many ways — by its insti- tutions and laws, its music, paintings, sculpture and architecture, its philosophy, science and literature, and in Culture other ways. Measured by any of these stand- ards, the Norwegians have culturally been a great people throughout their history. Let a word or two about their literature suffice. The actual beginning of writing no one knows for sure. But we all feel certain with Carlyle, sometimes called "that old Scotch-Norseman," that "the art of writing is one of the most miraculous things man has devised." No wonder that the old Norsemen attributed its origin to their god of wisdom, Odin. He is said to have invented the runic alphabet of the Scan- dinavians. Runic inscriptions have been found wherever Teutonic peoples have dwelt, but they are especially numerous in Scandi- navia and Great Britain. Many of these are in stone and go back as far as 300 A. D. The language is everywhere the same at this age. These inscriptions are the oldest remains of Norse literature ; in fact, they are the oldest specimens of Teutonic writings, being- older than Ulfilas' translation of the Bible into Gothic and "Beowulf," the Anglo-Saxon epic. During the Middle Ages the Norwegian settlers in Iceland carried on a most brilliant literary activity. Darkness, intellectual and spiritual, brooded heavy over the other nations of Europe. But way up in Iceland, "with frost and mist around it," the sun was at high noon. Men were making history and writing it. F. Metcalfe, in his "Comparisons of Anglo-Saxon and Old Norse Literature," says: "Scandinavian literature is very attrac- tive in itself, very sparkling, full of nerve and energy, like the people themselves Anglo-Saxon literature, on the other hand, is not so attractive. Good, solid, honest work it is, but of no great brilliancy." Says Mary W. Williams, in her "Social Scan- dinavia in the Viking Age" : "The literature produced- and pre- served by the Scandinavian North is a real national body of writ- ing, unequalled by any other literary compositions of the Middle Ages In consequence, it is a contribution which deserves the deep gratitude of subsequent generations. At a time when interest in things intellectual and literary scarcely extended be- 26 Norwegian People in America yond the monastic walls and when the literary output of the Con- tinent was in the form of dreary church chronicles of saints and martyrs, tiresomely told, these virile inhabitants of the Far North created a literature original in form, narrating in prose the deeds of real, red-blooded men and women living in a natural secular world and meeting and giving battle to the problems which the Fates sent their way; or sinping in meter their own hopes and fears, joys and sorrows, or the praise of the valor and wisdom of the sturdy gods of Northern heathendom." Norwegian literature may be divided into three sections — the Ancient Period, mainly Icelandic, from 800 to 1319; the Union Period, during which time Norway had its literature in common with Denmark, from 1319 to 1814; the Modern Period, from 1814 until the present day. The first of these periods has already been described as one of unique brilliancy, the richest in mediaeval Europe. The literary activities of the second period are blended with the glory of Denmark. "When Norway was separated from Denmark (in 1814) it was as if all the literary forces in the coun- try had awakened from a long trance with fresh life and energy, and there sprang forth with almost violent strength, a literature the importance of which reached far beyond the boundaries of Norway, and influenced the intellectual life of the whole of Europe." Again it can truly be said that the Norwegians, during the last century, have been active in making history and writing it. They have beaten their swords into plow shares and pen points. Henrik Wergeland, who died in 1845 when only 37 years of age, was a lyric poet, who typifies the poetical and national expansion of the race itself after centuries of repose. His sister, Camilla Collett, was a great novelist and champion of woman's emancipa- tion. Aasen and Vinje were ardent nationalists. Jonas Lie and Alexander Kielland were novelists of high rank. Arne Garborg was a fine lyric poet and novelist in "landsmaal." Head and shoul- ders above their fellows in the literary field were BjoYnson and Ibsen. Bjomson (1832-1910) was equally productive as lyric poet, dramatist and novelist, in all of which, as well as in platform oratory, he took up with mighty energy the questions of the day, particularly those that concerned Norway. His influence has been tremendous. For example, through the local color of his peasant stories, every hill and valley and fjord of Norway has had its own author. Ibsen (1828-1906) excelled in the drama, romantic, realistic and social. He is called the greatest of modern dramatists and his works have been translated into the chief modern lan- guages. There is a host of younger writers of note, such as, Heiberg, Hamsun, Prydz, Bojer, Olaf Bull, Herman Wildenwey, etc. These writers, as a rule, no matter how secular and gay in tone, have a serious vein and an uplifting influence. Like the The Norwegians 27 scalds and saga-writers of old, they picture the Norwegian as a man of high ideals and a seeker after the truth, imaginative, with deep convictions and sincere emotions, a toiler, a fighter, con- scientious in moral influence and profoundly religious. The English interest in the Norwegian language and literature has never been very wide-spread or intense. Englishmen have made Norway their summer resort and expect the Norwegians to use the English language if they would have the honor of their visits. An American minister to Denmark resided at Copenhagen seven years and, upon his return to America, proudly declared that he had not learned to speak Danish. Professor C. B. Burch- ardt of Oxford University, in his "Norwegian Life and Litera- ture," traces the development of the English interest in Norwegian matters. He finds that Ibsen is practically the only Norwegian author that is read to any considerable extent in English trans- lation. At present there is a flurry of interest over Hamsun and Bojer, but at best the English are careful to deny themselves the privilege of getting an inspiration from Norse literature. William Archer, the great English critic and translator of Ibsen, was a half Norwegian. 3. Their History The Norwegians came upon the historical arena relatively late. But when they did come they played a leading part, contributing on a large scale to the highest idealism and the soundest material welfare of the world. It is truly remarkable that general histories, as a rule, have so little to say about Norway and its part in the world's work. Norway gets in the average general history almost as little mention as Palestine. It is remarkable, too, that the two lands that have been most signally benefitted by Norwegian ideal- ism and labor, namely, Great Britain and America, should be content with histories that never say one word about the Nor- wegians and their contribution to the material progress and the pursuit of happiness in these English speaking lands. This in- difference to the story of Norway and all Scandinavia, for that matter, is also seen in the fact that, until recently, there have been very few histories of the Scandinavian North in the English lan- guage. In this book it is not possible to give even a brief catalog of important events in Norwegian history. We simply call attention to the fact that Norway has a history, and that this history, as well as the people who made it, is of special interest to those who pride themselves on being of English descent and American citizen- ship. Metcalfe says in his "An Oxonian in Norway": "But Nor- way is not only interesting for its unique scenery, but also for its blood-relationship with Great Britain." 28 Norwegian People in America The "New York Journal of Commerce" is quoted by P. S. Sinding as saying: "There is a nation, even now extant ( !), pos- sessing as brave a history as that of the Romans, as poetic as that of the Greeks ; a nation that controlled the world's history in many things, and at many times, and whose achievements in war and in letters, are worthy the most heroic age of Rome and the most fin- ished period of Greece; a nation whose philosophy outran their age, and anticipated results that have been slowly occurring ever since. This reference can be true of but one people, and that peo- ple is the Norsemen, who lived as heroes, lords and conquerors ; who, sailing out of the ice and desolation in which they were born and nurtured, conquered England, Scotland and Ireland ; rav- aged Brittany and Normandy; discovered and colonized Iceland and Greenland ; and they can be said, with confidence, to have crossed the Atlantic in their crazy barks, and to have discovered this very continent, before Columbus. And then their religion — what a wild, massive, manly mythology! With nothing of the soft sen- timentalities of more southern peoples, but containing much that revelation has assured us to be true of doctrine — preaching ever the necessity of right, and doing right — of manliness, honesty and responsibility, rewards and punishments." It is not necessary for an American to be ignorant about this people. There are books now, such as Knut Gjerset's "History of the Norwegian People" and his "History of Iceland," which give in plain English a truthful and sober account of the Nor- wegians, and it should be possible in the writing of American his- tories, to give due credit to the Norwegians and the other na- tionalities who have helped to make America. The story of Norway can be divided into two periods, of about equal duration — the Prehistoric (from 300 B. C. to 872 A. D.) and the Historic (from 872 A. D.). The Historic Period falls into six sub-periods — independence (800-1319), union with Sweden (1319-1380), union with Denmark and Sweden — the Calmar Union (1380-1523), union with Denmark (1523-1814), union with Sweden (1814-1905), and independence (1905—). There is, of course, much obscurity hanging over this era. The historical sources are only fragmentary and incidental — a few runic inscriptions and relics, a poem or two, Prehistoric Era like "Widsith" and "Beowulf," and an occa- (ca. 300 B. C— sional mention by a Greek and Roman his- 872 A. D.) torian, as Plutarch, Livy, Ptolemy, Tacitus. The world empire of Rome never extended as far north as Scandinavia. It was eventually (in 476 A. D.) crushed by the Teutonic tribes, particularly the Goths and the Germans. But the first Germanic people that crossed into the Roman Empire were the Cimbri, in 113 B. C, who came from The Norwegians 29 Denmark. From Denmark and its immediate vicinity came also the Angles, Saxons and Jutes, who in the latter half of the fifth century invaded Britain and made it England (after the Angles). The Norsemen were kinsfolk of these Cimbri, Angles, Saxons and Jutes, and no doubt took part in their expeditions. They had well-built boats, fitted with mast and sail. Their call was to the sea, if they would win fame and fortune. So the sea became their highway from coast to coast, and Viking expeditions were carried on in search of booty, conquest and adventure. The "Anglo- Saxon Chronicle" mentions the coming of the Vikings to Eng- land as early as 7S7 A. D. The ancient Norsemen had always been independent. There is no record to the contrary. But they had not been unified into a distinct nation before 872, when Harald Independence the Fairhaired defeated the last of the rival (872-1319) petty kings of Norway in a naval battle at Havrsfjord near Stavanger. After his death the kingdom was again broken up and reunited time and again. In 995 Olaf Trygvasson, a great-grandson of Harald, reunited the kingdom. He had been baptized in England and sought to Chris- tianize his people, but he met with opposition and was defeated and slain at Svolder by the united forces of Denmark, Sweden, and Eric, son of Jarl (Earl) Haakon of Norway. Another descendant of Harald, St. Olaf, again reunited the kingdom, besides trying to evangelize it. He attempted to force Christianity on his people, and naturally met with bitter opposition. He was killed in the battle at Stiklestad, in 1030. Soon he was regarded as a martyr and declared a saint by the national assembly. Among the more important kings who came after him may be mentioned the following: Magnus the Good (1035-1047), Harald Sigurdsson (1047-1066), Olaf the Peaceful (1066-1093), Mag- nus Erlingsson (1161-1184), Sverre Sigurdsson (1177-1202), Haakon Haakonsson (1217-1263), Magnus Law-Mender (1263- 1280), and Haakon Magnusson 1299-1319.) Magnus the Good established peace in the land. Harald Sigurdsson attacked England in 1066, the year of the Norman Conquest, and fell at Stamford Bridge. Olaf the Peaceful framed a constitution and organized the Christian Church. Magnus Erlingsson granted the Roman Catholic Church too large concessions, which brought on the bitter and bloody "Birkebeiner-Bagler" war between the common people and the episcopal party. Sverre Sigurdsson defeated Magnus and the papal party. Haakon Haakonsson, a grandson of Sverre, further deprived the clergy of their undue political influence, and annexed Greenland. Magnus Law-Mender subdued Iceland and reformed the laws. Haakon Magnusson was the last male descendant of the Harald-the-Fairhaired line. 30 Norivegian People in America King Haakon had a daughter, Ingeborg, who was married to Duke Erik of Sweden. Magnus Eriksson, the son of Duke Erik and Ingeborg, was only three years old when Union with Sweden his grandfather died. Over in Sweden a rebel- (1319-1380) Hon had broken out against King Birger, and Magnus Eriksson was proclaimed king. Thus Norway and Sweden were for the first time united under one ruler. The union was only nominal, as the two countries had separate laws and administrations, with nothing in common except the king. It was arranged that Erik, the king's oldest son, should reign in Sweden, and Haakon, the second son, should rule over Norway. Haakon married Margaret, a Danish princess. The most important event during his period was the coming of the Black Death, a terri- ble pestilence which ravaged most of the European countries, reaching Norway in 1349. In many districts it swept away the en- tire population. Centuries elapsed before the country recovered from this terrible calamity. In 1375 Queen Margaret succeeded in getting her son Olaf Haakonson elected king of Denmark. On the death of his father in 1380 he became king of Norway also. On Union with Sweden Olaf's death in 1387 Margaret was proclaimed and Denmark regent of Denmark and Norway and in 1389 (1380-1523) Sweden was also included in her regency. In 1397 her great-nephew, Erik of Pomerania, was formally elected king of the three Scandinavian states at the Diet of Calmar. Margaret continued to rule until her death in 1412. As each of the three kingdoms jealously maintained its own form of government, the prospects of a lasting peaceable union were not very bright. The Danish kings had the utmost dif- ficulty in maintaining the union. The outcome of the century-long struggle was that Norway, not having any nobility, was made a vassal province, and Sweden, through its aristocracy, with the backing of the peasantry, regained its independence. In 1523 Gustavus Vasa was proclaimed king of Sweden, and the Calmar Union was at an end. It has been said that during the union with Denmark, Nor- way had no history. In 1537, the year in which the Lutheran Reformation was introduced into Norway, Nor- Union with Den- wav was formally declared to be a province of mark (1523-1814) Denmark, and the decree was accepted without a protest. The country had been reduced to a state of poverty and dependence. Commerce had been destroyed ; taxation without representation consumed the people's substance. The Danish language supplanted the Old Norse. The literature of Norway from the Reformation to the end of the union is in- separable from that of Denmark. There was no university in The Norwegians 31 Norway before 1811, therefore the young Norwegians had to go to Copenhagen to get their higher and professional training. Lud- vig Holberg, the great "Danish" poet, is an example of a Nor- wegian, born in Norway, but trained in Denmark, hence reckoned as a Dane. As long as Norway was a mere appendage to Denmark it could not escape being involved in the consequences of Denmark's for- eign policies. When the Danes desired to maintain an armed neutrality in the Napoleonic wars in 1800-1801, England objected and attacked Copenhagen. Six years later, the English fleet again bombarded Copenhagen and forced the surrender of the Danish and Norwegian fleets. At the same time Norway was entirely cut off from Denmark by the British blockade, and reduced to the point of starvation. In the midst of these calamities the old love of freedom and independence awoke again in the Norseman's breast and he demanded his birthright. His night of political servitude was at an end. This was in 1814. Only a few years before the spiritual darkness which had for a century or more rested over Norway, was also dispelled by the Gospel preaching of the peasant-reformer, Hans Nielsen Hauge. On May 17, 1814, the Norwegians held a representative as- sembly at Eidsvold, where they adopted a new constitution and elected Christian Frederick, heir to the Danish Union with Sweden throne, as king of Norway. This show of inde- (1814-1905) pendence did not suit the great powers of Eu- rope— England, Prussia, Austria and Russia, which had decided at the Peace of Kiel that Norway should belong to Sweden. The powers demanded fulfilment of their decree. A Swedish army proceeded to occupy Norway as far as Glommen. Christian Frederick quickly resigned and set sail for Denmark, where he afterwards reigned as Christian VIII (1839-1848). The Norwegians prepared to defend their rights, and would no doubt have done so to the last man, in case war had been declared. As stated before, they laid their case before the Lord of Hosts, Who answers prayer. They called also a "storthing," or parliament, accepted the resignation of Christian Frederick and elected Charles XIII of Sweden as king of Norway, on condition that Norway should be an independent country and that the king would govern it in accordance with its new constitution. On these terms he accepted the crown of Norway and withdrew his troops. His successors were: Charles XIV John (1814-1844), Oscar I (1844-1859), Charles XV (1859-1872), and Oscar II (1872- 1905). These Swedish rulers were all noble-minded men, who, with the exception of Charles John, scrupulously sought to ob- serve the constitution of Norway and to promote the material and spiritual welfare of the country. 32 Norwegian People in America Under this system of dual monarchy, Norway was really just as independent as Sweden. But to the world it did not seem so, because the king was a Swede and the consular service was united. In the eyes of the world Norway was a province of Sweden, and this was a constant source of grievance to the Norwegians. The de- sire of the Norwegians to gain complete separation increased from year to year and came to a head in 1905. The Norwegian Storthing had passed a bill for a separate consular service, and this bill the king vetoed. The Norwegians promptly voted that he had for- feited their confidence and declared him "out of office." This resolution was confirmed by a popular vote — 362,980 votes against 182. An unofficial poll of women votes registered an additional 278,000 for dissolution. War clouds threatened, but arbitration and prayer averted the scourge of war. King Oscar abdicated the Norwegian throne, and the Norwegians offered it to a prince of his house, an offer that was refused. History is a record of what man has done, and should teach the nations of the world how to live together in peace and mutual helpfulness. In this selfish and war-mad world there is perhaps no finer example of national honor and justice than that of Swe- den and Norway during the dissolution of their union. Norway wanted to be free; Sweden wanted to be fair. They settled all their disputes without war, according to the principles of Chris- tianity. They continue to regard each other as friendly neigh- bors, kinsfolk, of equal rank and worth, with a right to a place in the sun. When King Oscar denied a Swedish prince the right to accept the throne of Norway, the Norwegian Storthing offered the vacant throne to Prince Carl of Denmark, on the basis Independence 0f an election, which gave 259,563 in favor of (1905—) a king and 69,264 in favor of a republic. Prince Carl accepted the offer and took the name of Haakon VII, taken from the saga period. He made his entry into Christiania Nov. 25, 1905, accompanied by his wife, Queen Maud (an English princess) and their son, Alexander, who had now been named Olav. In 1906 the king was formally crowned at Trondhjem. Thereby, after nearly 600 years, Norway again existed as an independent nation in its own consciousness and in that of its contemporaries. The country has passed through stirring times since it became independent. It lived close to the scenes of the World War, sailed the seven seas, and kept out of the war. The growth of manu- facturing is perhaps the most far-reaching of the changes in the land, bringing in its wake many changes in the life of the people. They are passing from a rural to a city population. Hence they The Norwegians 33 have many new problems — industrial, social, moral, religious and intellectual — with which they now are grappling. In 1914 Norway celebrated the centennial of its constitutional independence. What stupendous progress during the century ! What dreams had been fulfilled and how quickly! 4. Their Place in History The land is small, approximately 1 -450th of the earth's land surface. That is all. Siberia and Sahara are much larger, but count for less. Palestine and Greece are much The Land smaller, but have counted for more. In any event, Norway has great resources and marvel- lous scenery, and has a place in history that can not be exactly measured in square miles. Norway occupies a larger place in history than it does on the map. The population is small, only 1 -650th of the population of the earth. Just a handful. The Norwegians are not multitudinous as are their cousins, the Germans and the The People English. The immigration to Norway has always been small, the emigration has been great. Ethnographically, the Norwegians are Teutons, the most typical of Teutons. Physically, they are tall and lank, healthy and hardy, a vigorous, handsome race. Intellectually, they are like the other Teutons, highly endowed, with a boundless capacity for civilization. Morally, they are a clean, chaste race, with the highest standards and most tender conscience. Religiously, they are God-fearing — in olden days, according to their Norse mythol- ogy, they had the highest type of natural religion recorded ; and in our day, according to the Lutheran faith, the purest type of Chris- tianity ever formulated. Socially, they are a friendly, hospitable, thrifty, home-loving race, reverencing womanhood and respecting conjugal ties. Industrially, they love to work at any honest calling, and, as R. L. Stevenson says, "They know what pleasure is, for they have done good work." Politically, they are independent and democratic, anxious to make their own laws and willing to abide by them, loyal to their chosen rulers and magistrates, patriotically living for their country in times of peace and dying for it in times of war. Linguistically, they are Teutons of the purest type, and their written language as well as its dialects, is clear, strong, beau- tiful, extremely simple, yet fully adequate to express the widest range of thought and feeling. Culturally, they have from the dawn of their history been far advanced in civilization and have contributed liberally to art, science and literature, affecting the spiritual uplift and the material progress of the world. 34 Norwegian People in America The history of Norway is a record of war as well as peace, of course ; but it is to be noted that most of the wars are either in behalf of personal independence and de- Their History mocracy or in behalf of laws and institu- tions that safeguard individual rights and the stability of the nation. Norway's place in history is, then, a little land, putting up a great fight for individual freedom, democratic government, protection of fundamental institutions and loyal obedience to constituted authority. We do not want to say that the Norwegian is perfect and that he has no weaknesses. He has weaknesses aplenty, and his very strength has often become a weakness to such a degree as to pre- vent him from making the mark in the world that he should make. For example, his love of independence has frequently prevented him from uniting with others in greater undertakings. It was a long and bloody task, that of uniting Norway under one king. Many a brave Viking, many a hardy emigrant, has left Norway for good, in order to give his strength to some other land, just because he would not give up any of his personal freedom in Norway. But for the petty quarreling and extreme individuality of the Norwegians, Norway might early have been one of the largest and mightiest empires of the world. Norway is not counted as one of the great world powers, not only because it is small in size, but because it does not develop any great enterprise. It has prided itself too much on past achievements. On the other hand, the excessive respect for constituted authority has not been an un- mixed blessing for Norway and the Norwegians. They have in consequence often been too modest and submissive. They sub- mitted to a foreign yoke 600 years, sweetly dreaming about better days coming. They had so much respect for law and order that they did not like to protest at unjust laws and tyrannical govern- ments. Norway has therefore never had a real riot or revolution, and it often happens that the Norwegian in his heart has the moral firmness of a Brand, but in his life he has the moral inertia of a Peer Gynt. In spite of its shortcomings, Norway has secured an honorable place in history, and the sons and daughters of Norway every- where should be justly proud of their lineage. Concerning the place of Norway in history, DeChaillu says : "This country, embracing nearly sixteen degrees in latitude, is inhabited by a flaxen-haired and blue-eyed race of men — brave, simple, honest and good. They are descendants of the Norsemen and of the Vikings, who in the days of old, when Europe was de- graded by the chains of slavery, were the only people that were free, and were governed by the laws they themselves made; and, when emerging from their rockbound and stormy coasts for dis- The Norwegians 35 tant lands, for war or conquest, were the embodiment of courage and daring by land and sea. They have left to this day an indel- ible impression of their character in the countries they overran, and in which they settled ; and England is indebted for the free- dom she possesses and the manly qualities of her people — their rov- ing disposition, their love of the sea, and of conquest in distant lands — to this admixture of Scandinavian blood, which, through hereditary transmission, makes her prominent as descended chiefly from Anglo-Scandinavians and not Anglo-Saxons." Boyesen writes in his "Story of Norway" : "It is these con- quering Vikings who have demonstrated the historic mission of Norway, and doubly indemnified the world for the misery brought upon it. The ability to endure discipline without loss of self- respect, voluntary subordination for mutual benefit, and the power of orderly organization, based upon these qualities, these are the contributions of the Norse Vikings to the political life of Europe .... The breath of new life which the Vikings infused into history lives today in Norway, in England and in America." 36 Norwegian People in America A Viking Boat Chapter II THE VIKING EXPEDITIONS For the first eight centuries of the Christian era the Norseman is practically hid from our view, quietly attending to his own business way up there in his remote mountain home. Then sud- denly, in the role of a Viking, he burst upon the rest of Europe, like a tornado, spreading destruction in his path. The Viking Age had come. It lasted for three hundred years or more (800- 1100). The name Viking is thought by some to mean sea-king, from the fact that many of the chiefs of these expeditions were of royal birth — petty kings who refused to submit to Harald the Fair- haired and his successors in their attempts to unify Norway under one head. The name is more properly derived from their habit of leaving their boats in the viks, or inlets, along the coast when they pounced down upon a countryside to plunder it. What caused the Viking movement? There were various causes, some of them immediate, others more deep-seated. There were several kinds of Viking cruises. Some of them were ir- regular plundering expeditions, caused by the desire for adventure and booty. It was hard at best to make a living in Norway, and it seemed much easier to go off on a Viking raid and come back rich in plunder. Besides, such a trip was very interesting and thrilling — it came to be considered perfectly honorable and a nec- essary part of one's education. Some of the expeditions were The Viking Expeditions 37 well-planned military campaigns, numbering hundreds of ships, for the purpose of conquest. Other expeditions were peace- able commercial ventures, transporting goods of merchandise from one port to another. Still others represent an exodus from Norway, an exodus of people who were unwilling to submit to an overlord. Rather than give up their personal independence, they would leave their beloved country and go to some far-off land of their own choice. "The chief cause," says Haskins, "was doubtless that which lies back of the colonizing movements in all ages — the growth of population and the need of room." "Over- population," thinks Leach, "is the simplest explanation of the Viking madness." Coman and Kendall write thus : "In the course of the ninth century the people seem to have grown too numer- ous for the resources of the scant coast-lands, and the more enter- prising spirits set out to seek their fortunes in the richer realms to the south." Gjerset concludes : "In the Scandinavian countries, with their limited area of tillable soil, and their extensive seacoast, a sea- faring life was necessitated from the start, which produced a hardy and energetic race, and fostered the spirit of daring and adventure which expresses itself in the whole movement The young men were partly encouraged, partly driven by necessity, to seek fortune on expeditions to foreign countries. Led by love of adventure, and encouraged by the prospects of wealth and fame, they flocked to the standards of the Viking chieftains in such num- bers that the movement soon became a migration, and extensive campaigns were waged for conquest and colonization It is an error often repeated that the Vikings came to foreign lands as bands of adventurers, married women there, and soon forgot their customs and language. As a rule they brought their families with them, and settlers, both men and women, came to the new colony as soon as it was safely established. The social organiza- tion of the home country was reproduced in the colonies, and there is ample evidence to show that the Vikings clung to their own cus- toms and national identity with a tenacity not unworthy of so proud a race." The Viking movement affected all Scandinavia, not Norway only. The Swedes naturally directed their attention mainly to the east; the Norwegians and Danes, mainly to the south and west. In the chronicles of the times little distinction was made between these free-booters. There were Danes and Swedes as well as Norsemen in the raids on France, still in the French litan- ies they are all called by one name — Northmen. There were Norse- men and Swedes as well as Danes in the raids on England, yet the English chroniclers generally call them all Danes. With respect to England it should be remembered that England had 38 Norwegian People in America twice been conquered and governed by people from Denmark. The Angles and Jutes came from Denmark in the fifth century — the Angles (after whom England is named) came from southern Denmark, and the Jutes came from northern Denmark. Saxo Grammaticus, in the twelfth century, begins his history of the Danes by relating that Denmark was founded by two brothers, Dan and A n g u 1, and that A n g u 1 was the father of the English. "It is evident," says Mallet in his "North- ern Antiquities," "that two-thirds of the con- querors of Great Brit- ain came from Den- mark; so that when the Danes again infested England about three or four hundred years af- ter, and finally conquer- ed it toward the latter end of the tenth century, they waged war with the descendants of their own ancestors." This will illustrate why the Eng- lish preferred to apply the name Dane to the Vikings, even in in- Norse Settlements in Great Britain stances when they came (From L. M. Larson's "History of Eng- from Norway instead of land and the British Commonwealth." t-. ■, Copyrighted by Henry Holt and Co., New .Denmark. York.) 1. Great Britain The expeditions of the Norsemen took two main directions — to the south and to the west. The southward expeditions touched along the eastern coasts of Scotland and England and the western shores of the continent, as far south as Africa and Italy. The westward expeditions stopped at the Shetland and Orkney Islands, and then either went on south to the Hebrides and Scotland, and then on to England, Wales, Ireland, and even to France, Portugal, Spain, and the Mediterranean ; or, it went west to the Faroes, Ice- land, Greenland and Vinland. The Viking Expeditions 39 The Shetlands are an island group of 117 islands about 175 miles to the northeast of Scotland. They have a total area of 560 sq. miles and a population of about 30,000. Shetlands, Orkneys, They were discovered and settled by the Nor- Hebrides and Man wegians as early as 700 A. D., and belonged to them until 1471, when they were sold to Scot- land by the Danes for a song. Old Norse was spoken on the islands for over 1100 years. According to Jakob Jacobsen, the English dialect now in use on the islands has in it an admixture of not less than 10,000 Norse words. The population is still mainly Norwegian in race and customs. The Orkneys are an island group of approximately 75 islands just off the northeast coast of Scotland. They have a total area of 390 sq. miles and a population of over 25,000. They were settled by the Norwegians as early as the Shetlands. They were governed as a dependency of Norway by Norwegian jarls (earls) until 1471 when they were pawned by Christian I of Denmark to Scotland, but never redeemed. The people of these islands have also maintained until the present day their Norse character, race, language, customs, etc. Their English dialect is strongly marked by Norwegian words and accentuation. They say, for example : "luk the grind" for "shut the gate." One of the earls of the Orkney Islands was Thorfinn, who settled in Yorkshire, England, in 1030. He was founder of the Washington family in England, from which George Washington sprang. Welles' genealogy traces Washington 18 centuries. In Denmark, 70 B. C. — 735 ; in Nor- way, 735-900; in the Orkneys, 900-1030; in England, 1030-1659; in America, 1659-1799. The Hebrides are an island group of 521 islands to the west of Scotland, comprising 2,812 sq. miles and about 100,000 people. The Norwegians colonized the islands in the ninth century. They were annexed to Norway by Harald the Fairhaired and ruled by local chiefs, jarls and petty kings. In 1263 they were wrested from Norway by Alexander III of Scotland, and in 1471 they were formally ceded to Scotland by Christian I of Denmark. The Isle of Man lies between England and Ireland, is 22 sq. miles in area, and numbers a little over 50,000 inhabitants. It was early settled by Celts, chiefly Welshmen, but the Norwegians were in the ascendency during the Viking Age. Harald the Fair- haired made an expedition to the island and annexed it to Norway. Magnus Law-Mender ceded it to Scotland in 1266. The influence of the Vikings in the island can be seen in the fact that the present constitution of the island dates back to the Viking occupancy. 40 Nonvegian People in America The Norsemen early made settlements in Scotland, especially along the northern and western coasts. They entered the land also from the east, by sea, and from the south, Scotland where they had mighty settlements in north- ern England. When the Norsemen first be- gan to settle in Scotland, that country was not yet organized into a central kingdom. There were several Celtic tribes, with a poli- tical organization that resembled a rude confederacy. The com- ing of the Vikings forced the Picts and Scots to form a more per- fect union for the common defence of their country. The Nor- wegians had a good foothold in Scotland for over 1,000 years, and their language was spoken there during that period. Mar- garet, "Maid of Norway," was the heiress of the crown of Scotland, but she died as she was enroute to Scotland (1284). Another Margaret, daughter of Christian I of Denmark, king of Norway, became the wife of King James III of Scotland (1468). The Danish king was supposed to give a marriage dower, amount- ing to $24,000. As he was unable to pay this amount, he bor- rowed the money, giving the Shetlands, Orkneys and Hebrides as security. Thereby Norway lost these ancient dependencies. The Norsemen have left a deep and lasting imprint on Scotland — on the race, language, literature, art, customs, beliefs. According to George Henderson, in his "Norse Influence on Celtic Scotland," this influence has often been overlooked and belittled. "Carlyle once called the Highlanders a Norse breed," says Henderson, "and he was in a rough way nearer the truth than many imagine." In Ireland they appeared as early as 803, plundering churches and monasteries. In 826 they made their first permanent settle- ment, soon to be followed by numerous other Ireland colonies in many parts of the island, espe- cially along the east coast. In 836 Tor- gils became king of the Norsemen in Ireland. In 840 he founded Dublin (Dyflinn) and soon afterward Limerick (Hlymrik) was also established as a thriving Norwegian city. Norse kings reign- ed in Dublin in unbroken succession for nearly 400 years, until 1200. There was a good deal of fighting with the Irish, and at times the whole land was in the hands of the Norsemen. The Norsemen established in Ireland their social order and laws, and in return accepted Christianity. From Ireland they made warlike expeditions into England and" France and carried on a peaceable commerce with the lands of southern Europe. According to Gjer- set, the downfall of the Vikings in Ireland is connected chiefly with the name of Brian Borumba, the greatest of Irish kings. He slew King Ivar of Limerick and made himself king over the southern half of the land. Later he defeated King Olav Kvaar- The Viking Expeditions 41 an of Dublin and made himself high-king of all Ireland. In the Battle of Clontarf, known as the Brian battle, April 23, 1014, the last great conflict between the two races was fought, in which 4,000 Irish and 7,000 Norsemen lost their lives. The Norsemen continued to rule in Dublin and to occupy the same cities and ter- ritories as before, but their political power had been destroyed in the Brian battle. Meanwhile, during the 300-400 years of their stay in Ireland, they had been gradually intermarrying with the Irish and becoming part and parcel of the Irish people. When the Anglo-Norman armies came to Ireland in 1169-1171, they met with little resistance, except in the fortified Norse towns. But as there was no national government and no general leadership, the conquest was easily accomplished. Viking dominion in Ireland was at an end after 400 years of varied success. Traces of the Norwegian occupancy of Ireland are still numerous in the names of places and persons, and in the customs of the people. It has been claimed that all the red heads in Ireland are descended from Norse stock. Our own William Jennings Bryan, thrice a candi- date for the presidency of the United States, is thought to be a descendant of Viking Norwegian stock that came to Ireland pos- sibly via Iceland. He himself says he does not know. There was an almost uninterrupted stream of Norsemen to England and Wales from 787, when they sacked Lindisfarne, to 1066, when King Harald of Norway fell at England and Wales Stamford Bridge. Like the Danes, they came first to plunder, later to possess, and, if possible, to rule. They invaded the land from all sides and, to- gether with their Danish kinsmen, pressed the natives, both Celt and Anglo-Saxon, hard. They forced the Welsh into their moun- tain fastnesses and the Anglo-Saxons into the forests of southern Britain. Alfred of Wessex and Rhodri of Wales, both surnamed the Great, tried to organize the native forces against the invaders. In 876 Rhodri was a fugitive in Ireland ; in 878 Alfred was in hid- ing in Athelney, and was forced to make the treaty of Wedmore. By the terms of this treaty the invaders withdrew from southern England, and secured the right from Alfred to govern the north- ern half of England according to the laws of the Danes, hence, this part of England was called Danelaw. This gave peace to the land, so that the Anglo-Saxons were left to grow strong and united, able in time to defeat the invaders and rule the whole land. But a century after Alfred the Great, a new series of Viking invasions began which ended in a complete conquest of England, by Sweyn, King of Denmark, in 1012. He was succeeded by Canute the Great, greatly beloved in England and Denmark alike. After Canute's death, in 1035, two of his sons reigned briefly, and 42 Norwegian People in America then the crown went back to the Saxon rulers, in 1042. In 1066 they were in turn forced to hand it over to the Norman conquerors. It is quite customary even for historians to overlook or belittle the influence of the Danes and Norsemen in England and Wales. Edwards, in his "Story of Wales," calls these light-haired Scan- dinavians the "black Norse nations." These Scandinavians in the course of 1,000 years or more of close contact, at times hostile, oftener neighborly and friendly, gradually mingled with the Welsh- men and contributed much to the race and its culture. Yet Ed- wards does not give them one word of credit. Larned, in his "History of England," says : "England was little affected by any- thing which the Danes brought in ; since the two peoples were sub- stantially of one blood, and their institutions, customs and lan- guage were closely alike." But the influence of the invaders was not small. Their presence united the Anglo-Saxons. The Anglo- Saxons were invigorated by them. They contributed much to the language and the laws of the land. Bradley, in his "Making of English," (56) points out that the place names and modern dialects in England tell us that in some districts of England the population must at times have been far more largely Scandinavian than Eng- lish. The Pilgrim Fathers and John Washington, ancestor of our first president, came from the Danelaw. It is quite customary also for historians to magnify the influ- ence of the Normans on England. Welles has traced the geneal- ogy of George Washington through the English Records (the Common Pleas Rolls) back to a Norseman who came from the Orkney Islands. The pedigree which he has published he could establish by legal evidence. Washington Irving, on the other hand, in his "Life of Washington," thinks that Washington came orig- inally from Normandy. But, the Normans also were Norsemen, the name Norman being a softening of the name Northman. Nor- mandy was peopled by Norse Vikings in the same way as England was, and it makes very little difference whether these Vikings came directly to England or by the way of Normandy. As an example of what the historians say regarding the results of the Norman conquest, the following from Mont- gomery is given as one of the most modest summaries: "1. It was not the subjugation of the English by a different race, but rather a victory won for their advantage by a branch of their own race. It brought England into closer contact with a higher civilization of the continent, introduced fresh intellectual stimulus, and gave to the Anglo-Saxons a more progressive spirit. 2. It modified the English language by the influence of the Norman-French element, thus giving it a greater flexibility, refinement and elegance of expression." Montgomery adds also the following results from the Norman conquest : It im- The Viking Expeditions 43 proved architecture, established the feudal system, re-organized the people, put an end to the Viking invasions, created a strong monarcmal government, and enforced a partial obedience to law. 2. Continental Europe During the Viking Age practically all Europe was made to feel that the Scandinavian vikings were to be reckoned with. On the continent, as in Great Britain, the lands were first rav- aged for plunder and then colonized for permanent habitations. The Elbe, the Weser, the Rhine, the Scheldt, the Meuse, the Somme, the Seine, the Loire, the Garonne, the Guadalquivir, the Rhone, and other streams were open highways by which the long boats of the Norsemen approached the rich farm lands and populous cities of the interior. Smoking houses and bloody battlefields marked their track. They frequently pillaged and even burnt Paris, Amiens, Orleans, Poitiers, Bordeaux, Toulouse, Nantes and Tours. It is told of Charlemagne (742-814), ruler of all the Christian lands in western Europe, that he wept when he heard of the havoc the Vikings were already causing and predicted the ruin of his empire. In the litany service, as stated, the terrified clergy inserted a special prayer for protection from the fury of the Northmen. Normandy- was an ancient province of France, a trifle larger than Massachusetts. This fell into the hands of the Norsemen so completely as to take from them its name. Normandy The first mention of their coming to Nor- mandy was in 841, when they sailed up the Seine to Paris. In 911 King Charles the Simple granted the province to Rolf Ganger, leader of the Northmen. At the same time he gave Rolf permission to plunder Brittany. Rolf accepted Christianity and became a good ruler. It is related that Rolf, according to feudal custom, should kiss the king's foot as a token that he would be the king's vassal. But he re- fused, and ordered one of his followers to do so in his stead. This man lifted the king's foot to his mouth so that the king fell backward, and great merriment resulted. Under Rolf's successors Normandy became the most pros- perous and progressive land in the Feudal Era. Feudalism, chivalry, literature, learning, pilgrimages, crusades, Christian- ity and civilization, all seemed to thrive better in Norman soil than anywhere else on the continent. In 1066, William, a Norman duke, crossed the Channel and conquered England. In 1154, the Norman Empire, consisting of England, Ireland and western France, was established; in 1130, a Norman kingdom was established in Sicily and southern Italy. In the First Cru- 44 Norwegian People in America sade (1096-1099) Robert II, Duke of Normandy, was easily one of the greatest leaders. The Latin Kingdom of Jerusalem was founded and at its head was placed the Norman Godfrey, the most valiant and devoted of the crusader knights. Tancred, another famous Norman knight, was placed in charge of other parts of Palestine. Richard, the Lion Hearted, King of England, of Norman descent, was the central figure in the Third Crusade (1189-1192). In all these exploits they still bore the stamp of their original Norse character — physical strength, ready wit, loyalty, rugged virtue, religious zeal, independence, submission to chosen, constituted authority, ability to rule, surpassing courage. Myers gives the Normans the following tribute : "The his- tory of the Normans is simply a continuation of the story of the Northmen When first we met them in the ninth century they were pagans ; now they are Christians. Then they were rough, wild, danger-loving corsairs ; now they are become the most cultured, polished and chivalrous people in Europe. But the restless, careless, daring spirit that drove the Norse sea-kings forth upon the waves in quest of adventure and booty, still stirs in the breasts of their descendants. They have simply changed from heathen Vikings, delighting in the wild life of sea-rover and pirate, into Christian knights, eager for pilgrimages and crusades." The Norse Vikings pressed on farther south. The Norsemen in Ireland traded with western France and established a perma- nent colony on the Loire in A. D. 877, under Southern Europe the rule of Dublin. They sailed along the coasts of Spain and the Mediterranean lands, sometimes plundering, at other times trading. For example in 853, as they sailed along the west coast of Spain (now Portugal), they attacked Lisbon, plundered Cadiz, captured the suburbs of Seville, and fought many battles with the Saracens. In 866, a Norse fleet sailed around Spain to the mouth of the Rhone and then made an attack on the coast of Italy, where they captured Luna, mistaking it for Rome itself. Again in 1107, when Sigurd the Crusader, King of Norway, with ten thousand volunteer countrymen at his command, was on his way to Palestine, he defeated a Moorish fleet on the west coast of Spain, and on two Mediterranean islands, Formentera and Ma- jorca, and eventually reached Palestine. The Norsemen in Pal- estine were as mighty in battle as their brothers, the Normans. Mention has already been made of the Norman kingdom of Si- cily, which was really a Norse kingdom. When King Sigurd visited Duke Roger of Sicily, who was married to the widow of The Viking Expeditions 45 Canute the Great, king of Denmark and England, he was treated as a kinsman. Norsemen often joined the Swedes in their expeditions to the East, and often they went alone. They approached Finland and Russia from the north, and forced the Finns Eastern Europe to pay yearly trihute in walrus, seal, whale and fur. All the lands along the Baltic were visited by the Vikings. In 862, Rurik, a Swede, organized a Russian kingdom, with his capital at Novgorod. To this place many a Viking came, plying his trade. Two of the kings of Norway spent a considerable part of their youth here in the service of the Russian king. One of these was Olaf Trygvasson. who later when on Viking trips to Germany, Den- mark, Holland and England, became converted to Christianity, and then returned to Norway to evangelize it. The other was Harald Sigurdsson, who first held command of the Russian ar- mies against the Bulgarians and Greeks, then was captain of the Varangians, the foreign body-guard of the Greek emperors at Constantinople, then returned to Norway and won the title "Hard-Ruler" on account of his ruthlessness in breaking the power of the tribal aristocracy, and finally was killed at the battle of Stamford Bridge in England, in 1066. That Norway was favorably known in far-off Greece may be seen from the fact that as late as 1195 the Greek emperor. Alexius, sent a Norseman to Norway for more troops to help him out. In 1222 a Norwegian pilgrim followed the well -beaten route through Russia and the Black Sea to Constantinople and the Holy Land. 3. The Faroes and Iceland The great colonial empire of Norway extended westward to the Faroe Islands, Iceland and beyond — to Greenland and Vin- land the Good. Iceland may well be considered the most import- ant of the Old Norse colonies. Here grew up an active civiliza- tion, fostering the idea and ideals of independence, learning, literature, religion and brave deeds. Here the Old Norse race, language and spirit have been preserved to this day in their purest forms. The Icelanders are to this day Norwegians, and their literature is Norwegian. As Samuel Laing. the Icelandic scholar, says : "The sagas, although composed by natives of Ice- land, are properly Norwegian literature. The events, persons, manners, language, belong to Norway ; and they are produc- tions which are strongly stamped with the nationality of char- acter and incident." 46 Norwegian People in America The Faroes are a group of twenty-one islands, one hundred ninety miles northwest of the Shetland group and two hundred fifty miles southeast of Iceland. The area The Faroes Js five hundred and forty square miles. The population is eighteen thousand. The islands are mountainous, with thin, scanty soil and slight vege- tation. Trees can not grow there on account of the prevalent hurricanes. The islands were discovered and settled by the Norsemen in the middle of the ninth century. They were held by Norway until 1380 and have been a Danish possession ever since. "The people are of Norse descent — a vigorous, laborious, loyal and religious race, belonging to the Lutheran Church." They speak a dialect only slightly different from the Old Norse spoken by the original colonists one thousand years ago. Iceland is an island lying up to the Arctic Circle, six hundred miles west of Norway and two hundred miles east of Green- land. It is reckoned as a part of Europe, Iceland but geographically it belongs rather to Amer- ica. It has an area of 39,756 sq. miles, and, at present, about 100,000 people. It is a land of high mountains, great volcanoes, frequent earthquakes, vast lava deserts and glacial snowfields, nr'ghty waterfalls, hot springs and geysers, cold climate and rocky soil. Only one-sixth of the land is habitable. According to Sturla's "Landnamabok," Naddod, a Norseman, discovered Iceland in 860 A.D., having lost his way while on a voyage to the Faroes. According to Hauk's "Landnamabok," Gardar, a Swede, first discovered the island (in 864). Accord- ing to Ari Thorgilsson's "Islendingabok," Floke Vilgerdsson, a Norseman, sailed to Iceland from the Hebrides in 870 and gave the island its present name. When Harald the Fairhaired in 872 became sole master of Norway, many of the dissatisfied chieftains sought new homes. Some went to Normandy, others to Great Britain, while perhaps the greater number went clear to Iceland. First to that wonderful island went Norsemen breakinsr the fetter ; With them from Norway was liberty sent, There to establish it better. The island had already been occupied by a few Celtic Christians, who fled at the coming of the Vikings. That the immigration to Iceland was popular can be seen from the fact that King Harald was forced to place a heavy tax in gold upon everyone who set sail for Iceland, fearing that Norway might be depopulated. For nearly a century the colony received fresh additions from Norway. Anderson and Bryce estimate The Viking Expeditions 47 that the population at the close of the period of settlement (about 950) was 50,000; Hermann places it at 60,000; while Gjerset, Munch and Sars place it more conservatively at 25,000. The story of Iceland is very interesting. There were many settlements, each one at first independent of the others. They tried naturally to reproduce as far as possible the Norwegian social organization and laws, with such modifications as they found necessary. They founded a constitutional republic, "a home of the brave and a land of the free," nine centuries be- fore the American Declaration of Independence. In 1874 Ice" landers celebrated a millennial of their republic just as we in 1876 celebrated a centennial of ours. They had their legislative as- semblies, notably the Althing, in which all took part. They had their courts and codified laws. They were small in numbers, but great in organized freedom. King Olaf Trygvasson, with true crusading zeal, tried to make Norway and its colonies accept Christianity, and succeeded, in the year 1000, the year of his death. In 1262, after nearly four centuries of freedom, the island was annexed by Norway. In 1380, it became a Danish possession. During the Napoleonic wars it was captured by Great Britain, but ceded back to Denmark in 1815. Since 1814 there has been a constant agitation and struggle for home rule and complete independence. In 1874, the Icelanders obtained a new constitution, and in 1918, by the Danish-Icelandic Act of Union, Iceland was made a free and sovereign state united with Den- mark by a common king. Since 1550 the Lutheran faith has prevailed. The Icelanders are especially noted for their discovery and colonization of Greenland and their unique literary outout. Con- cerning their work in Greenland, a word will be said in another place. As to their work in literature, their glory is like that of the morning sun. From 875 to 1100 there was a great outburst of oral literature. "Most of the military and political leaders were also poets, and they composed a mass of lyric poetry .... much of which has been preserved. Narrative prose also flour- ished, for the Icelander had a passion for story-telling and story- hearing. After 1100 A.D. came the day of the writers. These saga-men collected the material that for generations had passed from mouth to mouth, and gave it permament form in writing. After 1250 came a rapid and tragic decline. Iceland lost its independence, becoming a Norwegian province. Later Norway, too, fell under alien rule Pestilence and famine laid waste the whole North ; volcanic disturbances worked havoc in Iceland. Literature did not die, but it fell upon evil days." The chief collectors and saga-writers were Ssemund Sigfus- son (1056-1133) and Snorri Sturlason (1178-1241.) Ssemund collected the poems that floated among the people, catching many 48 Norwegian People in America of them from the lips of the scalds. His collection is known as the Elder or Poetic Edda. Snorri wrote a Younger, or Prose, Edda, which is a scientific treatise of scaldic versification and a survey of Norse mythology. Both of these men were also historians — saga-men. Of Saemund's historical work nothing has been preserved. Snorri's "Heimskringla" is a collection of sagas, telling the story of the kings of Norway from the earliest times to 1177. It is one of the greatest history books in the world, masterful in outline and perspective, exact in description and reliable in details. The saga literature treats not only of Norway and Iceland, but also of the Norse settlements in France, England, Scotland, Ireland, the Shetlands, Orkneys, Hebrides, Faroes, in Green- land and America. "It is in these Norwegian sagas," says Samuel Laing, "not in Tacitus, that we look for the origin of the political institutions of England." And it is in these sagas that we find the first accounts of the coming of the Norwegians to America. 4. Their Place in History The Viking expeditions occupy at least one-sixth of the cen- turies since Christ. During these centuries the Scandinavians were everywhere. They ventured out upon the surging main ; in open boats, without compass, they sailed across the untried seas. Wherever they went they scattered seeds of independence and industry, liberty and law, vigorous literature and refined culture. No country today has a higher percentage of literacy than have the Scandinavian lands. In Scandinavia there is full religious toleration, yet nearly everyone is a Protestant ; 99 per cent are Lutheran. Norway has never seriously tried to establish a far-reaching empire with far-flung battle lines. It has been the peculiar genius of the Norwegians to give themselves to the countries which they have colonized rather than to make these colonies a part of a Norwegian empire. In Russia, therefore, the Norwe- gians have become Russians ; in Italy, Italians ; in Spain, Spaniards; in France, Frenchmen; in England, English; in Scot- land, Scotch; in Ireland, Irish; in Iceland, Icelanders; in Can- ada, Canadians ; in the United States of America, Americans. Everywhere they have given themselves wholly, and of their culture freely, to the lands of their adoption. It is impossible to escape noticing that the countries that were settled by Norsemen assumed leadership — Great Britain and France, in particular. Again, it is noticeable that within these countries it is the sections occupied by the Norsemen that came to the front. Thus, Normandy in France, Northumbria in England, Dublin in Ireland, etc. William the Conqueror was a great-grandson of Rolf Ganger, the Norwegian founder of The Viking Expeditions 49 Normandy. When he made a conquest of England, he met with a most serious opposition from the men of Northumbria, col- onists of his own race. He drove them by fire and sword over the border into Scotland, where their influence has been felt in the heroic struggles of a William Wallace, and a Robert Bruce, and is reflected in the persevering character of the people. The influence of the Normans upon Great Britain is ad- mitted by all historians to have been very great. The Normans were Northmen, their character like their In Great Britain name being somewhat softened by intermin- gling with the French. Concerning the in- fluence of the other Northmen on Great Britain; Samuel Laing, an Englishman, says in part : "All that men hope for of a good government and future improvement in their physical and moral condition, all that civilized men enjoy at this day of civil, religious and political liberty — the British constitution, repre- sentative legislature, the trial by jury, security of property, freedom of mind and person, the influence of public opinion over the conduct of public affairs, the Reformation, the liberty of the press, the spirit of the age — all that is, or has been, of value to man in modern times as a member of society, either in Europe or in America, may be traced to the spark left burning upon our shores by the Norwegian barbarians." Aug. J. Thebaud, an Irishman, says : "Endowed with all the characteristics of the Scandinavian race, deeply infused with the blood of the Danes and the Northmen, she (England) has all the indomitable en- ergy, all the systematic grasp of mind and sternness of purpose, joined to the wise spirit of compromise and conservatism of the men of the far Nor^th. She, of all nations, has inherited the great power of expansion at sea, possessing all the roving pro- pensities of the old Vikings, and the spirit of trade, enterprise and colonization of those old Phoenicians of the Arctic Circle." Paul H. Mallet, a Frenchman, writes : "Is it not well known that the most flourishing and celebrated states of Europe owe originally to the Northern nations whatever lib- In Continental erty they now enjoy, either in their constitution Europe or in the spirit of their government? ... Is not this, in fact, the principal source o£ that courage, of that aversion to slavery, of that empire of honor which characterized in general the European nations ; and of that moderation, of that easiness of access, and peculiar atten- tion to the rise of humanity, which so happily distinguish our sovereigns from the inaccessible and superb tyrants of Asia ? The immense extent of the Roman Empire had rendered its con- stitution so despotic and military, many of its emperors were 50 Norwegian People in America such ferocious monsters, its Senate was become so mean-spirited and vile, that all elevation of sentiment, everything that was noble and manly, seems to have been forever banished from their hearts and minds. . . . But Nature has long prepared a rem- edy for such great evils, in that unsubmitting, unconquerable spirit with which she has inspired the people of the North; and thus she made amends to the human race for all the calamities which, in other respects, the inroads of these nations and the overthrowing of the Roman Empire produced. The great pre- rogative of Scandinavia, and what ought to recommend its in- habitants beyond every people upon the earth, is, that they afforded the great resource to the liberty of Europe, that is, to almost , all the liberty that is among men. The North of Europe is the forge of mankind. It is the forge of those instruments which broke the fetters manufactured in the South. It was there those valiant nations were bred who left their native climes to destroy tyrants and slaves, and so to teach men that Nature having made them equal, no reason could be assigned for their becoming dependent but their mutual hap- piness." In speaking of the Icelandic literature, Pliny Miles s