How Does Tape Storage Work?

Magnetic tapes are palm-sized cartridges that can read and write data to tape. One tape can hold a large amount of data. FUJIFILM's LTO Ultrium 9 cartridge, for example, can hold 45 TB of compressed data or 18 TB of uncompressed data. To understand how much data that really is, consider this: 45 TB is equivalent to the data housed on 720 iPhones with a 64 GB capacity.

Tape can be used by organizations of all sizes for archival data storage. But large scale data centers, cloud providers and large corporations can rely on it for data management at scale — archiving and protecting extreme amounts of data that might be required for future endeavors or tasks.

How Google Backs Up the Internet

Typically, organizations use tape to archive cold data. This is data that doesn't need to be accessed, edited or overwritten in the normal course of business and must simply be saved for the future. The set-it-and-forget-it nature of tape lets organizations amass enormous banks of data as needed while expending minimal resources.

Tape Scores Points in 4 Data Management Impact Areas

Cost

You could be wasting money every day if you store cold data on a hard disk or in the cloud. HDD storage solutions are great for holding information you need to access on a regular basis. But once the data goes cold, why keep it on a spinning disk 24/7? Cold data sitting in the cloud means you'll pay for storage and accessibility at a much higher price than on-premises tape systems.

Find out how much you can save by leveraging tape for cold data. Use the calculator tool to estimate savings.

See How Much You Are Losing By Not Storing Cold Data On Tape

Security

Ransomware attacks are on the rise. According to Statista, 2023 saw approximately 73% of businesses victimized by ransomware attacks — an uptick of about 2% compared to 2022.

Stop Ransomware. Secure Your Data with a Tape Air Gap.

Data Management at Scale

Your data is growing at an exponential rate. You can choose to scale up your expensive on-premises or cloud solution. Or you can turn to tape, offloading cold data into safe, accessible storage to free up your other resources and make active data more manageable for systems and teams.

Whitepaper: Strategic Solutions for Data Storage at Scale

Learn how leveraging hybrid storage solutions can help solve massive data storage challenges.

Learn more about Hybrid Storage Solutions

Sustainability

Traditional drive-based, on-premises solutions take resources — a lot of them. Every day you hold archival data in these formats, you're needlessly increasing your carbon footprint — an important consideration for large corporations and other organizations that may need to keep ESG factors and compliance in mind. Moving sensitive cold data to tape storage helps increase sustainability and reduce carbon footprint.

Whitepaper: Improving Information Technology Sustainability with Modern Tape Storage

Discover tape’s role in trimming the environmental impact of data storage in this whitepaper from Brad Johns Consulting

Learn More about Sustainable Tape Storage

We recently hosted a virtual roundtable discussion entitled, “Is Tape Really Eco-Friendly?” with two end-users, Jason Adrian from Microsoft Azure and Vladimir Bahyl from CERN. TCO and energy consumption expert Brad Johns and Shawn Brume from IBM joined the discussion to share their observations and perspectives.

Is Tape Really Eco Friendly? - A Virtual Roundtable Event Presented by Fujifilm