Whether you’re doing DIY art projects, teaching a class, or conducting a meeting, magnetic tapes can make it much more hassle-free for you! These self-adhesive tapes help you magnetise lightweight objects such as nametags, labels, letters, etc. If you’re looking for the best magnetic tape brands, read on to find something worth purchasing.

How Do We Choose the Best Magnetic Tape Brands?

Choosing the right magnetic tape is quite easy, and you can do it online with some guidance. In India, you can buy good quality magnetic tapes ranging from Rs 199 to Rs 3,500 and more. Here are some factors we considered before curating this list.

Material

Here, we have added products made with high-quality materials such as plastic and more. These dual-layered tapes are easy to peel and use. While most of the tapes will stick only to steel surfaces, we’ve also added tapes that will stick to wood and metal surfaces without fail.

Adhesive Quality

It’s essential for magnetic tapes to have a strong adhesive to be able to hang objects properly. All the products mentioned in this list come with excellent adhesive quality to stick lightweight items.

List of the Best Magnetic Tape Brands in India

1. Hygloss

Hygloss is a popular retailer of classroom, art, and crafts products in India. The brand manufactures everything from name tags, letters, office magnets, paint, glitter, and puzzles to magnetic tapes, paint brushes, and more.

Prominent Features of the Hygloss Self Adhesive Magnetic Tape:

Strong magnetic tape roll that can be used to make art and crafts

The tape is 300 ft long and 5 inches wide

Works well to hang lightweight objects on magnetic surfaces such as desks, lockers, or refrigerators

Weighs 0.52 kgs

Pros:

Ideal for people between the ages 3-100 years

Easily sticks on magnetic surfaces

Great for educational purposes

Cons:

Can turn quite fatal if inhaled or swallowed

Why We Picked the Hygloss Self Adhesive Magnetic Tape?

If you’re looking for a fun way to teach in class or incorporate art and crafts in your kids, this magnetic tape is a must-have! This solid tape can be used to hang lightweight objects on different magnetic surfaces. Moreover, you can also use this tape to decorate your spaces.

2. ProMag

If you’re looking for magnetic tape to hang lightweight objects at home, workplaces, or schools, ProMag is a brand that you must check out. It offers a range of affordable and good-quality products that are easily available on Amazon.

Prominent Features of the ProMag Magnetic Tape:

A high quality magnetic tape that works well on chalkboards, whiteboards, fridges, and more

Transparent tape that leaves no residue whatsoever

Dimensions – 16.5 x 14 x 2.5 cm

The roll weighs 227 grams

Pros:

Very easy to use

Can be used to stick lightweight objects on surfaces

Thin but does its job well

Cons:

Might lose its adhesive after a while

Why We Picked the ProMag Magnetic Tape?

This ProMag Magnetic Tape is ideal for kitchen, home, office, and education purposes. Since the tape is transparent, it leaves no traces and residues once taken off. You can easily stick papers, notes, recipes, letters, and more with this tape on multiple surfaces.

3. Baumgarten’s

Baumgarten’s art and stationery products are quite a hit in the Indian online market. The brand makes everything from magnetic tapes to paper punching machines that are priced not only reasonably but also very durable.

Prominent Features of the Baumgarten’s Magnetic Tape:

A high-quality magnetic tape that will stick to any steel surface effortlessly

You can easily cut it with scissors and even draw on it with permanent markers

The tape is totally reusable and comes off the surface without leaving any residue

The roll is 50ft long and weighs 2.13 kg

Pros:

Doesn’t scratch surface

Can be reused

Will grip on the surface without any hassle

Cons:

Quite expensive

Why We Picked the Baumgarten’s Magnetic Tape?

The Baumgarten’s Magnetic Tape works really well for labelling metal shelvings due to its durable nature. The tape easily sticks to a steel surface and can be used to hang objects. It also doesn’t leave any residue after use so a great purchase altogether!

4. Imprint

If you’re looking for affordable yet high-quality stationary and art products in India, Imprint can be your go-to option. Whether you want notebooks, folders, magnetic tapes, rubber bands, dusters, paper packs, and more, this brand has a lot to offer!

Prominent Features of the Imprint Magnetic Tape:

Soft double-sided tape with one side magnet and one side sticky substance

Can be used to stick objects on magnetic surfaces, art, and crafts

The tape roll is 3 feet long and 1 cm wide

Pros:

Can be easily cut with scissors

Perfect for DIY craft

Very affordable

Cons:

The sticky substance might wear off quickly

Why We Picked the Imprint Magnetic Tape?

This magnetic tape is ideal for kids who need it for art, craft, and DIY work at home or school. It’s quite thin and can handle lightweight objects. All in all, a good purchase for use at home.

5. Mastervision

Mastervision is a popular visual communications and stationery brand that hails from the US. It was established more than four decades ago and has its headquarters in Coconut Creek, Florida, US. You can find good-quality writing boards, planning boards, easel pads, magnetic tapes, and more.

Prominent Features of the Mastervision Magnetic Adhesive Tape Roll:

Strong tape that can be used to create labels and gets stuck to magnetic surfaces easily

It can be used to hang pictures, cards, letters, etc

Dimensions – 1 inch x 4 feet

Has a super sticky adhesive which can be removed whenever you want

Pros:

No adhesive residue

Keeps the tags, pictures, nametags, etc., in place

It can be easily cut with scissors

Cons:

Not suitable for stacking heavy objects

Why We Picked the Mastervision Magnetic Adhesive Tape Roll?

This magnetic tape by Mastervision has a super sticky adhesive which makes it an amazing option to go for. Use it on your printed labels, letters, notes, and more to make life easy!

Moreover, We have also created an amazing list of top Multimeter brands available online in India. Do check it out and let us know if you find it helpful.

6. Kandle

Kandle offers a range of kids’ toys, stationery, and art products. The brand is quite popular on Amazon and has a strong customer base online.

Prominent Features of the Kandle Self Adhesive Magnetic Strip Tape:

High-quality tape with a strong adhesive that lasts for a very long time

Can be used at home, office, and schools to hang labels, letters, and other lightweight objects

The strong adhesive sticks to a steel surface easily

Dimensions – 2 cm x 1 m

Pros:

Can be easily cut with scissors

Works perfectly on flat surfaces

Soft and flexible tape

7. Lifekrafts

Lifekrafts is a Bengaluru-based brand that makes human safety and wellness products. Some of its bestsellers include window nets, door nets, baby crib nets, magnetic tapes, and more. All of its products are high-quality and true value for money.

Prominent Features of the Lifekrafts Nylon Self Adhesive Hook Tape Roll:

Strong magnetic tape that comes with a good-quality adhesive

You can easily cut the tape according to the size you want

Will work on metal, aluminium, wood, and UPVC surfaces

Pros:

Comes with thumbnails

Has multiple sizes that you can choose from

Strong adhesive and is reusable

8. Oddpod

Oddpod is a leading stationery and lifestyle brand that was founded in 1966 by Mr Bhawarlalji Jain. It retails top-notch pens, tissue paper holders, mobile stands, magnetic tapes, and more that are affordable.

Prominent Features of the Oddpod Self Adhesive Magnetic Strip Tape:

Quality magnet tape that can easily bear lightweight objects

Doesn’t curl or fold while cutting or sticking

It can be used to hang photographs or for art and craft purposes

Dimensions – 2 cm x 1 m

Pros:

Very easy to cut with scissors

Doesn’t curl while cutting

Cons:

Weak adhesive

9. Kraftmasters

Kraftmasters is a brand quite popular amongst art and craft enthusiasts in India. It sells boards, whiteboards, magnetic tapes, pens, ink, and more that you can easily buy on Amazon.

Prominent Features of the Kraftmasters Magnetic Tape:

Easy peel and stick tape that has a strong adhesive

Will easily stick to any steel surface and can be used to hang lightweight objects

Dimensions – 2 cm x 1 m

Pros:

Very convenient to use

Will quickly stick to steel surfaces

It can be used in kitchens, schools, garages, and offices

10. My Party Suppliers

My Party Suppliers offers a range of high-quality party decorations, toys, candles, tapes, etc. If you’re looking for solid magnetic tapes, you must check out this brand.

Prominent Features of My Party Suppliers Magnetic Tape:

Premium magnetic strips for DIY, art, and craft purposes

It can be used on cars, fridge doors, labels, and more

Has a low-length self adhesive which can easily bear lightweight objects

Can be used on both metal and non-metal surfaces

Pros:

It can be easily cut using scissors

Good medium-strength tapes

Cons:

It might lose stickiness after a while

Final Word

Magnetic tapes are a fun and easy way to do DIY art projects at home. In this article, we have listed some of the best magnetic tape brands in India based on their material, adhesive quality, and more. While we really like the products from Hygloss, ProMag, and Baumgarten’s, let us know which ones you like the best.

FAQs

What are the best magnetic tape brands in India?

You can find good quality magnetic tapes in brand such as ProMag and Mastervision. These brands makes thick tapes that can be used for lightweight and slightly heavy objects.

Do magnetic tapes work?

Yes, magnetic tapes are a great way to keep things organised and are widely used in art and craft projects, offices, garages, and classrooms.

Why Trust CashKaro Reviews?

Highly seasoned and qualified researchers at CashKaro work hard to supply you with the greatest market advice accessible online. To build a list of products you can trust, we examine numerous products and compare them based on a range of characteristics. We hope our recommendations of the best magnetic tape brands have helped you out. We genuinely hope that this list will aid you in making an informed judgement.

Sanskriti Mathur

Sanskriti is a creative content writer working as a Senior Content Associate with CashKaro since 2021. She has 3+ years of experience producing buzz-worthy blogs and social media posts. She specialises in writing product descriptions and lifestyle blogs and curating quality brand listicles to help users make the right purchases. She also has great expertise on writing about major appliances, electronics, and is a keen audio tech enthusiast. She completed her graduation in Journalism and Mass Communication from Manipal University Jaipur. Although a full-time content savvy, she moonlights as a metal musician and has a profound inclination toward art, food, and travelling.