1. TAPE RECORDER & VIDEO CONFERENCING Sujata Mohapatra

2. TAPE RECORDER

3. MEANING A tape recorder is used to record sounds on magnetic tape which can be reproduced at will and as many time as required. An audio tape recorder, tape deck or tape machine is an audio storage device that records and plays back sounds, including articulated voices, usually using magnetic tape, either wound on a reel or in a cassette, for storage.

4. TYPES ELECTRICAL  Electric current flowing in the coils of the tape head creates a fluctuating magnetic field. MECHANICAL Modern mechanical recorders usually use a three-motor scheme

5. CHARACTERISTICS • Immediacy • Emotional impact • Authenticity • Conquest of time & space • One way communication • Audition • Needs & interest

6. RIGHT WAY OF MAKING A TAPE RECORDING Choose a room with proper acoustics. Locate the microphone input socket and plug in the microphone. It is advisable to use external microphone placed 25 to 30cm Away from the person whose voice is recorded. Press the record-button, speak into the microphone. Recording requires an assistant to switch the machine on & to monitor sound levels.

7. ADVANTAGES Recording can be erased and the tape can be reused. The tape recorder is easy to operate as it has only a few controls. The talks of well-known personalities can be recorded at a convenient place and brought to the school for replay to the student. For teaching music, phonics, oral reading, poetry and recitation’s etc. Tape recorder is of immense values.

8. DISADVANTAGES • There is no personal contact with the speaker. • Listening for a long time generally distract the learner. • It encourages passive learning. • It is costly and so all can not afford it. • It does not provide a practical or laboratory experience.

9. USES IN NURSING EDUCATION Audio tape recording can capture the feelings & experiences of patients, which makes it a good medium for adding interest to sessions on nursing care. Tape recordings serve as an interesting audio visual aid in classroom teaching. These recordings serve as good source of knowledge pertaining to the specific health area & clarify the concept.

10. VIDEO CONFERENCING

11. DEFINITION A video conference or teleseminar is the live exchange and mass articulation of information among several persons and machines remote from one another but linked by a telecommunications system.

12. HISTORY • Multiple user video-conferencing first being demonstrated with Stanford Research Institute's NLS computer technology (1968).

13. COMPONENTS VIDEO INPUT VIDEO OUTPUT AUDIO INPUT AUDIO OUTPUT DATA TRANSFER COMPUTER

14. CLASSIFICATION DEDICATED SYSTEM DESKTOP SYSTEMS

15. IMPACT ON HEALTH • Videoconferencing is a highly useful technology for real time telemedicine and telenursing applications. • Patients may contact health care personnel in emergency or routine situations. • All health care professionals can discuss cases across large distances. • Rural areas can use this tehnology for seeking health information, thus saving lives and making more efficient use of health care money. • Remote community, long-term care facility, or from a patient's home any person can communicate with the health professional.

16. IMPACT ON EDUCATION • Two way student teacher interaction. • Faculty members keeping in touch with classes while they are out of the station. • Researchers collaborating with colleagues at other institutions on a regular basis without loss of time due to travel; • Schools with multiple campuses collaborating and sharing professors • Schools from two separate nations engaging in cross-cultural exchanges.

17. ADVANTAGES • Significant Travel Savings • Improved Communication • Increased Productivity • Time savings • Convenience • Collaboration • Stronger relationships • Increased collaboration • Access to dispersed resource • Reduced environmental impact

18. DISADVANTAGES • Physical presence • High cost • Need of technical assistance • Need for electrical assistance • Need of computer knowledge • Less applicability for large group