Alas, Babylon written by Pat Frank is a classic novel set during the late 1900s in the US, where a nuclear war breaks out with the US against the Soviet Union, and the author captures the struggles the characters experience. In the novel, the war is based on a real war, labeled as The Cold war, that occurred from 1947 to 1991. The author tries to picture what it would be like if the Russians sent up a Sputnik, which was a satellite, into space. The citizens of the US saw this as a complication, because of the satellites spying on them. Based on real events that took effect in Hiroshima, Pat Frank fantasizes about what would happen if the war was to happen in the US instead of in Hiroshima. Throughout the novel, Frank describes the aftermath …show more content…

But Miss McGovern, she won’t want to leave. She stuck on you” (Frank 10). Basically, Missouri is stating that Lib McGovern has a little crush on Randy, because from Missouri’s point of view, Lib would not want to leave Randy. From this point in the book, the reader can see a sense of sympathy from Lib toward Randy starting to grow. Lib’s caring of Randy started before the war began. With this in mind, Randy and Lib’s love did not begin during the war, but before, when times were normal. This concludes that their love was not because of the fear of not finding someone to love, but the true kind of love they found each other on their own time. According to critic Joyce Hart, “They strengthen the men with their love”( Novels for Students 15). In this quote, Hart is saying that women play a key role in this novel. Without the women, the men would have no love or affection. The same goes for women, without a loved one’s love and affection, the women would feel empty. For example, Randy’s brother, Mark, was believed dead, due to him not returning from war. This caused grieving and hallucinating from Helen into thinking Randy was her husband, Mark. Helen was giving Randy a haircut, when out of the blue, Helen says,” Don’t push me away! You’re Mark! You can’t deny it! You’re Mark”(Frank, 222). In this quote, the reader can clearly see the conflict Helen is dealing with. According to Lib McGovern, since Helen was so used to Mark’s love, she is still learning how to live on without his love. Overall, the reader can see that without love, there would be insanity. In this case, if Randy and Lib did not love each other, they would not have a chance at