Alas, Babylon (Perennial Classics (Prebound)) by Pat Frank, David Brin

Published by Audible Studios, Perfection Learning on July 1st 2005

Genres: Classics, Science Fiction, Apocalyptic & Post-Apocalyptic

Pages: 323

Format: Audiobook

ISBN: 0756958687

ASIN: B004GX2FQO

Goodreads

The day after the bomb dropped the thousands of years of "progress" that had covered the treacheries and lusts of ordinary man with a thin veneer of civilization were dissolved and melted like snow on the desert's dusty face. Then--the law of the jungle reigned. But in the wreckage a few courageous survivors, men and women with the guts to have hope, were determined to build a new and better world on the ruins of their old. THIS IS THEIR STORY.

Buy on Amazon

Buy on Barnes and Noble

#AlasBabylon #NuclearHolocaust #PatFrank #Apocalypse #WillPatton @audible_com

OK…so a couple of weeks ago I reviewed a book filled with spies and espionage and scary possibilities. Today I’m reviewing a book where the possibilities become reality and the bad guys actually carry out their threats. The result? Mass devastation and loss of life and one of the few areas left relatively untouched is a little town in Florida. Alas, Babylon by the late Pat Frank attracted my interest because the fictional town of Fort Repose is in Florida, my current home state, and because Will Patton is a narrator I really like.

This is the way the world ends

Not with a bang but a whimper.

In the true spirit of what is likely T. S. Eliot’s most often quoted line, the war that brings the known world to its knees is triggered by an over zealous military pilot who is no doubt a victim of “short man syndrome” and who takes a cheap shot at an enemy plane. The shot runs amok and blows up a town on the Syrian coast. This accidental bombing is all the incentive the Russians need to launch an attack which levels the major cities of the United States. Just envision a scenario where the Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare suddenly finds herself the Chief Executive of the United States because those who are ahead of her in the line of succession are no longer with us.

Will Patton has the right voice for a novel whose setting is central Florida in the ’50’s. Not too Southern, but not at all urban as much of Florida is now. He is also able to do believable accents for other parts of our country when called for in the narrative.

This is an old book – originally published in 1959 – but it has so much relevance in today’s world. We have our share of crazies and blusterers who like to threaten and play “mine’s better” with their nuclear weapons but always seem to stop short of an actual attack. And we have more than our share of terrorists who are only limited by their lack of nuclear weapons. Who’s to say our enemies or even our “frenemies” won’t end our world because of a stupid mistake? Can this story possibly have a happy ending, you may ask? Alas, Babylon has what I would call a satisfying ending. I think this riveting and thought-provoking book will hold your attention to the very end.