ROBERTS, Joyce Irene age 90, of Urbana passed away peacefully at her home on Monday, February 14, 2022. She was surrounded by her children who were honored to be able to be by her side as her journey to her next life began. We rejoice in knowing she entered into heaven embraced by the arms of Jesus and happily reuniting with her husband on Valentine's Day. What a celebration was certainly had with her son, Glen, and the many dear loved ones who found their place in the Lord's Kingdom before her. She was born on September 19, 1931 in Urbana, Ohio to the late Peter S. Colbert and Ruth Colbert Bills. In addition to her parents, Joyce is preceded in death by her beloved husband, Raymond C. Roberts, who she married on August 26, 1949; a son, Glen William Roberts; siblings: Betty Jane Colbert, Robert Harold Colbert, Roger Elden Colbert, Richard (Mary) Colbert, Jerry Lee Colbert, Etoyle (Harold "Dusty") Channell; brothers and sisters in law: William (Ruth Ann Henry) Roberts, Barbara VanHoose, Elwood & Marcella Bean, Vicki Smith and Glenn Jordan. She leaves behind her children: David (Anna) Roberts, Linda Ball, Renee (David) Johnson, and Carol (Dave) Ream; 11 grandchildren; 22 great-grandchildren as well as a recent newborn great great granddaughter who was named after her to carry on a legacy of love and strength she represented to all who were blessed to know her. This brought her such joy and fortunately had the opportunity to hold this wee namesake before she passed. Joyce is also survived by her brother-in-law Raymond VanHoose; numerous nieces and nephews as well as her long and very special close friends: Patricia McKenzie, Pam Fleming and Mary Eaton. Joyce was very active throughout her life in various clubs and organizations including: Sigma Alpha Sorority, Beta Psi Chapter; member of the senior center, and special card club for over fifty years. She was very dedicated to her faith and was a member and Deacon at First Presbyterian Church of Urbana. A visitation will be held on Friday, February 18, 2022 from 10:00-11:00 a.m. at First Presbyterian Church of Urbana. Her funeral will begin at 11:00 a.m. also at the church with Rev. Tim West officiating. Joyce will be laid to rest at Oak Dale Cemetery. Memorial contributions in Joyce's honor may be made to: Ohio's Hospice, The Choir at First Presbyterian Church of Urbana, or Urbana's Senior Center. Arrangements entrusted to Walter & Lewis Funeral Home and condolences may be expressed to the family by visiting www.walterfunerals.com