See other formats

TGONY $4.95 YA A splendid book for every sports fan . . . Professional football, as millions of de- vout fans well know, has arrived. And here, for its mushrooming audiences of the 60 ? s, is a colorful, wonderfully readable history of pro football's great- est dynasty, the New York Giants, the team Tim Mara bought for $500 on a sunny afternoon back in 1925 and con- verted into the champions of the roughest, toughest game of all. Here are the great stars of four dec- ades of Giant teams: Hinkey Haines, Century Milstead and the mighty Cal Hubbard from the 20's; Benny Friedman, the great passer and field general in the day of the master runners, whom Mara bought an entire team to get and who re- paid his purchase price many times over; Mel Hein ("the greatest pro lineman in history"), Ken Strong and Ed Da- nowski who led Steve Owen's cham- pions to victory over the Bears in the famous 1934 playoff game on frozen Polo Grounds turf; Tuffy Leemans, Ward Cuff, and later AI Blozis and Bill Paschal who starred in the late 30^ and early 40'S; of NEW YORK by BARRY GOTTEHRER (Continued on back flap) St? 2 - V37b 148 00113 6 796.32 C~66-g 63-19^2 Gcrttehxer Trie Giants of New York kansas city lag public library kansas city, missouri Books will be issued only on presentation of library card. Please report lost cards and change of residence promptly. Card holders are responsible for all books, records, films, pictures or other library materials , checked out on their cards. © 1963 by Barry Gottehrer All rights reserved. This book, or parts thereof, must not be repro- duced in any form without permission. Published simultaneously in the Dominion of Canada by Longmans Canada Limited, Toronto. Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 63-16182 MANUFACTURED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA VAN REES PRESS • NEW YORK To Arthur, who couldn't wait Acknowledgments The author wishes to express his appreciation to the New York Giants past and present who have made this book possible. In writing a history that covers many years, many events, and many personalities, an author inevitably encounters con- flicts between fact and fancy. In writing The Giants of New York, this author has found several instances where facts have been obscured by printed fancies. To document this work, the author has relied on interviews with players and coaches and on game-by-game scrapbooks collected by John and Welling- ton Mara and Robert Frank, vice-chairman of the American Stock Exchange, whose father was part owner of the Giants until the early 1940s. Thanks are offered to Larry Klein, assistant sports editor of Newsweek Magazine, and the authors wife, both of whom patiently read the completed manuscript and offered sugges- tions; the Maras, general manager Ray Walsh, and publicity man Don Smith, all of the Giant organization; Jim Kensil and Patricia Moore of the National Football League office; and Dick McCann of the National Professional Hall of Fame in Canton, Ohio. The author offers thanks, too, for the following source material: the files of Newsweek and Sport Magazine; Pro Foot- ball by Dr. Harry A. March; My Kind of Football by Steve Owen (McKay); My Greatest Day in Football by Murray Goodman and Leonard Lewin (Macmillan); The Story of Pro Football by Howard Roberts (Rand-McNally); The Encyclo* 1 pedia of Football by Roger Treat (Barnes); The Forward Pass by Charlie Conerly and Tom Meany (Dutton); New York Giants by Don Smith (Coward-McCann) ; The Pros by Robert Riger and Tex Maule (Simon and Schuster); and Backseat Quarterback by Perian Conerly (Doubleday). B. G. 8 Contents Acknowledgments, 7 Introduction, 1 1 1 . Score One for the Elements, 1 7 2. T. J. and the Galloping Ghost, 24 3. First of the Wars, 39 4. Powerhouse in the Polo Grounds, 53 5. S. O. S. for Benny, 62 6. Convincer for Rockne, 71 7. The Biggest Giant of Them All, 85 8. Stout Steve Takes Over, 93 9. Strong — and Stronger, 101 10. God Bless Abe Cohen, 111 1 1 . And the Rookies Shall Lead Them, 1 24 1 2. Alphonse and the Duke, 1 34 1 3 . AA Almost All the Way, 1 46 14. "We Dont Need a Band," 155 15. The Field Goal That Started a Riot, 167 16. The Message Was Urgent, 178 17. The Sound of Drums, 1 86 1 8. The Short, Sad Career of Frankie, 1 99 19. Bottom and Partway Back, 209 20. The Umbrella Had Holes in It, 218 2 1 • Big Jim Answers the Call, 2 $2 22. It Beats Working in the Mines, 242 23. For Want of a Couple Inches, 253 24. The High Cost of Winning, 264 25. The Littlest Giant, 276 26. The Old Men and the T, 291 All-Time Records, 301 Index, 313 10 Introduction Politician Jim Farley, singer Martha Wright, jeweler Jules Glaenzer, comedian Phil Silvers, restaurateur Toots Shor, and author Quentin Reynolds have one passion in common. Along with 64,000 other New Yorkers, they have discovered there is nothing more exciting or exhilarating than spending seven Sundays a year— in rain or snow— cheering Y. A. Tittle's passes, Don Chandlers punts, and Sam Huff's tackles. They are New York Giant football fans. To status-conscious New Yorkers, nothing offers more status today than two season tickets on the 50-yard line for Giant games. It wasn't always this way. Back in 1925, it cost Tim Mara only $500 to buy a National Football League franchise in New York; yet, for years it was the poorest investment the shrewd bookmaker ever made. In the early days, the NFL was strictly a low-budget operation and the Giants did little to strengthen it. Players earned less than $100 a game, schedules and franchises were subject to change from one day to the next, and Mara couldn't even give his tickets away. In 39 years, time and television have changed the face of professional football. In 1963, more than 4 million fans will pay their way into NFL games, and players now aver- age $13,000 a season. Today, Mara's sons wouldn't sell the Giants for $6 million. In 1956, the last time they won the NFL championship, the Giants sold fewer than 8,000 season tickets. In 1963, they sold more than 50,000. In 1956, ticket brokers rarely handled Giant tickets; in 1963, they ask and receive $25 for a $5 seat. For the li second straight year, the Giants expect to sell every single ticket for every single home game. The struggle for Giant tickets has had its amusing moments. In one New York divorce case, a husband and wife amiably agreed on the estate, the children, and the property in one day, then battled for nearly a week over the disposition of two Giant tickets. This, said the judge, is a sad commentary on the moral fiber of people today. The wife was equally dis- turbed; not because of the judge's criticism, but because her husband had been awarded the tickets. One prominent New York corporation was able to obtain four season tickets through a young employee who happened to be a close friend of Tim Mara Jr., the secretary-treasurer of the Giants. Dissatisfied with the youngsters work, the com- pany decided to fire him, then realized the consequences. If he went, he was taking his four Giant tickets with him. Need- less to say, the young man is still with the company and, with four additional tickets, is progressing splendidly. Since 1958, death has been the only cause for discontinu- ation of a season ticket. To avoid disputes, the Giants have established a policy that offers first choice to the family of the deceased, but sometimes even this hasn't worked. Not too long ago, a long-time ticket holder dropped into the Coliseum Tower office to visit Jack Mara, president of the Giants. The visitor and a friend had been sharing two 50-yard-line box seats for a dozen years, and only three days before the friend had died. The problem: both tickets were in the dead man's name. "Mr. Mara," said the survivor, "I just wanted to let you know what my friend's last words to me were, 'Tell the Maras I want you to have my Giant tickets/ " To those who remember the days when the Maras hired press agents to give away thousands of seats every week, the miracle of the New York Giants is a realization of an Amer- ican dream. For millions of youngsters, hours and days are spent devising and playing make-believe games of football. Throughout the years, there have been dice football, card football, electric football, and dozens of others. Desks and notebooks have been filled with statistics and daydreams re- cording the achievements of Glenn Davis, Doc Blanchard, and hundreds of other Ail-Americans. 12 For most youngsters, the games end somewhere between the first kiss and the last report card. For Wellington Mara, the games have never ended. When he was nine, his father did not buy him another football game: he bought him the New York Giants. This is the story of Wellington Mara and his family and the thousand giants who have made the New York Giants one of the most successful dynasties in sports history. *3 Score One for the Elements 1 From Shor's to Nedick's, from Brooks Brothers to Klein's, from the New York Athletic Club to the 92nd Street YMHA, and from El Morocco to Smalls Paradise, professional football had captivated New York in 1962. In a sophisticated city of 7.8 million people, conditioned to yawn at the Yankees, mythicize the Mets, and virtually ignore the Rangers, Knickerbockers, and Titans, New Yorkers suddenly were fascinated by the New York Giants. The Giants had been popular before, draw- ing increasing crowds since winning the National Football League championship in 1956, but now, for the first time, they were the city's team and their season tickets were a status sym- bol. From the moment they clinched the Eastern Conference championship, their championship game with Green Bay at Yankee Stadium December 30 was the only sports event that mattered. At Madison Square Garden a few nights before the cham- pionship, more than 10,000 basketball fans ignored the pretty cheerleaders and the doubleheader to chant repeatedly, "Beat Green Bay/' On Fifth Avenue, stylish matrons decorated their mink coats with red, white, and blue buttons that read: Let's Go Giants. And on Broadway, speculators were asking and receiving $40 for a $12 seat. When the 18,000 remaining non- subscription tickets were snapped up within three hours after the Giants put them on sale, speculators' prices skyrocketed even higher—and hundreds of New Yorkers quickly made reser- vations in Pennsylvania, Connecticut, and New Jersey motels, where, for from $8 to $20, they could watch the championship 17 on 21 -inch television in rooms outside the 75-mile blackout area. By the afternoon of December 29, 24 hours before GB Day, only the players themselves seemed unaffected by the football hysteria. That morning the Giants had worked out at Yankee Stadium for the last time and now, in their rooms at the Hotel Roosevelt, they relaxed in small groups, playing cards, read- ing newspapers, watching television, studying playbooks and, strangely enough, discussing the weather, which was cold and supposed to get even colder. It was a long day, the longest of the season for the players, with little to do but wait and try not to think too much about tomorrow. It wasn't easy. The Giants had been thinking about this particular tomorrow for nearly a year. As champions of the Eastern Conference in 1961, they were a proud and confident team when they traveled to Green Bay for the title game. When they returned a few days later, they were beaten, 37-0, and humiliated. "None of us could forget that afternoon/' said Sam Huff, Giant middle linebacker. "We've been waiting for this second chance for a long, long t xme. The rematch was a game to excite any fan's imagination— the Giants' devastating passing attack and defense matched against the Packers' overpowering running attack and defense. The oddsmakers liked Green Bay by 6 14 points, but they had been wrong before. In his hotel room, halfback Frank Gifford complained about the New York newspaper strike, flipped through the pages of a Boston paper, and stopped at a headline: Packers Favored in Title Game. "How's the knee?" Gifford asked roommate Ralph Guglielmi, New York's second-string quarterback. "Still stiff," said Guglielmi, who had twisted his knee in the final game against Dallas. "I'm going to ring Y. A.'s room and see if they're ready for lunch." Down the hall, mammoth tackle Rosey Grier, dressed in undershorts and T-shirt, hummed "Night Train," drumming out the beat with his fingers on the dressing table. "I've been thinking of using it in my act," Grier, an off-season night club singer, told roommate Rosey Brown. "What do you think of it?" 18 Without waiting for an answer, Grier pulled himself up in bed and started singing. As an entertainer, Rosey Grier, 280- pounds of baritone, remained one of the finest defensive tackles in NFL history. In another room Allie Sherman, coach of the New York Giants, smoked a cigar, letting the smoke billow up around his head, and tried to relax. It was impossible. For Sherman, these were the worst hours. "We want this one," he told a writer. "We want it so bad we can taste it." For a small group of Giants, it was time for a Saturday after- noon ritual started by quarterback Y. A. Tittle in 1961. One Saturday, too lazy to walk crosstown to Downey's or Shor's, Tittle had dropped into the Red Raven, a small Italian restau- rant on 45th Street. Tittle had eaten a meatball sandwich that afternoon and undoubtedly would never have returned if the Giants hadn't won the next day. But Tittle, the most valuable Giant, was also the most superstitious, and the Red Raven soon became a pre-game ritual. The Saturday before the champion- ship game, Tittle brought Del Shofner, Jim Katcavage, Alex Webster, and Gifford along with him. "Anything to keep Y. A. happy/' said Gifford. "Most of us spent the rest of the day with our families and friends. I watched the late show, discussed automatics with Guglielmi, and fell asleep before one." The tension began to build the next morning. In a special dining room, the Giants gathered at 9:30 for steak, eggs, and a quick review of football. Calm but still not relaxed, Sherman carefully ran through the six running plays, the eight passing plays, and the four automatics the Giants would use against the Packers. Superbly conditioned and supremely confident, the Giants thought they were ready for anything. They changed their minds the moment they stepped outside the hotel. "We knew it was cold," said Gifford, "but the wind surprised the hell out of us. As soon as we saw how bad it was blowing, we knew we were in trouble." A chilling blast cut across Tittle's bald head and the Giant quarterback shuddered. He could hardly keep his feet. If this wind kept up, how was he going to control a football? By the time the Giants arrived at Yankee Stadium, weather conditions were even worse. The temperature had dropped to 18 and would drop even lower; the winds had risen to 35 miles 19 an hour and would rise even higher. It was a terrible day for the players, but it was a treacherous one for the fans. The un- lucky people who had not been able to purchase tickets created traffic jams on the Merritt Parkway and New Jersey Turnpike and watched the game in heated motel rooms. The 64,593 lucky ones who had been able to buy seats dressed in a colorful assortment of storm coats, ski outfits, and long winter under- wear and huddled together in Yankee Stadium, sharing blan- kets, bottles, and total discomfort. Amazingly, only 299 fans who had bought seats decided to stay at home. "I almost lost all my toes one winter in Korea," said a New York commercial artist who watched the championship game from the open bleachers, "but that was nothing compared to the playoff game. My hands and feet were frozen, my teeth were chattering, I was convinced my nose and ears were going to fall off, and the damn game hadn't even started yet." If a day were ever designed for a football team, December 30, 1962, was tailor-made for the Green Bay Packers. The weather had reduced the game to its elemental state where the Giants' passing was futile, and violence and viciousness dominated play on the frozen field. The elements took over from the opening kickoff. Three times, Willie Wood, Green Bay's kickoff specialist, set the ball on the T, and three times the winds blew it off. Finally, with a teammate holding the ball, Wood booted deep into Giant territory. The pattern of the game was established almost immediately. The cold numb- ing his fingers, the wind blowing his passes off target, Tittle realized he couldn't throw long and was forced to rely on his running. Matched against the brute strength of fullback Jim Taylor, who stood up against one of the most severe poundings a back has ever received, the Giants could not win on the ground. Yet in the end, the 1962 NFL championship game was de- cided not by the weather, but by the breaks—and the Packers got all of them. Green Bay fumbled five times and recovered five times. New York fumbled twice and lost the ball twice. "Somebody up there must really like you when you can't do anything wrong," said defensive end Andy Robustelli. "They're a good football team but everything went their way." After Jerry Kramer kicked a 26-yard field goal to give the so Packers a 3-0 lead in the first quarter, the Giants started to drive. With a third down and 2 yards to go on his own 46, Tittle completed three straight short passes for a first down on the Packer 15. Faking a hand-off to Webster, Tittle dropped back into his pocket and spotted right end Joe Walton stand- ing all alone in the end zone. It was a perfect call and a perfect pass— except for one thing. Middle linebacker Ray Nitschke powered his way through the Giant blockers and just managed to deflect the ball with his right hand into the arms of teammate Dan Currie. By the margin of a finger, the Giants had lost a certain touchdown, one that would have changed the entire complexion of the game. Throughout the remainder of the first quarter and all of the second, it was a bruising, brutal battle of the lines. Time and time again, Green Bays Jimmy Taylor battled headfirst into the New York line, elbowing and kicking his way for a few extra yards. And time and time again, Huff and his team- mates battered Taylor to the ground, punishing him savagely. "Taylors a lippy guy," said Giant linebacker Tom Scott. "He takes it as a personal insult if you tackle him. He thinks the guy who hit him has challenged him and the next time you try to stop him he's going to make it hurt you/' On one play, Taylor went down under a half-dozen Giant tacklers and staggered to his feet, holding his stomach, blood pouring from his arm and his tongue. On another, he went down but bounced up. "I had my arms around him," said Giant tackle Dick Modze- lewski, "and all of a sudden I felt a terrible pain. Taylor bit me. The Giant ballcarriers were not in Taylors class. Late in the second quarter, Phil King was hit hard and fumbled, and Nitschke recovered on the Giant 28. On the first play, half- back Paul Hornung completed a wobbly pass to flanker Boyd Dowler on the 7. On the second, Taylor faked a plunge into the left side of the Giant line, drawing Huff out of position, then cut back through a big hole in the middle to go over for the touchdown without being touched. "That was the only time all day they didn't kill me," he said. "It felt funny." By half time, the weather had become unbearable. The temperature, falling below 10 degrees, was so cold that one 21 movie cameraman suffered severe frostbite, and the cameras had to be thawed out over open bonfires in both dugouts. The winds, swirling dirt through Yankee Stadium at 35 and 40 miles an hour, tore the American flag in center field to shreds, blew the Packer bench across the field, and toppled a camera mounted on a midfield platform. "We knew we'd lost the best part of our attack when we couldn't throw long," said backfield coach Kyle Rote, "but we still thought we had a chance. We needed a couple breaks." The Giants got their only break early in the third quarter and made the most of it. At 7:26, defensive back Erich Barnes broke through and blocked end Max McGee's punt. Substi- tute end Jim Collier recovered near the goal line, rolled over, and New York suddenly trailed by only three points, 10-7. Fired up, their defensive line outcharging the Packers for the first time all afternoon, the Giants held and forced Green Bay to punt. It was a poor kick, but Sam Horner fumbled on the Giant 42, Nitschke recovered, and the Giant momentum died. Five plays later, Kramer kicked his second field goal, this time from the 29, and Green Bay led, 13-7. Tittle still wasn't finished. Giving up the long pass, he started hitting with his short one and, with five completions and two penalties, moved the Giants from their 20 to the Packer 18. Then, just when they seemed ready to move ahead for the first time, the Giants were penalized twice for holding and pushed back to their own 40. With Taylor repeatedly carrying for necessary first-down yardage, the Packers kept possession for nearly five minutes, scoring again when Kramer booted his third field goal for a 16-7 lead with 1:50 left. Yet even now, few fans left their seats. With the lights turned on, the Giants started one more drive, but once again the cold, the winds, and the Packer defense stopped them. The Green Bay Packers had won their second straight championship, but the victory belonged to the elements. "I don't remember ever being hit so hard," said Taylor, who gained 85 yards in 31 carries. "I bled all game. They really came to play." Taylor's tribute was fitting, but it did not satisfy the Giants. They had lost a game they had desperately wanted to win and they had lost without getting the chance to play their own 22 game. Tears mixed with anger as the Giants stripped off their uniforms for the final time in 1962. "They're thirty-six tough S.O.B.'s," said Huff. "But they were lucky." "We're still the better team," said Gifford. "The ball was like a diving duck," said Tittle, who had been held to only eighteen completions and 197 yards in 41 passes. "I threw one pass and it almost came back to me. The short ones worked, but the long ball broke up. We needed the long one." Sherman leaned back against his desk, his face a rosy red from the cold, his eyes a watery red from the defeat. "A lot of people said we were humiliated last year when they beat us, thirty-seven to nothing," said Sherman. "Well, there was no humiliation today. The boys vindicated themselves. They es- tablished themselves as pros. They're still my champions." It had taken the worst afternoon in playoff history to defeat the Giants of 1962. Stripped of their chief weapon, they had still battled fiercely and still almost won. Yet even in defeat, the Giants remained the toast of New York. They had come a long way in 38 years. *3 T. J. and the Galloping Ghost As a youngster on New York City's Lower West Side in the early years of this century, blond, pink-cheeked Timothy James Mara had no time for games. To help support his widowed mother and himself, he rushed from his morning classes at P. S. 14 to his afternoon newspaper route along Broadway. After a hurried dinner, he was at the Third Avenue Theatre every evening— working as an usher. "It just got to be too much for a thirteen-year-old," he later recalled, "so I quit school." Timmy Mara was ambitious. Delivering his newspapers to the St. Denis and Union Square hotels, he was fascinated by the color and confidence of the well-heeled bookmakers who flourished legally in those days of plenty. At fourteen, Timmy started working as a runner— collecting small tips if the bettor won or 5 percent commissions if he lost— and by the time he was eighteen he was taking book himself. He opened a bindery for legal manuscripts on Nassau Street, but, within a few months, he was doing more bookmaking than bookbinding. Affable, gregarious, and honest, he made friends and custom- ers easily; so easily that in 1921 he decided to close his success- ful downtown office and open a betting enclosure in the most exclusive section at Belmont Race Track. It was a bold and risky venture, but despite some early losses including $60,000 on a fillie named Sally's Alley in 1922— Mara survived to build one of the best businesses and reputations in New York. Win or lose, Tim Mara was always good for a smile and a joke. "Where did you get that one from?" he'd bellow to a pros- pective bettor. "If that animal wins, I'll give you my watch." 24 Intrigued by Tammany Hall politics and interested in box- ing promotion, Mara soon became known as a young man who could get things done. The beefy 6-footer knew the right people—in the Police and Fire Departments, In City Hall, in Albany—and even if he didn't have big money himself, he had good friends who did. One of Mara s friends was Billy Gibson, a sometime book- maker who also happened to be a fight manager. Gibson, who had managed lightweight champion Benny Leonard, now was representing Gene Tunney, and T. J. Mara wanted a piece of Tunney. It was a warm, sunny afternoon that first day of August, 1925, when Mara left his office in the Knicker- bocker Building for an appointment with Gibson. Delayed by a phone call, Mara arrived late, and Gibson already was involved in a conversation with Joe Carr, a Columbus sports- writer, and Dr. Harry March, a Canton, Ohio, football pro- moter. Carr, commissioner of a sprawling, haphazard 1 8-team organization called the National Professional Football League, and March, an advocate of postgraduate football, had been trying to convince Gibson to invest in a New York franchise. In its four seasons of operation, the league had been unsuccess- ful financially, Irregular In its scheduling and, with one rainy Sunday often putting a franchise out of business, extremely shaky in its structure. Yet Gibson still was interested. When he had taken Benny Leonard to fight in Akron five years earlier, the bout had drawn fewer than 6,000 people. Three days before the fight, a professional football game between Akron and Canton had drawn 18,000. Gibson had been so impressed that he had invested $15,000 in a New York pro football venture with Harvard Ail-American Charley Brick- ley— and had lost his $15,000. Gibson was still convinced pro football in New York was a good risk, but it was one risk he wasn't prepared to finance a second time. When Mara arrived, Gibson had just made up his mind to reject the proposition. "Say, maybe you'd be interested in this, Tim," he said, as soon as Mara had eased himself into a large leather chair. "These men here may have something you might want to buy." "What is it?" said Mara. 25 "A professional football franchise for New York," said Gibson. "How much?" asked Mara, who had never seen a football game, professional or college. "They want five hundred dollars for the franchise," said Gibson. "We could go into this together/' Mara still wasn't sold but Carr and March, both persuasive and knowledgeable, set about convincing him. "You'll prob- ably lose some money the first year or two," said Carr, "but after you're established, you'll be making big money. The future of pro football is tremendous." It was a decided gamble but Mara liked the odds. "Any franchise in New York has to be worth five hundred dollars," he said making out a check to Carr. "Just tell' me one thing. Now that I have a franchise, what do I do with it?" "Just leave that to me," said Dr. March. "That's my department." So, on August 1, 1925, Tim Mara, who had wanted a piece of Gene Tunney, wound up with a piece of the All-Collegian Professional Football Club, Inc., the New York franchise in the National Professional Football League. With Gibson serving as president and March as secretary, treasurer Mara soon dis- covered that his $500 bought a paper franchise and not a football team. To put a team on the field, he first needed a team, a coach, a field, and publicity— and to get these, Mara needed money. Most of his friends thought he had made a foolish investment and refused to become involved financially, but Mara was able to convince Matty Frank, a real-estate speculator, and one or two others to buy shares in the corpo- ration. Renting the Polo Grounds, Mara decided to name his team after the baseball Giants, who played on the same upper Harlem field. With additional capital and a stadium that could hold 70,000, March, a white-haired, pipe-smoking physician who preferred pro football to medicine, went to work immediately. He hired little Bob Folwell, a fiery former wrestler whose vocabulary had proven too salty for the Naval Academy and several other colleges, as the Giants' first coach. To attract New York's sophisticated sports fans, the Giants needed big- name college stars, and March and Folwell got them. Their 26 first ballplayer was Dr. Joseph Alexander, an All-American guard and center at Syracuse in 1918-20 and one of pro- fessional football's finest linemen. A practicing physician in New York, 230-pound Alexander had been playing pro football on weekends for the last four years and eagerly ap- plied for the Giant coaching job. Told that Folwell had already been hired, Alexander still wanted to play for the Giants, but he did have one reservation. He wanted to play quarterback! "Well," said March, "lets see what happens. We were count- ing on you to play center." And for a flat $3,000 season con- tract, Alexander, the only Giant to wear a mustache and one of the few Giants to be signed for the full year, agreed to return to center. March then signed six other authentic All- Americans— ends Nasty Bob Nash of Rutgers and Lynn Bomar of Vanderbilt, guard Art Carney of Navy, tackles Century Milstead of Yale and Ed McGinley of Pennsylvania, and, the biggest name of them all, Jim Thorpe of Carlisle. To back them up, the Giants signed many of the best-known Eastern players— little Hinkey Haines of Penn State, handsome Jack McBride and Paul Jappe of Syracuse, Al Bednar, Joe Wil- liams, Wally Walbridge, and Matty Brennan of Lafayette, Dutch Hendrian of Pitt, Fred Parnell of Colgate, Heine Ben- kert of Rutgers, and Tom Myers of Fordham. The salaries ranged from $75 a game for all but a few of the linemen to $4,000 a season for Haines and Milstead. "This undoubtedly will be the finest eleven ever gathered," predicted Folwell. "I can't see how another pro team will be able to stay on the field with us." On paper, the new Giants did seem powerful— the line was the heavfe S . in pro football (averaging ?06) and ,he bacMeld was fast and versatile. Yet from their first practice in early September, the team was a problem team. With most of the players holding full-time jobs during the day, practices were crammed in after 4:30 every afternoon. Though they carried 22 men most of the season, the Giants, like every other pro team, rarely used more than one or two substitutes a game and then only in case of injury. With frequent injuries, the Giants often didn't have enough healthy players to practice. But the biggest problem was Jim Thorpe, the thirty-seven-year- 27 old Indian who had won the decathlon and pentathlon events in the 1912 Olympics and had since played professional base- ball and football. Hampered by a weak left knee and troubled by a fondness for alcohol, Thorpe signed a unique contract with the Giants. He was to be paid $200 a half game and to play no more than 30 minutes until later in the season when he had worked himself into shape. Nash, a fierce, rugged end and the Giants' first captain, had been playing pro football for four years and he, too, had slowed up considerably. Dr. Alex- ander, the strong man of the Giant line, was so busy with hospital duties that he often was late for practice and occa- sionally missed the sessions entirely. McGinley, at 185 pounds a lightweight among the giant Giants, lost interest quickly and quit to play with an Atlantic City team closer to his home in Philadelphia. Despite their troubles, the Giants seemed impressive enough in their opener—an exhibition in the rain at New Britain, Connecticut, against Ducky Pond's All Stars. Thorpe scored on a 3-yard plunge and McBride, Haines, and Jappe added touch- downs in the 26-0 victory. "We thought we were pretty good," said 2 1 5-pound, 6-foot- 1 Milstead, nicknamed Wally, Bozo, and Puny by his teammates. "Then we climbed aboard that damn boat for Providence/' The boat, carrying cargo in addition to the Giants, began to list badly in the North River, almost turned over near the Battery, and barely made it to Providence the next day. The beds were too small, the water was too rough, and the atmos- phere decidedly non-Spartan. Heine Benkert fell asleep with a cigar in his mouth and almost set the boat afire, and another player was drunk most of the trip. Only Jim Thorpe, tired and surprisingly tame, seemed untroubled, playing solitaire under a dim deck light. It was a sick football team that ar- rived in Providence, and lost to the Steamrollers, 14-0. Once Thorpe broke loose momentarily on a long run and showed his younger teammates a fleeting glimpse of what he once had been. "On that one run, Thorpe just gave that tackier the hip and that bimbo must have flown twenty yards," said dapper end Lynn Bomar. "It was just a sock with the hip. They rave about some players who have snaky hips. Well, 28 Thorpe has battering-ram hips and that's one heck of a lot better." Mara was not pleased with the Giants' performance. He had been counting on a good showing in Providence to help boost sales for the Polo Grounds opener against the Frank- ford Yellow Jackets of Pennsylvania. Already out $25,000, Mara placed ads in the New York newspapers, courted writers, hired publicity men and sound trucks, and distributed more than 5,000 free tickets every week. His prices— 50 cents, $1.10, $2.20, and $2.75— were scaled below the college games. But his tickets still weren't selling. The day before the home opener, the Giants traveled by train to Frankford, a Philadelphia club team, and lost their second league game, 5-3. Yet Mara still wasn't discouraged on the morning of October 18. It was warm and the sun shone brightly on the Mara clan as they stood outside Our Lady of Esperanza Church at 156th Street off Riverside Drive. They had just come from Mass and were on their way to the Polo Grounds. "Well," said Mara to a friend, "today's the day we see if I can put pro football over in New York." To root for their team, some 1,500 colorfully feathered Frankford Athletic Association fans had arrived early with a band and cheerleaders. By game time, the only thing missing was the paying customers. Of an estimated 25,000 in attend- ance, only half had paid their way in. While his seventeen- year-old son John handled one of tjie yard-markers, Tim Mara sat on the bench alongside his other son, nine-year-old Well- ington. The first time the Giants had the ball, Thorpe stum- bled off tackle for a short gain. Mara was delighted. Grinning, he turned to Bill Abbott, his publicity man, and said, "Now isn't that the greatest run you've ever seen?" But except for one drive late in the fourth quarter when McBride completed seven of nine short passes, the Giants never really threatened and lost the opener, 14-0. Thorpe couldn't even play his required 30 minutes. After stumbling unsuccessfully for a loose ball in the second quarter, Thorpe, his left leg encased in a heavy brace, limped to the sidelines and pitched forward onto a tarpaulin next to the Giant bench, thoroughly exhausted. At thirty-seven, he had played his final minute as a Giant. 29 Mrs. Mara was more disturbed about a cold Wellington had caught than she was about the attendance or the defeat. A bright, vivacious woman, she immediately came up with a novel solution— the Giant bench, placed on the south side of the field, was in the chilling shade from the second quarter on while the visiting teams bench remained bathed in sun. "She told Pop to switch the benches," says Wellington Mara. "It was either that or leave me home, so Pop switched benches. And they've stayed switched ever since." With Thorpe and Nash and a few other problem veterans no longer with the team, coach Folwell began to make prog- ress with his younger players— settling on a backfield of Hen- drian at quarterback, Haines and Benkert at halfback, and McBride at fullback. Hendrian did a masterful job calling plays and signals from the standard single-wing and punt formations, and the Giants finally began to play team foot- ball. Against the favored Cleveland Bulldogs, NFL champions in 1924, the Giants exploded to a 19-0 victory, but attendance dwindled to 18,000— with less than 10,000 paid. Thorpe might have been finished as a player but his name still was missed at the gate. Yet for many Giant fans, New York already had a new hero— slim, flashy Henry Luther Haines, a dangerous run- ner and agile receiver who scored twice against Cleveland. McBride and Hendrian, both triple threats, were more versa- tile, but 1 70-pound Haines was more spectacular. By the fifth week of the season, Giant newspaper ads read: Come See Hinkey Haines and His New York Football Giants At times during the 1925 season, the Giant organization seemed more a road-show comedy than a professional football team. Moments after the Cleveland game had ended, a minis- ter convinced a policeman to arrest Dr. March and Captain Hendrian for playing football on the Sabbath, a punishable offense in Pennsylvania but not in New York. The judge tossed the case out of court immediately but the minister, ob- viously a baseball fan, had March and another Giant brought to court on the same charge later in the season. Coach Folwell, a profane talker and a colorful character, drove to the Polo Grounds from his New Jersey apple orchard 3° every afternoon and returned home in confusion every eve- ning. At the start of the season, the Giant management had suggested that perhaps some of the players' wives would like to watch their husbands practice. A few of the wives showed up the first couple of afternoons, but by the end of a week, only Century Milstead's wife Mildred was left— and she never stopped coming. This wouldn't have created any problems ex- cept for one thing— the only passageway into and out of the Polo Grounds during practice was straight through the Giant clubhouse. So, to watch the Giants practice, Mildred Milstead would shut her eyes twice every day and, at a prearranged signal, run through the dressing room. Tough but fun-loving, Folwell usually added to his own problems. He loved to diagram his single wing and punt for- mations and seven-man diamond defenses on a blackboard in the dressing room, but, even more, he loved to down a few beers and recite poetry. Once started, he'd forget his single wing and offer a stirring recitation of "The Face on the Bar- room Floor." "Bob," commented Milstead, "was a diamond in the rough." In the next two games, both at the Polo Grounds, the Giants defeated the Buffalo Bisons, 7-0, and the Columbus Tigers, 19-0, but attendance plunged even lower. The night before the Columbus game, a policeman spotted two youngsters walk- ing across the bridge from the Polo Grounds to the Bronx carrying a large bag between them. "What do you think you're doing out here this late?" said the policeman. "Nothing," answered one of the boys. "We're just carrying some dirty laundry." "OK," said the policeman, "let's have a look." Inside the bag were 20 New York Giant scarlet and blue jerseys and eight pairs of cleats. The Giants got their uniforms back an hour before the game but Mara and the players would have been happier if they had never showed up. The weather was miserable and the crowd (less than 1,200 paid) was worse. To add to their problems, it was the roughest game of the season. On the first series of plays, Haines returned a punt 22 yards, was hit by a flying elbow, and left the game with a bloodied face and a 3 1 broken nose. Sixty minutes later, a dozen Giants and Tigers had been helped to the dressing room. McBride continued to dominate the Giant offense with bruising bucks, precise place- ments, and pinpoint passes, but rugged Joe Alexander turned in the play of the game. One of the first linemen ever to play a roving center on defense, Alexander picked off a pass against the Tigers, stiff-armed one tackier, and lumbered 50 yards for a touchdown. Mara, still a novice at football, was more appreciative of the brawling. "That was one hell of a fight," he said, "even if the shillelaghs were missing." To operate in New York each week, Mara needed at least $4,000 to cover Giant expenses and another $2,500 to $6,000 to meet visitors' guarantees, and, after checking the receipts of the Columbus game, he began to run out of capital and patience. Even if he didn't know football, he did know promotion— and he knew the Giants didn't have a personality he could sell. Haines was an exciting young athlete but New Yorkers ob- viously weren't going to pay their way to watch him. For the last three years, Mara had been hearing of the exploits of Harold (Red) Grange, the Galloping Ghost of the University of Illinois, who would be playing his final college game early enough in November to permit him to play at least four pro- fessional games if he could be signed. Mara was interested in Grange but there were complications. Grange would have to quit college without graduating before he could sign a pro- fessional contract. And more important, Mara, already losing four times as much money as he had ever thought possible, was hesitant about risking the $100,000 Grange reportedly wanted. Without Grange, the Giants continued to win, shutting out the Rochester Jeffersons, 13-0, before only 10,000 on Armi- stice Day with most of the fans turning out to see the high school preliminary game. Then they gained revenge over the Providence Steamrollers, 13-12, but lost ten men by injuries. Hendrian, who had lost four front teeth in an earlier game, was the most seriously injured— suffering a cracked rib. Haines, his nose hidden behind a leather mask, saved the victory with a brilliant piece of strategy in the final minute. Leading 13-10 with fourth down on his own 5, Hinkey, who did not want to give the Steamrollers another chance to score a touchdown or 3« a field goal, dropped back into punt formation. Instead of kicking, he touched the ball down in the end zone for a two- point safety. With the score now 13-12, the Giants ran out the clock without ever relinquishing the ball. Mara's corps of publicity men finally earned their salaries the following Sunday when Indian Joe Guyon, tackle Steve Owen, fullback Phil White, and the Kansas City Cowboys arrived in town. Dressing the Cowboys in rented chaps, boots, and ten-gallon hats in his Knickerbocker Building office, Mara then sent them on a tour of New York, distributing tickets on Wall Street and posing for pictures on horses in Central Park. The promotion paid off— 30,000 fans, the largest Polo Grounds crowd of the season, saw the Giants win their sixth straight, 9-3, on a McBride to Bomar pass and a field goal by Hendrian, who played almost a full game with his cracked rib swathed in two rolls of tape. Humorist Will Rogers presented the Cow- boys with a silver football before the game and offered "to lasso any Giant that tries to get away," but he apparently for- got his rope. Indian Joe Guyon, a Carlisle graduate with a degree in viciousness, hit little Heine Benkert with a crunch- ing shoulder tackle early in the game and roughed him up again on the next play. "He'd love to hurt a player and just do a war dance around him," said Milstead. "Lynn and I de- cided to teach him a lesson." A few minutes later, Guyon car- ried the ball off tackle. Bomar hit him high. Milstead hit him low. And Guyon was through dancing for the afternoon. To strengthen their backfield, the Giants bought fullback White from the Cowboys and signed Mike Palm and Bill Ken- yon, both assistant coaches at Georgetown. With 25,000 fans paying their way into the Polo Grounds to see Columbia play Syracuse, the Giants took the ferry to Staten Island for an exhibition game against the Stapleton team. It was supposed to be an easy afternoon for the Giants but the 7,000 Stape fans who rimmed the field at Thompson's Stadium expected a bloodbath. When one Giant lineman, a rough 215-pounder, missed a block early in the first quarter and stumbled out of bounds into the crowd, he suddenly felt a foot digging into his side. He looked up and spotted a red-faced fan getting ready to kick him again. The Giant didn't debate the issue. He got up quickly and raced back onto the field. From that moment 33 on, the Giants stayed clear of the sidelines. After winning 7-0 on the muddy field, the Giant players, their fists ready, walked close together in double file through the hostile crowd. "It was a matter of self-preservation," said one Giant. "Those people wanted to kill us/' Mara missed the excitement on Staten Island. Earlier in the week, he had secretly left New York with Billy Gibson and headed for Chicago. Mara had finally made up his mind— he desperately needed the Galloping Ghost and he was willing to pay for him. But he was too late. Early in the 1925 season, C. G. (Cash and Carry) Pyle, a movie theatre owner with big ideas, had signed Grange to a personal management contract and, immediately after Granges final game against Ohio State, he had convinced him to quit school and sign with the Chi- cago Bears for the rest of the season. To get Grange, the Bears almost had to give up their franchise, but Pyle finally relented. He settled for a 50-50 split— with Grange getting 60 percent of their share. Riding back to New York, Mara, who had lost out in signing the one man he thought could save his football team, still had one consolation: the Bears and Grange were scheduled to play in the Polo Grounds December 6. The Giants defeated the Dayton Triangles, 23-0, for their seventh straight victory after three losses, but everyone was thinking and talking about the Galloping Ghost. More than $45,000 in the red, Mara was very close to selling his franchise. "The only trouble," he said years later, "was where would you find anyone crazy enough to buy it?" He had put together an attractive and winning football team and New Yorkers had not supported it. Now, if Red Grange couldn't attract New York fans, he knew he was saddled to a loser. Despite a rain that fell throughout most of the week, the tickets sold faster than the Giants could print them. On the first day, they sold 15,000. Over the next two days, they sold 25,000 more. By Thursday, all 3,482 box seats had been sold, and 100 sportswriters from Albany to Chicago and Cleveland had wired ahead for credentials. For the first time in history, professional football was receiving page-one treatment in big- city papers and magazines. Every place Grange went, fans swarmed out to see him. In his first game as a professional, against the Chicago Cardinals on Thanksgiving Day, he drew 34 a capacity crowd of 36,000, then followed with 8,000 In a bliz- zard In St. Louis and 35,000 in Philadelphia. His next stop: the Polo Grounds. The Giants had traveled to Philadelphia to watch Grange play against Frankford and, on the train back, Folwell pre- dicted the Giants would win two touchdowns to one. The day before the game, New York was a slight 6-5 favorite. Mara, who had stubbornly refused to jump prices for the Bear game, remained calm as rain continued throughout Sat- urday. It was still pouring when Mara went to bed a little after midnight. Early Sunday morning, the phone rang. It was an associate. "Tim," he said. "I know it's early but just take a look out of your window." Groggy, Mara stumbled toward the window, pulled up the shade, and smiled. "That was the most beautiful sky I ever saw," he said. "It must be the Luck of the Irish." To those who knew him well, it was also the Luck of Mara, which would guide him through many a sunny Sunday in his years as owner of the Giants. "Pop used to give tickets to Wellington and me to give out at school/' says John Mara. "At first, no one knew what team we were talking about. Most of the time we couldn't get our friends to go even if we gave them a dozen free tickets. But the Grange game, that was different. Everyone wanted to see Grange." By noon, the 2,500 special police assigned to handle the crowds lost control of the mob pushing up 8th Avenue outside the Polo Grounds. Speculators darted out from behind pillars and hawked tickets for three and four times the regular price. By 1:00, nearly 70,000 jammed the upper and lower stands, filling the stairways, bracing against the rafters, and spilling out onto the emergency stands set up in the end zones and along the sidelines. Multicolored bunting and pennants of red, blue, orange, and black snapped in the wind as two bands entertained in a pre-game concert. Finally, ten minutes before 2, Mara cleared the bands and spectators off the field. As the bands blared "Hail, Hail, the Gangs All Here," the orange-and-black shirted Bears clomped down the stairs lead- ing from the center-field dressing room. Grange, his red hair and No. 77 highlighted by the sun, ran a few steps on the 35 muddy field and suddenly was engulfed by two dozen pho- tographers. "I'll have to sue that bum," said Babe Ruth, watch- ing from a lower box. "They're my photographers." In the dressing room, the usually talkative Giants were al- most totally silent. Gene Tunney had stopped by to wish them luck, and now coach Folwell began to run down his last- minute instructions. "We've got the defenses to stop Grange/' he said. "You know what they are. Now let's get out there." In their scarlet and blue jerseys, the Giants moved quickly and quietly down the stairs and started running through forma- tions. They huddled around Folwell and then, nervous and tense, trotted out to the center of the field. "It was amazing," said Art Carney, who had captained the 1923 Navy team, "but I never was this excited or tense before an Army-Navy game." Folwell's defenses worked perfectly—for the Bears. Designed to stop Grange by double-teaming him, the Giant defenses almost completely ignored the three other Bear backs— and Joe Sternaman and Laurie Walquist did the damage. Before the Giants could adjust, Sternaman scored twice in the first quarter and the Bears led 1 2-0. Midway in the second quarter, the Giants finally began to move the ball, and fullback White bucked over from the three to make the score 12—7. Almost everyone in the crowd of 72,000 had come to see Grange, and when he sat out the entire third quarter in his coonskin coat on the bench and didn't return at the start of the fourth, the fans began to chant: "Grange. Grange. We want Grange." Though one sportswriter suggested that Grange was too busy counting the house to play football, the Galloping Ghost returned late in the fourth quarter— just in time to gallop for his lion's share of the receipts. At the line of scrimmage, Giant quarterback Palm studied the situation— the ball was on the New York 18, second down, and less than five minutes to play. The Giants needed a long touchdown and Palm called a special pass pattern— McBride was to race deep to the left, Bomar, who was being double-teamed, was to go straight at the safety man and then take him to the sideline, and Palm was to delay and then drift over center for a pass from fullback White. With the middle cleared, Palm could go all the way. The play worked with only one hitch. White was rushed and 3 6 passed to McBride instead of Palm, who stood alone on the 25. McBride, his back to the ball, never saw the pass coming. Grange did— and brought it back 35 yards for a touchdown and a 19-7 Bear victory. For carrying the ball eleven times for 45 yards, completing two of three passes, catching one, and intercepting another in 33 minutes of football, Grange re- ceived $30,000 of the record $143,000— or, as several poorly paid writers pointed out, $1,000 a minute or $5,000 a point, "which makes him more valuable than Florida real estate," Mara, who only 24 hours before was deeply in debt, sud- denly was some $15,000 ahead for the season with still one more game with Grange and the Bears in Chicago. To show his gratitude, Mara canceled a Saturday game with an $8,000 guarantee in Cleveland against the Bulldogs so that the Giants would not have to play two days in a row and would be better conditioned to play the Bears. Then he hired three full cars on a special train and with his team, his friends, and his family, headed for Chicago. "Everyone wants to know how the players feel about Grange getting all that money," said Mike Palm. "We might have drawn forty thousand without him if we were lucky. With him, we drew more than seventy thou- sand. That means he's responsible for at least thirty thousand people and its only fair his reward is in proportion." Injured when Joe Alexander piled into him the week be- fore, Grange re-injured his left arm against Providence and decided not to play in the return against the Giants, the Bears' eleventh game in 22 days. Grange had already earned more than $100,000, and he and the Bears did not want to endanger their forthcoming West Coast exhibition tour. "We wanted to beat them at full strength," complained McBride. "Well be disappointed if he doesn't play." The Giants were disappointed but the fans were outraged— turning in more than 10,000 tickets at the gate and cutting the crowd to 15,000. Using only one substitute, the iron-men Giants scored on a 39-yard placement field goal by McBride in the first quarter and a 4-yard plunge by White in the fourth to win 9-0. It was a big victory, the Giants' eighth in twelve 1925 games, good enough for a fourth-place finish in the 20- team league, though not good enough to keep Mara from dip- ping into the red again. 37 But the Galloping Ghost had done his job the week befoie. He had kept T. J. in football and T. J. had kept the National Football League in New York. "I founded the Giants on brute strength and great ignorance," Mara said years later. "My players' strength and my ignorance. I was about ready to toss in my hand until Grange turned pro. He proved that pro foot- ball didn't have to be a losing poposition. That, more than anything else, kept me in football." 38 First of the Wars If Red Grange lit the spark to professional football in 1925, he nearly stamped it out in 1926. Still smarting from Grange's decision to drop out of the University of Illinois six months before graduation, intercollegiate officials exploded when Stan- fords Ail-American Ernie Nevers followed the Galloping Ghost into the pros. The professionals had stolen the top two senior football players in the United States. What was to stop them from raiding the juniors and sophomores next? Shaken and enraged, the National Collegiate Athletic As- sociation unanimously passed a rule barring anyone connected with professional football in any capacity from ever holding a college coaching, training, or teaching position. As the Na- tional Football League owners gathered in Detroit early in February of 1926, Mara sensed the storm. After increasing the league to 22 teams, raising the cost of a franchise from $500 to $2,500, and establishing a new player limit (minimum of 15 and maximum of 18), the owners set about making peace with the colleges. With Mara pressing the issue, the owners passed a rule making all college players ineligible for NFL competition until their class had graduated. Peace was won- derful, but it didn't last long. The owners momentarily had forgotten about Cash and Carry Pyle. Pyle was a man never content to rest on his last promotion. Son of a Delaware, Ohio, clergyman, the dapper marathon talker with the brush mustache had promoted his first event— a race between Bamey Oldfield and a local youth— when he was sixteen, and he had been promoting something or other ever since. He had dabbled briefly in boxing, theatre, and 39 movies with only limited success until, with luck and guile, he had succeeded in signing Red Grange to a personal manage- ment contract. In ten games and eight exhibitions with the Bears in 1925, Grange and Pyle had each earned more than $200,000. And with Grange now a free agent once again, it was time for Pyle to return to work. Even before Grange had joined them in 1925, the Bears had been the most solvent franchise in the league, and Pyle de- cided to approach Chicago owners George Halas and Ed Sternaman with a proposition. He'd let them have Grange for another season on a reasonable five-figure contract if the Bears agreed to turn over one-third interest in the club to Pyle. Halas, founder, owner, player, and coach, wanted Grange, but not as a partner. Pyle was disappointed, but he always had another idea. He headed for New York and a secret meeting with Col. Jacob Ruppert and Ed Barrow of the New York Yankee baseball team. Returning to Detroit with Grange, the two partners stormed the league meetings. Pyle told the own- ers that he had just signed a five-year lease for Yankee Sta- dium and demanded a New York franchise in the NFL for 1926. The owners liked Grange, but they disliked Pyle and his arrogant attitude. When Mara brought up the subject of his territorial rights, Pyle sneered and stormed out of the meeting. At a hastily arranged truce meeting later that night, Mara suggested that Pyle and Grange play in Ebbets Field, ten miles from the Polo Grounds and not within punting distance, with the two teams working out home schedules beneficial to both. "I'm playing at Yankee Stadium and no- where else," he snapped. When the meeting broke up minutes later, nothing had been accomplished. In the lobby of his hotel the next morning, Pyle met the press and announced he was going to form a new league directly in competition with the NFL. "It's all Mara's fault," he said. "Every other owner would have voted me in but Mara had the last word." Mara and the rest of the league still refused to believe Pyle would trigger a war that could destroy professional football. "Pro football has a hold, but not such a strong hold that it can be kicked about at the whim of any promoter who thinks he sees a chance to pick up a little quick money," said Mara. "I don't believe Pyle will be foolish enough to go through with it, but I've already offered to bet Grange $100,000 that if we have a go at each other, neither of us will make a nickel. Red Grange is a fine boy and a great athlete but he has fallen into the hands of Philistines. If he comes to New York for a pro football war, hell lose his shirt and that magic IT along with it." Pyle didn't scare easily. He picked up the Rock Island franchise from the NFL, convinced Joe Stemaman to jump the Bears and form another Chicago team, hired Georgia Tech All-American Doug Wycoff at $500 a game for a Newark club and Notre Dame All-American Harry Stuhldreher for Brooklyn, pried Folwell and Milstead away from the Giants for the Philadelphia Quakers, organized teams in Boston and Cleveland, and set up a ninth team that would play all its games on the road. Within one month, he had a nine- team league and a name— the American Professional Foot- ball League. He wanted a well-known commissioner, and after sportswriter Grantland Rice rejected his offer, Pyle signed Big Bill Edwards, a politician and former Princeton athlete, for $25,000, ten times the salary the NFL paid President Joe Carr. "I am now ready," said Pyle proudly, "to put the National Football League and Mr. Mara out of business." The battle for survival in New York (with Pyle teams in Yankee Stadium, Brooklyn, and Newark, and NFL teams in the Polo Grounds and Ebbets Field) was costly even before the season began. To keep players from jumping to the rival league, Mara raised salaries on the average of $50 a game, signed more players than before on full-season contracts, and settled back and hoped for the best. He knew he was going to lose money. The only question was how long could he last. The loss of Folwell did not hurt the Giants. Dr. March had considered a coaching change since the end of the 1925 season, and when Folwell jumped to the new league, March had al- ready picked out his new coach— Dr. Joseph Alexander, spe- cialist in lungs and line play. In 1925, Alexander, fullback Jack McBride, and end Lynn Bomar all had made the NFL All-Star team. With less than one month before the opening exhibition game against Trenton, Alexander and March hast- ily set about recruiting a team that had to be good enough and exciting enough to compete with the magic of Red 4.1 Grange just across the bridge in the Bronx. In addition to Milstead, the Giants had lost four regulars from their 1925 team— tackle Fred Parnell, who had returned to college to fin- ish his studies, end Paul Jappe, and backs Dutch Hendrian and Heine Benkert. In three weeks of scouting, Alexander and March more than compensated for these losses. In the backfield, they signed 165-pound sprinter Jack Hagerty of Georgetown, Glenn Killinger of Penn State, Walt Koppisch of Columbia, and Ranger Grigg of Austin to complement Hinkey Haines and Jack McBride. In the line, they picked up end Tillie Voss, tackle John Alexander, and centers Art Stephenson and George Murtagh to fill in with end Lynn Bomar, guards Tom Tomlin, Joe Williams and Art Carney, and center Joe Alexander. One of the prize newcomers was a last-minute addition. A large farm boy from tiny Phillips University in Enid, Okla- homa, 240-pound tackle Steve Owen had traveled East with the Kansas City Cowboys in 1925 for a game with the Giants and had impressed March. Mammoth and powerful, he still seemed to have good speed and mobility. When the 1925 sea- son ended and the Giants found themselves one man short for a brief, post-season tour of Florida, March just happened to remember Owen. By chance, Owen, who had finished the season with four exhibition games in Hartford, stopped in to visit March before heading back to Oklahoma. Given a chance to make some extra money, Owen jumped. Down South, he played a little tackle, filled in at end, and returned home never expecting to play for the Giants again. He had played well but he had not been outstanding. When he reported to fall practice with the Kansas City Cowboys, coach Leroy An- drews took him aside immediately. "Steve," said Andrews, "you are now a New York Giant. I have sold you to Tim Mara for five hundred dollars." At first, Owen was too surprised to say anything. Then thinking of the $500, an unusually high price for a relatively unheralded lineman, Owen asked for his share. Andrews, a tough businessman, refused, and Owen was on his way to New York the next morning. "I had seen a lot of fat hogs go for more than they paid for me," said Owen, "but in those days 4* a fat hog was a lot more valuable than a fat tackle. I was going to New York even if I had to walk there/' Reporting to the Giants* training camp at Lake Ariel in the Poconos of Pennsylvania three days before the exhibition against Trenton, Owen, a country boy, felt out of place among the sophisticated Easterners who comprised most of the 27- man squad. The only time he had been to New York before, as a member of the Kansas City Cowboys in 1925, he had to dress in a rented cowboy outfit for publicity. And his new teammates didn't plan to let him forget it. "I was a little fish in a big pond/* he said. "The Giant veterans had a great time ribbing me before the exhibition game. But I had the last lausrh." It was close to 90 degrees and climbing when the Giants took the field at Trenton, and coach Alexander decided to start Owen to see just how far he could go. By the end of the first half, ten Giant starters, out of shape and nearly out of mind, were drooping and had to be taken out. Owen, his mus- cles hardened from wrestling in the off-season, was just getting his second wind. Suddenly, the country boy was wielding the needle. "I sure am disappointed in all you big-city boys," he said. "Just what is it with all you New York fellas? Do you play only for thirty or forty or fifty minutes and not sixty? I sure am surprised at you." The Giants, sloppy and sweating, won, 12-0, and Alexander had found a starting right tackle. When the team broke camp and headed for the road opener against the Hartford Blues, Alexander still had his doubts about his line. His starting backfield of Haines, McBride, Hagerty, and Koppisch could outrun and outpass nearly any team in pro football. With four newcomers, the line, though the heaviest in the league at 220, still wasn't set. "It wasn't difficult instilling confidence in this group," said coach Alexander, who varied little from FolwelFs single wing and punt formation offense but stressed more team play on defense and less dramatics in the dressing room. "These boys already feel they have the pennant clinched." On a muddy field at Hartford's new Velodrome, the Giant line played like a pennant winner. With Voss and Bomar at the ends, John Alexander and Owen at the tackles, Joe Alex- ander and Murtagh at the guards, and Stephenson at center, 43 the Giants rolled up ten first downs to one for Hartford and won, 21-0, before 20,000 fans. McBride scored one touchdown, passed to Hagerty for another, and completed seven of ten passes for 96 yards. Traveling to Providence seven days later, the Giants again dominated play and again won the game in the line. The Steamrollers managed to rush for only three first downs to thirteen for the visitors, but the Giants still needed a brilliant defensive play to win. After scoring on a 15-yard diagonal pass from Haines to Bomar in the second quarter, the Giants gave up a touchdown late in the game and led, 7-6. With Bomar opening up a hole, McBride hurdled one blocker, dove headfirst into the kicker, and deflected the extra point attempt. "Jack's a funny guy," said one teammate. "He'd be the last guy in the world you'd expect to take a chance at getting his face mussed up but he's one helluva football player when he wants to be." Two for two, the Giants boarded a train for Chicago and Game No. 3 late Friday afternoon. Alexander, his play suffer- ing from his coaching and his coaching suffering from his medicine, couldn't leave until Saturday and wound up spend- ing most of his train ride giving football lessons to Tim Mara. "1 talked about the team, our strengths, our weaknesses," said Alexander. "Then all of a sudden, Tim started talking about the Giants. He was feeling low and he was unhappy and maybe he even was a little bit scared by Pyle. He told me he was sorry now he'd ever gotten involved in the war with Pyle and he realized he'd lose a small fortune fighting the new league without knowing if he'd ever win. Then he started talking about his two sons." "I guess the only reason I'm staying in this now is Jack and Wellington," said Mara. "You've seen them at the games. If the Giants ever amount to anything, it's all theirs. I've still got the bookmaking and they'll have the Giants." After a scoreless first half against the Grangeless Bears, the Giant line finally began to crack. With Stephenson no longer a Giant and Alexander on the sidelines, Murtagh, moved over from guard, shifted the ball between deep backs McBride and Hagerty and the Bears recovered on their own 47. Seven plays later, Bear left halfback Paddy Driscoll plunged over from the 1-foot line, dropkicked the extra point, and the 4 4 Giants had lost their first game of the season, 7-0. Returning East, the Giants lost 6-0 on two field goals to the undefeated Frankford Yellow Jackets In Philadelphia, and the next day moved Into the Polo Grounds for their home opener. Every- one was ready for the big afternoon. Mara had hired baseball comics Nick Altrock and Al Schacht to entertain, 4,000 Frank- ford rooters were in town with their own band and cheerlead- ers, and a crowd of more than 35,000 was expected. Then, the rains came. The game was delayed almost an hour to wait for Mayor Jimmy Walker to arrive and officially kick out the first ball, then started without him. He finally did make his ap- pearance, late in the second quarter, minutes after Frankford had scored on a 46-yard pass, stayed until half time, marched around the field with Tim Mara, waved to the 15,000 fans, and quickly left the ball park. He didn't miss a thing. With- out Hagerty, sidelined with an Injured leg, the Giant attack sputtered but never caught fire, and the score was 6-0, the Giants' third straight defeat. With the head-to-head New York war starting in seven days, March, who ran the personnel end of the organization with little interference from Mara, called Alexander to his combination office-apartment on Broadway and 103rd Street. It was an office very familiar to all the Giants. When a Giant needed a bed or a free meal, Doc March was the man to see. When a Giant needed an advance on his salary, Doc March was the man to see. And when a Giant had a gripe, Doc March was still the man to see. In fact, Giant ballplayers came to see him for everything-but medical treatment After some small talk, March, chewing on the stem of his pipe, came to the point. If the Giants made another dismal showing against the Kansas City Cowboys on Sunday and the Yankees played well against the visiting Western Wildcats, Mara and his franchise might never recover financially. Alex- ander, pressured by medical duties at several hospitals and lecture commitments at several medical schools, had been ar- riving late for his 3 p.m. practices since the Giants returned to New York. When he did arrive, he usually found the play- ers joking and playing touch football but rarely running through the formations. Angered by their failure to work when he wasn't around, he would keep the players an extra 45 hour or two to make up for the time lost. It was only a mat- ter of time before a few of the Giants started complaining to March. "I know it's not your fault, Joe," said March. "You've got your medicine but we've got to do something about the team." Finally, they agreed that Alexander would remain as head coach at his $5,000 salary but Ursinus halfback Earl Potteiger, one of the team's most popular players, would assist him and run practices when he was detained. That week, Alexander made sure he was at practice early and, slowly but noticeably, the Giants began to improve. The line still lacked the one great player to weld it together and several of the newcomers lacked the experience or endurance to play a full game at top speed, but the near rebellion against Alexander was forgotten and the Giants began to loosen up. Hinkey Haines, a fan favorite who had to be carried from the field with a wrenched neck against Providence and was just working back into top shape, was the butt of most of the needling. A New York sportswriter, obviously taken with Haines' ability to lift the Giants, wrote a poem in his column, and the Giants liked it so much they pasted it up in the dressing room where Haines would have to see it every time he entered or left the room. It wasn't Shakespeare but Hinkey Haines wasn't Red Grange, either: Oh Hinkey Haines, oh Hinkey Haines. The New York Giants football brains. He never loses, always gains. Oh Hinkey Haines, oh Hinkey Haines. Mara realized he was going to lose money for at least the first few head-to-head meetings with Grange and the Yankees, and he decided to make the best of a losing situation. He an- nounced that the receipts of the Cowboy game—minus ex- penses—would be turned over to the New York American's Christmas and Religion Fund. Even if he didn't make money, Mara was determined to make friends for the future. Later in the season, he began to employ another gimmick to build up his attendance. He would discount a large number of tickets for any game to a fraternal organization— such as the Elks or Masons— and let them resell the tickets to their mem- 46 bers at any price they wanted. The organizations would be getting a bargain and the Giants would be selling tickets instead of giving them away. If it weren't for Mara s friends, the Polo Grounds might have been empty for the Cowboys. For the second straight Sunday, rain bathed the field in mud and sent some 5,000 spectators scurrying for cover under the stands. Playing op- posite his brother Bill, left tackle for the Cowboys, Steve Owen turned in one of his best games as a Giant. Cowboy Hill, bought from the Cowboys a few weeks before, scored one touchdown, Koppisch passed to Bomar for another, and the Giants won, 13-0. It was a happy club in the Giant dressing room as the players peeled off their mud-caked jerseys and stepped under warm showers; so happy, in fact, that one vet- eran in the Giants' weekly report to the league publicity man jokingly reported that Joe Alexander had scored both New York touchdowns. The unsuspecting publicity man, who had not seen the game himself, listed Alexander as a two-time scorer in the newspaper summary of NFL weekend play, and the Giants were even more delighted. Watching from the clubhouse office of New York Giant baseball owner Charles Stoneham during the Cowboy game, Mara kept pacing back and forth to a back window trying to see how Grange and the Yankees were drawing across the bridge. He was told the Yankees had drawn close to 20,000, despite the rain, but this still didn't satisfy his curiosity. "If you're so damned interested, Tim," said a friend, "either go over there and buy a ticket or get yourself a pair of binoc- ulars." The next Sunday, with rain falling even more heavily that it had the two previous weeks, Mara had binoculars but he had nothing to watch— at either park. With 25,000 Elks in- cluding the Grand Exalted Ruler, Governor Al Smith, and former Justice Robert Wagner expected to watch the Giants play the Brooklyn Lions, Mara counted his house, which was less than 1,000, waited until a few minutes after 3 when the remaining spectators stood almost knee-deep in water, and finally postponed the game. Through his glasses, Mara knew the Yankees had called off their game, too. Two days later, the Giants awaited the visit of an old friend —Jim Thorpe, who had rejoined the Canton Bulldogs. Ads 47 announcing that Thorpe would play plus two preliminary high school games drew 35,000 fans, the seasons largest crowd, into the Polo Grounds. The high school teams played, but Thorpe, who had broken two ribs against Detroit the previous Sunday, sat on the bench the entire game. Canton, using only eleven players, did fairly well without him. After being able to gain only 1 1/ 2 yards in three straight rushes from the 2, the Giants scored in the third quarter. With Carney pulling out of the line and taking out two men on the play, Haines, playing halfback instead of his usual quarterback position, sprinted into the end zone on a reverse. The Giants domi- nated play until late in the final quarter. With a first down on the Giant 40 and time running out, Canton halfback Dick Vick lofted a long pass to Little Twig on the 10. Giant safety man Ranger Grigg cut in front of the receiver and neatly batted the ball away— right into the hands of Canton end Stan Robb on the four. Robb scored and the Giants had to settle for a 7-7 tie. Four days later, the Giants snapped back with a 20-0 vic- tory over the Chicago Cardinals. Haines scored twice, once on a twisting, electrifying 75-yard run, but only 7,500 fans watched the game. Mara watched Yankee Stadium through his glasses and bristled when 30,000 turned out to see the Yankees and Brooklyn Horsemen. "It almost reached a point where I couldn't enjoy anything," said Mara. "We'd either play poorly or they'd outdraw us." With Bomar injured, Alexander shifted Carney to end and started looking for a promising young guard. He found his guard— but he wasn't young. Six-foot, 200-pound Al Nesser started playing professional football on a family team, which included seven brothers and the son of one of the brothers, when he was seventeen in Akron in 1908. The thirty-five-year- old plumber was a throwback to the early days of football. He wore no helmet, his bald spot showing through his wavy blond hair, and he wore no shoulder pads, preferring instead a single strip of adhesive tape that he spread from one shoul- der to the other. He was a 60-minute man, and if he ever was injured, he never told anyone about it. Nesser had started the 1926 season with the Akron Steels as player-coach but had been fired. "I'm afraid those college boys didn't understand 48 me and my signals," said Nesser, who never finished high school. The Giant college boys understood him much better once they saw him play. When Murtagh was knocked unconscious against Ernie Nevers' Duluth Eskimos early in the first quarter, Nesser got his chance and made more than the most of it. Despite the drawing power of Nevers, a crushing fullback who had won thirteen athletic letters at Stanford, 20-degree weather and heavy winds kept the crowd under 5,000. It was a game worth seeing, the most exciting of the season. McBride scored first and kicked the extra point, but Nevers plunged his way right back to score and boot the tying point. Haines went 25 yards on a reverse play for another touchdown, and the Giants led 14-7 into the final quarter. When Nevers was injured and removed from the game in the fourth quarter, the Giants had little to worry about any more. But the fans had paid to see Nevers and, though league rules barred him from returning, the Giants decided to let him back into the game. Starting from his own 19, Nevers carried the ball every single play, finally diving over from the 1 with fifteen seconds left in the game. Forming a spear-shaped defense, a standard rushing formation of the day, with Tillie Voss at the point, Nesser and Voss broke through, smothering Nevers* kick and pre- serving a 14—13 victory. Mara's losses now exceeded $40,000 for the season but the end finally was in sight. The Giants were playing consistently good football, but, far more important, the American League had started to sink. The Newark team disbanded and sued for back salaries. The Rock Island team simply dropped out of the league. Boston was shaky, Cleveland was shakier. Brook- lyn was on the verge of quitting. Of the nine original teams, only New York and Philadelphia had any chance at all to finish near the break-even point. But Grange and Pyle, the Yankee owners, had bankrolled the rest of the league and stood to be the biggest losers, while Philadelphia had collected only $600 in receipts for its last home game. Then suddenly, the sinking league sank. The Brooklyn franchise, owned by boxing promoter Humbert Fugazy, had been playing at un- covered Commercial Field— and if the bad weather had hurt the Giants and Yankees, it had destroyed the Horsemen. Fi- 49 nally, Fugazy, with Mara working quietly as the middleman, announced he was dropping out of the American League and merging his franchise with the NFL's Brooklyn Lions, re- ducing Pyle's nine-team league to New York, Philadelphia, Chicago, and the traveling Western Wildcats. Meanwhile, Giant publicity men had a field day with the incoming Los Angeles Stars. Star of the Stars was Brick Mul- ler, who, in addition to finishing second in the high jump in the 1920 Olympics, supposedly could throw a football farther than any man in football and reportedly had his right arm insured for $100,000. Mara decided it might be a good idea to break Muller's distance record of 72 yards. Gathering a few dozen reporters and photographers, the Giants completed the longest pass in history— slightly more than 108 yards— but it still took five attempts. Standing atop the 20th story of the American Radiator Corporation Building on West 40th Street, Bomar spotted his receiver, Haines, standing 324 feet below in Bryant Park. Bomar was off target on his first three passes. The fourth hit Haines in the chest, almost driving him into the ground as it bounded away. Taking off his suit jacket, Haines set himself again, signaled to Bomar, took a deep breath, and neatly cradled the record completion. It was a cute stunt but only 4,000 people came to see if Muller could top it. He didn't, but Haines had problems of his own. With the game scoreless in the second quarter, Haines, fad- ing to pass on his own 22, had the ball knocked loose from his right hand. Los Angeles guard Don Thompson grabbed it in the air and stumbled the remaining yards for the game's only score. For the Providence Steamrollers, the Giants finally didn't get rain— they got a chilling frost and 15,000 nearly frozen spectators. With Parnell back from school and Nesser punch- ing big holes in the Steamroller line, the Giants completely outplayed the visitors. Haines scored twice and had to be car- ried from the field badly shaken up and his neck re-injured, and McBride scored once in a 21-0 victory. Assured of his victory in the war, Mara now began to think of a more tangible victory on the field. Watching his Giants defeat the Brooklyn Horsemen, 17-0, on Thanksgiving Day, he decided to challenge Pyle and the Yankees to a game— at 5° any stakes with all the money going either to charity or to the players. Pyle, who earlier in the season had said he would keep December 12 open for a possible playoff with the Giants, sud- denly changed his mind. He knew what he had, he knew what the Giants had, and, wisely, he didn't want any part of them. In the second meeting with the Brooklyn Horsemen, the Giants overcame freezing weather once again and won easily, 27-0. McBride scored fifteen points on two touchdowns and three extra-point placements, and the Giant second-stringers played most of the second half. Only one league game re- mained on the schedule— against the Chicago Bears in the Polo Grounds—and the Giants (8-4-1) still had a chance to knock the visitors (11-1-2 on the season) out of the champion- ship. If Mara thought the weather had been bad earlier in the season, he was in for a surprise. By game time, the tem- perature was 18 degrees, the wind was blowing 25 miles an hour, and two-foot snowbanks covered the entire field. It was not a day for football and, except for a few photographers, reporters and members of Mara's family, the stands were deserted. Only one official had been able to reach the ball park, and March and Alexander had talked a policeman into filling in. While Nesser dove headfirst in a snowbank and Haines and Bomar started a snowball fight, Mara crossed over from the Giant dressing room to tell the Bears the field was in unplayable condition. Halas, who with the rest of his play- ers was still dressed in street clothes, listened while Mara talked and then nodded his head. "That's fine with us," he said, "but where's our three-thousand-dollar guarantee?" "What guarantee?" shouted Mara. "There aren't a dozen paying customers in the house." "That's your problem, Tim," said Halas. "We've got a $3,000 guarantee rain or shine and we're not leaving with- out it." "OK, if that's the way you want it," said Mara. "You boys better get into your uniforms. If you think you're going to get that $3,000, you're going to play that game even if there are only two people in the stands." Mara slammed the door and stormed out. The Bears cursed, grumbled, started undressing, and cursed some more. Ten minutes later, someone opened the Bear 5i dressing room door a few inches and, without coming into view, said, "How about two thousand dollars?" Halas looked at his players, who wanted to play even less than Mara, and answered, "We'll take the two." The NFL season was over, but Mara still wanted a parting shot at the American League. The Philadelphia Quakers, coached by Folwell and captained by Milstead, had finished first, beating out Grange's Yankees, and Mara issued a chal- lenge. The Quaker players, like almost everyone else in the new league including Commissioner Edwards, had received little of their promised salaries and they readily accepted the opportunity to make a few extra dollars for Christmas. Once again snow covered the Polo Grounds and completely oblit- erated the chalk lines. In a day when there was little or no betting on professional football by fans, gamblers, or players, the Quakers were a slight favorite. It was a bad overlay. With Hagerty scoring one touchdown in his return to the start- ing lineup and McBride scoring three times with four extra points, the Giants trampled the Quakers and Milstead, 31-0, before fewer than 5,000 fans. "Ill never forget the amazing performance of Jack Hagerty returning punts in that terrible snow, catching them on the dead run and completely baf- fling the Quakers," said ParnelL "I never saw anything quite like it." The season was over. The war ended a few months later when Pyle, who lost more than $100,000 and his league, came to apologize to Mara, who lost more than $60,000 but saved his league. This time, both men gave a little— and Pyle got very close to what he had wanted in the first place. He re- ceived a New York Yankee franchise in the NFL but with most of his games on the road and no conflicts with the Giants' home schedule. "It wasn't Pyle's fault or mine," said Mara after the truce. "He's a great promoter. He was on his toes and got good players. But there wasn't enough for one of us, let alone two." 5* Powerhouse in the Polo Grounds The war was over and the American League was dead. The survivors had paid dearly, but they had learned their eco- nomic lessons well. Professional football might have a major- league future, but not in the minor-league towns of Ham- mond, Hartford, and Racine. Meeting at New York's Astor Hotel in February of 1927, the National Football League, a sprawling collection of 22 franchises, decided to reorganize. The new NFL had only twelve teams, greater balance, and tighter organization. Proven players suddenly were plentiful, salaries were lower, and fan interest was higher. In New York, Giant owner Tim Mara seemed surprisingly confident. "This is the year we take the championship," pre- dicted Mara, who had replaced Billy Gibson as Giant presi- dent in name as well as in fact. "Ill be very surprised if anyone beats us." To the other owners, placidly savoring the joys of peace, Mara's bristling optimism seemed totally unrealistic. Seventh with an 8-4-1 record in 1926, the Giants had lost eight regulars —including All-Star ends Lynn Bomar and Tillie Voss— and figured to drop even lower in 1927. But Mara and Doc Harry March, the Giants' football brain, had not been idle. "I don't care what it costs but get the players you need," said Mara. "I want a winner this year." March's first decision was an unpleasant but necessary one. He had to fire Dr. Joe Alexander, an original Giant and one of football's finest linemen, as head coach. Increasingly pre- occupied with his medical duties, Dr. Alexander had found himself with less and less time available for football. To re- 53 place him, March named Ursinus halfback Earl (Potty) Pot- teiger, Alexander's assistant in 1926 and an average player whose greatest asset seemed to be his popularity— with team- mates and with Harry March. Together, March and Potty began to study college rosters, interview unattached professionals, and mold Mara's cham- pions. By the time they had finished, the Giants had ten new players and the Polo Grounds had the makings of its first powerhouse. By far the most impressive of the newcomers was a mammoth end. Robert (Cal) Hubbard was a quiet giant of a man, stand- ing 6-foot-5, weighing 245 pounds, and wearing a size 8i/ 2 hat. He had started playing football at school in Glasgow, Missouri, in 1916, but had to retire the next year when his family moved to another town that did not have a school team. He didn't play another game until he enrolled at Chilli- cothe Prep in 1919, but he was so good that he was offered a football scholarship by Bo McMillin, coach at Centenary Col- lege in Louisiana. McMillin liked what he saw— a graceful, menacing giant who could trample opponents and still run 100 yards in 10.2 seconds— until the first day of practice. Play- ing defensive end, Hubbard had lined up three yards outside of the offensive left tackle, seemingly too far away to get near the ballcarrier. "Hubbard," shouted McMillin, "you can't make the tackle from way out there." "Yes I can," said Hubbard. "No you can't," shouted McMillin. "Yes I can," said Hubbard— and, before the discussion de- veloped into a debate, the offensive center shifted the ball back to the fullback and Hubbard proved his point. Throw- ing his left shoulder and 245 pounds into the left tackle, Hub- bard tossed him into the left guard, who collapsed against the center, who toppled into the right guard, who tripped up the right tackle, finally piling up the fullback for a loss. With one block, Hubbard had taken out the offensive line tackle to tackle and still made his tackle. When coach McMillin switched from Centenary to Geneva College, Hubbard and three other regulars went right along with him. Hubbard had to sit out the 1925 season, but, in 54 1926, he powered tiny Geneva to an upset victory over mighty Harvard and suddenly all the pros wanted him. The Giants finally signed him— and they weren't disappointed. As an of- fensive end, Hubbard gave the Giants a new passing attack. He would take two steps forward, turn his body slightly, and take a short bullet pass from fullback Jack McBride. The play rarely failed to gain five or six yards. And as a defensive tackle, Hubbard revolutionized professional footballs stand- ard formations. The pros worked from seven-, eight-, and nine-man lines with little variation and no pursuit. In the 1920s, linemen were strong, rugged, and slow. Faster than many backs, Hubbard was the exception and found his de- fensive tackle duties dull and unimaginative. Almost from the start, he began to experiment— finally settling on an early version of the roving linebacker as he often pulled out of the line to pursue the ballcarrier. The maneuver was thoroughly unorthodox but Hubbard made it work with bone-crunching effectiveness. "You could tell when Cal hit a man," says Wellington Mara. "You would hear it on the bench— a hard, dull boom." By the time the Giants reported to pre-season practice, March and Potteiger had done some brilliant recruiting. The line was stronger and the backfield faster. The best of the newcomers: end Charles Corgan, guard Ed Garvey, tackle Dick Stahlman, backs Mule Wilson of Texas A & M, versatile Doug Wycoff of Georgia Tech, 155-pound Tut Imlay of Cal- ifornia, and Joe Guyon, a temperamental, ageless Indian who had played college football with Jim Thorpe at Carlisle six- teen years before. "Football was a different game then," said captain and tackle Steve Owen. "The ball was bigger and harder to pass, you couldn't pass from closer than five yards behind the line of scrimmage, and, in 1927, they moved the goal posts back ten yards from the goal line. But the big difference was the way we played the game. We were pretty much a smash and shove gang. We were bone crushers, not fancy Dans." The Giants certainly didn't play like champions in the first exhibition game— a wild, brawling 6-0 victory over the Orange Athletic Club in New Jersey. The game was scoreless until the final quarter, when Mule Wilson broke it open with a 70-yard 55 ran with an intercepted pass. All the way down the field Hub- bard, leading the interference, needled Wilson, who could ran the 100 in 9.8 when he was in top shape. "Come on Mule," shouted Big Cal. "Come on Mule. Keep up with me if you can." Still out of shape, Mule couldn't and was tackled on the Orange 15. Four plays later, ragged 185-pound full- back McBride punched over for the touchdown. The Giants had loaned several of their second-stringers to Orange, but once the game started it was every man and Giant for himself. Jim Kendricks, a beefy Giant tackle borrowed by Orange and Cal Hubbard's roommate, was kicked in the face early in the first quarter and was still complaining when the game finally ended. "For Petes sake," snapped Hubbard. "Quit crying. You sound like a little girl." Kendricks stopped complaining and started punching— toss- ing a right hook at his roommates head. Calmly and coolly, Hubbard palmed Kendricks' fist in his left hand and floored him with a right. Momentarily, 1,000 Orange fans were racing toward Hubbard and the Giants, determined to protect Ken- dricks, their hero for a day. The officials finally stopped the fight but seconds later it started all over again. An Orange player had crept up behind Hubbard and aimed a punch at Big CaFs jaw. The punch missed and Hubbard, who had ran out of patience, split open his opponents eye and lip. This time, the battle lasted until the police forces of three town- ships forcibly stopped it one hour later. "By the time the cops got there," says Hubbard, "Kendricks and I were sitting in the locker room trying to figure out how the whole thing started." The Giants opening game— against Michigan All-American Benny Friedman and the Cleveland Bulldogs— was less inter- esting and more disappointing. Playing on a clear, crisp after- noon in Cleveland, the Giants stopped Friedman but had to settle for a 0-0 tie. Still on the road, the Giants played better football beating Providence, 8-0, on a touchdown by Mc- Bride, and Pottsville, 19-0, on two field goals by McBride and a touchdown by Wilson. Arriving home, the Giants (2-0-1) were in third place in the NFL, only percentage points behind the Chicago Bears and the New York Yankees. Mara was delighted— but not for long. For the third straight season, New York played dismal foot- 56 ball In its home opener, tackling woefully and falling apart under the passing of Benny Friedman. The Michigan quarter- back was sensational— completing eleven of seventeen passes and directing his team brilliantly— as Cleveland defeated the Giants, 6-4), before 18,000 fans. Immediately after the game, Mara summoned March and Potteiger to his office. "We looked terrible," said Mara. "We need help. What about Milstead?" Century Milstead, the powerful Yale All-American, had played tackle for the 1925 Giants and then jumped to the American League. The next day, March reached Milstead at his Connecticut home and persuaded him to rejoin the Giants. What turns a good football team Into a great one? Some- times its the addition of only one man. In 1927, Milstead was not the best Giant lineman. He wasn't even their best tackle. Yet the Giants were only a good football team In losing to Cleveland. By the next weekend, with Milstead back In the lineup, they began to show signs of becoming a great one. For the first time, Potteiger had a first-string line he knew he could depend on. With Hubbard and Corgan at the ends, Milstead and Owen at the tackles, Al Nesser and Garvey at the guards, and George Murtagh at center, the difference was noticeable immediately. After defeating Frankford, 13-0, on Saturday in Philadel- phia, the Giants returned to the Polo Grounds the next day— and exploded. Wilson scored twice, Hinkey Haines and Phil White once each, but it was the running of 165-pound Jack (The Ripper) Hagerty that electrified the 18,000 fans. Inter- cepting a pass on his own 47 in the second quarter, Hagerty slipped away from two tacklers, cut to the sidelines, stiff-armed one man, eluded three others, and headed for the goal line. When he was finally pulled down on the Frankford 3, he had run exactly 50 yards officially and some 200 yards unofficially. It was a brilliant open-field run and after the game, which the Giants won, 27-0, Charles Stoneham, owner of the base- ball Giants, called Hagerty to his office. "Jack," said Stoneham in the presence of Tim Mara and referee Tom Thorp, "that was the greatest run ever made by anyone in the Polo Grounds." Though the team continued to gain momentum, defeating 57 Pottsville, 16-0, the crowds still refused to pick up. Every Monday, publicity man Chick Wergeles would make the rounds of the New York newspaper offices and try to give away free tickets. In an average week, Wergeles, a boxing man trying to pay his rent as a football hustler, gave out 4,000 free tickets. "It got so Tim thought I was throwing the tickets down the sewer," said Wergeles. "Even when we did get fif- teen thousand out at the Polo Grounds, not more than ten thousand ever were paid." Mara even began to make the newspaper rounds himself— one week bringing Ernie Nevers, star of the Duluth Eskimos, with him. At each office, Mara would introduce Nevers and turn on his Irish charm. Mara's charm helped but not much. Only 15,000 watched the Giants beat Duluth, 21-0, but on Election Day, Mara sched- uled two high school games before the Giant game with Provi- dence and drew 35,000, all but a few thousand on 50-cent student tickets. The Giants defeated the Steamrollers, 25-0, and, when the New York Yankees beat the Bears, New York was in first place for the first time. After two shutout exhibition victories over Stapleton, the Giants routed the Cardinals, 28-7, scoring three touchdowns in the first ten minutes. It was a bruising game, and the Cardinals seemed determined to cripple the Giants physically even if they couldn't beat them. One Cardinal lineman had been slugging Steve Owen all afternoon until finally, in the fourth quarter, he staggered the Giant tackle with a right to the chin. In those days the officials, hired by the home team for the entire season, saw little and often called less, firmly believing that a professional football player was old enough and big enough to protect himself. Noticing that referee Tom Thorp was standing ten yards off to his right, Owen threw a left hook from his shoes to the Cardinal's chin. As his team- mates helped carry the unconscious lineman off the field, ref- eree Thorp strolled over to Owen. "Be nice, Steve, be nice," he said, smiling, and walked away. With only three games remaining on their schedule, the first-place Giants had won eight, lost one, and tied one, scor- ing 157 points, allowing only 13, and registering 8 shutouts. But the next three games—against the second-place Bears and 58 two against the third-place Yankees—would make or break the championship season. For the eighteen Giants who played in it, the Bear game of 1927 is the one they could never forget. The Bears struck quickly and drove for a first down on the Giant 5 early in the first quarter. Three times the Bears hit the middle of the line and three times the Giants gave up a yard. On fourth down, fullback Roy White took a direct snap and plunged forward, but Giant guard Al Nesser, submarining under the Bear line, brought him down on the 1. The Giants had held but, with the ball on their 1, they were still in serious trouble. Quarterback Haines signaled for a first-down punt, the expected call in those days, and the Bears dropped two men back and jammed the nine others into the line to rush the kicker. The Giants didn't huddle in the 1920's, calling all their plays at the line of scrimmage, and Haines shouted to punter Mule Wilson to be careful and not step behind the end line for a safety. Then Haines asked the referee for a towel to wipe some mud off the ball. A deceiving runner, Haines had proven even more deceiv- ing as an actor. Just before the ball was shifted to Wilson, Haines dropped back, took the ball, and passed to left end Corgan, standing all alone just beyond the line of scrimmage. Corgan made it to the 36 and the Giants were out of trouble momentarily. Within minutes, though, the Bears had the ball and, three more times in the first half, dro