Ohrid in English dictionary

Meanings and definitions of "Ohrid"

A historic city in the southwest of the Republic of Macedonia.

proper

A historic city in the southwest of the Republic of Macedonia.

a historic city in the Republic of Macedonia

more

Images with "Ohrid"

Sample sentences with "Ohrid"

Declension Stem

President Branko Crvenkovski said Macedonia has now entered the final phase of implementing the Ohrid Agreement. [ AFP ]

Over 20% of the lake's water comes from nearby Lake Prespa, about 10 km (6.2 mi) to the southeast and at 150 m higher altitude than Lake Ohrid.

In 2014, the first regional SEE SDEWES conference was held in Ohrid, Macedonia focused on South East Europe.

Moisi devoted the rest of his life to the Albanian struggle, but in 1464 he fell prisoner to Ballaban Badera, an Albanian-born Ottoman sanjakbey of the Sanjak of Ohrid at the Battle of Vaikal.

Epigraphical monuments from Ohrid are placed on the ground part of the house including precious objects as the "Milokas" (found on the Via Egnatia) road, the two torsos of the goddess Isis etc. The archaeological objects from ancient times and the medieval period are exhibited on the second and third floors.

Switzerland noted that the State had managed to find a path towards stability with the Ohrid Framework Agreement of 2001.

It has moved forward with decentralisation, meeting its obligations under the Ohrid Agreement

Lake Ohrid was declared a World Heritage Site by UNESCO in 1979, and in 2010, NASA named one of Titan's lakes after it.

The water quality monitoring shows significant organic loading to Lake Ohrid from municipal waste, agricultural and urban runoff

The aid, of course, has conditions attached to it, mainly to the effect that the programme of economic and public administration reforms continue and that the agreements reached in Ohrid earlier this autumn be implemented.

In 2008 the Macedonian Government signed a contract with the Turkish company Tepe Akfen Ventures (TAV) for a twenty-year-long concession during which this company would manage Macedonia's two existing airports in Ohrid and Skopje.

Welcomes the signing of the Ohrid Framework Agreement, and supports its full and timely implementation by the parties to the Agreement;

President Barroso and I will be visiting the region together, starting tomorrow and concluding in Ohrid on Saturday.

Ohrid was declared World Heritage site by the UNESCO back in 1979, and was cited by National Geographic in 2016 as one of the “100 places that will change your life.”

The name Ohrid first appeared in 879.

In addition, as a commitment to the Way Forward Document of the May 2003 Ohrid Agreement, the OSCE has developed the OSCE South-eastern Europe Cross-Border Cooperation Programme.

The EC report gives a generally favourable assessment to the performance of the government during # especially in terms of implementing the Ohrid Framework Agreement

This year, UNESCO-protected Lake Ohrid hosted # tourists, with # overnight stays, but these were mostly from within Macedonia

The oldest written record of the villagers is the "Verbose census defter the Sandzak of Ohrid" written in 1582, which tallied the population of Slatino at 327 residents, all Christians.

The Ohrid Framework Agreement, which ended the 2001 conflict and provides the framework for preserving the multi-ethnic character of the society, is mentioned in the preamble of the Constitution and continued to be implemented.

Up to # per cent of phosphorus in the water in three Macedonian lakes-- Prespa, Ohrid and Dojran-- come from phosphate detergents

The great number of monuments and memorials in Bulgaria and Republic of Macedonia, such as the ones in Petrich and Ohrid, signify the trail this historical figure has left in the memory of the people.

These funds will be used to complete implementation of the Ohrid Agreement

As a result, they are not only destabilising the country but also jeopardising gains made in the Ohrid peace agreement

Pursuant to the Ohrid Framework Agreement, the Union

Authors