Composer and musician James Newton Howard was born on June 9, 1951 in Los Angeles, California. He studied piano as a child and attended the Thatcher School and the Music Academy of the West. He attended the University of Southern California briefly before dropping out to pursue music full time. He worked as a session musician, but his break came in 1975 when he auditioned for Elton John. He got the job and toured with Elton in the 1970s and 1980s. In addition to touring with Elton, he arranged strings and played keyboards/synthesizers for several of his recorded songs. In the 1980s, he received an opportunity to score a small scale film, which would begin his film composing career.

Howard scored the 1990 hit movie, “Pretty Woman,” and received an Oscar nomination for his score of “The Prince of Tides” in 1991. Four more Best Original Score nominations would follow for “The Fugitive,” “My Best Friend’s Wedding,” “The Village,” and “Michael Clayton.” Not only did he do Oscar-nominated films, he also composed for independent films such as “Glengarry Glen Ross” and “Five Corners.” Howard scored for big budget films like “Space Jam” and “Collateral.” He created the theme for the television show “ER,” which earned him a Primetime Emmy nomination in 1995. Throughout the years, he built a partnership with director M. Night. Shyamalan and has scored nearly all of his films since “The Sixth Sense.” In 2005, he earned a Golden Globe nomination for Best Original Score for the movie, “King Kong.” He was nominated for an Oscar again for the musical score of “Defiance.” In collaboration with Hans Zimmer, he scored “Batman Begins” and “The Dark Knight,” for which he won a Grammy for Best Score Soundtrack for Visual Media in 2009. From 2012 to 2015, he composed the score for the popular film series, “The Hunger Games.” From “The Hunger Games – Mockingjay Part 1” soundtrack, the song “The Hanging Tree” sung by Jennifer Lawrence reached number twelve on the Billboard Hot 100.

James Newton Howard contact information is available for you to look at. We have James Newton Howard’s manager information, along with his booking agents info as well. If you want the James Newton Howard email address for his management team, or booking agency, we have that available for you to view by signing up. You can find the James Newton Howard booking info and booking price here.