Comedy Anthology Directed By Brett Ratner, Elizabeth Banks, Peter Farrelly & More Now Known As ‘Movie 43’

Relativity Media have released their 2011 slate and in doing so revealed title changes on two of their films.

Neil Burger‘s sci-fi-ish mindtrip thriller, “Dark Fields” starring Robert De Niro, Bradley Cooper, Abbie Cornish and Anna Friel has now changed its title to “Limitless.” Written by Leslie Dixon, who wrote of all things, “Mrs. Doubtfire,” “Freaky Friday” and “Pay It Forward,” is still due on March 18, 2011. Let’s hope Dixon used this as an exercise to channel a different voice.

Relativity Media, who absorbed Overture Films earlier this year, has quietly been buying back films they sold to several different distributors this year and surely enough Nicolas Cage‘s “Season Of The Witch,” a former Lionsgate picture is also on the Relativity slate, but granted has openly been so for a few weeks now. Another picture once at Universal, Michael Dowse‘s “Kids In America,” has obviously been bought back by Relativity which also produced the film. Starring Dany Wolf, Topher Grace, Gordon Kaywin, Jim Whitaker and Sarah Bowen the picture also has changed its name, now being referred to as “Take Me Home Tonight,” but keeping its March 4, 2011 release date.

Steven Soderbergh‘s “Haywire” starring Channing Tatum, Michael Fassbender, Ewan McGregor, Michael Douglas, Antonio Banderas, Bill Paxton and Gina Carano, however is still listed as via Lionsgate, but we don’t expect that one to stay there, (April 22, 2011 is the date we’ve been told).

Lastly, remember the untitled R-rated comedy anthology Relativity announced last year with directors like Peter Farrelly, Brett Ratner, Elizabeth Banks, Mike Judge, Bob Odenkirk, Steve Baker, Damon Escot and more helming short films? That picture has a title now, or at least a working title, called “Movie 43.” Other directors involved include Steven Brill, Steve Carr, James Duffy, Griffin Dunne, Patrik Forsberg, and James Gunn. The talent on display in these shorts is pretty insane too, including Emma Stone, Gerard Butler, Kristen Bell, Chloe Moretz, Josh Duhamel, Hugh Jackman, Johnny Knoxville, Elizabeth Banks, Naomi Watts, Kate Winslet, Christopher Mintz-Plasse, Richard Gere, Anna Faris, Justin Long, Liev Schreiber, Uma Thurman, Seann William Scott, Kieran Culkin, Leslie Bibb, Jimmy Bennett, Kate Bosworth, Patrick Warburton, Tony Shalhoub, Chris Pratt, Jason Sudeikis, Jack McBrayer, Aasif Mandvi, and Bobby Cannavale. The comedy omnibus still has a TBD 2011 release date.

New synopsis’ for “Limitless” and “Take Me Home Tonight” below.

“Limitless“

Bradley Cooper and Robert De Niro star in Limitless, a paranoia-fueled action thriller about an unpublished writer whose life is transformed by a top-secret “smart drug” that allows him to use 100% of his brain and become a perfect version of himself. His enhanced abilities soon attract shadowy forces that threaten his new life in this darkly comic and provocative film.

Aspiring author Eddie Morra (Cooper) is suffering from chronic writer’s block, but his life changes instantly when an old friend introduces him to NZT, a revolutionary new pharmaceutical that allows him to tap his full potential. With every synapse crackling, Eddie can recall everything he has ever read, seen or heard, learn any language in a day, comprehend complex equations and beguile anyone he meets—as long as he keeps taking the untested drug.

Soon Eddie takes Wall Street by storm, parlaying a small stake into millions. His accomplishments catch the eye of mega-mogul Carl Van Loon (De Niro), who invites him to help broker the largest merger in corporate history. But they also bring Eddie to the attention of people willing to do anything to get their hands on his stash of NZT. With his life in jeopardy and the drug’s brutal side effects grinding him down, Eddie dodges mysterious stalkers, a vicious gangster and an intense police investigation as he attempts to hang on to his dwindling supply long enough to outwit his enemies.

“Take Me Home Tonight“

As the summer of 1988 winds down, three friends on the verge of adulthood attend an out-of-control party in celebration of their last night of unbridled youth. Starring Topher Grace, Anna Faris, Dan Fogler and Teresa Palmer, Take Me Home Tonight is a raunchy, romantic and ultimately touching blast from the past set to an awesome soundtrack of timeless rock and hip-hop hits.

Recent MIT grad Matt Franklin (Topher Grace) should be working for a Fortune 500 company and starting his upward climb to full-fledged yuppie-hood. Instead, the directionless 23-year-old confounds family and friends by taking a part-time job behind the counter of a video store at the Sherman Oaks Galleria.

But Matt’s silent protest against maturity comes to a screeching halt once his unrequited high school crush, Tori Frederking (Teresa Palmer), walks into the store. When she invites him to an epic, end-of-summer party, Matt thinks he finally might have a chance with the girl of his dreams. With his cynical twin sister Wendy (Anna Faris) and best friend Barry (Dan Fogler), Matt embarks on a once-in-a-lifetime evening. From stealing a car to a marriage proposal to an indescribable, no-holds-barred dance-off, these friends share experiences that will change the course of their lives on one unforgettable night in the Go-Go ’80s.