Joining the last three Overture titles and Rogue releases are two Relativity productions – The Dark Fields and comedy Kids In America, which were previously set to open through Universal – as well as the acquisitions title TheWarrior’s Way.

Kids In America opens on March 4 2011 and stars Topher Grace, Anna Faris, Dan Fogler, Teresa Palmer, Chris Pratt and Michelle Trachtenberg. Styled in a vein of a John Hughes film, it follows a graduate who tries to win over his high school crush during a wild party.

Michael Dowse directed from Jackie Filgo and Jeff Filgo’s screenplay and Relativity CEO Ryan Kavanaugh will produce alongside Imagine Entertainment’s Jim Whitaker and Susan Bowen. Grace, Tucker Tooley, Dany Wolf and Gordon Kaywin are executive producers.

The Dark Fields opens on March 18 2011 and stars Bradley Cooper as a man who discovers a sinister drug that endows him with superpowers. Robert De Niro, Anna Friel and Abbie Cornish star and Neil Burger directed from Leslie Dixon’s screenplay. Dixon, Scott Kroopf and Kavanaugh are producing and Tucker Tooley is executive producer.

The Warrior’s Way opens on December 3 this year and is a rent-a-system deal with producers Emerald City and Sad Flutes. The martial arts Western stars South Korea’s Dong-gun Jang as an assassin forced to hide in a small town in the American Badlands. Kate Bosworth, Geoffrey Rush, Danny Houston and Tony Cox round out the cast and newcomer Sngmoo Lee wrote and directed. Barrie Osborne produces alongside Michael Peyser and Jooick Lee.

As previously announced, Relativity will distribute the final three Overture Films: Jack Goes Boating on September 17, Let Me In on October 1, and Stone on October 8 this year.

Upcoming Relativity titles include Fighter, Skyline (pictured), Catfish and My Soul To Take, a film by Wes Craven.

“We’re thrilled to be adding these two homegrown Relativity titles to our distribution slate and happy to be releasing The Warrior’s Wayon behalf of Emerald City and Sad Flutes,” Kavanaugh said. “It’s an honour to have such great partnerships in these productions with both the film-makers and talent.”