The Hradec Králové region was created on part of the territory of the former East-Bohemian region. It encompasses the districts of Hradec Králové, Jičín, Náchod, Rychnov nad Kněžnou and Trutnov. Its area is 4758 square kilometres and its population is around 550 000. It is ninth among the regions of the country by its size and tenth by the number of inhabitants. The density of population is 116 inhabitants per square kilometre.

The neighbouring regions are those of Liberec, Central Bohemia and Prdubice. To the north it borders on Poland and the 160 kilometre-long common frontier offers five border crossings, among which the one in Náchod also allows freight transport.

Tourists can find a number of attractive localities in the region that are exceptional in the amount of natural and cultural beauties and historical monuments. To the north, along the Polish border, there are the Krkonoše mountains with the highest peak in the Czech lands Sněžka (1602 meters above sea level). It is there that the river Elbe, connecting the country with the sea, finds its source. Worth mentioning are its tributaries Úpa, Metuje and Orlice. The river Stěnava flowing through the Broumov basin connects the northern part of the region with the catchment basin of the river Odra.

Other popular destinations for tourists are the picturesque Orlické mountains, the protected landscape area around Broumov, as well as the area of Český ráj (Bohemian Paradise) in part also within the Hradec Králové region. The zoological garden of Dvůr Králové nad Labem is unique in the country for its safari section. Many tourists, above all from Germany and Poland, admire the Baroque castle of Kuks and the nearby open-air nativity scene sculptured in sandstone by M. B. Braun. Others can visit the Benedictine monastery at Broumov and the world-famous mechanical nativity scene carved in wood by Probošt fom Třebechovice pod Orebem.

Every year tourists also visit a number of the smaller historical towns such as are Jičín, Náchod, Nové Město nad Metují, Dobruška or Opočno. Although the Hradec Králové region is not among the largest of the country, its wealth of historical monuments is remarkable. Interesting artefacts are to be encountered all over. In the surroundings of Jičín it is for example the castle Pecka, the Baroque castle Humprecht near Sobotka, in the area of Rychnov nad Kněžnou there are the castles of Častolovice, Opočno, Rychnov nad Kněžnou itself or the ruined castle Potštejn, in the surroundings of Hradec Králové the neo-Gothic castle Hrádek near Nechanice, in the area of Náchod a castle in the town itself as well as the castle Ratibořice and the Grandmothers valley „Babiččino údolí“, the fort Josefov from the end of the 18th century or the castle at Nové Město nad Metují. You may equally be tempted to visit the spas Jánské Lázně, Lázně Bělohrad or Velichovky.