Česká Lípa City

Collection of views from the city

Flag

Coat of arms

Official name: The city of Česká Lípa Country Czech Republic Region Liberecký District Česká Lípa Commune Česká Lípa River Ploučnice Elevation 258 m (846 ft) Coordinates Area 66.10 km2 (25.52 sq mi) Population 40,225 (2009-12-31) Density 609 / km2 (1,577 / sq mi) First mentioned 1263 Mayor Hana Moudrá Timezone CET (UTC+1) - summer (DST) CEST (UTC+2) Postal code 470 01 - 470 06 Wikimedia Commons: Česká Lípa Statistics: [1] Website: www.mucl.cz

Česká Lípa a district seat and the largest city of the district bearing the same name. Česká Lípa can be reached easily from the north via Dresden, Bautzen, and the border crossing at Seifhennersdorf / Varnsdorf. Together with Liberec, being a higher administrative region, it is a part of Nisa Euroregion. The Ploučnice River flows through the city with its nearby fount in the east side of the district. Ceska Lipa comprises about ten neighborhoods and 14 municipal parts populated by forty thousand permanent residents. The district is a favorite destination of tourists especially from Germany, Holland and other countries as well as domestic travellers. They often like to visit the towns of Doksy and Staré Splavy and the famous and recently renovated castle of Bezděz. Inhabitants of Ceska Lipa mostly work in the industrial zone and other companies in the city and its surroundings. Unemployment level resembles other parts of the Czech Republic, not the best and not the worst, simply some average. Majority of people live in residential neighborhoods surrounding the old style inner town. There are quite good shopping chances in the city and conditions for living are nice. Education is offered by several local high schools for students but no significant university has been established. Several sports facilities for entertainment was recently built and others renovated by the city. Free time can also be used to go to cinema, theater, disco, concert or a club but gorgeous amusement business has to be searched somewhere else. All points of interest and need are reachable by municipal transit buses out of which all are disabled accessible. In only 10 miles south from Česká Lípa, there lies a great lake—Máchovo jezero (Mácha's lake). This is a popular summer resort, providing water sports, including surfing and yachting. In one easy word, Ceska Lipa city is average and it reflects all that can be expected.

Contents

1 Description

2 Genesis

3 Emblem and Flag of the city

4 Monuments

4.1 Ecclesiastical Monuments

4.2 Other Monuments

5 Nature Protection

6 Education

7 Culture

7.1 Main Centers

7.1.1 Crystal Culture House

7.1.2 Art School

7.1.3 Museum and Gallery

7.1.4 Municipal Library

7.2 Cultural Events

7.2.1 Municipal Summer Festival

7.2.2 Lípa Musica Festival

7.2.3 Reggae Ethnic Session

8 Press and Media

8.1 Press

8.2 Advertising press

8.3 Other media

9 Sports

9.1 Sports facilities

9.2 Tourism

9.2.1 Hiking Trails and Background

9.3 Sports Organizations

10 Largest Companies

11 Banks

12 Transportation

12.1 Railways

12.2 Bus Transportation

12.3 Municipal Transit

12.4 Road Transportation

13 Store Network

13.1 Hypermarkets

13.2 Department Stores

13.3 Supermarkets

14 Significant Natives and Citizens

15 Territorial division of the city

16 Neighborhoods

17 Administrative Territory

18 Sister cities

19 References

19.1 Special reference note

19.2 References

19.3 Literature

19.4 External links

Description

Česká Lípa (Template:Vjazyce Template:Cizojazyčně) is a city in the district of Česká Lípa in Liberec Region. It is located in the North Bohemia and has Ploučnice River flowing through and the historic core at its north bank. In the area of 24 sq mi the city of Česká Lípa comprises 14 parts with population of 38 181 permanent inhabitants. Its old town has been built by the Water Castle near a ford via the Ploučnice River where a Slavonic colony existed from the 10th century. The ancestry of Ronovci and Jindřich z Lipé in particular contributed to the founding of the city[1] in 1305 to 1319 and the stem of Berkové z Dubé promoted its development. A hundred years later the city was occupited by Hussite army of Jan Roháč z Dubé and affected with devastating fires. Founding a monastery and school Alberf of Valdštejn, and later Kaunitzs, contributed to another boom of the city. After the founding of Czechoslovakia (The Czech Republic today), when a meeting of 25 000 Nazis took place downtown in 1934, the city became a center of nationality unrest. Modern urban looks and development has been influenced by industrial production in the city and uranium mining in the region. Residential neighborhoods consisting of prefab housing in large were built on the outskirts while the city center was preserved and enunciated as an urban heritage zone.[2]

Genesis

The territory of the city nowadays was not inhabited permanently until the 13th century. The first written reference of settlement comes from year 1263 and is included in the Doksany Prior's purchase roll. The history of the city is associated with Ronovci[1] ancestry's name of Chvala ze Žitavy, who founded the Lipý Castle, and mainly his grandson Jindřich z Lipé (1270–1329), a significant royal aristocrat. As rolls have not been preserved, it is not clear who exactly of the ancestry founded the castle and settlement around. Thus the Lipý Castle became their another fortified seat in the North Bohemia on the route of trade ways that time. As mentioned above, there were a Slavonic colony of that name near the castle, later renamed to Stará Lípa (a part of the city today).[3] There is a reference of Arnold, said to come from Stará Lípa, who used to be a burgess in Kravaře (a small town today). Historians derive from the reference of Stará Lípa that the Lipý Castle and the colony were established around.[4] Jindřich z Lipé moved to Moravia in 1319 after he had sold the castle with its surroundings to his cousin Hynek Berka. According to other news, in 1327 the mentioned Hynek Berka z Dobé, also a member of the ancestry of Ronovci and rich Prague burgrave, was the lord of Lipá and wide surroundings. When he died in 1348, his son of the same name took the grip and after his death the second of sons Jinřich succeeded him. Then his nephew Hynek Berka z Dubé reigned the area. The eldest city charter, which he issued on March 23, 1381, documents that discretions were granted to the city of Lipá and that it was he who contributed the most to the boom of the city and the castle bearing the same name.

City walls were constructed in the beginning of the 14th century as well as a perish church of St. Paul and Peter, which was destroyed when fires affected the city in 1787. it was canonized by Peter of Aspelt, the Mayence archbishop, in 1312 in the presence of Jan Lucemburský, the Czech king. The Dean's Office of Děčín was delegated to him in 1341.[1]

In the second half of the 14th century the family of Weitmile was concerned significantly in the development of the city even behind its walls. Members of this family used to hold positions of reeve and parsons. Petr z Weitmile was assigned as a witness on the granting of the urban discretions document by Hynek Berka z Dubé in 1381.[1] Development of the city and a larger part of Bohemia was paused by a great plague epidemic in 1389. In the end of the 14th century the castle was controlled by other members of lords of Lipá family, of which a powerful and significant Hynek Hlaváč was often referred, until the beginning of Hussite wars when in May 1426 it was carried by Hussites lead by Jan Roháč z Dubé[5] and became their considerable stronghold until 1436. In years 1502 to 1553 a larger part of the city and its surroundings belonged to Vartenberks. Later, the lords of Dubá / Lipá gained the castle again and kept it over 100 years. Albrecht of Valdštejn reunited the city in 1622 to 1623 being disintegrated by Berkas.[6] The city was destroyed in large part in 1787 and 1820.

Emblem and Flag of the city

The emblem of the city originates in the urban seal from 1389. Above the city wall there is a coat of arms of the lords of Lipá with crossed fighting rods. The flag was designed by the Heraldic Committee, the State District Archives of Česká Lípa, in 1992 and adjusted according to a historical artwork from 1937. The emblem proposal was discussed in the city government in June 1992, reviewed by Subcommittee for Heraldics of the House of Commons in December and 15 July 1993 the Speaker of the House of Commons granted the emblem to the city.[7]

Monuments

Ecclesiastical Monuments

Augustinian Monastery, founded by founded by Albrecht of Valdštejn in 1627, it took 150 years to complete. There used to be a school and printhouse. Today, beside others, the Homeland Museum and Gallery of the city of Ceska Lipa works here. Location: Náměstí Osvobození (Liberation Square), city center.

Loretan Chapel, built in 1698 in the monastery cloisters

All Saints Church, subsequent construction of the monastery, completed in 1710

Mary the Virgin's Birth Church, originally a gothic church of 14th century, reconstructed to baroque style in 1706 to 1710 by Josef Abondius. Location: Palackého Square, upper downtown.

St. Maria Magdalene Church was built in gothic style in the middle of the 13th century but later damaged by Hussite and Lužice armies. Jindřich Berka, brother-in-law of Jiří z Poděbrad the king, had it repaired and reconstructed around 1460[8] and 30 years later it became a part of the provost seat. It was reconstructed to the nowadays Late Gothic style in the 16th century. Location: Corner of Nábřeží B. Smetany a Hrnčířská Street, downtown

Cistorian Provost, today Deanery—Roman Catholic Parish, is adjacent to the church and comes from 1756, Location: 721 Hrnčířská Street

St. Cross Promotion Church, built in the second half of 14th century, later reconstructed to Late Gothic style and even later in 1897 adjusted to neo-Gothic style by Josef Mocker. Location: Hrnčířská Street, downtown

Evangelic Church was built in 1927 and 1928 by local Protestants and taken over by Czechoslovak Hussite Church in 1945, Location: Roháče z Dubé Street

Plague Maria the Virgin and Holy Trinity Column at T. G. Masaryk Square. Part by part built in 1683 after the plague pandemic which hit the city and surroundings in 1680.

The place where a synagogue had stood until destroyed in 1938 by Nazis is marked with the historical memorial stone installed ceremonially in 2008.[9]

Nearby the Střelnice train stop and Střelnice bar and disco area there is an enclosed Jewish Cemetery.

Other Monuments

Lipý Water Castle (also Lipá, Lipý) was built in 13th century by members of the ancestry of Ronovci who later called themselves the Lords of Lipá. In the beginning the construction was made of wood and was built by Ploučnice river. The river's flow was later deflected. A guard tower of stone was built in the 14th century. It was captured by Hussites and Swedes and ceased in time. There were a sugar refinery inside in the 19th and beginning of the 20th century and the castle was finally blasted out after 1945. After 1990 the city began with its gradual reconstruction and organizes cultural events in its grounds. A contributory organization Lipý, Česká Lípa has been established by the city for the castle's management and a neighboring recently renovated historical exhibition of Centrum textilního tisku (textile print center) was given in its charge in February 2011.[10]

Red House is in vicinity with the Lipý Castle and was built as a hunters' chateau by Jetřich Jiří Berka z Dubé in 1583.[3] This building of Italian renaissance style is fine decorated outside with sgrafitto and had been used for many purposes, such as a dye-house, a tavern, and a city museum branch in 1933. It is unused nowadays. Location: U vodního hradu St.

Neo-Renaissance City Hall from 1823 was reconstructed in 1884 and is in use for its purpose at T. G. Masaryk Square downtown. Basements are built in Gothic style as the city hall had been standing here even in past times before several devastating fires. The building had partially served as a saving house, a court and by 1900 also as a museum branch.

Fountain (Empire, with dolphins) at T. G. Masaryk Square from 1837, fully functional in Summertime down to this day.

Špičák Outlook Tower—The Hill of Špičák at the north edge of the city has elevation of 150 ft above sea level, the highest point far and wide. The outlook tower of 45 ft in height was built there in 1885 for a price of 5000 guilders and mere two years later partially burnt down. However, it was soon renovated and in 1906 only there were 2500 tourists written in its memorial book. It was used for anti-aircraft patrols in the Second World War and then began to cease. In 1997 it was renovated and adjusted to radio and cellular phone networks transmitter, unavailable for ordinary public. A blue hiking trail leads here from the downtown.[5]

Nature Protection

There are several monumental trees and one conservation in the city—Okřešice Meadows.

Education

As proved, there was a parochial school in 1391 in tie city, then records mention a doom of the school in 1515 during a big fire. The Latin school established in 1627 together with the Augustinian Monastery had been canceled by Maria Theresa the Empress. The facility was restored in 1806 as their high school. Education had its boom in 19th century. In 1824 an evening school for working children was established, then a trade apprentice school was opened in 1838, a business school in 1868, a practice school by the Monastery in 1869, a trade continuation school in 1879 and in October 19 the same year a high school of agriculture was opened. In 1882 the State High School was established and in 1895 girls' and 1900 a boys' burgress school.

There was 42 schools and kindergartens in 2003 in the city.

Read more about local schools in the article: Školství v České Lípě

Culture

Main Centers

There are several culture centers in Česká Lípa. Most important are the Crystal Culture House, the Jirásek Theater, the Art School with its halls, the Homeland Museum and Gallery with their branches and the Municipal Library with its branches.

Crystal Culture House

The building comprises a cinema, halls and a restaurant. A contributory organization was established by the city after 1990 bearing the name of Crystal Culture House as its manager and this helps organizing Summer events in the Lipý Castle. The city government concluded that the mentioned group would be renamed to Ceska Lipa Culture effective by the 1st of January 2011 and herewith a new organization Lipý Česká Lípa would be established. This one was given the castle in charge of as well as[11]) the recently created historic Textile Print Center in the castle vicinity opened in February 16, 2011.[12]

Before the Municipal Information Center was moved to the City Hall it had been a part of Crystal Cultural House as well.

Art School

This facility was established in the building called the White House which formerly served to the Communist Party District Coommittee until 1990. .[13] There are several sections and their schoolrooms in this multilevel building while the ground floor with its large hall serves as a seat of the Rainbow Dancing School. There is enough space for plastics exhibitions and the smaller hall is made for production of music files as well as the school activities. It is also used by other non-school music groups.

(More about this Art School and Dancing School see: Školství v České Lípě)

Museum and Gallery

Homelad Museum and Gallery of the city of Česká Lípa is located in the grounds of the former Augustinian Monastery. A big Animal World exhibition permanently takes place here. A Loretan courtyard grants place to short-time exhibitions. There is a religious building of Loreta in the middle and other places are occupied with artwork collections. The chapel is also part of the grounds and is used for concerts. This museum has a regional character and holds many object of the Ceska Lipa District area. It is as well the manager of Village Magistrate in the town of Kravaře, Karel Hynek Mácha Memorial in the town of Doksy including the Fisher and Pond Culture of Ceska Lipa exhibition. It is also in chrge of Breda Summerhouse in the grounds of Lemberk Chateau.[14]

Municipal Library

The main three-level building is downtown at the 170 T. G. Masaryk Square. There is an entertainment literature department on the 1st floor; educational literature, public internet access and reading and lecture rooms on the 2nd floor and children department on the 3rd floor.

The library offers consultancy to smaller libraries of the district and has its three branches in the city:

Branch for Špičák neighborhood, Červeného Kříže St.,

Branch for Lada neighborhood, 2989 Komenského St.,

Branch for Holy vrch neighborhood, 1814 Jižní St.

Cultural Events

Municipal Summer Festival

The city organizes the Municipal Summer Festival in the grounds of Lipý Castle every year at the beginning of Summer. This event was founded in 2000 when it took place in the city park, then celebrating 125 years from its founding. The next year it took place at the T. G. Masaryk Square. When Lipý Castle was renovated in 2003 the festival moved to its grounds. This event contains an antique fair, concerts, fireworks, theater performances and City Awards are granted.[15]

Lípa Musica Festival

The first annual International Lípa Music Festival was held in 2000, primarily featuring classical music. By 2008 there were 10 places in the Ustecky and Liberecky regions organizing concerts. In the city of Česká Lípa the opening and closing events of the festival are held in the All Saints Basilica, part of the Augustinian Monastery. The Lipa Musica Festival has a significant position among cultural events in Liberecký Region, being the leading musical event of the autumn season. This is not just a regional matter, especially since 2007, when its itinery changed, it presents top quality concerts which attract listeners from further afield including Prague. The aim of the management is to make this festival one of the biggest in Czechia.

Reggae Ethnic Session

For fans of reggae, ska and world music styles the Reggae Ethnic Session music festival was established in 2000 in Žízníkov, peripheral neighborhood of the city, and this one has become the biggest of its kind in Bohemia. Since guest number had skyrocketed and the place in Žízníkov ceased to be enough large any more, the session has moved to nearby meadows of Heřmaňičky neighborhood.

Press and Media

Press

After year 1850 the Leipaer Zeitung was released in German language for Česká Lípa readers and competitive Deutsche Leipaer Zeitung from 1884, both twice a week.Robert, Krejcar (2009). "Zmatená doba" (in Czech). Bezděz, vlastivědný sborník Českolipska (18): 80. ISSN 1211-9172. </ref>

The following periodical press titles are nowadays main information sources: Českolipský deník (Ceska Lipa Daily) now part of Vltaba Labe Press Holding, established in 1993 and Městské noviny (Municipal Journal) issued by the city hall. Lípa magazine, new Českolipský Šotek and Zpravodaj OSBD Česká Lípa bring information as well as advertising.

Advertising press

Retail chains of Interspar, Kaufland, OBI, Penny Market, Lidl, Albert Hypermarket (formerly Hypernova) and local OD Andy feed merely advertising press deliverd to post boxex. There is also a longer history of Českolipské kapky (Česká Lípa Drops) advetising magazine.

Other media

There is no commercial or municipal TV station in Česká Lipa but the Hitradio FM Crystal broadcasts here both for Ceska Lipa and Decin districts (formerly for Ceska Lipa only). The city has an official site on the net, there is also an independent i-noviny district web based newspaper and tens of other blogs, sites of private to rag style. Almost all institutions, organizations, Public Administration, sport and culture clubs have their sites.

Sports

Sports facilities

Sport Česká Lípa, a contributory organization, established by the city has the following facilities in charge:

Municipal Stadium, 3178 Boženy Němcové St., open soccer pitch, tennis hall, outdoor tennis courts, hothouse and solarium.

Sports Hall (Lokomotiva), 1439 Hrnčířská St.

Sports Complex by Kaufland, reconstructed winter stadium and indoor pool with water slide

Sever Swimmimg Pool, 2520 Školní St.

Skatepark, in the vicinity of the Sports Complex

Another Facilities

OLYMPIA Relax Center, squash, bowling, hothouse,

Bowling, three places in town

School gyms and pitches

TJ Lokomotiva grounds including a soccer pitch near the train station

Lada Airdrome, an air club and sightseeing flights

Sosnová Motor-racing Circuit, location of tens of contests including National Championship

PMultifunction Sports Hall near Kaufland Hypermarket for basketball, volleyball, handball, floorball and indoor soccer. The consgtruction in price of 45 ml. CZK was started in Summertime of 2010 and completed a year later.[16]

Tourism

There is the Municipal Information Center at the T. G. Masaryk Square.

Boating Ploučnice, used for canoes and kayaks from the town of Stráž pod Ralskem, municipal washtub funny rally from time to time.

Hiking Trails and Background

There are three cycling paths leading throughout the city, built partially on subsoil of canceled railroads.

Cycling Path 3053 leads from south from Provodin and Sosnová. Farther from Ceska Lipa it leads northwards via Písečná as Písečná Cycling Path, then to towns of Nový Bor and Cvikov in Lusation Mountains

Cycling Path 3054 leads from Provodin as well, via Vlčí důl (here Vlčí důl Cycling Path). From Ceska Lipa it leads northwards in direction of Skalice township and Nový Bor town.

Varhany Cycling Path's construction still in progress, a part of the path 3054. It should be 10.5 mi long in price of 17 mil. CZK. Its first part from Českokamenická Street to Horní Libchava township in length of 3.3 mi was opened ceremonially on June 23, 2008.

There is a network of hiking trails in the city as well as its surroundings and a guide-post crossing at Bulharská St. leading to the train station. The nearest rambler destination is the Peklo (hell), a part of E10 international route getting northsouthwards through the city. Blue trail leads from Bulharská St., as mentioned above, e.g. 1634 Trail to Mácha's Lake or yellow 6960 to Holany Ponds.

There is a Klub českých turistů (Czech Tourist Club) with a sign before the train station and the seat in Adela Villa and TOM (Youths Tourist Troop).

Sports Organizations

District Committee of Czech Union of Physical Education used to be an original administrative association which now is Česká Lípa District Sports Union, 1580 Mánesova St. the most significant Physical Education Organizations are as follows:

HC Predators Česká Lípa, hockey

FK Arsenal Česká Lípa, soccer

Lokomotiva Česká Lípa, soccer, volleyball, table-tenniss, handball, judo

Atletic club Česká Lípa, athletics

FBC Česká Lípa, floorball club with several units

Klub Sport Relax Znamenáček, karate

Largest Companies

There is a number of large automotive companies in the southwest part of the city, mainly in Dubice neighborhood and industrial zone where about 5000 workers are employed. Those are branches of international holding corporations such as Johnson Controls, Varta, Delphi Packard Electric, Autobaterie, Fehrer Bohemia and Bombardier.

Banks

Most of the following are downtown:

Česká spořitelna Hrnčířská St.

Komerční banka Hrnčířská St.

ČSOB, Barvířská St.

GE Money Bank, T. G. Masaryk Sq.

Raiffeisen stavební spořitelna,T. G. Masaryka Sq.

UniCredit Bank Czech Republic, Jindřicha z Lipé St.

Transportation

Railways

There is a junction of several important railroads in the city, namely: Česká Lípa hlavní nádraží|Česká Lípa Central Station, and train stops Česká Lípa střelnice and Česká Lípa-Holý vrch. The first one is on the railway Bakov nad Jizerou - Jedlová and the second one to Děčín. Downtown Station (Česká Lípa město) was canceled in 1979 and a railway connecting it with the central station in length of three quartesrs of a mile is not in use any more. Now train stop (with a misguiding name today) Vlčí důl - Dobranov belongs to the city as this peripheral area has become a neighboorhood of Česká Lípa. Railroads and stations have been built by various companies. The first railway was built in 1867 leading to the town of Bakov nad Jizrou and in opposite direction leading from the Central Station built in 1867 via train stop of Česká Lípa střelnice built in 1869 to the town of Rumburk. Another railway was opened in 1872 to the town of Bdnešov nad Ploučnicí and later prolonged to the city of Děčín. Another company then built the downtown station out of which the first train went to the town of Litoměřice and in 1903 the railway leading from Česká Lípa to Řetenice u Teplic and in opposite direction leading via the town of Zákupy to the city of Liberec. The railway from Česká Lípa střelnice to the town of Česká Kamenice was completed and opened in 1903 and large railway workshops was constructed in the vicinity of the central station. National corporation of ŽOS (Railway Repair and Engineering Workshops) had its seat here until 1980. The railway leading to Česká Kamenice was canceled over time, in 1979 to be precise, and its subsoil was used for building of a part of the Varhany Cycling Path. Railways in the city and peripherals are connected. The downtown station built in 1898 is out of service now and Czech Railways offer it for sale nowadays. The railway from this station leading to the neighborhood of Vlčí důl has been canceled and its subsoil used for construction of the cyclying path no. 3054. Three short sidings unused and blocked lead from the central station to several former factory and industrial buildings in Svárov neighborhood.

There are four directions to which trains are dispatched from the central station.

080 Bakov – Česká Lípa – Rumburk, leads northwards

081 Česká Lípa – Děčín, leads westwards

086 Česká Lípa – Liberec, leads southeastwards then northeeastwards

087 Česká Lípa – Lovosice, leads southwards

Railways 081 and 086 are joined by many trains. Ordinary passenger trains use them for routes from Liberec to Děčín and express ones from Liberec to Ústí nad Labem.

Bus Transportation

regional and intercity transportation, mainly ČSAD Česká Lípa Co., using its bus station from 1986,[17] provides connection in directions to towns of Mimoň, Nový Bor, Praha and connecting the city with surrounding towns and villages.

Small transportations companies (such as Mirobus for instance) provide transport for commuters of local large companies or offer an alternative transportation for Czech Railways in case of lockouts etc. Nevertheless, Municipal transit company of BusLine Co. has taken over most of such services.

Municipal Transit

Municipal Transit is provided with city buses exclusively (no ligh rail or trolley bus transit). Regional corporation of ČSAD with its seat in Ústí nad Labem and depot in Česká Lípa provided the municipal transit until 1993. Then from 1993 to 2008 the transit was provided by Vett Co. (with a month break in 2007). Another company, ČSAD Semily Co. became the carrier by February 2008 and city routes was legalized with licenses in April 2008. Several legal actions and complaints were engaged in the legal dispute betweeh the city and Vett Co.[18] To comply with reginal integrated transport regulations, routes of Ceska Lipa Municipal Transit was renumbered by March 1, 2008 and the transit operation optimized with regular intervals and service interlacing on main routes. After fusion of ČSAD Semily and ČSAD Jablonec nad Nisou companies in December 2010 a new company BusLine Co. was established and this one became the new transit carrier in Česká Lípa.[19]

.

There exists the,[20] an oranizational constituent of Lípa 2 civic association, which monitors the transit development, negotiates with the city, other authorities as well as carriers, and brings complete information in its website.

Road Transportation

The most important of this kind is a straight superlevel I/9 Road leading south to north from Praha to Nový Bor from 1987.[21] From west to east there is a II/262 Road from Děčín to Zákupy. There are junctions and pedestrian crossing with streetlights and several roundabouts in the city.

Store Network

While small shops remained dominant downtown only in the historic core around the main square, branches of international store chains was build in north part of the city (mainly Špičák neighborhood) such as Interspar, Albert, Penny Market, Lidl, Mountfield. When both market places had been canceled downtown by the city, many stores and shops in the center have been taken over by former stall owners (usually Vietnamese). Kaufland Hypermarket lies near the south bank of Ploučnice River and Parada Shopping Center in Holy Vrch neighborhood by the II/262 Road in direction to Děčín. Two department stores, Andy and Banco are right in the center.

Hypermarkets

All large stores have their parking lots, some of them under ground level.

Hypernova, Šluknovská St., near the road to Nový Bor, renamed to Albert Hypermarket by června 2009.

Interspar, Borská St., the same area

OBI, Borská St., the same area, together with Interspar

Kaufland, Mimoňská St., south bank of Ploučnice river

Parada Shopping, Děčínská Rd., shopping center

Department Stores

Andy, 2906 Erbenova St., independent proprietor

Banco, Dr. E. Beneš Sq, opposite to Andy, downtown as well

Supermarkets

Spar, Bardějovská St.

Spar, Děčínská Rd.

Penny Market, Žitavská St., Špičák neighborhood

Mountfield, Žitavská St., by Penny Market

Lidl, Purkyňova St., near Penny Market

Significant Natives and Citizens

Josef Bohumír Mikan (1743–1814), physician and professor of botanics and chemistry at Charles Universiti in Prague

Pavel Konopeus (1596–1636), monastery school director

Vilém Horn (1809–1891), photography pioneer pulisher of the first magazine about photos

Ernst Kutzer (1880–1965), painter, graphic designer, author and illustrator

Richard Duschek (1884–1959), painter and illustrator

Franz Winkler (* 1890), Austrian politician

Jaroslav Panáček (1908–1992), chronicler, historian, athletics chairman, teacher

Rudolf de la Vigne (1920–2004), German soccer player

Rudolf Jürschik (* 1935), chief editor, then art director of DEFA

Angela Jursitzka (* 1938), German journalist and writer

Věra Klásková (* 1970), Czech performer of Irish ballads

Petr Kellner (*1964), conterporary billionaire

Territorial division of the city

The city is divided into 14 cadastral territories and 14 parts:

Častolovice u České Lípy, část Častolovice, připojeno 1. ledna 1969, v 90. letech krátce samostatná obec

Česká Lípa

Dobranov

Dolní Libchava, joined on July 14, 1964

Dubice u České Lípy, part [[Dubice (Česká Lípa)|], joined on July 30, 1960; There was also Robeč part until 2007, which was canceled administratively.

Heřmaničky u Dobranova, part Heřmaničky

Lada, joined on June 30, 1960

Manušice

Okřešice u České Lípy, part Okřešice (Česká Lípa), joined on November 27, 1971

Písečná u Dobranova, part Písečná

Stará Lípa, joined on June 30, 1960[22]

Vítkov u Dobranova, part Vítkov

Vlčí Důl

Žizníkov

Neighborhoods

The inner town of the city is divided into the following neighborhoods as seen in the city map.

Sever

Lada

Špičák

Svárov

Dolní Libchava

Slovanka

Dubice

Stará Lípa

Kopeček

Administrative Territory

Template:Viz též Česká Lípa is a district city as well as a municipality with extended poweers and the local authority. Česká Lípa District comprises 57 municipalities, Česká Lípa Municipality with extended powers consists of 47 municipalities.

Sister cities

Template:Country data Rusko Aleksandrov, Russia

Template:Country data Slovensko Bardejov, Slovak Republic

Template:Country data Polsko Boleslawiec, Poland

Template:Country data Německo Mittweida, Germany

Template:Country data Norsko Molde, Norway

Template:Country data Ukrajina Užhorod, Ukraine

References

Special reference note

Except for one photo and the introductory paragraph this page has been translated from the Wikipedia page of Česká Lípa in Czech language. Any copyright is as stated by the author of the original article in Czech language. When referring to Czech language sources, a reader should opt for Czech language as well.

References

Literature

Jaroslav, Panáček; Marie, Vojtíšková; Ladislav, Smejkal (1999) (in Czech). Z dějin České Lípy. Česká Lípa: Sobotová, OVM.

Z minulosti Děčínska a Českolipska IV., kolektiv autorů, vydalo Severočeské nakl. V Ústí n.L r.1985

František, Gabriel (1997) (in Czech). Hrad Lipý. Praha: Unicornis.

Ladislav, Smejkal (2006) (in Czech). Českou Lípou krok za krokem. Česká Lípa: Magdaléna Sobotová.

Template:Geo cz