HELENA SUKOVA played mind games with her opponents on the tennis court.

And now she is getting inside the heads of athletes in her new role as a psychologist.

Sukova, 58, enjoyed a very successful career on the court after being born into a tennis family - her mum was a Wimbledon finalist and her dad was the president of the Czechoslovak Tennis Federation.

It could all have been very different had she not hated the piano and doctors banning her from playing soccer due to a problematic hip, spine and shorter left leg.

But Sukova went on to win ten singles titles and peaked at world No4, collecting $6.3million in prize money, despite playing in one of the greatest eras of women's tennis against the likes of Martina Navratilova, Steffi Graf, Chris Evert and Monica Seles.

The Czech ace, though, more than held her own and reached four singles Grand Slam finals - two at the Australian Open and two at the US Open.

In 1986 at Flushing Meadows, she lost to Navratilova and then to Graf seven years later.

In Australia, it was Evert and Graf who came out on top - the 1984 final coming after Sukova had ended Navratilova's 74-match winning streak in the semis and quashed the legend's Calendar Slam dreams.

Sukova also reached a French Open semi-final and five Wimbledon quarter-finals.

But it was in doubles that Sukova was the most prolific.

She won 69 doubles titles, including nine Grand Slams, reached world No1 and added a further five mixed-doubles majors.

The 6ft 2ins star's first Grand Slam success came at the 1985 US Open alongside German Claudia Kohde-Kilsch, with whom she also won Wimbledon two years later.

Sukova teamed up with Jana Novtona to complete the career Grand Slam and later added titles with Arantxa Sanchez Vicario and Martina Hingis.

In the mixed, three of her five majors were won with her brother Cyril Suk III - the other two, at the US and Wimbledon, came partnering Todd Woodbridge.

Two Olympic silver medals and four Fed Cup wins for her country cemented her place in tennis history.

And that was confirmed for good in 2018 when Stan Smith phoned to confirm the Hall of Fame had inducted Sukova.

She said: " I was very surprised because I didn't believe I was going to make it.

"I was already a nominee twice and this was really the last chance and there were other big names as nominees. I'm happy I made it.

I was mad at myself because I didn't do as well as I thought I would... now I'm happy

Helena Sukova

"Now I'm proud of everything I was able to achieve. When I stopped in 1998 I was mad at myself because I didn't do as well as I thought I would and I didn't win what I thought I would.

"For two years I didn't know where my rackets were. I was disappointed because I didn't make it and I stopped because I didn't believe I was going to get any better.

"But now I'm happy and all the trophies are back out and my Olympic medal is in a nice cupboard."

However, rather than pursue the coaching or punditry route like many of her peers, Sukova opted for a major career change after retiring in 1998 at the end of a 15-year career.

She had a spell as the head of Czech tennis and is a key member of the 90-strong group of athletes dedicated to promoting peace across the world through sport.

On top of that, though, the serial winner also went to university and graduated with a psychology degree.

And now she is helping the next generation thrive between the ears as a top-level psychologist - which includes working with various current and former sports stars.

Sukova, vice-president of Czechia's Association of Sports Psychologists since 2011, told the WTA: "It helps you in that you know how the athletes are feeling at a certain stage so you know what to look for.

"Every person is different but a lot of these deep things are similar.

"If I was a player now I would be so smart, telling myself what to do. I would be winning everything!

"It's like they say, now you have the experience, but you don't have the body."