James Franco will direct ex-girlfriend Ahna O'Reilly in Off-Broadway play after he won raves for starring onstage in Of Mice And Men

James Franco recently made his Broadway debut in the revival of John Steinbeck's Of Mice And Men alongside Chris O'Dowd and Leighton Meester.

He has wasted no time expanding his theater resume. On Monday it was revealed the 36-year-old actor will direct the Off-Broadway production of The Long Shrift, according to The Hollywood Reporter.

One of the stars is Franco's ex-girlfriend Ahna O'Reilly who he split from in 2011.

Scroll down for video

The play will be one of the productions in the 20th anniversary season of the Rattlestick Playwrights Theater and will run July 13 to August 23.

In addition to Ahna, the production will also star Scott Haze, Brian Lally, Allie Gallerani and Ally Sheedy.

Curtain call: Franco and his co-star Chris O'Dowd are shown on the opening niight of Of Mice And Men

Of Mice and Men runs through July 27 at the Longacre Theatre, so Franco will be pulling double duty for two weeks as his projects overlap.

James has 24 credits as a film director, including shorts and documentaries. He also wrote several of those projects.

As an actor, he's enjoyed a wildly varied career, from lowbrow comedy such as Pineapple Express to his Oscar-nominated performance in the drama 127 Hours, in 2011, to TV guest roles such as The Mindy Project and even having an arc on the soap opera General Hospital.

This may be his busiest year yet, with no fewer than 15 projects in various stages of production, according to IMDB, including The Adderall Diaries opposite Amber Heard and Forever Love with Mila Kunis.

Cast photo: The stars of the Steinbeck play pose backstage: O'Dowd, Leighton Meester, Franco and director Anna D. Shapiro

Given all the work on his plate, it's remarkable how much time Franco has spent posting bedroom selfies and denying that he ever slept with Lindsay Lohan, despite him appearing on the troubled actress' 'sex-list' in April.

Franco confessed to radio host Howard Stern in April that the pair did 'make out' back in 2004, but labeled the starlet as 'delusional' for claiming they had sex.

He even recently penned a story - titled Bungalow 89 - that concerns a character called Lindsay, who shares more than few personality traits with Miss Lohan.

Wild ones: Franco recently posted this shot with Amber Heard from the set of The Adderall Diaries

'She was a Hollywood girl, but a damaged one,' he begins in the tale, 'Let's call this girl Lindsay'.

Talking about their meet, he writes: 'Now we were lying in bed. I wasn't going to f*** her. She had her head on my shoulder. She started to talk. I let her.'

The actor also gained a lot of attention for a series of provocative near-nude selfies on his Instagram account, the actor has claimed he does it to increase his followers.

'It gets a lot of attention,' he told David Letterman on the Late show last month.

The selfies have included a swiftly deleted shirtless shot with his hand down his underpants.

He told the late night host:'There's a lot to get straight here and I don't even know if we have time.

Not too racy: This is one of the tamer bedroom selfies Franco has been posting of late

'But to me, it's just a fun thing. It's something I don't put a ton of thought into, but it gets a lot of attention. I have a lot of followers on Instagram.'

Franco is highly educated and has even taught courses at NYU.