Spider-Man star James Franco has confirmed that he and girlfriend Ahna O'Reilly have gone their separate ways after five years together.

The 33-year-old actor is currently a PhD student in English at Yale University, having previously studied at Columbia University and UCLA.

Franco, nominated for an Oscar for his role in 127 Hours, started dating fellow thespian Ahna, 26, in 2006 but says she was fed up of staying in Los Angeles alone while he studied away.

Scroll down to see James in the trailer for his new movie Rise Of The Apes...

All over now: James Franco has confirmed he's split from former girlfriend Ahna O'Reilly, seen with him here in Los Angeles last year

Talking in the August issue of Playboy magazine, he said: ‘That [relationship] lasted about four or five years.

'We'd been living together in LA then I came to New York to go to school for two years.

‘Then I signed up for more school at Yale. I think that was it for her.’

Ahna has had moderate success as an actress, appearing as Leslie in Forgetting Sarah Marshall, but has yet to achieve lead roles in the league of her former beau.

On his own: The 127 Hours star says Ahna got fed up being on her own in LA while he studied on the other side of the country

Franco however admitted he didn’t have much luck with the ladies during his early years at school, saying: ‘I think girls liked me, but I was awkward, shy and emotionally immature, so I didn’t have a ton of girlfriends.

'I had short-term relationships and always got dumped, I think because I was too slow for them.’

James meanwhile is gearing up for the release of his next movie, the eagerly-anticipated Planet Of The Apes reboot Rise of The Apes.

The sci fi action movie is even being tipped to give Harry Potter And The Deathly Hallows: Part 2 a run for its money.

Award-winning: James was nominated for an Oscar this year for his role in Danny Boyle's 127 Hours

The film is a prequel to the 1968 Charlton Heston original, and shows the period of time before they came to be a supremely intelligent society who rule the Earth.

Set in present-day San Francisco, it tells the story of scientist Will Rodman, played by James Franco, who is conducting tests on apes in an attempt to find a cure for Alzheimer's - before it all goes horribly wrong...

The movie also stars Harry Potter star Tom Felton - best known as Draco - as well as John Lithgow, Andy Serkis, Brian Cox and Freida Pinto and is directed by Rupert Wyatt, formerly behind The Escapist.