Gabriella Wilde’s actual name is Gabrielle Zanna Vanessa Anstruther -Gough-Caalthrope was born on 8th April 1989. She also called Gabrielle Calthorpe is a beautiful English model as well as an actress. She made her entry as a model by Naomi Campbell. Gabriella joined her agency and presented in campaigns for the organization including Lacoste, L.K Bennett, Abercrombie && Fitch, Topshop, and Burberry. On the other hand, she was given a pose for “Instyle”, “Cosmopolitan”, “Vogue” and “Nylon” magazines. In the year 2007, she got the name of the second most eligible girl in Britain, but she declined press attention as well as the ” It Girl” label.

In December 2009, she made her presence in the adventure comedy movie “St Trinian’s 2: The Legend of Fritton’s Gold”. Followed by the next year in 2010, she appeared in the “Doctor Who”, BBC television series. In the same year, she starred in the movie “The Three Musketeers”. This film was released in 2011 and earned $132 million worldwide.

Gabriella Wilde – Height, Weight, Age, Movies & Family – Biography

Gabriella Wilde Childhood Accomplishments

Gabriella was born in England to the parents John Anstruther -Gough-Caalthrope and Vanessa Mary Theresa. Her father was a former Watermark Group Chairman and her mother was a former model who did for John Swannell and David Bailey. For Gabriel’s parents, this was the second marriage. She has one younger sibling named Octavia and also she has five half-siblings. From her mother’s first marriage she has the half-siblings of Olivia and Arabella Llewellyn and from her father’s first marriage she has the half-siblings of Georgiana, Isabella, and Jacobi. Among the five Olivia, Isabella, and Cressida are also in the entertainment industry as an actress.

Gabriella and her future husband attended Windlesham House School. Afterward, she went to Heath field St.Mary’s School, Ascot as well as St Swithun’s School in Winchester. She was suspended from Heathfield school and transferred to St Swithun’s because of smuggled Vodka. She then studied fine arts course at the City and Guilds of Art School and dropped because of her acting career.

Gabriella Wilde Awards and achievements

Gabriella has won Satellite Award for the series “Poldark” under the genre Best Cast in Television Series

Best known for

Gabrielle Wilde is the best know for her film “Wonder woman 1984” in 2020

She is also well known for her excellent acting in many films including “Doctor Who”, “The Three Musketeers”, “Endless Love” and more

Gabriella Wilde Body Measurements

Interesting facts about Gabriella Wilde

Gabriella with her soul sister Chelsea Leyland

Octavia and Gabriella walking with her son

She shared a picture with her husband Pownall

This clip has been taken during the series “Poldark”

Beautiful Gabriella in an attractive scenario

She shared the picture of her husband and children by wishing Happy Birthday to his love

Gabriella is in white attire with white background

Gabriella Wilde Personal Info

Pre-relationship of Gabriella

Burberry model Gabriella dated Alan Pownmall, a musician, and also he studied with her in school. He also has a fashion background and studied design as well as worked for Roland Mouret. They have been in a love relationship for four years and both got married in the year 2014. This couple has three children and they are Sasha Blue Pownall, Shiloh Silva Pownall, and Skye Pownall.

Gabriella Wilde Family and personal life

Gabriella initiated her modeling career at the age of 14. With her hard work, she starred in many films as well as series. She acted in “Dark Horse”, ABC Sci-Fii television series in 2012. The same year Gabriella performed in the short film “Maestro” and soon she played in the film “Squatters”. In the year 2013, she acted in Scott Spencer’s novel called “Endless Love” which was released in 2014. She then starred as Caroline in “Poldark”, a BBC drama from 2015 to 2019. In 2015, Gabriella joined Estee Lauder company as their newest spokesmodel and became the brand’s advertising campaign face. Gabriella Wilde as an actress maintains an attractive body by improving her body measurements. In terms of height, she is 5 feet and 10 inches tall and 60 kgs in weight. Coming to her personal life, she married Alan Pownall and has three children.

What is the net worth of Gabriella Wilde?

The net worth of Gabrielle Wilde is around $ 4 million

What are her sources of income?

She is a famous actress and obtained her money in the cine field industry

How much is Gabriella Wilde educated?

Gabrielle attended Windlesham House School, Heathfield St Mary’s School, Ascot, and later St Swithun’s School in Winchester. She then joined in City and Guilds of London Art School and dropped it later to enter the entertainment industry

Does Gabriella Wilde smoke?

Yes, she used to smoke often

Controversies of Gabriella Wilde

She doesn’t involve in any controversies in her personal and professional life

How old is Gabriella Wilde?

Gabriella Wilde is 33 years old

Assets of Gabriella Wilde

No information regarding her movable and immovable assets

Does she have any tattoos?

Gabriella has tattoos on her left wrist and right hand. She has written VII Roman numerals on her left wrist but don’t know the tattoo on her right hand

Does she own any brand?

Gabriella is the brand ambassador for the Regent Street Boutique

She is a model for the Burberry brand

Gabriella Wilde Social Media Profiles

Instagram

Twitter

Gabriella Wilde Movies List

2009 – St Trinian’s 2: The Legend of Fritton’s Gold

2011 – The Three Musketeers

2012 – Il Maestro

2013 – Carrie

2014 – Endless Love

2014 – Squatters

2020 – Wonder Woman 1984

Gabriella Wilde TV Shows