Located within Europe’s leading business aviation airport Paris-Le Bourget north-east to Paris, the National Air and Space Museum of France is one of the world’s finest aviation museums, both for the wealth of its collections and long history. It features an incredible collection of historical artefacts spanning the three branches of flight: ballooning, aviation and space. Among which, more than a hundred aircraft from its collection are on display, from the very first flying machines to the Breguet 19 “Point d’Interrogation”, the Spitfire and Concorde. Stroll through its exhibition halls and tarmac and check out the must-sees during your visit to the museum.

The National Air and Space Museum of France is also a site museum. In fact, Le Bourget is a place that all aviation heroes have been through, including Charles Lindbergh. It is the birthplace of commercial aviation and includes buildings that are themselves of great cultural interest, like the terminal building with its Art Deco architecture. Read about its history and key dates since its creation in 1919.

Bridging the past and the future, the prestigious National Air and Space Museum of France is a lively place, holding events throughout the year, regularly acquiring items for the collection, hosting activities for all (including Planète Pilote for children) and being hired for various events and for filming.

VIGIPIRATE

In order to ensure the safety of visitors, the Air and Space Museum applies the preventive measures decided by the government for institutions receiving the public.

Suitcases and large bags are prohibited and control devices are placed at the entrance of the museum.

ACCEPTED BAGGAGE SIZE

We recommend that you do not come to visit the site with luggage, however the Air and Space Museum provides luggage storage.

Attention effects larger than 55cm x 35cm x 20cm are not accepted in the museum.

Items left in the locker must be picked up the same day. This service is free.

Thanks for your understanding.