As France gears up to host a summer of sporting excellence, its major international airports will be braced to deal with a massive influx of arrivals and departures. Thankfully, France also has an array of local and dedicated private airports, many of which are closer to the action, providing private jet passengers with more options and flexibility.

No matter which sporting spectacles you plan to see, with over 60 years of experience in the region and a worldwide network of experts across 24 offices, Air Partner has the knowledge and expertise needed to secure the ideal aircraft and airport slot, even during periods of high demand.

Le Bourget (LBG)

Situated just 11km from central Paris, Le Bourget is one of Europe’s busiest and most impressive dedicated corporate airports. It is suitable for aircraft of all sizes and has the infrastructure, including three runways and multiple FBOs, to cope with the increased traffic without compromising the high standards clients rightly expect.

Given its proximity to many of Paris’ main events, private car transfers are very efficient, and helicopter transfers can also be arranged to access events further afield.

Pontoise (POX)

Pontoise Aerodrome, also known as Cormeilles-en-Vixen, is an ex-military facility with two runways located in the Val-d'Oise region, around 40km northwest of central Paris. Today, Pontoise provides a bespoke service for light private jets on a 24/7 basis. Helicopter transfers can be organised, or private chauffeur transfers can whisk you to Paris in around an hour.

---

Le Bourget and Pontoise are the preferred private jet airports servicing the host city. However, alternate options include Melun Villaroche to the southeast, Beauvais Airport to the north, and Coulommiers Airport to the east.

Further afield

Lille Airport (LIL)Lille, the capital of the Hauts-de-France region, is a charming city packed with quaint cobbled streets, beautiful architecture, and fabulous museums. Lille Airport, also known as Lille-Lesquin, is modern and features two runways and a stylish terminal catering to discerning travellers.

The airport is just 7km from the contemporary multi-sport Pierre-Mauroy Stadium, which can accommodate up to 27,000 spectators.

Nantes (NTE)The international Nantes Atlantique Airport is just 8km from the centre of this vibrant city on the Loire River. The airport can accommodate aircraft ranging from small propeller planes to long-range airliners.

Châteauroux (CHR)Located in the Centre-Val de Loire region, around 260km from Paris, Châteauroux-Centre ("Marcel Dassault") Airport is equipped to accommodate aircraft of all sizes. It is less than 15km from the Chateauroux Shooting Centre, the largest sporting facility of its kind in Europe.

Châteauroux itself, with its ancient fortifications and winding medieval streets, is also well worth a visit.

Lyon-Bron (LYN)The smaller of the two airports serving the city, Lyon-Bron is a dedicated business aviation centre with sophisticated facilities. Conveniently positioned within 8km of the ultramodern Lyon Stadium, football fans can expect a road transfer to take less than 20 minutes.

Bordeaux (BOD)The revered wine region of Bordeaux is served by the international airport Bordeaux-Mérignac. Private jet passengers can enjoy a dedicated FBO with a host of premium facilities, VIP lounges, and a 24-hour immigration and customs service. The airport is conveniently located only 13km from the Bordeaux Stadium.

The stadium, built for the Euro 2016 Championships, is an architectural marvel designed by the renowned team behind Beijing’s Olympic Stadium. As well as being eye-catching, it is also environmentally responsible and has over 700sqm of solar panels on its roof. Before kick-off, find time to explore the Cité du Vin, with its fascinating permanent exhibition and informative wine-tasting workshops.

Nice Côte d'Azur Airport (NCE)With its discreet private jet terminal and first-class facilities, Nice Côte d'Azur Airport is the gateway to the glamorous French Riviera and, as the largest airport in the region, can accommodate all types of aircraft. Being so nearby, it also serves as the primary airport for accessing Monaco. The ultra-modern Nice Stadium, home to the local football team OGC Nice, is less than 7km from the airport.

As you would expect from such a stylish city, visitors to Nice and its luxurious neighbours, Cannes, St. Tropez, and Antibes, are spoilt for choice when it comes to high-end hotels and restaurants. If you have the time, a short helicopter flight offers exhilarating views of the glistening coastline and the principality of Monaco.

Marseille Provence Airport (MRS)With two runways and a host of premium facilities, Marseille Provence Airport ensures executive travellers a seamless, high-end experience. The airport is located to the northwest of the city, 30km from Roucas-Blanc Marina, which is staging the Olympic sailing events. The city will also host football matches at Stade Vélodrome, France's second-largest football stadium, accommodating over 67,000 fans.

Marseille Provence Airport is ideally positioned for exploring the wider Provence region and its illustrious vineyards, picture-perfect villages, and lavish châteaux. It is also under an hour from the outstanding natural beauty of the Parc National des Calanques.

Tahiti-Faa'a Airport (PPT)This international airport is the gateway to French Polynesia, which comprises over 100 stunning islands home to verdant rainforests, secluded beaches, and inviting lagoons. Some 70km from the Tahitian capital sits the village of Teahupo’o and its legendary surfing reef, which will challenge the most skilled surfers in the world.

Only 9 miles from the natural splendour of Tahiti, the island of Moorea boasts turquoise lagoons and thriving reefs where you can enjoy world-class snorkelling and scuba diving. Or, only a 50-minute flight away is the ever-popular island paradise of Bora Bora, with its brilliant white sand beaches and crystal-clear waters. The island’s exclusive hotels offer impeccable accommodations, with the Four Seasons Resort and St. Regis Resort being the standout options.

Fly to France by Private Jet

Whichever sporting events you plan to attend, our expert Private Jets team is on hand to secure the best aircraft and airport spots and ensure bespoke travel solutions of the very highest standard.