published on 2021-06-09T17:46:10Z

Theme for The New Nation by the Paxton/Spangler Septet For over 30 years, Tbone Paxton and RJ Spangler have been exploring the beauty of South African jazz, inspired by such artists as Hugh Masekala, Miriam Makeba and Chris McGregor's Brotherhood of Breath. They recorded with Sun Sounds Orchestra, which was awarded Best Jazz Recording at the Detroit Music Award in 1991 for the CD “Open the Doors (Eastlawn Records), which RJ produced. Decades later, they recorded a two-CD collection with their PD9 Township Jazz Project; “The Duderstadt Session/Live at the Scarab Club” (Eastlawn Records), which won a Detroit Music Award for Outstanding Jazz Recording in 2015. Their new project is a follow-up effort to 2020’s vocal jazz recording featuring Tbone, “Back in Your Own Backyard,” on the Detroit Music Factory imprint. A collection of compositions, by pianist/composer Abdullah Ibrahim, formerly known as Dollar Brand. The album is called Theme for The New Nation after one of the songs on the album. The band is built around drummer Sean Perlmutter, bassist Damon Warmack Phil and Hale, the pianist from the Township Jazz Project. Phil is well known around Detroit as a strong jazz player and for touring the world with blues diva Thornetta Davis. Also from the Township Jazz Project is tenor man Dan Bennett, a powerhouse player who toured and recorded with the Afrobeat band NOMO. On alto sax and flute is Rafael Leafar, a Kresge Fellow who has performed with Reggie Workman, Robert Hurst and Wendell Harrison. Rafael offers plenty of improvisational gusto to the proceedings. As Rafael became very busy as a producer around Detroit as this project was picking up steam, RJ called Kasan Belgrave, an excellent alto sax player and flautist who has recently played with the Jazz at Lincoln Center Orchestra. His father Marcus was a trumpet legend. RJ grew up in the ‘70s watching his Uncle Bud play drums in the band Tribe with with Kasans’ dad. This seven-piece band brings plenty of energy and Detroit soul to the music. South African music has always spoken to Tbone and RJ and they wish to perform this music as part of our musical contribution to the world.