The Georges Pompidou National Centre for Art and Culture, a public national establishment of a cultural nature whose head office is 75191 Paris Cedex 04, is responsible for processing your personal data linked to this web site, its purpose being:

To manage cookers and tracers destined to calculate our audiences. Click here to accept or configure the cookies deposited.

To manage the contact centre in order to process visitor requests.

The data collected and processed by the Centre Pompidou is stored in the European Economic Area (EEA).

Your data may be used by Centre Pompidou agents in charge of digital media. Your data will not be transmitted to any entity outside the Centre Pompidou, other than those who assist in providing this service and who are contractually bound to respect confidentiality clauses.

In accordance with French data protection legislation and European regulation no. 2016/679, you enjoy the following rights:

Right of access: You have the right to access data concerning you held by the Centre Pompidou as part of this processing.

Right to rectification: You have the right to obtain from the Centre Pompidou the rectification of inaccurate personal data concerning you.

Right to erasure or right to be forgotten: You have the right to obtain from the Centre Pompidou the erasure of personal data concerning you in the context of this processing.

Right to opposition: You have the right to oppose at any time the processing of your personal data.

Right to data portability: You have the right to receive the personal data concerning you in a structured format.

Right to submit a complaint to a controlling authority, and to an effective judicial remedy: You have the right to submit a complaint to the national controlling authority, the CNIL (French commission for data protection), if you consider that your rights have been violated by the data processing in question.

You can exercise the above rights with the Centre Pompidou by sending mail to this effect, enclosing proof of identity (photocopy of ID) to the following address:

by mail:

Centre Pompidou

Délégué à la Protection des Données

Direction des Systèmes d'Information et des télécommunications

4 rue Brantôme

75191 Paris Cedex 04