Questacon – The National Science and Technology Centre is an interactive science communication facility in Canberra, Australia. It is a museum with more than 200 interactive exhibits relating to science and technology.

It has many science programs that are intended to inspire the children of Australia to love science. Complementing the main museum, Questacon Science Circus is an extensive science outreach program. Each year, the Science Circus engages with more than 100,000 people, travels 25,000 kilometers, runs professional development courses for 600 teachers, and visits about 30 remote aboriginal communities as well as hospitals, nursing homes, and special schools.

History

Questacon is an interactive science centre that began as a project of the Australian National University (ANU), in spare space at the Ainslie Public School in Canberra. It opened with 15 exhibits and was staffed entirely by volunteers and by ANU physics lecturer Professor Mike Gore AM, it inspired him to develop Australia's first interactive science centre, based on the Exploratorium in San Francisco. The name 'Questacon' combines two words— 'quest' meaning 'to discover' and 'con' meaning 'to study'. Professor Gore went on to become the founding Director of Questacon and in 2015, he got an Australia Day honour for his service to science.Questacon's current building was Japan's present to Australia for the 1988 Bicentenary and it was opened on 23 November 1988. Japanese government and business contributed ¥1 billion, half of the capital cost of A$19.64 million. Questacon was formerly housed at the old Ainslie Primary School.As of 2021, the director is Professor Graham Durant, who had been in the position since 2003. Questacon's vision is "a better future for all Australians through engagement with science and innovation".

Galleries

In 2020, there were 8 galleries The Foyer has a Robot, the Clockwork Universe, the Cam Wave and the Questacon Shop. Fundamentals, which explores classic science exhibitions Awesome Earth looks at natural disasters and geology, featuring a Tesla coil and an earthquake simulator. Q Lab has a dynamic experiment space and includes the Questacon Beehive. The Shed contains experimentation with ideas, tools, science, technologies, and art. MiniQ is designed for children between the ages of 0 and 6. Exhibits include a water play area, a construction zone, and a quiet area. Excite@Q showcases spectacular scientific phenomena including Robot Hockey and the Freefall slide Australia in Space looks to the future space exploration Mars Gallery has displays from ancient mythologies to modern interactive media. Science Garden has interactive sculptures sculpturesQuestacon has around 500,000 visitors per year. The galleries are staffed by 200 paid staff, as well as a team of about 60 volunteers.

Questacon Technology Learning Centre

The Questacon Technology Learning Centre is located at the Royal Australian Mint's former administration building in Deakin and houses more than 80 staff. All of the outreach programs and the exhibition developers, including researchers, designers, electronics, metal and wood shop staff are based there. There are also an exhibition area and spaces for booked technology workshops and holiday programs.

Outreach programs

In addition to the exhibitions in Canberra, Questacon runs the Questacon Science Circus and Engineering is Elementary nationally and Q2U in the Canberra region. Past outreach programs run by Questacon include the Tenix Questacon Maths Squad, NRMA Roadzone, NRMA Tomorrow's Drivers, Starlab, Questacon Smart Moves, Questacon Science Play, Questacon Science Squad and a range of activities in remote Indigenous communities.

Photographs