Questacon – The National Science and Technology Centre strives to make science and technology a fun and interactive experience for all ages and abilities!

Questacon’s programs and kids activities are administered by the Australian Government Department of Industry, Science, Energy and Resources.

The Questacon team strives to promote greater understanding and awareness of science and technology within the community, making that experience more fun, interactive, relevant, and accessible for everyone.

Questacon in Canberra was opened in 1988. Each year, over 500,000 visitors come to Questacon in Canberra, while more than 660,000 see Questacon exhibitions in other centres and museums in Australia.

Questacon is a fantastic place to visit for families with kids of all ages and abilities, either during school terms or school holidays.

Over the past few years, Questacon – The National Science and Technology Centre, has been widely recognised and won several Tourism Awards in Australia:

In 2016, Questacon was awarded for exceptional tourism products and services at the 2016 Australian Tourism Awards;

In 2016, Questacon was honoured at the 2016 Canberra and Capital Region Tourism Awards, winning in four categories;

In 2015, Questacon was awarded silver in the National Tourist Attraction category at the 2015 National Tourism Awards;

In 2015, Questacon was honoured at the 2015 Canberra and Capital Region Tourism Awards in the Tourist Attraction category.

Questacon Canberra opening hours

Open daily, 9 am - 5 pm

Closed on 25 December, Christmas Day.

Please note that you need pre-booked tickets, and sessions start every half an hour. You can view the ticket details and book your tickets here.

Accessibility and Wheelchair Access

Questacon Canberra is an inclusive and pram, stroller and wheelchair-accessible space.

All Questacon galleries are accessible by ramps. A lift also opens on the ground floor (to access Galleries 8, 7 and 6), and Galleries 5, 4, 2 and 1. In addition, Gallery 3 and the Mezzanine can be accessed by taking the lift to an adjacent gallery and using the ramp.

Wheelchairs, prams and strollers are available to use, free of charge, from the Questacon ticketing desk. A form of proof of identity (such as a Driver’s Licence) will be required as collateral and returned once you return the item.

There is accessible parking available in both Questacon car parks, which can be used by Australian Disability Parking Permit holders, for no charge. In addition, they can also park for free in ticketed parking areas if no accessible parking spaces are available. Australian Disability Parking Permit holders can park for an unlimited time if the time limit on the parking sign is more than 30 minutes. If it is less, they can park for two hours.

For any other accessibility needs and further information, please visit our Accessibility page or contact our team at: