NINA comes to us from the suburbs of Phoenix, AZ, a daughter of World Dog Show Winner GCH Cowboy's Buffalo Hunter, CM and CH Jespersen's Melancholia CM. She is a darling little princess with super white coat, very black nose pigment and an ultra-feminine expression. Has exactly the temperament we want in a Coton; playful and active, yet still easy to settle down and very cuddly. Nina began her show career with a weekend in Wheaton, IL, with a Best of Opposite Sex win over "specials" (dogs who have already earned their championships)! She finished her AKC Championship on August 27, 2016, exclusively owner-handled by me, at the Elgin Kennel Club Show in St. Charles, IL and went on the next day to earn her first Grand Championship major win on her first day out as a new "special"! Nina then went on to finish her Grand Championship title less than three months later. Nina is also the 2017 AKC Coton National Specialty Show winner, again taking a Best of Breed over one of the larger entries of the year outside St. Louis, MO in September, 2017! Nina had a stellar year in the show ring in 2017, was ranked in the Top Five in National Breed Points, All-Breed Points, and Grand Championship Points, and was invited to both the 2018 and 2019 Westminster Kennel Club Shows in New York City (she won Select Bitch at WKC 2018, we retired her from the ring prior to the 2019 show) and to the prestigious Crufts Dog Show in Birmingham, England! In 2018, Nina continued her winning ways, ending her career as a SILVER grand champion and the 2018 NUMBER ONE COTON ALL-SYSTEMS, which means she came in at NUMBER ONE in every single way that the AKC keeps statistics on conformation achievement. She also finished her career as a Top 40 Non-Sporting Dog, the only Coton included in that group! She was also the top group winning Coton for both 2017 and 2018!! It was a remarkable ride; Nina exceeded all of our expectations and then some; you can read about her various exploits as they happened if you click on the "News" tab, and there are also many more photos there. Nina has been fully health-tested and has a CHIC certification. You can clickHEREto see the extensive testing we have done on her, as well as see the extensive health testing that HER breeder has performed on each of her parents! In May 2019, Nina became a mother for the very first time to our "Mamma Mia" litter (3 boys and 1 girl); daddy is our own Hamilton, who is himself a two-time National Specialty Show winner, and the Number One Coton all-systems for 2019. The two of them made a wonderful combination. We kept the little girl, whom we named Sophie, and she became an AKC Champion at the age of 10 months, also completely owner-handled by me! Sophie is now a Silver Grand Champion, and followed in mom's and dad's footsteps by earning a National BISS herself (2020). Two of Nina's and Hamilton's other sons, Louie (Sophie's littermate) and Sunny (repeat breeding in 2020) have also gone on to earn AKC championship titles, Sunny is also a bronze grand champion. Nina is a great mom (and now a grandma, too), and loves having her daughter Sophie and granddaughter, Nikki, around. Nina had a third litter in 2021 with our Artie, that produced another AKC grand champion, Vanessa, who is currently (August 2024) the No. 1 Owner-Handled Coton, showing with my co-owner Marilyn Thompson. We love having Nina back home with us, she is an amazing dog in every respect! I can't imagine life without her <3