This Monday, 22nd of August, the Guadiana International Bridge celebrates 25 years, serving traffic between Portugal and Spain. The results are quite positive both for the Algarve and Andalusia, as well as for the nearest border municipalities, Vila Real de Santo António, Castro Marim and Ayamonte.

The opening of the Guadiana international bridge, in 1991, changed the cross-border relations between southern Portugal and Spain and created new economic, social and cultural dynamics.

Twenty-five years after its inauguration, Vila Real de Santo António now has daily visits by Spaniards to local businesses, it is politically united with the Spanish town of Ayamonte in a Eurocity — which also includes the municipality of Castro Marim — and the social and cultural relations between inhabitants on both sides of the border are a reality.

The cultural exchange gave rise to the cultural movement “Poets of the Guadiana” which recently presented the book alluding to the fifth year of creation. (5.50 - Five Years, Fifty Poets)

The river crossing to Ayamonte is no longer the only connection with Spain, it has not ended, and, despite being located about five kilometers away, the bridge made daily visits by citizens from one country to another. The presence of Spaniards in restaurants, shops or beaches is constant and it is common to hear Spanish speaking in the streets of Vila Real de Santo António.

The long lines of cars to get on the ferry that made the only connection between the Algarve and the Spanish region of Andalusia, between Vila Real de Santo António and Ayamonte (Spain), no longer exist, but the forecasts that pointed to the collapse of visitors in the Pombaline city with the opening of the bridge were not confirmed and the visits of some even became more frequent.

The Guadiana International Bridge was thus inaugurated 25 years ago after the 25 de Abril Bridge, following a popular demand throughout the Lower Guadiana and neighboring Andalusia.

Everyone wanted to see the two banks of the great Iberian river united so that they would not have time to cross the border.

Initially planned to be built between Vila Real de Santo António and Ayamonte, technical and transport policy reasons meant that, in the end, the bridge would go upstream, to the municipality of Castro Marim.

Here we mark the ephemeris, to remember that what has been, and apparently seems to have always existed, is one of the 100 most notable civil engineering works built in the XNUMXth century in Portugal. The bridge became the symbol of the delegation of Faro of the Order of Engineers.

How it all began

The first step was taken in 1970, when the governments of Portugal and Spain signed an agreement to build the bridge. The dream began to take shape, but it was still a mirage.

Only in 1981, 11 years later, was the definitive location decided. During this period of time, several hypotheses were considered, including the connection to the south of the two locations — Vila Real de Santo António and Ayamonte — or immediately to the north of the latter.

This location coincided with the salt marshes and the nature reserve. In other words, whether for technical or environmental reasons, these alternatives were being discarded. In that same year, the two governments established that the bridge would be located north of the Parador de Ayamonte, opposite the Portuguese town of Monte Francisco, in the municipality of Castro Marim.

The mirage was becoming a reality – even for the most incredulous – and, at the same time, the dream of directly uniting Vila Real de Santo António and Ayamonte, now transformed into a chimerical cable car, was dying.

In early 1989, the works began. Two and a half years later, on August 22, 1991, the bridge was opened to traffic.

Until the final location, the biggest concern was with the companies that carried vehicles and passengers between the two banks. They feared the future with the construction of the bridge.

Today the movement of boats is maintained, cars are transported, but the schedules are more spaced and the number of passengers has nothing to do with the past.

Vila Real de Santo António feared that the passage of traffic, in particular its thriving textile trade, feared that it was not the bridge that influenced the decline of this activity to more modest levels, but trade liberalization was the end of the sliding shield. , which followed Portugal's entry into today's European Union.

At first, it was demanded the continuation of the boat connection, the improvement of accessibility to the city, namely, the improvement of the EN-122 and the construction of an overpass to the railway line, along the Carrasqueira river, to avoid the waits at the level crossing at the entrance. The problem was solved with the construction of the current road north of the railway line, which caused great controversy among ecologists, joining the EN122 and Avenida da República.

After the bridge was inaugurated, the motorway to Huelva was immediately opened, on the Spanish side, especially since the following year was Expo'92, in Seville.

In this way, the Algarve was united with the capital of Andalusia and the other Spanish capitals. Before, during the summer, due to the intense traffic and the long queues located essentially at the traffic lights in Lepe and Cartaya, it took more than an hour and a half to travel, on the national road, the 60 km separating the bridge from the city of Huelva.

Shortly thereafter, the first section of the IC-27 arrived, completed in 2002, between Monte Francisco and Odeleite, with 12,8 km, and, later on, the second section, between Odeleite and Alcoutim (about 19 km).

The third was not made when there was no crisis, delayed by other works that the government considered more priority. The section between Alcoutim and Albernoa, in the district of Beja, will be waiting for better days.

Before the bridge was built, going to Spain was a challenge to load a car onto boats, after waiting in an endless line to clear customs.

There is already another international bridge on the Guadiana, between Granado and Pomarão, also very important for the Lower Guadiana. This bridge came to fill a gap in the relationship of the populations along the banks of the Guadiana, which was hampered by the construction of the Chança dam, since car traffic was not foreseen at the top of the dam.

The year of the inauguration of the Bridge

The year of the inauguration of the Guadiana International Bridge began with the reelection of dr. Mário Soares for President of the Republic. Other candidates were Basílio Horta, Carlos Carvalhas, and Carlos Marques.

Early in the year, the government of Cavaco Silva approved PROTAL. Valente de Oliveira, Minister of Planning and Spatial Planning, traveled to the Algarve to deliver the last version of the document to the mayors of the Municipal Councils, who were entrusted with the responsibility of overseeing its execution.

At the II Meeting of the Parliamentary Group for Friendship Spain-Portugal, PSD deputy António Vairinhos called for the creation of an airline between Faro and Seville, the construction of a motorway between Huelva and Ayamonte, and emphasis was placed on the presentation in Brussels of a Cross-Border Development Plan.

Being a legislative year, the lists for deputies began to move as early as March, when a 13,6% growth in the tourism sector was announced in February and demand from the Bay of Monte Gordo by Swedes and Finns.

In the parliamentary days of the PS, António Guterres stated that the Administrative Region of the Algarve could be created as early as 1992, as long as there was a socialist majority. PS deputies visited the works of the Guadiana International Bridge.

That same month, Mário Fernandes, president of the Junta Autónoma das Estradas, before the Parliamentary Committee for Social Equipment of the Assembly of the Republic, announced the opening of the bridge for the month of August 1991, with a delay of 14 to 15 months, attributing the delay in discovering geological formations other than those detected during the surveys carried out for the preparation of the project. During construction, the bridge experienced a small crack and a fatal accident.

The first major criticism of the delay in defining the accesses was made by the socialist deputy José Apolinário, who criticized the Government for the lack of access to Castro Marim, Vila Real de Santo António and Alcoutim, on the eve of the inauguration of the bridge.

In the year of the bridge, the Association of Sotavento Algarvio Municipalities (AMSA) was created, which played an extremely important role in the supply of water from the Odeleite-Beliche system to the sub-region's municipalities.

In May, the cities of Ayamonte and Vila Real de Santo António held a colloquium at the Vila Real de Santo António Secondary School on the impact of the Guadiana International Bridge, where each one exhibited their dream: Ayamonte, the construction of the project for Isla Canela; Vila Real de Santo António and Ponta da Areia, both foreseeing the construction of marinas and golf courses, protesting against the bureaucracy of Faro and Huelva that blocked the launch.

Castro Marim City Council protested against the delay in the construction of the border facilities, four months before the opening, but the Junta Autónoma das Estradas downplayed the problem, saying that it was not a normal border and that only control would be exercised. Minimum.

At the end of June, entrepreneurs from Vila Real de Santo António and Monte Gordo they expressed their apprehension at the fact that the bridge is scheduled to open on 15 August and the accesses are quite late.

In July, it was learned that the river border would remain open to passenger traffic, after the inauguration of the bridge, and rumors were put out that it was close, with the Spanish company, at a meeting held at the Municipality of Vila Real de Santo António , announced that it would close for lack of economic profitability.

Towards the end of the month, controversy broke out, with the government backing down on the date of the inauguration, giving in to pressures related to the delay in works on the accesses to Vila Real de Santo António and Castro Marim.

ACRAL, in a press conference, stated that the opening of the bridge should only take place when access to Vila Real de Santo António was guaranteed. And, drawing a picture of catastrophe, he announced that, if such arrangements were not ready by the date of the bridge's inauguration, the city would be isolated "on the margin of the development and progress" that the bridge would bring, and bankruptcy, under these circumstances, would be expected. chain of commerce and services companies with the consequent unemployment of a large part of the population. The merchants then sent Prime Minister Cavaco Silva a letter requesting the postponement of the inauguration.

On August 11th, the rehearsals were over. Eighteen long 38-ton vehicles passed over the bridge at the same time, and each time one of those trucks was leaving the deck, it "jumped" with sudden starts and braking.

The bridge opened to traffic on August 22, discreetly, without pomp or circumstance. CP, in a gesture of good will, announced the automation of the level crossing, while at the time they pointed to the construction of an elevated walkway next to Bairro do Matadouro.

The first days of the opening of the bridge came to contradict the catastrophic claims, bringing to Vila Real de Santo António hundreds of Spaniards who traveled in their cars for shopping and gave more life to cafes and restaurants, the same happening in Ayamonte and Isla Cristina with the Portuguese, only comparable to the days of the October fair.

Optimism quickly returned to the commerce of Vila Real and some began right away to say that the opening of the bridge was only too late. The atmosphere was one of celebration and euphoria on either side of the Guadiana, although there was still the annoyance of poor access and border control.

In September, the merchants of Faro to express their satisfaction with the positive results of the opening of the Guadiana Bridge as a factor of dynamization of the Algarve capital, with the Spaniards flocking in greater numbers and in a more constant way.

In October, legislative elections were held, with the particularity of the PSD having won in all municipalities in the Algarve: PSD 50,5%, 5 deputies, PS 31,4%, 3 deputies, CDU 7,3%.

In December, the Algarve Regional Tourism Commission considered that, with the inauguration of the Guadiana Bridge, a new component in the tourist “impot” had been born and, with it, a certain expansion of the concept of tourist quality.

the bridge structure

The Guadiana International Bridge is made of multiple trusses, with a total span of 666 meters, subdivided into five. A power station measuring 324m (from tower to tower), the second largest in the country after the Bridge over the Tagus, in Lisbon, two laterals measuring 135 meters (also suspended), and another two measuring 36m.

The foundations of the two towers (100 meters high each) are made up of two pre-stressed concrete blocks (16,5 meters by 16,5 meters by 5 meters). For the construction of these massive towers located on the riverbed, the technicians resorted to the construction of an island surrounded by an enclosure, formed by the so-called sheet piles (20 meters by 50). The soil surrounding this island was treated by replacement vibro, in an area of ​​100 meters by 130 meters, to prevent the liquefaction of the sands, in the event of an earthquake.

The 128 tie rods that support the deck are made of high-strength galvanized steel cords, individually protected by a polyethylene sheath and wax filling the spaces. Thus, it is possible to replace them, cord by cord, without interfering with the traffic on the bridge.

Due to technical and environmental reasons, an access viaduct was also built on the Portuguese side. Unlike the construction of the deck, in which concrete staves were used on site, this viaduct (360 meters), which extends the bridge towards the so-called border area, consists of prefabricated beams measuring 30m each.

The Guadiana International Bridge and its road complex – which connect the IP1 (Valença/Castro Marim) to the Carretera Nacional 431, in Spain, including the E-01 European Road (Larne/Seville) – constitute the main crossing point between Portugal and Spain in the southern region of the country.