Guadiana International Bridge

Guadiana International Bridge links Ayamonte in Huelva province with Castro Marin in Faro District (Portugal). The bridge was built by a Spanish-Portuguese consortium in 1991. The bridge spans 666 meters over the river, and rises about 20 m. It has two, 100-metre high triangular pillars. The sheer size of the structure makes the bridge visible from many kilometres away.

Las Marismas de Isla Cristina Nature Site

Las Marismas de Isla Cristina is a protected area that was designated a Nature Site in 1989. It covers 2,145 ha, and spans two municipalities: Ayamonte and Isla Cristina.

It is located at the mouth of the River Carreras. Its most representative wildlife includes Spoonbills, Storks, Terns and other waders. Stone pines, Phoenician junipers, Spanish lavender, rosemary and shrubby sea-blite are some of the most notable plant species.

Marshes are wet lowlands that are flooded by seawater at high tide. They are usually close to the mouth of a river. These ecosystems rely on tidal activity, rendering them almost immune to seasonality.

In terms of the landscape, one must differentiate between those areas where the ecosystem has been affected by human activity, and those that have not and are better preserved.

Ayamonte

Some people say that Ayamonte dates back to the ancient Tartessus civilization. Ptolemy identified this city as Canaca. The etymology of the name, documented at least since the tenth century, is not clear. It may mean "on the bridge", or it could derive from the name of an Arab warlord.

The numerous remains found from different periods attest to the rich and time-honoured history of this place. In 1239, Sancho II of Portugal reconquered the settlement, and in 1335, it was definitely won over by the Castilians. During the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, Ayamonte was one of the most important towns in coastal Huelva. It saw its population grow significantly in the second half of the nineteenth century. Starting in 1920, the area underwent major industrialization, primarily of the canning industry.

Owing to its many natural attractions, tourism is a major source of income for Ayamonte, which also has an important fishing industry. The River Guadiana is the heart of the city that extends along its left bank. On the opposite bank sit the Portuguese towns of Vila Real de Santo Antonio and Castromarín, with whom it shares the estuary of this great river. Until 1992, when the Puente del Centenario that links Spain and Portugal was opened, both people and vehicles were ferried across the river. This ferry is still in operation. One can take a trip from Ayamonte on the sightseeing boat that sails upstream on the River Guadiana, stopping at several Portuguese towns, on its way to Sanlúcar de Guadiana.