In most ways, Beyoncé Knowles really is Destiny’s Child.

That’s the name of the signing quartet that took the world by storm beginning in 1998, for which Beyonce was lead singer. Destiny’s Child broke up in 2005, but not before becoming the top-selling girls group of all time, with hits such as “The Writing’s on the Wall,” “Say My Name” and “No No No.”

Beyonce left the group in 2003 for a solo career which was immediately successful, to say the least. Her first solo album, “Dangerously in Love” spawned the No. 1 singles “Crazy in Love” and “Baby Boy,” and earned Knowles five Grammy Awards. Her second album, “B’Day” (2006), brought worldwide No. 1 hit “Irreplaceable, “and a seventh solo Grammy Award (she has won 10 total).

Born in Houston in 1981, her first name is a tribute to her mother’s maiden name. Her maternal grandparents, Lumis Beyoncé and Agnéz Deréon (a seamstress), were French-speaking Louisiana Creoles. Knowles got her start singing in the church choir, and later teamed with her best friends from childhood, LaTavia Roberson and Kelly Rowland, along with LeToya Luckett, to form a signing quartet that would perform in their backyards and at Tina Knowles’ hair salon.

After a losing appearance on the TV show “Star Search,” Mathew Knowles, Beyonce’s father and Rowland’s legal guardian, quit his job at Xerox Corporation to manage the group. They were eventually signed by Columbia Records in 1996.

Although only 25, Beyoncé has experienced quite a bit. She’s been romantically linked with the Rapper Jay-Z, was an actor in a number of movies (“Austin Powers: Goldmember,” “The Pink Panther”) and has launched her own range of designer clothes. The clothing line, which is being designed by Beyonce and her mother, Tina Knowles, is called House of Dereon after the singer’s seamstress grandmother, Agnes Dereon.

And yes, she is even dogged by the occasional controversy. Animal rights activists, for instance, have persistently confronted the star on her use of fur in her clothing company. So far, she has refused to comment on it.

But by all accounts, Beyoncé Knowles remains grounded despite her amazing success.

“My mother always said, ‘Beauty fades but beauty from within is forever,'” Beyoncé said in an interview with iVillage.com last year. “When I was 15, we had a single that came out called “No, No, No,” it went to No. 1 and I thought I was all grown up. I was in the record store and she was talking to me but I was singing because I was ignoring her; I was being defiant. She threatened me, which she’s never done in her life. She slapped me in my face and said, “You better listen to me when I talk to you. Don’t think you can do that now that you got a No. 1 single.’

“I was so embarrassed and shocked because I’d never even gotten a spanking before. But that was the best thing she ever did because from that moment on, I never went there; they put me in my place before it started.”