HOUSTON — When Beyoncé shouts out Houston, it's not just lip service.

The global superstar loves her hometown, and H-town loves her back. When visiting her beloved city, it seemed that everyone had a story about Beyoncé.

At Phil & Derek's restaurant in Midtown, manager Eric Northern welcomed customers with open arms. He said he knew quite a few people in close proximity to Beyoncé's family, and he heard from a cousin he might have some connection somewhere in his lineage to the singer, through marriage.

The city is known for many things, including its sprawling geography, and diverse food and culture. But if fans want to experience Houston the Beyoncé way, here’s a guide to must-see places and why they are significant to Queen Bey.

Frenchy’s Chicken

It’s obvious Frenchy’s chicken has a special place in the singer’s heart. The owner Percy “King" Creuzot said she’s been dining there ever since she was a little girl.

She is notorious for visiting the fast-food restaurant or ordering to-go when she’s in town. The local chain has 10 eateries in the Houston area, but the flagship location at 4646 Scott St. is in the Third Ward neighborhood where Beyoncé grew up.

Beyoncé has raved about the food over the years — shouting out the restaurant in the 2014 song “I Been On (Remix)” and in her 2023 blockbuster concert movie “Renaissance: A Film by Beyoncé.”

“Her love of Frenchy’s I think goes beyond how great our food is. It’s similar to her connection to her community,” said Frenchy's CEO Ernest Ray Hunter II.

Even her mom Tina Knowles once called it “the best chicken in the world." After tasting the perfectly crisp chicken and delicious sides, she has a valid point.

St. John's United Methodist Church

Beyoncé has had special ties to this church, also known as St. John's Downtown Church, since her youth. She sang her first solo on its stage, and she continues to support the community there, donating millions over the years to different efforts.

When visiting the elaborate brick church at 2019 Crawford St., her roots are evident. The compound includes a Knowles-Rowland Center for Youth. In 2017, Beyoncé visited to serve food to hundreds of Hurricane Harvey survivors.

During that visit she said, “I just want to say that I’m home. This church is my home.”

Even when visiting during the week, a security guard was very welcoming and eager to sing Beyoncé's praises and talk about her connection with the church.

The Union Kitchen

This restaurant is a tasty American restaurant with multiple locations throughout the Houston area. Recently, the eatery threw a Beyoncé-themed brunch to commemorate the "Renaissance" movie premiere.

“She does so much for Houston and is so beloved we wanted to recognize and celebrate her in our own way," said Paul Miller, the founder and owner of Gr8 Plate Hospitality, which owns the Union Kitchen restaurants.

Miller shared a story about a running into the singer a few years ago when he sat near her and her husband, Jay-Z, at a Rockets basketball game.

The brunch included specialty drinks and food items in honor of Beyoncé, including the “Blue Ivy” blueberry muffin and the “Heated” chicken and waffles entree. Miller said the turnout was great with hundreds of reservations and customers decked out in silver — the dress code of the Renaissance World Tour.

B&B Butchers & Restaurant

If fans want a taste of another of Beyoncé's favorites, grab a bite at B&B Butchers & Restaurant. Its location is a vintage bakery converted into a steakhouse at 1814 Washington Ave. A butcher shop and deli are attached.

Beyoncé and her family are known to dine there, in a private room at times. She and Jay-Z are purportedly the only people who have used the back entrance of the restaurant.

In 2019 the pair reportedly ordered an assortment of crab cakes, king crab, calamari, brisket ravioli and lamb bacon to-go from B&B for their private jet after watching a Rockets game.

Parkwood Drive

If fans really want to get a glimpse of Beyoncé's early years, they can take a stroll down Parkwood Drive to see one of her childhood homes. The white residence is located in the MacGregor Way area. The home now has a new owner, but the foundation is the same.

This place may look familiar to some eagle-eyed fans. It was featured in the singer’s 2013 autobiographical film “Beyoncé: Life is But a Dream,” when a baby Beyoncé made a cameo.

Beyoncé founded her entertainment company and record label “Parkwood Entertainment” in 2010. It’s fair to assume from where she may have drawn inspiration for the name.

Fans can also get a peak of Beyoncé's other childhood home located on Rosedale Street.

It’s clear Beyoncé's affection for Houston runs deep and vice versa. For those visiting, these are a few great places to start. There is always more to see and do, especially when it comes to a superstar with so much impact and around the city and world.