For the last few shows of her record-breaking Renaissance World Tour, Beyoncé is headed back home. The Houston-bred megastar is set to play two shows at the city’s NRG Stadium — just two days after gracing Arlington’s AT&T Stadium — and her hometown is pulling out all the stops in her honor.

According to a Sept. 21 KPRC 2 report, the Harris County Commissioners Court passed a resolution to temporarily rename itself “Bey County” in honor of Beyoncé’s first tour stops in Houston since 2016, when she graced the stage for her Formation World Tour.

On Sept. 19, the official X (formerly Twitter) page for the city of Houston tweeted a graphic announcing an event called “Hou Run The World” — a tribute to the “Break My Soul” singer in collaboration with Houston First and Central Houston, complete with a “homecoming party on the plaza.”

At her Thursday night (Sept. 21) show in Arlington, Beyoncé squealed, “It feels so good to be home! Texas girl!” Born and raised in Houston, both the city and the larger state of Texas have provided a sturdy foundation for Beyoncé’s personal life and a bevy of musical throughlines for her catalog — from country music to Southern hip-hop.

Beyoncé’s homecoming will also coincide with the launch of the Knowles-Rowland House, which was first teased back in June. On June 27, officials announced that Harris County would be collaborating with Beyoncé and Kelly Rowland to create 31 permanent housing units using $7.2 million in American Rescue Plan funds. “Initiatives like this one I certainly will be supportive of it no matter who’s behind it, but it’s especially interesting… because there are these names of Beyoncé and Kelly Rowland, who, of course, have been supportive of the community for a very long time,” Judge Lina Hildago said during a press conference.

Officials also teased an “even bigger launch” for the project — which will include case managers, peer specialists, service specialists and support services, like transportation, mental health and physical and behavioral health support — upon Beyoncé’s homecoming. Queen Bey was spotted with her mother Tina Knowles at the renovation celebration for the Knowles-Rowland House on Friday morning (Sept. 22).