The businesswoman shared her gratitude in an Instagram video on Tuesday

It was quite a "party" for Tina Knowles' 70th birthday.

The businesswoman, 70, shared a video on Instagram detailing how she marked the occasion — which included a performance from Destiny's Child.

"Thanks to all the people that sent me flowers , physically and mentally. Too many to name ! But the flowers were exquisite!!! so so blessed to know and love the people in my life God is soo Good ❤️🙏🏽," Knowles captioned the clip.

Related: Tina Knowles Jokes Beyoncé Gets 'Really Mean' During Quick Changes Backstage at Her Concerts

However, she elaborated on the festivities and her gratitude in the visual, which features Knowles standing on a breezy beach in Malibu in a fur coat and red lipstick.

"This is 'turn up' Tina, coming to you, on my birthday in my favorite place in the world, Malibu Beach. And I have had the time of my life with all of my beautiful friends from Texas and my friends from California. Not all of them because a couple of them couldn't be here," she began the video.

Knowles continued: "This has been a spiritual weekend, and just about the empowerment of kickass women. Just tough, beautiful women filled with love. And I feel so loved. I had a little anxiety about turning 70, you know? But I'm so blessed to be here, and I'm so blessed to have the life that I have and the people that I have around me. All the love."

She then casually dropped the news that she received a very rare concert of sorts.

"I just got spoiled to death this weekend. I even got serenaded by Destiny's Child. How amazing is that?" she remarked. "So I just want to thank everyone who sent me flowers, everyone that told me a happy birthday. I got so many well wishes. I've got so many bonus children — beautiful bonus children — and I just feel so blessed. I love you guys. I love you so much."

Knowles' birthday isn't the first time the iconic R&B outfit has reunited lately.

Last week, former band member LeToya Luckett shared a sweet photo on Instagram of the girl group’s reunion when Beyoncé brought her Renaissance World Tour to her hometown of Houston in September. The R&B singer, 42, also opened up about how much the moment meant to her in the caption.

In the shot taken backstage, Luckett, Beyoncé, LaTavia Roberson, Kelly Rowland, all 42, and Michelle Williams, 44, stood in a row, with some of the performers throwing up deuces and others holding up rock-on signs.

Related: Tina Knowles Claps Back at 'Ignorant, Racist' Comments About Beyoncé's Film Premiere Look

“✨ALL LOVE✨,” Luckett began the post. “This was hands down my favorite moment of 2023 ❤️.”

She wrote that the love, joy, prayer and healing that she experienced during their reunion is what made it feel so special.

“May we all experience beautiful moments like this in 2024,” Luckett added, going on to tag each of her former collaborators.

The post concluded with one last heartfelt note: “All of the Chilren.”

For more People news, make sure to sign up for our newsletter!