NARRATOR: Direct from our nation's capital, the American Pops Orchestra presents, Ella Wishes You A Swinging Christmas.

Join Maestro Luke Frazier and the American Pops for a star-studded holiday celebration, starring multi-Tony, Grammy, and Emmy Award nominee, Vanessa Williams, with special guests, Grammy and Tony Award winner, Dee Dee Bridgewater, Broadway and Jazz singer, Carmen Ruby Floyd, Broadway star and recording artist, Morgan James, Grammy and Tony Award nominee, Norm Lewis, and celebrated recording artist, Nova Payton.

♪ ♪ eetings, I'm Vanessa Williams.

I am so thrilled to be here tonight with the American Pops at the historic Meridian International Center in our nation's capital celebrating legendary jazz singer Ella Fitzgerald.

In partnership with the Ella Fitzgerald Foundation, Maestro Luke Frazier and the American Pops present a new take on Ella's classic holiday album, "Ella Wishes You A Swinging Christmas" performed in its entirety.

Tonight, Ella's voice and her classic album live on through new voices in the world of music.

We have a remarkable lineup of talented performers, from Broadway stars to internationally acclaimed recording artists.

Kicking off our swinging Christmas party tonight is recording artist, Nova Payton with a classic tune.

So, let's deck the halls!

("Jingle Bells") ♪ NOVA: Dashing through the snow.

♪ ♪ In a one-horse open sleigh.

♪ ♪ O'er the fields we go.

♪ ♪ Laughing all the way.

♪ ♪ Bells on bob-tail ring.

♪ ♪ Making spirits bright.

♪ ♪ What fun it is to ride and sing a sleighing song tonight.

♪ ♪ Oh, Jingle bells, jingle bells, ♪ ♪ Jingle all the way.

♪ ♪ Oh what fun it is to ride in a one-horse open sleigh, ♪ ♪ oh!

♪ ♪ Jingle bells, jingle bells, ♪ ♪ Jingle all the way.

♪ ♪ Oh what fun it is to ride in a one-horse open sleigh.

♪ ♪ Now the ground is white.

♪ ♪ Go it while you're young.

♪ ♪ Take the girls tonight.

♪ ♪ And sing this sleighing song.

♪ ♪ Just get a bobtail nag.

♪ ♪ Two forty for his speed.

♪ ♪ Then hitch him to an open sleigh and crack!

♪ ♪ He'll take the lead.

♪ ♪ BACKUP VOCALS: Oh jingle bells, jingle bells.

♪ ♪ I'm just nuts about bells.

♪ ♪ Jingle all the way!

♪ ♪ NOVA: Oh what fun it is to ride ♪ ♪ in a one-horse open sleigh, ♪ ♪ hey, hey, hey!

♪ ♪ BACKUP VOCALS: There they go again.

♪ ♪ There they go again.

♪ ♪ With that tintinnabulation.

♪ ♪ NOVA: Love that vibration, syncopation.

♪ ♪ Of a one-horse open sleigh.

♪ ♪ BACKUP VOCALS: Jing, jing, jing, jinglin' bells.

♪ ♪ Jinglin' all the way!

♪ ♪ Oh what fun it is to ride in a one horse open sleigh!

♪ ♪ We have jingle jangle.

♪ ♪ Jingle spangle.

♪ ♪ Jingle all the way!

♪ ♪ Hey!

♪ ♪ What fun!

♪ ♪ It is to be slidin' in a one-horse open sleigh!

♪ ♪ NOVA: Oh jingle bells, jingle bells.

♪ ♪ Jingle all the way.

♪ ♪ Oh what fun it is to ride in a one horse open sleigh.

♪ ♪ Oh, jingle bells, jingle bells.

♪ ♪ Jingle all the way.

♪ ♪ Oh what fun it is to ride in a one horse open sleigh!

♪ ♪ Oh jingle, jingle jingle bells.

♪ ♪ Jinglelingle all the way.

♪ ♪ Oh what fun it is to ride in a one horse open sleigh!

♪ ♪ Oh!

♪ ♪ Jingle, jingle, jingle, jingle, jingle all the way.

♪ ♪ Oh what fun it is to ride in a one horse open sleigh!

♪ ♪ Oh!

♪ ♪ Jingle bells, jingle bells.

♪ ♪ Oh, Jingle all the way.

♪ ♪ Oh what fun it is to ride in a one horse open sleigh.

♪ ♪ Oh jingle, jingle, jingle bells.

♪ ♪ Jingle all the way.

♪ ♪ Oh what fun it is to ride in a one horse open... ♪ ♪ I'm just crazy 'bout horses!

♪♪ (applause).

LUKE: What a way to start off our show tonight.

I'm Luke Frazier, the founder and music director of the American Pops Orchestra.

I started this orchestra in 2015 with one mission in mind: To save the music I love, classic American popular music, the music that we as a country have created together.

I think this music is near and dear to so many of us.

It's seen us through trials, tribulations, COVID, and everything in between.

And now tonight, we get to celebrate the music of a true icon, Ella Fitzgerald in an exact replica of her 1960 album, "Ella Wishes You A Swinging Christmas".

I'm delighted that we're joined tonight by a cavalcade of stars from stage, screen, and everything in between.

("Santa Claus Is Comin' To Town").

♪ NORM: I just came back ♪ ♪ from a lovely trip along ♪ ♪ the Milky Way.

♪ ♪ BACKUP VOCALS: Doot, doot, doo, doo, doot.

♪ ♪ NORM: I stopped off at the ♪ ♪ North Pole to spend a holiday.

♪ ♪ I called on dear old Santa Claus to see what ♪ ♪ I could see... ♪ ♪ BACKUP VOCALS: Doot, doot, doo, doo, doot.

♪ ♪ NORM: He took me to his workshop and told his ♪ ♪ plans to me.

♪ ♪ So, you better watch out.

♪ ♪ You better not cry.

♪ ♪ You better not pout.

♪ ♪ I'm telling you why, Santa Claus is comin' to town!

♪ ♪ BACKUP VOCALS: Look out, I'm tell'in you!

♪ ♪ NORM: He's making a list and checking it twice.

♪ ♪ He's gonna find out who's naughty and nice.

♪ ♪ Santa Claus is comin' to town.

♪ ♪ BACKUP VOCALS: Look out, he's watching.

♪ ♪ NORM: He sees you when you're sleepin'.

♪ ♪ He knows when you're awake.

♪ ♪ He knows if you've been bad or good.

♪ ♪ So be good for goodness sake.

♪ ♪ Oh!

♪ ♪ You better watch out, you better not cry.

♪ ♪ You better not pout, I'm tellin' you why, ♪ ♪ Santa Claus is comin' to town!

♪ ♪ BACKUP VOCALS: With little tin horns and ♪ ♪ little toy drums and rooty toot toots ♪ ♪ and rummy tum tums.

♪ ♪ NORM: Santa Claus is comin' to town!

♪ ♪ Look at that crazy red suit!

♪ ♪ BACKUP VOCALS: Curly haired dolls that cuddle and coo, ♪ ♪ and elephant boats and kiddy cars, too!

♪ ♪ NORM: Santa Claus is comin' to town!

♪ ♪ Ride, ride, red, ride!

♪ ♪ He sees you when you're sleepin', ♪ ♪ He knows when you're awake, ♪ ♪ BACKUP VOCALS: Doo, doo, doo, doo, doo, doo.

♪ ♪ NORM: He knows if you've been bad or good.

♪ ♪ So be good for goodness sake.

♪ ♪ Oh!

You better watch out.

♪ ♪ Ya better not cry.

♪ ♪ Ya better not pout, I'm tellin' you why.

♪ ♪ BACKUP VOCALS: Oh Santa ♪ ♪ NORM: Is coming to town ♪ ♪ BACKUP VOCALS: Oh Santa!

♪ ♪ NORM: Get rid of that frown 'cause Santa Claus is ♪ ♪ comin' to town!

♪ ♪ BACKUP VOCALS: Look out, I'm tellin' you why!

♪ ♪ NORM: It's in the bag!

♪♪ (applause).

♪ ELLA: It don't mean a thing if it ain't got that swing.

♪♪ NARRATOR: Called "The First Lady of Song," Ella Fitzgerald was the most popular female jazz singer in the United States for more than half a century.

In her lifetime, she won 13 Grammy awards and sold over 40 million albums.

Her voice was flexible, wide-ranging, pitch perfect and ageless.

She could sing sultry ballads, sweet jazz and when she brilliantly scatted, could imitate every instrument in the orchestra.

(Ella scatting).

Ella's talent was simply unparalleled and everyone wanted to work with her.

Her collaborators included: Duke Ellington, Count Basie, Nat King Cole, Benny Goodman, Frank Sinatra, Dizzy Gillespie and of course 'Satchmo', Louis Armstrong.

But her fame and success didn't happen overnight, in fact, it was her fraught history that would shape her art for the rest of her life.

Ella Jane Fitzgerald was born in Newport News, Virginia on April 25, 1917.

Ella and her mother Tempie made their way to Yonkers, New York, where they moved in with Tempie's longtime boyfriend, Joe Da Silva.

It was not an easy childhood for Ella, but still a happy one.

She enjoyed dancing and singing yet considered herself more of a tomboy, often joining in neighborhood games of baseball.

On special evenings her friends would take the train into Harlem and watch the variety show at the Apollo Theater.

After her mother's tragic death in 1932, Ella became increasingly unhappy and plunged into a difficult period of her life.

She frequently skipped school and after getting into trouble with the police was taken into custody and sent to a reform school where she suffered beatings at the hands of her caretakers.

When she was 15, Ella managed to escape from the reformatory, but found herself broke and alone during the Great Depression.

Somehow, she endured and found salvation through music and dance.

In 1934, a weekly drawing gave Ella the opportunity to compete in the famous Amateur Night at the Apollo Theatre.

She arrived that night planning to dance, but when the frenzied Edwards Sisters closed the main show, Ella changed her mind.

"They were the 'dancingest' sisters around," Ella recalled, and felt her act would not compare.

Once on stage, and faced with boos and murmurs from the rowdy crowd, a scared and disheveled Ella made the last-minute decision to sing.

She asked the band to play Hoagy Carmichael's "Judy," a song she knew well as it was one of her mother's favorite records by the Boswell Sisters.

Ella instantly captivated the audience and they demanded an encore.

She obliged and sang the flip side of the record, "The Object of My Affection."

In the glare of the spotlight, Ella had finally found her home.

She said, "Once up there, I felt the acceptance and love from my audience, I knew I wanted to sing before people for the rest of my life."

♪ ELLA: Shout hallelujah, come on get happy!

♪ ♪ We're goin' to the promised land.

♪♪ ("Have Yourself a Merry Little Christmas").

♪ DEE DEE: Have yourself a ♪ ♪ merry little Christmas.

♪ ♪ Let your heart be light.

♪ ♪ Next year all our troubles ♪ ♪ will be out of sight.

♪ ♪ Have yourself a merry ♪ ♪ little Christmas.

♪ ♪ Make the yule-tide gay.

♪ ♪ Next year all our troubles will be miles away.

♪ ♪ Once again as in olden days.

♪ ♪ Happy golden days of yore.

♪ ♪ Faithful friends who were dear to us.

♪ ♪ Gather near to us, once more.

♪ ♪ Someday soon, we all will be together.

♪ ♪ If the Fates allow.

♪ ♪ Until then we'll have to muddle through somehow.

♪ ♪ So have yourself a merry little Christmas now.

♪ ♪ ♪ ♪ ♪ ♪ ♪ ♪ Once again as in olden days.

♪ ♪ Happy golden days of yore.

♪ ♪ Faithful friends who were dear to us.

♪ ♪ Gather near to us, once more.

♪ ♪ Someday soon we all will be together.

♪ ♪ If the Fates allow.

♪ ♪ Until then we'll have to muddle through somehow.

♪ ♪ So, have yourself a merry little Christmas now.

♪♪ (applause).

LUKE: And now another true legend, a musical powerhouse, and one of the most kind and beautiful individuals I know, Miss Vanessa Williams.

("What Are You Doing New Year's Eve?").

♪ VANESSA: When the bells all ♪ ♪ ring and the horns all blow.

♪ ♪ And the couples we know ♪ ♪ are fondly kissing.

♪ ♪ Will I be with you, or will I be among the missing?

♪ ♪ Maybe it's just too early in the game.

♪ ♪ Ah, but I thought I'd ask you just the same.

♪ ♪ What are you doing New Year's, ♪ ♪ New Year's Eve?

♪ ♪ Wonder whose arms will hold you good and tight.

♪ ♪ When it's exactly twelve o'clock, that night.

♪ ♪ Welcoming in the New Year's, ♪ ♪ New Year's Eve.

♪ ♪ Maybe I'm crazy to suppose.

♪ ♪ I'd ever be the one you chose.

♪ ♪ Out of a thousand invitations you'll receive.

♪ ♪ Ah, but in case I stand one little chance.

♪ ♪ Here comes the jackpot question in advance.

♪ ♪ What are you doing New Year's, ♪ ♪ New Year's Eve?

♪ ♪ ♪ ♪ ♪ ♪ Ah, but in case I stand one little chance.

♪ ♪ Here comes the jackpot question in advance.

♪ ♪ What are you doing New Year's, ♪ ♪ New Year's Eve?

♪ ♪ What are you doing New Year's Eve?

♪♪ (applause) ("Sleigh Ride").

♪ ♪ ♪ DEE DEE: Just hear those ♪ ♪ sleigh bells jingling, ♪ ♪ ring, ting, tingling, too.

♪ ♪ Come on, it's lovely ♪ ♪ weather for a sleigh ride ♪ ♪ together with you.

♪ ♪ Outside the snow is falling and friends are calling, ♪ ♪ "Yoo hoo!"

♪ ♪ Come on, it's lovely weather for a sleigh ride ♪ ♪ together with you.

♪ ♪ Giddy yup, giddy yup, giddy yup, let's go, ♪ ♪ let's look at the show.

♪ ♪ We're riding in a wonderland of snow.

♪ ♪ Giddy yup, giddy yup, giddy yup, it's grand, ♪ ♪ just holding your hand.

♪ ♪ We're riding along with the song of a wintery fairyland.

♪ ♪ Our cheeks are nice and rosy and comfy cozy are we.

♪ ♪ We're snuggled up together like two birds of ♪ ♪ a feather should be.

♪ ♪ Let's take that road before us and sing a chorus or two.

♪ ♪ C'mon, it's lovely weather for a sleigh ride ♪ ♪ together with you.

♪ ♪ ♪ ♪ ♪ ♪ Giddy yup, giddy yup, giddy yup, let's go, ♪ ♪ let's look at the show.

♪ ♪ We're riding in a wonderland of snow.

♪ ♪ Giddy yup, giddy yup, giddy yup, it's grand, ♪ ♪ just holding your hand.

♪ ♪ We're riding along with the song of a wintery fairyland.

♪ ♪ Our cheeks are nice and rosy and comfy cozy are we.

♪ ♪ We're snuggled up together like two birds of ♪ ♪ a feather should be.

♪ ♪ Let's take that road before us and sing a chorus or two.

♪ ♪ C'mon, it's lovely weather for a sleigh ride ♪ ♪ together with you.

♪ ♪ Sleigh ride together with you.

♪ ♪ Sleigh ride together with you.

♪ ♪ Sleigh ride together with you.

♪♪ (applause) VANESSA: Ella Fitzgerald recorded this landmark album in 1960 when she was 43 years old.

Her focus was to sing the American holiday classics written by composers like Irving Berlin, Leroy Anderson, and Mitchell Parish, making it one of the most celebrated holiday albums of all time.

Through these songs we hear the unbridled celebration of what brings us all together around this time of year, and the joy we look forward to from the holiday season.

And what more can we ask for of this time of year than a little more joy?

Bringing us all a bit more of that cheer, please welcome back to the stage my dear friend, Norm Lewis.

("The Christmas Song").

♪ ♪ ♪ NORM: Chestnuts roasting on an open fire.

♪ ♪ Jack Frost nipping at your nose.

♪ ♪ Yuletide carols being sung by a choir.

♪ ♪ And folks dressed up like Eskimos.

♪ ♪ Everybody knows a turkey and some mistletoe.

♪ ♪ Help to make the season bright.

♪ ♪ Tiny tots with their eyes all aglow.

♪ ♪ Will find it hard to sleep tonight.

♪ ♪ They know that Santa's on his way.

♪ ♪ He's loaded lots of toys and goodies on his sleigh.

♪ ♪ And ev'ry mother's child is gonna spy.

♪ ♪ To see if reindeer really know how to fly.

♪ ♪ And so I'm offering this simple phrase.

♪ ♪ To kids from one to 92 ♪ ♪ Although it's been said many times, many ways, ♪ ♪ "Merry Christmas to you."

♪ (guitar solo) ♪ ♪ ♪ ♪ ♪ ♪ ♪ And so I'm offering this simple phrase.

♪ ♪ To kids from 1 to 92 ♪ ♪ Although it's been said many times, many ways, ♪ ♪ "Merry Christmas, ♪ ♪ Merry Christmas, ♪ ♪ Merry Christmas to you."

♪♪ (applause) LUKE: And now, welcome back to the stage our beautiful host for this evening, Vanessa Williams.

VANESSA: Thank you, Luke.

I feel it's time to swing.

I've loved learning these Ella classic holiday arrangements for you tonight and to be in such amazing company with these musicians.

Here is one of my personal favorites written by the great Count Basie, Eddie Durham and Jimmy Rushing.

Here we go.

("Good Morning Blues").

♪ ♪ ♪ It's Christmas time.

♪ ♪ And I wanna see Santa Claus.

♪ ♪ Yeah it's Christmas time.

♪ ♪ And I wanna see Santa Claus.

♪ ♪ Gonna ask him for my baby.

♪ ♪ Ain't that a real good toy?

♪ ♪ He was my lovin' baby.

♪ ♪ And I loved him, oh, so strong.

♪ ♪ He was my lovin' baby.

♪ ♪ And I loved him, oh, so strong.

♪ ♪ Oh Mister Santa Claus.

♪ ♪ His arms are where I belong.

♪ ♪ Where I belong.

♪ ♪ Santa Claus, Santa Claus.

♪ ♪ Listen to my plea.

♪ ♪ Oh Santa Claus, listen to my plea.

♪ ♪ Don't send me nothin' for Christmas.

♪ ♪ But my baby back to me.

♪ ♪ Mmm, yeah.

♪ ♪ ♪ ♪ Mmm, Santa.

♪ ♪ Send my baby, send my baby.

♪ ♪ Send my baby back to me.

♪ ♪ Mm, it's Christmas time.

♪ ♪ Oh, Santa won't you.

♪ ♪ Send your baby's baby back to me.

♪ ♪ Don't send me nothin' for Christmas.

♪ ♪ 'Cept my baby back to me.

♪ ♪ Oh, Santa!

♪♪ (applause) ("Let It Snow").

♪ CARMEN: Oh, the weather ♪ ♪ outside is frightful.

♪ ♪ But the fire is so delightful.

♪ ♪ And since we've ♪ ♪ no place to go.

♪ ♪ Let it snow!

♪ ♪ Let it snow!

♪ ♪ Let it snow!

♪ ♪ It doesn't show signs of stopping.

♪ ♪ And I brought some corn for popping.

♪ ♪ The lights are turned way down low.

♪ ♪ Let it snow!

Let it snow!

♪ ♪ Let it snow!

♪ ♪ When we finally kiss goodnight.

♪ ♪ How I'll hate going out in the storm!

♪ ♪ But if you really hold me tight.

♪ ♪ All the way home I'll be warm.

♪ ♪ The fire is slowly dying.

♪ ♪ And, my dear, we're still goodbye-ing.

♪ ♪ But as long as you love me so.

♪ ♪ Let it snow!

Let it snow!

♪ ♪ Let it snow!

♪ (bass solo) (violin solo) ♪ When we finally kiss goodnight.

♪ ♪ How I'll hate going out in the storm!

♪ ♪ But if you really hold me tight.

♪ ♪ All the way home I'll be warm.

♪ ♪ ♪ ♪ Oh, the weather outside is frightful.

♪ ♪ But the fire is so delightful.

♪ ♪ And since we've no place to go.

♪ ♪ Let it snow!

Let it snow!

♪ ♪ Let it snow!

♪ ♪ It doesn't show signs of stopping.

♪ ♪ And I brought some corn for popping.

♪ ♪ The lights are turned way down low.

♪ ♪ Let it snow!

Let it snow!

♪ ♪ Let it snow!

♪ ♪ When we finally kiss goodnight.

♪ ♪ How I'll hate going out in the storm!

♪ ♪ But if you really hold me tight.

♪ ♪ All the way home I'll be warm.

♪ ♪ The fire is slowly dying.

♪ ♪ And, my dear, we're still goodbyeing.

♪ ♪ But as long as you love me so.

♪ ♪ Let it snow!

Let it snow!

♪ ♪ Let it snow!

♪♪ (applause) ♪ ♪ NARRATOR: On the night of Ella's fateful debut at the Apollo Theater, she met saxophonist and arranger Benny Carter.

Impressed with her natural talent, he began introducing her to people who helped launch her career.

Ella entered and won every talent show she could find.

Then in January 1935 she met drummer and bandleader Chick Webb, a meeting that would permanently alter her life and career.

Chick hired her to travel with the band for $12.50 a week.

With Webb, Ella delivered a rendition of the song, "Mr. Paganini".

It was one of the first times she experimented with scat singing, and her improvisations instantly dazzled Webb's fans, quickly becoming Ella's fan as well.

Throughout her career, Ella would master scat singing, turning it into a special part of her performances, and spawn many imitators.

(Ella scatting).

♪ ELLA: A-tisket, a-tasket.

♪ ♪ A brown and yellow basket.

♪♪ NARRATOR: A little over a year later in 1938, at the age of 21 Ella recorded a playful version of the nursery rhyme, "A-Tisket, A-Tasket."

The record sold over 1 million copies, was number one on "Your Hit Parade", and stayed on the pop charts for 17 weeks.

Suddenly, Ella Fitzgerald was truly famous.

After decades of singing every conceivable type of song, in 1960 Ella released 'Ella Wishes You a Swinging Christmas', to characteristically rave reviews.

It became the representative soundtrack of the holidays for millions of listeners always finding new fans along the way.

The album continues to be one of the all-time, best-selling Christmas albums and appeared once again on the Billboard charts, as recently as Christmas 2019.

♪ ELLA: Jingle all the way.

♪ ♪ Oh what fun it is in a one-horse, ♪ ♪ open sleigh.

♪♪ ("Winter Wonderland").

♪ MORGAN: Sleigh bells ring, ♪ ♪ are you listenin'.

♪ ♪ In the lane, ♪ ♪ snow is glistening.

♪ ♪ A beautiful sight, ♪ ♪ we're happy tonight.

♪ ♪ Walking in a winter wonderland.

♪ ♪ Gone away is the blue bird.

♪ ♪ Here to stay is the new bird.

♪ ♪ He sings a love song, ♪ ♪ as we go along.

♪ ♪ Walking in a winter wonderland.

♪ ♪ In the meadow we can build a snowman.

♪ ♪ And pretend that he is Parson Brown.

♪ ♪ He'll say, "Are you married?"

♪ ♪ We'll say, "No man, ♪ ♪ but you can do the job when you're in town."

♪ ♪ Later on, we'll conspire.

♪ ♪ As we dream by the fire.

♪ ♪ To face unafraid, the plans that we've made.

♪ ♪ Walking in a winter wonderland.

♪ ♪ Are you listenin'?

♪ ♪ The snow is glistening.

♪ ♪ A beautiful sight, we're happy tonight.

♪ ♪ Walking in a winter wonderland.

♪ ♪ In the meadow we can build a snowman.

♪ ♪ And pretend that he is Parson Brown.

♪ ♪ He'll say, "Are you married?"

♪ ♪ We'll say, "No man, ♪ ♪ but you can do the job when you're in town."

♪ ♪ Later on, we'll conspire.

♪ ♪ As we dream by the fire.

♪ ♪ To face unafraid, the plans that we've made.

♪ ♪ Walking in a winter wuh-uh-uh-uh-nderland.

♪ ♪ Eeeeh-eh ♪♪ (applause) LUKE: Thank you so much Morgan!

I'd like to take a moment now and thank Ambassador Stuart Holliday and everyone at the Meridian International Center.

Stuart, thank you so much for having us at Meridian.

I wondered if you could start by telling us a little bit about the history of these beautiful buildings that we're filming in.

STUART: Uh, Meridian is a very interesting place.

Uh, it started as a vision, an idea that if Americans and people from other countries shared ideas and culture and collaborated that we'd have a better world.

LUKE: As part of our mission we focus exclusively on American music, but what I think makes American music so strong is the global influence.

You know, there are so many cultures that went into this music, and of course the icon, Ella Fitzgerald, draws so much of that, uh, influence into her music.

STUART: For me, at home, I put on her music during the holiday season, she's one of my favorite artist and uh, just makes me happy every time I hear her soothing tones.

LUKE: And that's why it's fun to be recording this album, "Ella Wishes You A Swinging Christmas".

So Ambassador Holliday, thank you so much for having us, we're honored to be here.

STUART: Thank you, Luke.

("Rudolph The Red Nosed Reindeer") ♪ NOVA: Rudolph the Red-Nosed Reindeer.

♪ ♪ Had a very shiny nose.

♪ ♪ And if you ever saw it.

♪ ♪ You would even say it glows.

♪ ♪ All of the other reindeers.

♪ ♪ Used to laugh and call him names.

♪ ♪ They never let poor Rudolph.

♪ ♪ Join in any reindeer games.

♪ ♪ Then one foggy Christmas Eve.

♪ ♪ Santa came to say.

♪ ♪ "Rudolph with your nose so bright, ♪ ♪ Won't you guide my sleigh tonight?"

♪ ♪ Then how the reindeer loved him.

♪ ♪ As they shouted out with glee.

♪ ♪ "Rudolph the Red-Nosed Reindeer, ♪ ♪ You'll go down in history".

♪ ♪ ♪ ♪ ♪ ♪ Hang your nose down Rudy.

♪ ♪ Hang your nose and cry.

♪ ♪ You know Dasher and Prancer and Vixen.

♪ ♪ But what do you know about Rudolph and his nose?

♪ ♪ Rudolph the Red-Nosed Reindeer.

♪ ♪ Had a very shiny nose.

♪ ♪ And if you ever saw it.

♪ ♪ You would even say it glows.

♪ ♪ Then one foggy Christmas Eve.

♪ ♪ Santa came to say.

♪ ♪ "Oh Rudolph with your nose so bright, ♪ ♪ Won't you guide my sleigh tonight?"

♪ ♪ Then how the reindeer loved him.

♪ ♪ As they shouted out with glee.

♪ ♪ Oh, "Rudolph the Red-Nosed Reindeer, ♪ ♪ You'll go down in history".

♪♪ (applause) LUKE: Thank you so much, Nova.

We have a special treat for you tonight, I'd like to introduce our trumpet soloist and principal trumpet of the American Pops Orchestra, David Detwiler, for this special arrangement of the holiday favorite, "Frosty the Snowman".

(applause) ♪ BACKUP VOCALS: Who's debonair with a tall silk hat?

♪ ♪ ♪ ♪ Muffler of wool, and a tummy that's fat.

♪ ♪ King for a day, and he loves to roll.

♪ ♪ With a broomstick cane and a heart of gold.

♪ (trumpet solo).

♪ ♪ ♪ ♪ ♪ ♪ ♪ ♪ ♪ BACKUP VOCALS: Oh Frosty the Snowman knew the sun ♪ ♪ was hot that day.

♪ (trumpet solo).

♪ BACKUP VOCALS: Oh down to the village with a ♪ ♪ broomstick in his hand.

♪ (trumpet solo).

♪ ♪ ♪ ♪ ♪ ♪ ♪ ♪ (applause) MAN: Take it Ella, swing it.

♪ ELLA: Heaven... ♪♪ NARRATOR: Ella's later career continued to soar as she reached new artistic heights, embracing current music and finding new fans all over the world.

In 1975, she spent a legendary two weeks performing in New York with Frank Sinatra and Count Basie.

♪ ELLA: Well you can cry me a river... ♪♪ NARRATOR: In September of 1986, Ella was diagnosed with diabetes.

The press carried rumors that she would never sing again, but Ella proved them wrong.

Despite protests by her family and concerned friends, Ella returned to the stage and soldiered on with an exhaustive schedule.

Outside of the arts, Ella had a deep concern for child welfare, borne from her own early history.

Though this aspect of her life was rarely publicized, she frequently made generous donations to organizations for disadvantaged youths, and it became one of the driving forces of her later life.

♪ ELLA: Happiness I see... ♪♪ NARRATOR: In 1987, President, Ronald Reagan awarded Ella the National Medal of Arts.

It was one of her proudest moments.

Soon after, she was awarded the Commander of Arts and Letters Award from France, received The Kennedy Center Honors in 1979, and for her significant impact and contributions to the arts, was bestowed with many honorary doctorates.

By the 1990s, Ella had recorded over 200 albums, and in 1991, gave her final concert at New York's renowned Carnegie Hall.

It was the 26th time she had performed there.

Ella's audiences are as diverse as her music, whether they're rich or poor, racially rainbow hued and multi-cultural, they represent all philosophies, religions and beliefs.

But they share one common bond, they all love her.

The incomparable legacy of Ella Fitzgerald continues to shape the music of today, for her enduring influence is ever present and shall be cherished for generations to come.

♪ ELLA: Dream a little dream of me... ♪♪ LUKE: Vanessa, thank you so much for joining us tonight.

It's an honor to share the stage with you.

You know, Ella's music is so important.

It's built our country's musical legacy, and you brought so much to that tonight.

Thank you so much.

VANESSA: Well, thank you for inviting me, and thank you all for joining us this evening.

Ella gave us so much joy during her life.

Celebrating her contributions to the American music lexicon continues her musical tradition of spreading joy throughout the holiday season.

It helps us come together as a community in a time where it is imperative that we be united.

LUKE: From all of us at the American Pops, we wish you the happiest of holidays.

VANESSA: To conclude tonight's concert, please welcome back to the stage another dear friend, Carmen Ruby Floyd, performing "White Christmas".

("White Christmas").

♪ CARMEN: I'm dreaming ♪ ♪ of a white Christmas.

♪ ♪ Just like the ones ♪ ♪ I used to know.

♪ ♪ Where the treetops glisten ♪ ♪ and children listen.

♪ ♪ To hear sleigh bells in the snow.

♪ ♪ I'm dreaming of a ♪ ♪ white Christmas.

♪ ♪ With every Christmas card I write.

♪ ♪ May your days be merry ♪ ♪ and bright.

♪ ♪ And may all your Christmases ♪ ♪ be white.

♪ ♪ ♪ ♪ ♪ ♪ ♪ ♪ ♪ ♪ I'm dreaming of a ♪ ♪ white Christmas.

♪ ♪ With every Christmas card I write.

♪ ♪ May your days be merry ♪ ♪ and bright.

♪ ♪ And may all your Christmases ♪ ♪ be white.

♪♪ (applause) LUKE: Thank you so much for tuning in tonight.

From all of us at the American Pops Orchestra and all these incredible guest artists, we wish you the happiest of holidays.

NARRATOR: Once again, Nova Payton, Morgan James, Dave Detwiler, Carmen Ruby Floyd, Norm Lewis, Vanessa Williams, Maestro Luke Frazier, and the American Pops Orchestra.

♪ ♪ ♪ ♪ ♪ ♪ ♪ ♪ ♪ ♪ ♪ ♪