Men's Soccer 10/12/2011 8:17:00 PM

RUTV: STRONG SECOND HALF LEADS MEN’S SOCCER PAST VMI, 4-1

BOX SCORE

RADFORD, Va. – Radford erupted for four second-half goals, including a game-winning header from James Jordan (Dartford, England / Dartford Grammar) in the 68th minute as the Highlanders ran by VMI, 4-1, in Big South men's soccer action Wednesday evening at Cupp Stadium.

Radford, which is unbeaten in eight of its last nine at home, improved to 6-6-0 overall and 2-2-0 in the league, while the Keydets fell to 1-10-1 and 1-2-0.

Jordan's difference maker off an Anthony Payne (Manassas, Va. / Osbourn Park) corner kick came a minute and 12 seconds after Luis Grande (Caracas, Venezuela / U.E. Colegio Los Arcos) broke a scoreless contest with his third score of the season.

Grande put Radford up 1-0 in the 66th minute when he tracked down a lofted pass from Ramzi Dridi (Falls Church, Va. / JEB Stuart) over the Keydet defense that keeper Taylor Feuerstein slipped and fell leaving an open net for the sophomore.

VMI's Kip Zechman made it a one-goal contest in the 74th minute with a blast from about 35-yards out.

Clinging to a 2-1 lead, Iyiola Awosika (London, England / Aylesbury Grammar) put the game out of reach when he beat Keydet defenders and ripped a low shot far post. Kevin Fleming (Centreville, Va. / Westfield) assisted on Awosika's team-leading eighth goal of the campaign.

Radford had a number of scoring opportunities in the opening period, while outshooting the Keydets, 11-3.

The Highlanders' best look in the first half came off a through ball from Chel Ho Kim Park (Santander, Spain) to Awosika, who had his one-on-one attempt saved by Feuerstein.

18 of Radford's 25 goals this season have come after intermission.

The Highlanders's final score was the result of an own goal.

In addition to controlling the shot column, 22-6, Radford held a 6-3 advantage in corner kicks.

The Highlanders will conclude their brief homestand Saturday evening with a 6 p.m. Homecoming Match against High Point. VMI hosts Gardner-Webb on Saturday at 4 p.m.