The Bronx is one of the five boroughs in New York, located north of Manhattan, and it’s brash, loud and unapologetic. The Bronx is home to the New York Yankees (and their ruthless, loyal fans, the Bleacher Creatures), the Bronx Zoo and Pelham Bay Park which is (almost three times larger than Central Park).

Crime boss John Gotti and celebrities like Billy Joel and Jennifer Lopez (when she was just Jenny from the block) have all called The Bronx home. Edgar Allan Poe wrote his poem, “Annabelle Lee” while living in The Bronx, and you can still visit his cottage.

The Bronx is the birthplace of rap/hip hop where artists like Cardi B, Grandmaster Flash and Mary J. Blige got their start. Lewis Morris signed the Declaration of Independence, and his half-brother Governor Morris drafted much of the Constitution of the United States—and they lived in The Bronx.

To determine the best neighborhoods in The Bronx, we took things like crime, demographics, diversity, transportation and attractions into account. Home to 1.3 million people, AddressReport.com cites expenses in The Bronx are 22% higher than the national average.

Most people rent, and the risk of crime is 12% lower than the national average. The neighborhoods of The Bronx are as unique as their reputation. Let’s take a look at some of its best areas. (in alphabetical order)

Co-Op City

Nestled between the I-95 and the Hutchinson River Parkway in the northeast section of the Bronx, Co-Op (short for co-operative) City was originally an amusement park in the 1960s called Freedomland, USA before it was converted to the largest co-op housing project in the world.

The development is home to over 15,000 families through a series of apartment complexes and townhomes. Niche.com gives Co-Op City an overall rating of A-, with high marks for diversity, outdoor activities, good for families and health and fitness. It earns B+ in cost of living and jobs and a C+ for crime.

The median housing price is $25,700, and most people rent. Fifty-nine percent of residents with high school and some college, 17% of the families have children, and median family income is approximately $55,000.

According to Niche, crime in Co-Op City earns a C+, with theft far and away the biggest challenge. However, AddressReport states that the chance of all different types of crime is lower than the national average.

A typical commute south to downtown NYC is an average 40-minute subway ride, 25-minute train ride, or a 15-minute taxi ride that will cost you between $75 to $90 and possibly a couple of gray hairs.

Fieldston

Fieldston is a private neighborhood located on land originally owned by Major Joseph Delafield and is a designated historic district by the New York Landmarks Preservation Society.

The boundaries are Manhattan College Parkway to the south, Henry Hudson Parkway to the west, 250th Street to the north, and Broadway to the east. Covering just 140 acres total, the design was intended to preserve the natural beauty, so streets meander around hills and trees.

The land is owned and maintained by Fieldston Property Owners Association, Inc. and charges annual dues to the 250 residents of the area to cover snow removal costs, sewer repair, street repair, and caring for the 1,000 trees in the area. They also run private security patrols. To maintain its privately owned status, the streets are closed to non-residents once a year, and parking is always restricted to residents and their guests.

Before moving to Fieldston, remember there are annual dues based on the lot size and strict rules and regulations to abide by for things like parking, open houses,and what to plant where. Most of the homes also fall under the historic designation, which frowns on extensive renovations.

Median household income in Fieldston is $97,000 and median house prices are $382,000. Niche reports a 50/50 split between people who own and rent. Niche gives Fieldston an overall rating of A, with A+ for health and fitness and nightlife, A for diversity, outdoor activities and good for families.

Twenty-eight percent of residents have a masters’ degree or more, 28% have a bachelor’s degree and 19% have some college or university.

Not surprisingly, Fieldston is also the home of two of the three prestigious "Hill Schools," the Horace Mann School, an Ivy League private preparatory school with a yearly tuition of $53,200 and the Ethical Culture Fieldston School, another Ivy League private preparatory school around since 1878 which focuses on ethics and social justice, with tuition of $55,500.

Crime is lower than many areas because, in addition to the 50th precinct of the NYPD, Fieldston has its own private security company to patrol.

A typical commute south to downtown NYC is an average 45-minute subway ride, the bus will take 1 hour 10 minutes, and it will take you 15 minutes by car or taxi. But if you’re driving, make sure you have change, because the Henry Hudson Parkway is a toll road, unless your driver knows a shortcut.

Spuyten Duyvil

Spuyten Duyvil (pronounced SPYton DIEvul) is named after the creek of the same name and is snuggled in between the Hudson River to the west and the Harlem River to the south. The name is Dutch in origin and loosely translates to “spouting devil,” which is thought to refer to the strong tidal currents in the area.

The Henry Hudson Park, named after the explorer who landed in New York harbour in 1609, is in the southern part of the neighborhood, providing green space, sports pads and walking trails that end up along the shores of both rivers.

Niche gives Spuyten Duyvil an A+ in terms of best neighborhoods to live in The Bronx. It earns A+ for health and fitness, an A for diversity, nightlife, outdoor activities and good for families.

With a median family income of $97,000, 61% of residents in Spuyten Duyvil own their own homes and the area is considered dense urban, with many apartments and condos in addition to housing. The median house price is $321,000, and the average rent is approximately $1,800 per month. Twenty percent of the residents have children.

As far as crime goes, Niche.com ranks it B-, with most crimes falling in the theft category, followed by burglary and assault.

A typical commute to downtown NYC is an average 30-minute train ride, the bus and subway will both take 1 hour 10 minutes, and it will take you 15 minutes by car or taxi, not counting the tolls.

The neighborhoods in The Bronx are unapologetic and unique, just like the borough they are located in.

If you need a place to stash your belongings while you decide where to set up a home, or you have too much extra stuff for your new space, check out Storage Post locations in The Bronx.