Actress and director Joanne Samuel has backed her longtime friend Mel Gibson after he was accused of making anti-Semitic and bigoted remarks by actress Winona Ryder.

The 62-year-old, who starred with Mel in the 1979 flick, Mad Max, told The Daily Telegraph that she takes all the allegations against him with a 'grain of salt because I know what he is like'.

'He is a loyal, wonderful, very generous, talented, creative, and great guy,' Joanne gushed about the Braveheart star, 64, who she has remained friends with for more than four decades.

Offering a different perspective, Joanne claimed: 'He is like you or anybody else. He has his good side, and he struggles with different things, but not all of us have cameras and people running around after us everywhere to capture that stuff and make of it what they will.'

She once again drove her point home, saying: 'I know him as a good friend. He is such a generous man and a lovely person.'

Joanne first met Mel when she took on the role of his wife in the 1979 hit, Mad Max.

This comes after Mel hit back at explosive claims by Winona Ryder that the Oscar-winning actor and director made anti-Semitic and bigoted remarks.

He also accused the Stranger Things star of lying about their interactions.

'This is 100% untrue,' a representative for Gibson said in a statement to TooFab. 'She lied about it over a decade ago, when she talked to the press, and she's lying about it now.

'Also, she lied about him trying to apologise to her back then. He did reach out to her, many years ago, to confront her about her lies and she refused to address it with him.'

The Heathers actress, 48, claimed Mel asked her if she was an 'oven-dodger', an apparent reference to her Jewish faith, in an interview with the Sunday Times.

'We were at a crowded party with one of my good friends, and Mel Gibson was smoking a cigar,' began the Black Swan actress.

Winona - whose birth name is Winona Laura Horowitz - said when the issue of her faith came up, Mel asked, 'You’re not an oven dodger, are you?'

The slur is a reference to the method by which Jewish bodies were incinerated during the Holocaust.

Ryder also claimed that at the same party, the Passion of the Christ director asked her friend, who was gay, 'Oh, wait, am I gonna get AIDS?'

The Little Women actress had previously told a similar story to GQ back in 2010.

'I was at one of those big Hollywood parties. And [Gibson] was really drunk,' Ryder, told the magazine at the time.

'I was with my friend, who's gay. [Gibson] made a really horrible gay joke. And somehow it came up that I was Jewish. He said something about "oven dodgers", but I didn't get it.'

'It was just this weird, weird moment. I was like, "He's anti-Semitic and he's homophobic." No one believed me!'

Gibson's long track record of racist and homophobic outbursts is now well-documented however.

The Oscar-winning star was famously arrested in California in 2006 after he was caught drink driving.

The devout Roman Catholic was alleged to have told the police officer that stopped him: ‘F****** Jews. The Jews are responsible for all the wars in the world.’

He is then said to have challenged officer James Mee: ‘Are you a Jew?’

In 2010, Gibson was heard hurling racial abuse at his former girlfriend Oksana Grigorieva in a recording made by the Russian singer.

He was heard screaming: ‘You look like a f****** pig in heat, and if you get raped by a pack of n******, it will be your fault.’

He pleaded no contest to a charge of misdemeanour battery against Grigorieva in 2011 and served no jail time.

In 1991, the star made comments to Spanish newspaper El Pais that many construed as homophobic in nature.

'With this look, who's going to think I'm gay?' he told the publication.

'Do I look like a homosexual? Do I talk like them? Do I move like them?'

Meanwhile on Tuesday it was reported that Gibson will not reprise the role of Rocky in Chicken Run 2.