The latest instalment in the Mad Max Cinematic Universe is almost upon us, with Anya Taylor-Joy starring as Imperator Furiosa in Furiosa: A Mad Max Saga, which comes to cinemas on 24th May.

A role made famous by Charlize Theron in the 2015 Mad Max: Fury Road, Anya's casting is sure to bring new and unfamiliar fans into the world of Mad Max. But, don’t walk into Furiosa blind as the history of this cinematic saga has spanned more than 40 years of lore.

The Mad Max Saga follows a societal collapse in the not-so-far future, brought on by environmental destruction and widespread oil shortages. So, before you get furious, here is the rundown of every Mad Max film and the order you should watch them.

Mad Max (1979)

Length: 1 hour 33 minutes

Cast: Mel Gibson, Hugh Keays-Byrne, Joanne Samuel

The film that sparked a franchise, the original Mad Max comes from George Miller and stars Mel Gibson as the eponymous Mad Max Rockatansky, former police officer turned vigilante living in a post-apocalyptic, dystopian Australia.

When his wife and son are murdered by a biker gang, Max begins a relentless fight for revenge and a personal vendetta against the gang.

Mad Max 2 (1981)

Length: 1 hour 36 minutes

Cast: Mel Gibson, Bruce Spence, Emil Minty

The second film in the Mad Max franchise sees the return of Mel Gibson’s Mad Max Rockatansky, fresh off the avenging of his family (spoiler alert?), out on his own in the Australian outback, defending himself against nomadic tribes.

He finds himself entangled with a not-so-threatening tribe, initially planning to rob them, but ultimately rising as a leader in the group, helping to defend the people from criminal outlaws.

Mad Max Beyond Thunderdome (1985)

Length: 1 hour 47 minutes

Cast: Mel Gibson, Tina Turner, Bruce Spence

Mad Max Beyond Thunderdome features Tina Turner as the founder and leader of a trading post town called Bartertown who, after initially refusing Max’s entry into her encampment, agrees to resupply his personal arsenal if he completes a task for her.

The task? Infiltrate the town’s energy-producing underworld and assassinate the man who runs it, paving the way for her to gain more control in this post-apocalyptic wasteland. The franchise that can’t be killed, the film was received positively and paved the way for a fourth, fifth, and sixth Mad Max installment.

Mad Max: Fury Road (2015)

Length: 2 hours

Cast: Tom Hardy, Charlize Theron, Nicholas Hoult

Mad Max’s reentry into the zeitgeist came 30 years after the franchise’s third film with Mad Max: Fury Road. The first installment not to feature Mel Gibson, Fury Road stars Tom Hardy as Mad Max Rockatansky and Charlize Theron as Imperator Furiosa, a former army officer who joins forces with Max to take down a cult leader she once served.

The film is one long road battle, as the pair fight to free the leader’s sex slaves from his grips. The film was initially conceived in 1987, but didn’t come to fruition until 2010 with the casting of Tom Hardy as the new millennium’s Mad Max.

Furiosa: A Mad Max Saga (2024)

Length: 2 hours 28 minutes

Cast: Anya Taylor-Joy, Chris Hemsworth, Nicholas Hoult

The diamond of the season, Furiosa: A Mad Max Saga delves deeper into the character introduced in the previous film, Imperator Furiosa. The new film is set 15 to 20 years before the events of Fury Road, bringing franchise fans directly into the drama of the fictional societal collapse that began the lore so many years ago.

Furiosa’s story begins when she is kidnapped by a villainous biker gang, ripped from her home at the Green Palace of Many Mothers. God, apocalyptic lore is so fun.

Furiosa: A Mad Max Saga is in cinemas on 24th May.