Keith Wickham is a British voice actor, comedian and screenwriter. He is known for providing the voices of various characters in the children's television series 64 Zoo Lane and in the British children's series Thomas and Friends.

Career

Wickham voiced Changed Daily in The Secret Show, Mr. Small, and Mr. Tall in The Mr. Men Show (UK version), Corneil in Watch My Chops, Mr. Mouseling and most of the male voices in Angelina Ballerina, Nelson the Elephant, Reginald the Lion, Victor the Crocodile and the others in 64 Zoo Lane, Frank the Koala, Archie the Crocodile and Sammy the Shopkeeper in The Koala Brothers and Ol' Graham the Galleon, H.P. the Speedboat, Ken Toyn the Shipwright and Bryan the Ferry in Toot the Tiny Tugboat.

He voiced Polluto in Tommy Zoom, the first in-house BBC animation production, The Professor, Pipsquawk, Trevor and Mr. Crumble in Frankenstein's Cat and in 2009, participated on voice in Disney Channel's Jungle Junction, for then Playhouse Disney and Spider Eye Productions.

Other cartoons include: Vampires, Pirates & Aliens, Tails and The Thousand Tasks, The Way Things Work, and The Octonauts in which he plays both Professor Inkling and biologist Shellington. He has appeared in about 20 CD-ROM games including Fable and Fable II, and voiced TV commercials. He appeared on stage as Kenneth Williams in Round the Horne Revisited.

He is also recognised for voicing Steff and Sariac from Pitt and Kantrop.

Other work

Wickham worked as an actor and writer on the radio series Bits from Last Week's Radio recorded by Ear Drum productions for BBC Radio 1, as well as voicing Jack of Blades in the 2004 video game Fable.

He can also be heard in the podcast The Offcuts Drawer as part of the cast.

In addition, he has done acting work for the company iHASCO, and demonstrates through some of their interactive training, on issues such as asbestos awareness Bullying & Harassment training, Equality & Diversity, Health & Safety in the workplace, Food Allergy Awareness amongst others.

Thomas & Friends – CGI version

Since 2009, Wickham has co-worked on the CGI version of the children's television series Thomas & Friends. Wickham co-provides the voices of various characters of the series: Edward, Henry, Gordon, James, Percy, Whiff, Dash and Harold in the UK, and Harvey, Glynn, Skarloey, Sir Handel, Bert, Stafford, Salty, Den, Norman, Bertie, Captain, Sir Topham Hatt, Dowager Hatt in both the UK/US, and various other characters.

In 2020, Wickham reprised his roles as Gordon and Sir Topham Hatt in Rainbow Sun Productions' 20th anniversary celebration reading of Thomas and the Magic Railroad.

Radio restoration

Wickham has been involved in restoration of archive BBC Radio comedy shows. He traced missing episodes of the series I'm Sorry, I'll Read That Again, which were repeated on BBC Radio 7, and restored episodes for broadcast.

Voice roles

Film

Year Title Role Notes 2001 Christmas Carol: The Movie Mr. Leach and Undertaker 2002 Return to Never Land Schroder The King's Beard Additional voices 2005 Angelina Ballerina: Angelina's Princess Dance William Longtail and Mr. Maurice Mouseling Direct-to-video 2006 Azur & Asmar: The Princes' Quest Le Père English version Angelina Ballerina: Angelina Sets Sail William Longtail and Mr. Maurice Mouseling The Jungle Book: Rikki-Tikki-Tavi to the Rescue Bagheera As part of the BKN Classic Series trilogy A Christmas Carol Scrooge's Father, Jacob Marley, Collector of the Orphanage # 1, Ghost of Christmas Past and Ghost of Christmas Present 2007 Alice in Wonderland: What's the Matter with Hatter? Additional voices The Three Musketeers: Saving the Crown 2009 Hero of the Rails Edward, Henry, Gordon, James, Percy and the Fat Controller UK voice; direct-to-DVD 2010 Misty Island Rescue Edward, Henry, Gordon, James, Percy, Whiff, Dash, Harold and the Fat Controller (UK) Salty and Captain Direct-to-video Rainbow Magic: Return to Rainspell Island Leonardo 2011 Day of the Diesels Edward, Henry, Gordon, James, Percy and the Fat Controller (UK) Salty, Den, Norman, Paxton and Dowager Hatt Direct-to-video 2012 Blue Mountain Mystery Edward, Henry, James, Percy the Fat Controller and the Thin Controller (UK) Skarloey and Sir Handel 2013 King of the Railway Edward, Henry, Gordon, James, Percy and the Fat Controller (UK) Skarloey Moshi Monsters: The Movie Buster Bumblechops and Diavlo 2014 Tale of the Brave Edward, Henry, Gordon, James, Percy and the Fat Controller (UK) Salty and a shunter Direct-to-DVD 2015 Thomas (the Tank Engine) & Friends: The Adventure Begins Edward, Henry, Gordon and James (UK) Glynn, Sir Topham Hatt/The Fat Director, Gordon's driver, James's guard, the Knapford Station speaker, some workmen and some signalmen Sodor's Legend of the Lost Treasure Edward, Henry, Gordon, James and Percy (UK) Salty, Arlesdale Bert, Bertie, Sir Topham Hatt/The Fat Controller, a diver, some workmen and a policeman 2016 Thomas & Friends: The Great Race Edward, Henry, Gordon and James (UK) Salty, Den, Norman, Stafford, Skarloey, Sir Handel, Arlesdale Bert and Sir Topham Hatt 2017 Journey Beyond Sodor Edward, Henry and Gordon (UK) Sir Topham Hatt 2018 Big World! Big Adventures! Edward, Henry, Gordon, Harold and the Thin Controller (UK) Bertie, Sir Topham Hatt, additional voices

Television

Year(s) Title Role Notes 1996–1998 Douglas and Vince: The Two Heroes Vince Alongside Richard Pearce 1998-2007 Gamba no Bouken Noroi 1998–2000 Archibald the Koala Archduke Alongside Richard Griffiths 1999–2000 64 Zoo Lane various (UK version) 52 episodes 2000–06 Cubeez Bozz Alongside Marc Silk & Tara Newley 2002–06 Angelina Ballerina Mr. Mouseling, Grandpa Mouseling, William Longtail, Doctor Tuttle, various characters Alongside Rob Rackstraw 2002 Wilf the Witch's Dog Door, Sly Alongside Kerry Shale 2003–06 Watch My Chops Corneil Alongside Ben Small 2004–07 The Koala Brothers Frank and Archie Alongside Rob Rackstraw 2005 Pitt & Kantrop Stef, Sariac, Vegas & Atlas Alongside Emma Tate 2005–08 Planet Sketch Alongside Morwenna Banks, John Sparkes and Bert Kwouk 2007 Tommy Zoom Polluto and Bad Polluto Drawings 2007–08 The Secret Show Changed Daily Alongside Rob Rackstraw 2008 Frankenstein's Cat Trevor, Dr. Frankenstein, Mr. Crumble and Pipsquawk Alongside Joe Pasquale 2008–10 The Mr. Men Show Mr. Small and Mr. Tall Alongside Teresa Gallagher, Steven Kynman, Rob Rackstraw and Tim Whitnall; UK voice role 2009–13 Jungle Junction Bungo, Crocker and Dozer Alongside Jimmy Hibbert 2009–21 Thomas & Friends Edward, Henry, Gordon, Whiff, Dash, Harold and Mr. Percival (UK) The Fat Controller/Sir Topham Hatt (US; 2015 onwards / UK), Harvey, Glynn, Skarloey, Sir Handel, Arlesdale Bert, Stafford, Salty, Den, Norman, Bertie, Captain, Dowager Hatt and Lord Callan Succeeded by Nigel Pilkington as the role of Percy (UK) and Rob Rackstraw as the role of James 2010–present The Octonauts Shellington, Professor Inkling Alongside Simon Greenall, Jo Wyatt, and Rob Rackstraw 2011–12 Fleabag Monkeyface Dr. Dirk Spamflex Alongside Bob Golding 2014–present Toot the Tiny Tugboat Ol' Graham the Galleon, H.P. the Speedboat, Ken Toyn the Shipwright, Bryan the Ferry alongside John Hasler 2015–2016 Wissper Bert and Monty Alongside India Chesher-Good 2019 Ricky Zoom Loop Alongside Max Fincham Thomas & Friends: Steam Team to the Rescue Edward, Henry, Gordon, The Fat Controller/Sir Topham Hatt, Salty, Den, Captain and Norman (UK/US) Television Special 2020 Thomas & Friends: The Royal Engine Henry, Gordon, The Fat Controller/Sir Topham Hatt, Dowager Hatt, Thomas' Crew and a Stationmaster (UK/US) Television Special Thomas & Friends: Marvelous Machinery Edward, Gordon (UK) Harvey, Salty, Harold, Sir Topham Hatt, The Policeman, and the Station Master (UK/US) Television Miniseries 2021 The Smurfs: A New Touch of Blue TBA TBA

Video games