Overview

Wayland is a tiny city located in the state of Kentucky. With a population of 387 people and just one neighborhood, Wayland is the 339th largest community in Kentucky.

Occupations and Workforce

Unlike some cities, Wayland isn’t mainly white- or blue-collar. Instead, the most prevalent occupations for people in Wayland are a mix of both white- and blue-collar jobs. Overall, Wayland is a city of sales and office workers, service providers, and transportation and shipping workers. There are especially a lot of people living in Wayland who work in sales jobs (21.30%), office and administrative support (15.74%), and law enforcement and fire fighting (8.33%).

Setting & Lifestyle

Overall, Wayland’s crime rate is one of the lowest in the nation, which makes a great place to live if safety is an important concern.

Residents will find that the city is relatively quiet. This is because it is not over-populated, and it has fewer college students, renters, and young children - all of whom can be noisy at times. So, if you're looking for a relatively peaceful place to live, Wayland is worth considering.

In Wayland, however, the average commute to work is quite long. On average, people spend 31.14 minutes each day getting to work, which is significantly higher than the national average.

As is often the case in a small city, Wayland doesn't have a public transportation system that people use for their commute.

Demographics

The population of Wayland has a very low overall level of education: only 6.47% of people over 25 hold a 4-year college degree or higher.

The per capita income in Wayland in 2022 was $18,610, which is low income relative to Kentucky and the nation. This equates to an annual income of $74,440 for a family of four. However, Wayland contains both very wealthy and poor people as well. Wayland also has one of the higher rates of people living in poverty in the nation, with 42.90% of its population below the federal poverty line.

The people who call Wayland home describe themselves as belonging to a variety of racial and ethnic groups. The greatest number of Wayland residents report their race to be White, followed by Black or African-American. Important ancestries of people in Wayland include English, Irish, British, German, and Scots-Irish.

The most common language spoken in Wayland is English. Other important languages spoken here include Italian and African languages.

The Neighbors

How wealthy a neighborhood is, from very wealthy, to middle income, to low income is very formative with regard to the personality and character of a neighborhood. Equally important is the rate of people, particularly children, who live below the federal poverty line. In some wealthy gated communities, the areas immediately surrounding can have high rates of childhood poverty, which indicates other social issues. NeighborhoodScout's analysis reveals both aspects of income and poverty for this neighborhood.

The neighbors in the neighborhood in Wayland are lower-middle income, making it a below average income neighborhood. NeighborhoodScout's research shows that this neighborhood has an income lower than 81.7% of U.S. neighborhoods. With 46.0% of the children here below the federal poverty line, this neighborhood has a higher rate of childhood poverty than 92.3% of U.S. neighborhoods.

What we choose to do for a living reflects who we are. Each neighborhood has a different mix of occupations represented, and together these tell you about the neighborhood and help you understand if this neighborhood may fit your lifestyle.

In the neighborhood, 41.9% of the working population is employed in manufacturing and laborer occupations. The second most important occupational group in this neighborhood is sales and service jobs, from major sales accounts, to working in fast food restaurants, with 30.7% of the residents employed. Other residents here are employed in executive, management, and professional occupations (19.6%), and 7.8% in clerical, assistant, and tech support occupations.

Ethnicity / Ancestry

Culture is the shared learned behavior of peoples. Undeniably, different ethnicities and ancestries have different cultural traditions, and as a result, neighborhoods with concentrations of residents of one or another ethnicities or ancestries will express those cultures. It is what makes the North End in Boston so fun to visit for the Italian restaurants, bakeries, culture, and charm, and similarly, why people enjoy visiting Chinatown in San Francisco.

In the neighborhood in Wayland, KY, residents most commonly identify their ethnicity or ancestry as Irish (8.6%). There are also a number of people of Scots-Irish ancestry (6.4%), and residents who report English roots (4.1%), and some of the residents are also of German ancestry (4.0%), along with some Hungarian ancestry residents (3.2%), among others.

Getting to Work

Even if your neighborhood is walkable, you may still have to drive to your place of work. Some neighborhoods are located where many can get to work in just a few minutes, while others are located such that most residents have a long and arduous commute. The greatest number of commuters in neighborhood spend between 30 and 45 minutes commuting one-way to work (34.6% of working residents), which is at or a bit above the average length of a commute across all U.S. neighborhoods. However, there is also a significant group of residents (10.5%) who commute over an hour in each direction.

Here most residents (87.5%) drive alone in a private automobile to get to work. In addition, quite a number also carpool with coworkers, friends, or neighbors to get to work (5.2%) . In a neighborhood like this, as in most of the nation, many residents find owning a car useful for getting to work.