Title: Goodfellas

Director: Martin Scorsese

Actors: Ray Liotta, Robert De Niro, Joe Pesci, and Lorraine Bracco

The film Goodfellas is a gangster film, directed by Martin Scorsese, that follows the lives of three gangsters trying to make their mark in the mob. The lighting used throughout this film really sets the tone and feeling for the movie. Scorsese uses different lighting techniques for each scene in order to display the mood of the characters and the atmosphere. He uses bright lights when the scene is happy and fun and the characters are having a good time, but uses dark lighting for the scenes where the characters are angry or in a bad situation. The majority of the movie uses low-key lighting, except for the few scenes that are happy such as Henry (Ray Liotta) and Karen’s (Lorraine Bracco) wedding. Low-key lighting creates the overall theme for the movie by portraying the mob lifestyle as being dark and ruthless.

In the Copa Club scene, the lighting of the outside and inside is primarily dark except for the kitchen and the direct light on Henry. This sets the mood for the scene by displaying Henry as a “good guy” trying to impress his girlfriend Karen, while also using the dark shadows to show that his lifestyle is nothing like a regular working guy. We are living out this scene with them and at the end of the scene, Karen and Henry are seated at their table, the lighting is very dark, and Karen asks Henry what he does for a living and he replies by saying he works in construction. The use of the dark lighting while Henry lies to Karen about his work is a foreshadowing for how both of their lives are moving to a dark place and contributes to the theme of the film.

One of the benefits of this style of lighting is that it makes the film feel very real. The use of deep shadows contrasting with bright parts and dark parts of each scene makes the audience feel as though they are living out each scene with the characters. Another benefit is that the style of lighting displays the mafia lifestyle as something that is filled with murder, deception, and constant fear. Even though Henry has always dreamed of becoming a gangster and parts of that lifestyle are glamorous, the reality is that being a gangster is not glamorous. Scorsese continues to remind us of this throughout the film, which contributes to the theme. While the start of Henry and Karen’s life together is filled with wealth and excitement, they soon realize that they are in way over their heads, and Scorsese’s use of lighting makes sure the audience does not forget this either.

The lighting technique used by Scorsese fit perfectly within the genre of gangster films. Gangster films are filled with crime mystery, and death therefore, the use of low-key lighting is essential. The film has a lot of murder scenes and other crime-related scenes that would not be portrayed accurately if another style of lighting were used. If the film had used high-key lighting the overall theme and feel would have been completely different and it would not have been a true gangster film. The characters need to be displayed as ruthless and need to be feared in some ways. Similarly, their actions throughout the film must also be portrayed as criminal and at times evil, thus low-key lighting is necessary in creating an epic gangster film such as this.

Reference

Goodykoontz, B., & Jacobs, C. P. (2011). Film: from Watching to Seeing. San Diego, CA: Bridgepoint Education, Inc.

WarnerBros. (2010). Goodfellas: Where Are They Now? [photograph] Retrieved from: http://www.nydailynews.com/entertainment/tv-movies/goodfellas-gallery-1.92462

YouTube. (2009). Goodfellas Copacabana Nightclub [Video file]. Retrieved from: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yCYwcObxl78