Welcome back to another Monday Movie! Today, Darius and Micah are talking about Goodfellas, the acclaimed 1990 movie directed by Martin Scorsese and starring Ray Liotta, Joe Pesci, and Robert De Niro. The movie is a biographical film following the lives of Henry Hill, an American gangster, and his wife, Karen. The movie is based on Wiseguy by Nicholas Pileggi, a nonfiction book on the same subject published in 1985. Dive into our thoughts below!

What do you think of the worldbuilding in Goodfellas?

Darius Mullin, Evening Circulation Supervisor, said: I couldn’t help but compare Goodfellas to The Godfather as I watched. In The Godfather, the danger of the Corleones’ world lurks like a shadow even in the most benign scenes. In Goodfellas, the moral depravity of Henry Hill’s world is more subtle most of the movie (at least for the first half) but is readily apparent in certain explosive scenes. This is probably because the movie is told through Hill’s eyes, and Hill repeatedly mentions how “normal” everything felt for him.

What do you make of the decision to include voiceover monologues as part of the storytelling?

Darius Mullin said: Really interesting decision. It’s interesting to hear what the characters are thinking in situations where an audience would naturally want to know and otherwise wouldn’t. On the other hand, it introduces an unreliable narrator element to the story, as both narrators have a) hindsight, b) normalization, and c) other personal motives potentially skewing their recollection and interpretation of events.

Micah Rhodes, Cataloging Associate, said: It was a smart choice, especially for a mobster movie and world. The core value of mobster society as presented in Goodfellas seems to be the tying of threads of individuals and nuclear families into the shared narrative tapestry of “The Family,” which makes its own rules to take care of its own people. A combination of where someone comes from, what they do, and who they know determines their place and importance in this narrative and Family. If someone doesn’t show the proper respect to one of those three areas, no matter how much they may respect the other two, they risk being cut out of that tapestry. So, the historical story of the mob Family is held as one of the most important parts of mobster life. Additionally, we see many moments where characters recount and reminisce about past crime jobs, lovers, fights, and other wild activities; indicating that personal storytelling is both a skill and a way to establish your place in the Family. It matters what stories someone has to tell and how they tell them. Thus, the voiceover monologues are internally consistent to how any Goodfellas mobster would recount their lives, as well as effective in communicating important details while showing related, and equally important, but different details that provide important characterization and context for the audience. Finally, the plot justification for the monologues is revealed by the end of the movie, which I think was unnecessary given all the utility I just described, but it was simply the cherry on top of a well-executed frame device.

Goodfellas could be considered a “slice of life” movie focusing on a particular community. What do you think draws audiences to this world?

Darius Mullin said: The crime world that is so normal to Henry Hill is equally alien to (most) viewers. True-to-life stories of human depravity like Goodfellas, The Godfather, or even Breaking Bad give viewers a window through which to observe “the life” without the danger of experiencing it. I remember when working on an article for the library’s March Book Madness I came across a literary critic who described the appeal of The Godfather novel being a sort of nonsexual voyeurism. I reckon he hit it on the head. Henry Hill frequently asserts how enchanted he was with “the life” and how great it was to experience such freedom in such a tight-knit community; movies like Goodfellas give an opportunity to peek in on these things without the danger of, you know, being murdered.

One last thought—both The Godfather and Goodfellas present the increased sale of illegal drugs as a marker delineating the beginning of a new, worse era of organized crime, and therefore the end of the previous era. I suspect that presenting the organized crime world as a bygone golden era allows audiences to somewhat suspend the instinct for ethical judgement.

Micah Rhodes said: There are many reasons, so I’ll list just a few. One is that it’s simply a little thrilling to see life lived outside of legal and social rules; after all, that thrill is one of the chief reasons mobsters embrace that lifestyle. Another is that there’s always a spectacle when things go wrong. It’s never something mundane like missing bills or getting over the flu, but heists turning into stings or murders going too far. There might even be a bit of wistfulness in wondering what you would do with all that wealth, if you would make smarter decisions than the “wise guys,” if you could get out before you get too sucked in, or what it would be like to belong to a close-knit community. When everyday life is all about keeping away from the law and taking as much as you can get, “slice of life” tends to be intense.

What character did you find most interesting?

Darius Mullin said: Probably the protagonist, Henry Hill. At times he seems to be a decent guy, but then he does something awful. You want to root for him but know you shouldn’t.

Micah Rhodes said: For me, it has to be the main character, Henry Hill. It’s never explicitly stated that he’s a diplomat, but he is always doing whatever he can to defuse tensions and act as the go-between for deals with competing personalities. He’s the “nice guy” who may not achieve the same notoriety as some of his peers but without whom many would tear each other apart—along with a good portion of the Family and its assets. You naturally want to root for him but must be conflicted while doing so, as it’s quite clear from his actions and family life that he is not a good guy.

Without spoiling it—what did you think of the ending?

Darius Mullin said: One of the characters makes a decision at the end of the story that I found to be quite surprising. The revelation of who the protagonist was speaking to in all the monologues also surprised me. Needless to say, the movie did not end the way I expected. In a way I was pleasantly surprised that the movie did not conclude the way I thought it would; on the other hand, the ending felt out of character for the kind of story that was being told.

Micah Rhodes said: It’s deliciously ironic. I think viewers generally walk away with a sense that things ended in a somewhat positive manner, but the film’s protagonist would not see it that way at all. Not many movies—or any stories for that matter—end with those two perceptions in such clear opposition. Goodfellas pulls it off quite well.

You can find Goodfellas in the Media Collection of the Union University Library.

Library staff reviews reflect their personal opinions and not necessarily those of the library or university.