Michel Houellebecq (born February 26, 1956 or 1958, Réunion, France) is a French writer, satirist, and provocateur whose work exposes his sometimes darkly humorous, often offensive, and thoroughly misanthropic view of humanity and the world. He is one of the best-known, if not always best-loved, French novelists of the early 21st century.

Houellebecq’s parents sent him to live with his maternal grandparents when he was an infant. At age five or six he was transferred to the care of his paternal grandmother, whose maiden name he later adopted. His body of work gives evidence that the abandonment by and continued absence of his parents, who divorced when he was young, deeply scarred him. At the boarding school he attended, he became a well-read outcast. At 18 he enrolled in preparatory school. Though he studied the sciences, in which he excelled, Houellebecq was drawn to the company of writers in Paris and began to write poetry. His guardian grandmother died in 1978. In 1980 he took a degree in agronomy (a branch of agriculture), a field in which he rapidly lost interest.

Britannica Quiz

Famous Poets and Poetic Form

Houellebecq submitted some poems for publication in Nouvelle Revue de Paris, and they were accepted. His editor there, Michel Bulteau, encouraged him to write for a series Bulteau had initiated at Éditions le Rocher publishing house. As a result of this connection, Houellebecq wrote H.P. Lovecraft: contre le monde, contre la vie (1991; H.P. Lovecraft: Against the World, Against Life), a biography and an appreciation of that American master of the macabre. The same year, Houellebecq published a collection of short prose meditations, Rester vivant: méthode (To Stay Alive: A Method), and his first book of poetry, La Poursuite du bonheur (The Pursuit of Happiness). In order to support himself in his nascent writing career, he worked as a computer programmer, a job that inspired his first novel; Extension du domaine de la lutte (1994; Whatever; film 1999) featured an unnamed computer technician. This book brought him a wider audience. He then published another volume of poetry, the bleak Le Sens du combat (1996; The Art of Struggle).

Houellebecq gained his first real international attention only four years later with the publication of Les Particules élémentaires (1998; filmed 2006), published as Atomised in the United Kingdom and as The Elementary Particles in the United States. In it he presented two half brothers who were abandoned by their parents in childhood. Bruno is driven by an insatiable sexual appetite, while Michel, a scientist, avoids the issue of any attachment whatsoever by focusing his attention on the cloning of human life. The book’s combination of reactionary political views and pornographic passages, as well as its misogynistic plot and scathing indictment of the 1960s “free love” generation that produced these unhealthy human specimens, made it the source of much controversy. New York Times critic Michiko Kakutani considered it “a deeply repugnant read,” but it won the 2002 IMPAC Dublin Literary Award.

As his award reveals, Houellebecq’s dark perspective brought him many fans, but the author remained a figure of controversy for expressing publicly in interviews as well as in his works what some readers considered racist, sexist, and deeply cynical views. His later works include Lanzarote (2000; Lanzarote), an attack on the European vacation practices; Plateforme (2001; Platform), a consideration of sex tourism in which he drew a spiteful and savage portrait of his mother; and La Possibilité d’une île (2005; The Possibility of an Island, film 2008, directed by the author), a bleak futuristic tale about the implications and possibilities of reproduction by cloning. In 2008 Ennemis publics (Public Enemies) documented an exchange of opinions—via e-mail—between Houellebecq and French public intellectual Bernard-Henri Lévy on a variety of subjects, including what they considered undeserved criticism.