Screened at the Locarno International Film Festival 2008 (Switzerland)

The documentary Last Words directed by Erik Lieshout, Arno Hagers and Reinier van Brummelen. Bonanza Films was in charge of the production. The film shows Michel Houellebecq while he is translating his last book ‘The Possibility of an Island’ into images. Iggy Pop, who is Houellebecq’s admirer as well as idol, made 7 songs especially for the documentary. A search for a ‘farewell without an end’ and the ‘pure fear of space’. The result of Houellebecq’s film version of the book at the festival was under its original French title 'La Possibilité d'une île.'

http://www.lapossibiliteduneile-lefilm.com/

‘The Possibility of an Island’

Synopsis

Who, among you, deserves eternal life? Daniel is a highly successful stand-up comedian who has made a career out of playing outrageously on the prejudices of his public. But at the beginning of the twenty-first century, he has begun to detest laughter in particular and mankind in general. Despite this, Daniel is unable to stop himself believing in the possibility of love. A thousand years on, war, drought and earthquakes have decimated the earth and Daniel24 lives alone in a secure compound - his only companion, a cloned dog named Fox. Outside, the remnants of the human race roam in packs, while Daniel24 attempts to decipher his predecessor's history. In a nightmarish vision of the implosion of the modern world, he, like his predecessor attempts to fathom the meaning of love, sex, suffering and regret.

.

About the Author

Michel Houellebecq lives in County Cork, Ireland. He is the bestselling author of the Atomised, Platform and Whatever. He is also a poet, essayist and rap artist.

cb

http://iggypop.org

cb wrote:

Update: The 7 songs are very Sinatra-like (low voice and all). Cool. Interesting and nothing like what he's been doing. cb

http://iggypop.org

wow.. really go for this

Cb what you exactly mean by 'nothing he's been doing'?

cuz Sinatra like stuff he did..also stuff like nazi girlfriend..he's frank and other low voice/crooner stuff. So you really mean something totally different??

and what about the lyrics and titles, you know a bit more?

God is Dead for example... is very Houellebecq

but that is planned as Stooges stuff isn't it?