Ohio Northern University is a safe and friendly residential campus situated on 342 acres in small-town Ada, Ohio. ONU is located within 90 minutes of several metropolitan cities, including Dayton, Columbus, Toledo, and Fort Wayne, Ind. The campus is also four hours from Chicago. Some nearby attractions include the Neil Armstrong Air and Space Museum (first man on the moon), Ohio Caverns and the Wilson Football Factory (Super Bowl Sunday).

Ohio Northern is an independent, comprehensive and private University, comprised of five colleges: Arts & Sciences, Business Administration, Engineering, Pharmacy and Law. Students receive high-quality instruction and hands-on, professional experience in whatever field they choose to study. Since its inception in 1871, Ohio Northern University has been dedicated to developing well-rounded students who are prepared to enter the work world and lead successful careers.

College of Arts and Sciences

The Getty College of Arts & Sciences educates the artists, musicians, writers, doctors, teachers, and scientists of the future. The college encompasses a wide range of studies in the liberal and fine arts, sciences and pre-professional programs.

Fields of Study

Art and Design

Biological and Allied Health Sciences

Chemistry and Biochemistry

Communication and Media Studies

Education

English Pathway Program

History, Political Science and Geography

Human Performance and Sports Science

Mathematics and Statistics

Music

Nursing

Philosophy and Religion

Physics and Astronomy

Psychology, Sociology and Criminal Justice

Technological Studies

Theatre Arts

College of Business

The James F. Dicke College of Business Administration undergraduate and graduate programs give students a strong foundation in both theory and practice. The college is AACSB accredited and ranked No. 1 in Ohio for teaching quality and 45th in the nation for best undergraduate business schools by Bloomberg Businessweek.

College of Engineering

Students in the T.J. Smull College of Engineering at Ohio Northern are improving our world by finding new ways to design, build and use technology. We’re ranked as #32 undergraduate engineering schools in the nation by US News & World Report, and our engineering education major is one of the first of its kind.

College of Pharmacy

The Raabe College of Pharmacy at Ohio Northern University will equip you with the knowledge, skills and tools you’ll need to be prepared in the highly respected and rapidly evolving field of pharmacy – all within six years of graduating high school. You will learn that pharmacists not only dispense complex and lifesaving medications, but also provide patient care and services.

Unique Program Distinctions

0-6, direct-entry pharmacy school experience

9,000+ ONU pharmacists have graduated into the profession since 1884

Ranked the No. 1 private college of pharmacy in the state of Ohio (according to U.S. News and World Report)

91 percent of our graduates are employed within six months of graduation

92.5 percent of our graduates pass the National Association of Boards of Pharmacy Licensure Examination (NAPLEX) on their first attempt

International Scholar Transitional Program

The ISTP pathway program is an academic program that combines intensive English language instruction with academic course work and cultural support to allow an easier transition for international students to immerse into the university and ONU campus community.

ISTP pathway program is suitable for both degree-seeking or non-degree seeking international students who are looking for a semester-long or year-long academic program with exclusive academic courses and cultural events. ISTP program is built upon an academic degree program infrastructure within ONU to provide adequate resources and opportunities for international students to earn up to 37 university credits toward their ONU degree while improving their language skills.