PREMIER LEAGUE NEW KIT SPECIAL: The strips your team will be wearing for season 2010-11

It's the moment fans have been waiting for all spring - their club revealing the new home, away and third strips for the following season.

Some fans are delighted with the new kit, some deflated. And before the official release there is always some dodgy fakes doing the rounds on the internet.

So with a whole host of new strips hitting the stores in the coming weeks - Sportsmail brings you the best - and worst - of what's on offer.

ARSENAL

Next season’s Arsenal kits have been unveiled with the promise that is a hark back to the simple design of the Seventies.

But you don’t need to look that far back to see the traditional plain red and white – the new shirt could be mistaken for the one the Gunners wore in 2006.

The shorts, socks, sleeves and collars are plain white, with a block of red in the middle of the shirt – just as they were four years ago barring a little gold stripe.

Jersey boys: The new Arsenal kit as modelled by Song, Vermaelen, Arshavin and Walcott

After learning the lesson of the wine-coloured strip of a few years ago, Arsenal have learned that you don't need to tamper too much with the classic design.

But the 2010 shirts are original in a different way: made from recycled polyester, crafted from up to eight plastic water bottles diverted from landfills to be used in the manufacturing process.

Something to shout about: Van Persie looks chuffed to be sporting the new Arsenal away kit

Walcott said: ‘The colours are very traditional, it feels nice and it’s made from recycled plastic bottles. It fits and feels nice, and that’s the most important thing. I think it’s important that you feel comfortable in it.'

The Gunners' new away kit is also made from recycled polyester, using plastic water bottles, as part of Nike’s ‘Considered Design’ programme.

So yes, it's rubbish. But wait, there's a retro angle to consider here, too. The redcurrant stripes and cuff sleeves are a throwback to its Woolwich Arsenal days.

And on the reverse of the badge is stitched the motto 'Victoria Concordia Crescit', which translates as ‘Victory Through Harmony’.

Well, they've tried everything else over the last five years - maybe the new shirts can inspire them to silverware.

SPORTSMAIL VERDICT: The away kit is an eye-catcher but the home effort is hardly revolutionary. Still it is a tidy design which Walcott describes so eloquently as being 'nice.' HOME: 7/10, AWAY: 8/10

ASTON VILLA

Tricky times over at Villa Park - for the second summer running, Martin O'Neill is battling to keep hold of his best midfielder.

O'Neill will be hoping his team can improve on their sixth-place finish last term and have two new kits in which to launch their attack on the upper-echelons of the top flight.

Hero or Villan? Steve Sidwell on friendly duty in the new Villa away kit

The strips were officially unveiled on Centenary Square at The ICC Birmingham and features foreign exchange broker FxPro on Villa’s shirts.

FxPro recently signed a three year sponsorship deal with the Villans.

SPORTSMAIL VERDICT: It's hard to get too excited about this one. It's tidy and, erm, available to buy now. 6/10

BIRMINGHAM CITY

Winner: Here's the kit which won the Birmingham fans' vote

Here’s a unique way of choosing your new kit – let the fans do it.

Birmingham offered their supporters four options for their new strip and the winner was chosen via an online poll.

And here's the winner. With 33 per cent of the vote, this will be the Blues' new home jersey, shorts and socks when the season restarts in August.

The innovative solution to kit selection came after the club signed a ground-breaking agreement with Chinese sportswear firm Xtep to supply their kit for the next five years.

The deal, worth £7.8 million, has been completed on the back of Carson Yeung’s arrival.

SPORTSMAIL RATING: Nice V on the neck, but not that different to this season's, is it? 6/10.

BLACKBURN ROVERS

Simple designs for Rovers’ new home and away kits next season.

But then they don’t want to make away days too difficult for their fans after the season they’ve endured.

The club mustered just three wins away from Ewood Park last season - maybe this red number will bring them more luck?

We've been checking on-line and the reaction towards the new kit has been favourable.

From the gushing 'l'll buy it,' to the reserved 'looks like a Manchester United strip.'

Still, you can't please them all. This one is available to buy now.

And now to the new home kit.

Well, it took us quite some time to spot the differences between this and last season's

Like one of those really annoying games in the pub, you stare and stare but can't identify the changes. The disappearance of the red trim on the neck and, erm, that's about it.

SPORTSMAIL RATING: The away kit does it looks rather Man United-ish, which will please Big Sam no end. The home kit, well, it's a case of more of the same. Away 7/10, Home 5/10

BLACKPOOL

Tangerine dream: Brett Ormerod sports the Seasiders' new kit

Ian Holloway has become a hero on the for taking the Seasiders up into the Premier League but despite hitting the big time, he isn't letting his players get carried away.

He said: 'I won't have any big time Charlies. Anyone who just wants a meal ticket and thinks 'I can play in the Premier League' and just wants the money can jog on.'

And so to the new kit. What else were you expecting other than a huge splash of bright orange?

The club will certainly make their mark this year in the new kit made by Carbrini and features the logo of their sponsors Wonga.com.

SPORTSMAIL VERDICT: It's orange, what were you expecting? Standard piece of kit. 6/10

BOLTON WANDERERS

This snazzy number will adorn Trotters’ players and fans next season and it a marked improvement on the current effort.

Designed and manufactured by Reebok, the new home shirt features a raft of features which no one really understands.

It has a moisture management system called ‘Play Dry’ which aids the players’ performance. Apparently. Very smart - and doesn’t Kevin Davies look proud?

But if you squint a bit, it looks exactly the same as the current kit. No?

All they've done is take the grey stripes away from the bottom and put some Reebok branding on the arms.

On sale now.

SPORTSMAIL RATING: Erm, it's white and there's blue and a bit of red it in. Far from inspiring. 5/10

CHELSEA

Dark arts: The blues go black with their new away kit

Calm down dear, it’s just a bit of red on the Chelsea blue kit. The bright trim is homage to the club’s historical association with the Chelsea Pensioners.

A move which will suit the likes of Michael Ballack, Juliano Belletti, Deco and the rest of the pensioners who are still turning out for the Blues down to a tee.

Gone are those breast plates which adorn the current kit in favour of a simpler style, or ‘retro’ look which is de rigeur at the moment.

And the away kit is a dark number, featuring loads of technology your average fan couldn't care less about

SPORTSMAIL RATING: It's Chelsea blue and the red is a nice nod in the direction of the club's history. But Lampard and Terry look very angry in this picture. Are they trying to sell shirts or start a fight? 8/10.

EVERTON

Just when you thought it was safe to go back to the Everton superstore... this happens.

Granted, David Moyes's side played with verve and panache in the second half of last season. But they'll need real bottle to sport this bright pink number next season.

There were a few raised eyebrows when their previous away kit featured pink stripes but they've gone the whole hog this time round.

An all-out attack on the senses, a luminous effort which will identify exactly where all Toffees fans are on the planet... to those watching down from the moon.

Still, this isn't the first garish number we've had to suffer. Barcelona have been running around in unmissable jerseys for some time now.

Palermo shocked us with their pink effort which was launched two seasons ago and Seville launched a rose third kit a couple of years ago too.

But will fans around the country nod in deference at the continental stylings or laugh helplessly as the marauding pink hordes descend on various clubs during the coming season?

We think we know the answer to that one.

The new home kit says goodbye to the white V on the neck, and returns to the all blue effort of recent years. There's probably some overly-convoluted technology behind it, but essentially, it's just a shirt.

SPORTSMAIL RATING: They say Scousers are known for their sense of humour. They're going to need one to wear this, or a few Chang beers, maybe? Away 6/10, Home 5/10

FULHAM

Not many Fulham fans would have envisaged starting the new season in such uncertainty after the departure of Roy Hodgson to Liverpool.

The Cottager enjoyed a memorable year last time round but start this term not knowing who the manager,or players will be come kick-off on August 14.

Tight fit: Some reckon this new kit looks too much like Tottenham's

The club tell us that the shirt: 'is characterised by attention to detail: 3-needle seam with covering, ergonomic cuts on the sides, customised embroidery and the new V neck that gives new personality to the shirt.'

We think it looks natty. But chaps, disappointing news, the shirt apparently has a stretch-fit enhancement. A feature that doesn't go well with a beer belly!

SPORTSMAIL VERDICT: A tidy take on the classic black and white. they couldn't go wrong, could they? 5/10

NEWCASTLE UNITED

Black and white boy: Peter Lovenkrands sports Newcastle's new strip

New season, new league, new kit. At least we think it's new. Newcastle have returned to the Premier League and they've stuck to the famous black and white stripes for their new jerseys.

Puma tell us that the news shirts are made from a lightweight, breathable fabric. Great news.

And boss Chris Hughton can barely contain his excitement about the new strip, he said: 'We’re delighted with the new Puma home strip and our players are all really pleased with the look and feel of the design.

'There’s always a lot of excitement every time a brand new black and white shirt comes out and I’m sure the strip will go down well with our supporters.'

SPORTSMAIL RATING: You really want us to rate this this? It's black and white stripes, just like all the shirts have been for the past 120 years or so. Standard: 5/10

LIVERPOOL

New kits, new sponsor, new players… new manager.

It's all change at Anfield, with Roy Hodgson the new boss, new home, away and third jerseys for the coming campaign.

This new Liverpool shirt has been designed to match the kit the club wore when they last won the league back in 1990.

A fine idea seeing as they have exhausted every other avenue trying to recapture bygone glory days. They may as well try and design a lucky shirt.

United dropped a clanger by accidentally allowing the reserve side to wear this new kit two days in advance of it's official release. Tut, tut.

Sir Alex Ferguson's side will wear the logo of insurance giants AON after they replaced current sponsors AIG. And rumours abound that they will be unveiling a new white away kit too.

Don't get shirty: A line-up of serious-looking United stars model the new jerseys

SPORTSMAIL RATING: We like these shirts. No great tracks of black across the home kit - a retro design which harps back to the glory years of 1980-81 when they Reds won, erm, nothing. 7/10.

STOKE CITY

Captain's job: Faye sports the Potters' new strip

The new kit is launched in tandem with the Potters' deal with Adidas.

The Club's new kit and training wear will carry the famous adidas 'Three Stripes' after City sealed the biggest kit partnership deal in their history.

Chief Executive Tony Scholes said: 'Twelve of the 32 countries at this summer's World Cup Finals will be wearing adidas kit and many of the top clubs in Europe, including Real Madrid, AC Milan, Chelsea, Liverpool and Bayern Munich.'

So that's settled that, then. Stoke for the title next season.

Available to pre-order now from the club's website.

SPORTSMAIL RATING: Hardly sets the pulses racing and word is the stripes have been removed from the back. 5/10

SUNDERLAND

All smiles: Darren Bent looks pleased with the Black Cats' new kit

Darren Bent looks pleased with himself, doesn't he? Well, you would if you'd been dropped like a stone by your previous club and then gone on to become your new club's top scorer.

Bent finished up with 24 league goals, just behind Wayne Rooney last season, but that was still not enough to get him on the plane to South Africa - lucky boy.

The shirt is, of course, in the traditional red and white stripes, and has been constructed using lightweight and breathable fabric.

You may be interested to know that a mesh-vent seam under the arm has been incorporated to aid ventilation.

This jersey is available to buy now.

SPORTSMAIL VERDICT: Like many, this is just a variation on a never-changing theme. Still, it is smart, new sponsor, too! 6/10

TOTTENHAM HOTSPUR

Leaked images of this shirt surfaced a number of weeks ago and we were inclined to dismiss them as fakes.

But the photos turned out to be genuine and this is how Harry Redknapp's side will turn out next season - their first in the Champions League.

Back to the future: Tottenham's retro kit for next season

With a nod to the Admiral and Le Coq Sportif kits the Lilywhites wore in the 1970s and 1980s - this new jersey is all-out retro.

Tottenham have signed a two-year deal withsoftware infrastructure company Autonomy to carry their name on their shirts in the Premier League.

The deal is worth £20 million with the potential for a further £5 million, depending on the club’s success in the League. The club are still searching for a sponsor for their cup games.

SPORTSMAIL RATING: On first sight, this looks really good. The only problem could be a sponsors logo spoiling the smart retro feel. 8/10

WEST BROM

Tight fit: West Brom's new kit is not so baggy

Premier League new boys West Brom unleash two new kits as the club attempt to move up and stay up in the top flight.

Boss Roberto Di Matteo has identified a few strikers the club need for the coming season and has promised to leave no stone unturned in his search.

He said: 'We are looking for players who have experience in the highest leagues, whether it’s England, Germany, Spain, Denmark or Switzerland.'

So you're not bothering with Italy or France, Roberto?

The chaps at Umbro tell us that the new blue-and-white striped home shirt features 'zig zag' detailing and a classic-style collar to give a modern touch to the Baggies' traditional design. Super.

SPORTSMAIL VERDICT: A really smart shirt that is somewhat diminshed by the huge blob of red in the middle. Damn those sponsors. 8/10

WEST HAM

Avram Grant is the man the Davids Gold and Sullivan have chosen to steer the Hammers through a tricky period in their history.

The former Chelsea and Portsmouth boss has some rebuilding to do, particularly the away form as last season's was terrible.

Irons in the fire: Carlton Cole leads a quartet of West ham players sporting the new home and away kits

West Ham's one away win last term was their fewest in the top flight in 49 years since they also won just once away in 1960/1961.

So this new strip had better bring the Irons some luck. Their new home kit, manufactured by Italian sports retail firm Macron, is retro 1950s design inspired by the club's former greats Noel Cantwell and Malcolm Allison.

But the big question is, has anyone got an XXXL for Benni McCarthy?

SPORTSMAIL RATING: Everyone knows that stripes around the waist only accentuate your size - yes Mr McCarthy, I'm talking about you, again. 6/10

WIGAN

The Latics' latest: Diame models Wigan's new strip

The new Latics strip has been manufactured by MIFIT , the gym fitness brand of DW Sports who recently signed a two year kit deal with Wigan.

So, the same lot who sponsor the ground. Talk about eggs in one basket.

I digress - the shirt is blue with a single white stripe on the left side and features the 188Bet sponsors' logo.

Wigan Athletic players wore the strip for the first time in the pre-season friendly against Oldham Athletic which finished 1-1.

And Manager Roberto Martinez is a big fan of the new strip, too.

He said: ' It follows the club traditional blue and white and I think the fans will like it. It is a kit worthy of our Wigan Athletic!'

SPORTSMAIL VERDICT: The stripe down the side is smart but the huge splodge of orange across the chest is not good. Looks like vomit. 6/10

WOLVES

New to the pack: Wolves' new strip - as sported by Adlene Guedioura

It's the pretty gold shirt with black collar we expect from a Wolves kit - but they've incorporated some of that fancy technology which helps players so much.

The club's website tells us that this new kit is 'made from a textured performance fabric incorporating innovative Cool Dry technology that absorbs moisture away from the skin to ensure an improved comfort and fit.' Nice.

Unveiled for the last game of the season - the 2-1 win over Sunderland - the supporters are already big fans.

And in a move many clubs have taken recently - this jersey has been designed with a retro feel to it