Arsenal Football Club shipped in a total of 64 goals from July 17, 2010 to May 22, 2011, with goals from set pieces taking a large percentage of the goals conceded.

As expected, the Premier League was the competition where Arsenal conceded the highest amount of goals all season long with 41 being the magic number. These goals proved costly for Arsenal in their title bid because Arsenal settled for fourth place after challenging for Premier League honors with Manchester United for a considerable chunk of the season.

The Carling Cup of the 2010/11 season would have been Arsenal’s first trophy in six years, but a self-inflicted wound in the final match was more than enough for Birmingham City to win the trophy.

Arsenal’s first goal conceded in the Carling Cup was in the hands of Lukasz Fabianski when he failed to make a save from a tame shot by Robbie Keane. Wojciech Szczesny’s outburst made him usurp Vito Mannone to be Arsenal’s Cup Keeper because Manuel Almunia had fallen out of favor with Wenger after his antics when West Brom visited the Emirates.

Szczesny kept clean sheets against Newcastle and Wigan, but he conceded a goal in the semifinal when Ipswich hosted Arsenal. A second leg clean sheet against Ipswich paved the way for a final showdown with Birmingham City, but Nikola Zigic and Obafemi Martins left Arsenal fans and players alike with tears that could fill buckets.

Leeds United’s Robert Snodgrass thought that his penalty was enough to give his team a fairytale win against Arsenal in the FA Cup, but Fabregas’ penalty canceled it out. Arsenal won the return leg in Elland Road but the standout goal conceded went into Arsenal’s net—thanks to a screamer from a Leeds midfielder.

Almunia was in goal when Arsenal conceded two goals to Huddersfield Town and Leyton Orient, but Arsenal’s FA Cup adventure ended in the hands of rivals Manchester United courtesy of two goals from Fabio and Wayne Rooney.

Arsenal started the Champions League with a 6-0 spanking of newbies Braga before conceding a solitary goal to Partizan in their 3-1 win at Belgrade. Eduardo scored two goals on both grounds when Arsenal played Shakhtar in a fortnight. Braga’s Matheus’ brace put Arsenal’s Champions League life on a thin thread, but a 3-1 win against Partizan sent Arsenal for a double date with Barcelona.

Villa made a clinical finish when Barcelona visited the Emirates, but Robin van Persie and Andrey Arshavin gave the gooners a night to remember. Arsenal’s visit to the Nou Camp was a horrible affair because the gooners made history by being the first team not to make any attempt on goal for 90 minutes. A Messi brace and a Xavi finish was enough to send the Gunners packing.

Despite all these shortcomings, Manuel Almunia, Lukasz Fabianski and Wojciech Szczesny made some magnificent saves that can never be forgotten by the Arsenal faithful.

Here’s my take on the top 10 saves made by Arsenal goalies in the 2010/11 campaign.

In a game where we found ourselves at the back foot throughout the game, Fabianski pulled out a save of the highest quality in the dying moments of the game. With Arsenal leading by a lone goal with seconds to spare, a low drive to the bottom corner was saved by Fabianski’s left hand.

The best part of it all was that his long throw led to a quick counter attack which saw the Gunners go two up thanks to Chamakh. This save stands out as my save of the season because of its importance in that game.

If Fabianski didn’t make that stop, Wolves would have equalized and the tie would’ve ended in a draw because the game was almost over.