Sean Eilers

CEO & Founder

Sean founded Tiburon Media Group in 2003 and leads the organization. Along with day to day operations, he continues to guide the company's technology innovation and development. Prior to founding Tiburon Media, Sean was Vice President, US Media Sales for Terra Lycos. At Lycos, he was responsible for the media sales, direct marketing and subscription sales teams, which monetized properties like Lycos, Wired, Gamesville, Quote, Raging Bull, Tripod, Angelfire and Sonique. He was also instrumental in the acquisition of Get Relevant, one of the original co-registration platform technologies. Sean joined Lycos in 1999, through their acquisition of Gamesville, where he held the position of Director of Sales. Prior to joining Gamesville, he held sales management positions with Cox Interactive Sales and Listing Link, having begun his online advertising career in 1995. Sean has served in numerous corporate advisory positions and as a board member of the Bay Area Interactive Group. Sean earned a Bachelor's Degree in Economics from the University of California, Davis.

Tom Callagy

VP of Sales

Tom joined Tiburon Media Group in June of 2006. As the VP of Sales Tom manages client relationships with most of the largest companies and agencies in almost every vertical of the Lead Generation space. Prior to joining Tiburon Media Group Tom was a National Accounts Manager for Lycos, where he developed and maintained client relationships. Tom has also held Sales Management positions with the Cintas Corporation FAS Division, in medical sales. Tom brings to Tiburon Media Group a strong customer management background and sales experience in the interactive marketing business.

Danielle Carire

Director of Finance

Danielle joined Tiburon Media in December, 2003 as the Director of Finance. She is responsible for financial reporting, billing, credit and collections. Prior to joining Tiburon Media, Danielle was a Sales Development Specialist for Terra Lycos where she liaised with the sales department and finance department, reporting to the VP of Sales. Danielle joined Lycos in 1999 when they acquired Gamesville. Prior to Lycos she was a Manager of Traffic and Distribution for Rysher Entertainment. Danielle earned a Bachelor’s Degree in Communications from Brooklyn College.

Rahul Richhi

Director of Information Technology

Rahul joined the TMG team in 2006 managing a team of developers, engineers and database administrators. His research duties include sourcing best of breed technologies in developing a state of the art application/database platform for TMG. In parallel, Rahul facilitated migration of all processing capacity to a cloud based network to enhance scalability. Along with handling day to day technical requests he is responsible for research & development of the new technologies to enhance TMG's proprietary platform. Rahul consults closely with TMG clients to understand their business needs and improve work flow.

Rahul earned a B.A. from Delhi University, Masters in Computer Applications from Department of IT Ministry, New Delhi and a MBA from SCDL, Pune, India. He is Cisco Certified (CCNA) and PMP Trained.

Tara Collins

Operations Manager

Tara joined Tiburon Media in August 2011, interfacing directly with the TMG Sales Team and Publishers to maximize revenue within the TMG Lead Generation Network. Prior to joining Tiburon Media, Tara was a leading Sales Manager for Restoration Hardware, opening numerous new store locations with corporate directors and leading product training for new store teams.

Tara earned a Bachelor's Degree in Business Management from University of Phoenix.

McLaren Behrendt

Campaign Manager

McLaren joined Tiburon Media in January, 2020 as a Campaign Manager, working directly with the TMG Sales Team and Publishers to maximize revenue and optimize campaign performance. When she is not at work you will see her catching a live show or at the beach. She studied Political Science at University of Denver.