The celebrated American actress Alexandra Chando is from Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, where she attended Liberty High School and earned her diploma. Her mother, Rebecca, works at home, while her father, Steve Chando, owns his own commercial roofing business in Bethlehem called CHM Contracting. Alexandra is presently a resident of New York City. Chando studied at Manhattan College right before pursuing a career in acting. For her dual roles as Emma Becker and Sutton Mercer, identical twins, in the ABC Family drama series The Lying Game, and as Maddie Coleman in the CBS serial opera As the World Turns, Alexandra Chando is well-known.

Alexandra Chando’s Popularity

On the television soap opera As the World Turns, Alexandra Chando created the character of Maddie Coleman, who she played from 2005 until 2007 and then again started in late 2009. The MTV documentary series True Life’s episode “I’m Getting My Big Break” recorded her experience of being cast on As the World Turns.

Alexandra Chando was nominated for a Daytime Emmy Award in the Younger Actress category 2007. She was cast as Debin in Josh Schwartz’s 2008 WB online series Rockville, California. Later, she portrayed Danielle in the Zoey Dean novel-based web series Talent in 2011. On the ABC Family series The Lying Game, Chando was given the lead role of Emma Becker and Sutton Mercer, identical twins. She appeared in a Castle episode following the conclusion of The Lying Game.

Alexandra Chando’s Early Life

Alexandra was born in Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, on July 28, 1986. As of 2022, Alexandra Chando, July 28, is, is 36 years old. The Chandos are Steve and Rebecca Chando’s parents. It is well known that her mother stays home while his father owns CHM Contracting, a commercial roofing business in Bethlehem. She grew up alongside Christopher Chando and Benjamin Chando, two elder brothers.

Alexandra Chando’s Education

After enrolling at Liberty High School, Alexandra finished her elementary schooling. She joined Manhattan College right before she became an actor, as is also known. When Alexandra was eight years old, she started taking theatre classes. At Circle in the Square in New York, she eventually found a mentor in Alan Langdon.

Alexandra Chando’s Career

On the famous TV soap opera As the World Turns, Alexandra Chando created the part of Maddie Coleman, which she performed from 2005 through 2007 and once more for a period starting in the year 2009. This show stopped streaming in 2010. The True Life documentary series on MTV had a segment titled “I’m Getting My Big Break” that detailed Alexandra’s experience joining the cast of As the World Turns. She was nominated for a Daytime Emmy Award in the category of Younger Actress in 2007. This award ceremony made her name famous amongst the audience, and she started getting good and meaningful roles in different series, shows, commercials, etc.

Check out the body measurements of other actresses

Alexandra Chando’s Career Struggle

Alexandra Chando was given the role of Deb in Josh Schwartz’s 2009 web series Rockville CA for The WB. She participated in Robert Pattinson’s screen test for the main role in the inspiring 2010 film Remember Me with high hopes. Also, she had an audition for the part of the leading character,, Elena Gilbert,, of The Vampire Diaries on The CW. Though she did not get the role, Alexandra did not get heartbroken but struggled toward recognition.

Alexandra Chando’s Rising to Success

Alexandra Chando portrayed Danielle Anderson in the 2011 web drama Talent, based on the Zoey Dean novel series. Chando played the identical twins, Sutton Mercer and Emma Becker, in the ABC Family television program The Lying Game, which ran for two seasons before the network canceled it. After The Lying Game concluded, she appeared as a Lindsay Lohan or Miley Cyrus type in a Castle episode. This appearance made her path toward success more accessible than ever as Hollywood started recognizing her as a good and able actress.

With the release of her short film LPM, Likes Per Minute, in 2018, Chando made her directing debut. It was shown during the first Mammoth Film Festival, where Chando also manages operations. Alexandra did not have to look back again, and she has been working on multiple shows and web series to make her name known to the public.

Alexandra Chando’s Net Worth

Since Alexandra Chando has not yet made her pay public, no information has been supplied about it. However, additional information is currently being examined and will be released soon.

Alexandra Chando’s strong career has contributed to her estimated net worth of around $8 million as of 2022. Her acting career is her primary source of income. She has been able to amass good fortune from her different sources of income, yet she likes to live.

Alexandra Chando’s Dating History

Currently, Michael Trevino and Alexandra Chando are dating. Since their relationship began in 2015, they have been together for almost six years and are happy. He is an Aquarius, while she is a Leo, which might not be the perfect pairing according to Zodiac, but they are deeply in love as of 2022 news. Michael Trevino, Alexandra Chando’s boyfriend, is a well-known actor. He became well-known because of his role as Tyler Lockwood in The Vampire Diaries.

Alexandra Chando’s Personal Information

Full born name: Alexandra Chando

Nicknames: Alex

Occupation: American Actress

Religion: Christianity

Date of birth: 28th July, 1986

Birthplace: Bethlehem, PennsJuly 28

Zodiac sign: Leo

Father name: Steve Chando

Mother name: Rebecca Chando

Sibling’s names: Christopher Chando and Benjamin Chando

Spouse/ Boyfriend: Michael Trevino

Children: N/A

Alexandra Chando’s Body Measurements

Alexandra Chando’s inches measure 30-23-30 respectively.

Alexandra Chando’s Bra And Breast Size

Alexandra Chando is a Fitness Model & Social Media Sensation whose bra size is 30B.

Height: 5’3″

Weight: 48 kgs.

Bra Size: 30B

Cup size: B

Body Measurement: 30-23-30 in or 76-58-76 cm

Figure: Pear

Chest size: 30 in

Waist size: 23 in

Hip’s size: 30 in

Dress size: N/A

Shoe size: 6 US