Alexandra Chando is a Director, Producer and Emmy nominated Actor. She got her start in the entertainment industry as an actor. With over 20 years of experience on network TV and film, she is no stranger to the production process. Chando played the lead roles of identical twins, Sutton and Emma, on (the then) ABC Family’s “The Lying Game”. It was during this experience she became interested in directing. Once completed with that series, Chando began shadowing directors on network TV series (ABC’s “Mistresses”, Fox/Marvel’s “The Gifted”), totaling over 400 on-set hours, while also playing series regular roles in television pilots for NBC, The CW, FOX, as well as guest stars on network series and a recurring role on Amazon’s “Sneaky Pete”. In 2017, Chando created, directed and produced “The Dinner Party”, an unscripted female driven pilot providing a platform for diverse women to have meaningful conversations in a dinner party setting. Next, she directed a music video and her first short, “LPM, Likes Per Minute”, was an official selection at Oscar-Qualifying HollyShorts, among other nationwide festivals. In 2019, Chando produced the short, “A Good Son”, for Suzanne Weinert, which world premiered at SXSW. She also directed and executive produced an independent pilot called “NSFW” alongside Executive Producer, Eric Amadio (Creator of FX’s “Snowfall”) and Cameron Duncan (“Preacher”, “Longmire”, “Tulsa King”) as Director of Photography, with the intention of selling it as a series. In early 2021, Chando directed two short films that played the festival circuit. She delivered her feature directorial debut “And on the Eighth Day”, a female driven heist set in 1994 in West Texas, starring Phoebe Tonkin, Darren Mann, Mustafa Speaks, Valerie Mahaffey and Lindsey Morgan. It was her third collaboration with DP, Cameron Duncan.

As the Festival Manager of Mammoth Film Festival™ and the Executive Director of HER VOICE, an initiative aiming to create accessibility and opportunities to emerging female filmmakers, Chando has immersed herself in filmmaking and is dedicated to making strides in gender parity. In 2020, she launched “The Her Voice Podcast” under Kevin Connolly’s Action Park Media, a podcast about getting candid and having meaningful conversations with females (and males) in the entertainment industry. Guests have included Anne Heche (Actress/Producer), Gina Girolamo (SVP Alloy Entertainment), Carolina Garcia (Director of Original Series, Netflix), Kimberly McCullough (Episodic Director), and Lesley-Ann Brandt (Actress), Erica Huggins (President, Fuzzy Door), John Scott (Episodic Director).

Chando was a cohort in the 2022 class of the Sony Pictures Television Diverse Directors Program.