Arthur R. Wenczel, 89, of Alexander, NC, passed away in his home on Wednesday, November 24, 2021.

Born in Trenton, NJ, he was the husband of Carolyn (Rice) Wenczel of Alexander, NC, and the son of the late Stephen and Mary (Bernacka) Wenczel. He was preceded in death by a son, Evan; son-in-law, David Cook; four siblings: Chester, Thomas, Stephen, and Valeria Bielawski; and survived by a brother, Walter Wenczel, two sisters: Florence Kazior and Elizabeth O’Grady.

Art is remembered as being very kind, wise, and supportive. A give-you-the-shirt-off-his-back kind of guy. Being a compassionate and caring man, he was a former volunteer with Care Partners Hospice and was a faithful member of St. Eugene Catholic Church, Asheville.

Art graduated from the University of Notre Dame and Georgetown University Law. After retiring from the law profession, he and Carol moved to Asheville, NC to own and operate The Wright Inn and Carriage House for 6 years until their second retirement in 2000.

Creating beauty through gardening and landscaping was his lifelong joy and passion.

In addition to his wife of 65 years, he is survived by eight children: Carolyn Maruhnic and her husband Peter of Montville, ME, Michael Wenczel and his wife Evelyn Good of Princeton, NJ, Arthur Wenczel Jr. and his wife Tonjia of Asheville, NC, Lisa Lario and her husband Mark of Dayton, OH, Stephen Wenczel III, and his wife Stacey of Leverett, MA, Kristin Taulbee and her husband Larry of Alexander, NC, Andrew Wenczel of Alexander, NC, and Jennifer Moore and her husband Chris of Henniker, NH; and daughter-in-law Carmen Wenczel; 11 grandchildren: Jared, Kelsey, Devon, Chris, Julia, Ben, Eric, Kale, Stella, Samantha, and Alex; and 3 great-grandchildren: Evan, Petra and Sage (on the way).

A memorial mass will be held at 1:00 PM on Wednesday, December 1, 2021 at St. Eugene’s Catholic Church in Asheville. Friends will be received from 12:30 to 1:00 prior to the service. Inurnment will follow in the church columbarium.

In lieu of flowers, memorial contributions in Art’s memory may be made online to St. Jude Children’s Hospital at stjude.org/donate or to St. Eugene Catholic Church at steugene.org/onlinegiving.

Groce Funeral Home at Lake Julian is assisting the family.