Joss Whedon, from whose fertile mind sprang Buffy the Vampire Slayer, the cult sci-fi series Firefly and its film spin-off Serenity, has stepped aside from the planned Wonder Woman film. Whedon had been hired in March 2005 to develop and write the adaptation, and was in the frame to direct it as well.

But, according to Whedon, he left the project after it became clear that he and the studio and production company involved, Warner Bros Pictures and Silver Pictures, had different ideas about what kind of film they wanted to make. Writing on the fansite www.whedonesque.com, Whedon said: "I had a take on the film that, well, nobody liked.

"We just saw different movies, and at the price range this kind of movie hangs in, that's never gonna work," he explained. "Non-sympatico. It happens all the time. I don't think any of us expected it to this time, but it did. Everybody knows how long I was taking, what a struggle that script was, and though I felt good about what I was coming up with, it was never gonna be a simple slam-dunk. I like to think it rolled around the rim a little bit, but others may have differing views."

So instead of writing about a lasso and bullet-deflecting bracelets, Whedon will be working on Goners, a thriller for Universal Pictures, while writing Runaways, a comic about super-powered teens for Marvel.

In other comic-book adaptation news, Night at the Museum director Shawn Levy has been brought in to direct Warner Bros' The Flash, following the departure of Batman Begins screenwriter David Goyer. Goyer's ideas were said to have been too dark for the studio.

Goyer wrote on his MySpace page on Friday: "I am sad to say that my version of The Flash is dead at WB," Goyer wrote. "The God's honest truth is that WB and myself simply couldn't agree on what would make for a cool Flash film. I'm quite proud of the screenplay I turned in. I threw my heart into it, and I genuinely think it would've been the basis of a groundbreaking film. But as of now, the studio is heading off in a completely different direction."