Academics

Lane College provides a liberal arts curriculum leading to Bachelor of Arts and Bachelor of Science. All the academic programs are accredited by the Commission on Colleges of the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools. The Bachelor of Arts degree is awarded to students having major such as history, interdisciplinary studies, criminal justice, mass communication, music, religion, or sociology. The Bachelor of Science is conferred to students with any of the following majors: computer science, mathematics, biology, business, chemistry, physical education, or physics.

Students can also opt for a dual degree program with Tennessee State University; those with engineering majors get a Bachelor of Science in Mathematics from Lane College, and a Bachelor of Science in Engineering from Tennessee State University. Lane College is composed of the following academic divisions: Business and Social and Behavioral Science; Liberal Studies and Education; and Natural and Physical Sciences.

Most Popular Fields of Study

Admissions

Lane College has an enrollment of more than 2,000 students each year. Students seeking admission to the College must be a graduate of an accredited or approved high school or have acquired a Graduate Equivalency Diploma(GED). Applicants must take either the American College Test (ACT) or Scholastic Aptitude Test (SAT).

Transfer students are encouraged to apply for admission. They must send all the official transcripts from previously attended institutes. Lane College offers a great learning environment for international students. International applicants whose native language is not English must take The Test of English as a Foreign Language (TOEFL).

Students

The Student Government Association (SGA) works like the representative of the student body, at the same time enriching their college experience. It promotes leadership and regulation of student activities and organizations. The SGA serves as a medium through which student’s suggestions and concerns can be addressed. There are several on-campus clubs and organizations that students can participate in. Some of them are Communication Club, Alpha Omega Library Club, Biology Club, English Club, Pre-Alumni Council, Students Ministerial Alliance, and Criminal Justice Association.

Lance College has a strong Greek presence. There are several honor societies, sororities and fraternities, governed by the Pan-Hellenic Council. Some of the Greek organizations include Beta Kappa Chi Scientific Society, Alpha Kappa Mu Honor Society, Alpha Phi Alpha, Kappa Alpha Psi, Phi Beta Sigma, Delta Sigma Theta, Sigma Gamma Rho, and Zeta Phi Beta.

Campus Facilities:

Lane College offers decent housing options to most of the students. The residence life is enriched with activities, events and modern facilities. There are on-campus residence halls and off-campus apartments. Each residence hall on the beautiful campus is modernized and wired for the Internet, telephone and cable services. Lane’s Cyber café offers a wireless coffeehouse experience, where students can stop by for smoothies, pastries, or a cup of coffee.

The Library at Lane College houses an extensive collection of books, journals, magazines and reference materials. It is also accessible online. The writing center is situated in the Library Resource Center. It serves as a resource for students looking for help on writing assignments. The environment is created to foster student’s focus on writing, thinking, reading, and research. There is also a Living and Learning Center that houses High Definition television screens, a fitness center, and an area featuring state-of-the-arts sound system.

The Mathematics Laboratory at Saunders Hall provides assistance in general mathematical concepts. Tutoring and assistance with assignments are provided by faculty located in the Math Laboratory. Computers are available for students to practice their math skills. There is also a Communication Arts Studio designed for students enrolled in Mass Communication courses.

The HBCU Wellness Project is an intervention that is designed to use the human and social capital at private historically black colleges and universities to encourage health and reduce risks of unremitting diseases. The primary goal is to leverage educational and service-oriented resources to positively impact the well being of Tennessee residents.

The Counseling Center at Lane College is a place where students can focus and seek assistance in personal and career goals. It helps students become self-understanding, self-reliant, and develop strong personal values, social skills and a sense of ethics.

Student Enrollment Demographics

Student Graduation Demographics