George Zebrowski is a science fiction author and editor who has written and edited a number of books, and is a former editor of The Bulletin of the Science Fiction Writers of America. He lives with author Pamela Sargent, with whom he has co-written a number of novels, including Star Trek novels.

CONTENT:

Macrolife Series

1. Macrolife (read by Victor Bevine, Kevin T. Collins)

2. Cave Of Stars (read by Joe Barrett)

Omega Point Trilogy

3. The Omega Point (read by Oliver Wyman)

4. Ashes And Stars (read by Oliver Wyman)

5. Mirror Of Minds (read by Oliver Wyman)

Sunspacer Series

6. The Sunspacers (read by MacLeod Andrews, Elizabeth Evans)

7. The Stars Will Speak (read by MacLeod Andrews, Elizabeth Evans)

Non-Series

8. Brute Orbits (read by William Dufris)

9. Stranger Suns (read by William Dufris)

10. Empties (read by Mark Boyett)

11. The Killing Star (read by Stephen Angus)

Audio-DVD format:

It can be used on DVD and DVD-Rom players, also on devices such as Playstation, Xbox or portable DVD players. In addition, the tracks can be taken to any mp3 player, such as portable mp3 player, tablets, smartphones, etc. through the computer.

- The tracks are handled in the same way that you would handle the songs through iTunes.

- The number of discs varies by each title, although generally it goes in a single disc.

- The AudioDVD format is not the same as traditional CDs and does not work on CD players. Please be sure to use one of the players mentioned above.

- The format of the tracks is MP3; This is the extension of better handling and of more quality.

- Kbps vary by title.

- Audiobooks are read by professional narrators.

MP3-CD format:

This audio CD-MP3 works on your computer. It also works on CD and DVD players with mp3 capacity, including car stereos.

- The number of discs varies by each title. Each disc can contain one or several audiobooks.

- The mp3 tracks can be taken to different mp3 players or smartphones and iphone or ipad. Make sure your device is compatible with this technology before making your purchase.

- The format of the tracks is MP3; This is the extension of better handling and of more quality.

- Kbps vary by title.

- Audiobooks are read by professional narrators.

SHIPPING:

All audiobooks are sent through USPS First Class and will arrive at your hands between 7 and 10 days after your purchase (usually much sooner than later). A link will be sent so you can track your product online.

We ship worldwide through USPS.

RETURNS:

If the product presents any problem, we will send you another one immediately! Any disagreement will always be resolved. You will also have the PayPal purchase protection against any problem that occurs with your purchase.

Original case is not included with your purchase. Pictures Of Disc covers/cases in this listing are for illustrative purposes only.