Recently I’ve been re-reading two novels by Bruce Chatwin that I picked up on a bookstall at Beeston Castle in the summer. On The Black Hill was published in 1982 and won the James Tait Black Memorial Prize and the Whitbread Best First Novel – despite it being his third book, and second novel (the other Chatwin I’ve been reading, The Viceroy of Ouidah, was the first).

On The Black Hill may have been inspired by the hill that loomed over the first house owned by Chatwin and his wife Elizabeth in Gloucestershire. It follows the lives of identical twins born at the turn of the 20th century into the harsh life of a hill-farming community on the border between England and Wales. One theme of the book concerns the changes taking place in the wider world during the 20th century that come to affect this isolated community: the First World War, the decline of the landed gentry, mechanisation, and changes in the farming economy, and the arrival in more recent times of a new breed of country dweller – all affect the twins, even as they try to cut themselves off from the world.

On the Black Hill develops themes that Chatwin explores overtly in his travel books – Songlines and In Patagonia – the tension between settlement and travel, between the ascetic and the aesthetic life, between celibacy and the pleasures of the flesh. The twins personify these contradictions – Lewis yearns to move away and discover worldly delights whereas his brother is fiercely committed to remaining on the farm. Nicholas Shakespeare, Chatwin’s biographer, has called it a ‘story about two ways of being in the world.’

Nicholas Shakespeare recently presented a major re-appraisal of the life and work of Bruce Chatwin on BBC 4,in which he focussed on Chatwin’s obsession with the superior qualities of the way of life of the few remaining nomadic tribes left on earth.

In an essay in 1997 Chatwin wrote:

Change of fashion, food, love and landscape. We need them as the air we breathe. Without change our brains and bodies rot. The man who sits quietly in a shuttered room is likely to be mad, tortured by hallucinations and introspection. […]

“He who does not travel does not know the value of men”, said Ib’n Battuta, the indefatigable Arab wanderer who strolled from Tangier to China and back for the sake of it. But travel does not merely broaden the mind. It makes the mind, Our early explorations are the raw materials of our intelligence. [… ] Children need paths to explore, to take bearings on the earth on which they live, as a navigator takes bearings on familiar landmarks. If we excavate the memories of childhood, we remember the paths first, things and people second – paths down the garden, the way to school, the way round the house, corridors trough the bracken or long grass. Tracking the paths of animals was the first and most important element in the education of early man. We are travellers from birth. Our mad obsession with technological progress is a response to barriers in the way of our geographical progress. The few “primitive” peoples in the forgotten corners of the earht understand this simple fact about our nature better than we do.

John Edwards has written of the puzzlement about the causes of wanderlust that permeates Chatwin’s writing:

In much of his work, he attempts to explain why men wander rather than sit still. (Even his surname, derived from the Anglo-Saxon chette-wynde, meaning ‘winding path’, fortuitously prefigures his major obsession.) He agreed with Pascal that man’s unhappiness stems from a single cause: ‘his inability to remain quietly in a room’…. In The Viceroy of Ouidah, a crammed and claustrophobic book, the main character, a Brazilian slave trader from Dahomey, considers “any set of four walls to be a tomb or a trap,” yet is involved with confining others.

More than that, Francisco da Silva, the novel’s central character, is a man who has wandered far from home – yet who, later in his life, yearns – but fails – to return to his Brazilian homeland.

The Viceroy of Ouidah has an identical structure to On the Black Hill, beginning in the present, before unfolding its story in flashback. Its subject matter could not be more different, however. The Viceroy of Ouidah tells the real-life story of Francisco Manoel da Silva, a white Brazilian who became the most powerful slave trader on the West African coast in the 1800s. He was born into poverty in the wild north-east of Brazil, his wanderings led him to the port town of Ouidah in the African Kingdom of Dahomey, notorious for its thriving slave-trading enterprises and human sacrifice. Da Silva marries a local girl, impregnates countless others, and spawns progeny whose multi-coloured descendents, over a century after his death, still gather annually to honour him in Ouidah.

Chatwin did his research: he travelled to Ouidah and then to Bahia in Brazil, where the slaves were sold, to gather detail and local colour. But this is not a historical novel as such; rather, it has more in common with the ‘magic realism’ of Latin American novelists. A novel of barely more than a hundred pages, The Viceroy of Ouidah has no moral centre, containing scenes of unspeakable brutality, madness and depravity, and not one character of any moral virtue. Chatwin observes the processes of the slave trade, but does not comment, and offers no heros.

Chatwin’s prose is spare but rich, vividly evoking colour, smell and sound in scenes permeated with decay, corruption and cruelty. Perhaps the finest section of the book is that which tells of da Silva as a boy barely surviving in impoverished and drought-ridden Bahia. But there are moments of rich comedy too – especially the early scene at the da Silva’s annual dinner, with family members continuing their conversations as the radio broadcasts an address by the President. It’s hilarious. Most of the rest is not.