"Hearst Magazines and Yahoo may earn commission or revenue on some items through these links."

Since her relationship with Prince William became public, long before the couple married in 2011, Kate Middleton has been drawing comparisons to William’s mother, the late Princess Diana. The much-loved princess was and remains an iconic figure in the public consciousness—so much so, a new biography contends, that it almost inspired Kate to turn down the use of the title of Princess of Wales.

Princess Charlotte Had a Heartwarming Reaction to Princess Kate’s Standing Ovation

I’m not crying, you are!

Shop Now

Prince William’s Annual Salary Is Revealed in a New Report

The document details the money the Prince of Wales made in his first year as the Duke of Cornwall

Shop Now

Princess Beatrice Takes a Style Cue From Kate and Meghan

Her outfit included elements that often appear in the other royal women’s wardrobes

Shop Now

“In marrying the elder son of Prince Charles, Catherine was aware she'd one day have to tread in her late mother-in-law's footsteps—but the prospect of becoming the Princess of Wales held little appeal,” writes Robert Jobson in an excerpt from his new book Catherine, the Princess of Wales. “She knew she'd inevitably be compared with Diana, whose untimely death had provoked such a tsunami of anger and grief. And she was right. The similarities and differences between the two women were dissected ad infinitum, and even discussed in the royal household.”

He continues, “Kate found all such talk stressful. Indeed, it got to the point where she felt she might follow Camilla (who opted to become Duchess of Cornwall) in refusing—when the time came—to be known as HRH Princess of Wales.”

Indeed, when King Charles acceded the throne in 2022, as his eldest son Prince William inherited a number of his titles, including that of the Duke of Cornwall and, of course, the Prince of Wales—the title traditionally held by the heir to the throne. Kate in turn, took on the courtesy titles of Duchess of Cornwall and Princess of Wales, but could have followed in Camilla's example and chosen not to use the Wales title publicly.

However, as we know, she did ultimately choose to take on Diana's former mantle, becoming the first royal to use the title officially since her late mother-in-law's death in 1997. “Enough time had passed to make the title more palatable, and Catherine had been on the world stage long enough to be appreciated for her own qualities,” Jobson writes.

In a 2022 speech announcing the title change, Charles emphasized Kate's new status alongside William. “Today, I am proud to create him Prince of Wales, Tywysog Cymru, the country whose title I have been so greatly privileged to bear during so much of my life and duty. With Catherine beside him, our new Prince and Princess of Wales will, I know, continue to inspire and lead our national conversations, helping to bring the marginal to the centre ground where vital help can be given.”

You Might Also Like