so far, the Romantic Princess has been one of my favorites.

Characters: an A+

Angela Zhang as Xiao Mai – i was indifferent to Zhang a few telenovelas back then, but i’m starting to love her! and her voice. Her role: she plays this girl, Xiao Mai, who dreamed of having this big castle. Although very hardworking, she calculated a total of 400 years of hard work before she can finally get her dream house. Who knew that one day, a butler, accompanied by limosines and a good number of body guards would come fetch her and tell her that she is the long-lost grandaughter of Asia’s richest man, Huang Fu Xiong(aka EMP, short for emperor). As she starts her life in the Huang Fu family, she finds life in the covered courts of her palace different and exaggerated. What could ever go wrong?

The Nan Feng Kids:The four stars in this drama reminds me of the F4 back in Meteor Garden. They exude money, power, and hotness. (at least in the drama). Handpicked by Huang Fu Xiong himself, these boys have lived a life of plethora in terms of food, clothes, cars, money, power, you name it. Of these four boys, one will be chosen to become the heir of the Huang Fu family’s vast empire. [As Huang Fu Xiong’s daughter and her husband is already dead.] and of course, the heir would eventually marry EMP’s grandaughter.

Wu Zun as Nan Feng Jin – Who wouldn’t like Wu Zun? He models, sings and acts. bottomline, he’s hot. He and his band, Fahrenheit, is invading Asia! His role: he plays as Nan Feng Jin, one of the Nan Feng kids. Athough he had been living in a life full of everything money-related, he wants more than life in the Huang Fu’s empire. He wants his way of working hard, not just a life conveniently laid out for him. As he constantly finds ways in making Xiao Mai hate him(starting from their first encounter), the risks in renouncing his title to become heir suddenly becomes greater as he develops a love interest in Xiao Mai.

Calvin Chen as Nan Feng Cai – one of members of the Taiwan band, Fahrenheit. His role: He plays Nan Feng Cai, the catalyst in Nan Feng Jin and Xiao Mai’s interest in each other. As he bribes Xiao Mai of money(in millions) in order for Xiao Mai to get revenge on Nan Feng Jin by telling her grandfather that she wants to marry Jin and to pay back her debt to her grandfather(don’t ask why she became indebted). As the story progresses, he will find ways to make the story more interesting.

George Hu as Nan Feng Lin – His role: Cai’s cousin and Jin’s brother. He has a crush on Xiao Mai and asks Jin of tips in courting her.

Li Ang Lin as Nan Feng Ying – His role: Cai’s brother and Jin’s cousin.

Gu Bao Ming as Huangfu Xiong (EMP) – His role: Xiao Mai’s grandfather. Although a bit obnoxious in his mischievous plots in unravelling Xiao Mai and Jin’s relationship, the man has it in making the story really interesting.

Plot: An A

Ending: a B

yes, they managed to produce a happy ending, but it was very.. bitin.