Park Sihoo: In “The Princess’s Man” I tried to express love in a romantic way.”

Park Sihoo starred in the period drama of tragic love “The Princess Man” which was also called the “Korean version of Romeo and Juliet”. The drama was a big hit in Korea and he maximized his charm. Up until now, he has been playing charming men who suffered from love, and viewers’ hearts have been warmed up.

However, in this work, from the bright and cheerful son from a prestigious family, he was transformed into a dark man who was regarded as a sinner with a burning desire to take revenge, and a sad man who suffered from love. Park Sihoo played the character Kim Seungyu who went through multiple transformations.

“The Princess’ Man” is a historical drama, but it is a drama centered on a love story.

I tried to express the love between a man and a woman in a sweet and romantic way. There were many kissing scenes that you don’t see in ordinary historical dramas. (Laugh) There were parts that dealt with historical facts and others that are fictional. I think the drama harmonized well the melodrama with the traditional historical drama parts. It is a story full of highlights, with dark fights between men and romance between young men and women.

Instagram Reel Video – Park Sihoo: 2012: Interview 2011: Romantic Princess Man, 21 July 2022

View this post on Instagram

A post shared by Park Sihoo-ssi: Korean actor (@parksihoossi)

In the beginning of the drama, Kim Seungyu, the son from a prestigious family, was called “Wonchonam 완초남” (perfect Korean man) and “Dalchonam 달초남” (sweet Korean man). What do you think?

(Laugh) I heard people talk about this and I am glad I did a historical drama after all. (Laugh). At the beginning, I wanted to present the bright and sweet romance of the children from prestigious families who do not have to work hard. The very sad love part in the second half made the acting more prominent.

In the middle of the drama, you turned around and showed a tattered appearance. In modern dramas, you have always shown the appearance of a scion. How do you feel about the appearance of going through hard times?

I didn’t particularly want to dress up like that, but it was required in the drama. (Laugh) I am glad I was able to show you a different side of me after wearing beautiful clothes. Because I looked so pitiful, I received a lot of sympathy. (Laugh).

What did you think of the names “Sexy Seungyu” and “Dark Seungyu” after such a pitiful time?

I can understand “Dark Seungyu” but “Sexy Seungyu”? Maybe it was because of the scene where he bathed in water or practiced martial arts with his chest showing casually. (Laugh). The manly and charismatic appearance was sexy. Oh, I wondered if he was also sexy when he strangled Seryung. (Laugh)

As for the scene of strangling, Moon Chaewon who played the opposite role said, “Park Sihoo’s acting was so real and it was really painful.” Was there any story (Nance: behind-the-scene story) at that time?

I could have made it a little bit less painful, but I did it because I wanted her to act well and have good emotions. It was all for a good drama. (Laugh). But the filming came out well, didn’t it? There was a scene where she was strangled twice, but the second time was ad-lib.

The acting with the eyes was also attractive and sexy. There were many masked appearances and acting without lines, what are your thoughts about acting with your eyes?

I like acting with my eyes! (Laugh) There were scenes where I had to talk with just my eyes as there were no lines at all. In real life, I am a man of few words and one who listens to other people’s stories. So it was easy to act with only my eyes, and I am glad the viewers liked it.