Title: Romantic Princess

Country: Taiwanese

Genre: Romantic Comedy, Drama, Idol drama

Stars: Angela Zhang, Wu Chun, Calvin Chen, Gu Bao Ming

Episodes: 13

Where you can see it: Gooddrama, Viki

Dramawiki

Do your eyes deceive you? No. I am legit writing a drama review. Holy shit! I know we will throw confetti later, probably. No, let’s not. Okay so recently and some of you may also experience this, where you miss dramas. And need to rewatch them because 16 hours are easy to come by and waste. Needless to say I made my mom rewatch Wish to See You Again which is by far my favorite Taiwanese drama. So before you start wondering what the fuck this has to do with the actual drama I will be reviewing Romantic Princess, I will tell you if you let me holy shit get off my back!

Anyway, after watching WtSYA I decided my mom needed to be introduced to the genre known as idol dramas. I think WtSYA is technically an idol drama because ¾ths of the Taiwanese F4 star in it. But no, I mean a real, over-the-top Taiwanese idol drama. She really doesn’t like incredibad stuff so I couldn’t show her anything with Rainie Yang in it. So I remembered this one from my early drama days when I was fresh out of college and unemployed and reading manga 24/7 and just discovering dramas were a thing. Point being, this is a very basic, easy to watch idol drama that will ease even the snoodiest of tastes into the overly acted and ridiculous world of Taiwanese idol dramas.

Like I said this is a very basic drama plot. Mai Qiu Sui aka Xiao Mai (Angela Zhang) is a poor girl wishing she was magically actually a princess or some rich man’s daughter in hopes to leave her destitute life. Holy shit guess what she totally is. Turns out Xiao Mai was adopted by her current parents from a human trafficker who kidnapped her from the super, uber, ultra rich Huangfu family. Her proof, heart shaped butt birthmark. Yeah, I dunno what idol drama writers are smoking either but I want some.

So now she is getting exactly what she’s always wished for but isn’t too happy about it since it means leaving her adopted parents (Bu Xue Liang and Phoebe Huang) behind. Drama, drama, annoying tears blah, blah, blah. So now Xiao Mai is the heir to this crazy fortune and has her choice of four eligible bachelors who have been selected previously to be groomed to become Huangfu Xiong aka EMP’s (Gu Bao Ming) successor. They’re all cousins, distantly I hope. So she first meets Nan Feng Jin (Wu Chun) and immediately take a dislike to each other when he insinuates she’s a fake. Yeah, she’s gonna end up with him. It’s not a spoiler, it’s a fact.

Initially, even though she is now a fancy shmancy, real life heriess, Xiao Mai is not happy that she can’t live with her adopted parents (real ones are dead, shock), so she visits them often which pisses EMP off so he fixes it so they are shipped to Brazil. Bye bye, adopted parents, hello overly involved grandpa who is determined to marry her off to his successor and basically sell her like a human trafficker.

I mentioned she and Jin are “enemies who are gonna eventually hook up” right? Because they are. So when Xiao Mai meets one of the other potential successors, Jin’s cousin Cai (Calvin Chen) who’s only goal in life is to drink beer, party and bang chicks, he sets up a little prank for Jin. He convinces Xiao Mai to get engaged with Jin in hopes that Jin will rebel against EMP. If she does Cai will give her 5 million NTD (approx. $158,000) to pay off EMP whom she promised to pay for the house he gave her adopted parents. Of course she agrees and the engagement is basically set when Xiao Mai gets close to Jin and realizes he doesn’t want to be EMP’s successor and be a businessman in his own right. Of course this new revelation moves Xiao Mai’s heart and she begins to like Jin and Jin too has begun to like her. Told ya, they’re gonna hook up. However, Jin holds back his feelings because if he does go for her he knows he will be trapped being EMP’s successor. So some shit happens and Xiao Mai breaks the engagement and her deal with Cai.

So as the story progresses Xiao Mai eventually finds herself engaged to Cai even though neither of them want that. Basically, it’s a move between Cai and EMP to get Jin to admit he likes Xiao Mai and visa versa. Eventually they do hook up but have to hide it so they don’t end up engaged again. However, they aren’t very good at hiding it and EMP figures them out but won’t come out and say it and they won’t admit anything and he does everything to try and get hard proof. There’s a whole bit about money rewards for proof. Yeah… However, drama really kicks up when Gong Mo Li, a woman claiming to be the REAL heir and granddaughter shows up with her eyes apparently on Jin. And this is where I will end my summary.

Set in, clearly a hotel, Romantic Princess is a fun and often ridiculous ride. But unlike most idol dramas, no one gets kidnapped (aside from the initial babynapping), no one gets rain flu (a must in romantic dramas), and no one gets amnesia from an impossible explosion. There is however, weird imagination scenes, over acting and crazy weird effects that pull you out of the scene but are actually pretty funny when you get used to them. It’s not the best drama you will ever see and the storyline is nothing new nor involved but it is what it is and it’s not a bad way to waste 13 hours. The leads are super cute together and, as I said aside from the overly silliness of some of the scenes it’s a fairly light hearted and funny drama.

Real quick though, is Angela Zhang like out of the acting world now? Because it doesn’t look like she’s been in anything since. I mean she’s not a strong actress but she’s pretty decent as far as idol drama actresses go. I mean she was nominated for an award for one of her dramas. Or is she strictly sticking to singing because she’s actually very talented on that front. Just wondering. But I would be interested to know. You’re adorable Angela Zheng come back!