A while back, I admitted here in Film Scene that there were many, many movies most folks would tend to assume someone such as myself would have definitely seen at some point, but which I simply have not.

"The Princess Bride" is one of those films. I know, I know. The horror.

Other than a handful of disconnected moments from that 1987 romantic fantasy comedy I've caught by chance on TV throughout the intervening years, I have no memory of director Rob Reiner's filmic take on author William Goldman's 1973 novel of the same name. To be sure, I know it stars a uniquely amazing cast (including Cary Elwes, Robin Wright, Mandy Patinkin, Chris Sarandon, Christopher Guest, the late, great André the Giant, Billy Crystal and Fred Savage), and that it was narrated by the one and only Peter Falk.

Other than that, you got me.

But people love this film. Oh, how they love it! Although it barely doubled its shooting budget upon first release (bringing in a fairly paltry $30 million in theaters), it's one of those "slow burn" films that over time has grown into that most rare of creatures: A mainstream cult film.

Folks of all stripes adore this movie and can quote virtually the entire film by heart. Hopefully there won't be too much of that taking place in the Lucas Theatre when they screen "The Princess Bride" as part of an early Valentine's Day double-feature on Feb. 7.

The good-natured fairy tale, replete with nasty royals, sword fights, secret identities, giants, kidnappings and all manner of dashing derring-do, has become a beloved classic in its own right, and a darn-near perfect date movie for the young at heart, no matter how old their arteries are.

Plus, if you're like me and can't bear the thought of going through life without seeing every single motion picture that playwright and actor Wally Shawn appears in, you'll definitely want to make sure to be there for this show. As an avowed Cary Elwes fan from his string of ace cameos on the sorely missed TV series "Psych," I suppose I really should get around to watching it myself, sooner or later.

Immediately following "The Princess Bride," the Lucas takes a drastic shift in tone by offering director Tony Scott's gleefully depraved 1993 crime-comedy "True Romance."

Written by director and screenwriter Quentin Tarantino, whom the Lucas recently feted with two double-features of his own, the film, which stars Christian Slater ("Pump Up the Volume," that movie where he has a baboon heart or something) and Patricia Arquette ("Boyhood," "Lost Highway") as young, fast-moving lovers whose whirlwind affair finds them entangled in a somewhat astonishing amount of violent, criminal behavior (there's a shocker, coming from Q.T.), it was his first script sold to a major studio.

Much like "The Princess Bride," "True Romance" boasts a stellar cast, all of whom turn in memorable performances. Look for Dennis Hopper ("Hoosiers," "Easy Rider"), Val Kilmer ("Masked & Anonymous"), Gary Oldman ("The Fifth Element"), Brad Pitt ("Johnny Suede") and Christopher Walken ("Heaven's Gate") in quirky, scene-stealing roles.

Be aware, however, that "True Romance" bears all the hallmarks of early Tarantino - it was, after all, derived in part from his earliest movie, an unreleased, 40-minute B&W talk-fest shot inside the video store where he worked and tutored himself in the art of cinema before becoming a professional filmmaker.

So, be prepared for plenty of bloodshed and cursing when inviting a potential sweetheart to this one. "The Princess Bride" screens at 7 p.m. with "True Romance" at 10 p.m. Individual tickets to each film are $8 ($5 for students/seniors/military), or you can take advantage of two different package deals: two tickets to either movie, plus two sodas and one popcorn to share for $15, or the exact same deal but for both movies for only $25.

Looking ahead, the Psychotronic Film Society serves up a steaming platter of vintage black exploitation cinema at The Sentient Bean. In fact, the Feb. 11 selection, famed schlock-meister Al Adamson's hilariously dated and laughably low-budget 1976 "action" flick "Black Heat," is likely a guilty pleasure of Tarantino's, as he is a known aficionado of such rough-and-tumble "grindhouse" features.

Shot on a shoestring on the mean streets and in the skeeviest nightclubs of 1976 Las Vegas (and I do mean on a shoestring - most of the time director Adamson uses only natural lighting to save money), "Black Heat" packs more stereotypes and cliches into its taut 94-minute run time than can easily be explained.

Completely recut and then re-released under the alternate titles "Girl's Hotel" and "The Murder Gang" in hopes of tricking people into seeing the same basic movie three different times (this ploy worked, by the way, and made the producers three times as much money), in its original form, "Black Heat" is the tale of two plainclothes Vegas police detectives - one black and one white, of course - who team up to try and get to the bottom of an illegal arms deal between a Detroit-based crime boss and an unnamed Central American country that need the guns for a revolution.

Along the way, the two cops try to help out some friends who just happen to be foxy prostitutes. The shoddy camerawork, "jive" dialogue, amateurish acting and "porno-funk" soundtrack make this one a must-see for fans of trash cinema. It doesn't hurt that Russ Tamblyn ("West Side Story," TV's "Twin Peaks") also makes a featured appearance, looking extremely high on who knows what. Showtime is 8 p.m., with $6 admission for mature audiences.

Next week, Armstrong State University kicks off its seventh annual Francophone Film Festival, a three-day event that might just be the least-known and most-cool film fest in town. From Feb. 12-14, a total of five critically acclaimed French language movies will be shown in the school's Ogeechee Theater, in its Student Union building, with free admission.

Opening night features "Le Hérisson" ("The Hedgehog"), a drama concerning an artistically and philosophically inclined 11-year-old girl who grapples with thoughts of suicide. Following the film, there will be a free reception with French cuisine. Showtime is 6 p.m. Look for an extended article in the next issue of Do.

Until next week, see you at the movies, and remember: Don't forget to turn off that cell phone.

Jim Reed directs Psychotronic Film Society of Savannah. Read more at www.filmsavannah.com.

IF YOU GO

What: "The Princess Bride" and "True Romance"

When: 7 p.m. and 10 p.m. Feb. 7

Where: Lucas Theatre, 32 Abercorn St.

Cost: $8 or $5 for students/seniors/military; package deals available

Info: www.lucastheatre.com

What: "Black Heat"

When: 8 p.m. Feb. 11

Where: The Sentient Bean, 13 E. Park Ave.

Cost: $6; mature audiences

Info: www.sentientbean.com

What: Francophone Film Festival

When: Feb. 12-14

Where: Armstrong State University's Ogeechee Theater

Cost: Free

Info: www.armstrong.edu