Gov. Parris Glendening married one of his deputy chiefs of staff over the weekend and is taking a honeymoon at an undisclosed location, his press office announced yesterday.Glendening and Jennifer Crawford were married Friday in a civil ceremony. They had a small formal ceremony Saturday at the governor’s mansion that was attended by members of their immediate families.Mike Morrill, the governor’s communications director, said Crawford gave notice more than two weeks ago that she would resign her state job. Friday was her last day on the payroll.It is the third marriage for Glendening, whose divorce from Frances Hughes Glendening, 50, was final in November. They were married nearly 25 years. The governor’s first marriage to Lynn V. Shaw in 1963 ended in divorce eight years later.Glendening, 59, had been romantically linked to Crawford, 35, but has refused to answer any questions about his private life. Rumors about their relationship surfaced shortly after Glendening separated in July 2000 from Frances Hughes Glendening.As Glendening’s wife, Crawford will have the unofficial title of Maryland’s first lady and will be at the governor’s side at dinners, receptions and other social events during the remaining 11 months of his administration.Morrill said he did not know if she will pursue any particular interest as first lady. Governor’s wives sometimes use their positions to advance special causes. Frances Hughes Glendening made promotion of the arts in Maryland part of her agenda.Morrill would not give any details of the two ceremonies except to say that the Saturday event was attended by members of the couple’s immediate families.Robert Duckworth, clerk of the Anne Arundel County circuit court, said he was asked early last week to perform the civil ceremony, which took place about 4 p.m. Friday in the governor’s mansion.“They looked very happy together,’’ he said. “The governor is ready to move on to the next phase of his life, I suppose, with his new bride.’’Duckworth said the first ceremony was attended only by four or five family members.Morrill said he did not know where Glendening and Crawford are spending their honeymoon. The governor is scheduled to return Thursday to the office.The marriage is the first for Crawford, who will continue to use her maiden name.Glendening was elected to his second term as governor in 1998. Because of term limits, he cannot run this year for re-election.