GOVERNOR PARRIS GLENDENING

Â• Glendening was born in the Bronx, where his father owned a gas station. His mother named him Parris after a central character in King's Row, a popular novel at the time, later made into a movie starring Ronald Reagan. After his father lost his business, the family moved to Miami and settled in a house that had no plumbing and electricity in only two rooms. His father worked two jobs to support his wife and six children. Glendening started working at a drugstore when he was 12 and sold newspapers to make extra money for the family.

Â• Glendening was the first member of his family to attend college. After a year at Broward County Community College, he transferred to Florida State University where he obtained his bachelor's degree, a master's in international relations, and a Ph.D. in political science. At age 25, he became the youngest student ever to receive a doctorate from Florida State.

Â• After completing his doctorate in 1967, Glendening joined the faculty of the University of Maryland at College Park, where he taught political science and met his second wife, Frances Anne Hughes, who was one of his students. His wife has grown to be one of GlendeningÂ's closest political advisors, which has earned her comparisons o Hillary Clinton.

Â• He became involved in politics in 1971, when he won a seat on the Hyattsville County Council. He served in that post for three years before successfully running for a seat on the Prince George's County Council. In 1982, he decided to run for Prince George's County Executive against popular incumbent Larry Hogan. Few gave Glendening a chance, but Hogan decided to run for U.S. Senate at the last minute, and Glendening coasted to victory. He won re-election twice -- the only county executive in the state elected three times.

Â• In 1994, he won the Democratic nod for governor in a crowded primary field. In the general election, he faced a rising GOP tide around the country and received little support from the popular outgoing Governor William Donald Schaefer (D). Glendening eked out a win by only 5,993 votes against Republican Ellen Sauerbrey, who is challenging him again this year.