Gershwin Melody #27, also known as “One Minute More,” was one of the many songs that Kay Swift and Ira Gershwin found among George’s manuscripts after George died in 1937. Fortunately, Ira got most of the way through writing a lyric for it (see lyric and note below), though this may be the first time they appear together as a complete song.

Though Ira’s lyrics to “One Minute More” are a love song to a girl, the one person that Ira would have wanted to have more time to spend with was his brother George.

Ira and the Ghost of George Gershwin

Lyricist Ira Gershwin collaborated with a veritable Who’s Who of the creators of the Great American Songbook: composers Harold Arlen, Jerome Kern, Vernon Duke, Kurt Weill, Harry Warren, Vincent Youmans, Arthur Schwartz, Aaron Copland, and Burton Lane, as well as lyricists Gus Kahn, Yip Harburg, and Buddy DeSylva, among many somewhat lesser known writers.

But of all these songwriters, there is no denying the unbreakable, incomparable bond he had with his future collaborator whom he first met in September of 1898, just months before Ira’s second birthday: his younger brother George.

From 1918’s “Beautiful Bird” until 1964’s “All the Livelong Day (And the Long, Long Night),” Ira worked to find the perfect words for his brother’s impeccable melodies. After their hugely successful Lady, Be Good in 1924, the first show consisting of solely the Gershwin brothers’ songs, George teamed almost exclusively with Ira to versify his music.

Ira knew the thrill of hearing a new George creation, as was evident when George first played Porgy and Bess music to a room full of friends. Ira was said to have grinned widely and pointed to his brother during the performance as if to say, “Can you believe this guy wrote this incredible music!”

But Ira also counted on George to keep him on track professionally:

“I always avoided George when I could, because he would ask me what I was doing, tell me to get busy, and all that.”

“I always felt that if George hadn’t been my brother and pushed me into lyric writing, I’d have been contented to be a bookkeeper.”

Music lovers around the globe felt an immense loss on July 11, 1937 with the passing of George Gershwin, but the loss to Ira is hard to fathom. The working relationship, the camaraderie, and the lifelong kinship were all gone in a moment.

Walter Rimler explored the depths of Ira’s loss in his book George Gershwin: An Intimate Portrait. Rimler states that Michael Feinstein, who was at Lee and Ira Gershwin’s house around 1983, heard Ira talking to George in long conversations while Ira was sleeping. Ira’s sleeptalking was “often filled with anger, centering around Ira’s desire not to stay here on earth and George’s insistence that he stay.”

Even more astounding was the revelation from Ira to Feinstein that “Shortly after George’s passing, Ira had looked into his brother’s workroom upstairs at 1019 Roxbury and had seen George ‘sitting on the sofa, smiling and nodding to me. It terrified me. I wasn’t drinking. I wasn’t drunk. But I saw him.'”

Ira did somehow learn to carry on after the fateful year of 1937 and topped out at 86 years of age in August of 1983. He scored some memorable hit songs in the post-George years: “My Ship,” “For You, For Me, For Evermore,” and “The Man That Got Away,” and wrote plenty of quality non-hit lyrics as well.

But part of Ira seems like it agreed with John O’Hara who famously said:

“George Gershwin died on July 11, 1937, but I don’t have to believe it if I don’t want to.”

Editor’s Note: The use of the term “Ghost” above is used to simply describe the perceived apparition of a dead person, and it is not meant to suggest that Ira or the author believe ghosts are real entities.

Download the PDF of the simplified sheet music to “One Minute More – Gershwin Melody #27” here: One Minute More

And here is the PDF in the key of C: One Minute More (in C)

Lyrics to “One Minute More” by Ira Gershwin:

One minute more, with the only girl I adore.

All I ask is one minute more, my dear.

One little kiss, one I know you never will miss.

All I need is one little kiss, it’s clear.

* Never knew that I could care as I do.

Oh, how I pine for you, all day and all night through.

Right from the start I felt I might find heaven’s doors.

I made up for losing my heart by finding yours.

* Ira Gershwin did not write lyrics for these two lines of the song in italics. Lyrics from his 1922 song “Mary-Louise” have been adapted to complete this song.