August Mark Vaz OBITUARY

August Mark Vaz Feb. 8, 1926 – Sept. 12, 2013 Resident of Castro Valley August Mark Vaz was born in Hayward, CA, and spent his early years on the island of Terceira, Azores. He returned as a young boy to northern California, where he stayed for the rest of his life. After receiving a Masters Degree from the University of California at Berkeley, he taught in Yuba City for three years and then spent thirty-three years as a beloved history teacher at San Leandro High School, where his room was referred to as “The Temple” and his high-profile bust of Virgil ended up receiving a diploma from a grateful school when August retired. Portuguese was his first language, and August Vaz was a pioneer in writing about the Portuguese in America; his volume The Portuguese in California is still cited as an important book on the subject. He co-wrote Cooking With a Portuguese Flavor with his wife, Elizabeth Sullivan Vaz.His skills as a painter were widely admired and remain proof of his creative, artistic soul. He was a gentle, witty gentleman and a believer in matters of the spirit. A magical gardener, he never failed to produce a bumper crop of fava beans in his yard. An avid coin and stamp collector, he spent years as an editor of the American Philately Newsletter. He is survived by his wife of almost sixty years, Elizabeth (Bettylu) Vaz and by their six children: Mark, Katherine, Maria, Patrick, and Peter Vaz, and Teresa Goodfellow; a daughter-in-law, Judy Vaz, and a son-in-law, Jon Goodfellow; grandchildren Daniel and Matthew Duarte; John, Katelin, and Joseph Labat; Michael and Alexandra Vaz. He is also survived by his sister, Mary Lou Weinberger, and her husband Al Weinberger, and cousin Clementina Vaz. He used to say, “Tempus Fugit!” and taught his children the Portuguese prayer of asking for a father’s blessing. May he now have that in return: Good night. Sleep well. May God make you a big saint. A memorial Mass will be celebrated at Our Lady of Grace Church.