< Return to Latter-day Saint Characters in Movies

Latter-day Saint (Mormon) Characters

and References

in the movie

One Night at McCool's (2001)

"One Night at McCool's" (2001)

Directed by Harald Zwart

Screenplay by Stan Seidel

Starring: Liv Tyler, Matt Dillon, John Goodman, Paul Reiser, Michael Douglas, Andrew Dice Clay (as Andrew Silverstein), Reba McEntire

MPAA Rating: R

U.S. Box Office: $6,276,532

In this crime comedy three different men (played by Matt Dillon, Paul Reiser and John Goodman) recount their experiences with a mysterious woman named "Jewel" (played by Liv Tyler).

Jewel runs a scam with her boyfriend/partner in crime, an apparently non-churchgoing Mormon named "Utah." Utah and Jewel stage a fight in front of an unsuspecting man, who then comes to the rescue. Jewel then goes home with the man, lulls the mark into a false sense of security, after which she calls Utah and they rob the victim.

"Utah" is played by popular comedian Andrew Dice Clay, credited in the film as "Andrew Silverstein." Clay has the 6th-billed role in the film for his dual role as "Utah" and his Utah's twin brother. (Only the top five roles received official poster billing.)

At the start of the film, Jewel is running her scam on a bartender named "Randy" (played by Matt Dillon). Half-way through her scam, Jewel tells Randy that she feels bad about the whole thing, because she really likes him. She says that she has not yet called Utah, but he arrives at the house anyway.

During this scene, not long after hearing Jewel mention Utah's name, Randy asks her if Utah is a Latter-day Saint ("a Mormon"). She answers, "I wouldn't say that."

When Detective Charlie Dehling (John Goodman) comes to investigate the killing of Utah he is told the man's nickname. He asks, "'Utah'... The Mormon State?"

In the film's climax, the three principle male characters (Matt Dillon, Paul Reiser and John Goodman) are confronted by a man who appears to be a Latter-day Saint missionary. This is Utah's twin brother. The character is played by Andrew Dice Clay, the same actor who played the part of Utah. Early cast/character listings listed Clay's dual roles as "Utah/Mormon brother."

Dozens of reviews of this movie referred Clay's character at the end of the movie as a "Mormon," either because they read it from the cast/production notes, or simply based on the way the character looks and acts. These reviews include: Adam J. Hakari: "twin Mormon brother"; Matt Heffernan/FilmHead.com: gun-toting Mormon; Joanne Latimer/Montreal Mirror: "avenging Mormon with a shotgun"; Jason Shahinfar/The Johns Hopkins News-Letter: "Just imagine a Mormon starting a shoot out played to The Village People's YMCA."; jumptheshark.com: Utah's "mormon brother"; James Bowman/CelebrityWonder.com: "Utah's avenging Mormon brother"; Hour (www.hour.ca): "Andrew Dice Clay's cameo as twin Mormon brothers."

Webpage created 9 October 2004. Last modified 1 February 2005.