Friday, October 14, 2011

Can an Irishman, or for that matter, an Irish pub have a better moniker? The name actually derives from “Fionn mac Cumhaill” in Old Irish, the blonde hunter-warrior of Irish myth and legend, the English version of the name being “Finn McCool.” And it is the name of a large, national chain of traditional Irish taverns.

The Finn McCool’s in Ambler is one of the more recent additions to the franchise, and further enlivens Ambler’s bright entertainment and restaurant scene. It is housed in a huge, historic old stone building right on the main drag through Ambler. It has some outdoor tables with umbrellas right out front. Inside, it is all classic pub, all in Kelly green and varnished woods, hardwood floors and, of course, a large central bar offering cold drafts and drinks.

Anyone with any Irish in them, real or wannabee, will feel at home here, either at the square bar or at one of the many well-spaced tables.

While McCool’s large menu features a few good ol’ Irish favorites like Shepard’s Pie and Gaelic Steak made with Jameson Irish Whiskey, it is well filled out with many more American pub standbys, among the appetizers (“Pub Grub”), soups, salads, hot and cold sandwiches, very good cheesesteaks and burgers, wraps, pastas, and platters – all priced very reasonably. There is even a small kid’s menu, so children are welcome.

Since it opened, I have made both a lunch and a dinner visit, each time with three or more dining companions. All the dishes both times were more than satisfactory, well-portioned, and tasteful.

As the photos taken at my more recent lunch there attest, my salad and my tablemates’ hamburgers and cheesesteak picks were excellent, fresh, juicy, and most savory.

The grilled Gulf shrimp & baby spinach salad ($12.45) was completed with roast red pepper, hard boiled egg, tomato, crumbled bacon, and wild berry vinaigrette. (It also comes with provolone cheese, which I eschewed). I loved the combination of these ingredients, and made a very happy plate.

The burgers are made with a half pound of Angus beef ($6.95), which looked really delicious, and served with lettuce, tomato, and onion on a fresh bun. You are invited to “name your own burger” by adding from a choice of five cheeses, and four toppings. Add fries for an addl. $1.75.

Homemade crab cakes are featured in three of the eight entrees and in a sandwich which should mean that they make them especially well. One is served alongside a NY strip steak for $22.95. The crab cake sandwich for $12.45 sounds like a bargain, and I may have to try one next time.

Bartender Aileen holds forth behind the bar during daylight hours, and will chat it up and take good care of you if you sit at the bar.

Note that internet reviews such as on Urban Spoon and Yelp are very mixed. Noise levels can be very loud when the dining room/bar is full.

Source: Mitch Davis, ambler.patch.com

Friday, 30th Sept, 2011

Can an Irishman, or for that matter, an Irish pub, have a better moniker? The name actually derives from “Fionn mac Cumhaill” in Old Irish, the blonde hunter-warrior of Irish myth and legend, the English version of the name being “Finn McCool.” And it is the name of a large, national chain of traditional Irish taverns.

The Finn McCool’s in Ambler is one of the more recent additions to the franchise, and further enlivens Ambler’s bright entertainment and restaurant scene. It is housed in a huge, historic old stone building right on the main drag. It has some outdoor tables with umbrellas right out front. Inside, it is all classic pub, all in Kelly green and varnished woods, hardwood floors and, of course, a large central bar offering cold drafts and drinks.

Anyone with any Irish in them, real or wannabe, will feel at home here, either at the square bar or at one of the many well-spaced tables.

While McCool’s large menu features a few good ol’ Irish favorites like Shepherd’s Pie and Gaelic Steak made with Jameson Irish Whiskey, it is filled out with many more American pub standbys, among the appetizers (“Pub Grub”), soups, salads, hot and cold sandwiches, very good cheesesteaks and burgers, wraps, pastas, and platters – all reasonably priced. There is even a small kid’s menu, so children are welcome.

Since it opened, I have made both a lunch and a dinner visit, each time with three or more dining companions. All the dishes both times were more than satisfactory, well-portioned, and tasteful.

My salad and my tablemates’ hamburgers and cheesesteak picks were excellent, fresh, juicy, and most savory.

The grilled Gulf shrimp and baby spinach salad ($12.45) was completed with roast red pepper, hard-boiled egg, tomato, crumbled bacon, and wild berry vinaigrette. (It also comes with provolone cheese, which I eschewed). I loved the combination of these ingredients, and made a very happy plate.

The burgers are made with a half pound of Angus beef ($6.95), which looked really delicious, and served with lettuce, tomato, and onion on a fresh bun. You are invited to “name your own burger” by adding from a choice of five cheeses, and four toppings. Add fries for an additional $1.75.

Homemade crab cakes are featured in three of the eight entrees and in a sandwich which should mean that they make them especially well. One is served alongside a NY strip steak for $22.95. The crab cake sandwich for $12.45 sounds like a bargain, and I may have to try one next time.

Overall rating: mmm 1/4 (out of 5 m’s) classic Irish pub chain, good menu at reasonable prices.

Location: 34 E. Butler Pike

Phone: 215-643-2705

Hours: Monday, Wednesday-Sunday 11 a.m. to 2 a.m., Tuesday 9 a.m. to 2 a.m.

Prices: Appetizers, soups, salads $4 – $12.50; sandwiches, burgers, wraps $6 – $8.50; entrées, pastas $10.50 – $23, (average $14)

Ambiance: Classic Irish pub.

Reservations: Suggested on weekends.

Credit cards: All major accepted

Alcoholic beverages: It’s a tavern.

Wheelchair access: Yes

Special features: Ealy Bird specials, Happy Hour Monday – Friday.

Source: Mitch Davis, horsham.patch.com

Source: Annie Nisbet, westsidetoday.com

Wednesday, 07 Sept, 2011

On September 8, 2011 at 10pm, International, chart-topping, Australian musician, GRAYSON, performs at Finn McCool’s Irish Pub in Santa Monica, reaching the end of the line on his “66 Days on Route 66” tour. GRAYSON has revitalized the American Road Trip, traveling from Australia to trek cross-country playing gig-to-gig at over 50 saloons, festivals, radio shows and venues along Route 66. “66 Days on Route 66” is Grayson’s live music tour and documentary video series capturing his adventures and discovery of America’s love affair with this most musical of highways, as he explores historic landmarks and the people working toward and living The American Dream.

GRAYSON began his journey in Chicago on July 8, 2011, then headed West through Missouri, Kansas, Oklahoma, Texas, New Mexico and Arizona. He comes to the end of the line this week in California, performing at Finn McCool’s Irish Pub in Santa Monica on Thursday, September 8, 2011 at 10pm.

Grayson’s gregarious soul and humour endear him to his audience. A compelling storyteller, his songs emote heartfelt experiences as he connects with his live audience.

During his 2008 European tour, Grayson secured a contract with Rifle Range Records. He moved to Ireland and spent most of 2009 recording his debut album “Somewhere In The Night” before touring Europe along with some of the greatest Irish musicians, as well as his own sold-out solo shows. Grayson’s first single “Stand Clear” entered the Top 40 Commercial Charts and reached #1 on the Indie Download Charts in Ireland.

In 2010, Grayson returned to Australia to tour with Jimmy Barnes, The Whitlams and Vanessa Amorosi. His second single “Change” went to #1 on the ARIA Physical Singles Chart and #8 on the ARIA Hit Seekers Chart, followed by a USA tour. Grayson is currently recording his 2nd full-length album “Chronology” to be released during the “66 Days on Route 66” American Tour.

ABOUT FINN McCOOL’S IRISH PUB: The Irish Herald says, “The moment you walk through the doors of Finn McCool’s Irish Pub in Santa Monica, you hear the racing clip of fresh Irish accents from [the] bar and wait staff [who are] bantering with each other as they serve an assortment of Irish fayre and beverages to satisfied customers smitten by the ambiance of genuine Irish charm”. Finn McCool’s features 17 draught beers, over 200 whiskeys from all over the globe, a full bar and an impressive cocktail and wine list. Their menu runs the gamut from Traditional Irish Boxty’s and Irish Potato Skins featured on The Travel Channel’s PUB PARADISE, to fresh salmon and home-made gravlax. They also feature an extensive Vegetarian and Vegan Menu to delight the most healthy or socially conscious palette.

Music plays a key role amongst the Irish and LA Magazine rated the Sunday Night Traditional Irish Music as the “Best Irish Music in Los Angeles”. Known for showcasing talented professional and up-and-coming performers almost every night.

The authentic Irish ambiance is enhanced by its vintage memorabilia, exquisite celtic carvings and hand painted murals depicting the legendary Irish warrior, Fionn MacCumhail. Many of the staff originally hails from Ireland, helping preserve the very essence of Ireland and making one truly feel back in the Old Country.

Finn McCool’s Irish Pub – Santa Monica . NO COVER CHARGE!

Source: Ian McNulty, bestofneworleans.com

Wednesday, Aug 24th, 2011

A new nonprofit aimed at local Irish expats, Irish Americans and those who love them is forming in New Orleans. Called the Irish Network-New Orleans (IN-NOLA), the group is part of the national Irish Network USA and combines local and national social networking with real live socializing at cultural and philanthropic events throughout the year and across the community.

The group is holding its first event to recruit founding members on Thursday, Aug. 24, at Finn McCool’s Irish Pub in Mid-City, from 5:30 p.m. on.

“I think this will appeal to young professional people who are interested in Irish culture and also want to have a good time,” says Pauline Patterson, an IN-NOLA board member and Belfast native who runs Finn McCool’s with her husband Stephen. “It’s like an adult Irish Facebook, but one where you get to meet in person at these events too.”

Members get access to online forums for social and professional networking, and throughout the year IN-NOLA plans to host a mix of public and members-only events. In November, the group will hold a launch party downtown at Gallier Hall.

Patterson says programs to come include breakfast meetings with speakers on Irish cultural topics, family events and classes in Irish language, music and dance. Other ideas in the offing include an Irish music festival, an Irish film festival, literary events and cultural exchanges.

“New Orleans is so famous for its food, so one thing we’ll hopefully do is send a New Orleans chef to Ireland and host an Irish chef here for a while,” Patterson says.

IN-NOLA will also raise money through its members and at public events to support local charitable causes.

“The two things I never get tired of are fundraising and potatoes,” says Patterson.

Thursday’s recruiting party will feature plenty of both. The event is free and open to the public. The festivities start at 5:30 p.m. with free food, including salmon-stuffed potatoes, potato pancakes, Scotch eggs (eggs wrapped in sausage, fried), black and white pudding (that’s more sausage, by the way), shepherd’s pie, beef stew, mashed potatoes and more iterations on the spud.

From 7 p.m. to 8 p.m., students from the Joni Muggivan School of Irish Dance in Metairie show off their moves, and from 8 p.m. to 11 p.m. the New Orleans-based Irish roots rocker Danny Burns performs. DJ Dylan O’Donnell (of NOLA Bulls fame) will spin tunes throughout the night.

The main order of business will be signing up new members for IN-NOLA, and there are different registration levels for businesses ($150), families ($80), individuals ($50) and seniors and college students ($30).

Those who register get drink deals at Finn McCool’s during the party, as well as a goodie bag that includes a pint glass, Guinness and Jameson brand trinkets and a raffle ticket for prizes including Saints tickets and a Jameson-logo mountain bike (please use bike and Jameson separately).

The pub will be smoke-free all day for the event (part of an ongoing social experiment the normally smoke-friendly Finn McCool’s is now conducting). Extra parking is available behind Grace Episcopal Church two blocks away at 3700 Canal Street during the event.

Finn McCool’s Irish Pub

3701 Banks St., 486-9080