3 Doors Down

Style: alternative rock

members

lead vocals: Brad Arnold (born 27 September 1978)

guitar: Matt Roberts (born 10 January 1978)

bass: Todd Harrell (born 13 February 1972)

guitar: Chris Henderson (born 30 April 1971)

drums: Richard Liles (born 25 February 1973)

3 Doors Down was formed in Escatawpa, Mississippi, (a small town of 400 people) by school friends Brad (vocals and drums), Matt (guitar), and Todd (bass). The band played songs by Metallica, Bush, and similar bands at parties and clubs, adding their own original music. While on a road trip in Alabama the three musicians came out of a building and noticed the sign said “Doors Down”, which combined with there being three members in the band, was the origin of the name 3 Doors Down.

After two years, the band invited Chris, a member of Todd’s earlier band, to fill out their sound by addting a second guitar. The band recorded their own album in 1998. Radio station WCPR in Biloxi, Mississippi, started playing the song Kryptonite, leading to a showcase at New York City’s CBGB’s and a record contract with Republic/Universal.

After the release of the first album, Better Life, and the number one single Kryptonite, the band added session drummer Richard to join the band so that Brad could concentrate on lead vocals.

official web site: www.3doorsdown.com

booking agent: Ken Fromaglish / The Agency Group

ThisSideofSanity.com now has 13 3 Doors Down songs

“Away From the Sun (official video)” by 3 Doors Down [play song]

“Behind Those Eyes” by 3 Doors Down [play song]

“Duck And Run (official video)” by 3 Doors Down [play song]

“Here By Me (official video)” by 3 Doors Down [play song]

“Kryptonite (official video)” by 3 Doors Down [play song]

“Landing In London (official video)” by 3 Doors Down [play song]

“Let Me Go (official video)” by 3 Doors Down [play song]

“Live For Today” by 3 Doors Down [play song]

“Running Out of Days” by 3 Doors Down [play song]

“Sarah Yellin’” by 3 Doors Down [play song]

“The Road I’m On” by 3 Doors Down [play song]

“Ticket to Heaven” by 3 Doors Down [play song]

“When I’m Gone (official video)” by 3 Doors Down [play song]

ThisSideofSanity.com now has 13 3 Doors Down songs

#1 - 37906 votes for “Kryptonite (official video)” by 3 Doors Down [play song]

#2 - 19094 votes for “Away From the Sun (official video)” by 3 Doors Down [play song]

#3 - 17107 votes for “Let Me Go (official video)” by 3 Doors Down [play song]

#4 - 17029 votes for “When I’m Gone (official video)” by 3 Doors Down [play song]

#5 - 16837 votes for “Here By Me (official video)” by 3 Doors Down [play song]

#6 - 16165 votes for “Duck And Run (official video)” by 3 Doors Down [play song]

#7 - 15854 votes for “Landing In London (official video)” by 3 Doors Down [play song]

#8 - 12307 votes for “Running Out of Days” by 3 Doors Down [play song]

#9 - 12195 votes for “Ticket to Heaven” by 3 Doors Down [play song]

#10 - 11090 votes for “Behind Those Eyes” by 3 Doors Down [play song]

#11 - 10599 votes for “Live For Today” by 3 Doors Down [play song]

#12 - 10512 votes for “Sarah Yellin’” by 3 Doors Down [play song]

#13 - 9583 votes for “The Road I’m On” by 3 Doors Down [play song]

singles: 3 Doors Down

Kryptonite 2000

Kryptonite

Smack

When I’m Gone 2002

When I’m Gone

Here Without You 2003

Here Without You (radio version)

Here Without You (album version)

Let Me Go 2004

Let Me Go (rock version)

Let Me Go (alternative version)

albums: 3 Doors Down

The Better Life 1999

Kryptonite (follow link for lyrics)

Loser (follow link for lyrics)

Duck and Run (follow link for lyrics)

Not Enough (follow link for lyrics)

Be Like That (follow link for lyrics)

Life of My Own (follow link for lyrics)

Better Life (follow link for lyrics)

Down Poison (follow link for lyrics)

By My Side (follow link for lyrics)

Smack (follow link for lyrics)

So I Need You (follow link for lyrics)

Away From The Sun 2002

When I’m Gone (follow link for lyrics)

Away From The Sun (follow link for lyrics)

The Road I’m On (follow link for lyrics)

Ticket to Heaven (follow link for lyrics)

Running Out of Days (follow link for lyrics)

Here Without You (follow link for lyrics)

I Feel You (follow link for lyrics)

Dangerous Game (follow link for lyrics)

Changes (follow link for lyrics)

Going Down In Flames (follow link for lyrics)

Sarah Yellin’ (follow link for lyrics)

This Time (Hidden Track) (follow link for lyrics)

Another 700 Miles 2003 (live)

Duck And Run

When I’m Gone (Intro)

When I’m Gone

Kryptonite

Here Without You

It’s Not Me

That Smell

Seventeen Days 2005

Right Where I Belong

It’s Not Me

Let Me Go

Be Somebody

Landing in London

The Real Life

Behind Those Eyes

Never Will I Break

Father’s Son

Live For Today

My World

Here By Me

official fan club:

In De Goot

119 West 23rd Street, suite 609

New York, NY 10011

web sites

official web site: www.3doorsdown.com

fan web sites:

3 Doors Down Fan Site Created for 3 Doors Down fans. Contains several features, including chatroom, message board, image gallery, Hotbar Skin gallery, links and much more.

The Unofficial 3 Doors Down Board Message forum (must register to post).

3 Doors Down Europe Lots of exclusive stuff like questionnaires filled out by band members, backstage and concert photos, news, info, cool links, wallpaper, polls, messageboard, lyrics and more!

3 Doors Down: The Aussie Site The first Australian based 3 Doors Down website. Features a biography, chat room, and lyrics.

Matt’s 3 Doors Down Page Contains tablatures, biography, images, discography, lyrics, midi files, tour dates, and contact information.

3 Doors Down Fan Dome A really good 3DD site with tons of exclusive pics and original content!

3 Doors Down Lyrics Contains lyrics, pictures, biography, and FAQs.

Alex’s 3DD Fan Page Links, tour dates, lyrics, pictures, polls, chat, 3DD Club, free email, original content, and more!!

3 Doors Down Tabs A tribute site with guitar tabs, tour dates and multimedia.

Bassmasta.net - 3 Doors Down A collection of bass tablatures.

Three Doors Downer

3 Doors Down: The Unofficial Site Features a biography, lyrics, tour dates, and MP3 samples.

Mirella’s 3 Doors Down Fan Site!!! Fansite with Polls/Pictures/3DD E-CARDS/3DD CHATROOM/ an exclusive interview with Frankie Cheez

3DoorsDown.ws: Ultimate Fan Site Includes biography, discography, lyrics and a photo gallery.

Busting Our Buttons Just a proud family sharing the success of one of our own 3 Doors Down’s Chris Henderson

Down by Three A fan fun site for 3 Doors Down fans, with Games, Lyrics, music, news, and much more

Be Like That Features concert reviews, biography, news, tour dates, and photo gallery.

Jason’s 3 Doors Down Site News, Bio, CD Info, Tour Dates, Links, and more about 3 Doors Down

Duck And Run Includes a discography, lyrics, photo captures, tour dates, ringtones, and links.

European 3DD Messageboard For 3DD fans all over the world (must register to post). European and Dutch sections.

3 doors down

Kryptonite: 1st 3 Doors Down Fan Site Message board (must register to post).

3 Doors Down / Eleven All you need to know about 3 Doors Down.

TeenMusic.com: 3 Doors Down Interview with Matt Roberts.

3 doors down

Duck and Run : A 3 Doors Down Site Created for 3 Doors Down fans everywhere. Has everything you could think of. bio, lyrics, links, media, etc.

Toazted.com free mp3 interviews with hiphop-, mainscene- and alternativerockbands. all uncut and uncensored!

3d down pics, lyrics, discography, and more

If you like this artist, you might like: