For 15 years, Rachel Goswell has been known first as a member of Slowdive and then as one-third of Mojave 3. In the first group and on the latter group's 1996 debut, Ask Me Tomorrow, Goswell shared vocal duties on 9 songs with frontman Neil Halstead, but on the three albums that followed, Halstead sang every song but one-- "Comin' Home" from Excuses for Travelers (which he wrote). Goswell's willowy, expressive voice always seemed like a potentially dynamic counterpart to Halstead's understated whisper, but it was mostly an underused asset. Instead, she usually hung back on bass and only occasionally supplied backing vocals, certainly to the frustration of fans desperate to hear more from the woman who gave "Love Songs on the Radio" its elegiac elegance. So Goswell's own solo debut, entitled Waves Are Universal, seems not just long overdue, but, more critically, freighted with the high expectations of a horde of eager listeners.

On the album's lead-off track, "Warm Summer Sun", Goswell meets those expectations head-on. Over a gentle guitar strum, she sings about falling over from lack of forward motion and decides not to "waste my time on things that stop me feeling." Drums and guitar kick in for the second verse and the song builds gradually. SPOILER ALERT: Then traditional Irish uilleann pipes come in loud and jarring, like a Shyamalan twist ending that completely reframes everything that preceded it. Suddenly, the song is not just a smell-the-roses reaffirmation, but a statement of career resolve. If the beginning seems like a distillation of Mojave 3's strengths, the pipes serve the same purpose of Slowdive's droning guitars: Goswell has found the hidden connections between her current group's pastoralisms and her former band's shoegazerisms.

Unfortunately, little else on Waves Are Universal lives up to the promise of "Warm Summer Sun", though a couple of songs do come close: "Deelay" overlays loping rhythms with one of the album's most evocative melodies, while "Coastline" and "Save Yourself" churn with eddying guitars whose raggedness contrasts nicely with Goswell's crystalline voice. But the rest of the album dispenses with the murky guitars in favor of burbling percussion, tasteful acoustic strumming, and occasional flourishes like the birdchirp samples and breathy harmonium in "Gather Me Up". Producer David Naughton incorporates a dizzying array of instruments-- shakers, Wurlitzer, vibraphone, bongos, letterbox bells, and rain stick. Three songs even credit Mother Nature on Thai waves, rain and ambience.

Such inventive accompaniment, however, often overcompensates for weak song structures, lackluster lyrics, and a general lack of focus. Over 12 tracks, Goswell undertakes a range of musical approaches, from quiet folk to more conventional rock to jangly pop, but not all of them work equally well. Softer, midtempo songs like "Thru the Dawn" and "Shoulder the Blame" lag with inertia, and "No Substitute" is polished to a characterless AOR sheen (she can sound startlingly similar to Shawn Colvin). "Hope" expresses the frustrations of city life, but the banal lyrics ("You give me space to live in/ You give me hope/ And that's just fine") and Naughton's overproduction-- especially the chorus of back-up singers-- buff away the music's texture and tension.

The result is a warm summery sound that's agreeable, if not very exciting. Goswell proves she's more than just another pretty voice, but too often Waves Are Universal sounds less than confident, almost timid. The album's ambition is rich musical diversity, but it sounds less adventurously eclectic than simply scattershot, less assertive than merely restless, eager to try anything but not always sure what works and what doesn't.