Known for being the home of two the world’s most renowned educational institutions, Cambridge is full of great ideas and innovative attitudes.

Situated just across the Charles River from the heart of Boston, Cambridge is quickly becoming a popular playground for tech companies and startups, which are becoming the heart of the Boston area’s expanding tech scene.

Philo is an internet television company that provides live TV and on-demand programming on a subscription basis. It offers content from more than 60 channels as well as movies and streaming television, which users can customize to create a bespoke entertainment package that eliminates the need for multiple redundant streaming subscriptions and cable packages. The company, which was founded at Harvard, maintains three offices, including one in Cambridge.

Pharma and biotech company Novo Nordisk works at the leading edge of innovation in healthcare and other patient-centered medtech applications, like using machine learning to develop emerging treatments for cardiometabolic disease. The company is part of the robust Boston-Cambridge healthtech ecosystem, which includes institutions like MIT and Massachusetts General Hospital.

FareHarbor makes management software for businesses that offer ticketed activities, events, tours and other site-specific experiences — think boat tours, mountain bike rentals and zipline courses. By offering booking and business management from one dedicated platform, the company says its tech is designed to support scaling and drive customer satisfaction.

Formlabs makes 3D printers for customers across a broad range of industries and provides them with the materials, software and other associated resources for fulfilling their digital fabrication projects. The company’s technology has been used to make more than 300,000,000 parts for fields such as education, automotive design and manufacturing, dentistry and custom jewelry production.

MORSE’s scientists, engineers and software developers work to create technology solutions for overcoming national security challenges. Its capabilities cover artificial intelligence, testing and evaluation, human-centered design, building hardware prototypes and other core technical proficiencies.

InterSystems offers a variety of data technology products that help organizations working in finance, life sciences, business and government identify and manage data to unlock new capabilities. The company’s IRIS Data Platform allows companies to build high-performance, cloud-first applications with machine learning capabilities to connect data and applications, facilitating solutions in healthcare and beyond.

Quick Base is an app-building platform that allows teams to automate processes regardless of previous coding knowledge. From dashboards and workflows to collaboration and integration tools, users can easily build exactly what they need or choose from over 800 pre-built apps.

Bookbub sends personalized deals on books and e-books directly to a user’s inbox. The free service allows readers to discover new titles all while helping authors and publishers expand readership and drive sales.

CarGurus is a comparative site for automotive shoppers. The team at CarGurus is all about making car shopping more transparent by providing relevant local deals and unbiased information on vehicles.

Demiurge Studios creates games for multiple gaming platforms including mobile, PC and console. Founded in 2002, Demiurge has since joined SEGA Networks, developing impressive works under Marvel and Rock Band titles.

Whether for a professional or a dabbler in music, iZotope makes products that allow people to express their creativity. The company's technology solutions and virtual plugins are used all over the world and in major TV, film and recording studios.

Odds are, if you’ve watched an online video, you’ve already used Wistia. Beginning as a video hosting platform, Wistia has since evolved into a tool for marketers to host, manage and track their video content with numerous customization controls.

Jobcase powers and connects more than 100 job sites to employers and jobseekers. To date, the site has a registration membership base of over 48 million in the United States.

Cogo Labs is a startup accelerator creating companies out of great ideas and innovative tools. With a team of over 100 analysts, engineers and entrepreneurs, Cogo takes their own ideas and translates them into effective online businesses.

Superpedestrian is the creator of the Copenhagen Wheel, a semi-autonomous wheel attachment that makes bicycling more efficient. The wheel retrofits to most bikes and learns from movement, capturing energy when the brakes are applied and using it later whenever an extra boost is needed.

Insurify has built a virtual insurance agent that provides personalized recommendations while comparing numerous quotes all at once.

Fuze is a cloud-based platform that helps enterprises streamline their communications across any device and gain valuable insights into business operations.

Charles River Analytics works with a number of government and commercial customers, creating data solutions for decision-making and critical assessment. Their systems cover a wide range of tools and solutions from robotic platforms to large scale information management.

Hubspot is the creator of industry-leading inbound marketing and sales software. With 21,000 customers across 90 countries, Hubspot offers a large portfolio of services, including social media monitoring and publishing, SEO, website content management, reporting, analytics and email marketing.

Zagster is a bike sharing company that has accessible bikes at over 140 locations. Unlike other bike sharing sources, Zagster has 6 different models, making their bikes more accessible to all.

Talla is a virtual assistant that takes care of tedious administrative tasks. Talla works in the user’s chat platform to answer questions and schedule meetings in addition to numerous other components.

NuTonomy builds self-driving cars and autonomous robots with the end goal of being the first company in the world to create an autonomous taxi service.

Squadle provides a technology suite that enables brands like Denny’s, IHOP and Burger King to streamline their restaurant operations. Their API consists of multiple technologies, including cloud-based dashboards, wireless sensors and mobile apps that help to enhance overall operations and communication.