Cambridge is top 3 in the world for Arts and Humanities (QS World Universities Ranking by Subject 2024)

Foundation Year Programme at Cambridge

Have circumstances prevented you from reaching your academic potential? If you want to study a degree in the Arts, Humanities or Social Sciences, the Foundation Year can help you get there.

The aim of the course is to prepare you to study a degree at Cambridge. It is a full-time, residential programme.

The programme offers a challenging academic curriculum. It will broaden and deepen your knowledge and understanding of the Arts, Humanities and Social Sciences. You'll get to experience Cambridge's teaching methods and educational community.

On the course, you'll live and study in Cambridge, alongside our other students. You'll also be part of a College community and can join the University's student societies.

Join our mailing list

Join our mailing list to find out more about the Foundation Year Programme.

Progression and further study

Completing the programme will equip you to continue to many degree courses in the Arts, Humanities and Social Sciences.

At Cambridge, if you complete the course to the required standard, you will be able to progress on to one of 18 degree courses.

Cambridge courses you can progress to

For some of our courses, you will need to complete relevant curriculum streams. Those courses are:

History and Modern Languages

Modern and Medieval Languages

Music

Philosophy

Linguistics

Archaeology

Anglo-Saxon, Norse and Celtic

Asian and Middle Eastern Studies

Classics

History of Art

Land Economy

Other Cambridge courses you could progress to are:

English

Law

History

History and Politics

Human, Social and Political Sciences

Education

Theology, Religion and the Philosophy of Religion

You will also be supported to apply to degree courses at other universities.

At the end of the programme, you will get a recognised qualification from the University of Cambridge. This will help set you up for successful study and careers in a range of fields.

Facilities

You will be based in the West Cambridge Hub for most of your studies.

You’ll have access to:

a variety of modern spaces for your lectures, seminars and supervisions

private and small-group study spaces

West Hub library, with staff offering one-to-one and small group support to students

cafeteria and café bar

You will also be able to visit archives and museums within the University and elsewhere in the UK, depending on your course interests.

Tuition fees and course costs

Tuition fees

There are no tuition fees charged for the Foundation Year.

If you continue to study at Cambridge by progressing to a degree course, you will need to pay the tuition fee for that course. Find out more about our tuition fees.

Living costs

You’ll get a Scholarship on the Foundation Year to cover:

rent

other living costs

This will be the same as what you would receive as a maintenance loan from student finance. It will also be ‘topped up’ so that it is in line with the levels of support that undergraduate students are given through the Cambridge Bursary Scheme.

Because you will receive the Scholarship, you won’t need to take out student finance loans or support.

If you move on to a degree course after the Foundation Year, you may need to apply for student finance support to help with your living costs. As part of the Foundation Year, you’ll be given guidance on the options available to you when you progress. This includes government financial support and Cambridge-specific bursaries that you may eligible for.

Course costs

Photocopying and printing: on average, you might spend between £10 and £30 in using printers based in libraries or Colleges during the Foundation Year.

Textbooks/course books: University and College libraries are well-stocked and it shouldn’t be necessary to purchase more than a handful of books. These should not exceed £200.

Your College and Department, together with the University Computing Service, offer computing facilities for your academic work. You'll have a University email account, and access to central file storage for your work and for publishing web pages. Some Colleges may charge for internet/wireless connection but fast free WiFi is available throughout the University.

On the Foundation Year in Arts, Humanities and Social Sciences at Cambridge you will study a multi-disciplinary course.

From the start you can follow your interests and explore new subjects.

Teaching

You will be taught through lectures, seminars and supervisions. This will develop your ability to take philosophical, reflective and critical approaches to different sources. You'll also learn to use a range of analytical methods.

Most classes take place in the West Hub. Some classes will be held at the University's museums and archives.

You will also take part in field trips linked to your studies.

Induction week

The course begins with an induction week before the start of the main University term. For this week you will live in Cambridge alongside other students on the programme.

You'll get to take part in an academic and social programme that will help you to start building your skills and confidence.

Foundation Year streams

The curriculum is offered across four streams. You will complete eight papers from the options available across these four streams.

Working with textual sources

This stream helps you to develop a critical approach to textual sources.

This is useful for subjects which rely on the interpretation and use of textual sources. For example, subjects like History, English, and Theology.

You will increase your understanding of:

the variety of textual sources used in different subjects

the appropriate approaches for different disciplines

the different purposes, origins and biases of textual sources

Working with material sources

This stream supports you in developing a critical approach to material sources. For example, artefacts and artworks.

This is useful for subjects that analyse material sources. For example, sources like art, material culture, sound, film, sculpture, sites and landscapes.

You will learn about the approaches and interpretations that can be used for different types of material evidence. This will help you to explore the relationships between different material sources.

Working with languages

This stream aims to develop your competence and confidence when working with languages. You will be introduced to a range of ancient and modern languages.

The stream has two components.

Firstly, it will help you to understand:

how language works

the challenges of translation

understanding of cultural contexts

Secondly, you will be encouraged to develop your language skills if you already have a solid grounding in another language. For example, you studied a language at A level. Experience of formal language-learning is essential for some degree courses. This stream can help you to gain that experience.

Working with data

This stream develops your critical approach to different types of data sources.

You will learn:

a range of data analysis skills. This includes qualitative research training which focuses on society and community

the logical principles behind data

how to evaluate and interpret a range of data types, their potential sources and limitations. This will include basic analytical and statistical techniques and experience of data handling

The stream will include IT-based sessions to support handling and analysis skills development.

Optional language learning

All Foundation Year students will have access to optional extra-curricular language learning.

Knowledge of languages can broaden your options for degree courses.

Assessment

The way you're assessed will depend on what you choose to study during the course.

Assessment methods include written assignments and a final examination.

You will also be able to explore a topic of your own choice through an extended project.

The entry requirements listed are for entry in 2025 or deferred entry in 2026. Entry requirements for future years will be published in due course. Check our guidance on choosing high school subjects.

Application deadline

All applicants for this course must apply via UCAS by 29 January 2025 (6pm UK time).

Typical offers require

120 UCAS Tariff Points:

academic points only

no specific subjects are needed

Use the UCAS Tariff Points Calculator to check that your grades meet the required level.

Check the information on this page for a list of qualifications that we accept.

You will also need to show that you meet our eligibility requirements before you are considered.

Qualifications

Before applying, you need to check that you have, or are likely to achieve, the right grades in suitable qualifications.

The Cambridge Foundation Year uses UCAS Tariff Points for admissions.

Accepted qualifications

AS or A levels and A levels combined with other qualifications (listed below)

International Baccalaureate (IB), the UCAS Tariff value is calculated on the components of the IBDP.

The International Baccalaureate Career-related Programme (IBCP), providing the component qualifications are suitable. The UCAS Tariff value is calculated on the components of the IBCP.

Access to HE Diploma

The Cambridge Pre-U

Scottish Highers, Advanced Highers and a combination of Highers and Advanced Highers. You can also combine these with other qualifications.

Core Maths combined with your other qualifications to meet the total tariff required.

Extended Project Qualification combined with your other qualifications to meet the total tariff required.

Welsh Baccalaureate - the A levels part of the Advanced Diploma is accepted. You can use the Advanced Skills Challenge Certificate, combined with other qualifications, to meet the UCAS tariff.

BTECs, Applied General and other Level 3 qualifications are generally accepted. But, there are some restrictions:

Qualifications must be Level 3.

Certificates, Diplomas and Subsidiary Diplomas are accepted alongside additional qualifications to meet the UCAS Tariff. For example, you could complete more than one BTEC or a combination of the BTEC with other qualifications (such as A levels).

Extended Diplomas are accepted. But we don't accept those that are vocational in focus. Vocationally oriented subjects include Hospitality, Public Services, Sport, Aviation Operations, Dental Technology, and Floristry etc.

Voluntary Qualifications or Awards are not considered appropriate preparation for this course and should not be included in your UCAS Tariff Points calculation.

Qualifications that we may consider

T-Levels in a subject relevant to the Foundation Year subjects. For example, we would consider applicants studying education and childcare, legal services, science, healthcare science, and agriculture, land management and production.

If your qualification isn't listed

If you are unsure whether your qualifications meet our entry requirements contact us. Email foundation.year@admin.cam.ac.uk before the application deadline. Give information about your qualification type and level.

Previous Higher Education study

We do not accept applicants who have already completed study to FHEQ Level 6 or above (a Bachelor’s degree or higher).

Those with grave extenuating circumstances, such as refugees or asylum seekers, who have studied to FHEQ Level 6 may be considered.

If you believe your circumstances mean you should be considered, contact foundation.year@admin.cam.ac.uk before applying.

We don't usually consider applications from:

students enrolled at other UK universities

applicants who have already completed a Foundation Year elsewhere

If you have exceptional circumstances or you are changing subject, your application may be considered. We would need a letter of support from your current institution, if you are currently enrolled elsewhere.

We welcome applicants who have undertaken some HE-level study. For example, life-long learning programmes. If this applies to you, get in touch providing full details of:

your Level 3 qualifications (for example A levels)

when you took those qualifications

what courses and modules you studied at HE-level, including how they were graded and assessed

English language requirements

If your first language isn’t English, your English language skills must be good enough for you to take the course.

Throughout the admissions process, we will assess your English language skills and your academic ability. Check our English language requirements for details.

Qualifications from outside of the UK

The Cambridge Foundation Year is for applicants ordinarily resident in the UK. But, we appreciate some applicants may have completed their studies outside of the UK.

If this is the case, we advise you to check if your qualification is listed in the UCAS Tariff Calculator.

If it is not listed, you are welcome to contact us at foundation.year@admin.cam.ac.uk. In your email, please provide:

the qualification’s full title

the country in which you studied

the grade(s) you achieved

Re-sits

We recognise that even the best students can have 'bad days' when an exam doesn’t quite go to plan. Therefore, we’re not concerned if an applicant has retaken or is planning to retake a few modular units where the results obtained are out of character.

A higher number of retakes would also be acceptable if justified by circumstances beyond your control. Your circumstances would need to be made clear in your application (reference and Extenuating Circumstances Form).

Admission assessment

If shortlisted for interview, you will need to take a written assessment. You will be given details in your interview invitation.

You do not need to register for the Foundation Year admission assessment. There are no charges.

Find out more and access a sample paper from the Foundation Year website.

Find out if you are eligible

The Foundation Year intends to address educational disadvantage and disruption.

To be considered for the programme, you should:

meet eligibility criteria as outlined below

and

be ordinarily resident in the UK

Eligibility criteria

These criteria reflect experiences that have been shown to negatively impact educational attainment. The combination of such factors has also been shown to have a cumulative impact.

They are a gateway to consideration for this programme. Places are awarded on academic suitability.

Check your eligibility by carefully consulting the list below.

You should then read the Full Eligibility Guidelines for further guidance. In some circumstances, you may need to provide evidence.

Additional guidance is available for Mature Students and Refugees and Asylum Seekers.

You are automatically eligible and don't have to meet criteria from the categories below if you are:

care-experienced (currently in local authority care or have been in care while in education)

a refugee

an asylum-seeker

from a forced migration background

If this does not apply, you must meet one or more criteria in two or more of the categories below.

Category 1: Individual Characteristics

You will be eligible under this category if you meet one or more of the following:

You have experienced medical or health issues that have resulted in long or extended periods of absence (over 6 weeks) from school or college within the past 3 years

You have experienced bereavement due to the death of a close family member whilst in secondary education. For example your parent or carer

You have been a young carer while in education

You have become a parent while in education

You became homeless while in education

You became estranged from close family members whilst in secondary education. For example, your parent or carer

You moved state schools two or more times whilst in secondary education

You have been delayed in completing qualifications because you were working while studying part-time

You experienced a gap of more than one year. For example leaving school at 16 but returning to complete Level 3 qualifications after several years in work

Your parent or carer has been imprisoned while you were in education

Please note, disruption caused by COVID-19 school/college closures is not applicable.

See pages 8-13 of the Full Eligibility Guidelines for further guidance and information on how you may need to verify your eligibility.

Category 2: Household Characteristics

You will be eligible under this category if you meet one or more of the following:

You are currently eligible for Free School Meals

You have been eligible for Free School Meals at any point in the previous 6 years

You have a combined UK household income of £25,000 or less

You or your parent(s) or carer(s) receive Universal Credit

See pages 14-16 of the Full Eligibility Guidelines for further guidance and information on how you may need to verify your eligibility.

Category 3: School or College Characteristics

The criteria in this category refer to the school or college that you currently attend or attended in the past. The criteria listed apply only to:

Secondary education

State or maintained sector schools

Schools or colleges that you have attended within the UK

You may be eligible in this category if you meet one of more of the following:

A state school or college you attend or have attended has performed poorly in an inspection in the past four years

Check your school inspection report to find out if it meets the above criteria.

See page 17 of the Full Eligibility Guidelines for further guidance.

A state school or college you attend or have attended has below-average attainment. This applies to schools or colleges in England, Wales and Scotland.

See page 18 of the Full Eligibility Guidelines for guidance on how to check if this applies.

This data is not published for schools or colleges in Northern Ireland. We are working to find a solution so if you believe you would qualify under this measure, please check this page again at a later date. You can get in touch with us about this measure at foundation.year@admin.cam.ac.uk.

A state school or college you attend or have attended has a below-average number of students staying in education. This applies to schools/colleges in England.

See page 19 of the Full Eligibility Guidelines for guidance on how to check if this applies.

This data is not published for schools or colleges in Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland. We are working to find a solution so if you believe you would qualify under this measure, please check this page again at a later date. You can get in touch with us about this measure at foundation.year@admin.cam.ac.uk.

Your state school or college does not offer the A Level subject or equivalent qualification that you need for entry to Cambridge.

See page 20 of the Full Eligibility Guidelines for guidance on how to check if this applies.