Located in the heart of Kendall Square in the culturally diverse and academically rich city of Cambridge, Massachusetts, the U.S. DOT Volpe Center attracts motivated, talented professionals who put their expertise to work in the service of others and address the nation’s most pressing and complex transportation challenges.

A national transportation organization with an international reputation, the U.S. DOT Volpe Center offers a stimulating environment where employees research, develop, and deploy state-of-the-art transportation technologies and help shape innovative policies and programs to resolve real-world transportation issues.

The U.S. DOT Volpe Center is a unique federal agency that is 100 percent funded by sponsor projects, which makes us agile in our approach and entrepreneurial in our nature.

We offer our employees competitive benefits, professional development opportunities, and a flexible and family-friendly work environment.

Job Openings

Search for U.S. DOT Volpe Center jobs on USAjobs.gov. You may also apply for Direct Hire positions at the U.S. DOT Volpe Center through the U.S. DOT agency-wide postings on USAjobs.gov.

Opportunities for Veterans at U.S. DOT Volpe Center

The U.S. DOT Volpe Center is committed to increasing the number of veterans employed by the federal government. Learn more about opportunities for veterans at U.S. DOT.

Equal Employment Opportunity

U.S. DOT strives to ensure that equity, transparency, accountability, collaboration, and communication permeate all that we do for the betterment of the Department, the traveling public, and our nation. As such, U.S. DOT values a highly diverse workforce of persons who promote a culture of belonging by respecting the personal dignity and worth of each individual and fostering a positive environment where all feel safe and welcome. If these commitments coincide with your personal ideals and professional aspirations, please consider joining the DOT family.

The U.S. DOT Volpe Center maintains a model federal work environment that is free of discrimination. We ensure equal employment opportunity for employees and applicants for employment, regardless of race, color, national origin, religion, sex (including pregnancy and gender identity), genetic information, age, disability, sexual orientation, or protected activity.