Houston Rockets' Jabari Smith Jr. will compete in the Panini Rising Stars event Friday night as part of the league's All-Star Weekend in Indianapolis.

Smith has started all 49 games this season, averaging 13.2 points and 8.4 rebounds. Smith's selection helped the Rockets take a 135-119 victory over the Los Angeles Lakers. He finished with 18 points, nine rebounds and four assists on Jan. 29.

Smith's performance against the Lakers came after the former Auburn prospect returned from a four-game absence due to an ankle injury. He will be part of Team Pau [Pau Gasol]. Smith's teammates will feature the No. 1 and 3 picks of the 2023 NBA Draft, Victor Wembanyama and Brandon Miller.

"It felt good, but I do wish my teammates were with me, Cam [Whitmore] and Amen [Thompson]," Smith said. "But it is cool to be out there. It's a fun experience. So, I am happy about it."

Among sophomores, Smith ranks eighth in scoring, third in rebounding and third in total 3-pointers made. He is shooting 47.8 percent from the floor and 38.3 percent from 3-point range this season after shooting 40.8 percent as a rookie in 2022-23, including 30.7 percent from behind the arc.

He is the first player in NBA history to have reached his totals of points, rebounds, blocks and 3-pointers made through the first 120 games played of a career.

The Panini Rising Stars will feature four seven-player teams competing in a mini-tournament consisting of three games. The player pool will have 11 NBA rookies, 10 second-year NBA players and seven NBA G League players.

The 21 NBA players, selected by NBA assistant coaches, will be drafted onto three seven-player teams. The seven NBA G League players, selected by the league office, will comprise the fourth team.

All three games in the Panini Rising Stars will be played to a final target score, meaning each game will end with a made basket or a made free throw instead of the clock running out. The semifinal games will be played to a final target score of 40. The championship will feature a final target score of 25.