In his second NBA season, Houston Rockets forward Jabari Smith Jr. raised his averages for points, rebounds and assists from his rookie rate. But the biggest increase for the former Auburn standout in the 2023-24 campaign came in the Rockets’ win total.

After posting a 22-60 record in Smith’s rookie season, Houston went 41-41 in 2023-24.

“We’ve realized what it takes to win,” Smith said. “How hard you got to play, how on point you got to be to beat those good teams. We know what it takes, so from the jump we’ll be ready for that. This year, we kind of had to grow into it. Took ups and downs and bumps, but next year I feel like we’ll be way more consistent and ready for what’s next.”

More stories on the NBA

NBA 2K25 Summer League provides opportunity, experience

JT Thor, South Sudan nearly upset U.S. Olympic basketball team

Former Alabama guard seeks fresh start in NBA summer league

But their .500 record left the Rockets as the first team out for the field of the play-in tournament in the Western Conference.

“You can view it a few ways,” Smith said of Houston’s season. “You can view it as an accomplishment. But I’m pretty sure all of us -- everyone around the arena, the team, the organization -- view it as a letdown because we know we could have been better, so just use it as motivation going into next season.

“It’s definitely some growth there, but it’s nothing to go jump up and down about. Still work to be done. Take the accomplishments, take the improvements and just get ready to win some more games next year.”

In his second season, Smith played about one minute a game more than he averaged as a rookie. His per-game averages increased from 12.8 points to 13.7, 7.2 rebounds to 8.1 and 1.3 assists to 1.6.

Smith’s 616 rebounds and 61 blocked shots were the most for Houston during the 2023-24 season.

While Smith shot fewer times in his second season than he did as a rookie, he got the ball through the basket more often as a 20-year-old than he did at 19. His shooting percentage on 2-point shots went from .487 to .530, 3-point shots from .307 to .363 and free throws from .786 to .811.

“I feel like I grew in all areas just as far as knowing what to do, knowing where to be,” Smith said. “Mentally, I feel like I grew. Physically, I just feel like I made a name for myself just a little bit more as a player -- a little bit more respect. And just trying to find my role and find my niche.

“I’m still not where I want to be, but it’s a start. I’m not rushing it. Just trying to keep getting better.”

The 6-foot-11 frontcourter wants to improve his ballhandling during the summer and report for his third NBA training camp physically stronger.

Houston has its regular starting lineup of guards Fred VanVleet and Jalen Green, forwards Smith and Dillon Brooks and center Alperen Sengun under contract for the 2024- 25 season.

The Rockets also hold the third pick in the 2024 NBA Draft thanks to their trade of guard James Harden to the Brooklyn Nets on Jan. 16, 2021. Houston acquired Smith as the third pick in the 2022 NBA Draft.