Small business owner Theodora Velys is waiting for her intern to arrive. Once the college student gets to Velys’ company, they’ll start working on their little plan to take Southampton-based Revco Electrical Supply global.

Revco is one of eight companies participating in Export NY, a 10-month training program that teaches small- and medium-sized businesses the ins and outs of exporting their wares. Not simply an academic exercise, Export NY pairs a business principal with a college student to design a plan that leads to at least one exporting project by the end of the program.

A statewide initiative, Export NY began upstate 18 months ago, with 45 companies participating in the program offered through Syracuse University and SUNY at Buffalo and Albany.

In September, Export NY arrived at Hofstra University, which is the only Long Island entity to offer the program to area businesses. The Empire State Development Corp. and the U.S. Department of Commerce are partners in the program.

According to Henry Mund, regional director of the Empire State Development Corp., "Exporting is complicated. It can be very expensive, and smaller businesses are usually not familiar with other countries’ business practices and markets."

To that end, Export NY works to acquaint local businesses with the international markets, and ESD assists the efforts through its international offices.

"We can supply cluster information of what (products and services are) most marketable in Germany and other places," Mund said.

Because the earliest upstate graduates of the program are still getting their feet wet in exporting, no data is available to attest to the viability of the program. But the need for a program like Export NY on Long Island is especially transparent: In 1997, exporting comprised $4.2 billion in sales for New York State-based businesses. Of that, only 10 percent of the pie went to Long Island area businesses.

While Velys has exported electrical supplies to Saudi Arabia, South America and the Orient, she admits she "exported project by project by the seat of the pants. We didn’t do it systematically and didn’t know how to pursue it."

But after 51 years in the business, she’s found that New York businesses are stretching their services east, resulting in "fierce competition" on an Island that is "geographically a dead end" for businesses looking to expand their market share.

With three locations, 50 employees and about $10 million in annual sales, Revco is now embarking on a marketing journey in cyberspace to help sustain its earning power. The company has forged itself a niche, in part, simply by surviving. Being one of oldest electrical supply firms in the industry, Velys said the expertise she and her husband have acquired over the years is often sought out, and they’ve built part of the business by offering referrals.

That skill, plus the knowledge that "even in a technology age, everybody needs light bulbs" leads the electrical supply company president to believe she can be "a player here in the global market."

But its one locale in particular that Velys has had her eye on, and she’s anxious to brainstorm with her business intern on how to enter this one market, in particular.

"I really want Cuba. That door’s going to fly open at any minute and it’s going to be a very vibrant market," she said, noting people often disagree with her theory. Yet, no matter where Velys sets her sights, she’s going to find competition, even sitting next to her in Export NY class.

Also participating in the program is Kenneth Laremore, president of Edgewood-based Thermo-Vu Sunlite Industries, a commercial and residential skylight company. Over the past five years, Laremore has grown his 19-year-old, 45-employee business by expanding his product line and taking the company’s goods beyond the New York border. Since 1994, Laremore said the business, which brings in between $5 million to $10 million annually, has grown 40 percent simply because "our reach is a lot farther than it was five years ago. Thermo-Vu was always very local, but now we’re trying to be national," he said. To do that, he expanded his product line from two to 12 — something that the production department "hates" because it complicates what was once a much simpler process.

As part of the expansion, Laremore invested heavily in equipment and new facilities and the quest to go global is, in part, spurred by wanting to recoup on his investment. While he hasn’t set his sights on knocking Velux out of its current ranking as the biggest skylight company in the world, he is already aware of the fact that his is a highly regional business. In the United States, Thermo-Vu is selling well in the Midwest and the South.

Abroad, Laremore is targeting Northern Europe with its "dreary climate" as potential Thermo-Vu country. While optimizing on sunlight is a residential regional want driven by climate, corporations are turning to daylighting as a cost-effective means to minimizing energy expenditures. Laremore sees Export NY as a "good program" that will add sales to his rooftop business’ bottom line.

"When exporting connects, it’s usually very lucrative" even with just a few contacts, Laremore said.

Both Velys and Laremore exemplify the applicant criteria for participants in Export NY: senior-level managers of companies with more than 10 employees and sales between $2 million and $50 million with demonstrable domestic business success in products or services viewed as "exportable" by the U.S. Department of Commerce Foreign Commercial Service. To make participating in Export NY possible for company principals normally stretched for time, the program meets just one time a month for the 10-month duration.

In Laremore’s experience, he said taking advantage of programs like Export NY is the reason he "always stays abreast of what New York State is doing."

And even with modest exporting experience, Velys said she "doesn’t know what the exporting market is all about" but she "has a feeling there’s a lot to be gained from it."

The brief history of Export NY dictates that once Laremore and Velys graduate, the odds are in their favor that they will remain committed to exporting as a method for expanding market share.

"So far, most of the companies upstate are staying with it. They had an interest going into it and they paid (tuition) to participate in the program," Mund said, noting the success stories should begin soon for upstate businesses that participated in Export NY.