Page/Link:

Page URL: HTML link: Citations:

MLA style: "Revco employees talk about chain's demise.." The Free Library. 1997 Racher Press, Inc. 10 Aug. 2024 https://www.thefreelibrary.com/Revco+employees+talk+about+chain%27s+demise.-a019330648

Chicago style: The Free Library. S.v. Revco employees talk about chain's demise.." Retrieved Aug 10 2024 from https://www.thefreelibrary.com/Revco+employees+talk+about+chain%27s+demise.-a019330648

APA style: Revco employees talk about chain's demise.. (n.d.) >The Free Library. (2014). Retrieved Aug 10 2024 from https://www.thefreelibrary.com/Revco+employees+talk+about+chain%27s+demise.-a019330648

TWINSBURG, Ohio - For the 1,100 employees at Revco D.S.' corporate offices here who are about to lose their jobs, the recent news that the company would most likely be acquired by CVS Corp. before too many more months have passed was the second serious shock they'd received in little more than a year. The initial blow was the news, in late 1995, that Revco was to be acquired by Rite Aid Corp.

"We never dreamed that could happen to us," says Lori Walk, a 21-year Revco employee who manages the company's store operations services, of the Rite Aid acquisition. "We believed - still believe - that this is the best drug chain in America, and that we would never be acquired. Of course, it's not as big a surprise the second time around - even if it's just as devastating."

It's particularly devastating for Walk, who, after seven years of attending evening classes, is about to graduate from Akron University with a B.A. degree in communications. Indeed, she had her eye on a corporate communications slot at Revco upon graduation. Now she'll have to look elsewhere.

Like so many other Revco people, Walk is bewildered and bothered that a company as successful as Revco could suddenly disappear. As Walk puts it, in a remark that could have come from almost anywhere inside Revco's headquarters building: "We thought we were doing what we were supposed to do."

Indeed, that is the view of many Revco employees. So too is the bad taste that lingers still, weeks after the event, at Revco's headquarters.

(By contrast, it should be noted, Revco's field people, who constitute the overwhelming majority of the chain's workforce, are greeting the impending acquisition with considerable optimism and have been openly enthusiastic in their brief exposure to CVS chief executive officer Tom Ryan and other senior CVS executives.)

Most Revco people either read about the CVS acquisition in the newspaper, heard about it on the radio, or got an initial inkling by watching the stock price rise on the Internet. This, before anyone at Revco got around to telling them. "I was more surprised last year, when Rite Aid tried to acquire us," says Kelly Kreischer, Revco's manager of methods and procedures. "That news brought reality. It showed us that things are unstable, even when they appear to be stable. And that there's only so much you can do. And while I was surprised this time, my surprise was not as great. I'd become much more cynical."

Kreischer, a five-year Revco employee, had just been promoted to a job monitoring the company's store operations systems and ensuring they are current. Like so many other Revco employees, she has not even begun thinking about what she'll do after the acquisition is finalized sometime this summer. And, as is true with so many Revco people, she'd like to know the effective date on which her Revco career is formally terminated.

"I'd be happier if I knew when my job ends," Kreischer says. "Meanwhile," she adds. "I've gotten some great experience. Revco is the place to be if you want to learn about retailing." That is a sentiment universally shared by Revco people.

Indeed, the sense of Revco as America's premier drug chain pervades the environment at the company's headquarters building in Twinsburg. Walk is particularly saddened by the fact that "there are so many good things we've built here that will disappear."

Jay Ross, a 28-year Revco veteran and merchandising vice president responsible for planogramming, takes a more philosophical view of the acquisition. "If you were being honest with yourself, you knew it would happen," he says. "Vendors began talking about this last fall. Then I started getting caring telephone calls. I believe that where there's smoke, there's flame. So I wasn't surprised." As with so many others, by the time Ross heard about the acquisition from Revco's management, it had already been reported in the consumer press.

Ross, who joined Revco in 1970 as a part-time sales associate, nonetheless never stopped hoping it would not come to this. "I had believed we might be able to get Zell out," he says of the investment banker whose interests controlled Revco and ultimately determined its fate. "After all, we were doing well."

And what will Ross do when the acquisition is completed? "I haven't thought about it. After all, I'm still employed by Revco. When I'm told to leave, I'll leave." Indeed, the vast majority of the drug chain's employees intend to continue to do their jobs. "We can't help doing what we're paid to do," says Ross. "That's what makes Revco people Revco people."

Judy Willets, the 17-year Revco employee who currently manages marketing income, also believes that the wrong chain is disappearing, sentiments she initially felt with the 1995 announcement of Revco's acquisition by Rite Aid. "The general feeling at that time was that it shouldn't have been us," says Willets. "We feel that way today. But we knew, after the first time, that it would happen again. It was only a matter of time."

As is the case with many Revco headquarters people, Willets doesn't know what she'll do after she leaves. "I'll take some time off to regroup. It will be a big transition for me. I've been working 60 to 70 hours a week here for a very long time. But I've loved it."

One of the common themes that run through discussions with Revco's headquarters people is that the Rite Aid experience was a preview of coming attractions, the event that laid the groundwork for CVS. "Rite Aid took too much out of me," says Willets, "too much out of all of us."

But perhaps the overriding theme among Revco employees is that this is, was, will always be remembered as a great company. "I've been proud to work for Revco," says Willets.

Martha Walker, a 30-year Revco employee who directs store operations, is more direct. "Putting CVS and Revco together will make the most dynamic drug chain in America. The only disappointment, from my viewpoint, is that I wish that Revco could be the survivor."

Adds Walk, "This has been a marvelous company, one of camaraderie and accomplishment. What made it so good is that we, the employees, have been a caring, concerned, unique group of people, and we've always had a nucleus of talent to lead and teach us. Revco will always be," she concludes, "a unique experience in each of our lives."