Lieutenant General Kenneth James Gillespie is a retired senior officer in the Australian Army. Gillespie served as Vice Chief of the Defence Force from 2005 until 2008, then Chief of Army from 2008 until his retirement in June 2011.

Ken Gillespie was born on June 28, 1952, in Brisbane, Queensland, Australia. His birth geographical coordinates are 27° 28’ 5” South latitude and 153° 1’ 41” East longitude. Ken Gillespie is currently 72 years old.

Astrologically, Ken Gillespie falls under the Sun sign of Cancer, with Libra as his Ascendant, Virgo as his Moon sign, and Leo as his Black Moon Lilith sign.

Planets

Planets represent different aspects of personality, life themes, and energies within a birth chart, influencing individual characteristics, motivations, and experiences.

Planets in Signs

Planets in a zodiac sign denote how the energies and qualities associated with those planets express themselves within the context of the themes and attributes of that particular zodiac sign.

Sun Cancer Moon Virgo Mercury Cancer Venus Cancer Mars Scorpio Jupiter Taurus Saturn Libra Uranus Cancer Neptune Libra Pluto Leo Ceres Taurus Chiron Capricorn Eros Virgo Hygiea Taurus Juno Aquarius Pallas Aries Vesta Virgo Ascendant Libra Black Moon Lilith Leo Midheaven Cancer North Node Aquarius South Node Leo Part of Fortune Sagittarius Vertex Aries

Sunin Cancer6° 19’ 2”

What does it mean to be a Cancer Sun? The Cancer Sun in the Natal Chart makes you emotional and subject to your moods. You […] Read more »

Moonin Virgo9° 17’ 59”

The Moon in Virgo in the Natal Chart makes you realistic and helps you keep your feelings in check. You are honest, can ignore your […] Read more »

Mercuryin Cancer26° 8’ 54”

Mercury in Cancer in a Natal Chart makes you sensitive and thoughtful. You are imaginative and can be introverted. You frequently think about your feelings […] Read more »

Venusin Cancer7° 11’ 31”

Cancer Venus in the Natal Chart makes you generous and affectionate. You are compassionate and can be empathetic and loving. You are sincere and can […] Read more »

Marsin Scorpio3° 11’ 12”

Scorpio Mars in the Natal Chart makes you intense and mysterious. You have a probing nature and an insatiable appetite for knowledge. You seek hidden […] Read more »

Jupiterin Taurus13° 13’ 25”

Jupiter in Taurus in the Natal Chart is a generational placement that relates to having a materialistic vision. You are part of a generation that […] Read more »

Saturnin Libra8° 27’ 3”

Yet, when you face challenges, you can be a staunch advocate for others. You have a feisty side and can be passionate about your mission. […] Read more »

Uranusin Cancer13° 42’ 55”

Cancer Uranus in the Natal Chart indicates you are part of a generation that dramatically changes society. Your breakthroughs and epiphanies help redefine home and […] Read more »

Neptunein Libra18° 55’ 57”

Libra Neptune in the Natal Chart indicates you are part of a generation that craves connection. You want intellectual and emotional intimacy. You are artistic […] Read more »

Plutoin Leo19° 50’ 33”

The Pluto in Leo generation empowers celebrities, giving those with status the authority to lead. Society is materialistic during this transit, and you are part […] Read more »

Ceresin Taurus22° 3’ 38”

Ceres in Taurus in the Natal Chart indicates you are down to earth and practical. You find reasonable ways to express love and show others […] Read more »

Chironin Capricorn9° 44’ 27”

Chiron in Capricorn in the Natal Chart is an ideal placement for healing from subconscious wounds related to work, money, and security. You are productive […] Read more »

Erosin Virgo17° 13’ 12”

What is Eros in astrology? The asteroid of passion and sexual obsession can spike your libido in most cases. Yet Eros in Virgo in the […] Read more »

Hygieain Taurus14° 13’ 29”

Hygiea in Taurus in the Natal Chart indicates a desire to pursue beauty and strength. You are helpful and use your nurturing gifts to encourage […] Read more »

Junoin Aquarius24° 7’ 30”

Aquarius Juno in the Natal Chart indicates you have an intellectual and creative connection to your love interest. You have a rebellious spirit and can […] Read more »

Pallasin Aries6° 48’ 47”

Pallas in Aries in the Natal Chart makes you passionate, and you have a dramatic and zealous approach to sharing your message. You can be […] Read more »

Vestain Virgo17° 3’ 10”

Vesta in Virgo in the Natal Chart is an ideal placement for a devoted healer. You are on a clear spiritual mission and face restraints […] Read more »

Ascendantin Libra12° 48’ 26”

Libra Ascendant in the Natal Chart makes you a peacekeeper. You lead with your ideals and see the best in others. You are optimistic and […] Read more »

Black Moon Lilithin Leo10° 10’ 33”

Leo Black Moon Lilith in the Natal Chart makes you spontaneous and impulsive. You are dramatic and use your creative gifts to compensate for fears […] Read more »

Midheavenin Cancer8° 23’ 54”

Cancer Midheaven in the Natal Chart indicates a gift for nurturing others. You help inspire others to grow and use your professional skills to uplift […] Read more »

North Nodein Aquarius23° 58’ 36”

Aquarius North Node in the Natal Chart makes you rebellious. You break from tradition, and your destiny involves leading others in grassroots campaigns. You are […] Read more »

South Nodein Leo23° 58’ 36”

Leo South Node in the Natal Chart makes you born with passion and desire to succeed. You are confident in your abilities and have a […] Read more »

Part of Fortunein Sagittarius15° 47’ 23”

Sagittarius Part of Fortune in the Natal Chart makes you independent and intelligent. You are luckiest when you use your instincts to make spontaneous decisions. […] Read more »

Planets in Elements

Planets in elements denote how the fundamental energies and qualities associated with those planets interact with the elemental nature of the signs they inhabit, shaping an individual’s overall temperament and approach to life.

Earth Element

The earth element in astrology is associated with practicality and grounding. This element is associated with career and wealth. Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorn are signs […] Read more »

Water Element

Astrologers and other occultists study the water element to understand emotional healing. This element relates to love and compassion. Numerous planets in water signs in […] Read more »

Fire Element

The fire element in astrology is associated with passion and motivation. This element brings creativity and intensifies planets and natal houses. Your competitive nature comes […] Read more »

Air Element

The air element in astrology corresponds to three signs; Gemini, Libra, and Aquarius. This element is associated with new insights and perspectives. The air element […] Read more »

Planets in Qualities

Planets in qualities signify how the inherent attributes and tendencies of those planets align with the modalities of the signs they occupy, influencing an individual’s style of action, decision-making, and engagement with the world.

Cardinal Quality

The Cardinal quality in astrology is associated with new seasons and initiative. Cardinal signs mark the equinoxes and solstices. The Cardinal modality represents the extremes […] Read more »

Fixed Quality

The second Quality in astrology is the Fixed modality. Fixed Signs follow the Cardinal Signs, bringing strength and endurance. These signs build upon the foundation […] Read more »

Mutable Quality

The third Quality astrological signs are grouped into is mutable. Mutable Signs come at the end of a season. Mutable Signs are associated with flexibility […] Read more »

Planets in Houses

Planets in a zodiac house signify where in life’s areas and experiences the energies and influences of those planets are predominantly focused and expressed.

Sun Ninth House Moon Twelfth House Mercury Tenth House Venus Ninth House Mars First House Jupiter Seventh House Saturn Twelfth House Uranus Tenth House Neptune First House Pluto Eleventh House Ceres Eighth House Chiron Fourth House Eros Twelfth House Hygiea Seventh House Juno Fifth House Pallas Sixth House Vesta Twelfth House Black Moon Lilith Eleventh House North Node Fifth House South Node Eleventh House Part of Fortune Third House Vertex Sixth House

Aspects

Aspects reveal the dynamic relationships and interactions between planets within a birth chart, influencing the way their energies combine and manifest in an individual’s life experiences and personality traits.

Within this birth chart, there are 17 major aspects, alongside 13 minor aspects, as well as 9 extra aspects.

Major Aspects

Major aspects highlight significant connections between planets, providing insights into key dynamics, challenges, and potentials shaping an individual’s life journey and psychological makeup.

Jupiter Sextile Uranus Sun Conjunct Venus Venus Square Saturn Neptune Sextile Pluto Sun Square Saturn Moon Sextile Venus Sun Sextile Moon Sun Trine Mars Moon Trine Jupiter Moon Sextile Uranus Venus Trine Mars Jupiter Quincunx Saturn Saturn Square Uranus Uranus Square Neptune Sun Conjunct Uranus Venus Conjunct Uranus Jupiter Square Pluto

Explore detailed articles on the major aspects in this birth chart, gaining deeper insights into this cosmic identity. Dive into each aspect and uncover how it shapes Ken Gillespie’s life journey.

Sun Conjunct Venusorb: 1°

When the Sun is conjunct Venus in your Natal Chart, you are exceptionally romantic. Others see you as beautiful, and you have a gift for […] Read more »

Sun Square Saturnorb: 2°

The Sun square Saturn in the Natal Chart makes you feel stifled and restricted. You struggle to adhere to rules and practical routines. With work, […] Read more »

Moon Sextile Venusorb: 2°

When the Moon is sextile Venus in a Natal Chart, this typically means that a person is a kind and loving person. They tend to […] Read more »

Sun Sextile Moonorb: 3°

The Sun’s sextile Moon in the Natal Chart makes you easygoing and friendly. You are optimistic and share your charming nature without overwhelming others. You […] Read more »

Sun Trine Marsorb: 3°

The Sun trine Mars in the Natal Chart makes you ambitious and strong-willed. You are caring and affectionate. You show warmth and generosity. You can […] Read more »

Moon Trine Jupiterorb: 4°

The Moon trine Jupiter in a chart typically indicates a person is friendly, warm, and generous. They are confident and have no issue expressing their […] Read more »

Moon Sextile Uranusorb: 4°

When the Moon is sextile Uranus in a Natal Chart, this typically means that a person is free-spirited, unique, and a bit rebellious. Someone with […] Read more »

Jupiter Quincunx Saturnorb: 5°

Jupiter quincunx Saturn in a chart indicates that a person may struggle to prioritize and find work-life balance. People with this aspect in their charts […] Read more »

Sun Conjunct Uranusorb: 7°

The Sun conjunct Uranus in your Natal Chart impacts your personality in unusual ways. You can be innovative and creative. You are known for being […] Read more »

Venus Conjunct Uranusorb: 7°

Venus conjunct Uranus in a Natal Chart makes you erratic in love. You are enamored with people from a distance but have difficulty sustaining intimate […] Read more »

Minor Aspects

Minor aspects represent subtler connections between planets, offering additional nuances and layers of interpretation to understand more detailed influences on an individual’s personality and experiences.

Sun Square Pallas Moon Trine Chiron Venus Square Pallas Jupiter Quincunx Ascendant Saturn Square Midheaven Sun Square Vertex Moon Sextile Midheaven Venus Conjunct Midheaven Jupiter Conjunct Hygiea Saturn Square Chiron Uranus Sextile Hygiea Uranus Square Ascendant Saturn Opposite Pallas

Discover additional layers of meaning with this collection of articles on the minor aspects found in Ken Gillespie’s birth chart. Delve deeper into these cosmic nuances to gain a richer understanding of this astrological profile.

Sun Square Pallasorb: 0°

Pallas aspects to the Sun emphasize your unique gifts and visionary nature. The square is one of the challenging aspects. The Sun Square Pallas forces […] Read more »

Jupiter Quincunx Ascendantorb: 0°

Jupiter quincunx Ascendant in a chart focuses on self-improvement and image. It can make growing and evolving difficult, but it also offers the energy to […] Read more »

Sun Square Vertexorb: 1°

When the Sun squares the Vertex in a Natal Chart, you have unique insights into your fate. Yet your best advancements toward your purpose come […] Read more »

Venus Conjunct Midheavenorb: 1°

Venus conjunct the Midheaven in the Natal Chart makes you stand out from the crowd for your exceptional grace and beauty. You are a charming […] Read more »

Extra Aspects

Extra aspects, though less emphasized than major or minor aspects, contribute subtle nuances and intricacies to the overall astrological interpretation, offering additional insights into an individual’s personality traits and life experiences.

Chiron Quincunx Black Moon Lilith Eros Conjunct Vesta Juno Conjunct North Node Juno Opposite South Node Chiron Opposite Midheaven Eros Square Part of Fortune Pallas Conjunct Vertex Vesta Square Part of Fortune Pallas Square Midheaven

Explore how these extra aspects contribute to the intricate tapestry of Ken Gillespie’s life path through subtler influences. Dive into each extra aspect and uncover the hidden gems that shape a unique cosmic identity.

Pallas Conjunct Vertexorb: 1°

Pallas conjunct the Vertex in a chart creates a connection between fate, intellect, and intuition. Someone may have an easier time perceiving their destined encounters, […] Read more »

Houses

A house starting in a zodiac sign indicates the area of life where the qualities and themes of that sign are particularly emphasized and influential within an individual’s birth chart.