Funeral services for Kenneth Cordum, 79, of Gillespie, will be at First United Methodist Church, 900 West Broadway, Gillespie on Sunday, May 5. The family will receive friends and celebrate Ken’s life at from 2 p.m. to 3:30 p.m. A service will be held at 3:30 p.m.

Ken passed away on Thursday, May 2 at his home after a lengthy struggle with vision problems, a rare form of cancer, and resultant heart disease. Throughout his physical challenges, Ken acted with good humor, stubborn independence, and optimism, recently preparing vegetable seeds for his extensive garden and planning a fish fry for his colleagues at the Gillespie food pantry.

Ken was born in Litchfield, Illinois, on June 11, 1939, to Clarence Henry Cordum and Kathryn L. (Callans) Cordum. His family lived in Macoupin County where his father Clarence operated a grocery business, which Ken eventually took over. He served in the Army National Guard.

He married Judith Schmutzler on February 5, 1966, in a specially built chapel in West Plains, Missouri, where she lived.

They settled in Gillespie where they raised their two children, Terry and Susan. The family spent many happy hours on their rural property where they maintained a productive orchard, raised exotic cattle, and fished and swam in their small lake.

Judy passed away on October 23, 2018, after her own valiant struggle with multiple forms of cancer.

Ken was well-known in the Gillespie area as a grocer, bank board member, investor in radio stations, and later insurance agent for Prudential. He and his family were active at Gillespie’s Zion Lutheran Church and later at First United Methodist Church, where he was an integral part of its monthly Harvest Feast. He also had a leadership role in the Gillespie Kiwanis Club and later the Community Service Club.

After retirement, Ken assumed an active leadership role with the Gillespie area food pantry, managing acquisition and distribution of food. He was also a member of the Area Agency on Aging. He stayed busy at home with his large vegetable garden and assisting his wife Judy with her landscaping and extensive perennial gardens.

Ken will be remembered for his humor, love of cooking, bartering, and bargaining, but most of all for his love of family. Together he and Judy were devoted to family and took great pride and pleasure in the company and accomplishments of their children, their spouses, and their grandchildren. He leaves children Terry Cordum (Shelly) of Alton, Illinois, and Susan (Pete) Stromsland of Gillespie. He was the devoted grandfather of Katie (Kathryn) Stromsland of Forest Park, Illinois, and Jason Stromsland of Key Largo, Florida. He also leaves behind a brother, Ronald (Carol) Cordum of Tiskilwa, IL. Ken was preceded in death by his parents, stepmother, Evelyn (Zelmer) Cordum, spouse, and sister Judith K. Wood.

Memorials may be made to the Caring Center, Gillespie First United Methodist Church, or charity of donor’s choice. Kravanya Funeral Homes is in charge of arrangements.

Share this story

Comments

comments

Carolyn M. Reznicek, 74, of Carlinville, passed away Wednesday, July 31, 2024, at her home in rural Carlinville. Carolyn was born December 28, 1949, in Springfield, a daughter of Gene and Margie Flener Tapp.

Carolyn graduated from Virden High School with the class of 1968. She grew up in the Virden area. She married Kenneth Greff in 1969. They would later divorce. She married David Reznicek on April 30, 2005, in Las Vegas, NV.

Carolyn passed away peacefully, leaving behind fond memories for her family and friends. She was a devoted family member and had a lifelong passion for collecting antiques. Her home was filled with these treasures, reflecting her unique taste and love for history. Throughout her life, Carolyn operated several antique booths around the area, where she was well-loved by fellow collectors and customers alike. Carolyn adored animals of all kinds. Throughout her life, she cared for cats, dogs, and even birds, always providing them with a loving home. Her career was spent mostly at Colonial Insurance, where she was respected for her hard work and dedication. For a time, she also owned a pet store, fulfilling a dream that combined her love for animals and her entrepreneurial spirit. The greatest joy in Carolyn’s life was her family, especially her grandchildren. She loved spending time with them and took every opportunity to spoil them. Her love for her family, her pets, and her antiquing will be remembered by all who knew her. Carolyn will be deeply missed by her family, friends, and the pets she cherished. On a yellow sticky note found after she passed, she had written, “Life is not forever. Love is.”

Carolyn is survived by her husband, David N. Reznicek of Carlinville, daughter, Denyse Greff of Thayer, daughter, Tara Watts of Athens, son, Philip Greff of Virden, step-daughter, Betsy Reznicek of St. Louis, MO, step-daughter, Audra (Joseph) Puleo of Sycamore, fifteen grandchildren, 1 great granddaughter, brother, Larry Tapp of Mackinaw, and brother Tony Tapp, of Mt. Vernon, as well as several nieces and nephews. Carolyn was preceded in death by her parents, grandson, Devyn Greff and granddaughter, Keianna Watts.

There will be no services for Carolyn M. Reznicek. The family suggests memorials may be made to Macoupin Animal Shelter. Please visit www.davisandersonfuneralhome.com to leave condolences or light a candle in her memory. Davis-Anderson Funeral Home, Carlinville, is in charge of arrangements.

Kenneth C. Kincaid, 82, of Bunker Hill, died at his residence on Sunday, August 4, 2024, at 2:34 am. He was born July 20, 1942, in Louisville, to Glenn Kincaid and Betty Higgins. He married Linda (Liljenberg) Kincaid.

He was a concrete finisher. He was a veteran after having served with the US Army. Kenneth enjoyed fishing, mushroom hunting, and riding in the country. Kenneth never met a stranger; if the garage light was on, people could stop by and talk with him and have a drink with him. He enjoyed his dog Ruby and his family.

He is survived by his spouse, Linda Kincaid of Bunker Hill, children, Kenneth Kincaid of Godfrey, Constance Kincaid of FL, Jenny (Jeff) Byrne of IN, Ashley Kincaid of Alton, Joseph Kincaid of Alton, and Drew Kincaid of HI, grandchildren; Madalynn, Camryn, Sydney, Masen, Paisley, Carter, siblings; Sharon Kincaid and Brenda (Dennis) Emmons. Kenneth was preceded in death by his parents, stepmother who raised him, Edith Kincaid, son, Jeffery G. Kincaid, brother, Richard Kincaid, and his dog, Ruby.

No public services will be held. Anyone wishing to send an online condolence may do so at www.kravanyafuneral.com. Kravanya Funeral Home, Bunker Hill, is in charge of the arrangements.

Alice J. Morse, 84 of Carlinville, passed away on Thursday, August 1, 2024, at Lakeside Health Care in Carlinville. Alice was born June 26, 1940, in Carlinville, a daughter of Michael and Helen (Moros) Bilauski.

Alice graduated from Carlinville High School with the class of 1958. She married Richard W. Morse, on August 15, 1959, in the Carlinville Methodist Church. Alice had worked at Sullivan’s in the pharmacy department as a technician for 17 years before retiring in 2001. Then later worked as the administrative assistant in the Springfield Department of Corrections school district. Alice enjoyed working on her crossword puzzles. She loved to cook, and enjoyed several cooking shows as well. Alice’s favorite holiday was Christmas, where she was often cooking for the whole family. She loved her dogs, but most of all she loved her family and spending time with them.

Alice is survived by her husband Richard W. Morse of Carlinville, IL, sons; Michael (Susie) Morse of Carlinville, and Gregory (Shana) Morse of Richmond, VA, daughter, Abbe Eldred of Carlinville, three grandchildren, Lily Morse, Chris Morse, and Alex (Brittany) Eldred, twin great-granddaughters, and two nieces. Alice was preceded in death by her parents, son, Jeffrey Morse, and sister, Mary Ann Simpson.

There will be a private family service. Memorials may be made to Carlinville Area Hospital Foundation. Please visit www.davisandersonfuneralhome.com to leave condolences or light a candle in her memory. Davis-Anderson Funeral Home, Carlinville is in charge of arrangements.