Derry — Kenneth D. Gillespie, Jr., 69, passed away peacefully at home surrounded by his loving family. He was born in Boston, MA, on October 31, 1944, the son of Kenneth D. and Helen (Koskie) Gillespie, Sr. Ken was a 1963 graduate of Manchester Memorial High School. After graduation he joined the National Guard where he served for 6 years. He was joined in marriage on August 21, 1965, with Shirley Ann Bartlett. Ken was a mechanic and specialized in auto body restoration. He also enjoyed drag racing and NASCAR.

Ken is survived by his loving wife of 48 years, Shirley; 4 children, Keith Gillespie and fiancée, Cheri Breton, Kim Gibbons-Cole and husband, Kevin Cole, Kristina Shelley and husband, Dustin, Michelle Perez and husband, Miguel; 4 grandchildren, Kaitlin and Caleb Gibbons and Makayla and Andres Perez. He was preceded in death by a sister, Joanne Breen.

Memorials in Ken’s memory may be made to Compassionate Care Hospice, 25 Nashua Road, Unit E3, Londonderry, NH 03053 or the American Red Cross, P.O. Box 2528, Concord, NH 03302. Please visit www.goodwinfh.com to sign the online guest book.

ARRANGEMENTS: A calling hour will be held from 10 to 11 a.m. on Saturday, March 8, 2014, in the Goodwin Funeral Home, 607 Chestnut Street, with a Memorial Service following at 11 a.m. in the funeral home. Interment in Pine Grove Cemetery will be private.

Published on March 13, 2014

Plant a Living Memorial

In Memory of KennethHow does it work?

Send Flowers: When Is the Ordering Deadline?

Next-Day Delivery

ANY DAY OF THE WEEK

Order any time up till the day before

Same-Day Delivery

MON-FRI Order by 2:00PM

SAT & SUN Order by noon

Morning Delivery

TUES-SAT Order by 3:00PM

The day before

SAT & SUN Order by Saturday

Note: These are general guidelines; some florists may not be able to operate within these timelines. During peak periods such as Valentine’s Day, Memorial Day and most holidays, florists are not always able to keep up to demand. Tribute will contact you if there are any issues.

Plant a tree: How does it work

When your purchase is complete, a post will be made on the tribute wall of the deceased signifying the planting of a memorial tree.

An official certificate recognizing your purchase will be included with your email receipt. You can then forward the email to the family or print it and give it to them personally.

After an order is placed, our forestry partners will plant the tree in the area of greatest need (nearest the funeral home), according to the planting schedule for the year.

Due to seasonal conditions, the tree planting takes place during the spring and summer.

Tree Planting Timeline

Orders placed in:

January - May

Planting will take place in Spring or Summer of the same year.

June - December

Planting will take place in Spring of the following year.

Hide Detail

In Memory of Kenneth

Plant a tree How it Works Plant a tree