August 20, 1925 – March 9, 2013 Kenneth Raymond Gillespie of Calgary, quietly left us in the early morning of Saturday, March 9, 2013 at the age of 87 years. Kenneth Raymond Gillespie was born in Toronto, Ontario on August 20, 1925 to Marie and Cecil Gillespie, the eldest of eight children. Ken completed his civil engineering degree and later his geotechnical masters program. Ken joined the Canadian Military in 1950, where he would serve at home and abroad with the United Nations force to the Gaza Strip during the Suez Middle East Crisis. Ken met, courted and married Dorothy White on June 29, 1963. In 1968, Ken joined the Calgary engineering firm Ripley Klohn & Leonoff and would remain with them until his retirement in 1990. Ken led a very busy and active life, loved his world travel and his many trips to the Maritimes embracing his Eastern heritage. Ken was an avid golfer, loved cross-country and downhill skiing and many years hiking in his much loved mountains. In quieter times, Ken was an avid reader, with a passion for fine wines and shared conversation over good food with friends and family, rarely missing family get-togethers, even when his health began to fail. Kenneth is lovingly remembered by his siblings all living in Eastern Canada: Joan MacIssac, Leonard (Mary) Gillespie, Mary (Rene) Hebert, Lawrence (Alva) Gillespie, Neil (Lorraine) Gillespie, Elaine (Tibor) Hary, John (Maureen) Gillespie; and by his loving sister-in-law Ilene (Bill) Bachewich of Turner Valley; numerous nieces, nephews, great-nieces and great-nephews; and special friend Irene Higa of Pincher Creek. He was welcomed into the loving arms of his wife Dorothy Kathleen (nee White) who left us ten years ago. Kenneth was predeceased by his parents Cecil and Marie (nee Von Zuben) Gillespie in 1959 and 1954. A Celebration of Ken’s Life will be held at McINNIS & HOLLOWAY’S Fish Creek Chapel (14441 Bannister Road S.E.) on Monday, March 18, 2013 at 2:00 p.m. Ken will be laid to rest with his wife Dorothy Kathleen in Innisfail, Alberta. Forward condolences through www.mcinnisandholloway.com. The family would like to extend a heartfelt thank you to the dedicated staff at Intercare Southwood Hospice for the kind loving care and support provided to Kenneth Gillespie and his family. In living memory of Kenneth Gillespie, a tree will be planted at Fish Creek Provincial Park by McINNIS & HOLLOWAY FUNERAL HOMES, Fish Creek Chapel, 14441 BANNISTER ROAD S.E. Telephone: (403) 256-9575.