ELAN’s mission to search and create more new consumer electronics applications with digital technology; to integrate wired and wireless networking with home electronics environment; to provide intelligent HMI solutions that would allow humans to enjoy the convenience of digital life right in the comfort of their homes and workplace. To offer the best of life comfort to the consumers is ELAN's persistent code of operations. ELAN is focusing its efforts on digital home market with consumers' interest in mind. As the future demand for of audio-visual digital data is extremely huge, broadband solution will be required to cope with the expected massive data transfer. Additionally, the advent of intelligent home appliances applications is certain to influence the growing popularity of home networking. ELAN is the only IC provider in the marketplace today who can deliver chips for central office (VDSL2 end), user terminal (CPE), analog front-end, and splitter applications in order to meet broadband and home networking requirements. With its capability in integrating broadband and home networking, ELAN has laid a strong foundation for its future growth in digital home solutions. Furthermore, after years of endeavor, ELAN has successfully developed a handwriting recognition system. The new creative technology continues to find new niches of applications and market. Apart from cell phone application, its usage is penetrating into high-end educational learning aid (ELA), electronic dictionary, mobile pen, etc., markets. Handwriting recognition technology is also being integrated together with ELAN's capacitive sensor technology into its eFinger touchpad product. The touchpad is able to recognize and input finger-scribed Chinese, English, and other characters. This advanced HMI will find more applications with future digital electronic devices, such as multimedia PCs and smart remote controls for digital home appliances. etc. The revolutionary product is anticipated to give a new milestone in boosting market prospects for ELAN and its business partners. To address the market opportunities of the new digital home market, ELAN is solidifying forces from its subsidiary companies in developing new first-in-the-market products and promoting the product worldwide through its global marketing and sales channels. The joint effort is foreseen to drive ELAN conglomerate's revenue to its highest level. Elan shares start trading over the counter (OTC)in 2000.