Search for:

Aptera › Community › Aptera Discussions › Aptera Spiritual Ancestors

Aptera Spiritual Ancestors

I found it interesting to look back at past vehicles and consider which ones have DNA similar to the Aptera. I’m curious if other reservation holders have owned any of these “Aptera Distant Cousins”.

In no particular order:

The Two Seater Gene

Mazda Miata — A simple and reliable Japanese version of a Lotus Elan

Saturn Sky or Pontiac Solstice

Toyota MR2

Pontiac Fiero

Honda Insight (2000-2006) version

Lotus — Europa, Elan, Esprit, Elise, Evora (Yes, they love the letter “E”.)

The Lightweight Gene

Honda Insight (2000-2006) version is about 1,850 – 1,925 lbs.

Lotus — Elan (1,900-2,200 lbs), Europa (1,350-1,570 lbs.), and Elise (about 2,000 lbs.)

Mazda Miata 2400 lbs. — steel body vs. aluminum for Honda and composite for Lotus

The Three-wheel Gene

Dymaxion — Buckminster Fuller design from 1933 (two front wheels with single rear) – only 3 prototypes were built

Davis Divan — made in 1948 (single front wheel and two rear wheels) – only 16 were made

Reliant Robin — (single front wheel and two rear wheels) – made in England for 30 yrs.

Morgan — (two front wheels with single rear) – made in England

Pulse — two main wheels with two small outrigger wheels; like Aptera it was classified as Motorcycle in most states despite its having 4 wheels

The Aerodynamics Gene

Saab 96 (0.32 coefficient of drag)

Lotus Europa (0.29 coefficient of drag)

Honda Insight (0.25 coefficient of drag)

Pulse (0.193 coefficient of drag) Vehicle was manufactured between 1982-1990

The EV Gene

GM EV1

Toyota Prius (yeah, I know — not a pure EV but initially had a futuristic vibe like the Aptera)

Nissan Leaf

Gizmo EV — a three-wheeler with lead-acid batteries

Chevy Bolt

Any Tesla model

This discussion was modified 1 year, 11 months ago by bbelcamino.

90 Replies

Aptera Spiritual Ancestors

I have a Kia Niro EV…

But what about the Vanderhall Edison 2? It’s electric… 3 wheeler…

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6s-u0XhZKZs

This vehicles about 17 years old but I found it really interesting.

https://youtu.be/3ll0KR3qAiQ?si=37lbAy0_s2jKahVp

First, any of the first round of EVs, including compliance cars like the Fiat 500e (for all intents and purposes a 2-seater) and the Smart four 2 EV – which was not only an EV but a two-seater are cars that appealed to early adopters. (As a 2-seater the ICE-powered Smart Fourtwo has sold over 1,000,000 units world wide in the last 20 or so years).

The Chevy Volt went a long way toward rebuilding GM’s reputation as the company that killed the electric car. BTW: I don’t think anyone ‘owned’ a Chevrolet EV1 as GM recalled all but a few examples destined for museums as all were leased and crushed.

You also left the SparkEV of which only a little over 7,400 examples were made from your list. This was the first Chevy pure EV available for ownership. It even won the KBB award in ’14 and ’15 among plug-ins for five year cost of ownership and that was based on the depreciation of ICE-powered Sparks. This low cost of ownership is confirmed by my experience as the ’14 Spark EV I bought three years ago with just over 10,000 miles actually is retailing at 51,000 miles for more than the $9,000 I paid.

My expenses? Eight (cheap) all-weather tires (heavy foot combined with the ability to get scratch at >45mph) and a wheel bearing. The cost of the electricity was totally off-set by the special EV-rate offered by my EMC – I.e. my overall electric bill is smaller now than it was before I got the EV.

Bottom line, this car makes me believe Elon Musk might be right when he suggested people might buy EVs as an investment. I mean, if I could sell mine for the same $10,500 advertised on Carvana, I’d come out with a profit for driving the car 40,000 miles.

My FWD 1969 Saab 96 was a great snow car. The Ford V4 engine and freewheel option combined for great gas mileage, compared with most other cars of that time. Skinny tall tires, a clean undercarriage, wheel wells designed to reduce snow buildup, a great heater and defroster. Included Headrests and shoulder belts before any American cars. No wonder it was a successful rally car. Plus the back seat could be removed to haul lumber. Later Saabs lost their aircraft inspired design.

Thanks for compiling the list, Ray!

Proud owner of a Miata and Leaf. Always wondered what it would be like to put the two together…

My parents saw 1 of the 16 Davis’ at the Chatanooga Motorcar Festival and had to show me! I’ll see if I can find that picture.

None of those mentioned, but we own a classic Mini. It revolutionized lightweight car design while maximizing passenger space.

I owned a 2001 Honda Insight with the 5 speed manual transmission. It was an awesome car to drive, and the mileage was still far above any other gas burning car we’ve ever owned. I made a road trip through the Rockies that was over 72 MPG, and lifetime I think I had something around 68 MPG. It was also fun to drive (very “tossable” due to the lightweight and basically 50/50 weight distribution. It wasn’t fast though, with 0-60 times up in the 10.5 second range, but it was super quick off the line and 0-30 speed was quite fast (because you could hit 30 at redline in first gear :). My dad gave it the nickname of “silver bullet” (which I might reuse for my Luna Aptera).

We’ve also owned several Priuses (Prii?): A first gen, a second gen, and we still own a third gen from 2014. Not exciting, but decent mileage and very dependable. The 2014 is a very nice road trip car, with the full tech package and “Dynamic Cruise Control” (Level 1 autonomous driving).

And I’ve been driving Nissan Leafs since 2011 (leased a 2011, then leased a 2014, and currently own a 2018). I love the E-Pedal in the 2018, and the “ProPilot” is pretty good (Level 2 autonomous). These are great city cars, good for commuting and driving in the metro area (the 2018 has about 145 miles range after 3 years, although I’ve put less than 1000 miles on it since the start of the pandemic, so it might not be typical).

Hey Ray,

I got a 2000 (Gen1) Insight in 2015, loved it, took it to L.A. and back a couple of times. Had a Honda CRX before that, for a short time, but with less success. Was on the electric quest even earlier: converted a Yamaha 650 to 72-volt EV in 2008.

Add to the list a Lotus Eleven (mine is a Westfield replica). Photos exist of Keith Duckworth sprawled across the hood of an Eleven with Colin Chapman driving down a runway. Keith, an aerodynamicist who designed the body was looking at tuffs of yarn all over the body and checking airflow. At somewhere around 1100 pounds it is a light weight, about 100hp (1098cc), and Stirling Moss drove it over 141 mph around Monza in the late ‘50s.

My list has included past ownership of a Miata, Honda CRX, 1st gen. Insight, 2nd gen. Insight, and a S1 Lotus Europa. Current stable is a Lotus Esprit Turbo and the Westfield Eleven.

Don Z.

I hope the Aptera marketing folks have seen the responses in this thread since they paint a very telling portrait of the past vehicle preferences of current Aptera reservation holders. Here’s a few pics of vehicles that have been mentioned. The white Twike is actually an EV that can be pedaled also.

I owned a first generation Honda CRX Si which had a curb weight of 1900lbs which is very close to the Aptera. And both also share a similar 2 seats up front with cargo in the back hatchback format.

But there the comparison ends as the CRX had a 0.33 coefficient of drag and a 0-60 time of 9.8 seconds. And it was definitely not an EV.

I am surprised that in the two-seater list, a wide range of very successful cars were left off. Our favorite, was a 2002 Porsche Boxster that we drove for over a decade throughout Europe. Small but comfortable interior. Front and back trunks. Great travel machine. For me, Aptera is a two-seat sports car with, possibly, even better performance and roughly half the price. Nowadays, the Boxster/Cayman interior is fancy to the point of being gaudy, so I value the Aptera’s simplicity, closer to our 2002 Porsche. Of course, the best example might be the original Porsche “bathtub” or, my very first car, a MG TD.

Suprised theres not already an Insight owners club on here.

I have been dailying mine for the past 4 years averaging 50-60mpg. got 72mpg out of a 120 mile trip once.. I drive it too hard haha. Sought the citrus green one when I decided I needed an Insight when my commute got crazy.

(2 seater)Also have a Suzuki Cappuccino. Smaller and more efficient than a miata, and with a turbo.

Plan on getting a Reliant Robin/Rialto soon.

Insight, fun, unique, efficient.

Reliant, crazy.

Aptera, Craxy fun unique efficient and fast.

Another EV Gene Corbin Sparrow around 20 years ago

3 wheel 144 volts

https://www.conceptcarz.com/vehicle/z3021/corbin-motors-sparrow.aspx

It’s been a long strange trip. I had a deposit on one of these. Reports of problems with early production examples convinced me to get my deposit back after waiting for about a year for the factory to deliver. The company went bankrupt soon after.

To bring the Corbin story up to date, Dana Myers, an Ohio businessman, bought the assets of Corbin Sparrow once that California-based company went belly up. Mr. Myers is apparently still in business with a more refined version(s) at: https://www.myersev.com/about.html

Have no idea about how good, bad, or indifferent his latest version are in production form. Guess the moral of the story is that it’s not easy to produce a low-volume EV and stay in business.

The Sparrow showroom was right down the street from my second studio in San Francisco. Went in there often looking at them. As is the case for a company with the right idea at a time that wasn’t quite right, Sparrow was one of them. I remember that they trotted out the same “average US commute miles” as does Aptera. They were the google glass of 3 Wheel EV’s.

I ended up buying one. Very dependable but the Pb batteries (optima yellow tops) only had a 30 mile range. If only we had Li battery back then. Had if for about 1.5 years. Sold it when I moved. Fun to drive though.

Just watched a review of the new Morgan three wheeler. Interesting design although it’s more classic is built for customisation and adventure. I hope aptera will be adapted as a leisure vehicle and made more suitable for adventure.

Didn’t find the 3 wheel Trivette from the 1970’s and it’s V-8 powered descendant, the Vigilante on the list. These were very unique, very good handling cars.

This reply was modified 2 years, 4 months ago by Michael Turner.

I converted a 1992 Honda Civic hatchback into a low drag streamliner in 2005, dropping the Cd from .34 to .17 in the process. It got 72 mpg at 70 mph in the summer and averaged mpg in the lower 70’s on my 52 mile commute.

This reply was modified 2 years, 4 months ago by Michael Turner.

Haven’t driven any of these vehicles. BUT I can make a dutch contribution with our own dutch brand The electric carver:

https://carver.earth

and the original carver one:

https://youtu.be/TK4wzBYmTIo

Many years ago(1999) there was a three wheeled version of this vehicle and in that sense it is a spiritual ancestor of the Aptera.

Unfortunately the original carver company went bankrupt. But this electric version has a good chance of becoming very popular.

This reply was modified 2 years, 4 months ago by Elzo Stubbe. Reason: extra info

This reply was modified 2 years, 4 months ago by Elzo Stubbe.

This reply was modified 2 years, 4 months ago by Elzo Stubbe.

On a visit to the GM Tech Center in the early 80s, I saw a pre-production Pontiac Fiero. It was love at first sight. I ordered one as soon as GM opened up ordering. I had the 4 cylinder in that one. It was way underpowered so I bought a 6 cylinder when they became available in the 85 model year. That had adequate power. Lots of fun to drive.

Years later, my job took me to the Lansing, MI plant where the GM EV1s were being made. After we got done with the meeting, we took a tour of the assembly line and got to drive one of the finished EV1s. As homely as it looked, I was surprisingly impressed on how quick it was. Quiet too.

I had a brief infatuation with the Pulse, but never got to drive one.

Now, along comes Aptera. If they make it to production, I will have one.

Shhhhh! Don’t tell the wife.

I got hooked on efficiency because last year I traded in a Nissan Leaf for a Hyundai Ioniq, and it was so strange that the Ioniq had a smaller battery but 30 miles more range, and this meant I had to charge a lot less often, straight away I went 2 months without using a public charging point, and it meant I charged far faster (3 times faster on home charging point). And I’d done all that with less battery! It really hammered home how life-changing efficiency can be.

Still enjoying my Solectria Force. Been a good dependable EV. Has all the things, 3 phase ac induction motor, regenerative brakes, air conditioning. In the early ‘90s Solectria had a couple cool prototypes, the Flash and the Lightspeed. Both had 250 watts of solar built in. The 3 wheeled Flash was the most efficient at 60 Wh/mile. They make my Force seem like an energy hog at 190 Wh/mi.

Bought a brand new 2000 Honda Insight in 2000; 5 speed. Best car I’ve ever owned and wish they still made it with some very minor updates; blue tooth, keyless entry, back up camera, etc. Had to sell it when wifey and I started kicking out kids. Once drove it from Cincinnati to Cleveland round trip (500 miles) and averaged 75 miles to a gallon. With the federal tax credit I paid somewhere around $15,000.00

Gull wing doors are awesome. I had a Bradley GT2 on a 69 Vw chassis. It had the gull wing door and was like driving around in a terrarium. You just about baked in the sun all the time

For me

The 2 Seater Gene

84 Rx-7 (2300 lbs) & 93 Rx-7 (2800 lbs)

The EV Gene

13 Nissan Leaf (bought in Oct 2020)

I’ve had multiple 2 seaters

Had: Bradley GT2, invader GT, 75 MGB , 79 MGB

85 Bertone X1/9 , 87 Bertone X1/9, 69 Datsun 1600

Have: 1952 MG-TD

Page 1 of 3

Log In to Reply

Log in or register to reply.

Start of Discussion

0 of 0 replies

Now