AMSTERDAM — Nortek Security & Control (NSC) announces the release of the Elan 8.3 software update, which features expanded support for the growing line of Elan surveillance cameras, plus advanced IntelliVision video analytics. The update is making its debut here at Integrated Systems Europe (ISE), a major trade show for A/V and systems integrators.

“Elan 8.3 is our latest software that makes the smart home or business more intuitive and intelligent, and provides dealers and end-user customers with more customization options,” says NSC director of software product management Tom McKeon. “With every update, we make it easier to access, control and automate more subsystems within the installation and, in doing so, we continue to equip our dealers with the most seamless control platform to sell to their customers.”

The latest update offers support for the new line of Elan surveillance cameras, which employs new advanced object detection by NSC subsidiary IntelliVision to minimize false positive alerts. NSC acquired IntelliVision last year.

Through 8.3, new Elan surveillance configuration and recording options are now available to the end user in the Viewer tab. Users can set a recording schedule and choose between constant, motion only, or custom modes.

The Custom mode schedule can be created and quickly applied to all channels, and all users can set, clear and customize motion areas and sensitivity with motion-only and weighted recording support. Users can also employ a privacy mask password protection on per-user basis with up to four regions per camera, and add link recording and privacy options to system mode.

Additionally, dealers can now optionally set static IP addresses for NVR and cameras in the Discover tab with a new preview window when adding camera to assist with identification and renaming. The update also offers improved surveillance footage timeline loading, and progressive loading for more responsive local and remote playback, according to the company.

With the 8.3 updated, Elan now also communicates directly with the 2GIG Vario hybrid wired/wireless security panel. For pool and spa control, Pentair IntelliCenter support has been added.

The Sonos driver updates enable line-in support for players as well as static zones for home theater players and optical-in selection. A new port scan & tunnel feature allows the Discovery tab to scan a local network for open http port (80) and provide access to device configuration pages. A device status feature allows dealers to check device status in real-time with color coding shown in the Configurator tab.