Pilar Pallete is a former Peruvian actress and third wife of the American film star John Wayne.

Pilar was born into an upper class family, the daughter of a Peruvian senator. She married and divorced professional big-game hunter Richard Weldy.

She met John Wayne, 29 years her senior, in Lima, Peru in 1953, while he was scouting locations for ”The Alamo." In 1953, Pilar came to Los Angeles to dub a film in English, when she ran into John Wayne for the second time. A year later on November 1, 1954, they married in Kona, Hawaii, the same very day as Wayne's divorce became final. Pilar retired from her motion picture career to be a wife and mother to their three children: Aissa, Ethan, and Marisa. During the next ten years of their marriage, they traveled extensively, usually on location for John Wayne's many films. In 1965, they moved to Newport Beach, California. She and Wayne separated in 1976. She rented a studio inside the Fernleaf Courtyard, in Corona Del Mar, California. She would entertain her clients outdoors with coffee and finger sandwiches and found herself, one year later, with a full-time restaurant. After a long and painful illness, John Wayne died on June 11, 1979.

In 1998, Pilar married Jesse Upchurch, a travel company executive. Pilar has created among other works of art, a collection of still nature and beautiful ladies, Belly Dancers called "Glamour Girls", as well as group images from the Hollywood world.

---

From her English Wikipedia page:

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pilar_Pallete

Pilar Pallete (Paita, Peru September 3, 1928) is a former Peruvian actress and third wife of the American film star John Wayne.

Pilar was born into an upper-class family, the daughter of a Peruvian senator in the Paita Port (Northern of Peru). She married and divorced professional big-game hunter Richard Weldy.[1]

She met John Wayne, 21 years her senior, in Lima, Peru, in 1953, while still married to Richard Weldy . Wayne was in Peru scouting locations for ”The Alamo."[2] In 1953, Pilar came to Los Angeles to dub a film in English, when she ran into John Wayne for the second time. A year later on November 1, 1954,[2] they married in Kona, Hawaii, the very same day Wayne's divorce became final.

Pilar retired from her motion picture career to be a wife and mother to their three children: Aissa, Ethan and Marisa.

During the next ten years of their marriage, they traveled extensively, usually on location for John Wayne's many films. In 1965, they moved to Newport Beach, California. She rented a studio inside the Fernleaf Courtyard, in Corona Del Mar, California where she would entertain her clients outdoors with coffee and finger sandwiches and found herself, one year later, with a full-time restaurant.

Pilar has created among other works of art, a collection of still nature and beautiful ladies, Belly Dancers called "Glamour Girls", as well as group images from the Hollywood world.

In 1973, she and Wayne separated and he died of stomach cancer on June 11, 1979.

In 1984 she married Stephen Stewart, a municipal court judge. They were later divorced.

In 1998, Pilar married Jesse Upchurch, a travel company executive.

References

1. Orange Coast Magazine. Books.google.com. Retrieved 2012-05-22.

2. "Interview - John Wayne on Women, Marriage, and Family". Emanuellevy.com. Retrieved 2012-05-22.

External links

Pilar Pallete at the Internet Movie Database

Living Palette is the 3rd Wife (abt.1956?-1979?) of John Wayne