The first time Andrew Woo asked Angela Pan for her phone number, following a brief encounter at a party, Angela said no. Not because she didn’t like the Bahamas-born app developer, with whom she felt an instant connection, but because she thought she was being cute by playing hard to get. “However, he didn’t think it was so cute, and he walked away,” says Angela, a landscape and nature photographer.

As fate would have it, the two ran into each other again a few months later, and by that point Angela had learned her lesson; she didn’t hesitate to share her contact information. A first date at Coastal Flats quickly blossomed into a relationship that grew over six years, until Andrew made it official with an over-the-top romantic hot air balloon proposal.

Flash-forward to their fall wedding nine months later, when the fashionable couple tied the knot in a modern, family-oriented wedding at Saint James Catholic Church. Their Shih Tzu, Frankenstein LeBron WooPan, was the ring bearer at the ceremony, and he almost stole the show. “Frankie started smelling the flower petals, sort of like how he always smells plants during his daily walks. It was cute, but he slowed down the ceremony,” says Angela.

An intimate reception at the W Hotel followed. Stunning arrangements of purple and blue flowers surrounded the elegantly decorated room, and slideshows of photographs of the couple made for plenty of sentimental moments. After the newlyweds’ first dance to Alicia Keys’s “No One,” the bridal party surprised the couple with a dance of their own. “My bridesmaids reenacted the story of how Andrew and I met through dance and song selections. Everybody loved it!” says Angela, of the fun personal touch. The night ended on a sweet note with a floral white chocolate ganache and chocolate fudge cake.

Details:

Photographer: Nat Wongsaroj Photography

Ceremony Venue: Saint James Catholic Church

Venue/Caterers: W Hotel Washington, DC

Bride’s Gown: Demetrios

Groom’s Tux: Hugo Boss

Hair/Makeup: JK Styled

Event Coordinator/Florist: Modny Events

Cake Baker: Fancy Cakes by Leslie

Videographer: Dolce Studio Films

Music/Entertainment: DJ Hi Def

Invitations: Wedding Paper Divas

Honeymoon Spot: Hawaii

Where They Currently Live: Falls Church, VA