The city said goodbye yesterday to Chan Hung-lit, the 66-year-old TVB actor who died in hospital last month after falling ill during shooting of the popular comedy series Off Pedder.

After a service at the Universal Funeral Parlour in Hung Hom, relatives, colleagues and members of the public lined up at the funeral hall to pay their last respects to Chan. Among them were actors, actresses and behind-the-scenes crew of Off Pedder.

TVB's senior staff paid their last respects to him during a vigil held on Monday.

Hundreds of wreaths were placed at the funeral hall, including from Chan's first wife, Taiwanese star Angela Pan Yin-Tze and local actors and actresses.

Chan's second wife, Hsu Shih Jong, and their daughter and son wept as TVB staff carried Chan's coffin to the hearse, which drove away amid drizzle to the Cape Collinson Crematorium in Chai Wan for cremation. Chan's family will take the ashes to Taiwan, where most of them now live.

Daughter Tammy Chan Ping-hang, 22, said she missed her father 'so much'. 'There is no way to replace my daddy in my heart. [His] sudden departure was a shock to us. I miss everything about him. When we went out, he would hold my hand whether we were shopping or out for a walk. We talked to each other all the time about schoolwork and daily life. I promise daddy I will study hard and take care of my mother and brother.'

TVB colleague Queenie Chu Wai-man said Chan was a good colleague. 'He was a cheerful person. He always thought positively. He was full of energy. He was professional and took care of his colleagues,' she said.

On November 24, Chan complained of chest pain when he was in the make-up room at the station's headquarters, TVB City in Tseung Kwan O, at 4.30pm. He was taken to Tseung Kwan O Hospital, where he died at 7.11pm.

Chan had been filming during the day and fell ill while preparing to change for another scene. Chan, a major supporting actor in the series Off Pedder, played wealthy and powerful company president Yim Hei.

One of his fans, Cheng Fat-ming, 53, said he asked for a day off yesterday to pay his last respects to Chan. 'I admired him acting 'villains' in the films. I have watched most of the films he shot,' he said.

Tsang Sing-ming, TVB's external affairs deputy controller, said Off Pedder episodes featuring Chan might run until next month, when the script would explain that Chan's character had died of a heart attack.

Chan was born to a wealthy family in Shanghai on June 7, 1943. He joined Shaw Brothers in 1962 and earned fame with impressive performances as villains during the 1960s and 1970s.

He also directed a number of films during the 1970s with his production company. He joined TVB in 1995, left in 1996, and rejoined the station in 2003. He had been in more than 20 drama series productions from TVB, including the popular The Gem of Life and Off Pedder in recent years.