During his four-decade feature film career, Fred Astaire danced with Ginger Rogers, Leslie Caron, Rita Hayworth, Cyd Charisse, Eleanor Powell and Vera-Ellen. But did you know that he once cut a rug with award-winning actor Charles Durning? Coincidentally, Durning taught ballroom dancing at the Fred Astaire Dance Studio in New York early in his career.

According to the late Burt Reynolds in an interview I did with him a year ago for the Los Angeles Times, Astaire and Durning met at one of his parties several decades before. Astaire walked over to Durning and asked if he would dance with him, “And he said ‘yes’,” recalled Reynolds, who got misty-eyed at the memory. “And when they started to dance everybody stopped. The room got quiet and they danced around the room and kept dancing.”

Astaire was all about the joy. The sophisticated Art Deco, funny and romantic musicals he made with Rogers at RKO from 1933-1939—including THE GAY DIVORCEE (‘34), TOP HAT (‘35) and SWING TIME (’36)—are as sparkling, delightful and joyful as they were over 80 years ago. (The duo reunited for 1949’s Technicolor THE BARKLEYS OF BROADWAY.)

There are Astaire fans who maintain that Rogers was his best partner. In fact, the late former Gov. of Texas Ann Richards famously proclaimed: “After all, Ginger Rogers did everything that Fred Astaire did. She just did it backwards and in high heels.”

However, I cast my vote for Barrie Chase, who appeared in the chorus of the 1957 Astaire-Charisse musical SILK STOCKINGS and was Astaire’s leading lady in his Emmy Award-winning specials “An Evening with Fred Astaire,” “Another Evening with Fred Astaire” and “Astaire Time.”

The leggy Chase brought a playfulness and sexiness out of Astaire, especially in the “St. James Infirmary” number in the first special and in the “Sophisticated Lady” sequence in the second show in which Astaire wears a Mad magazine Alfred E. Neuman mask.

Of his post-Rogers movies, 1942’s YOU WERE NEVER LOVELIER was the second and best of the two films he made with Hayworth, whom he would later say was his favorite on-screen partner and the most natural dancer he had worked with since his sister Adele. And just as in their first film, YOU’LL NEVER GET RICH (‘41), Hayworth blossoms as a dancer and actress working with Astaire and they get their jive on with “The Shorty George.”

Astaire and Charisse are perfection together in the 1953 Vincente Minnelli classic musical THE BAND WAGON, starring Astaire as a washed-up film musical star who attempts a comeback in an artsy and awful Broadway musical. Their two best numbers are the poetic, quiet and sexy “Dancing in the Dark” and the athletic, breathtaking Mickey Spillane spoof “The Girl Hunt,” both of which were choreographed by the great Michael Kidd.

Astaire brings out the best in Eleanor Powell, MGM’s premiere tap dancer of the era in 1940’s BROADWAY MELODY OF 1940. Though Powell usually performed solo in her musicals, this hit gave her a chance to tap-tap-tap with Astaire. Though it’s impossible to remember the plot of the movie, it’s hard to forget their gorgeous routine to Cole Porter’s “Begin the Beguine.” “Miss Powell blends in beautifully with the inexorably logical Astaire patterns,” Bosley Crowther wrote in his 1940 New York Times review, “especially in the most ambitious number, in which Mr. Porter’s already familiar song “Begin the Beguine,” is elaborately translated into dancer terms.”

The lithe, athletic and graceful Vera-Ellen, who came into her own opposite Gene Kelly in ON THE TOWN (‘49) was Astaire’s leading lady in THREE LITTLE WORDS, a better-than-average 1950 bio-pic about composers Bert Kalmar (Astaire) and Harry Ruby (Red Skelton). Though Kelly and Astaire were vastly different dancers, Vera-Ellen proved that she could handle any type of style of dance or dancers with THREE LITTLE WORDS.

According to Andrew Pragasam on the web site The Spinning Image, Vera-Ellen “proves to be a sprightly partner for the indefatigable Astaire. Their “Life at Home with Mr. and Mrs. Hoofer” routine is delightfully off the wall.”

Astaire had retired by the time he reteamed with Judy Garland in the beloved 1948 musical EASTER PARADE. Gene Kelly, who had starred with Garland in his film debut FOR ME AND MY GAL (’42) and THE PIRATE (‘48), was originally cast but broke his ankle, which lured Astaire out of a two-year retirement to replace him.

Astaire and Garland are charming together on screen and reportedly had a good off-screen relationship. Their great number was Irving Berlin’s fun, indelible “A Couple of Swells” in which they seem to be having a field day performing the number dressed as hobos. The routine became one of Garland’s signature moments in her concerts.