Childhood friends Erlend Øye and Eirik Glambek Bøe made their musical debut performing a comedic rap about one of their teachers during their time in school. By the time they were 16, the pair had founded and played in the indie-folk group Skog alongside other friends, and released the EP “Tom Tids Tale”. Following the disbandment of Skog, Øye and Bøe formed Kings of Convenience and began spreading their music at European festivals during the summer of 1999.

Before long the duo caught the attention of American label Kindercore, and move to London, UK to record and release their debut album “Quiet Is the New Loud” in 2001. Produced by Coldplay producer Ken Nelson, the album earned positive reviews from critics, and even led to a small movement of musicians in the pop underground genre lending its name. The album topped the charts in Norway, charted at No. 72 in the UK, and No. 103 in France. In October 2001 Kings of Convenience issued a remix album entitled “Versus”, featuring remixes of their debut by the likes of Röyksopp, Four Tet, and Andy Votel.

Following the release the band took an unannounced hiatus, with Øye moving to Berlin and focusing on solo material. The guitarist and singer's solo album “Unrest”, was released in 2003, earning more than favourable reviews from the musical press, with notably all songs recorded in a different city. Also around this time Øye founded the side-project The Whitest Boy Alive – a dance music outfit – releasing “Dreams” in 2006 and “Rules” in 2009.

Fans were kept waiting until 2004 for Kings of Convenience to return, issuing the album “Riot on an Empty Street” in June of that year. Earning stronger reviews than its predecessors the album peaked at No. 2 in Norway, No. 3 in Italy, and No. 49 in the UK. Despite rumours that the band were breaking up, Kings of Convenience embarked on a worldwide tour in January 2008 including large parts of Europe, North America and Latin America. The full-length “Declaration of Dependence” was subsequently announced and released in October 2009. Led by the singles “Mrs Cold” and “Boat Behind” the album charted well in Norway, Italy, Sweden and on the U.S. Heatseekers chart. The acoustic album “Kings of Convenience’s Live Acoustic Sessions” followed in 2010, recorded in Milan, Italy in 2009.