The Signs Are Everywhere…

Rituals: Book of Skog, from a UK-based indie studio Curioso Games, is a result of an exploratory journey to create an immersive puzzle game with a horror twist. Differing from the playful aesthetics of traditional, casual puzzle games, Rituals is an unpredictable display of moody visuals, unsettling effects and captivating original music.

Even the simplest of puzzles can become a challenge in these conditions and Rituals thrives on surprising its players. While the scary themes make the game unsuitable for children, the accessible mechanics and atmospheric setting make for a fun experience even for those with no prior knowledge of mobile gaming.

In the game, players trek across Skog, performing rites by matching symbols to cleanse an area of evil that comes in many guises. From mysterious wardens to cursed artifacts, there are various challenges and jumpy surprises hiding all around these woods.

RITUALS: BOOK OF SKOG TEXT

SKOG is a secluded forest area, which locals have for centuries believed to be gripped by an ancient dark spirit. Every year thousands trek to SKOG in the hope of uncovering its mystery. Equipped only with the ‘Book of SKOG’ and amulets, how far will you go and what will you find?

EXPLORE THE MYSTERY OF SKOG

Enveloped in a moody mist and local folk tales, Skog puts on a haunting display that has attracted many brave travellers to explore what lies beneath. Accompanied by the pages of the local guide ‘Book of Skog’, you will embark on a scary journey across the vast woodlands, performing rites and conquering evil.

UNIQUE HORROR PUZZLE

Rituals: Book of Skog employs a sliding match puzzle mechanic, where you sequence amulets with matching symbols on the board to perform rites. This is no easy feat, as even simplest tasks become a challenge in an unsettling atmosphere with an unrelenting evil looking to ruin your play.

PERFECT ANCIENT RITES

With easy to learn, hard to master rituals, you will have to learn to plan your moves, conjure special amulets and blast your way free from the darkness. From timed challenges to limited moves, Skog has many spooky modes to throw you off.

PURGE UNPREDICTABLE EVIL

Evil works in mysterious ways and forms in Skog and you must be able to hold your nerve and stay focused to the task at hand. By possessing artifacts left behind by travellers lost, evil will try to shock you, distract you and even haunt you.

IMMERSIVE FREE TO PLAY MOBILE EXPERIENCE

With captivating illustration visuals, effects and a haunting soundtrack, Rituals: Book of Skog is a fully immersive horror game, best experienced with headphones on.

Rituals: Book of Skog is available now for FREE on the Apple App Store and Google Play.

*For the best gaming experience, players are advised to plug in their headphones and turn off the lights. *

**WARNING: This game contains flashing lights and jump scares. **

Start playing today by getting the game at:

Universal (device detection)

Apple App Store for iPhone, iPad (iOS)

Google Play (Android)

If you enjoy the game, make sure to check out the Rituals: Book of Skog Soundtrack, which is now out on Spotify, Apple Music, iTunes, Amazon Music, Deezer and Tidal.