Talking about soccer, the country has in the recent past experienced a rise in the number of football clubs, with some producing notable players that in notable regional and international football clubs. In this piece, you will get to know more about some of the notable professional soccer teams in the country.

Auckland City Football Club

This is a professional football club found in the suburbs of Sandringham in Auckland NZ. The team these days takes part in the ISPS Handa Premiership. This is a high-level of domestic football in the country. They have over time established themselves as a major force in not only New Zealand but also Oceania for having won up to seven league titles and up to nine OFC Championship League titles since it was formed. Auckland City Football Club was formed in 2004.

Southern United Football Club

This team was previously known as Otago United football club. It is based in Dunedin New Zealand. The team was established in 2004, and they currently hold their home games in Caledonian Ground as well as Forsyth Barr Stadium.

Team Wellington

This one is another New Zealand’s professional football team that is currently based in Miramar suburbs in Wellington, New Zealand. The team competes in the ISPS Handa Premiership. It has over time been one of the most successful soccer clubs in the country since it was established in 2004. They have won the league championship twice and also have won the FC Champions League in 2018. They play their home games at David Farrington Park.

Hamilton Wanderers association football Club

This is one of New Zealand's semi-professional football team that hails from Hamilton, New Zealand. The team currently takes part in the ISPS Handa Premiership. It is famous for their youth day academy where players such as the New Zealand international Marco Rojas and Chris Wood are graduates. The club joined the New Zealand football championship in 2016 after Waikato club WaiBOP United was dissolved. They started their first season beating Southern United 1-0 by a goal from Tom Davis. They also beat Eastern Suburbs four goals.

Hawke's Bay United

This is an association football club found in Napier, New Zealand. The team takes part in the ISPS Handa Premiership. This is a semi-professional franchise-based confederation that runs independently of the winter club season. The local winter clubs are responsible for providing the player pool for every franchise. The clubs home stadium is Bluewater Stadium.

Tasman United