Learn German with news, feature articles and more

Every month the magazine provides learners of the German language with interesting texts on current topics about life in Germany, Austria and Switzerland. The audio trainer and the workbook help you to improve your German language skills even more.

Journalism meets language learning: the magazine

With every new issue, Deutsch perfekt magazine provides interesting insights into live in the German-speaking countries: interviews, news stories, society features, articles on history and culture, practical tips for living in Germany... At the same time, the language learning magazine makes room for explanations of the German grammar, useful vocabulary and phrases and much more.

Learn German with texts on three language levels

All of the German texts featured in Deutsch perfekt are written according to clearly defined language level. This enables beginners and more advanced learners to choose the level that suits them. The language levels are oriented on the Common European Framework of Reference for Languages:

Easy (A2): Texts for beginners with basic German knowledge

Intermediate (B1): Intermediate-level texts (ideal for preparing for German tests such as the Goethe certificate B1, the ösd certificate B1 and Zertifikat Deutsch / telc Deutsch (B1))

Advanced (B2 and higher): Texts for advanced learners of the German language

Word explanations for simplified reading

In each issue of Deutsch perfekt you will find explanations for around 750 German words, expressions and idioms you might not have learnt yet. The words are described in simple German and the explanations correspond to the language level used in the text. They are conveniently located next to the articles. The explanations also include information about the pronunciation, the plural form as well as regional or country-specific differences. Here is an example:

The word explanations not only help you with understanding the articles but are a great way to learn German words that you might not have heard before.

The topics featured in our German learning magazine

More than 20 editors, writers and correspondents are constantly on the lookout for topics that are best suited for Deutsch perfekt.

The magazine offers learners of German a mix of short articles and longer news stories, interesting interviews and controversial discussions, travel recommendations and practical tips for work, university and everyday conversations. Economics, career, politics, culture, entertainment, sports, tourism and everyday life in Germany – not forgetting Austria and Switzerland – are all featured in Deutsch perfekt.

As often as possible, the magazine focuses on people: On celebrities and experts as well as “regular” people who have something special to say about a particular topic. All of the Deutsch perfekt issues also cover topics from a foreigner’s perspective, looking at Germany “from the outside”.

Deutsch perfekt helps you to learn more about what is important in Germany, Austria and Switzerland, the locals’ wishes, fears and dreams, and what they are talking about.

Exercises for learning German grammar, vocabulary and idioms

Each month learners find explanations and exercises on German grammar, vocabulary, style and idioms as well as other German language phenomena on the approx. 15 pages of Deutsch perfekt magazine. The exercises correspond to the content of the texts, and there are German dialogues, sample texts, vocabulary lists and reading comprehension tests for the readers to discover.

Learn German with our flash cards

From the flash cards you will learn important linguistic details such as German vocabulary and idioms for specific situations. They offer tips and examples for better communicating in everyday life and on the job. The content of the cards is summed up in a compact format, which makes them easy to archive.

Additional exercises on German grammar, vocabulary and more

You will find even more exercises in our exercise booklet. It is a great tool to learn German vocabulary and grammar as well as practise topics featured in the magazine. Each month additional exercises help to improve your spelling as well as your reading and listening comprehension.

Learn to understand German with the audio trainer

Would you like to practice your listening comprehension and improve your pronunciation? Our audio trainer makes it possible. Enjoy over an hour of German listening practice with audio texts, dialogues and exercises on CD or to download. Many of the tracks correspond to the content of the magazine, and there is a focus topic with exercises for beginners, intermediate and advanced learners featured each month.

In addition to listening comprehension and pronunciation, the audio trainer also includes content to practice and learn German vocabulary, grammar and phonetics.

Learn German by app

Improve your German language skills on the go: The Deutsch perfekt app combines the magazine and the audio trainer in an app for effortless learning experience.

Improve your German online with deutsch-perfekt.com

Our website provides a selection of German texts, exercises and audio samples from the Deutsch perfekt products. We are also offering additional content for learning German.

Who is behind Deutsch perfekt?

ZEIT SPRACHEN

Deutsch perfekt magazine is published by ZEIT SPRACHEN. Since 1981 the German publishing house has been combining journalism with language training. In addition to Deutsch perfekt, the following language learning publications by the ZEIT SPRACHEN publishing house are also available:

Spotlight (English)

Business Spotlight (Business English)

ADESSO (Italian)

ECOS (Spanish)

écoute (French)

The editorial team of Deutsch perfekt

The editorial team of Deutsch perfekt is a close-knit collaboration of professional and seasoned learning experts for “German as a foreign language” (DaF).

The journalists in our editorial team and our writers have all worked – or are still working – for established German newspapers or broadcasting stations, including:

Die Zeit

Süddeutsche Zeitung

Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung

Berliner Zeitung

Westdeutscher Rundfunk

Norddeutscher Rundfunk

Deutschlandradio

Deutsche Welle

Their expertise is a valuable asset to ensure accurate research and high-quality texts.

Our language editors are experienced with all levels of German language teaching in Germany and abroad. They have, for example, given German courses and lessons at:

Goethe-Institute

adult education centres

universities

private language schools

employee training in companies

A further team of editorial employees creates around 750 word explanations (German-German) and translations into seven languages (for a special section) each month. In addition, specialist writers are in charge of the magazine supplements, the exercise booklet (for intensive learners) and Deutsch perfekt im Unterricht (for teachers and instructors).

Our editorial team also includes experts in the fields of photo editing, design/layout, illustration, production, internet and recording studio.

Who are the readers of Deutsch perfekt?

Readers from over 100 countries enjoy Deutsch perfekt. To all of them the German language is important. To many of them because they learn German and they love the language. Some of them love someone who speaks German. Or they learn German for work and want to improve. Many of the readers want to live in Germany, Austria or Switzerland. Others are already there and wish to communicate more easily with their neighbours and co-workers. Therefore, it’s not surprising that Deutsch perfekt is among the three most popular German newspapers and magazines at Goethe-Institute libraries all over the world, next to the news magazine Der Spiegel and the weekly newspaper Die Zeit.

Deutsch perfekt for teachers

Deutsch perfekt is not only great to learn German from home. The magazine, the audio trainer and the workbook are also perfect for German courses.

The most important benefits of Deutsch perfekt for German courses and as additional learning aid:

Authentic journalistic magazine texts with current topics: perfect for discussions on society, culture and geography in your German lessons

Ideal mix of text types (descriptive texts, interviews, first-person narratives, etc.) and lengths (from short articles to longer news stories)

Three language levels in accordance with the Common European Framework of Reference for Languages

German word explanations corresponding to the language level as a motivation for learners – making Deutsch perfekt ideal to use in order to learn German around the world

Free teacher’s edition “Deutsch perfekt im Unterricht” for your German lessons: Take advantage of the exercises and templates in the magazine supplement based on the texts from that month’s issue. Teachers and instructors receiving the magazine by post will get the teacher’s edition as a printed version. Subscribers to the digital edition (emagazine) will receive the teacher’s edition to download.

Questions and answers

Do you have any questions? Here you will find answers to the most important questions asked by our readers.