Our lady of Ransom Church

The Kanyakumari Parish almost coincides with the civil village of Kanyakumari. Archeological evidences suggest that St. Thomas, a disciple of Jesus Christ visited this soil. In 1542 St. Francis Xavier came here. In 1862, Kanyakumari became a separate parish. In 1914 the church was constructed. The length of the Church is 153 feet, breath 53 feet and height is 153 feet. All these depict the breads of the Holy Rosary. The parish has nearly 13,000 people organized into 86 Basic Christian Communities.

History of Kanyakumari Parish

Kanyakumari village is situated in the District of Kanyakumari which is the southern most part of the Indian subcontinent. The Kanyakumari Parish almost coincides with the civil village of Kanyakumari. It is closely associated with the mainstream Catholic faith in India.

There were archeological evidences suggesting that St. Thomas, one of the twelve disciples of Jesus Christ visited this soil. The tomb stones unearthed at Kumari Muttom, near Kanyakumari contain evidences to show that Catholics were living there for many centuries. The tomb stones dated 1496 contain the edict of the local ruler granting tax exemptions to the residents of Kumari Muttom and authorizing levy of a cess from the fishermen in Kumari Muttom. The aggregate income thus generated had to be used to keep the lights of the church burning.

The second inscription dated 1526 AD reads “on the twentieth day of the moth of Panguni king Siraval Muttambiranar was pleased to order Muttakangan and Illayakangan and others among the subjects living at the place of Muttom. We having been pleased to put a stop to riots, quarrels, injustice, tyranny, blackmail and confiscations of fish, they shall here after live here as in an asylum for the oppressed”.

In 1542 when St. Francis Xavier came to Cape Comerin (Kanyakumari) he was delighted to find ‘Our Lady of Delights Grotto’, at Kanyakumari. Then it became a center for mission activities of the Jesuits from Thoothoor to Ramanathapuram. It is believed that Our Lady of Delights Grotto, in which St. Francis Xavier worshiped, later became the church of Our Lady of Ransom. Our Lady of Ransom is the Patron of the congregation in Spain which redeemed the Christians from the Muslim invasion in the year 1218. The people of Kanyakumari were delighted to combine the name Ransom with Delight and call their patron as Alangara Upakara Matha. The wooden alter elegantly depicts the artistic Roman Art. This church remains part and parcel of the new church. The foundation stone for the new church was laid on 31st May 1900 by Rev. Fr. John Consolvez. Mr. Pakiam Pillai of the Vadakkankulam was the architect of the new church. It is the model of ancient Gothic Art and culture. The length of the new Church is 153 feet, breath 53 feet and height is 153 feet. All these depict the breads of the Holy Rosary.

In 1862 Kanyakumari was established as a separate parish and many eminent priests have served as parish priests of the church. In 1914 Msgr. Vincent Fdo celebrated the First Mass in the newly built Church. In 1956 Rev. Fr. Josaphath Maria completed the front elevation and the pinnacles. In 2006 the parish celebrated the golden jubilee of the erection of the golden cross and 106th year of laying foundation of the church.

At present Kanyakumari parish has 2,850 Catholic families, which are organised into 88 Basic Christian Communities. The total Number of the Catholics amounts to 12,839. There are 21 pious associations. The parish established an elementary school in the year 1882 and now 540 children are studying in the vernacular language. The parish has a Higher Secondary School established in the year 1921, where 1350 students are studying.

The spiritual life of the parishioners is well attended too under the able leadership of the parish priest. The co-pastors and a few guest priests constantly render spiritual services to the people. The Sunday Catechism is well organized, nearly 800 children attend the Sunday Catechism.

Tsunami which struck the coastal villages of Tamil Nadu on 26th December 2004 had great impact on Kanyakumari village too. Thanks to the Non Governmental Organisations (NGOs), Religious Organizations, other establishments and philanthropists for their great yeomen services in relief and rehabilitation of the tsunami affected people. A remarkable achievement is nearly 750 houses for the poor fishermen of Kanyakumari were established in addition to the support extended to reestablish their sources of livelihood.

The local catholic church at Kanyakumari is growing day by day in the love of Christ and ever pray for the blessings of our Lord Jesus Christ through the interceding of Alangara Upakara Matha.

History of the Flag Mast:

In 1917 a foreign merchant ship got struck to the sand shore of Leepuram, Kanyakumari. The strenuous efforts of the crew and other experts to restore it did not help them. Hence they decided to abandon the ship and went in for an auction.

One Mr. Kayathan Villavarayan a merchant from Tuticorin paid the highest bid and assumed the ownership of the abandoned ship. He had donated the iron mast to Our Lady of Ransom Church, Kanyakumari. The kattumarams of Kanyakumari were brought to Leepuram to take the mast to Kanyakumari. It is said that as soon as the mast was loaded on the kattumarams, the mast together with the kattaumarams sunk into the sea water. After a few minutes, the kattumarams and the mast began to float. The bye standers were astonished to see the grace of Our Lady of Ransom. Then they took the mast to Kanyakumari by road.

When the mast was taken to the church yard, another major difficulty was faced regarding the erection of the mast. They consulted the experts and engineers and came to the decision of inserting it into a hole cut out of a large stone. The stone cutters were approached and they searched for such a huge stone that could serve this particular purpose. In spite of rigorous search, they could not find out any suitable stone. It is believed that Our Lady of Ransom appeared to a stone cutter in dream and indicated the location of a suitable stone. The stone cutter accompanied by the people of Kanyakumari reached the location indicated and they were surprised to see a big stone, befitting the purpose.

They took the stone, made a bore hole and inserted the mast into it. To make the fitting more concrete and long lasting, they poured molted led and erected the mast.

Feast of Our Lady and the Golden Car Procession

Every year the feast of our Lady of Ransom is celebrated for 10 days in the month of December. The feast of Our Lady of Ransom begins with the flag hoisting on the following Friday immediately after the feast of St. Francis Xavier, Kottar which falls on 3rd of December. The first day of the feast begins with the flag hoisting. During the festivals, every day morning festival mass is celebrated and in the evening there will be benediction with special prayers and preaching. The eight day evening Corpus Christi Procession is held with due decorum. The ninth day evening special vespers and celebrations are held. The culmination of the feast is the golden car procession. There are two golden cars which are taken on the 9th and 10th days of the feasts. Our Lady of delight is taken in procession in the 1st car, which was made in the year 1798. St. Joseph, the spouse of Mary is taken in procession in the 2nd car, which was made in the year 1833. Like any other coastal village of Kottar diocese, the festival is celebrated with full spirit and all pomp and glory.

Mass & Prayer

Sunday: Holy Mass 5.30 am, 7.00 am and 4.00 pm

Week days: Holy Mass 6.15 am

First Friday:

Rosary 6.30 pm

One hour Adoration from 7.00 to 8.00 pm

First Saturday:

Rosary 6 pm

Holy Mass 6.30 pm

Healing Prayers 7.30 pm

Benediction 8 pm

All other Saturdays:

Rosary 6 pm

Holy Mass 6.30 pm

Healing Prayers 7.30 pm

Contact:

Our lady of Ransom church

Kanyakumari 629702

Tel: 04652-246323, 246295

For more information please visit: www.ransomchurchkanyakumari.org

Source: http://ransomchurchkanyakumari.org/