Our Lady of Ransom Shrine

Tourist attraction • Catholic church

One of the Best Places To Visits in Kanyakumari

Address

Church Rd, Kanniyakumari, Tamil Nadu 629702, India

Contact

+91 4652 246 323

Rating on Google Maps

4.60 (1.9K reviews)

Working Hours

Sunday: 5 am to 6:30 pm

Monday: 5 am to 6:30 pm

Tuesday: 5 am to 6:30 pm

Wednesday: 5 am to 6:30 pm

Thursday: 5 am to 6:30 pm

Friday: 5 am to 6:30 pm

Saturday: 5 am to 6:30 pm

Featured Reviews

Frequently mentioned in reviews: church (74) Kanyakumari (38) Church (28) Lady (26) Ransom (22) visit (19) beach (15) beautiful (14) white (14) peaceful (12)

Reviews are sorted by relevance, prioritizing the most helpful and insightful feedback at the top for easier reference.

5/5 Dr Ben S. 1 year ago on Google • 138 reviews

A beautiful Christian Catholic Church located very close to the beach in scenic Kanyakumari. Its majesty and beauty are very ancient. It is a powerful Christian Catholic Church. People from many parts of the world come here for prayers. Its doors are always open for prayer. The beauty of this Catholic Church is stunning. This Catholic Church is very beautifully designed. Its towers and infrastructure are elegantly designed and Brahmi locks. People used to come here for prayers at all times. Especially in the evenings, people pass by in groups, families and individuals to sit and pray in this church. There is always a peaceful atmosphere inside this church. The people there maintain this church and its surrounding areas with beauty, neatness and dignity...

7 people found this review helpful 👍

4/5 Saurav C. 4 months ago on Google • 632 reviews

Beautiful white Church, the surroundings are very neat. It's near the railway station.

1 person found this review helpful 👍

4/5 Ajin T V. 7 months ago on Google • 34 reviews

Our Lady of Ransom Church is a Catholic church located South of India in Tamil Nadu, Kanyakumari dedication to Mother Mary. In 1542 when St. Francis Xavier came to Cape Comerin (Kanyakumari) he found 'Our Lady of Delights Grotto' here. It is believed that Our Lady of Delights Grotto later became the church of Our Lady of Ransom. It is a amazing white colour catholic church is beautifully built with good infrastructure. It's very close to the scenic beach and Sun Rise view point Vivekananda Memorial, Kanyakumari. The Church is well maintained and very peaceful place for prayer. Timing is 5 am to 6.30 pm. Near by there is a CBSE school

4 people found this review helpful 👍

4/5 Pratheesh D. 10 months ago on Google • 67 reviews

Our Lady of Ransom Church is a Catholic church located at Kanyakumari, Tamil Nadu in dedication to Mother Mary. In 1542 when St. Francis Xavier came to Cape Comerin (Kanyakumari) he found 'Our Lady of Delights Grotto' here. It is believed that Our Lady of Delights Grotto later became the church of Our Lady of Ransom. Our Lady of Ransom is the Patron of the congregation in Spain. The people of Kanyakumari combined the name Ransom with Delight and call their patron Alangara Upakara Matha. The amazing white colour catholic church is beautifully designed with stunning architecture. It's very close to the scenic beach and Vivekananda Memorial, Kanyakumari. The pearl white Church looks awesome in night time. The Church is well maintained and very peaceful place for prayer. Timing is 5 am to 6.30 pm. From the moment you enter the church, you can feel a sense of peace and tranquility wash over you. If you are staying in nearby hotels you can also enjoy the stunning view of Sunrise and sunset, just walking a few meters. Overall, Our Lady of Ransom Shrine in Kanyakumari is a must-visit for both locals and tourists alike. Whether you are seeking solace, spiritual growth, or simply appreciate beautiful religious architecture, this shrine has it all.

3 people found this review helpful 👍

5/5 Akshay S. 4 years ago on Google

MUST Read and Must Visit ... Kanyakumari is a beautiful city that’s rich in culture and is also a place for worship. It is home to Our Lady of Ransom Church, a 100-year old Christian shrine that is run purely on faith and goodwill. It is situated close to the beach and stands at the height of 153m. It was constructed in Gothic style and looks incredible because of its pearl-white color and the ocean in the background. The church has 12 towers, each representing the 12 disciples of Lord Jesus. There are numerous stories and legends about the history of the shrine. The most noteworthy story is of the iron mast that floated in the sea and the amazing story about how it was erected in the courtyard of the church.

3 people found this review helpful 👍

5/5 Amanda R. 2 years ago on Google

"The church of rock and pillar is nothing without the many colours of light." - Angela Abraham The stained glass windows and the lit up alter with her sari clad form throws an ethereal glow on the entire church. It would be utterly beautiful when the light hits the windows during sunset. Our Lady of Ransom Shrine sits outsides to the left of the Church.

3 people found this review helpful 👍

5/5 Binny & Meena F. 1 year ago on Google • 126 reviews

Beautiful church. Very peaceful. Great view of beach from the church. The architecture is one of the best. Has a iron pillar in front. It is believed that at Thomas, one of Jesus’ disciple came to this place. Walkable distance from the railway station and the beach.

2 people found this review helpful 👍

5/5 John M G. 7 months ago on Google • 42 reviews

Wow!! Huge and so beautiful church. I went here during Christmas and attended the Night holy mass as well. Safe and beautiful environment. People are lovely here. 😇❤😍

2 people found this review helpful 👍

4/5 Sushil kumar k. 11 months ago on Google • 196 reviews

Our Lady of Ransom Church of Kanyakumari, Tamilnadu is an old church built by Portuguese in 18th century in dedication to Mother Mary. The amazing all white colour catholic church is beautifully designed with stunning architecture. It's very close to the scenic beach and Vivekanand Memorial of Kanyakumari. The pearl white Church looks awesome in night time. The Church is well maintained and very peaceful place for prayer. Timing is 5am to 6.30 pm. If you are staying in nearby hotels you can also enjoy the stunning view of Sunrise and sunset, just walking few meters. Visit and enjoy beautiful surroundings !!!

1 person found this review helpful 👍

5/5 Amit D. 1 year ago on Google

It feels so peaceful inside the church that u can sit for hours admiring its beauty & architecture... When the sun sets down and lights get on its looks very gud.

2 people found this review helpful 👍

5/5 Nithis K. 1 year ago on Google

Famous Church which is very near to Kanyakumari Beach! We can reach the church in a short period by walking from Kanyakumari beach because it is less than 0.5KM from it. Every year I visit the church in December during the festival time. We can get positive vibes during the visit. The surroundings of the place are clean. Tourist’s people can visit the church on normal days because parking facilities are available.

2 people found this review helpful 👍

5/5 Anantha K. 2 years ago on Google

* Just walk to church from kanyakumari bus stand or take bus just ₹10. * Or you can walk from road towards left side of boat jetty entrance. This Church is near the strech in the sea.

2 people found this review helpful 👍

4/5 Apu C. 1 year ago on Google • 155 reviews

Biggest church in kanyakumari located near kanyakumari beach. The building structure is huge. The white colour makes it more visible. The premises infront of the church gate has a huge open space. Most christians come here to offer prayers. Calm and peaceful place.

1 person found this review helpful 👍

4/5 Manish B. 7 months ago on Google • 308 reviews

Exact year of construction not known..But seeing the architecture it seems to be constructed during the Portuguese rule..That is during early 18th century.. Church looks great coloured in white.. Surrounding area has got fisherman houses.. Very close to the sea & Vivekanand rock.. Taking a four wheeler can be a problem as roads to the church are too narrow.. Don't worry..It's walking distance from most of the spots at Kanyakumari..

5/5 Prithviraj K. 7 months ago on Google • 87 reviews

Beautiful church. I was lucky to visit it on Christmas eve when it was beautifully decorated.

1 person found this review helpful 👍

5/5 Moment with Dev N. 6 months ago on Google • 67 reviews

Our Lady of Ransom Church is a Catholic church located South of India in Tamil Nadu, Kanyakumari is an old church built by Portuguese in 18th century dedication to Mother Mary. The Church is well maintained and very peaceful place for prayer. In 1542 when St. Francis Xavier came to Cape Comerin (Kanyakumari) he found 'Our Lady of Delights Grotto' here. It is believed that Our Lady of Delights Grotto later became the church of Our Lady of Ransom. It is an amazing white colour catholic church is beautifully built with good infrastructure. It's very close to the scenic beach and Sun Rise view point Vivekananda Memorial, Kanyakumari.

1 person found this review helpful 👍

4/5 Jacob N. 2 months ago on Google • 210 reviews New

A good catholic Church and well maintained. This church can be seen from the Vivekananda Rock. Inn fecility available. A small memeto shop present. A huge flag post present in front of the church.

4/5 PaNkaJ P. 2 years ago on Google

Its a one of old church in the Kanyakumari. Its a huge and very beautiful church. Front area of church is very clean and neat.

1 person found this review helpful 👍

5/5 Vinesh C. 1 year ago on Google

Peaceful, pleasant and feel very prayerful. It’s a very nice place to be in prayer with no busy traffic sound or disturbances… We happen to see the church from far and thought me must definitely visit rather than miss it. Holy Mary pray for us…🙏🙏🙏

1 person found this review helpful 👍

5/5 Anto J. 2 years ago on Google

KK trip doesn't get fulfilled without OLR shrine visit. Such a holy place; majestie church building! The grotto at the shrine premise is an added beauty!!

1 person found this review helpful 👍

5/5 Antony R. 2 years ago on Google

Our lady of Ransom church ⛪️ Kanyakumari. This is one among the oldest Catholic Church in Kanyakumari. The church is located in the middle of a fisherman’s hamlet you can find catholic traditions fallowed by people around here. The entire village is governed by the parish priest. This church has more history. There are more miracles happened in this church . This church is built in Gothic style . Pls visit here if you come to Kanyakumari.

1 person found this review helpful 👍

5/5 Balvinder S. 4 years ago on Google

It was my first time in the church and I loved it. Very beautifully buildup . You should for at least 5 minutes and feel he pleasure here. Its near the beach and Vivekananda memorial . Seat on the chair and feel the peace.

1 person found this review helpful 👍

4/5 Travel Days T. 3 years ago on Google

Beautiful pristine white color peaceful church. Located near beach, this church is a catholic church and very beautiful.

1 person found this review helpful 👍

4/5 Nijanthan F. 3 years ago on Google

If any christians visits Kanyakumari beach don't miss to visit this church. Its white color gives more holiness to this church. Very peaceful place. Its mother maru church. Very near and clean place. I love this church very much. Everytime i vist this church if i went to Kanyakumari. If you a church lover you have to visit here. Have a great journey. ...

1 person found this review helpful 👍

5/5 Srinivas K. 1 week ago on Google • 125 reviews New

Visited the Church in the evening on Monday. No service at that time. We can spend some peaceful time in the premises. Climbed up to the adoration chapel adjacent to the church from where one can have a great view of the sea and the rock memorial.

5/5 SAGAR 7. 2 months ago on Google • 113 reviews New

The Our Lady of Ransom Shrine, located in Kanyakumari, Tamil Nadu, India, is a revered Catholic pilgrimage site dedicated to Mother Mary. Perched on a cliff overlooking the confluence of the Arabian Sea, the Bay of Bengal, and the Indian Ocean, the shrine offers breathtaking views and serves as a place of solace and spiritual reflection for devotees from around the world.

5/5 anjitha mekkayil a. 1 month ago on Google • 93 reviews New

I recently visited Our Lady of Ransom Shrine in Kanyakumari and was very impressed. The all-white church with its tall spires is striking from afar and even more impressive up close. The interior is well-maintained and offers a serene atmosphere. If you're seeking a quiet place for prayer or reflection, this shrine is perfect. It provides a welcome respite from the bustle of Kanyakumari. Built in the 16th century by the Portuguese, the church has a rich history that adds another layer to the experience. Whether you're religious or simply appreciate beautiful architecture, Our Lady of Ransom Shrine is a worthwhile stop in Kanyakumari.

5/5 hemanth r. 6 days ago on Google • 90 reviews New

Its a nice church with unique architecture, I haven't seen anything like that before Has been built 100 years ago, but modernized during recent years, In side it has been neatly decorated, I would recommed to visit to appreciate in unique architecture.

4/5 Rajeev N. 1 day ago on Google • 85 reviews New

Carm and cool place. Better to visit at evening

5/5 Dipankar B. 1 month ago on Google • 76 reviews New

Our Lady of Ransom Shrine.. It is a amazing white colour catholic church is beautifully built with good infrastructure. It's very close to the scenic beach and Sun Rise view point Vivekananda Memorial, Kanyakumari. I visited this place in 1988. It was very nice to see the historical church at that time.

5/5 jyothis j. 4 days ago on Google • 73 reviews New

A peace and serene place to pray

3/5 vishnu r. 1 month ago on Google • 40 reviews New

A nice church which is set upon the backdrop of the blue sea. Most recommended to visit after the sunrise viewing.

5/5 Rohith R. 1 month ago on Google • 37 reviews New

In Kanyakumari surroundings you will see so many churches . And our lady of ransom shrine is one of them. So peace and claim you have peacefully pray and seat here. And by walk you can reach here from Kanyakumari view point. And the church is constructed long ago. All the construction was so well.

5/5 sashikanth r. 1 week ago on Google • 25 reviews New

Best in architecture and must visit place in kaniyakumari

5/5 Tejasv G. 1 week ago on Google • 21 reviews New

Nice

4/5 Asha P. 10 months ago on Google

If you are looking to visit churches on your visit to Kanyakumari, this is must visit. Huge church but currently under renovation.

5/5 Swetha 1 year ago on Google

The church is very nice and beautiful. Well maintained. Very big and calm. Quiet place. Just loved it. The atmosphere and surroundings are very beautiful. Good job. Well done.

5/5 Chandrika S. 1 year ago on Google

The view of the sea n the city is very awesome from this place. The white colour of theis church makes it more visible. Really Beautiful n very peaceful place.

4/5 Mr D. 1 year ago on Google

Awesome architecture and beautiful lightings. Lady Church which is very near to (CAPE HOTEL)our room. The surroundings of the place are clean.

5/5 Priti D. 2 years ago on Google

Remains opened full-day, biggest church in kanyakumari I guess. place to get highest positive vide & energy. We did spent around 2-2:30 hours there & it was worth it.

5/5 Shubhrokamal D. 2 years ago on Google

Only 2 words to describe this holy shrine. Peaceful and serene. Very close to the Kanyakumari beach and the pier, this is one of the must visit places in Kanyakumari.

3/5 Pravin x. 2 years ago on Google

The church looks cool outside, but the interior is not that good. Hate the guys beating the dogs around the church (They preach to be kind to all but hitting dogs)

4/5 Mathankumar C. 2 years ago on Google

Beautiful place. Outside view is great. As a tourist you may not be able to spend much time inside the church.

5/5 Marivalan D. 2 years ago on Google

Our Lady of Ransom Church, Kanyakumari Overview Our Lady of Ransom Church is a famous Catholic Church that is located in the Kanyakumari District of Tamil Nadu and was built in dedication to Mother Mary. A brilliant example of Gothic architecture, the church was built during the 15th century and looks breathtakingly beautiful against the blue lashing waves of the ocean behind it. The gold cross on the central tower of the church further adds beauty and charm to this magnificent structure, and its beauty and tranquillity are what attract people the most. Our Lady of Ransom is the Patron of the congregation in Spain, which had long ago redeemed the Christians from Muslim invasions in 1218. The people of Kanyakumari combined the name Ransom with Delight and began to call their patron by the name of Alangara Upakara Matha. It is in her honour that this splendid church has been built. The colourfully stained windows of the church throw multi-hued lights inside the main building, and the three white spires of the primary structure rise up to the sky. The church is in its full splendour in evenings and at night, when it gets lit up. What enthrals people the most is the statue of Virgin Mary, clad in a sari, at the altar. And this in itself is reason enough to visit the enchanting Our Lady of Ransom Church.

5/5 Johnson R. 2 years ago on Google

Must visit place at Kanyakumari

5/5 Aravin F. 2 years ago on Google

Peaceful place to worshipping clean and tidy

5/5 Vincent K. 2 years ago on Google

Oldest chruch in Town.