If the National Weather Service is correct, the weather outside is frightful.

Warren County is under a lake effect snow warning that went into effect early Monday morning through 1 a.m. Wednesday.

An advisory from the NWS projects 6 to 10 inches of “heavy lake effect snow” north of US 6 “and lesser amounts across the southern part of the county.”

The worst of it was projected for Monday night into Tuesday “when snow rates may reach 1” per hour for brief times within the strongest snow bands. Gusty winds will also lead to blowing and drifting snow.

“Travel could be very difficult,” the National Weather Service said. “The hazardous conditions could impact the morning and evening commutes, especially on Tuesday.”

The Pennsylvania Department of Transportation issued a statement Sunday night urging motorists “to slow down, pay attention and use caution on area roadways, especially during snow squalls or low-visibility conditions that may occur.”

“Our crews, particularly in Erie, Crawford and Warren counties, are cued up and the equipment is ready to hit the road whenever the storm approaches,” said Aaron Fox, assistant district executive – maintenance for District 1, which includes Warren County.

“Though we manage our plow routes based (on) county lines, we approach winter as a region,” Fox said. “This means our operators and plow trucks can be easily shifted to help in what are traditionally the snowiest areas, like Interstate 90, or wherever the need may develop as the weather changes.”

“With freezing temperatures, roads that look wet may actually be icy, and extra caution is needed when approaching bridges and highway ramps where ice can form without warning,” PennDOT Press Officer Jill Harry said.

“Our crews will work in 12-hour shifts to maintain the roads and equipment as long as the storm lasts. Our goal is to provide safe and passable roadways. We ask in return that area motorists do their part to keep our drivers safe and never attempt to pass a truck while it is plowing or spreading winter materials,” Fox added.

“If a crash occurs due to or during a snow squall and you are involved or stopped due to the crash, in most cases, you are safer in your vehicle with seat belts fastened,” Harry said.