Carnatic music, or Karnāṭaka saṅgītam is a system of music commonly associated with the southern part of the Indian subcontinent, with its area roughly confined to four modern states of India: Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, and Tamil Nadu. It is one of two main subgenres of Indian classical music that evolved from ancient Hindu traditions, the other subgenre being Hindustani music. The main emphasis in Carnatic music is on vocal music; most compositions are written to be sung, and even when played on instruments, they are meant to be performed in gāyaki (singing) style.

Students are taught the basics of Carnatic music in a structured curriculum. Along with this, simple compositions are also taught in order to prepare them for performances and to give students an exposure to the variety and range of Carnatic music. Links to the lyrics and reference audios are provided to students.

Why Carnatic Music is a very interesting article written by Todd McComb detailing the similarities between Carnatic & Western music.

Level 1:

Sarali Varisai – Lessons 1 to 14 in three speeds

Janta Varisai – Lessons 1 to 9 in two speeds

Both Sarali Varisai and Janta Varisai in akAram

Level 2:

Dhaatu Varisai – Lessons 1 and 2

Tara staayi Varisai – Lessons 1 to 5

Alankarams – Lessons 1 to 7

Theory: Tala Angas, Sapta Talas, Pancha jaatis,Alankarams in Sapta Talams

Level 3:

Geethams, Nottu Swarams

Theory: Sapta Swaras – Names, Twelve variations, Arohanam and Avarohanam, Staayis

Level 4:

Geethams, Nottu Swarams, Swarajathis

Theory: Classification of Ragas and Raga Lakshana, Advanced Tala systems – 35 Talas

Level 5:

Varnams – Adi Talam

Krithis

Theory: Melakartha Ragas and the Katapayadi sankhya, Vaaggeyakaras – Biography of eminent composers

Level 6:

Varnams – Ata Talam

Krithis

Theory: Types of compositions

Simple krithis, bhajans, and slokams will be taught in all levels.

Participation in special workshops and performances are an integral part of the training program.

Regular attendance and consistent home practice will contribute immensely towards rapid progress.

Music book is available for purchase and lyrics to compositions will be provided as and when they are taught

For home practice you can purchase the Tanpura app for both Android & iOS

You can also click on the following You Tube link for 15 minutes of tanpura in "A" scale (6 kattai) which can be played on a loop.

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5ddMfvsmTkQ