News

Does OHS inspector misconduct in Ontario reveal deeper problems?

In his latest column, Norm Keith takes a look at recent reports of misconduct by Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) inspectors in Ontario that has garnered national attention. » Read More...

Man arrested at Alberta legislature after gun pointed at construction workers: police

Edmonton police say they were told that a man was spray-painting a message on a column on the north steps of the legislature when he was confronted by construction workers. Police say the man allegedly picked up a firearm from the steps, pointed it at the workers and told them to leave him alone. » Read More...

Powerline contacts jump more than 300% in Ontario: ESA outlines myths and facts around dangers

Since 2019, there has been a 310% increase in powerline contacts by the general public in Ontario — a number the Electrical Safety Authority (ESA) calls a "staggering increase." » Read More...

Ottawa concrete company fined $140K after worker killed during demolition of foundation wall

The incident happened on Jan. 25, 2021, in Ashton, Ont. — a town located about 50 kilometres southwest of Ottawa. Bacic Forming Concrete Ltd. was subcontracted by a home building company to perform foundation work for a new residential dwelling. » Read More...

Most Ontario elementary teachers experienced or witnessed violence: survey

ETFO president Karen Brown pinned the blame on a lack of investment by the province in public education, saying that "learning is being disrupted and violence is being normalized." " » Read More...

SPONSORED SPOTLIGHT

The Dräger Wildland Fire Respiratory Kit

Easy respiration with low resistance

Dräger's wildland respiratory kit provides long-lasting protection in tough conditions. The kit includes the Dräger half mask X-plore 3500, 2 P100 particle filters, a carrying bag, and cleaning wipes. The reusable P100 filter is NIOSH-approved and protects against particulates, dust, and ash from wildfires.

The mask is made of comfortable DrägerFlex material and has a low profile; wide field of vision.

The exhalation valve reduces breathing resistance.

Suitable for firefighters, first responders, paramedics, and civilians.

» Learn more!

Featured

Are you prepared for a health and safety inspection? One expert offers her advice

Wendy Irwin, health and safety consultant at BrightHR Canada, shares what employers need to know about health & safety inspections so they can be best prepared. » Read More...

Worker injured by bear at Suncor plant north of Fort McMurray

Suncor Energy says someone was injured by a bear at its oilsands base plant north of Fort McMurray, Alta. » Read More...

Sponsored Spotlight

Hand protection against impact injuries

Protect your workers’ hands with Superior Glove’s innovative impact resistant gloves designed with ergonomic protection to maximize safety and comfort.

TenActiv™ STXFNVB: Industry’s first knit gloves to feature maximum Level 3 impact protection. These high cut-resistant gloves are the most dexterous Level 3 impact gloves on the market.

Endura® 378GCXVB: For workers who require impact and extreme cut resistance, we’ve added a flexible Level 2 impact bumper to our maximum A9 cut-resistant leather gloves.

TenActiv™ STAGBLPVB: For environments with wet or oily work surfaces, these cut-resistant Level 1 impact protection knit gloves feature leather ErgoHyde palms that maximize grip and durability.

» Request samples today!

GLOBAL OHS NEWS

Florida man pleads guilty to threatening poll workers

According to court documents, the man was at a polling station when he was heard counting election workers and saying, "Should I kill them one by one, or should I blow the place up?'' » Read More...

Van carrying oxygen tanks explodes in Milan; driver injured

A van that was transporting oxygen tanks to a nearby medical facility exploded in the center of the Italian city of Milan last week, forcing the evacuation of a school and residential apartment buildings. » Read More...

Shooting at Mercedes factory in Germany leaves 2 dead; suspect detained

A man opened fire at a Mercedes-Benz factory in southwestern Germany last Thursday, leaving two people dead, authorities and the company said. The shooting occurred in Sindelfingen, a city near Stuttgart. » Read More...

OPINION

It’s time to elevate safety: Change the name of CSSE

Safety needs a seat at the boardroom table. And before HR puts up their hands, let me rephrase that: Safety needs its own seat at the table. No offence to our human resources friends, but the CHRO is already wearing enough hats — and they’re all pretty critical. Senior editor Todd Humber chimes in. » Read More...

We need to prepare for the public safety hazards posed by artificial intelligence

For the most part, the focus of contemporary emergency management has been on natural, technological and human-made hazards such as flooding, earthquakes, tornadoes, industrial accidents, extreme weather events and cyber attacks. However, with the increase in the availability and capabilities of artificial intelligence, we may soon see emerging public safety hazards related to these technologies that we will need to mitigate and prepare for. » Read More...

Sponsored Spotlight

Looking For a Stress-Free FR Clothing Program?

Why settle for an unsatisfactory clothing program experience? Leave used, damaged, and lost garments and unreliable service – common in uniform rental with industrial laundry programs – behind. Tyndale’s direct-purchase model provides new, high-quality arc-rated and flame resistant clothing that meets your company’s requirements. When workers choose the clothing they prefer for maximum comfort and style, compliance and satisfaction soar!

Say goodbye to program administrative headaches too! Tyndale sets the standard for:

Customizable managed PPE programs.

Transparent billing and comprehensive reporting for complete budgetary control.

Reliable service from a dedicated account management team.

Discover a better way to protect your workers. » Explore our resources

Events