founded in 1915 by Daimler-Motorengesellschaft, the Sindelfingen plant is now the largest production plant of Mercedes-Benz AG. Since its foundation, it has grown to cover an area of more than 2 km². The E-Class and S-Class, the GLC and the electric S-Class EQS are produced here.

At the Sindelfingen plant, our department plays an essential role in the process chain when building cars and acts as an interface between batch production in the press shop and flow production in the body shop to ensure a smooth production process. This includes not only the optimization of supply and disposal processes, but also the scheduling and control of press and body-in-white parts

One of the pivotal points is the automatic high-bay warehouse and the press part conveyor system with its driverless transport vehicles for the automatic supply of the body shop and the loading center.

WHAT AWAITS YOU!

You will work on current projects

You will get to know our partner areas in close cooperation and regularly take part in meetings

You will work on digital solution concepts

You create process descriptions and rough concepts with the specialist department

You develop concrete measures to increase efficiency

You moderate and take minutes of project meetings and regular communications within the team

You create PowerPoint documents for the management

WHAT YOU SHOULD BRING WITH YOU?

You are currently studying for a Bachelor's or Master's degree in a program related to production, business administration, logistics and/or IT

You have a good command of German and English

You are proficient in Microsoft Office applications (especially PowerPoint and Excel)

You are interested in topics related to vehicle production and especially logistics at Mercedes-Benz

You are committed, structured and can work independently as well as in a team

WE OFFER YOU ..

An interesting insight into exciting and future-oriented topics of the production and logistics processes of the global Mercedes-Benz Cars network

Varied tasks with different focal points

A motivated working environment in a motivated team

Partial opportunity for mobile working

Additional information:

Of course, we can't do without any formalities. Please apply online only and attach a CV, current certificate of enrollment stating the semester of study, current transcript of records, relevant certificates, proof of mandatory internship if applicable and proof of the standard period of study (max. total size of attachments 5 MB) to your application and mark your application documents as "relevant for this application" in the online form.

Further information on the recruitment criteria can be found"here".

If you are a national of a country outside the European Economic Area, please send us your residence/work permit.

We particularly welcome online applications from severely disabled persons and persons with equivalent disabilities. If you have any questions, you can also contact the site's representative for severely disabled employees at sbv-sindelfingen@mercedes-benz.com, who will be happy to support you in the further application process after your application.

Please understand that we no longer accept paper applications and that there is no entitlement to return postage.

If you have any questions about the application process, please contact HR Services by e-mail at myhrservice@mercedes-benz.com or by phone: 0711/17-99000 (Monday to Friday between 10 a.m. - 12 p.m. and 1 p.m. - 3 p.m.).