What do we expect from the technologies we use? Artists have always been more than mere «users» of technology; they have helped design, reshape, hack, and invent tools. This international group exhibition considers artists as inventors of «tools for conviviality» and brings together a broad spectrum of artistic positions that create alternative visions for technology and society by emphasising access, creativity, justice, and interdependence. The concept of «convivial tools» (a term coined by the Austrian social philosopher Ivan Illich) forms the framework for this exhibition, which looks at artists‘ tools, both in the form of software and social structures, and shows how technology and society could be reimagined.

On the occasion of the exhibition "Tools for Change," ISSA brought its house library, a collection of texts, videos, images and audio files on the topics of convivial tools and "how to live well" to HeK. The library is hosted on a Raspberry Pi mini computer with an open source software called shareboxx that creates a wireless anonymous offline local file sharing system. This means that visitors can access the file system using their devices, they are invited to sit dow in the reading room, download texts, files etc. and take them home.

Taming of Chance

by Olsen with the !Mediengruppe Bitnik, Evan Roth & Eryk Salvaggio

As part of the accompanying program for the exhibition "Decoding the Black Box"

12:00 – 18:00

Taming of Chance explores spaces of possibility in binary architecture. Kits with modified binary cubes serve as a starting point for interactive and participatory experiences. The playfulness goes back to the game metaphor of the dice, but also to the game of chance. We are faced with a paradox here, because a computer cannot emulate real chance due to its architecture, as algorithms, tamed by reduction and order, cannot leave anything to chance. On the other hand, we are constantly guided and controlled by algorithms. The endeavor to undermine this determinism in a playful or artistic way can be found, for example, in the approaches of the Situationists (e.g. Guy Debord’s buzzing around in Paris with a street map of London) or in Fluxus (e.g. a negation/abolition of chance in Robert Filliou’s work Eins. Un. One.), which took the game with chance to the extreme. The dice boxes were distributed by Olsen to the !Mediengruppe Bitnik, Evan Roth and Eryk Salvaggio so that they could further develop the content. The rules created in the process and the way in which the contents of the box are to be handled are presented by those involved.

12 – 1:30 p.m.

Evan Roth

Suggested Sharing (EN)

Evan Roth will host an informal sharing session where participants use rolls of artist Olsen Wolf’s binary dice to identify and (optionally) share suggested content from online services such as Instagram, Youtube, Netflix and Spotify. He will then archive the resulting shared media and use it as source material to produce an algorithmically generated documentation video. The session is intended as a playful way of getting to know each other through chance and media.

1:30 – 2:30 p.m.

Lunch Break

2:30 – 3:15 p.m.

Eryk Salvaggio

Reverse Diffusion: Chance x Prediction, Part I. (EN)

Eryk Salvaggio will present his newly developed project Reverse Diffusion: Chance x Prediction. Current AIs for image generation work with diffusion models that assemble pixels into images according to the constraints of algorithmic predictions. In his project Reverse Diffusion: Chance x Prediction, Eryk Salvaggio presents an alternative version of generativity which is anchored in an essay by Fluxus performer George Brecht and focuses on chance. In this presentation, Salvaggio will discuss these ideas of chance in the presentation of a new work which reimagines the AI as a chance operation, producing endless possibility through abstraction, rather than an engine for the computational constraint of possibility.

3:30 – 5 p.m.

!Mediengruppe Bitnik

Non Guided Tour (Taming of Chance Edition) (GER)

The !Mediengruppe Bitnik takes participants on a Non Guided Tour (Taming of Chance Edition), a digital reinterpretation of the performance piece Sanitas#79 by Tomas Schmit from 1962. In Sanitas#79, Schmit asked the audience to board a bus to be dropped off at a random location after 100 km. The !Mediengruppe Bitnik takes up this experience of losing one’s bearings in a physical location by transferring the Fluxus work into a web-based game.

The players of Non Guided Tour (Taming of Chance Edition) find themselves on a virtual map, exactly 100 km away from the Galerie Stadt Sindelfingen. They must find their way back to the gallery using rudimentary clues such as blurry road signs, scenic features and architectural landmarks. The game clearly references the structure of online games such as MapCrunch and GeoGuessr, but deliberately contradicts their logic, which is based on score and speed. Non Guided Tour invites participants to take a walk through digital space and playfully addresses the role of the audience and the dimension of time while responding to today’s increasingly privatized and panoptic digital space.

17:10 – 17:40 p.m.

Eryk Salvaggio

Reverse Diffusion: Chance x Prediction, Part II. (EN)

17:40 – 18:00 p.m.

Conclusion

OPENING:

03/04/2024 19:00

With One Star Review Tour, Selena Savić, Gordan Savičić and !Mediengruppe Bitnik look at how rating systems shape the perception and experience of a place. In contemporary data-driven environments, credit scores, social influence rankings and product/service reviews dictate choices regarding, for example, selecting a doctor, shopping or dining out. One of the most widely used evaluation schemes online is the five-star system. Its popularity stems from the ease of judgement it proposes, its implied clarity (five is better than one) and the way it transforms personal opinions into objective values by way of aggregation (individual reasoning doesn’t matter if many people come to the same conclusion).

While the reviews are often nothing more than personal opinions, their cumulative values have become a driving force for the service and tourist industries as well as many other sectors of the economy. For businesses, reviews have become a feared measure of success or bust.

Not all sites, services or products can align with conventional consumer requirements. To obtain the five-star rating, they must be easy to consume, readily available, impressive, fun or “instagrammable”. And while privately owned companies can fight bad online reviews, public spaces can hardly talk back or ask Google to leave them alone.

The exhibition at Aksioma explores what it means when places we love are scrutinised and publicly rated: it investigates the politics of rating systems and engages with the power of reviews to produce real effects.

15:00 – 18:00

The artists scraped thousands of one-star reviews of public sites in Ljubljana. Taking the scraped data as a starting point, the workshop will look at the materiality of this data, its specific textures and aesthetics. What types of views of the city can we generate from the data? How can we approach the data in interesting ways? Can we use the scraped data as a form of critique and artistic research?

What other participants say:

AMAZING!!! DON’T MISS!! THE BEST WORKSHOP BY BRILLIANT ARTISTS! (5/5)

This workshop will be such an amazing experience and give everyone a deep insight into the data that the artists used for the show at Aksioma. They scraped sooo many 1 star reviews! Like thousands! And most are hilarious! The artists will do an amazing job of explaining their process in great detail. And they’ll share links to other helpful resources for artists who want to work with data. The artists will be so knowledgeable it will truly blow your mind. Also just really nice people!!! You will learn a lot! ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

THE WORST WORKSHOP EVER. TOTALLY SKIP IT. SO DISAPPOINTED (1/5)

RATINGS SUCK!!!! This workshop is going to be soooo boring. Seriously, who wants to look at data. Learn about data. Scrape data. I’d rather stare at the wall than look at excel sheets. Who comes up with this stuff? Data scraping has NOTHING to do with art or aesthetics. What does that even mean!!!! And you’ll also have to DO stuff. Most probably analyse and sort THEIR data. In an artist workshop? Without pay? Am I here to learn or to work? They’ll ask: what can be generated from the data? Sounds like a question they should have answered themselves before doing the workshop. Not going to work for free. This makes me so angry ⭐☆☆☆☆

Talks by Aleksandra Lakić and Max Haiven

Bonfire storytelling and food with Mara Ferreri, Valeria Graziano, Marcell Mars, Tomislav Medak & !Mediengruppe Bitnik

"Snađi se, druže!" – "figure it out, comrade" – is a common phrase used in former Yugoslavia. It originated during the WWII indicating that partisans in action had to come up with solutions under extremely unfavourable conditions. The question, when given instructions for an impossible mission, would often be "but how do I do that?", and the answer would often be "figure it out, comrade". Later during the socialist period, this expression would be used for practices that people were devising when encountering bureaucratic or material constraints in everyday life. All periods and societies have such practices of common lying, cheating and stealing and common phrases to name them.

FIO is a collective exploration of stories of ingenuity that people with little or no power devise when systems fail them. The evening at panke.gallery is focused on the inginuity of workers in the global gig factory. Particularly on tactics the workers on platforms such as Microwork, Amazon Turk or Upwork based in the Eastern Europe and the Global South contrive to fake their location or presence to cirumvent scant pay, surveillance and control that is frequently not expected from the gig workers in the Western Europe and the Global North.

The upcoming event features a talk by Aleksandra Lakić, introducing her and Saša Savanović's research on the socio-economic situation and labor conditions in platform economy in South Eastern Europe. The talk will also assess the impact of algorithmic management and surveillance as factors contributing to declining quality of work on digital labour platforms. A second presentation will be held by the researcher Max Haiven, who has recently collaborated with rank-and-file Amazon workers to write and publish short, speculative fiction stories about 'the world after Amazon.'

The bonfire is an invitation to participate in a collective reading of stories of such practices we have gathered and to contribute your own first-hand or second-hand stories and thoughts. We intend the reading to be convivial, spilling over into a shared meal.

Event produced by Drugo More in collaboration with !Mediengruppe Bitnik.

Part of transmediale & CTM Vorspiel 2024.

Cracked smartphone displays, distorted images, colorful pixel structures: as one of the youngest and most unpredictable art forms today, glitch art specifically directs our attention to the aesthetic of the flawed. Initially used in technical jargon among radio and television engineers in the 1950s, the term glitch (from the early New High German verb “glitschen”, meaning to [left] glide or from the Yiddish “gletshn”, to slide, slip, or skid) soon comes to designate coding bugs or graphic errors in computer games. A glitch is the unexpected result of a malfunction. In the art context, disruptions find immediate expression in the realm of computer-generated images, in digital media and Internet art. The roots of technical “glitches” reach back to the early days of photography; as an artistic strategy directed against recognized forms of expression, they evolve in avant-garde film and video art and, finally, in digital image media and net art, where instances of image interference are intentionally provoked or deliberately programmed.

The catalogue Glitch. The Art of Interference is the first comprehensive survey with a historical derivation of the potential of glitches in art, media, and society. With works by Maya Dunietz, Jake Elwes, JODI, Joan Jonas, Germaine Krull, Ryoichi Kurokawa, Mame-Diarra Niang, Carsten Nicolai, Kazuma Obara, Nam June Paik, Jiang Pengyi, Sondra Perry, Man Ray, Pipilotti Rist, Steina Vasulka, amongst others, alongside with historical magazines and guidebooks on how to avoid photographic errors as counter narrative. In essays and free-forming writings, Franziska Barth and Markus Rautzenberg, Katrin Bauer, Nick Briz, Doris Gassert, Ute Holl, Justyna Janik, Franziska Kunze, Rosa Menkman, Mame-Diarra Niang and Agnieszka Roguski provide broader insights into the recent fields of research on the global phenomenon of glitch art.

The title of the book, The Computer as Seen at the End of the Human Age, is a reference to the exhibition “The Machine as Seen at the End of the Mechanical Age”, curated by Pontus Hultén for MoMA in 1968, highlighting how technology was influencing art at a time when mechanical machines were increasingly replaced by electronic and chemical devices. Through its selection of contemporary art works the exhibition thus came to function as a recording of technological history.

I never got to see the exhibition since I wasn’t born at the time, but a couple of years ago I came across a curious book with a tin cover. The book was published in connection to the exhibition, and the history recorded between its covers ends at approximately the same time that early computers start to make their way into the art world. In the fifty years that followed, art came to be marked by a digital presence.

It was that book, along with an interest in dead media, and a curiosity for art aided by algorithms, that sparked the idea for The Computer as Seen at the End of the Human Age.

Here you will encounter new works by a selection of artists, specifically invited to use algorithms/AI to contribute to a continuous, self-reproducing, anachronistic, machine aided recording of history. A way to preserve, revise and/or comment upon digital history from the vantage point of present-day technology or through the lens of imagined future media, perspectives and technologies.

The works have been created specifically for the book. Some are based on works by other artists, made in another era, repurposed for our time and technologies. Others are based on redundant technologies, revived and given new functions. Some adopt a critical or political approach to the algorithm and its impact on society. Several utilize it as an opportunity to create unique works for each separate copy of the edition. Thousands of files eventually compiled into 200 unique books, each with a different cover and different contents – generated, aided or influenced by algorithms.