(1875–1950). African American historian, author, editor, and educator Carter G. Woodson opened the long neglected field of Black studies to scholars. He also popularized the field of study in schools and colleges with a large percentage of Black students. To focus attention on Black people’s contributions to civilization, Woodson founded Negro History Week in February 1926. This weeklong commemoration was later expanded into Black History Month.

Carter Godwin Woodson was born on December 19, 1875, in New Canton, Virginia. His family was poor, and Woodson had to support himself by working in the coal mines of Kentucky. For this reason, he did not enroll in high school until he was 20. After graduating in less than two years, Woodson taught high school, wrote articles, and studied at home and abroad. He earned a doctorate from Harvard University, in Boston, Massachusetts, in 1912.

To encourage scholars to study Black history, in 1915 he founded the Association for the Study of Negro Life and History (later renamed the Association for the Study of African American Life and History). Prior to this, the field of Black studies had been largely neglected or distorted in the hands of historians who accepted the traditionally biased picture of Black people in American and world affairs. In 1916 Woodson edited the first issue of the association’s The Journal of Negro History. Under his direction, it remained an important historical periodical for more than 30 years.

Woodson was dean of the College of Liberal Arts and head of the graduate faculty at Howard University, in Washington, D.C., in 1919–20. He served as dean at West Virginia State College (now West Virginia State University), in Institute, West Virginia, in 1920–22. While there, Woodson founded and became president of Associated Publishers to publish books on Black life and culture. Experience had shown him that the usual publishing outlets were rarely interested in scholarly works on Black people.

Important works by Woodson include the widely consulted college text The Negro in Our History (1922; 10th ed., 1962); The Education of the Negro Prior to 1861 (1915); and A Century of Negro Migration (1918). He was at work on a projected six-volume Encyclopaedia Africana at the time of his death, on April 3, 1950, in Washington, D.C.