Johnson & Johnson (J&J) is an American multinational corporation founded in 1886 that develops medical devices, pharmaceuticals, and consumer packaged goods. Its common stock is a component of the Dow Jones Industrial Average, and the company is ranked No. 36 on the 2021 Fortune 500 list of the largest United States corporations by total revenue. Johnson & Johnson is one of the world's most valuable companies, and is one of only two U.S.-based companies that has a prime credit rating of AAA, higher than that of the United States government.

Johnson & Johnson is headquartered in New Brunswick, New Jersey, the consumer division being located in Skillman, New Jersey. The corporation includes some 250 subsidiary companies with operations in 60 countries and products sold in over 175 countries. Johnson & Johnson had worldwide sales of $93.8 billion during the calendar year 2021.

Johnson & Johnson's brands include numerous household names of medications and first aid supplies. Among its well-known consumer products are the Band-Aid Brand line of bandages, Tylenol medications, Johnson's Baby products, Neutrogena skin and beauty products, Clean & Clear facial wash and Acuvue contact lenses. Johnson & Johnson's pharmaceutical arm is Janssen Pharmaceuticals.

The company announced in November 2021 that it would split into two publicly traded companies: one focused on consumer products and the other on pharmaceuticals and medical technologies.

Johnson & Johnson is an American multinational corporation that was founded in 1886 by three brothers: Robert Wood Johnson I, James Wood Johnson, and Edward Mead Johnson. The company was initially established to produce surgical dressings and sterile sutures, which were in high demand at the time.

In its early years, Johnson & Johnson focused on expanding its product line to include other medical supplies and equipment. In 1887, the company introduced a line of dental floss, which was the first commercially available dental floss in the United States. The company also began producing surgical instruments, such as scalpels and forceps, and other medical devices.

In the early 1900s, Johnson & Johnson began to expand its operations beyond the United States. In 1903, the company opened a subsidiary in the United Kingdom, and in 1907, it established a subsidiary in Canada. By the end of World War I, Johnson & Johnson had subsidiaries in several countries around the world, including France, Germany, Italy, and Australia.

During World War I, Johnson & Johnson played a significant role in supplying medical equipment and supplies to the United States military. The company produced millions of surgical dressings and other medical supplies for the war effort, and its contributions earned it several awards and commendations from the U.S. government.

Throughout its early history, Johnson & Johnson also focused on developing a culture of innovation and social responsibility. In 1906, the company established the first sanitary laboratory in the United States, which was dedicated to ensuring the safety and purity of its products. The company also introduced a profit-sharing plan for its employees in 1917, which was one of the first of its kind in the United States.

In the 1920s and 1930s, Johnson & Johnson introduced several new products, including Band-Aids, which were invented by Earle Dickson, a company employee, in 1921. The company also began producing surgical gloves, first aid kits, and other medical supplies.

During World War II, Johnson & Johnson once again played a significant role in supplying medical equipment and supplies to the United States military. The company produced millions of surgical dressings, bandages, and other medical supplies for the war effort, and its contributions earned it the Army-Navy "E" Award for excellence in production.

In the post-war years, Johnson & Johnson continued to expand its operations and diversify its product line. The company acquired several companies, including McNeil Laboratories, which produced Tylenol, a pain reliever that would become one of the company's most successful products. Johnson & Johnson also began to focus on the development of prescription drugs, launching several new products in the 1950s and 1960s.

Throughout this period, Johnson & Johnson remained committed to social responsibility and innovation. The company established the Johnson & Johnson Credo in 1943, which outlined the company's commitment to putting patients and employees first, as well as to supporting the communities where it operated. The company also continued to invest in research and development, launching several new products and technologies that would become industry standards.

In the 1960s, Johnson & Johnson continued its expansion into new markets, including Europe, Asia, and Africa. The company also introduced several new products, including baby shampoo and dental floss. In the 1970s, Johnson & Johnson faced a crisis when several deaths were linked to its Tylenol pain reliever. The company responded by introducing tamper-resistant packaging, which became the industry standard.

In the 1980s, Johnson & Johnson continued to expand its portfolio, acquiring several new companies, including Neutrogena, Ethicon, and Janssen Pharmaceutica. In the 1990s, the company continued to innovate, introducing several new products, including the first disposable contact lenses and the first antipsychotic medication for schizophrenia.

In 2006, Johnson & Johnson acquired Pfizer's Consumer Healthcare division, which included brands such as Listerine and Sudafed.

In the early 2020s, Johnson & Johnson was one of several companies to develop a COVID-19 vaccine. Its vaccine was granted emergency use authorisation by the FDA in February 2021. However, in April 2021, the company faced another crisis when its vaccine was linked to a rare blood clotting disorder. The company temporarily paused distribution of the vaccine while it worked with regulators to investigate the issue. In July 2021, the FDA added a warning label to the vaccine, indicating the risk of blood clots. Johnson & Johnson acquired Momenta Pharmaceuticals in 2020 and launching several new products in 2021, including a new diabetes medication.