Associated Press

Health care giant Johnson & Johnson yesterday reported a 14 percent increase in first-quarter profits, citing broad growth in sales of its pharmaceutical products and its medical devices and diagnostic tests.

The maker of Tylenol and a wide range of skin and baby care products posted net earnings of $1.5 billion, or $1.06 per share, beating by 2 cents the consensus of analysts surveyed by Thomson Financial/First Call.

In the year-ago quarter, net earnings totaled $1.3 billion, or 93 cents per share.

J&J shares closed up $1.85 to $94.45 yesterday on the New York Stock Exchange.

New Brunswick-based Johnson & Johnson said net sales reached $7.8 billion in the January-March quarter, up 6.5 percent from $7.3 billion in 2000’s first quarter.

U.S. sales increased 9 percent, to $4.6 billion; international sales jumped 10.9 percent, but most of that growth was wiped out by a negative currency impact of 7.2 percent, the companies said.

Sales growth was led by anemia medication Procrit, the Duragesic skin patch for chronic pain, epilepsy drug Topomax, anti-psychotic drug Risperdal and Remicade for arthritis and Crohn’s disease.

Among medical devices and other products sold to hospitals and doctors, strong sellers included heart stents made by the Cordis unit, Gynecare women’s health products, LifeSpan’s blood glucose-monitoring products and Vistikon’s disposable contact lenses.

Meanwhile, Johnson & Johnson is in the process of buying drug-delivery specialist Alza Corp. for $12.3 billion in stock and also is acquiring Heartport Inc., which develops products to make cardiac surgery less invasive.

William C. Weldon, a J&J vice chairman, said the Alza acquisition would bring Johnson & Johnson new products and help extend the life of existing ones.

“Products and technologies from Alza will enhance existing Johnson & Johnson growth platforms in areas that include oncology, women’s health, urology, pain management and the central nervous system.”

The Alza deal, which still needs approval by U.S. and European regulators and by stockholders, is expected to close early in the third quarter, while the smaller Heartport deal is set to be completed during this quarter.