Johnson & Johnson, founded in 1886 is an American company manufacturing mainly medical products and devices, pharmaceutical, and consumer packaged goods. Johnson & Johnson has its headquarters in New Brunswick, New Jersey. It has around 250 subsidiaries selling its products in around 175 countries.

In any business, there are several companies & brands which compete with each other by offering similar products & services.

For any company to thrive, it is not only important for them to improve their own products, but to also look at what their competitor is offering.

Below we look at the top 10 competitors of Johnson & Johnson.

1. Reckitt Benckiser:

Reckitt Benckiser (RB) group PLC is a multinational group of British origin. The Company was formed in 1999 by merger between Reckitt & Colman PLC in UK and Benckiser NV from Ireland. It believes in 'Purpose with Passion' and has been active in improving the consumer health products since its beginning.

2. Unilever:

Unilever is one of the biggest FMCG (fast moving consumer goods) company in the world. It is a British-Dutch company co headquartered in Rotterdam and London. Unilever has more than 400 brands and operates in more than 190 countries with a turnover of €50+ billion.

3. Procter and Gamble (P&G):

P&G or Procter and Gamble, is a fortune 500 fast moving consumer goods multinational corporation headquartered in Ohio, USA. With its acquisition of Gillet in 2005, P&G became the largest consumer product company in the world. It is ranked in most admired companies of the world.

4. Colgate-Palmolive:

Colgate-Palmolive is a leading consumer products company headquartered in New York. It has a huge presence worldwide operating in 75 countries and selling its product offerings in 200 countries. Colgate-Palmolive is present in four product categories- oral care, personal care, home care and pet nutrition.

5. Pfizer:

Pfizer, is one of the highly reputed biopharmaceutical companies of the world. It was founded by Charles Pfizer and Charles Erhart. With a deep and long term commitment to global health, Pfizer has used its global resources and technical know-how to deliver the best products.

6. Novartis:

Novartis is one of the important manufacturers of pharmaceuticals and other pharmaceutical ingredients (API). The company is currently working in many countries as it one of a largest company in the world. Novartis has the extensive network of distribution overall globe.

7. GSK Consumer Healthcare:

GSK Consumer Healthcare is a subsidiary of GlaxoSmithKline plc which is a pharmaceutical giant based in Brentford, London. The company was established in 1958 as Hindustan Milk Food Manufacturers Pvt. Ltd.

8. Roche:

Roche is one of the biggest competitors of Johnson & Johnson.

9. Merck:

Based out of USA and Canada, Merck is one of the largest pharmaceutical companies in the world. It was found in 1891 and then as an independent organization in 1971. Close to 70000 people are employed with the company.

10. Abbott:

Abbott Laboratories is an American health care company founded by Wallace Calvin Abbott in the year 1888. Abbott Laboratories has been using leading-edge science and technology to provide consumers with the highest quality equipment. Also, it happens to be the market leader in the Blood screening process, Remote heart failure monitory and left ventricular assist devices.

To conclude, the above article highlights the various competitors which compete with Johnson & Johnson. This understanding helps to evaluate the various external business factors for any company.

This article has been researched & authored by the Content & Research Team which comprises of MBA students, management professionals, and industry experts. It has been reviewed & published by the MBA Skool Team. The content on MBA Skool has been created for educational & academic purpose only.

Browse analysis of more brands and companies similar to Johnson & Johnson. This section covers many brands and companies.

Continue Reading: