•

1 like•1,021 views

Will Rogers was an American humorist and blogger in the early 20th century. He wrote short, down-to-earth columns on current events and everyday life that were published in newspapers. These columns gave an average person's perspective on politics and other topics. Rogers also saw value in connecting with others through blogging and sharing one's experiences. He believed that after meeting someone, it was possible to see the good in them, regardless of preconceived opinions. His folksy writing style and ability to provide humorous commentary on important issues made him one of the first widely popular bloggers.

Related slideshows

7 types of villains

7 types of villains

Outsiders Intro And Background

Outsiders Intro And Background

The disreputable history of frankie landau banks

The disreputable history of frankie landau banks

Will rogers america's blogger

2. William Penn Adair "Will" Rogers

3. No one grows up wanting to be a blogger

6. Toutes les filles s'appelle Fifi: D'Orsay counsels Rogers' irritated American in Borzage's “They Had To See Paris”, 1930.

9. Blogging, or web logging, is no more than a personal journal published on the World Wide Web consisting of individual entries.

10. These short daily columns of down-to- earth, sometimes humorous takes on current events, everyday issues, and life’s questions

13. Telegraph was the delivery mechanism of choice because “mail was to slow”

14. “It is to be skipped about in, picked up from time to time, and above all, to be used for historical reference. “

17. ‘I never met a man I didn’t like’ "I bet you if I had met him and had a chat with him, I would have found him a very interesting and human fellow, for I never yet met a man that I dident like. When you meet people, no matter what opinion you might have formed about them beforehand, why, after you meet them and see their angle and their personality, why, you can see a lot of good in all of them.”

18. "One sure certainty about our Memorial Days is that as fast as the ranks from one war thin out, the ranks from another take their place. Prominent men may run out of Decoration Day speeches, but the world never runs out of wars. People talk peace, but men give up their life's work to war.”

20. Blogging Tips • Write to be helpful. • Be brief. • Tell a story. • Connect others, if appropriate. • Share. Often. • Don’t overthink it. (It’s a blog, not a dissertation.) • But be thoughtful. • Don’t be mean. • Publish often enough to build a relationship. • But be mindful of your audience’s time.

21. Let me answer all your blogging questions

22. Are bloggers journalists? “All I know is just what I read in the papers, and that's an alibi for my ignorance.”

23. Which is more important, quality or context? “That’s the way I write it and that’s the way I want it to lay”

24. When searching "The Writings of Will Rogers," remember that Rogers took liberties with spelling and grammar. Here are some tips that might make your search more successful: • “Avoid searches that involve contractions. Rogers did not always use apostrophes; sometimes he spelled out a contraction (e.g., "dident" for "didn’t"). For example, if searching for the quote "I never met a man I didn’t like," insert in the search window only a part of the quote and avoid the contraction (e.g., I never met a man).” • “Try different possible spellings of a proper name or a concept.” Will Rogers Memorial Museum

25. What can today’s bloggers learn The power of an amplified voice creates a moral responsibility to get the facts straight and to not spread hate.

26. What can today’s bloggers learn Define the word value and then consider whether you have something valuable to say and people want to or need to hear it.

27. “The more things change the more they stay the same” Jean-Babtiste Alphonse Karr

28. "Everything is changing. People are taking the comedians seriously and the politicians as a joke."

29. Rogers Thinks Little of G.O.P. Convention Tactics The whole show has degenerated into nothing but a dog fight for vice president. All we have done today is listen to Senator Fess explain what he forgot to say yesterday, and it took him all day today to alibi for it. I don’t know who he forgot today that he will have to bring up tomorrow. 1928 Republican Convention

30. Will Says Arkansawyers Hard to Tame – He Knows Well boys, she blowed up about noon today in a blaze of harmony. Joe Robinson of Arkansas got the nomination with more democratic agreeing than had ever agreed on anything in the history of the party. They got a great fellow in Joe. He is a real two-fisted he candidate. He comes from the wilds of Arkansaw where they are hard to tame. Everybody was in a hurry and sweating and all the states were voting on the Smith nomination when it got to them. Course Oklahoma didn't agree, and the whole 15,000 people had to stop for half an hour while they called all their names and instead of sending 20 there was 40 come with half a vote each. 1928 Democrat Convention

31. “Americans will feed anyone that’s not close to them.” “Even if you are on the right track, you’ll get run over if you just sit there.” “The only problem with Boy Scouts is there aren’t enough of them.” Will Rogers

32. There will never be another • Spoke for everyone but “everyone” doesn't exist anymore • So much static not possible to break through with the same force

36. “Never miss a good chance to shut up.” Will Rogers