Posted by Alex Rutter on 9/05/2022

YOU’RE never too young to make your mark on the Russell Taylor Group growth journey - as the achievements of recruiter Isaac Hayes can testify.

At the age of 20, Isaac is an integral part of the multi-million pound industrial and technical recruitment operation, joining the business straight from school with only a Saturday job at a local café his experience of the world of work.

And his own remarkable journey from school-leaver to key player in the business, helping the company through the challenges of the coronavirus crisis and into a new period of growth, reached a high point when he was named Young Person of the Year at a prestigious awards event.

Russell Taylor Group managing director Rob Kurton said: “Working in a dynamic yet family-focused environment, Isaac was regarded from his first day of employment as part of our young talent pool, apprentices and trainees who have worked their way up to become some of our most vital assets.

“It’s been great watching him grow in confidence and experience – particularly taking charge of new areas during the pandemic – and one whose work is vital to the company’s current growth programme.”

Isaac knew he was taking a huge leap into the unknown when he embarked on an apprenticeship with Russell Taylor Group at the age of 16 and based at the company’s Burton Manor headquarters.

Nothing, however, could have prepared him for the challenges of the past couple of years when, working an industry whose operational sectors had been badly hit by the pandemic, the only way to act was to step up and take on major tasks above and beyond his normal day-to-day role in the busy Industrial Trades Division.

This meant dealing with demanding inquiries from companies looking to recruit labour during the coronavirus crisis, helping with issues such as wages and furloughing as well as supporting job-seekers searching for work as pandemic restrictions continued.

Isaac took on a role in the Manufacturing Division too and began recruiting in two completely diverse sectors. While Industrial Trades requires knowledge of businesses ranging from painting, mechanical and electrical operations to aerospace and automotive industries, Manufacturing calls for familiarity of scientific, food and general manufacturing areas.

On top of this, he also took some of the workload from the Russell Taylor admin team, left short-handed due to the Covid-19 outbreak.

It was this commitment to his job and appreciation of his efforts by the business that earned him the title of Young Person of the Year at the West Cheshire and North Wales Chamber of Commerce Recognition Awards 2021.

Isaac began an apprenticeship with Russell Taylor after making the decision to get a job rather than go to college. Within a short time, he had passed his Level 2 Recruitment Resourcing qualification with distinction and, getting 100 per cent hands-on experience, watching and learning from others and constantly picking up new skills, became an integral part of the Russell Taylor operation as it watched its turnover of £19.1 million in 2019 reach its 2021 projected figure of £23.5 million.

He said: “I’d always wanted a job after doing A-levels. My first job was Saturday work in a café while I was still at school and, as well as making an apprenticeship my decision, my Dad encouraged me to choose this career route as he’d been an apprentice himself.

“I saw the vacancy at Russell Taylor on the internet and was invited for interview. I really didn’t know what to expect as I didn’t know anything about recruitment at the time.

“Since taking up the apprenticeship, I’ve learned so much about the industry. It’s 100 per cent hands-on experience, watching and learning from others, constantly picking up new skills and getting things right.

“I love the fast-paced environment here, dealing with a variety of people from different backgrounds where not one day is the same yet taking a methodical approach to the job via a customer relationship management system.

He added: “Joining the business as a boy also helped me quickly grow into an adult, making me more confident and outgoing in my life outside work.”

“I know I am growing in knowledge and ability because of my training here and that I’m being set on course for a successful career.”