Things to do in Freiburg (i.Br.)

About Freiburg (i.Br.)

Freiburg (also known as “Freiburg im Breisgau”) has around 230,000 inhabitants and is one Germany’s biggest southern cities. Freiburg is a historical and cultural hub, not to mention being the seat of the regional council. It is often described as the heart of the Black Forest. The city also holds a strong image elsewhere, thanks to its title of “ecological capital” and is internationally known as the “Green City” – due to its picturesque settings and large areas of woodland. Freiburg is famous for its beautiful surroundings – where mountains, hills and vineyards all overlook the city. Even the Schauinsland summit of 1284 meters belongs to the city and can be explored when your bus arrives to Freiburg. The University of Albert Ludwig was founded in 1457 along with countless other institutes for teaching and researching, making Freiburg a city of scientific foundation as well as a hub for industrial companies. Any visitor to Freiburg will always leave with wonderful memories, making the city a valuable visit. Countless tourists travel to Freiburg every year by bus, train or car and all wanting to discover the attractive old town or experience the bustling atmosphere in Muensterplatz (the main square). Tourists who only plan a short break in Freiburg and will soon hop back onto their bus, should definitely visit the ‘Planetarium’ next to the main train station. Any of our bus travelers who are interested in our galaxy should definitely visit this museum. The Freiburg Baechle are also a unique intriguing landmark in Freiburg; they are small water channels that can be seen at the side of most roads and alleys in the old town.

Places of Interest in Freiburg (i.Br.)

Bus travelers to Freiburg must have seen the Freiburg Minster – the most famous landmark of the city. This cathedral was built between 1200 and 1513 and still contains its original stained glass windows. Inside the church there are many art treasures, as well as the two altars, the “high altar of Hans Baldung” and the “Hans Holbein the Younger.” The Gothic tower is an impressive 116 meters high, towering above all other buildings in the city. Jacob Burckhardt, a well known art historian, has even referred to it as one of the most beautiful towers throughout Christendom. The Minster is also known for being a gothic architectural masterpiece, its remarkable carillon consists of a staggering 19 bells. The square in front of the cathedral, known as the “Muensterplatz” is the biggest square in the city and every morning (except Sundays) you will find the market here. There are other markets that are located in the square in front of the cathedral, such as the farmer’s market on the North side of the square, which you can visit as soon as your bus arrives to Freiburg. The square was previously used as a cemetery in the middle ages, evidence of this can be seen from the outlines of the former plaster ossuary. At the main entrance of the cathedral you will see three columns made from sand stone which date back to 1719. Another square in the old town is the “Augustinerplatz.” It is surrounded by Augustinian Monastery as well as the remains of the city wall. In “Augustinerplatz” you will see a showcase of Mediterranean flair through the staircase located there, in the summer months our bus travelers can feel like they are visiting the Spanish Steps in Rome.

Culture and History of Freiburg (i.Br.)

Taking a bus to Freiburg means that you can immerse yourself a little deeper into its history by making a trip to the city’s history museum, which you will find in the late Baroque “Wentzingerhaus.” The exhibits here cover all periods from 110 to the Baroque period, with an impressive display of models of the city from the 17th and 18th Century’s. The focus of the museum lies on the history of trade and commerce, the monasteries and also the Universities in and around Freiburg. After visiting the museum, our bus passengers who are interested in art and culture should not miss a trip to Freiburg’s theater. It is a theater that offers productions from three different genres: acting, musical theater and ballet. Before boarding your bus be sure to check online in advance what will be on offer when you arrive into Freiburg – then you won’t miss out! An attractive characteristic of Freiburg its countless musical opportunities that our bus passengers can take advantage of. This can be seen alone with the music school, which has been open since 1946. An outstanding example of Freiburg’s famous orchestras is the SWR Symphony orchestra of Baden-Baden and Freiburg, which exhibits a new style of interpretative, orchestral music. Once you have visited Freiburg you will realize that not only can you experience such a cultural delight, but that your FlixBus journey will be efficient and safe – getting you from A to B in no time at all!

Interesting Facts about Freiburg (i.Br.)

For those who like to have a dip in cool water, whether its summer or winter, then choosing your bus travel to Freiburg is definitely the right decision. You will find nine indoor swimming pools and three open-air swimming pools. The biggest one is the “Eugen-Kiedel-Bad,” which also has a very large sauna for their guests. The largest open-air pool of the city is the “Strandbad” (beach pool), which has a wading pool, kiddies pool and a 50 meter swimming pool. For those who prefer to relax they can sunbathe on the large lawn – every bus traveler will be satisfied!

Surrounding Areas of Freiburg (i.Br.)

When choosing your bus travel to Freiburg, upon arrival you can immediately relax by the Arlesheimer lake – one of Freiburg’s most beautiful nature areas. It is named after the Swiss town of Arlesheim, located near Basel. The lake’s water spans across 8 acres and is surrounded by a swamp forest. Another recommendation for our bus travelers is to visit the “Jesuitenschloss,” an estate in Merzhausen just outside of Freiburg. Visitors to “Jesuitenschloss” will get a beautiful view of not only Freiburg but also the Kaisterstuhl and the Black Forest. The name derives from the castle’s previous owner, the Jesuits, who received the castle as a gift. The mansion was supposedly built in 1666, although this date is frequently debated and questioned. Today the property is used as a wine tasting room and a large exhibition hall, both of which our bus travelers can visit.

Buses to Freiburg

Find the most affordable bus tickets to Freiburg

Looking for affordable tickets to Freiburg? We've got you covered with buses to Freiburg from as little as $1.49 – and you can save even more when you book in advance. FlixBus has many connections in Germany and in many other countries, so no matter where you're traveling from, we've got a trip for you. Hop on board and enjoy your trip with our free Wi-Fi and spacious seats. Booking your ticket is easy, whether you want to do it online, at a sales point, or with our FlixBus App. You can also use the App to manage your bookings and use the digital tickets to get on board. For the most affordable tickets, book on the App in advance – the earlier you book, the cheaper your ticket will be!

Why travel to Freiburg with FlixBus

FlixBus is the most affordable and convenient way to travel to Freiburg. There are 2 stops in Freiburg and you can reach them from 143 departure cities. Just check on the FlixBus network if you have a connection in your city! Booking a ticket with FlixBus is very simple: you can choose between different payment methods, such as credit card, Paypal, Google and Apple Pay. Book your ticket online in advance on our website or the FlixBus App, or pay in cash onboard or at a sales point. traveling by bus is one of the most environmentally-friendly options available, as you reduce traffic-related emissions and you can help the planet by offsetting your CO₂ emissions when booking your ticket!

Onboard services

Traveling to Freiburg is a very comfortable experience: once you're on board your FlixBus, you can sit back, relax, and enjoy our onboard services. Our buses are equipped with toilets and power outlets, and to make your experience even nicer, they have free Wi-Fi, so you can catch up on emails or watch your favorite show as we take you to Freiburg. Do you like to travel by the window? When booking your ticket, you can reserve your preferred seat, and if you want more space or privacy, you can even book the seat next to you for some extra comfort! When it comes to baggage, you can bring whatever you want to Freiburg as one stored bag and one carry-on are included in your ticket, free of charge!