“Baden-Württemberg is a state of Germany located in the southwest, east of the Upper Rhine. It is Germany’s third largest state in terms of size and population, with an area of 36,410 square kilometres (14,060 sq mi) and 10.7 million inhabitants. Capital - Stuttgart.“

[from Wikipedia]

Landkreise

Alb-Donau

Biberach

Bodensee

Böblingen

Breisgau-Hochschwarzwald

Calw

Konstanz (Constance)

Emmendingen

Enzkreis

Esslingen

Freudenstadt

Göppingen

Heidenheim

Heilbronn

Hohenlohe

Karlsruhe

Lörrach

Ludwigsburg

Main-Tauber

Neckar-Odenwald-Kreis

Ortenaukreis

Ostalbkreis

Rastatt

Ravensburg

Rems-Murr-Kreis

Reutlingen

Rhein-Neckar-Kreis

Rottweil

Schwäbisch Hall

Schwarzwald-Baar-Kreis

Sigmaringen

Tübingen

Tuttlingen

Waldshut

Zollernalbkreis

Cities

Stuttgart

Reutlingen

Mannheim

Heidelberg

Heilbronn

Baden-Baden

Karlsruhe

Pforzheim

Sindelfingen

Esslingen am Neckar

Ulm

Freiburg im Breisgau

Despite the fact that the maps surround us everywhere in our life, usually the process of their drawing is sufficienly complex and labor-intensive. But now, thanks to the ConceptDraw DIAGRAM diagramming and vector drawing software extended with Germany Map Solution from the Maps Area of ConceptDraw Solution Park, we have the possibility to make easier this process. Design fast and easy your own pictorial maps of Germany, map of Germany with cities, and thematic Germany maps in ConceptDraw DIAGRAM

Example 1. Germany Map Solution — Baden-Württemberg State (Mac OS X, Windows)

Use of ready objects is a fastest way of drawing vivid and attractive maps and cartograms, and Germany maps are not exception. The Germany Map Solution offers for ConceptDraw DIAGRAM users wide variety of ready-to-use vector map objects, which compose the Germany library.

Example 2. Germany Library Design Elements

These objects allow easy design many kinds of Germany maps, among them geographic, topography, political map of Germany, detailed map of Germany with cities, various thematic Germany maps that are used for visually illustration important information and statistical data, and many other useful maps.

All source documents are vector graphic documents. They are available for reviewing, modifying, or converting to a variety of formats (PDF file, MS PowerPoint, MS Visio, and many other graphic formats) from the ConceptDraw STORE. The Germany Map Solution is available for all ConceptDraw DIAGRAM users.