Description

White Plains is an impressive, detached period residence that occupies a central location within the primary suburb of Whitecraigs. The property enjoys a slightly elevated setting with aspects towards the fairways of Whitecraigs Golf Course and could not be more convenient for a full range of local amenities including Whitecraigs Golf Club, Whitecraigs Train Station and Rouken Glen Park.

The house has been painstakingly refurbished, remodelled and redesigned in 2017 and offers an exceptional family home within a central location. Notable improvements include new roof system, upgraded electrics, upgraded gas central heating system with Worcester boiler, double glazed windows, many incorporating original leaded glasswork, and the property features high ceilings and generous room sizes.

Very impressive entrance with beautiful sandstone steps leading to vestibule with decorative storm doors giving access to principal reception hallway with feature oak flooring, lovely wood panelling and under stair storage, splendid bay windowed lounge with focal point fireplace and decorative porthole leaded window, snug room/bedroom five, bay windowed bedroom to the front, larger style dining sized kitchen with granite worktops and full range of integrated appliances, French doors to gardens and access through to spacious laundry room with integral access to large garage. The ground floor is completed by a family bathroom with shower. Broad staircase leads to very spacious upper landing with storage where there is access to three double sized bedrooms, all with built in storage, principal bedroom with modern en-suite shower room and an additional shower room/WC completes the upper accommodation. Under floor heating.

The garden grounds are a real feature of the property, have been beautifully tended and landscaped over the years. Twin gated entrance to horseshoe driveway offering parking for multiple vehicles. Fully enclosed and gated rear garden with decking area, two patio areas, sculpted lawn, mature planting, and mature trees retaining privacy. Integral larger style single garage. Power and light. Remote control roller door system.

EER Band D

Local Area

Whitecraigs is considered one of the premier residential locations within the south side of Glasgow. Located approximately six miles south of the city centre, its close proximity to Glasgow effectively makes it one of the most sought after suburbs in the Greater Glasgow area. The district features an abundance of beautiful homes and provides catchment to some of the best schools in Scotland. It is located to the east of the M77 motorway, giving swift communication links to Glasgow city centre, airports, and coastal Ayrshire with Whitecraigs train station being nearest. The surrounding district provides excellent sports and recreational facilities - Whitecraigs Golf Course, Tennis, Squash and Bowling Clubs and Rouken Glen Park are all within a short walk from the property, as is the station.

Directions

From our office on Ayr Road, Newton Mearns travel city bound and just before Whitecraigs Golf Club the property is located on the right hand side.