Description

Whitecraigs Court delivers a private development of luxury apartments and 6G provides a spacious second floor apartment with private balcony, elevator access, private parking, and a lock up garage. The flat is nicely set back at the rear of the development, adjacent to the golf course.

Security entrance system gives access to communal residents' entrance with lift to all floors and the second floor apartment has private storage accessed off the residents' landing with the accommodation offering private style reception hallway which is spacious and generous in size with good storage cupboard, 22 foot lounge/dining room, dining sized kitchen with a range of integrated appliances, breakfasting bar and access to balcony. The principal bedroom has an en-suite shower room and dressing area with fitted wardrobes, second double bedroom with en-suite shower room and the apartment is completed by a main family bathroom.

The specification of the property includes gas central heating with combi boiler, double glazed windows, and the property is presented in modern decorative tones throughout. Adjacent to the front door of the building there is a private parking space with garage nearby.

EER Band B.

Local Area

Whitecraigs continues to be one of the most desirable residential suburbs on Glasgow's south side. A haven for young growing families, the district is synonymous with some of the best schooling in the West of Scotland. Moreover, there are excellent transport links via bus and train close at hand, in addition to local motorway links (M77/M8) providing swift access to the city centre and Ayrshire. There are two train stations within close proximity, Whitecraigs Train Station and Giffnock Train Station. There are numerous independent shops, restaurants and delicatessens only a short distance away. An abundance of sports and leisure facilities are available within East Renfrewshire including Pure Gym, David Lloyd Sports Club, Nuffield Health Gym, Whitecraigs Golf Club, Whitecraigs and GiffnockTennis Clubs and Rouken Glen Park which was voted UK's Best Park of 2016

Directions

From our office on Ayr Road, Newton Mearns travel city bound and just after the entrance to Whitecraigs Golf Course turn left into Whitecraigs Court, follow the road around to the right and the block is on the left hand side.