Starting this Wednesday, actors April Strelinger and David Schmittou will don furry suits and face paint and take on the roles of Duchess and Thomas O’Malley in STAGES St. Louis’ production of Disney's The Aristocats. As this year’s Theater for Young Audiences production, the show promises to be dynamic, colorful, and short enough to hold even the youngest theatergoer’s attention. We chatted with April and David after rehearsal to learn more about them and what makes this show so special.

What is the best part about performing for an audience of children?

April: I’m the mom of a six-year-old little boy, and I also am a Disney princess at heart. So I love this world. I think Disney is a great way to get kids to understand theater.

David: I love that TYA (Theater for Young Audiences) requires you to be honest. Kids demand more honesty than any other audience. They will call you out on any phoniness right away because they don’t censor yet. But if they believe you, they will go with you one hundred percent.

A: I would echo David’s sentiment in that the best thing about performing for kids is that they just get it. Kids pick up if you’re living the moment. And I think as actors, living in the moment is one of the things we have to do and we try to do, but sometimes we get so distracted by “Oh, does this costume fit,” or “Am I standing in the right place?”...but for kids, if you’re there and living the moment, they are right there with you. And I mean, they’re the greatest audience when that happens—their eyes twinkle and they smile, and if there’s audience participation, they will yell. They are not shy.

D: It’s immediate gratification!

A: Which every actor loves!

D: Yeah, there are times when we break the fourth wall and talk directly to the audience, and that doesn’t make kids uncomfortable at all like it sometimes does for adults. You know, adults think “Oh, I hate it when they talk to me,” but the kids love it—as long as they believe you, those kids will go on any adventure or any journey with you.

Do you involve any of that audience participation during this show?

D: We break the fourth wall a little bit in this show.

A: There also is a sing-along at the end of the show.

D: You can’t give that away!

A: We can say that, there’s always a sing-along at the end of the STAGES’ TYA shows! And that’s totally breaking the fourth wall; that’s us getting up onstage, basically begging the kids to sing with us. It encourages kids to know that it’s okay to respond to what’s going on onstage. I think that’s a really good lesson that kids who go to theater early on get to learn.

How does this adaptation differ from the movie?

A: I actually made sure to not play Duchess how Duchess is in the movie. Duchess in the movie is very cool, calm and collected the whole time—

D: But she didn’t have to do our choreography.

A: [Laughs.] That’s right, she didn’t have to do our choreography. But my Duchess definitely has more spirit. She’s a little bit more of a fierce mom. I like it, I think it gives the role a different color and it just makes it more real for me.

D: As far as the play being different from the movie, it’s really not too different. It’s trimmed down so it’s not hard for the kids to sit through. It’s got great lessons in it and a lot of very interesting characters who get a lot of time on stage. Overall, it’s just a really fun show to do.

Can you each talk about some of your favorite moments in the show?

D: “Everybody Wants to Be a Cat.” Doing that number is one of my favorite moments in the show—as long as I can remember our choreography! It’s a high-energy, fast-paced number that I think the kids are just going to love. And I think I love just about any part we do with the kittens. Because unlike when we did this show five years ago and used high-school-aged kids for the kittens, we’re using actual little kids. And like playing for kids, it’s a joy being onstage with kids.

A: My favorite moment in the show is anytime I have a one-one scene with these actors. The really cool thing about this group of actors is that I feel like we’re listening to each other. It’s such a gift as an actor to have another actor onstage listening and then actually responding to what you’re saying. These lines are great as written, but it’s so nice to actually have actors that aren’t just waiting to say their lines—they’re actually fun to play with and to give and take with. That’s probably the best thing about this show.

What would you say have been some of the challenges of putting this show together?

A: The choreography is very fast-paced. It’s not that we’re old, it’s just that—

D: It’s not simple!

A: It’s definitely not slow. I think it’s going to be just amazing onstage, because we’re all just bringing it.

D: Ellen [Isom, choreographer] is tough. She demands precise dance, but she’s never mean, she doesn’t talk down to the adults. I’m not a dancer, I’m just what we actors call a “mover,” but she never treats us like we can’t do something. She is really a great choreographer because she knows how to deal with people.

You are both clearly so dedicated to this show—what makes children’s theater so important to you?

A: Children’s theater is what I fell in love with when I was a little girl; it’s what made me want to be an actor. Whenever TYA actors would come to school, I would see them onstage, and think that I wanted to do that too. STAGES has such a great production, and it’s a Disney show, so it’s a win-win for me.

D: Yes, I think one of the greatest parts about Disney is that the villains really are scary or bad, and the kids learn from those characters. I also think children’s theater is just so important, especially in this day and age. Schools don’t have the music, art, and theater classes that they had when I was a kid, so I think that having live theater presented by a professional company like Stages is a great thing. I think the arts enrich everybody’s lives. It’s part of our society, part of our culture.