The Aristocats is a 1970 animated film, the last one that Walt Disney himself approved (he died, in 1966, before it was completed). Unfortunately, it is one of the most overlooked classic Disney films, as critics and audiences seem to favour The Jungle Book, Pinocchio, Cinderella, Bambi and Snow White. Disney considered Snow White to be his greatest work of art, and could see all the short-cuts taken in Cinderella. (I’m paraphrasing this from an excellent BBC documentary, Walt Disney, which unfortunately is no longer available on iPlayer).

It is a simple story (no spoilers): in pre-war Paris, a wealthy lady leaves all the money in her will to her cat, Duchess, and her three kittens (Marie, Berlioz, and Toulouse). The greedy butler, Edgar, takes the cats and leaves them far out in the countryside. The rest of the film concerns their journey home, with the help of street cat Thomas O’Malley, and Scat Cat’s jazz band.

It is understandable why it is overlooked — perhaps critics could sense that Disney’s creative momentum was slowing (the Disney renaissance was not until 1989) and it is not based on a book or fairy tale that the audience recognises. In a sense, the plot is basic and potentially boring — haven’t we seen the ‘animal’s journey home’ many times before (Lassie Come Home, The Incredible Journey etc) ?

Also, it does not include any magic to make up for what it lacks in plot. Of course, other classic Disney films don’t include magic in the story but, for example, The Jungle Book has an exotic location instead, and viewers may have read the book. And Bambi has a greater emotional power. So you could argue that The Aristocats lack two of the qualities that make Disney films great.

Although the film is very much set in the real world, the magic comes through the music. I recommend listening to a beautiful part of the soundtrack, Pretty Melody/My Paree.

If I remember correctly, this appears at a part of the film which Marie says is Oh, so romantic, (and I quite agree with her) as Duchess and Thomas sit on a rooftop in the moonlight over Paris — it is quite magical, without there literally being magic.

I should mention that this film is really a musical, but the skill of it is to seem that it is not. This is an important strength — for those of us, (the majority of us I think) who enjoy music, but do not really like musicals — in The Aristocats you have the best of both.

I like French music and jazz, so the soundtrack is my favourite of any Disney film — this is a very biased opinion! Scales and Arpeggios is very endearing and introduces us well to the personalities of Duchess and her kittens; Marie is very funny. I like how Toulouse plays on the piano with paint on his paws.

The singing voices of the actors are also fresh and clear, particularly Duchess (singing by Robie Lester, uncredited) — if you listen to the French version of the soundtrack the voices are not as strong. There is humorous music for the waddling geese it sounds like Baby Elephant March. And everywhere the soundtrack is full of character, particularly the action sequences with Edgar and the dogs, and at the end of the film with the cats — I recommend a listen to it, it can’t be explained.

Of course the musical highlight is Ev’rybody Wants to be a Cat—

it is the best Disney song: it makes Let It Go sound weak, but this is all a matter of taste ofc… And I like the diversity of Scat Cat’s band!

I mentioned that the film lacks the emotional power which Bambi has. Of course, The Aristocats is a comedy, so it is unfair to judge it in that way. I think the achievement of The Aristocats is that it is different to other Disney films. It shows the skill of Disney’s studio’s writers and artists to make a great film without their usual ingredients as it were.

It could also be argued that the plot is weak but also unbelievable. This is true. The plot is fairly weak and quite unbelievable. This is precisely why it is a great film. Who wants to watch a series of believable events for 90 minutes? You might as well watch a documentary. Who wants complicated plots? Life is complicated enough. I might even go as far to say that it is the simple-minded who seek the over-complicated. It is best for the artist to choose a simple plot, and show the strength of their talent through the imaginative treatment of this ‘weak’ subject-matter. Besides, most Disney films are simple and have straightforward characters.

Also the attitudes of the film-makers is important. I read somewhere that the second scene with the two dogs (one of the best and most hilarious scenes in the film) was included not because it needed to be, not because it furthered the plot or achieved anything significant — but simply because the artists wanted to. They liked the characters and wanted to include another scene for them. This is another reason why it is a great film.

Now I might add that if you waste precious hours of your life reading writing advice (don’t do it!) you often come across the idea that a scene should only be included if it has a point or furthers the plot or whatever. But only a superficial person who is writing for the money would say that. Often scenes that don’t appear to have a purpose, don’t appear significant actually are. Like the scene in The Aristocats, it may well be a highlight of the piece, even though it isn’t ‘necessary’. (Of course it isn’t necessary. The film itself isn’t necessary. This review isn’t necessary. Artists can’t make decisions based on what is ‘necessary’!)

In his dialogue essay The Critic as Artist, Oscar Wilde wrote that a poet writes not because he must, but because he chooses to. It should be a pleasure. The aim (for all artists) should be the beautiful, not the realistic.

Speaking of realism, the film is supposed to be set in 1910 but jazz music was brought to France by African-Americans fighting in WWI. This is one major anachronism… But who cares? (It symbolises a bygone age, that is all. It makes no sense to demand accuracy from a film where animals are talking to each other. Animation encourages the audience to suspend our disbelief).

Now before I start ranting about commercial fiction and Disney’s current output (that’s for another day) I should mention Frou-Frou. Frou-Frou is Madame’s horse. I like Frou-Frou because she is very expressive (particularly at the end of the film!) Here are some pictures.

As you can see, the animation is beautiful and amusing, as you would expect from a Disney film of this era.

Frou-Frou is another example of including something in the story which isn’t necessarily ‘necessary’. Many of the characters in the film don’t do very much, but the artists thought that each character, each song, each scene added a bit of personality or colour, so they remained. I think it is worthwhile for current film makers, especially those directors who like to think they’re clever/experimental, to keep this in mind.

Anyway, that’s my very biased opinion on The Aristocats. I’ve probably missed a few things (let me know in the comments) but I hope I’ve encouraged you to watch or better appreciate this film.

Thank you for reading!

Frou-Frou