By CARL BARBATI

cbarbati@njherald.com

FRANKFORD — It's official.

The new professional baseball team that will debut at Skylands Stadium next May will be called the Sussex County Miners.

Team owner Al Dorso, who also owns the stadium, revealed the name on Tuesday night.

He had planned to unveil it Tuesday morning at the Sussex County Chamber of Commerce breakfast, but the event was postponed because of expected bad weather.

“My son, Michael, did the research on this,” said Dorso, who now runs a Belleville-based, family-owned, outdoor entertainment company that dates back to the 1920s.

“We wanted a name that had local history and local sports history, and this seemed like a perfect choice.”

Dorso bought what was then known as Skylands Park in October, and, within weeks, announced that he would own a new team in the independent Canadian-American League.

The 4,200-seat ballpark, now known Skylands Stadium, was bought by Dorso in October. In a matter of weeks, he announced that he would have a team in the independent Can-Am League in May 2015.

“This is it,” he said Tuesday night. “Now, we've got a name, now, we've got a team. It's the Sussex County Miners. Everything's there. Now, we've got to produce for the people who come to the games and give them a great night out, rooting for their hometown team.”

The Miners will play a 97-game regular-season schedule from May 21 to Sept. 7. at the ballpark at the intersection of Route 15 and 206. Playoff games, if any, would have the Miners active another two weeks.

The previous team at Skylands was the Sussex Skyhawks, another Can-Am League team that was there from 2006-11.

Before that, from 1994 to 2005, Skylands was the host to the New Jersey Cardinals, a Single-A, New York-Penn League affiliate of the St. Louis Cardinals.

The Cards were still in the middle of the pack of the league in attendance when they closed shop and moved to State College, Pa., over financial disputes with stadium ownership.

That can't happen this time around as Dorso owns both the stadium and the team.