Reading broadly and intelligently are essential components of a good education, and Blair faculty members encourage reading throughout the year. The summer is no exception, which is why all Blair students are encouraged to read a minimum of five fiction or nonfiction books over the summer.

Blair is proud to share news of a remarkable number of athletes who have continued to make an impact in their respective sportsThese former Bucs have made headlines over the past weeks and months for their collegiate and professional athletic achievements beyond the hilltop.

The practice of "looping" involves matching students with the same instructor for several consecutive years, and in the Blair fine and performing arts departments, it leads to rich benefits for students and teachers alike.

The experience of venturing home was felt across the hilltop during Alumni Weekend this June, as classmates returned to the School to relive fond memories and forge new ones.

Blair’s Board of Trustees has greenlit a renovation of Mason and Freeman Halls. Read on to learn more about the dormitories' transformation—including new and updated exteriors made of limestone, stone and brick, new windows that should lend the dorms more visual compatibility with the rest of campus, and plenty of space for relaxing outside.

Blair’s Matthew Tung ’19 made international headlines recently as the first athlete to represent Hong Kong in Olympic-style weightlifting in more than a decade. Making his professional debut at the Asian Championships in Uzbekistan in February 2024, Matthew clinched fifth place in the 96 kg. division, Hong Kong’s highest placing in the competition.

Blair Academy is proud to announce the 2024 spring varsity award winners after another memorable spring season.

As the academic year comes to a close, underclass students and faculty came together for a night of recognition in the DuBois Theatre. On Monday, May 27, the Underclass Prize Assembly honored members of the ninth, 10th and 11th grades for their outstanding academic and co-curricular work throughout Blair’s 176th year.

As the 2023-2024 school year enters its final weeks, Blair’s School Store shares information regarding textbooks that students rented or purchased for use in their coursework this year.

At the 176th Commencement ceremony on Thursday, May 23, Blair honored the triumphs of the Class of 2024 and celebrated their victories as they continue on in their academic careers as prepared undergraduates and global citizens contributing to the greater good.

Surrounded by classmates, faculty and family, outstanding students were recognized for their unwavering dedication, hard work and contributions to the Blair community at the Senior Prize Assembly.

Commencement Week went to new heights Tuesday, May 21 as the upperclass dressed to impress at Prom!

In an event revered as the kickoff to Commencement activities, a select group of seniors stole the stage on May 13, captivating the audience with their narratives.

Ten years from the inception, Day of Service lent a helping hand to 25 service projects at Blair and in the extended community, showcasing the best of Blair—genuine care for others.