Today, June 9th, we are going to make a special tribute to one of the greatest writers of history of British Literature, Charles Dickens!

Charles Dickens was born on February 7th of 1812 in Portsmouth, England and Died at the early age of 58 in June 9th of 1870.

He was a great writer from Victorian period.

Charles Dickens is one of the most admired writers, not only of English, but also of all universal literature.

His novels and short stories are beloved by many people around the world.

Along with Shakespeare, the novels of Charles Dickens have been adapted for the silver screen many, many times.

Among them, “A Christmas Carol”, “Oliver Twist”, “A Tale of two Cities”, “Great Expectations”, “David Copperfield” and “Nicholas Nickleby“. These are great masterpieces of literature and have been adapted for stage and cinema a lot of times.

Many of Charles Dickens novels are of social criticism.

Charles Dickens fought for human rights and he was againts of cruelty against children.

Leon Tolstoi was a great admirer of Charles Dickens.

I also enjoy to read “The Pickwick Papers”.

I recommend everyone to read the short stories, novels and other writing of Charles Dickens.

It’s a big delight to read on every Christmas “A Christmas Carol”.

And let’s not forget that “David Copperfield” it’s “almost” autobiographical.

“Oliver Twist”, “A Christmas Carol” and “Great Expectations” are the novels that have more film adaptations.

It’s funny to mention that both “A Christmas Carol” and “Oliver Twist” have musical adaptations including the Academy Award winner film “Oliver” directed by Carol Reed and starring Ron Moody, Jack Wilde and Oliver Reed in this musical adaptation, winner of 6 Academy Awards including Best Picture.

And let’s not forget “Scrooge” the musical, with Albert Finney (the youngest actor that portrayed Ebenezer Scrooge). By the way, both musical films, have similar choreographies.

Anyway, back to our tribute to Charles Dickens, after the success of his popular novel,”A Christmas Carol”, the celebrations of Christmas became more and more popular with a lot of joy and excitement in Great Britain, the American Continent and the rest of the world. We can be very grateful with Charles Dickens for the happy Christmas celebrations, thanks to “A Christmas Carol”.

Charles Dickens was a great humanitarian, he cared for children, women, the poor and he was against slavery.

Charles Dickens died at very early age. He was laid to rest in the Poet’s Corner of Westminster Abbey.

A printed epitaph circulated at the time of the funeral reads: “To the Memory of Charles Dickens (England’s most popular author) who died at his residence, Higham, near Rochester, Kent, 9 June 1870, aged 58 years.

All of Dickens’ s fans love his characters, Ebenezer Scrooge, Bob Cratchitt, The Artful Dodger, Fagin, David Copperfield, Samuel Pickwick, Pip, Abel Magwitch, Mrs Havisham and many, many more incredible characters are in our hearts forever.

And all of us are scared and afraid of Bill Sikes in “Oliver Twist” or “The Ghost of Christmas Yet to Come” in “A Christmas Carol”.

The best way to make a tribute to Charles Dickens is, reading his stories. You are going to love it!!!

My best wishes from a big Charles Dickens fan!!

Jacqueline