Who is Luke Newton?

A London-born 31-year-old actor with a bevy of BBC and Disney TV roles under his belt.

Have I seen him before?

Newton's debut acting role was in the 2009 teen BBC series The Cut. Following that, he then starred in another teen series on the Disney Channel, The Lodge, before landing his coveted role in Bridgerton.

Who is Nicola Coughlan?

An Irish actor from Galway, though if your first introduction to Coughlan is in Bridgerton you wouldn't know it due to her brilliant British accent.

Have I seen her before?

If you haven't heard of Coughlan, then we implore you to binge her breakout role in Channel 4's Derry Girls immediately. In the comedy, which follows four Catholic schoolgirls in Northern Ireland during The Troubles in the 1990s, Coughlan plays the hysterical Clare Devlin. This year, the actor has also made her screenwriting debut, with her first series, Big Mood, which also stars It's A Sin's Lydia West, now available to watch on BBC.

Who is Claudia Jessie?

A 34-year-old, Birmingham-born British actor with a long list of TV show credits to her name.

Have I seen her before?

Jessie has starred in another recent period drama Vanity Fair, and British drams and soaps like Line of Duty, Doctors and Doctor Who. In 2015, she played the lead role in BBC drama WPC 56, a historical series about the first female police officers in the UK.

Who is Golda Rosheuvel?

A British-Guyanese actor and singer, most famous for her work on stage.

Have I seen her before?

In 2018, Rosheuvel made headlines when she became the first gay woman to portray Othello in Shakespeare's famous play at the Liverpool Everyman theatre. She has also portrayed a female Mercutio in Romeo & Juliet at The Globe.

Not only has the actor been embraced with open arms by the fashion world - she's a FROW regular at Harris Reed and Roksanda - she was also the focal point of last year's Bridgerton prequel, Queen Charlotte, which explored her character's rise to monarch in the Netflix series.

Who is Simone Ashley?

A 28-year-old South Asian actor who grew up in Surrey but moved to London as a teenager to pursue acting. She studied performing arts at college, earned a place at ArtsEd drama school and had small television parts before landing a role in Sex Education, which marked the beginning of her ascent.

Have I seen her before?

If you’ve watched Sex Education - the Netflix series that candidly portrays teenage sex, relationships and coming-of-age experiences - then you’ve most likely come across Ashley.

The actor also had small TV parts in shows such as mystery drama The Sister and movies Straight Outta Compton and A Working Mum's Nightmare. Ashley has also been adopted by the fashion world as one of its newest darlings, with Prada, Valentino and Dior among the clutch of brands to have endorsed her.

In an interview with , Ashley said: ‘I was always fearless; if I want something, I’ll go and get it. I’m like that with a lot of things in my life.’

Who is Luke Thompson?

A 35-year-old RADA graduate whose breakout TV role is as the second-eldest Bridgerton child, a role he was cast in in 2019.

Have I seen him before?

Thompson played Willem in the stage adaptation of Hanya Yanigihara's A Little Life, which earned him a WhatsOnStage Award and a Laurence Olivier Award nomination. He also starred in the Netflix World War II miniseries Transatlantic and made his feature film debut in Christopher Nolan's 2017 blockbuster Dunkirk.

Who is Shelley Conn?

A 47-year-old actor and producer, who stars in fantasy comedy Good Omens and previously had roles in shows such as crime drama Liar and the British version of relationship-focussed series Mistresses.

Conn is married to fellow actor Jonathan Kerrigan, with whom she shares her eleven-year-old son Oscar Kerrigan.

Have I seen her before?

It’s likely that you’ve seen Conn before, if TV series such as The Deceived, Liar, The Rook and Mistresses have been on your radar. As well as reprising her role for all three seasons of the latter series, which saw her star as one of four women navigating the complications of love, lust and heartbreak, she starred in 2018 thriller movie Malevolent, alongside Florence Pugh, and in 2020's heartwarming drama Love Sarah. She also starred in 2023's American superhero television series, Gen V.

Who is Hannah Dodd?

Colchester-born Dodd is a 28-year-old actor who started as a model before training as a dancer and finally ending up on the small screen as the sixth Bridgerton child.

Have I seen her before?

While her role as Francesca is her most prominent yet, she also had a small role in Netflix's 2022 film Enola Holmes 2, but we predict that Dodd is merely a star in the making and there will be many leading roles to come.

Who is Sam Thompson?

He is a 39-year-old graduate from the notorious Guildhall School of Music and Drama who joined the cast of Bridgerton in the third season as Penelope Featherington's new suitor Lord Debling, who tried to pry her away from the arms of Colin Bridgerton.

Have I seen him before?

The chances are very high that you may have enjoyed something that Phillip's starred in before, yes. The Crown, Grantchester and The Syndicate are among the many productions that he's been a part of during his career to date.

Who is Adjoa Andoh?

A 61-year-old Bristol-born British actor who is well-respected in the theatre world and a familiar face for British viewers.

Have I seen her before?

Yes, it's very likely as she is an extremely acclaimed British actor with a particularly impressive legacy when it comes to the stage, including having starred in leading roles for the Royal Shakespeare Company, the National Theatre, the Royal Court Theatre and the Almeida Theatre. Andoh played Richard II at the world famous Globe theatre in the first Shakespeare play to be performed and staged entirely by women of colour. The play was also directed by theatre director, Lynette Linton.

TV wise, not only did Andoh play a leading role in Bridgerton's 2023 prequel, Queen Charlotte, but she also made her Hollywood debut in 2010 with the Morgan Freeman-starring and Clint Eastwood-directed Nelson Mandela biopic, Invictus. She also played Nurse Collette Griffiths in Casualty for 10 years, starred in two series of Doctor Who, and was in Eastenders for a year in the early 90s.

Who is Bessie Carter?

A British actress with a legendary set of acting parents in the form of mother Imelda Staunton, aka Dolores Umbridge from Harry Potter and Queen Elizabeth II in The Crown, and her father Jim Carter, who played Mr Carson in Downton Abbey.

Have I seen her before?

Carter had two high-profile roles prior to joining the cast of Bridgerton, playing Evie Wilcox in the BBC adaptation of Howard's End and Violet in Beecham House. She also played one of the nasty factory women who bully Fantine (played by Oscar winner Anne Hathaway) in the 2012 adaptation of Les Misérables.

Who is Regé-Jean Page?

A 36-year-old British-Zimbabwean actor who spent his childhood both in London and Harare, Zimbabwe. He also has 1.7 million followers on Instagram.

Have I seen him before?

This isn't Page's first time working with Rhimes having starred in her American legal drama For The People in 2018. Over the years, he's also had parts in Roots, British series Waterloo Road, hospital drama Casualty and even a small part in Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows: Part One.

More recently, he featured opposite Chris Pine and Bradley Cooper in last year's Dungeons & Dragons: Honour Among Thieves, and also starred in 2022's The Gray Man with Ryan Gosling and Chris Evans.

Page is also a star of the theatre, with roles in The History Boys and The Merchant of Venice. The actor has prevously told ELLE UK that of all the people to have inspired his career, one of his most memorable was American actor and playwright Anna Deavre Smith in her one-woman show.

Who is Jonathan Bailey?

An award-winning 36-year-old British actor.

Have I seen him before?

If you were a fan of adored crime drama Broadchurch then yes, as Bailey played journalist Olly Stephens in the series, alongside Olivia Colman and David Tennant. Elsewhere on the screen, he's starred in comedy W1A and played artist Leonardo da Vinci in the children's CBBC programme Leonardo. He will also star opposite Ariana Grande and Cynthia Erivo in the first installment of this year's long-awaited adaptation of Wicked.

In 2019, Bailey won an Olivier award, which are oft-considered the BAFTAs of theatre, for his role in the revival of the musical, Company.

Who is Phoebe Dynevor?

A 29-year-old actress from Greater Manchester. Speaking to ELLE UK ahead of the launch of Bridgerton, Dynevor revealed more about her passions and likes, sharing all of her cultural favourites which include TV series The Morning Show and The Undoing, the singer Jhené Aiko, films La La Land and Breakfast at Tiffany's and Marriage Story.

In sad news for fans though, despite starring in the first two seasons of the show, Dynevor explained to Screen Rant during the Sundance Film Festival last year that she won't be returning for its third installment. 'Sadly not in season three. Potentially in the future. But season three, I'm just excited to watch as a viewer,' she said.

Have I seen her before?

Similarly to her on-screen love interest Page, Dynevor has also starred in the BBC's Waterloo Road as well as another cult British TV series, Prisoners Wives. Before Bridgerton, she was best known for starring in Snatch, the TV show based on Guy Richie's film of the same name alongside Rupert Grint and Luke Pasqualino. Last year, she also starred in Netflix original film Fair Play and in 2021 featured in another period drama, The Colour Room.

Any British audiences also might recognise Dynevor's face as her mother Sally Dynevor is an icon of British TV, having played Coronation Street's Sally Webster since 1986.

Who is Ben Miller?

A 58-year-old British actor, who is best associated with comedies having made up 50% of the Armstrong and Miller duo. Miller and his Cambridge University classmate, Alexander Armstrong, had their own sketch show in the 00s.

Have I seen him before?

It's very likely especially given he is one half of the aforementioned BAFTA-winning comedy duo. Miller's backlog of British comedy sitcoms include the likes of The Worst Week Of My Life and Moving Wallpaper and films like Paddington and Johnny English. He also portrayed media mogul Rupert Murdoch on the Tracey Ullman Show and starred in the first two series of the BBC's Death In Paradise.

Who is Ruth Gemmell?

A British actress who has starred in a very beloved children's TV show.

Have I seen her before?

Following the release of Bridgerton, social media went into a frenzy when British viewers made the connection that Lady Bridgerton was also the mother of Tracy Beaker in the 2004 TV movie based on Jacqueline Wilson's cult book.

As well as this iconic role, Gemmell has featured in last year's Bridgerton prequel, Queen Charlotte, as well as having had recurring roles in The Bill, Eastenders, Silent Witness and Deep State.

Who is Julie Andrews?

Of course, the Academy Award, BAFTA, Emmy and Grammy award-winning actor, who is the narrator of Bridgerton, requires no introduction.

Have I seen her before?

Where do we start? Some of Dame Julie Andrews first - and most famous - roles were filmed in the 1960s with Mary Poppins, The Sound of Music and Thoroughly Modern Millie. But her work didn't stop there: in the years since, has continued creating her legacy with Victor/Victoria, That's Life, Star, The Princess Diaries (as the Queen of Genovia) not forgetting her voice parts in Shrek 2 and Despicable Me.