This week’s episode is all about The Master’s big plan and…..Buffy’s new crush.

1.Poor Slaying Form

“Never Kill a Boy on the First Date” begins with what Buffy does best, slaying a vampire. Once the one-on-one battle is over, it’s then revealed that Giles is hiding behind a tombstone grading her. The opening of this episode is a funny gag showing us more quirkiness to Giles’s and Buffy’s teacher/student relationship. The takeaway from their conversation is that when you’re slaying, your objective is to “plunge and move on” and not be flashy with your stabbing. So remember that next time when you’re out in the world slaying.

2. The Master is Back Preaching From His Bubble

The past two episodes of Buffy the Vampire Slayer have just been “monster of the week” episodes. In “Never Kill a Boy on the First Date” The Master, the overarching bad guy of season one, returns to the forefront. This time The Master has a new prophecy up his sleeves (apparently there are numerous prophecies that The Master thinks will help him get out of his entrapment underground.) The prophecy involves five people dying on a certain night and when that happens, an “Anointed One” will rise. We’re told that the one that will rise will be a great adversary to Buffy. It’s a better prophecy than the previous ones and doesn’t involve Claw Guy.

3. Broody, Quite Owen

Owen is introduced in this episode. For the life of me, I can’t remember if Owen plays a big part in season one, other than the role he plays in “Never Kill a Boy on the First Date”, or not. The reason why I probably can’t remember is well….he’s pretty boring. Owen is the embodiment of the stereotypical “sensitive guy.” We get it, Owen, you’re a good looking guy who likes to sit alone contemplating the works of Emily Dickinson. I bet he likes long walks on the beach too or he maybe enjoys reading Walt Whitman in the woods. Of course, Angel is jealous.

Regardless, we see Buffy awkwardly fall head over hills for this Owen. To the point, he distracts her from paying full attention to stopping the Master’s plan. At least by the end of the episode, she learns the lesson that she shouldn’t be dating someone who doesn’t know she’s a slayer. If she did, she would be putting whoever she’s dating at risk. Buffy’s responsibility is very similar to that of a superhero. And we all know, “with great powers, come great responsibilities.” Buffy carries the burden that people around her could be hurt because of her being The Slayer and she realizes this.

4. Xander and Willow Have Giles’s Back

While Buffy is distracted by Owen, Giles is trying to figure the whole “Anointed One” prophecy out. Luckily Xander and Willow risk the danger and decide to follow Giles to the morgue. If they didn’t, who would have saved him? Well, they didn’t exactly save him, but they do run all the way to the club to get Buffy for help. What’s the point of your beeper Buffy, if your pals don’t know how contact you by beeper?

5. Another Twist Ending

The gang thinks they saved the day, but “The Anointed” turns out not to be the over-religious creepy guy from the bus crash. In a Shyamalan twist, the anointed one is revealed to be the child from the crash. All kidding aside, it is a good twist.

Join me next for a discussion on episode six, “The Pack.”