Animal Crossing: Wild World -- A Case Study

By Bryn Williams |

Nintendo's Katsuya Eguchi delivered a session that asks "Is that a franchise in your pocket?"

One of last sessions today at the GDC saw Nintendo's Katsuya Eguchi, director of Animal Crossing: Wild World, deliver a case study regarding the challenges of recreating a console franchise on a wireless handheld console system. Mr. Eguchi's past achievements at NCL include being a course designer for prestigious games such as Super Mario Bros. 3, Super Mario World, Wave Race 64 and Yoshi's Story.

The session revolved around the notion that consoles and handheld consoles have distinct differences in terms of hardware, so careful consideration needs to be given before attempting to migrate a fully fledged franchise to a portable platform. Mr. Eguchi began by briefly recapping the original Animal Crossing's development lifecycle, stating that the game was planned to be a title for the ill-fated 64DD add-on hardware released only in Japan. The 64DD offered a way for the developer to utilize unique hardware features, such as the relatively large amount of on-board memory and the real-time clock.

But as the 64DD proved to be a failing business model in Japan at that time, a swift redesign was needed for the AC project. It was determined that the game would now be developed for the standard N64 platform, but due to certain hardware limitations, this was seen as the wrong way to go. In terms of gameplay ideals, AC was also originally intended to be quite different than the final product turned out to be. At one point, there were to be dungeons and monsters in the game, and common goals that needed to be achieved by the players.

Eguchi's team decided in the end to make Animal Crossing a game that's very essence would be one of communication rather than story-telling or goal achievement, but that in itself would present many significant design challenges. It was decided that AC would be made for the upcoming GameCube hardware and would be a game that had absolutely no story whatsoever, but needed instead, motivational and addictive gameplay.

So what actually makes AC fun and interesting to play? The key to its success -- the DS game has currently sold over 2.8 million units worldwide to date -- is the communication aspect. The game creates unique personal experiences as well as the multiplayer-enabled shared experiences. It has a large degree of freedom and a wide variety of choices, but none of this matters unless the gamers are given some level of tutoring as to what can be done via the gameplay.

The premise then, was to limit the number of choices at first for the user. For example, the local store would have a limited selection of items to buy initially, so as not to overwhelm and confuse. As the player became accustomed to the game, more and more items are available and so on.

One of the more interesting challenges facing the development team was giving the player the motivation to play the game on a daily basis -- something that is tricky when such a great amount of freedom is given over. The notion that it was important for the player to feel satisfied actually meant that in reality, the design team needed make things quite inconvenient in some respects. Take the example of growing a fruit-bearing tree. Players would need to first find their desired piece of fruit (maybe from another town, or randomly on their own), and then they would need to plant it. It would need nurturing and feeding for a few real-time days before fruit grows, and once the fruit has been harvested, the player would need to try and sell the fruit at the store. It would then be several more days before more fruit could be harvested. This is essentially not very convenient for the player.

Next: Page 2 >>

Page: 1 2