Richard Jefferson: Chet Holmgren’s numbers would’ve been ‘equally as ridiculous’ as Wemby’s if he were on Spurs

Richard Jefferson — who won the only title of his NBA career back with the Cleveland Cavaliers in 2016 — argued that Oklahoma City Thunder big man Chet Holmgren would have put up stats similar to what Victor Wembanyama put up if he had played for the San Antonio Spurs during the 2023-24 campaign.

The Hornets got a very difficult cup draw

On Friday, the NBA announced the groups for the second annual In-Season Tournament, now known as the Emirates NBA Cup because Emirates can’t help themselves from sponsoring cups.

Richard Jefferson On Why Losing Klay Thompson Was Such A Big Blow To The Lakers

In a recent episode of the 'Road Trippin' podcast, former NBA swingman Richard Jefferson gave his candid take on the Lakers' 2024 offseason. According to Jefferson, losing out on Klay Thompson, who signed with the Mavericks this summer, was a major blow to their chances to contend next season.

Richard Jefferson shares true story about Warriors’ Klay Thompson disrespect

Klay Thompson is joining the Dallas Mavericks after agreeing to a $50 million sign-and-trade with the Golden State Warriors. Thompson has spent his entire career with the Warriors but is now set for a new chapter in Dallas.

Jared McCain explains handling TikTok during wins and losses, hilariously roasts Richard Jefferson

Jared McCain carries a big social media presence with him as he prepares to enter the NBA, particularly on TikTok. The guard used that to his advantage as a freshman at Duke, using it to create business opportunities for himself through NIL.

Richard Jefferson blames Lakers’ front office for JJ Redick hiring criticism

The Los Angeles Lakers will enter the upcoming season with JJ Redick as their new head coach. While one could argue that the former NBA player is a good media analyst, many fans are concerned with Redick’s lack of coaching experience.

Why Tim Duncan is the most underappreciated legend ever

When San Antonio Spurs legend Tim Duncan joined the inaugural “Richard Jefferson and Larry Show” recently, Jefferson started the interview by asking the Hall of Famer whether he chose to retire from the NBA in sudden fashion so that he could avoid any sort of real fanfare and attention.

Tim Duncan reveals which of his Spurs Hall of Fame teammates he’d start, bench and cut

The greatest San Antonio Spurs player of all-time played extensively with three teammates who are also in the Basketball Hall of Fame. Between David Robinson, Tony Parker and Manu Ginobili, Tim Duncan was asked which one he’d start, which he’d bench and which he’d cut.

Tim Duncan Features In Hilarious Video Where Richard Jefferson Borrows His NBA Championship Trophy

Richard Jefferson put together an incredible video skit for social media, bringing Tim Duncan to feature alongside him. The notoriously private Duncan rarely makes such lighthearted appearance and in this skit, lends Jefferson one of the five Larry O'Brien trophies he's won in his career for one day.

Ben Stiller, Richard Jefferson Feud Over Knicks

It's safe to say that Richard Jefferson won't be appearing in Ben Stiller's Circle of Trust any time soon. Stiller took issue with Jefferson's analysis amidst the New York Knicks' Sunday victory over the Philadelphia 76ers, one narrated by the 17-year NBA veteran on the airwaves of ABC.

Richard Jefferson On How He Got Drunk With Raptors Cheerleaders A Night Before Game: 'Bartender, Can I Get 25 Shots Immediately'

Richard Jefferson was one of the standout wings of the early 2000s, flying all around the court with the New Jersey Nets. Jefferson shared an incredible drinking story from his time with the Nets, where a night partying with the Toronto Raptors dance team led to one of the greatest games of his career.

Richard Jefferson Says He Could Easily Beat 61-Year-Old Michael Jordan In A 1-On-1 Right Now

Richard Jefferson was asked by TheScore what would happen if he and Michael Jordan were to have a 1-on-1 today. Jefferson had a clear answer, claiming he'd beat the six-time champion by a score of 11-7.

When Richard Jefferson fought Nets teammate Kenyon Martin

During the 2000s, Richard Jefferson was a valuable member of the New Jersey Nets, serving as their mainstay starting small forward. During that time, he was also teammates with Kenyon Martin for a few years, including their runs to the 2002 and 20023 NBA Finals.

"I almost wrecked my car on the freeway" - Richard Jefferson after hearing he would be playing with Jason Kidd

Richard Jefferson was drafted with the 13th overall pick in the 2001 NBA draft, under the impression that he would be playing for the Houston Rockets. However, shortly after, RJ was told he was traded to the New Jersey Nets, which initially was an uncharted place for him.

Richard Jefferson: Why Knicks Can Trade For Joel Embiid ... and More

Whenever a star player in the NBA could be moving to a new destination, the New York Knicks always seem to be part of the conversation. Former NBA player

Knicks Pick Channing Frye Recalls Richard Jefferson's 'Welcome to the NBA' Gift

Mere hours after his NBA entry with the New York Knicks, Channing Frye was already putting up big numbers. Alas for the eighth overall pick of the 2005 NBA Draft, those big tallies came not on the statsheet but rather his credit card bill.

Richard Jefferson Credits Spurs, Gregg Popovich for 'Extending Career'

Richard Jefferson is a rising name in the NBA media world, but it didn't come until after a long and fruitful career in the league. Jefferson spent 17 seasons in the NBA, three of those came with the San Antonio Spurs from 2009-12, where his career began to take a shift.