The San Antonio Spurs acquired Richard Jefferson expecting him to help revitalize their offense. Jefferson has struggled a bit with his scoring, but he is trying to bring an unexpected benefit to the club.

Jefferson is emerging as the Spurs' designated defensive stopper who is usually assigned the opponent's best perimeter scorer. So look for Jefferson to spend time defending Brandon Roy during Friday night's game.

The small forward hasn't been known as a strong defender, but the Spurs need a individual defensive presence on the perimeter after they sent former defensive specialist Bruce Bowen to Milwaukee as part of the trade for Jefferson. Bowen was slowing down during his eighth and final season in San Antonio, and the Spurs needed someone to step up.

Jefferson is averaging 12.3 points and 2.8 rebounds a game in his first three games, the lowest numbers of his career since he was a rookie in 2001-02. Playing on a team with Tim Duncan, Tony Parker and Manu Ginobili, Jefferson's decrease in scoring isn't surprising. Jefferson is still learning and adjusting to Spurs' coach Gregg Popovich's offensive and defensive sets, but he played his best game as a Spur when he scored 21 points on 7 of 8 shooting in the Spurs' 113-94 win against Sacramento on Saturday. Then he scored 14 points on 5 of 9 shooting against Utah on Thursday. Jefferson will get his share of jump shots with the Spurs playing off Duncan's presence in the post area, but he will be expected to penetrate using his athleticism, something the Spurs do need.

The Spurs are playing their second set of back-to-back games in a little more than a week. The

on Thursday night and face the Blazers tonight. The Spurs lost three of four regular-season games to Portland last season and they haven't won at the Rose Garden since April 6, 2008.

The Spurs know who they are as a team while the Blazers continue to search for their identity. The "Big Three" of Duncan, Parker and Ginobili are the mainstays, and Jefferson will certainly help. The Spurs also have a deep bench with Antonio McDyess, Michael Finley, Roger Mason and rookie DeJuan Blair.

The Spurs have won two of their first four games, but they don't concern themselves too much with the early season schedule. The Spurs are much more interested in playing their best basketball going into the playoffs, and they usually pick up their intensity after the New Year.

Udoka excited about opportunity with Kings:

Ime Udoka says he thinks he can remain with the Sacramento Kings for the entire season.

"I’m looking at it in the same way as Portland (in 2006)," Udoka said Thursday night. "It’s a chance to come in and play some minutes, similar to when I came to Portland."

The former Blazer and Portland State player will likely see his first action when Sacramento plays at Utah Saturday night. Sacramento coach Paul Westphal wanted Udoka to get in a practice with the team before playing him in a game.

"They needed a defensive presence to guard some of the wings guys. Bring a little toughness," Udoka said. "And they wanted a veteran presence."

Udoka said his agent Mark Bartlestein, contacted Utah, Chicago, Oklahoma City and Sacramento. But the Kings presented the best opportunity for long-term success for Udoka, now in his sixth season in the league.

"I wanted a place where I would have a chance to play and be there the whole year, not for a month or so," Udoka said.

Udoka's fortunes received a boost after the Kings released Desmond Mason, a similar type of player. Mason had struggled throughout the preseason and the Kings' first four regular season games. Mason's departure and

will certainly open up court time for Udoka.

"They saw me twice in the preseason (Blazers played Sacramento twice)," Udoka said. "They know what I can do, and they just told me do what you did in San Antonio - guard guys, chase them around and knock down shots."

News, notes and links:

running for governor?

by Jazz.

Boozer turns

."

Rookie

turning heads.

Missed shots haunt

.

provide spark.

Cavs-Knicks:

speculation heats up ... as usual.

LBJ says

.

Shock:

against Bulls.

struggling Jose Calderon.

Glen Davis wants to

.

Byron Scott

.

Devin Harris

at least another six games.

Players getting

shots before kids?

Anyone notice league

?