Richard Jefferson had a lengthy NBA career as a player. In fact, he had several stopovers in the league, having played for the New Jersey Nets, Milwaukee Bucks, San Antonio Spurs, Golden State Warriors, Utah Jazz, Dallas Mavericks, Cleveland Cavaliers, and the Denver Nuggets, which helped Jefferson build a net worth of $50 million.

His career was highlighted by an NBA championship in 2016 as part of the historic Cavaliers squad that climbed out of a 3-1 Finals series hole. But while Jefferson had a solid NBA career and is continuing to make his presence felt as an analyst, it's sad to say that Jefferson has yet to find a way to navigate the romantic aspect of his life. For this piece, let's get to know more about Richard Jefferson's dating life.

Richard Jefferson's rumored ex-wife Teresa Lourenco

Teresa Lourenco was born Jan. 25, 1981, in Trinidad and Tobago. She made waves as a model and turned heads on television.

Lourenco was a model who has worked with agencies such as IconicFocus and Mega Model Agency. Lourenco also modeled for major brands such as Victoria's Secret, Christian Dior, Valentino, Ralph Lauren, and Gap.

As a model, one of her most notable achievements include winning the “Les Trophees de la Mode” in Paris for Best New Face. Furthermore, she was also the recipient of the International Design Award.

According to IMDB, Lourenco appeared in the music video of Lenny Kravitz's Again. She also appeared in the soundtrack of television series Rage. Furthermore, Lourenco also made an appearance in the television series Die Harald Schmidt Show.

Teresa Lourenco's relationship with Richard Jefferson

Given that Jefferson and Lourenco kept their relationship under wraps, little to no details were known about the allegedly married couple. However, the couple is no longer today. Based on sources, Lourenco is currently married to Juice Press founder Marcus Antebi.

Richard Jefferson's ex-girlfriend Jennie Finch

Jennie Finch was born on Sept. 3, 1980, in La Mirada, Calif. She went to La Mirada High School and excelled in basketball and volleyball.

Finch emerged as one of the greatest softball players in NCAA history during her time at the University of Arizona. In 2002, the former Arizona softball star recorded 51 consecutive wins to set a new NCAA record for consecutive victories by a pitcher.

For making history, Finch revealed “It's awesome and everything, but it's nice to get it over with. I tried to treat it just like any other game; we want to win every game, and it doesn't matter if I'm on the mound or not. It's significant and it's nice. But it doesn't even come close to the team goal of winning a national championship.”

Finch represented Team USA internationally. She wore the national team colors at the 2004 and 2008 Olympics.

At the 2004 Athens Summer Olympics, Finch was part of the national squad that brought home gold. Four years later, she returned to the Olympic stage to help Team USA win silver.

Jennie Finch's relationship with Richard Jefferson

Jefferson and Finch dated during their days at Arizona. Both were student-athletes.

However, the relationship came to an end at some point after Jefferson began his NBA career. Currently, Finch is happily married to former MLB player Casey Daigle.

Richard Jefferson's ex-fiancée Kesha Nicols

Kesha Nicols was born July 25, 1978 in Drexel, N.C. Nicols embarked on a career path in dance, as per her LinkedIn profile. In 2001, she was hired as a dance specialist for Dreher High School.

In 2004, she was hired as a professional dancer for the New Jersey Nets of the NBA. Nicols would also work as a dancer and cheerleader for NBA Entertainment. In 2017, Nicols worked as an Artistic Director and Dance Instructor at Sherri's School of Dance.

Aside from having a career in dance, Nicols also took on corporate jobs. While being a dancer for the New Jersey Nets, Nicols also worked as a the Director of New Business Development for HEAT USA.

Years later, Nicols worked as the CEO & Artistic Director for dance entertainment firm Sugar & Spice Productions, LLC. In 2016, Nicols also served as the President of the Board of Directors for religious organization Jaime Torres Ministries, Inc.

In 2013, Nicols was one of the founding partners for lifestyle brand BlenDiva. Two years later, Nicols launched her own dance academy called Southern Swag Dance Academy. Nicols continues to oversee the overall operations of the dance studio.

Kesha Nichols' relationship with Richard Jefferson

According to Sportskeeda, Jefferson and Nicols met and dated since they met when they were both working for the New Jersey Nets organization with Jefferson as a player while Nicols was a cheerleader. After dating for five years, the couple was scheduled to tie the knot on July 22, 2009, with the ceremony supposedly held at the Mandarin Oriental hotel in New York City.

However, Jefferson surprisingly called off the wedding.

In the same article by Sportskeeda, Jefferson explained “There was a lot of stress and tension in the relationship. We've been through a lot — but we just couldn't continue.”

Despite the wedding being called off, Nicols clarified that she will continue to care for the current NBA analyst, even from a distance.

In a report by ABC News, Nicols confessed “I have no hard feelings. I will always care about him. … My heart is broken. I'll miss him as a friend.”

Although there were rumors that the wedding was worth $2 million, Nicols revealed that the actual cost of the wedding was only around $500,000. Nevertheless, what mattered more was marrying the right person.

In the same conversation with ABC News, Nicols added “They were talking about how much was spent on the wedding; the No. 1 thing to me was marrying the person I was in love with.”

Nevertheless, this is all the information that we have on Richard Jefferson's dating life.