Twitter:

Needless to say, former San Antonio Spurs forward Richard Jefferson's time in Silver and Black wasn't the best.

After the Spurs traded for Jefferson with the Bucks in 2009, he was touted as the missing piece the team needed during their title run but he never panned out as many thought he would.

Even Spurs GM R.C. Buford of Jefferson after the trade was complete.

“We are thrilled to add Richard Jefferson to the Spurs roster. He is a talented, athletic player - in the prime of his career - who can influence the game on both ends of the court. We think he is a great fit for our team."

His scoring numbers were sub-par and steadily declined each season with the Spurs averaging 12.3 points in 2009-10, 11.0 in 2010-11, and 9.2 in his final season in San Antonio through 41 games before being traded to the Warriors for Stephen Jackson.

Spurs fans still shudder when they hear his name and Jefferson admits, he wasn't the best RJ in San Antonio while as a guest on The Bill Simmons Podcast.

"And truth be told, I was not the best version of myself when I was there."

"Honestly, it was a new experience for me. I think the role that I was playing there was unlike anything that I've done before in my career. You remember in the (New) Jersey (Nets) days it was fast-pace, go up and down, iso-basketball. There (San Antonio) it's very, a lot of pick-and-rolls and I was never a pick-and-roll player so it was pick-and-roll with Tony (Parker), Manu (Ginobili) and then you have the post-ups with Tim (Duncan). It was like 'Richard stand over here. Stretch the floor.'"

Although the Spurs' system did not lend to Jefferson's style of play, he does say the system works flawlessly and credits it for the success of Kawhi Leonard.

"I think part of the reason you've seen the success of Kawhi (Leonard) is because you've seen Tim (Duncan) leave, Tony (Parker) getting older, Manu (Ginobili) older. I came in when those guys were kind of still in their primes or towards the end of the primes. So it was more about 'Hey, come here and help us.'"

I didn't handle it great."

Jefferson did go on to say he couldn't adjust to his minutes getting reduced by Head Coach Gregg Popovich after being one of the leaders in minutes-played while with the Nets and simply says it was just a different environment.

He also said he was dealing with a lot of things off the court that got in his way of being a productive player with the Spurs.

"I went through a lot in that moment in time. I was having a lot of things off the court and just like anything, you're human.

I really wish I would have been a better version of myself in that moment."

Fast forward and Jefferson has gone on to have a solid career post-Spurs, winning a title with the Cavaliers in 2016 and still carrying with him lessons learned in San Antonio which has helped prolong his career.

Including Popovich's "fat-shaming" ways.

"But I will say a lot of the things that I learned there have helped me prolong my career since the time I left there.

"The way you need to workout during the summer, the taking care of your body, the constant focus on your weight and your body fat and everything that you do."

You really have to watch it and manage it (body fat). Something that San Antonio used to be up on the board."

You can see if you gained weight. Full on fat-shaming. It was a good time.

All-in-all, Jefferson's time wasn't the greatest for him nor San Antonio. It got to the point the Spurs tried to amnesty him prior to begin traded. But as they say, time heals all wounds and Jefferson's statements should put some closure on his chapter in San Antonio.

Sometimes things don't work out in life, and Jefferson's time in San Antonio proves it.

For the full interview check out the podcast where RJ talk highly of Popovich and explains just how great a teammate Duncan was.