Hadrian’s Arch (also known as Hadrian’s Gate) is one of the most iconic and accessible antique monuments in modern Athens. Built in the 2nd century CE by the Athenians in honor of Hadrian, the landmark contains two inscriptions that appear to equate the emperor with the city’s legendary founder, Theseus. By the time the arch was dedicated in c. 131 CE Hadrian had been an Athenian citizen for two decades and I argue that, by including the two inscriptions, the residents of the polis were honoring him as an Athenian first and as the reigning Roman emperor second. But how and why did the monument survive in such good condition through nearly twenty centuries and multiple ruling regimes? This paper discusses the motivation(s) behind the dedication of the arch and traces its cultural history from the 2nd century CE to the present. Throughout the centuries, it has served various purposes, including that of an honorary arch, a city gate, probably as a bell tower to a Byzantine-era church, and it has even been replicated in an 18th-century estate in England. The arch has also featured in art, literature, poetry, music, and, in recent years, it has been illuminated in bright colors in order to raise awareness for various social causes. Nevertheless, its most enduring function since the naissance of the Modern Greek state in 1830 has been that of a rendezvous point for both locals and tourists. Hadrian’s Arch is a testament to how the Roman past is not a closed chapter of the history of Athens but is very much alive and a vibrant part of the capital’s contemporary cityscape.

In the decade of the 1960’s the remains of a large building were discovered, 65 m southeast of the Library of Hadrian in Athens. The temple-like construction with dimensions 87 m and 39 m was identified with the Pantheon built under Hadrian. Recent research in the Library of Hadrian discovered a number of architectural features that match the colossal size of the building. Column bases and drums, as well as fragments from the superstructure, mostly incorporated in second use in the Tetraconch building, allow for the reconstruction of the outer and interior orders and their association with the in situ remains. The raised panels in the ashlars of the masonry, together with the octastyle prostyle plan which was used only during Hadrian’s years confirm the suggested chronology. As the cella corresponds to the 8 columns of the facade, the interior width equals 32 m, making the ‘Pantheon’ of Athens the broadest known cella, appropriate for the worship of all gods. The article includes stylistic comparisons with other works of the Hadrianic repertoire and views the ‘Pantheon’ as the Athenian response to the Pantheon in Rome.

"When discussing the topography of Athens, one thinks first of all of Judeich (1931) and Travlos (1971), still an inevitable point of departure for any attempt at a synthesis. And such an attempt would still not be possible without recourse to other invaluable texts by Wachsmuth, Milchhöfer, Cavvadias and Kawerau, Dörpfeld, Della Seta, and Graindor, to mention only a few of the protagonists of investigations on ancient Athens, or without the analytical work carried out by the Americans on the Agora, by the Germans on the Kerameikos, and by the Greeks on the Acropolis and in the city – especially during the building of the subway –, or the excellent general overviews by Camp (2001) and Etienne (2004). This study has the ambition of representing the topographical history of Athens without neglecting the contribution of a whole range of disciplines and viewpoints, and without forgetting to take account of written sources, not only per se, but in the light of the variety of interpretations resulting from different approaches - anthropological, political-historical, economic and religious. It is hence not a mere update, but a work that intends to rethink the history of the Athenian urban space employing new approaches and critically verifying all the opinions put forward in earlier studies. The book includes many photographs and images - almost all reworked -, which make it easier to follow the text. In addition to these, in the outer pockets of each volume are detailed area plans and, in the fourth volume, a general archaeological map of the Asty."

This paper examines the architectural ‘cleansing’ of Athens in the decades following the establishment of the Modern Greek state. The primary concern during this period was to connect Modern Greece with its glorious ancient past. Thus, the ancient monuments of the city, and especially the Acropolis and its surroundings became a source of inspiration and legitimation for the newly established state. The goal was to enhance the ancient monuments by freeing them from post-classical additions and alterations. In this process most of the post-classical history of the ancient structures was lost; within a few decades they were transformed from living monuments into museum pieces. The same principle guided the planning of the new capital. The classical emphasis led to a disregard for the Byzantine and Post-Byzantine architectural heritage and, in turn, to the destruction of a large number of churches in the course of the XIXe century. This history can only be recovered through the study of early maps and plans, visitors’ accounts, textual sources, and the material remains recovered by excavations. Here, I will provide an overview of the development of Athens in the Byzantine and later periods. Most of the surviving churches date to the Middle-Byzantine period, a time when Athens grew as a provincial town. Athens experienced a second period of growth under Ottoman rule, in the XVIe and XVIIe centuries, when many churches and chapels were built. In the last part of this paper, I will examine the architectural ‘cleansing’ of the XIXe century by documenting specific examples of demolished churches.