Patrick Joseph Sullivan, Jr., of Cheshire, beloved husband of Elizabeth Carlson Sullivan, passed away unexpectedly on March 14, 2024. He was born on May 12, 1961, in Waterbury, CT, to the late Patrick J. and Frances Sullivan, Sr.

Patrick was a graduate of St. Paul Catholic High School in Bristol. He went on to further his education at UCONN, earning a Bachelor of Science in Business Administration followed by an MBA from the University of Chicago Booth School of Business. He began his career in the financial industry at Bankers Trust Company and Bank of Montreal, both in NYC. Patrick was Chief Financial Officer at New Vision Television and a founder and CFO of US Broadcast Group. Shifting careers, he then became owner and President of Amstep Products in Bristol. Most recently, Patrick was the Chief Operations Officer at Global Medical Virtual Assistants.

Patrick had many passions including travelling the world, especially to places where he could experience different cultures or play a round of golf. He enjoyed March Madness (Go HUSKIES), almost any type of live music, slightly off-color comedy, summer drives in his convertible, and setting up his extravagant Christmas light display. He reveled in coaching his sons’ baseball and basketball teams and assisted with Boy Scout troop activities for several years. Patrick adored his family and would, nearly every day, gift someone ‘a little something’ and then, with a grin, ask “who takes care of you?”. And what he loved most was connecting with people. Whether family, friends, or complete strangers, Patrick was always up for a good conversation during which he would share his unique style of humor and inevitably leave you with a smile.

In addition to his wife, Elizabeth, Patrick is survived by his sons, Patrick J. Sullivan III and William C. Sullivan; sisters, Debra (Robert) Raboin and Anne (Rory) Eastman; mother-in-law, MaryAnn Carlson; siblings-in-law, Christine (Wayne) Pegolo, Glenn (Terri) Carlson, Jr., and Robert (Jill) Carlson; nieces and nephews, Amy (Jason), Beth, Caroline, Andrew, Kyle, Courtney (Michael), John, Alyssa and Christopher; great nieces and great nephews, Taylor, Patrick, Samantha, Bobby, Ellie and Aiden; and his cousin, Joe (Amy) Pelehach. Not to be forgotten, Patrick also leaves behind his furry dog companion, Finn. In addition to his parents, Patrick was predeceased by his brother, James Sullivan; father-in-law, Glenn Carlson, Sr.; niece, Jessica; nephew, Andrew; and his dogs, Bonnie and Clyde.

Family and friends are invited to pay their respects on Friday, March 22, 2024 from 4 p.m. to 7 p.m. at the Alderson-Ford Funeral Home, 615 South Main St., Cheshire, CT. In lieu of flowers, memorial contributions may be made to Cheshire Animal Control, 500 Highland Ave., Cheshire, CT 06410.