PEABODY: Joseph A. Sullivan, 93, beloved husband of the late Barbara (Marston) Sullivan, died peacefully on Thursday, January 29, 2015, at Exeter Hospital in Exeter, N.H.

Born in Lynn, he was the son of the late Frederick and Corinne (Walker) Sullivan. He graduated from Lynn English High School. He had lived in Peabody over 20 years, before moving to Northwood and Hampton, N.H., where he had lived the last 30 years.

Mr. Sullivan was a veteran of World War II, with service in the United States Army Air Corps, which is the branch that became the Air Force.

For a career, he worked as an Inspector with General Electric in Lynn, retiring over 25 years ago.

Sully was a member of the American Legion Post 210 of Saugus, enjoyed snowmobiling, building models, and was very handy with household repairs. He had a love for dogs, and was very devoted to various dogs he had over his life that were a source of much love and contentment for him. His most passionate interest was his devotion to family, especially the children, grandchildren and great-grandchildren.

He is survived by two daughters and sons-in-law, Donna and her husband, Patrick Morgan of Peabody and Robin Sullivan and her husband, John Gillen of Hampton, N.H.; a son and daughter-in-law, Loran and his wife, Bette Sullivan of Georgetown; five grandchildren, Loran Sullivan of Haverhill, Cheryl Blanchard of Carrollton, Texas, Kevin Collins of Peabody, Veronica Gillen of Tampa, Fla., and Bridget Gillen of Hampton; six great-grandchildren; and several nieces and nephews. He was preceded in death, besides his wife and parents, by siblings, Frederick J. Sullivan, John Sullivan, Rosamund Lang, Genevieve De Genio, and Margaret Marie.

Relatives and friends are kindly invited to gather for a visitation on Thursday, February 5th, from 10 to 11:30 a.m., in Conway, Cahill-Brodeur Funeral Home, 82 Lynn St., Peabody. A Funeral Service will be held at 11:30 a.m. Burial will be in Puritan Lawn Memorial Park, Peabody. Memorial donations may be made to any animal rescue or shelter of one’s choice. Please visit for his obituary and to sign condolences.