It is with great sadness that we announce the passing of Fr. Joseph Patrick Sullivan who was called home to the Father Monday morning, December 11, 2023 at Montreal's St. Mary's Hospital, following a brief illness.

He was 83.

Predeceased by his mother Kathleen Richardson, his father Joseph Sr, his brothers Thomas, Sean, Kevin, Jerry and Terry as well as his sisters Ellen and Catherine.

He is survived by brothers Michael and Danny.

As well as brother in law Richard and sister in law Monique.

He leaves to mourn many nephews and nieces, their children, and many other family members and friends.

Father Joe was very proud of his Irish background and served as Chaplain to several Irish Societies and was named Irishman of the year 1989.

A native son of St. Anthony of Padua in Little Burgundy, Fr. Joseph (Joe) Sullivan served a varied and rich ministry that spanned more than five decades.

Ordained May 13, 1967, he began his priestly ministry that spring at his home parish of St. Anthony and that summer as chaplain at Trail’s End Camp. In the years that followed, he served as assistant at St. Monica, Annunciation, St. Malachy and St. Edmund of Canterbury parishes, during which he also served as chaplain at Marymount, St. Pius X and Pierrefonds Comprehensive secondary schools.

In 1977, he began a seven-year mandate as pastor of Transfiguration of Our Lord, during which he also served for two years as part-time chaplain at the Royal Victoria Hospital. He was engaged in full-time hospital chaplaincy work from 1985 to ’88, first at the Royal Victoria, then at the Montreal Children’s. In 1988, he was appointed pastor of St. John Brébeuf and in 1994, he was named parochial administrator to the east-end communities of St. Aloysius and St. Philip Neri, serving until 2008. He returned to Transfiguration as administrator until 2010 before retiring, after which he was available for occasional ministry.

While in the East-end, Fr. Sullivan also took on a new ministry at Canada’s highest security prison facility located in Ste-Anne-des-Plaines, Quebec, from 1995 to 2005, where he ministered specifically to prisoners housed in the Special Handling Unit.

A Wake for Father Joe to take place on Thursday January 4, 2024 from 6 - 9 pm, in Transfiguration of Our Lord Catholic Church. A prayer service will be held at 7:30 pm.

A funeral Mass will be held at Transfiguration of Our Lord Parish on Friday, January 5, 2024 at 11:00 a.m. 11775 Rue Filion, Montréal H4J1T4.

The Exhibition will be held on Thursday, January 4, 2023 from 6 to 9 p.m. A prayer service is planned for 7:30 p.m.

Followed by a reception at the Parish Hall.

Heartfelt prayers and condolences to Fr. Sullivan's family, close friends and his brother priests, and all those who were touched by his ministry.

''Eternal rest grant unto him, O Lord,

and may perpetual light shine upon him.

May he rest in peace.''

In lieu of flowers, donations to the charity of your choice would be appreciated.