Festival Express Script - Dialogue Transcript

Voila! Finally, the Festival Express script is here for all you quotes spouting fans of the concert documentary movie. This script is a transcript that was painstakingly transcribed using the screenplay and/or viewings of Festival Express. I know, I know, I still need to get the cast names in there and I'll be eternally tweaking it, so if you have any corrections, feel free to drop me a line. You won't hurt my feelings. Honest. Swing on back to Drew's Script-O-Rama afterwards for more free movie scripts!

Festival Express Script

Driving that train High on cocaine Casey Jones, you better watch your speed Trouble ahead Trouble behind And you know that notion just crossed my mind [ music ] This old engine makes it on time Leaves central station 'bout a quarter to nine Hits river junction at seventeen to At a quarter to ten you know it's drivin' again Driving that train High on cocaine Casey Jones, you better watch your speed Trouble ahead Trouble behind And you know that notion just crossed my mind [ music ] Drive your train, whoo! [ music ] Trouble with you is the trouble with me Got two good eyes but still don't see Come round the bend you know it's the end The fireman screams and the engine just gleams Driving that train high on cocaine Casey Jones, You better watch your speed Trouble ahead Trouble behind And you know that notion just crossed my mind Driving that train high on cocaine Casey Jones, you better watch your speed Trouble ahead you know Trouble behind And you know that notion just crossed my mind And you know that notion Just crossed my mind [ guitar music ] Goin' down the road feeling bad Goin' down the road feeling bad Goin' down the road feeling bad Oh no, no Don't wanna be treated this way Mama told me, son... We were going to get a whole bunch of... acts together and do a big festival. And rather than do it at one site, I said, "We're going To travel the country On a private train." [ music ] Well, the normal mode was to go into a ci... fly into a city, do the show and then leave. So this was... You were kind of... more like a travelling circus. Walker: I wanted it to be a party, so I put... amps and a Hammond B and a drum kit in the bar car and I set it up like that. Oh, no, no Don't wanna be treated this way It was unusual because you never expected to... to open a passenger car door and... and see a band playing, you know. Microphones and cameras and... It was... it was not only a concert on the stage, it was a concert for the entire travel. The phrase that's become common now about leaving your ego at the door, we left... we left our egos at the station, quite frankly Walker: I had a hard time getting C.N. to agree to rent me the train. Originally they told me that... I'd have to... go from west to east, and I said, you know, no way. It's "Go west, young man." [ music ] And just imagine putting a bunch of crazy musicians together, and... and telling them to go have a good time, try and have a good time. Not a problem. [ music ] I knew that this was going to be our home, for the next week, you know I said, "Wow, what an adventure." I thought, "This is really In the spirit of... of... of the music, and of the times," you know, in trying new things. [ music ] I said, "This going to be exciting." And the people they had on there was exciting, [ chuckling ] as the train ride was. [ music ] It was a train full of insane people, careening across the Canadian countryside, making music night and day. And then occasionally we'd get off the train and go play a concert. [ guitar music ] Man: The Grateful Dead, The Grateful Dead. [ guitar music ] [ wild cheering ] Don't ease don't ease Don't ease me in I've been all night long coming home Don't ease me in I was standing on the corner With a dollar in my hand I was looking for a woman, sweet mama Didn't have no man Don't ease don't ease Don't ease me in I've been all night long coming home Don't ease me in That girl I love She's sweet and true And that dress she wears, sweet mama It's pink and blue She brings me coffee She brings me tea You know she brings me every darn thing But the jailhouse key Don't ease don't ease Don't ease me in I've been all night long coming home Don't ease me in [ music ] Don't ease don't ease Don't ease me in I've been all night long coming home Don't ease me in I was walking down main Deep Ellem too You know all the women round there Got the texas blues Don't ease don't ease Don't ease me in I've been all night long coming home Don't ease me in Don't ease don't ease Don't ease me in I've been all night long coming home Don't ease me in [ cheering ] Garcia: Thank you. And the idea of this festival was an ingenious one. Instead of, like, getting everybody from all over the continent and everywhere to come to one place, it would be like the mountain would go to Mohammed. Like, you would take this festival to the various places, and it was a great idea, except, of course, by this point, it... it had reached Canada, the idea that all these festivals really should be free. Just in front of the festival, we received this leaflet, that told people to boycott buying tickets for this festival. And it said that, you know, you know, this is our music. $ . is an outrageous fee and the festival should be free. As I recall, there were some people who were quite vocal about thinking that... the musicians should be playing... We should be playing for free, regardless of the expense that it takes for us to get there and... and the fact that we need to make a living, details like that. I had $ . worth of pay-duty police. men a shift. And I had them on horseback. And I had a good relationship with the police department, so I knew I was going to be facing protesters, and I was prepared for that. Man: There are a hell of a lot of people out there. They're having their heads busted by the pigs. Crowd: [ yelling ] And why don't... He made his money. Why don't you let them in now? You don't need to get any more money. [ yelling ] See what I mean? The pigs are on his side. He's a pig like the rest of them. Hey, could everybody calm down, for a minute? Oh, wait a minute. [ yelling ] Hold it. We're trying to do something, and... and Jerry Garcia would like to explain to you exactly what we're trying to do. The thing we're trying to do is organize another sort of scene that we can have here, and we would like, if possible, man, to have, like, about a half hour of just coolness, so that we can work something out that would be an alternative to all this hassling, and see if we can avoid getting people hurt. Man: Let people in. It's the only alternative. Garcia: You have to remember, man, that somebody put their neck out to put on a festival here, they didn't have to do it. All this stuff is, like, voluntary in nature. [ angry yelling ] Now we're trying to ma... Put on a free stage, man. You don't have to go for it. You can believe it or not, but that's where it's at right now. Be back in a while. I talked to Superintendent Art Woolmer of Metro's finest, and I said, "There's a little park not far from here. Why don't we set up a free concert over there?" And he said, "No problem." He said, "Good idea." Performer: We finally got it... all that together, that we were talking about before for the people outside. Here's Sam Cutler, the manager of the Grateful Dead, to explain it all to you. Cutler: What we've managed to get together is two flatbed trucks, and we'll be over in Coronation Park. It seemed to us, as long as we were there, we could go ahead and play something for free, and we did. [ music ] I set from Reno I was trailed by hounds Didn't get to sleep that night Till the morning came around I set out running but I take my time A friend of the devil is a friend of mine If I get home before daylight I just might get some sleep tonight [ music ] These kids came without money in their pockets. They had no intention of paying. So just to get them away from the gates So that paying customers could make it in, was really in my best interest, and I didn't mind doing it. You know, the word was out that the protests had, you know, fucked the promoters, and that despite the music and despite the pleasure that the people who were attending were having with the music, it was going to be a financial disaster. Well, I'd like to see them, you know, get as many people as can possibly come. Because it's a... there's a fantastic amount of... Great, great line-up of talent, you know. Yeah, well, it's funny... if you figure... if you figure... people say the tickets are too high, but if you figure, it's less than a dollar per super group, you know? Announcer: Folks, The Band. [ cheering ] [ "Slippin' And Slidin' ] Slippin' and a-slidin' peekin' and a-hidin' Been told a long time ago, all right now Slippin' and a-slidin' peekin' and a-hidin' Been told a long time ago I've been told, baby, you've been bold Not gonna be your fool no more Oh my Melinda she's a solid sender You know you better surrender Oh my Melinda she's a solid sender You know you better surrender Slippin' and slidin' peekin' and hidin' Not gonna be your fool no more [ music ] Oh big conniver nothing but a jiver I done got hip to your jive Oh big conniver nothing but a jiver I done got hip to your jive Slippin' and slidin' Peekin' and hidin' Not gonna be your fool no more Slippin' and a-slidin' peekin' and a-hidin' Been told a long time ago Slippin' and a-slidin' peekin' and a-hidin' Been told a long time ago I been told that you been bold Not gonna be your fool no more [ music ] [ cheering ] Thank you. Good night. [ cheering/applause ] Man: I think The promoters realized this was a lost cause, that they weren't going to make a profit and whereas some promoters might say, "To heck with it," you know, they said, "Well, we're... we're on a train, let's go for it." Man: They knew how hard they were bleeding right from the first Toronto concert. And they must have known, based on the numbers, that they weren't going to make that back. But they never held up on anything for the artists. Walker: You know, when we were in Montreal ordering the train, they were going to give me a cafeteria car. And I said, "I don't want a cafeteria car, I want a proper dining car." And this is like the "Orient Express" to a lot of these musicians. And I said, "Now I want snacks at night, and I want decent sandwiches, not spam sandwiches and not baloney and not peanut butter and jam." And I said, "If anybody says that they've gotten up late and they want breakfast, you'll make it." Dalton: Somebody on the train said Woodstock was a treat for the audience, and the train was a treat for the performers. I mean, you would get up, people would be playing. You'd go to sleep, get up again, and there would be another group of people. There was no escape. I mean... the only place you could go really was to your room. But sometimes you needed a rest. Go back to sleep, but... so it was kind of like... Like this little "La BohEme" Society, you know? And people really began to appreciate what it was and love it. [ "Country jam" ] Sylvia Tyson: It was -hour-a- day, it was non-stop, so it was great to have that opportunity to actually hang with some people that... that you liked and would never normally get to spend much time with. Oh hear the mighty billows roll Better take Jesus with you He's a true companion For I'm sure without him That you never will make it home [ music ] That awful day of judgement Is coming in the by and by We'll see our Lord descending In glory from on high Oh let us keep in touch with Jesus In the special love of God May be ever called ready When he calls us over Jordan's tide Oh look at that cold Jordan Look at its deep water Look at that wide river Oh hear the mighty billows roll You better take Jesus with you He's a true companion For I'm sure without him That you never will make it home Oh what you gonna do What you gonna say How you gonna feel When you come to the end of the way? Weir: As you know, there was the blues car, the country car, the folk car, whatever, you know, you could drift from car to car and get involved in any number of jams that... some of which really... really did amount to some pretty heady stuff. Guy: You could walk in, and you didn't ask me what I was playing, you just looked at me and I looked at you, and I nodded my head and vice versa and you played. And you didn't say, "Play it like this," or, "Play it like that." You just got into it some kind of way, you know? [ music ] I can't do it, baby Well Lord I tried so hard But I just can't do it, baby, no [ music ] I can't do it, baby Yo! Well Lord, I tried so hard But I just can't do it, baby, oh no [ music ] You made me mess up my happy home... [ music ] Gradney: It was, I believe, two and half days from Toronto to Winnipeg, and for any musician that was on this train it was like heaven. Walker: Basically, you know, we spent an... Man: It's a focal point. A very enjoyable two days riding this train with the groups, jamming... and... and being together, unlike a lot of festivals, you rush in an you rush out, and they don't see each other, they're here and we're here all to make... all to make a living and to provide entertainment. When it gets to the point where... where... where kids, as in Toronto, want to become violent, that doesn't go hand-in-hand with the kind of entertainment the groups want to provide and we want to provide. Weir: And all these kids got uptight because the admission was too high, and they decided they were going to have a riot. They busted some cop's head, man. They busted it wide open. He's got a plate in his head now and he may still be in critical condition. Is that worth the fucking dollars? Woman: Okay, but... but how many kids got busted wide open too? Weir: Who started it? Woman: No. Usually... Man: Nobody got busted. No kids got busted at all? No. Man: kids got arrested because they jumped the fence and it was against the law, they weren't supposed to. Because when you play, you pay. It's exactly... Weir: Is that worth a $ ticket? Is that worth $ ? Nearly killing some cop? You know, nearly killing a person? Woman: And the Canadian cops are boss. And those cops up there, I talked to a lot of them, and they were all boss. They were all good people. The basic thing that the Saturday papers, and I guess they caught the last bit before the... [ clearing of throat ] papers went to run, all they showed was... well, one pic... one shot I know that was used as a national photo was a policeman's horse reared up. They forgot to tell you that somebody threw pepper at the horse. They forgot to show you the shots of the kids that were inside the show enjoying it. Man: There was people in there that had fun. You must have talked to the outside the gates trying to get in. Man : No, the outside the gates... Man: Let me tell you something. I want to show the camera, I want to show the camera. Take a look at that. Man: Must we put up with yellow journalism? People in Toronto demanded we let everybody in for free, Or, if we wouldn't accept that, they were willing to accept % of the gross ticket sales, which they would distribute as they saw fit. That was nice. And also, they wanted free food and free dope. [ laughter ] Weir: These people weren't looking for free music, they were looking for trouble. They were looking for an excuse to bust cops' heads. They were, you know, pathologically unauthoritarian. I know, I'm... I'm that way myself. Walker: The press picked it up and there was a movement formed in Winnipeg and then one in Calgary. So ticket sales were not doing very well, mainly because of the protesters. So we lost a significant amount of money, and the bands all knew it. So, I said, you know, "Hey, let's carry on and party." [ "Comin' Home Baby" ] [ music ] [ cheering ] Announcer: Mashmakhan, come on! [ cheering/whistling ] Announcer: Buddy Guy. Buddy Guy. [ wild applause ] Yeah! [ music ] Your love gives me such a thrill But your lovin' don't pay my bills I want some money, honey I gotta have it It's all right it's all... Ow! It's all right It don't get everything, it's true What it don't get I can't use I've got to have it, baby Hey hey It's all right It's all right It's all right Gonna be all right You told me, now listen to this I can't hardly tumble to the words of rock'n'roll Gotta have it That's what I want Ah-h-h-h... [ music ] I told ya I've got to leave you now Got to but you doubted somehow I gotta go I hate to go, yeah I got to go-o-whoa Baby, baby, baby, baby, baby I've got to go I've got to go now W-a-a-a-a yeah So long. I've got to go-o-o-whoa Bye-bye. Ciao, bye. Bye-bye. [ music ] [ cheering/whistling ] [ wild applause ] Crowd: More. More. More... Announcer: Will you welcome please... the Flying Burrito Brothers. [ cheering ] It's a lazy day I'm down with nothing else to do It's a crazy day I got a thing that I want to try with you Now, baby, don't go away Please don't spoil my lazy day Now isn't it better? didn't you know? Sittin' down here by the radio I'm gonna make you worry none about your income tax I don't have much money I'm gonna show you how to relax It's a lazy day I'm down with nothing else to do It's a crazy day I got a thing that I want to try with you Now, baby, don't go away Please don't spoil my lazy day [ music ] Sittin' down here by the radio I'm gonna make you dizzy Sparkle like a brand new dime I don't have much money But I always got plenty of time It's a lazy day I'm down with nothing else to do It's a crazy day I got a thing that I want to try with you Now, baby, don't go away Please don't spoil my lazy day [ music ] Lazy day It's a lazy day It's a lazy day [ whistling/cheering ] [ mixed shouting ] [ music ] I pulled in to Nazareth I was feeling 'bout half past dead I just need to find a place Where I can lay my head Hey, mister, can you tell me Where a man might find a bed? He just grinned and shook my hand And no was all he said And I want you to Take a load off, Fanny Take a load for free Take a load off, Fanny And And You put the load right on me put the load right on me [ music ] I picked up my bag I went looking for a place to hide When I saw old carmen and the devil Walking side to side I said, "Hey, Carmen, Come on let's go downtown" She said, "But I gotta go But my friend can stick around" And you can Take a load off, Fanny Take a load for free Take a load off, Fanny And And You put the load You put the load Right on me Right on me [ music ] Go on down, Miss Moses 'Cause there ain't nothing that you could ever say It's just old Luke And Luke's waiting on the judgement day Well, Luke, my friend What about old Anna-Lee? He said, do me a favour, son Won't you stay and keep Miss Anna-Lee company? Take a load off, Fanny Take a load for free Take a load off, Fanny And and And you put the load Right on me Put the load right on me [ music ] Crazy Chester followed me And he caught me in the fog He said, "I will fix your rat If you just take Jack my dog I said "Wait a minute, Chester, You know I'm a peaceful man" He said, "That's okay, boy, Won't you feed him when you can?" Yeah yeah yeah Take a load off, Fanny Take a load for free Take a load off, Fanny And And You put the load You put the load Right on me Right on me [ music ] Catch a cannonball now To take me down the line My bag is sinking low And I do believe it's time To get back to Miss Fanny You know she's the only one Who sent me here with her regards for everyone Now I want you to take a load off, Fanny Take a load for free Take a load off, Fanny And And You put the load You put the load Right on me Right on me [ music ] [ cheering/whistling ] Announcer: Janis Joplin [ tapping of drumsticks ] [ music ] Cr-y-y-y-y-y Baby Cry baby Cry baby Welcome back home You know, she'll tell you Honey, I know she told you that she loved you Much, much more than I did But I know she left you And you swear that you just don't know why But, honey, you know that I'll always be around If you ever want me Come on and cry Cry baby Cry baby Cry baby Oh, honey, welcome back home yeah Don't you know Honey, nobody ever going to love you The way I try to do? To take your pain And all your heartache too And, honey, you know That I'll always, always be around If you ever want me Come on and cry Cry baby Cry baby Cry baby Honey, like you always seem to do And I know that it might be true, darling That the grass always looks greener When you're looking in somebody else's yard But, honey, you left the real thing Waiting for you at home I swear you did I had a man. He said, "Honey, honey, you know that I love you. See, but I've got to go and find myself, you know, I've got to go and find my life. I've got to go and find myself over in Africa. Or over in New York City or over in Olema." Some place those cats are always wandering of to. I've never figured out exactly where it was. They're always going somewhere, man. And I said, "Baby, don't you realize... you're looking for your life over there, honey? You wanna know where your life is? Your life's waiting like a goddamn fool right here." For you, man. And one morning you're going to wake up in Casablanca, One of those fancy places, honey, you're going to be freezing to death, man. You're going to wake up and you'll say, "Good, good Lord. Good, good, good Lord. I just went off and left that woman in that great big huge double bed with the great big fur rug on top of it and those satin sheets, man, What am I doing in Casablanca, man?" I mean, really, man, One of these days that cat's going to wake up and say that to himself. And when he comes back home, there, just like the capricorn that I am, I'll be standing there waiting. Saying, "Baby, I knew one day, honey, I knew, knew, knew one day, that you'd finally come on home to me." Honey, when you walk through my front door, I'm going to be able to tell by the look in your eyes. I'll say, "Good God, the man finally done got it." Lord, that man finally done realize. So you can put your head on my shoulder, baby, yeah, 'cause I know you've got some more tears to shed, dear, so come on, come on, come on, come on, come on, come on, And cry, cry baby Cry baby Cry baby Oh honey, welcome back home Yeah, yeah, yeah Cry baby Cry, cry, cry, cry, dear I know when you wanna get a bit lonely, baby Cry Cr-y-y-y-y-y Cry baby You can talk to your mama now Honey, you can talk to your sweet loving mama now Cr-y-y-y-y-y Cry baby Cry baby Cry-y-y-y-y-y Cry-y-y-y-y-y Cry-y-y-y-y-y Cry baby Cry baby [ music ] [ cheering ] [ blaring of train horn ] [ "Funk jam" music performed by Buddy Guy Blues Band, Rick Danko and others. ] When we left Winnipeg, It was like, "Can we leave now?" you know? Because everybody just wanted to get right back on the train. We went back on the train and we had an overnighter to Calgary And that was a long one, but nobody really noticed. [ "Funk jam" music ] [ jamming ] [ music ] Till: It seemed that time was sort of suspended, you know, like usually, a performer wants to get there, Get his job done and get home. In this situation, you wanted it to go on forever. [ music ] Guy: Well, I couldn't keep up with them, man. They was partying all night long. And I said, "I got to go to sleep, man." Every time I went to bed, I thought I was going to miss something and I said, "Well, I got to go back again." And I wouldn't... as a matter of fact, I never did stay in the bed for an hour. This train was not for sleeping. It was for a lot of other things, but not for sleeping. Very few people slept on this train. Weir: Most all of us were new to drinking at that point too. We'd all been taking L.S.D. Or smoking pot or whatever and this was a new experience for a lot of us. And it... it worked just fine. [ "Funk jam" music ] Walker: The C.N. Guy came to me and said, "They've drank us dry." And I said, "Well, where's the next stop?" And he said, "We're not scheduled for a stop." I said, "You are now." [ grunting ] Walker: So I told everybody on the train, "They've run out of booze, but we're making an emergency stop." And then we passed a hat, and if I remember correctly, I think we collected about $ . So we made a run on the liquor store. Then on the way out, I saw, up on a shelf, A display bottle of Canadian Club. And so I said... I looked up and I said, "I'll have that too." And he said, "It's a display bottle, it's not for sale." I said, "It's for sale now and if you don't climb up and get it down, then I'm going to get somebody to climb up and bring it down." So when we got back to the station, the guys that were with us, the performers that were with us, were absolutely ecstatic. Andersen: They did run out of booze and they did stop in Saskatoon, the whole damn train stopped, like, in front of a liquor store, and they bought the place out. So the ride that night, I mean, there was a party you couldn't believe. [ "Sunshine Of Your Love" ] [ music ] Weir: Somebody had doctored that big bottle of Canadian Club and you could see little gel caps at the bottom floating around down there. I did my best to stay away from that, but... even so, there was more going on than... at that point than just the alcohol. There were psychedelics involved. And I-I don't know what kind or how much, but that... that train was sort of buzzing down the... the rails. We achieved lift-off for sure. [ music ] You shoulda been on the river... In C. [ striking of chord ] G. ... O-o-h They were drivin' women Just like they was men O-o-o-h Ain't no more cane On the brazos Oh o-o-o-h It's all been ground Down to molasses Whoa oh whoa [ music ] Danko: Then... and then Jerry takes it. [ guitar music ] So then she said... "We've all been here for years." Man: . And everybody said, O-o-h oh oh Danko: So she said, "If everything isn't legal by the time we get down to it, and you make it free and it lasts for years." And everybody said, Oh oh oh So, the last time we'll say... we'll say, Ain't no more cane On the brazos O-o-o-h oh o-o-h oh o-o-h oh Men: Ain't no more cane. It's all been ground down to molasses Whoa o-o-h whoa o-o-h Whoa oh whoa oh whoa [ guitar music ] Oh-oh-oh-oh Whoa-oh-oh-oh Oh-oh-oh-oh-h Hit it now. [ guitar music ] [ whooping ] Man: Ain't no more brain in the castle. We say, "Thank you, Jerry Garcia." Joplin: No more brain at all, man. Joplin: Fuck it. God bless you, folks. God bless you. Peace, love, truth, beauty. Man: Rock on. [ mixed chatter/laughter ] Joplin: Are we in Calgary already? Man: No. Are we in Calgary yet? Garcia: We're stopped. Weir: Maybe we're in Alberta. Maybe we ought to run out and take a look. Alberta? Garcia: Alberta, let your hair Hang down. Alberta, don't let your hair hang down. No. And we're also stopped, man. We could get off the train and go and buy something. An old folk singer, I've heard that. Garcia: Janis, I've loved you ever since the day I saw you. I got to tell you. God's own cop-out, man. [ laughter ] Man: Oh, keep on rocking. I don't think we can quit now, man, really. [ whooping ] It's gotten too good. How are you doing, Danny? [ guitar music ] [ clanging of crossing signal ] Joplin: Oh, yeah. I got you. Hi, man, how you doing? Rock and roll. [ blaring of train horn ] Crowd: [ chanting ] Man: Open the fucking gates! Dalton: When we got to Calgary, The mayor was this radical character who came out... on and... and he said, in this very kind of grandiose way, "I...I demand that the children of Calgary pass through the gates free." Walker: Well, the mayor of Calgary decided that he was going to become a big hero to these kids who were also protesting and... he came backstage and said to me... that I should open the gates and let the children of Calgary in free. And I refused. So he called me "Eastern scum" And "a capitalist rip-off son of a bitch." And my answer is his teeth in my knuckles. That was my answer. Crowd: [ cheering/whistling ] Announcer: give a hand, Sha Na Na. [ cheering/applause ] We've just got one t'ing to say to youse. [ wild cheering ] And that is that rock and roll is here to stay. [ music ] Rah-rah-rah oh, baby Rah-rah-rah oh, baby Rah-rah-rah Rah-rah-rah Rock 'n roll is here to stay It will never die It was meant to be that way But I don't know why I don't care what people say Rock 'n roll is here to stay We don't care what people say Rock 'n roll is here to stay Rock 'n roll will always be our ticket to the end lt'll go down in history Just you wait, my friend Rock 'n roll will always be lt'll go down in history Rock 'n roll will always be lt'll go down in history Everybody rock everybody rock Everybody rock everybody rock Come on, everybody rock Everybody rock 'n roll everybody rock 'n roll Everybody rock 'n roll everybody rock 'n roll Come on every body rock Everybody rock 'n roll Rock 'n roll yeah rock 'n roll Rock 'n roll, rock 'n roll Rock rock 'n roll If you don't like rock 'n roll Think what you've been missin' But if you like to bop and stroll Come on down and listen Let's all start to have a ball Everybody rock 'n roll Rah-rah-rah oh, baby Rah-rah-rah oh, baby Rah-rah-rah Rah-rah-rah Rock [ cheering/whistling ] [ music ] [ wild cheering/whistling ] Announcer: Sha Na Na. They've got to catch a plane, say goodbye to them. Give a hand, please. Beside from some earlier rain this afternoon, It's been a beautiful day with the temperatures near the s. An ideal sort of day for this type of festival. With people here this afternoon, The big crowds are really expected tonight and as we mentioned earlier, this could be the high point of the rock Festival Express Tour. [ cheering ] [ music ] Please don't dominate the rap Jack If you got nothing new to say If you please, don't back up the track This train has got to run today Spent a little time on the mountain Spent a little time on the hill Saw things getting out of hand I guess they always will I don't know, but I was told It's hard to run with the weight of gold Other hand, I've heard it said It's just as hard with the weight of lead [ music ] You can't overlook the lack, Jack Of any other highway to ride It's got no signs or dividing lines And very few rules to guide Spent a little time on the mountain Spent a little time on the hill Heard some say, "Better run away" Others say, "Better stand still" I don't know, but I was told If the horse don't pull You got to carry that load I don't know whose back's that strong Maybe find out before too long [ music ] One way or another One way or another One way or another This darkness got to give [ music ] One way or another One way or another One way or another This darkness got to give One way or another One way or another One way or another This darkness got to give One way or another One way or another One way or another This darkness got to give [ music ] [ cheering/whistling ] Announcer: We'll have lan and Sylvia in just a minute, the great speckled bird. I think that certainly, what happened on the train carried over on to the stage because people just became aware of the possibilities. We ended up in Calgary doing some stuff with a lot of sort of crossovers too, And, I mean, it really was quite extraordinary. Oh, C.C. Rider See what you've done done Yeah, Lord, Lord C.C. Rider, See what you've done done Well, you made me love you And now your woman's gone One of these mornings I won't be back till fall Yeah, Lord I'm goin' away baby and I won't be back Till fall And if I find me a good man I won't be back won't be back at all [ music ] [ singing "C.C. Rider" ] SylviaTyson: It was a totally unique experience. I've never had one like it before or since. There are a whole series of moments that are kind of crystallised for me... on different levels. Some of them are musical, some of them are just sort of moments. This is the part of this train tour we've been waiting for. [ cheering ] [ music ] They say everything can be replaced [ cheering ] They say every distance is not near So I remember every face Of every man who put me here I see my light come shining From the west down to the east Any day now Any day now I shall be released They say every man needs protection They say that every man must fall Yet I swear I see my reflection Somewhere so high above this wall I see my light come shining From the west down to the east Any day now Any day now I shall be released Now yonder stands a man in this lonely crowd A man who swears he's not to blame All day long I hear him shouting so loud Just crying out that he was framed I see my light come shining From the west down to the east Any day now Any day now I shall be released [ cheering/whistling ] [ cheering ] [ drumbeats ] Joplin: Hey. [ cheering/whistling ] Are you having a rocking good time? [ whooping/cheering ] Well, I want to tell you something, man. I don't know where you've been all week, but we've been at a party. Right? Right. Really. Really. A par... I mean, I couldn't have thrown a better party, man. I finally met someone who can throw a better party than me. And I would like to bring them on stage and tell them thank you, just from the performers, man. just from the performers, man. Okay? Really. We got Thor Eaton, And Ken Walker, Ken Walker, And Dave Williams. Right. Let's get them out here. I want to get them on, man. Get them on and give them a hand 'cause they sure showed us a good time, baby. [ music ] Garcia: Hey, John Cook, where's the thing, man? John, John. Joplin: Wait, wait. We happen to have a few presents to give these boys. The first one is a genuine train... that's labelled "Festival Express" on one car that's labelled "Festival Express" on one car and "Bar car" on the other car 'Cause that's where The action was, man. And this is from everyone and it's signed by everyone. This box is from me. It's a case of tequila. [ laughter ] The train is for remembering, man. The tequila is for continuing, Man. The tequila is for continuing, Man. [ cheering/laughter ] Joplin: All right. Garcia: All right. Will you give these people a hand, please, Who put this entire thing on. [ cheering/whistling ] This is from us to you, baby Why, thank you. You're welcome, baby. Thank you. Thank you. Just thank you for coming. Hey, man, next time you throw a train, invite me, man. that's for sure. [ laughing ] All right. All right. I'm ready, man. [ music ] Wh-o-o-o-a, yeah! You thought you had found yourself a good girl One who would love you and give you the world Then you find, hon, that you've been misused Come to me, honey I'll do what you choose I want you to Well, tell mama all about it Yeah, tell mama what you need Tell your mama, babe, what you want Tell your mama, babe, what you need What you want what you need What you want whoa I'll make everything all right Do you hear, she didn't have no sense, dear Wasn't worth all the time that you spent And that same man he throws you outdoors I just heard that mick stole all your clothes Hey Well tell mama all about it Tell mama what you need Tell your mama, babe What you want Tell your mama, babe What you need What you want what you need What you want Wow! I'll make everything all right, babe [ music ] Rock 'n roll! [ music ] Baby, was it worth all the time that you spent? Now that same man, he throws you outdoors I just heard that he tore all your clothes, hey Well, tell mama all about it Tell your mama what you need Tell your mama, babe What you want Tell your mama, babe What you need What you want what you need What you want Anything I can do Anything I can do for you Tell your mama, babe Whoa, mama, babe Oh, mama, babe oh, mama, babe Hey, your mama, babe tell your mama, babe Hey, your mama, babe tell your mama, babe Wow! Don't tell me no I know you're lonely Sometimes your man is bad Sometimes when I know you're lonely Sometimes when I know you're glad I said every day I cry, now, now Every day I cry now so Every day now, now Hey, every day now, now I know what you figure. I tell you, When you get lonely, and I figure everybody does, right? Because, as a matter of fact, everybody does. I figure if you're a woman, I mean if you're really a woman, You already know what you need, man. You already know what you're looking for. Man, I found out at years old. And I've been looking ever since too. But if you're a young cat, you know, like about... years old and about this tall, right? If you be a young cat, man, and you ain't figured it out yet, I'll tell you what you need, baby. When you get those strange thoughts in your head, You don't know where they came from, man, You got those strange little weirdnesses happening to you, you don't know what they are. I'll tell you what you need. You need a sweet-lovin' mama, babe Honey sweet-talkin' mama, babe You need a sweet-lovin' mama, babe Honey a sweet-talkin' mama, babe You need somebody to listen to you Someone to want you Someone to hold you Someone to need you Someone to use you Someone to want you someone to need you Someone to hold you someone to want you Someone to hold you You need a mama, ma-ma, ma-ma ma-mama, babe Lord, a mama, ma-ma ma-ma ma- ma ma-ma mama Mama mama mama mama mama mama mama mama Mama mama mama mama mama mama hey Mama mama mama mama Yeah, mama mama mama mama Tell mama all about it Tell mama all about it What you need what you want What you need what you want Anything I can do Anything I can do I'll be your mama, babe Yeah, your mama, babe Whoa, mama, babe oh, mama, babe Whoa, mama, babe whoa, mama, babe Whoa, mama, babe whoa, mama, babe Whoa, I'll make everything all right Hey! Yeah! [ music ] [ whistling/cheering ] Joplin:And feelin' good was easy, Lord Bobby sang the blues And feelin' good was good enough for me, uh-huh Good enough for me and Bobby McGee Till: It was all too short a time But it seemed to go on forever when you were there. But when it was over, there was a sadness. There definitely was. It was... It was a great experience. Gradney: It was better than Woodstock, As great as Woodstock was. And people who've heard of Woodstock will go, "Well, that's impossible" because they didn't know about this train. Dalton: You know, it just was a... a brief moment in time when everybody came together for one last time to celebrate that utopian vision that we all started with. Weir: It was a truly wondrous... time to be a musician. You know, people took music... music seriously and the prospect for music... becoming more than just... entertainment or diversion. Guy: I'll carry it the rest of my life, that I'll never get the chance... that chance to be with Jerry and Janis again. And things like that only happen once in a lifetime. Andersen: A magnificent historical event occurred in the history of rock 'n roll and music. And everybody knew it. Walker: I think the lesson I learned was that I gave the public too much and they didn't deserve it. And if I was to do it again, I wouldn't do it to that scale. And I'm thinking of doing another one. You know, this train was happy until we stopped. Garcia: Yeah, let's roll! Gradney: It's the truth. Onward and upward. Gradney: This... this train, We hadn't had a newspaper. We hadn't had a bath, But this... this train was groovy We were happy, man. Weir: Maybe we had a few pips But we had some good times. And then we had to stop. [ music ] [ cheering/ applause ] [ music ] Oh, sinner, as you tread the last journey Take Jesus as your daily guide Though you may feel pure and saintly Without Him walking by your side But when you come to make the crossing At the ending of His pilgrim's way If you ever will need your saviour You'll surely need Him on that day Now look at that cold Jordan Look at its deep water deep water Look at that wide river wide river Oh, hear the mighty billows roll You better take Jesus Jesus with you He's a true true companion Oh, I'm sure without Him sure without Him That you never will make it home [ music ] That awful day of judgement Is coming in the by and by We'll see our Lord descending In glory from on high Oh, let us keep in touch with Jesus And in the special love of God You may be ever called ready When he calls us over Jordan's tide Now look at that cold cold Jordan Look at its deep deep water Look at that wide wide river Oh, hear the mighty billows roll Now you better take Jesus Jesus with you He's a true true companion Oh I'm sure without him sure without him That you never will make it home Now what what you gonna do? And what what you gonna say? And how how you gonna feel When you come to the end of the way? [ whoop/cheering/applause ] Garcia: Thanks a lot. Deep in the darkest hour Of a very heavy week Three earthmen did confront me And I could hardly speak They left me in a hurry They left me tired and sore And when I'm fit for wishing I hope they'll come no more When I'm wishing I hope they'll come no more Standing by the exit With one arm on the door I listen to them argue I asked them why and what for They showed me terrors And each one struck my soul They gave me questions Each one an endless goal questions Each an endless goal Did you see the moon last night Hung like a chinese bowl You should have seen the moon last night At the party of the cell Did you see the moon last night Hung like a chinese bowl You should have seen the moon last night At the party of us all Deep in the darkest hour Of a very heavy week Three earthmen did confront me And I could hardly speak They showed me terrors And each one struck my soul They threw me questions Each one an endless goal questions Each an endless goal Crowd: [ cheering/applauding ] This one was written by a guy fromToronto. [ strumming of guitar ] Murray Maclaughlin. Crowd: [ cheering ] [ guitar ] It's a song about leaving home. it's a very honest song, called "The Child's Song". Goodbye, Mama Goodbye to you too, Pa Little sister, you'll have to wait a while To come along Goodbye to this house and all its memories We just got too old to say we're wrong I've got to make one last trip to my bedroom I guess I'll have to leave some stuff behind It's funny how the same old crooked pictures Just don't seem the same to me tonight They're ain't no use In shedding no more tears, Ma They're ain't no use In shouting at me, Pa I can't live no longer with your fears, Ma I love you but that hasn't helped at all Each of us must do the things that matter And all of us must see what we can see Though it was long ago you must remember You were once as young and scared as me I don't know how hard it is yet, Mama When you realize you're growing old I know how hard it is now to be younger I know you've tried to keep me from the cold Thanks for all you've done it may sound hollow Thank you for the good times that we've known But I must find my own road now to follow You will all be welcome in my home I've got my suitcase and I must go now And I don't mind about the things you said I'm sorry, Ma I don't know where I'm going Remember, little sister, look ahead Tomorrow I'll be in some other sunrise Maybe I'll have someone at my side Mama, give your love back to your husband And father you have taught me well, goodbye Goodbye, Mama And goodbye to you too, Pa Thank you very much. Crowd: [ cheering ] Maclaughlin: Thank you. It was really kind of weird for me because I was the only one, uh, though I thinkTom Russ played a couple dates, or, one of the dates, but I was the only one on the show that was just alone with a guitar. [ Clearing of throat ] And it was a little scary, but, um... you gotta do it. You gotta do what you gotta do. I mean, they didn't have any musicians. They just had me, the songs... my songs, and the guitar. Here's a song I'd like you to sing on. You may know it. It's called "Thirsty Boots". Crowd: [ cheering ] You know that I'm the open road You've been sleeping in the rain From dirty words and muddy cells Your clothes are smeard and stained But the dirty words, the muddy cells Will soon be judged insane So only stop to rest yourself Till you are off again So take off your thirsty boots And stay for a while Your feet are hot and weary From a dusty mile And maybe I can make you laugh Maybe I can try I'm just looking for the evening And the morning in your eyes Tell me of the ones you saw As far as you could see Cross the plains from field to town A-marching to be free And of the rusted prison gates That tumble by degree Like laughing children, one by one And they look like you and me Sing it if you know it. So take off your thirsty boots And stay for a while Your feet are hot and weary From a dusty mile And maybe I can make you laugh Maybe I can try I'm just looking for the evening And the morning in your eyes Hum the melody with me. [ harmonica ] Sing it. I know you are no stanger Down the crooked rainbow trails From dancing cliffs and shattered sills Of slanty-shackled jails For the voices drift up from below As the walls are being scaled Yes all of this, and more, my friends Your song shall not be failed So take off your thirsty boots And stay for a while Your feet are hot and weary From a dusty mile And maybe I can make you laugh And maybe I can try I'm just looking for the evening And the morning In your eyes Crowd: [ cheering ] Well, at the time, Mashmakhan had, uh, just completed our first album. Uh, we hadn't made a tour across our own country yet. We were quite well known in Montreal area and in Toronto, and Ontario because of earlier entities that we had been a part of. With Trevor Payne and the soul brothers and a group called the triangle. But, uh, when we changed our name to Mashmakhan and made that first album, [ growing ] we hadn't made a tour across the country so suddenly, into our laps, this was presented, uh, an opportunity to go across Canada on a train with, with a load of the current stars of the day. It was like a dream, right? [ chuckling ] Didn't have to twist my arm too hard for that one. So we just leapt at it and, uh, it didn't matter whether we were getting paid or not. At the time we were like the group at the bottom of the totem pole because it was our first record and first national tour. A child that says, mother do you love me And it really means will you protect me His mother answers him, I love you And it really means you've been a good boy And as years go by True love will never die At his girl says do you love me And it really means will you respect me The teenage boy answers I love you And it really means can I make love to you And as years go by True love will never die I-I-I will love you Forever I-I-I will love you Forever At his wife says do you love me And it means I like to hear it again Her husband says to her I love you But it really means I'll love you till the end And as years go by True love will never die Now you're asking me if I love you And it really means will I marry you And I answer yes I love you But it really means that I will be untrue And as years go by True love will never die I-I-I will love you Forever I-I-I will love you Forever Crowd: [ cheering ] Singer: As the years go by. Uh, that record, 'as the years go by' did wonders for us. I mean it was a bit of a fluke how that record even occurred. Uh, the album was done in New York. Um, that little piece, 'As the years go by' came after, uh... we had this rather melodramatic long piece on the record and, uh, we were the first to know that though, you know And, 'As the years go by' was a little bit of a sarcastic ditty placed at the end of this very melodramatic piece and when we got the test pressing back from New York, uh, that long melodramatic piece was gone. Nowhere to be found. And there sat 'As the years go by'. Of course we were up in arms because, you know, they were messing with our integrity now. [ Chuckling ] But, uh, deejays starting putting it on cartridge and the next thing you know, Columbia had themselves a hit. And that was just... really, prior to Festival Express. And the song just exploded both in this country and took us to Japan, so, uh, in retrospect, a hit is a hit And you can't knock that. The beauty of the timing was that, um, In each city we arrived at the song was, you know, either one, two, three on its local hit-parade. So, like, although we were new, we were the flavour of the month, [ laughing ] at the time of the tours so that gave us a great boost and a nice connection with the audience. And, uh, it just helped make the whole Festival Express a very meaningful memory Well it was through, um, uh, Kenny Walker, of course and, uh, thor eaton and they did say they were putting this together and they wanted to have a Canadian contingent, even though they had some major American names on it. And, uh, so, uh, he knew both lan and I, being sort of, part of the Toronto crowd and, uh, and we immediately agreed because we thought it was an amazing idea. [ guitar ] This is a great Bob Dylan song. About raising his kids. And it's called 'Tears of Rage'. and it goes like this. We carried you In our arms On Independence Day And now you'd throw us All aside And put us on On Our wa-a-a-a-y Oh what, daughter Beneath the sun Would treat her father so To wait upon him In pain and... And always answer no-o-o-o-o Tears of rage Tears of grief Why must I be the one To be the thief Come to me now you know We're so low And life is brie-e-e-e-e-f Well we pointed out The way to go Baby we scratched your name In the sand Though you thought It was nothing more Than a place for you to stand But now I want you to know That while we watched You discover there was no one true But I remember That I thought It was a childish thing to do-o-o-o-o Tears of rage Tears of grief Why must I be the one To be the thief Oh come to me now you know We're so low And life is brie-e-e-e-e-f It was a-a-a-a-a-ll very painless When you went out to receive All that false instruction Which we never We never could Believe And now our heart is filled with gold As if it was a purse But oh, what kind Of love is this Which goes from bad to worse Tears of rage Tears of grief Why must I be the one To be the thief Oh come to me now You know we're so low And life is brie-e-e-e-f Crowd: [ cheering ] I-I barely knew who Buddy Guy was myself, other than by name. And I think his terri... the great album he made on, uh, the 'Hoodoo Man' album, I don't think it had been out too long. This was the very early 's. Uh, you know, in . Uh, that's as early as you get. And, um, uh, I think in a certain circuit in the states, [ guitar ] uh, it was customary that the artist would go among the howling wolf. All these guys played. they went on the tables, they walked on the bars, they'd do this. It was normal. It's the first time I had seen that. I was so surprised, it was, it was quite wonderful but I couldn't figure it out technically. He must have had a lot of chords, his roadie, strung together. [ guitar ] I learned that from the late Guitar Slim, out of, uh, Louisianna. And, uh, when I first came to Chicago, when I went to the music store to get that kind of lead they told me, say, it's not gonna work. And I'm saying, 'Just give it to me.' You know, 'cause I saw Guitar Slim being introduced, and I'm at the stage trying to figure out how to play this guitar, and I say, 'Well I wanna be the first one there' and there's no seat so I was standing, and all I heard was a guitar, and I didn't see him. And twenty minutes later a guy brings him in on his shoulders. And I said, 'I want to play like B.B. King but I wanna act like Guitar Slim.' And I've been doing that ever since. Crowd: [ cheering ] Gypsy woman told my mother Just before I was born Say you've got boy-child coming Gonna be a son of a gun Gonna meet pretty women Run and jump and shout And the world gonna know What's it all about 'Cause you know [ blues ] Hey, yeah Got a black-cat bone I got a mojo too I got the Johnny Conkeroo I'm gonna try to mess with you I'm gonna make you little girls Lead me by my hand And the world gonna know I'm a hoochie coochie man Yeah Yeah Yeah Yeah Yeah Yeah On the seventh hour On the seventh day The seven doctors say He were born for good luck And for that you can see I've got seven hundred dollars woman now Don't you mess with me 'cause you know I'm here Everybody knows I'm here You know I'm your hoochie coochie man Everybody Hail Crowd: [ cheering ] Playing outdoors in the daylight is one of my favourite things in the whole world to do. I love to be able to see all the way to the end. I love to be able to see the people dancing, you know And, uh, outdoors especially, because there's no walls to bounce the sound back at you. And you really have a clean, clear kind of sound experience. So, you know, for, and for us that was always our favourite. We wou...would prefer to play outside, during the day if we could. Hey, baby, here I am I'm a man on your scene I can give you what you want But you got to come home with me And I've got a whole lot of good old loving And I got some in store When I get to throw it on you You've got to come back for more Toys and things that come by the dozen That ain't nothing but drug store lovin' Hey little thing let me light your candle 'Cause mama I'm sure hard to handle now Gets around But action speaks louder than words And I'm a man with great experience I know you got you another man But I can love you better than him Take my hand and don't be afraid I'm gonna prove every word I say I'm advertising love for sale So you can place your ad with me Toys and things that come by the dozen That ain't nothing but drug store lovin' Hey little thing let me light your candle 'cause mama I'm sure hard to handle now Gets around Lovin' It's all I need Lovin' Love is all you I got to get some Oh, baby, all right Yes I do Good love Yes I got to get some Yes I got to have some Got to have some I got to feel all right My, my I got to feel all right My, my Owl I got to have it Give it to me Give it to me All right Ooh [ guitar ] Baby, here I am And I'm a man upon the scene And I can give you what you want But you got to come home with me And I've got a whole lot of good old lovin' And I've got some in store When I get to throw it on you You got to come back for more Toys and things that come by the dozen That ain't nothing but drug store lovin' Hey little thing let me light your candle 'cause mama I'm sure hard to handle now Yes I am Crowd: [ cheering ] Singer: Thank you. As a band you get to play outdoors during the daytime in the summer a fair bit. So it wasn't new to us. I-I do enjoy, bein' you know... What I don't enjoy is the heat of the day so much. Uh, if there's no shade and the sun's hot and stuff like that, Uh, I don't know about that. But uh, other side... Otherwise, playing outdoors is just fun. During the day. You know, it's not quite the fantastic um, experience playing at night when, you know, your visual sense is, sort of, taken a back seat to your... your other senses, Uh, in terms of, you know, importance. Um, but still, you know, there's an hallucinogenic realm that you go into whenever you're listening to music anyway, or playing music. Hit it. Easy wind Going cross the bayou again There's a whole lotta women Out in red on the streets today The river keep a-talking But you never heard a word it say I been ballin' a shiny black steel jack-hammer I been chippin' up rocks for the great highway I live five years if I take my time Ballin' that jack and drinking my wine Easy wind Flowin' cross the bayou again There's a whole lot of women Out on the streets in red today And the river keep a-talking You never heard a word it said I been a-chipping them rocks From dawn till noon While my rider hide my bottle in the other room Doctor say you better stop ballin' that Jack If I live five years I'm gonna bust my back Yes I will, now Easy wind Cross the bayou the other day There's a whole lotta women, Mama Out on the streets in red down the way And the river keep a-talking But you never hear a word it say [ harmonica ] Lord Gotta find a woman be good to me Won't hide my liquor try to serve me tea 'cause I'm a stone jack baller And my heart is true And I give everything that I got to you Yes I will Easy wind Blowin' cross the bayou again There's a whole lotta women Out on the streets in red that way And the river keep a-talking You never heard what it say Crowd: [ cheering ] Thank you. I think, you know, that all these people were in their prime. And it was also, you know, um, the end of an era in another sense. Of course Jimi Hendrix just died before this trip started And Janis died shortly after. Pigpen I think, a year later. Um, Richard Manuel who wasn't on the train, but was in the band. Rick Danko, Jerry Garcia, Pigpen. Um, yeah, it's amazing that, you know, the number of people who are...who are gone from that...from that trip, and, uh, and, you know, that's why it's so precious to be able to see them again. Please don't you do it to me, babe no Please don't you do it to me, babe Either take the love I offer Or let me be I ain't got the time for walkin' no Ain't got the time for walkin' What's a poor boy to do with your love Love just danglin' Hey Make up your mind, honey You're playing with me Make up your mind, honey You're playing with me I say, hey No need to play my loving, babe Come on now Let me honey let me be yeah Say that it's over baby Say that it's over dear But still you hang around, come on Won't you move over You know that I need a man, yeah Know that I need a man When I ask you to you just say That you think you can Yeah You ain't quite ready for walkin' no Ain't quite ready for walkin' What's a brother to do with your love Lord, just dangling Well I know that it's dangling Well I know, know, know Like a carrot, baby now Like a carrot dear Like a carrot baby now Like a carrot dear Hey, come on, hey I gotta hey Come on hey I gotta love You teasin' me Hey you teasin' me Hey you teasin' me Hey you're teasin' me Like a carrot baby now Like a carrot dear Like a carrot baby now Thank you! Crowd: [ cheering ] I can't speak for Janis, but my... I'm sure if all the gentlemen in this room have been in a situation where you might have over-imbibed at some point. And the old saying, 'The hair of the dog'. But if you continue passed the hair of the dog, uh, things become part of your system and your resistance... Uh, it...it's not that surprising to me that you could be crazy and, you know, be on a real bender and the next night be able to be, you know, perform. Sometimes if you're not feeling that well, you're reduced to like, your gut... your gut, uh, instincts and talents. And maybe that's why she was so on top of it. Well she was a very intelligent girl. She was not a... a silly girl at all. I think, uh, you know, that certain things that people do through their lives, I mean, there's positive and negatives. She just happened to get caught on the negative side of a particular thing, and... It was not a good thing. But, we all know that. But, uh, she was always there to perform for the people, always. She... she lived for that. She really did. Time keeps moving on Friends, they turn away Lordy, Lord, Lord Well I keep moving on But I never find out why I keep pushing too hard And baby I keep trying To make it right to another Lonely day Whoa, yeah Dawn has come at last Honey, time keeps a-moving on Yeah, yeah, yeah Well I'm years older now So I know it can't be right And I'm no better, baby And I can't help you no more Than, honey, when I was just a girl Yeah But it don't make no difference, baby No, no 'Cause I know that I could always try There's a fire inside of everyone of us I'm gonna need it now I'm gonna hold it, yeah I'm gonna use it till the day I die Don't Honey, don't you expect any answers, dear Oh no, they don't come with age No-no, no Hey They ain't never gonna love you any better, baby And ain't never gonna love you right So you better take it now Said right here and now Yeah But it don't make no difference, baby No, no 'Cause I know that I could always try There's a fire inside of everyone of us, hey I'm gonna need it now I'm gonna use it, yeah I'm gonna hold it till the day I die Don't make no difference No, no-no Well I hate to be the one I said you'd better leave me now And you'd better love love your life I'm gonna need it now I'm gonna hold it, yeah I'm gonna use it, say what Don't make no difference, baby No, no-no Well I hate I hate to be the one I said Every time you're gonna want to love somebody Every time you're gonna want to need somebody You're gonna want to turn and run I'm gonna be there No, no, no No, no, no No, no, no No, no, no, no, no, no When you wanna put out your hand All you want is somebody to pick it up man He ain't gonna be there Said you know he ain't No, no, no-no No, no, no-no No, no, no-no No, no, no, no, no, no No, no, no-no No, no, no-no No, no, no-no Whoa-oo Whoa-oo Whoa-oo Whoa-oo Whoa-oo Whoa-oo Whoa-oo Who-a-a Whoa-oo Whoa-oo Whoa-oo Whoa-oo Whoa-oo Whoa-oo Honey, want, I wanna Reach out my hand I said, darling all I ever wanted Was for you to understand Whoa-oo, whoa-whoa Whoa-baby, I wanna pick up and leave Lord, honey, everyday Crowd: [ cheering ]

Special help by SergeiK