The Nobel Prize is an international award administered by the Nobel Foundation in Stockholm, Sweden. Since 1901, the Nobel Foundation has been honoring men and women for outstanding achievements in physics, chemistry, physiology or medicine, literature, and for work in peace.

Ten of the world’s most distinguished scientists who have received this honor of the Nobel Prize were members of the Endocrine Society, including four of the Society’s past presidents: Edward A. Doisy, Edward Calvin Kendall, Roger Guillemin, and Rosalyn Yalow. Rosalyn Yalow is one of only 12 women to have received the Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine.

Here is a list of the four Endocrine Society past presidents and six Endocrine Society members who received the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine or the Nobel Prize in Chemistry since 1943.

Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine

Year Name Prize motivation 1943 Edward A. Doisy "for his discovery of the chemical nature of vitamin K" 1947 Bernardo Alberto Houssay "for his discovery of the part played by the hormone of the anterior pituitary lobe in the metabolism of sugar" 1950 Edward Calvin Kendall "for their discoveries relating to the hormones of the adrenal cortex, their structure and biological effects" 1977 Roger Guillemin "for their discoveries concerning the peptide hormone production of the brain" 1977 Andrew V. Schally "for their discoveries concerning the peptide hormone production of the brain" 1977 Rosalyn Yalow "for the development of radioimmunoassays of peptide hormones" 1998 Ferid Murad "for their discoveries concerning nitric oxide as a signalling molecule in the cardiovascular system"

Nobel Prize in Chemistry

Year Name Prize motivation 1955 Vincent du Vigneaud "for his work on biochemically important sulphur compounds, especially for the first synthesis of a polypeptide hormone" 1985 Herbert A. Hauptman "for their outstanding achievements in the development of direct methods for the determination of crystal structures" 2012 Robert J. Lefkowitz "for studies of G-protein-coupled receptors"

Sources:

Nobelprize.org. Nobel Foundation, 01 Feb. 2016. http://www.nobelprize.org.

Association Notices: Roster of Members, Association for the Study of Internal Secretions. Endocrinology. Vol. 37, p. 53-68, 1945.

Endocrine Society Membership Directories, Endocrine Society, 1947-present.