Munich's Robert Lewandowski (C) against Muenster's Fabian Hergesell (L-R), Muenster's Jens Truckenbrod and Muenster's Marc Heitmeier during the DFB Cup 1st round soccer match between Preussen Muenster snd Bayern Munich in Muenster, Germany, 17 August 2014. PHOTO: JONAS GUETTLER/dpa (ATTENTION: The DFB prohibits the utilisation and publication of sequential pictures on the internet and other online media during the match (including half-time). ATTENTION: BLOCKING PERIOD! The DFB permits the further utilisation and publication of the pictures for mobile services (especially MMS) and for DVB-H

Captions are provided by our contributors.

RMID:Image ID :E67MHH

Image details

Contributor :

dpa picture alliance / Alamy Stock Photo

Image ID :

E67MHH

File size :

31.9 MB (1.3 MB Compressed download)

Open your image file to the full size using image processing software.

Releases :

Model - no | Property - noDo I need a release?

Dimensions :

4090 x 2722 px | 34.6 x 23 cm | 13.6 x 9.1 inches | 300dpi

Date taken :

17 August 2014

Photographer :

dpa

More information :

This image could have imperfections as it’s either historical or reportage.

Munich's Robert Lewandowski (C) against Muenster's Fabian Hergesell (L-R), Muenster's Jens Truckenbrod and Muenster's Marc Heitmeier during the DFB Cup 1st round soccer match between Preussen Muenster snd Bayern Munich in Muenster, Germany, 17 August 2014. PHOTO: JONAS GUETTLER/dpa (ATTENTION: The DFB prohibits the utilisation and publication of sequential pictures on the internet and other online media during the match (including half-time). ATTENTION: BLOCKING PERIOD! The DFB permits the further utilisation and publication of the pictures for mobile services (especially MMS) and for DVB-H and DMB only after the end of the match.)

Sorry this image isn’t available for license in your territory, please contact us for more information.

Available for editorial use only. Get in touch for any commercial

Commercial use includes advertising, marketing, promotion, packaging, advertorials, and consumer or merchandising products.

or personal uses

Personal prints, cards and gifts, or reference for artists. Non-commercial use only, not for resale.

.