Lleyton Hewitt's 15-year-old son Cruz has been granted a wildcard entry to the Australian Open Junior Championships in the biggest milestone of his tennis career so far.

It means he'll contest the same tournament his father starred in back in 1996 when he was just 14, with Lleyton making it into the second round that year.

Cruz joins 10 other Aussie juniors in snagging a coveted wildcard entry and will make his main-draw debut at the junior Grand Slam level.

He's currently ranked 14th in the world for boys born in 2008, with an overall world juniors ranking of 199 after winning three tournaments on the junior circuit in 2023.

Cruz got some top-tier help with his game not just from his dad, but from two of the biggest stars at the Australian Open when he got to practice with local hope Alex de Minaur and Austria's Dominic Thiem last week.

He also trained with de Minaur, his dad and Aussie veteran John Millman in Perth on January 3.

Cruz took out the first professional win of his career in Darwin last September.

Then aged 14, he passed the mark in the first round of qualifiers at the Darwin Tennis International, winning 3-6, 6-4, 10-5 over 25-year-old opponent Brian Tran.

The teenage prodigy then backed it up with another win (6-3, 6-7, 10-3) over 21-year-old Jerome Iaconi in the second round.

He bowed out of the round of 32 after he was beaten convincingly by 24-year-old Jesse Delaney, 3-6, 1-6 in the third round of qualifiers.

'I'm pretty stoked on getting that win because I had to come from behind. I was fired-up to be honest,' he said after the win over Tran.

'It's cool getting to go to different places like here (Darwin) and it's a lot of fun, but I came here to test myself at this level against some older players and see how I go.

'I also get to miss school today because I won, so that's even better.'

His father wasn't court-side to witness the win, but Cruz says he gave him a call to give him the good news.

'He [Lleyton] is actually at the Davis Cup at the moment so he wasn't able to come,' Hewitt said.

'But I spoke to him on the phone and he was pretty happy and stoked that I won'

Lleyton Hewitt was seen watching Cruz play at the IMF Quarter Finals held in Sydney in August - and couldn't have looked prouder.

The teen has had tennis ambitions for some time and in 2021 the Hewitt family upped stumps from Melbourne and spent just over $4million for a prized Burleigh Heads mansion on the Gold Coast.

Daily Mail Australia revealed the motive behind the Gold Coast relocation was all part of their 'Cruz Mission' to develop the burgeoning tennis career of son Cruz.

Local sources in the tight-knit tennis community have revealed the Hewitts ditched the unpredictable weather and Covid lockdowns of Melbourne in favour of the warm and sunny conditions of the Gold Coast as Cruz started serious training.