The Israeli newspaper Yedioth Ahronoth confirmed that the price "Israel" is required to pay is steep and very heavy and that "the deal may lead to frightening results", indicating that "Nevertheless, the cabinet must approve the deal today, even on the basis of the conditions that have been leaked to us in the past 24 hours."

The newspaper justified this by stating that "Israel" had already paid an unbearable price, adding that "1,200 were killed in one day. Another 300 soldiers fell in battles in the Gaza Strip," proclaiming: "We are in a phase where there is no chance of achieving a comprehensive victory."

According to the newspaper's political commentator, after all that has happened, nothing can be considered a victory, stressing that "additional weeks or months of fighting will not fundamentally change the situation" and that freeing the Israeli captives abandoned by "Israel" was the only thing that could bring some solace to the Israeli occupation's settler families.

The newspaper considered that "there was no reason to celebrate, because this is only the beginning," indicating that if the agreement is implemented, a number of captives may return to "Israel" while others remain in the Strip.

More significantly, the commentator argued that once this agreement had been reached if reached, a later agreement would become inevitable and deal a heavier blow to the Israeli occupation.

Netanyahu in the spotlight of a downfall

The newspaper observed widespread difficulty in comprehending Netanyahu's decisions, asserting that rather than strengthening "Israel", he significantly weakened it. It suggested that Netanyahu's actions, which could have been proactive and resulted in minor victories, were instead reactive responses made under pressure.

The newspaper confirmed that "there was no single strategic mistake that Netanyahu has not committed", explaining that "this is even more infuriating because one must be completely blind not to understand that the international public opinion would not remain indifferent to scenes of destruction and devastation in the Gaza Strip".

Yedioth Ahronoth observed that "Israel's" failure to attribute responsibility for the destruction of the Strip to Hamas has led to worldwide public opinion predominantly accusing "Israel" rather than the Palestinian Resistance. Consequently, this failure to recognize the impact on the US administration's position is likened to blindness.

The newspaper said that Netanyahu "has ears and does not hear, has eyes and refuses to see, and has a mind and refuses to understand," pointing to the role reversal, "after it was said about our neighbors that they only understand force. Today, Netanyahu is the one who only understands pressure."

Estimates from Yedioth Ahronoth suggest that in the event of Hamas' acceptance of the deal, it would be a surprise. That is because this occurs as Hamas appears to achieve its objectives without formal agreement; Israel faces international isolation, pro-Palestine demonstrations persist, the Israeli military presence in Gaza serves largely symbolic purposes, and Hamas fighters return to vacated areas.

The newspaper concluded saying "Time is on Hamas's side. So why [would Hamas] rush?"