While the Nets, and the rest of the NBA, wait for the March 15 trade deadline to roll around to see whether the Orlando Magic pull the trigger and trade Dwight Howard, there are still games to be played over the next couple weeks.

And the Nets, who on Tuesday got a glimpse of what might have been had Brook Lopez been healthy all season, certainly hope to win some of those games.

The 93-92 win over the defending champion Dallas Mavericks was a blueprint for the Nets, and it included plenty of Lopez, who scored a game-high 38 points — including the game-winning free throws.

But the formula also included a nice contribution from Gerald Green, the 6-8 forward the team signed to a 10-day contract on Monday. Green, whom the Nets signed after he won MVP honors in last weekend’s D-League all-star game, scored 10 points off the bench for the Nets, including two 3-pointers and one crazy fast break alley-oop dunk in which he nearly knocked his teeth out on the rim.

“I was telling the guys, I wish I could have done something a little bit better, but I’m just glad it went in instead of missing it,” Green said.

For Green, Tuesday’s game was his first in the NBA since the 2008-09 season. But given the Nets’ need for athleticism and a true small forward on the roster, he has a good chance to stick around beyond his original 10 days and make a place for himself on the team the rest of the season.

In the visitor’s locker room at American Airlines Center after the game, though, Green wasn’t willing to talk about that possibility — not after what he’s gone through in his career.

• Brook Lopez explodes for 38 points in Nets' 93-92 upset of Mavericks

• Nets stories and columns

• Nets photos

• Nets videos

“You know what? You’ve just got to take it day by day, and game by game,” he said. “I don’t want to think ahead.”

Green, 26, was a first-round pick by the Boson Celtics out of high school in 2005, but the Celtics tired of his immaturity and his poor work ethic. And after he won the All-Star Weekend Slam Dunk Contest in 2007, Boston sent him to Minnesota that summer as a throw-in to the deal that brought Kevin Garnett to the Celtics. Green didn’t get off the bench in Minnesota, and after finishing second to Dwight Howard in the 2008 dunk contest, he was sent by the Timberwolves to his hometown Houston Rockets at the trade deadline.

But the Rockets waived Green shortly afterward, and after he played the 2008-09 season with Dallas, he went to Russia for the next two seasons before going to play in China last fall. There, he was cut by his team, Foshan Long Lions, which humbled him, he admitted. But overall, his overseas experience helped him grow up, he said. He’s a different, more mature person, now, he said.

When the lockout ended, Green got a look from the Lakers in training camp, but he was cut. He ended up with the Lakers’ D-League team, the Los Angeles D-Fenders, where he averaged 19.1 points per game before the Nets worked him out last weekend. He was in the car with his fiancée when he got the call the Nets were going to sign him.

How did he react to the news?

“I was screaming in the car at the top of my lungs,” he said. “I just didn’t know what to do — just because it’s been a long journey.”