The City of Tulsa is evaluating options for the dilapidated Cyrus Avery Bridge, formerly the 11th Street Bridge.

Some say the bridge is the most important in all of Green Country; however, it’s fallen into a state of advanced disrepair.

Tulsa County Commissioner Karen Keith said the bridge is pivotal to the city’s history.

“This is one of the most important links on the whole Route 66 road,” Keith explained. “The only reason Route 66 came through Tulsa is because Cyrus Avery worked on the commission, and he said, ‘We’ve got a bridge to get across the river, so that’s where the route should go.'”

However, according to Bruce Henley of the architectural firm Dewberry, there’s a major problem.

“That bridge is in really bad shape,” Henley said. “It’s inevitably going to fall in [the river]."

"You can’t really walk on it. There’s literally holes. You can see the river," Keith said.

Tulsa City Councilor Jeannie Cue said something must be done before this languishing love letter to the Mother Road falls into the Arkansas River.

“The longer we wait, the worse shape we’re gonna be in,” she said.

Fortunately, the city has an idea. It’s the brainchild of Keith and Dewberry, whose Tulsa office volunteered to develop a proposal.

“I had lunch with Commissioner Keith one day and talked about the Ponte Vecchio in Florence,” Henley said, referring to the famed medieval Italian bridge with built-in shops, “and how you can do a bridge, a pedestrian bridge, with some economic impact.”

“You and I can spend money all day long, and it just recirculates. But when people come in from the outside and they drop their money here, that’s a bonus for all of us," Keith said.

Tulsa’s city councilors appear to be in favor of rebuilding the bridge as a pedestrian market.

Dewberry created renderings of four designs, including a traditional art deco structure, an arch suspension bridge, and a contemporary market with shops made from shipping containers. Each design includes retail and restaurant space.

“It’ll have a huge economic impact, in my mind,” said City Councilor Christian Bengel.

“Because of the nostalgia factor, that would actually draw people to it,” added City Councilor Lori Decter Wright.

Money could be an obstacle. Henley said it’ll cost about $2 million just to do a feasibility study and evaluate what kind of shape the bridge is in. Keith said a final price tag is further down the road, but estimates it could cost$30-50 million.

The biggest obstacle, though, is the bridge’s status on the National Registry of Historic Places. Deviating from its original design and function would leave it ineligible for many grants, not to mention the risk of erasing a crucial part of Tulsa’s history.

“But there’s a way to do it,” Keith claimed. “And I think anybody on the trust would recognize that it’s too far gone.”

Henley said it’s possible to argue the space itself is on the National Register, not the Cyrus Avery Bridge. He said the final design would likely utilize some existing part of the bridge, provided it's structurally sound, so the project won’t be a full replacement.

Keith said the potentially high costs would be roughly equivalent to the cost of constructing ONEOK Field, but there would be no additional burden to taxpayers.

“You’re not going to be paying additional dollars atop what you’re paying now,” she said. “That’s not what we’re going to do. It might be a renewal of a tax, but it’s not going to be something new.”

“This is a project that would probably have a mixture of all the colors of money,” she continued. “Some public investments, and some enhancements from private dollars.”

Keith said worrying about the expense is short-term thinking. She believes the new bridge could become a Tulsa icon.

Keith thinks the bridge could end up paying for itself.