Tulsa to Carthage - Trip Day #21

On Friday I gave myself a tour of Tulsa. I love all the art deco architecture and also the commemorative Cyrus Avery Centennial Plaza and love to photograph it in different light. The oil boom and the art deco craze flourished at the same time here, coming together in a huge array of types and sizes of buildings in the various nuances of art deco style. If you'd like to know more - http://www.tulsapreservationcommission.org/artdeco/

I had stayed in Oklahoma City the night before and woke up feeling a bit lazy. The morning disappeared with some writing and some shopping and then I made up some time on the interstate for awhile. From Sapulpa I took 66 right on up into Tulsa to the Cyrus Avery Centennial Plaza. There were lots of heavy dark clouds to give things a moody look. In 2004, the old 11th Street Route 66 bridge was renamed in honor of national highway advocate and "father of Route 66" Cyrus Avery and closed off with a memorial gate. The "East Meets West" statues depict a horse-drawn wagon narrowly averting a collision with a Ford Model T driven by Avery himself. These bronze figures by artist Robert Summers stand at 135% of actual size.

After the bridge and plaza, 66 turns sharply east (well, if you're eastbound it does) and skirts the downtown. Nearby is the amazing Boston Avenue Church, completed in 1929. The church's website states that it's "considered to be one of the finest examples of ecclesiastical art deco architecture in the United States and has been designated by the Department of the Interior as a National Historic Landmark as well as listed on the National Register of Historic Places." Every time I've posted a photo of it, someone says it looks like that ghostbusters building! Well, same style!

Another terrific example of art deco is the Warehouse Market Building, just a few blocks away. This building served as a farmer's market and then the home of a grocery chain which is still family-owned and operated, but no longer at this location. This gem is getting great re-use with several retail businesses in the rebuilt structure - the tower and facade are original.

A bit north on the earlier alignment is the Blue Dome gas station. Just love this building - it was purchased a year ago by the owners of the adjacent Arnie's Bar for $1.52 million, according to Tulsa World and Ron Warnick's Route 66 News. It stands sentinel as a landmark of the Blue Dome Entertainment District.

I found this nice streamline building near the Blue Dome and am painfully ignorant of what it once was, although it looks like a car dealership building. If someone reading this knows its history, please fill me in. I didn't take time to research it, but wanted to share the photo.

Farther east (and back on the later alignment) at 11th Street and Quaker Avenue is the Meadow Gold sign. Last time I photographed this beauty it was at dusk, and it photographed beautifully. Still looks cool in the daylight! It was saved from the wrecking ball in 2004 at its original location about a mile away and due to preservation efforts was restored and mounted here.

Back on the road, I made a quick stop at everyone's favorite cheerful whale - the Blue Whale at the Port of Catoosa.

After dark I still had some miles to go into Carthage and got a little neon fix stopping in "Miam-uh" for a sandwich and of course going by the Coleman Theatre for a couple night shots.

And then it was the rest of the way into Carthage, eagerly anticipating the welcoming glow of the pretty Boots Courts sign for my last night on the road.

Day #4 of another road trip - a little neon to say good night

This morning I heard from three of our conference speakers on various details about their presentations. Wow! What an amazing gathering this event is going to be! If you've been thinking about registering for our Halloween weekend event, this would be a great time while you can still get rooms in our host hotel block at the discounted rate. www.bluecarpetcorridor.org/rt66conference Today I had a long, good, productive day up in Baxter Springs. I spent most of the day at the Heritage Center down in the archives, finding a few more goodies and scanning them. Then it was out and about town to take some photos and also compare sites with old photos. This evening I made a special trip back downtown in Miam-uh to grab some Blue Hour neon shots of the Waylan's KukuBurger and Coleman Theatre signs. But for whatever reason, neither one was on! So i settled for these. Happy neon dreams, everyone.

Sixth Annual Miles of Possibility Route 66 Conference is planned for October 2021

The Miles of Possibility Route 66 Conference is back this year with its sixth annual event, to be held virtually Thursday – Sunday, October 21 – 24, 2021. This year's theme is “A Worldwide Celebration of Route 66,” emphasizing the love of Route 66 and its collegiality that is truly an international phenomenon. To that end, this year's slate of speakers and presenters comes to you from across all eight Route 66 states and from locations around the world. Embracing the virtual format, the organizers have created a truly “worldwide” event! The by-now familiar conference format plus social activities will be followed again this year with a few new twists. The event kicks off with a Thursday evening virtual Happy Hour to meet and greet old and new friends and colleagues from around the globe. Friday and Saturday feature daytime conference sessions, with no need this year to choose from multiple breakout sessions. ROUTE Magazine editor Brennen Matthews will present the keynote speec

Edwardsville's A&W Drive In - Edwardsville's Route 66 History #7

As promised, here we are back to Edwardsville's Route 66 history with the story of the A&W Root Beer Drive-In. This was published in the November 2012 issue of The Prairie Land Buzz and also in an issue of Show Me Route 66. Give an eatery half a century in the same location and it's bound to generate a lot of memories. And when the restaurant is owned by the same family all those years, their story becomes part of the community's story. Mel and Vonney Kaufmann lived in Wisconsin when they started hearing glowing reports of Vonney's sister's successful A & W Root Beer Drive-In franchise in Springfield, Illinois. Inspired to search for a city that needed an A & W, Mel and Vonney decided on Edwardsville. They arrived in 1954 and purchased a lot on St. Louis Street/Route 66 on which to build their A & W. The Kauffmanns' chosen property had once been the location of the grand two-story A. O. French residence, but the now-empty lot had more re