From a small cabin in the mountains of New York, Nina Breeder and Massimilian Breeder begin a journey across the United States. California is just the initial destination, but just as the edge of the surrounding landscape expands, so does their ultimate d“Bonnie & Clyde meet Bruno Dumont in a sensually explosive road trip through the USA.” – CPH:DOX Festival, Copenhagen, 2008

Devil Come To Hell and Stay Where You Belong directed by Nina and Massimilian Breeder is an outstanding cinematographic work of art. From a small cabin in the mountains of New York, the artists begin their journey across the United States. California is the initial destination, but just as the edge of the surrounding landscape expands, so does their ultimate destination. Immersed in the impressive countryside, these two nameless characters hit the road in quest of sensations, images and sounds. Humans as well as nature are vulnerable: dead animals on the road, dying forests, the drying out of the earth, the actors' wounds, all are evident signs of the ecological and human fragility. Devil Come To Hell and Stay Where You Belong is a contemplation of nature and time along a raw journey through the American landscape.

Devil Come To Hell and Stay Where You Belong is also a reflection about the cinematographic treatment of landscape and how filmmakers apprehend, draw and become part of it, in a perpetual coming and going between force and fragility, appropriation and reject, proximity and distance. Within this artistic research the film oscillates between different cinematographic genres and evokes elements of a road movie, a documentary, and a performance film, yet without completely belonging to one of those categories. The strength of the film lies precisely in its hybridity and openness based on the artists’ very personal experience.

Devil Come To Hell and Stay Where You Belong has been shot in HD without the support of a film crew; the filmmakers are both the camera operators and the main characters. Any narrative event in the movie occurred at the time and place that it was filmed. The subjects and events filmed have not been modified from their original appearance and no action was re-staged for better results. In order to preserve the intimacy that occurred in the act of observing the scenes depicted, no camera assistants, boom operators or producers were involved.