Bollywood actor Shahid Kapoor, known for his versatile acting skills, is poised to make his mark in the gritty action genre with the upcoming film Bloody Daddy. The much-anticipated trailer of this action-packed entertainer was unveiled today in Mumbai, creating a buzz among fans and the film industry alike. Amidst the trailer launch event, Shahid Kapoor revealed an impressive aspect of the production of the film, stating that they managed to wrap up the entire shoot within a remarkably short span of just 36 days.

Bloody Daddy trailer launch: Shahid Kapoor reveals the action-packed film was shot in 36 days; says, “I don’t know how Ali has managed to mount this film on such a scale”

During the trailer launch event of Bloody Daddy, Shahid Kapoor engaged with the media and discussed the high-quality action sequences featured in the film. He also mentioned his collaboration with Ali, the director of the film, highlighting that he followed Ali's instructions closely during the shooting process. Shahid said, “I just followed everything that Ali said. The whole credit goes to Ali. He understands action that is cinematic and gritty. It's not like an amusement park where people are flying. The action here is very raw, nice, edgy and sexy. It's a very interesting combination of a subject, which is driven by emotions. The action goes hand in hand with emotions. Ali and I have known each other for many years, much before he made his debut as a filmmaker. I feel proud that he has come so far as a filmmaker.”

In addition, Shahid Kapoor further shared that Ali had undertaken the task of creating the film on an immense scale. The filmmaker has evidently put significant effort into ensuring that the project encompasses grandeur and magnitude. The actor said, “We have shot this film in 36 days. I don't know how Ali has managed to mount this film on such a scale.”

Directed by Ali Abbas Zafar, apart from Shahid Kapoor, the film also features Diana Penty, Sanjay Kapoor, Ronit Roy and Ankur Bhatia in pivotal roles and is slated to release on June 9 directly on Jio Cinema.

Also Read: Bloody Daddy trailer launch: Shahid Kapoor reveals that exhibitors called the makers, requesting them to release the film in cinemas: “Trust me, we were all tempted (to go for a theatrical release)”

More Pages: Bloody Daddy Box Office Collection , Bloody Daddy Movie Review

BOLLYWOOD NEWS - LIVE UPDATES