International conservative organizations spend considerable money, time and energy in Europe, and for a reason. Sometimes their efforts to push their conservative agenda into the legislation of European states are successful, and Poland is a good example of their success. That was thanks to the effort of the Ordo Iuris movement, which is also one of the partners of the Czech organization Alliance for the Family.

The Polish Catholic think-tank Ordo Iuris (OI) was founded in 2012 at a conference where one of the patrons was an American organization called Alliance Defending Freedom (ADF), which was also listed as a partner on the first website of this Polish group.

Ordo Iuris aims to defend “family and traditional values” through research, advocacy, and litigation. According to Balkan Insight, this organization has been trying to limit the rights of LGBTQ+ people and access to abortion for several years, all so as to ostensibly defend the “traditional, natural family.” OI also runs a private law school, Collegium Intermarium, where various personalities give lectures, including former Czech president Václav Klaus a few years ago.

The organization has long supported the agenda of the Polish party Law and Justice (PiS), which, until recently, was in power. OI said it was not affiliated with PiS, but adding that there were “many like-minded individuals” in the party. According to Balkan Insight journalist Claudia Ciobana, OI helped the Polish government create a narrative of “resistance to the West,” which Warsaw then used in its confrontation with the European Union. When a large number of Polish municipalities decided to declare themselves “LGBT ideology-free zones,” it was OI that helped create “pro-family” documents and materials for these declarations.

God, nation and family

Ordo Iuris cooperates with the Czech organization Alliance for the Family on several levels. Both organizations came together to form the Alliance for the Common Good (ACG) in 2021. ACG unites “pro-life” groups from Poland, the Czech Republic, Slovakia and Hungary.

ACG was founded three years ago in Poland with the aim of protecting “our inherent self-worth, granted to us by our Creator, and unalienable rights”. The mission is said to be to defend society and individuals from totalitarian ideologies. “Together, we strive to make Europe a space of freedom and security guided by our true European values: God, the Nation and the Family,” says ACG’s website.