What are the main political parties in Poland offering ahead of the October 15th elections? The parties have, finally, published their manifestos just over a month before voting begins.

Below is a summary of the manifestos of the two largest parties running in the parliamentary elections.

Civic Platform (PO) / Civic Coalition (KO)

The leading opposition party has moved its political centre of gravity from "centre-right" to "centre-left". The party perceives the need to be populist in offering social benefits - "pork-barrel politics" - in response to the same from the ruling Law and Justice party (PiS) - to imitate the ruling alliance in this area.

In terms of personal ethics, the party and its alliance - Civic Coalition (KO) - have taken the opposite road, clearly opposing Law and Justice's hard line on abortion.

Their main policy has been viewed hitherto by critics as "remove Law and Justice", suggesting a lack of policy initiative. So their manifesto was keenly awaited.

Their manifesto offers:

social support to mothers returning to work after maternity leave

liberalisation of abortion law

higher salaries, in particular for school teachers (a group notably dissatisfied with the ruling party)

a return to "rule of law" in Poland, following recent crises in judiciary

punishment of Law and Justice leaders found guilty of violating the constitution

"European" level of healthcare

Law and Justice (PiS) / United Right (ZP)

In Poland described as "right-wing", their policies are economically very left-wing in international terms. The ruling party has introduced several extremely large benefits packages. Their claim to be right-wing is based partly on their pro-Church stance, but this has been perceived as political expedience rather than conviction, at times. Their main international "win" has been their firm support of Ukraine, but this policy is not popular or at least not of much interest to their grassroots support. Before the elections they have softened expressions of support for Ukraine to appeal to the nationalist sentiments in their electorate.

Their manifesto offers:

increasing child support - from their flagship "500+" to "800+"

adding a month's extra pension for pensioners

free medicine for the elderly and for children

increasing efficiency of tax system

further modernisation of the Polish Army

Sources: Newsweek, Super Express, pis.org.pl, Program KO

pt