Sun Microsystems, the quintessential Silicon Valley company known more for creating ahead-of-the-curve products than its ability to sell them, is now on the chopping block.

Oracle, which has reshaped the business technology industry by acquiring and carving up other companies, is sure to shed thousands of Sun workers after its $7.4 billion acquisition of the server and software company, industry observers say. Some figure it will cut from a third to a half of Sun’s work force.

“A lot of jobs will be cut,” said Cassatt Software CEO Bill Coleman, a Sun alumnus who also cofounded BEA Systems, which Oracle acquired last year for $8.5 billion.

Coleman believes Oracle could shrink, sell or shut down Sun’s high-end server products and storage business. “The servers are being dramatically squeezed by the next generation of servers and blades,” a type of server, Coleman said. “Sun’s storage business is not a leader and it’s being squeezed by commodity storage” competitors.

Santa Clara-based Sun had already planned major layoffs, announcing in November that it would cut up to 6,000 of its 33,000 employees over the next year in hopes of saving the struggling tech giant $800 million annually. Sun has roughly 6,500 workers in the Bay Area, with campuses in Santa Clara and Menlo Park.

Oracle, whose headquarters are in Redwood City, has not revealed its strategy, so it is hard to say exactly what impact the merger will have on Sun, a company that once embodied the valley’s change-the-world swagger. “The ’80s was the era in which Silicon Valley freed the computer” from prohibitive costs, Coleman said. “Apple did it for the desktop and Sun did it for the server.”

But after the dot-com bubble bust, Sun struggled to convert its ideas into marketable products, observers say. Now the company is almost certain to be broken into pieces.

When he announced the deal Monday, Oracle CEO Larry Ellison said the acquisition will expand his company beyond being a business software powerhouse.

By beating out IBM for the deal, analysts said Oracle will gain valuable software, including Sun’s widely used Java programming language, that will make it a stronger competitor. Additionally, a successful integration of Sun could make Oracle a data center giant rivaling IBM, Hewlett-Packard and even Cisco Systems.

Oracle President Safra Catz said she expects Sun to operate at “substantially higher margins.” She estimated Sun could create an additional $1.5 billion a year in operating profit for Oracle and add at least 15 cents a share to net income in its first year.

“We do know from Oracle’s past mergers that they have always made good on the commitments they made to the Street in terms of cost-cutting,” said Pacific Crest Securities analyst Brendan Barnicle. “They come into their deals with a very good understanding of their potential to cut costs.”

After swallowing PeopleSoft in January 2005 for $10.3 billion, Oracle cut about 5,000 jobs, or 9 percent of the combined work force at the time. After acquiring Siebel Systems in 2006 for $5.85 billion, Oracle slashed about 2,000 jobs, or about 3.5 percent of its global work force.

“Clearly, there will be big layoffs — thousands is fair to say,” said Gordon Haff, an analyst at Illuminata, a technology industry research firm.

In the first quarter of 2009, more than 84,000 tech jobs were lost in the United States, according to job-search firm Challenger, Gray & Christmas. Mergers and acquisitions have resulted in more than 44,000 job cuts so far this year — more than four times the merger-related cuts by the same point last year, the agency said.