Third-party maintenance powerhouse Curvature has appointed a new CEO eight months after the completion of its merger with SMS.

Peter Weber, an industry veteran who previously held the top executive role at Carpathia and SevenSpace, will replace John Wozniak as CEO of Curvature, the company said Wednesday. Weber began serving as executive chairman of the combined firm's board of directors in February.

Under Weber's leadership, data center and cloud services provider Carpathia was acquired by QTS Realty Trust in 2015 after driving "seven-fold profitable revenue" at the company, according to his LinkedIn page. Weber also led SevenSpace, a managed services provider that he co-founded, to an eventual purchase by Sun Microsystems.

[Related: Curvature CEO Wozniak On Helping Aggressive Partners, Interest Among 'Disruptive' Vendors ]

’I’m excited to lead Curvature on its fast-growth trajectory as demand escalates for third-party maintenance, pre-owned hardware and alternative services strategies,’ Weber said in a statement. ’Now more than ever, global organizations need help extending IT asset life cycles while optimizing their existing networks and data centers to reduce cost and risk. Curvature’s unbiased, vendor-agnostic services provide customers unparalleled IT freedom and flexibility.’

The Curvature-SMS deal closed in late February and was backed by $57 billion private equity firm Partners Group, majority owner of the $545 million combined company according to a previous CRN report. It is unclear what role Wozniak, who had served as CEO of SMS since 2011, will hold moving forward.

Joel Schwartz, head of private equity Americas at Partners Group, said in the statement that Weber's business skills and IT background will position Curvature for "accelerated growth" in an evolving third-party maintenance market. In August, Gartner released a market guide for data center and network third-party maintenance – the first of its kind – and found that 71 percent of "very large" enterprises relied on third-party maintenance support to some extent in 2016.

The leadership change also follows a global rebranding that Curvature – No. 85 on the CRN Solution Provider 500 – unveiled in July. The Charlotte, N.C.-based IT asset life-cycle service provider told CRN at the time that it would make significant investments in branding and digital marketing amid a push to expand its international foothold.

"We believe the market demand and the increasing awareness for a leading independent [solution provider] is higher than it's ever been," Wozniak said. "You're going to see us put a significant effort into awareness around just how defined of an organization we are. A lot of it is also bringing to life what we've been internally to the external world."

Curvature specializes in global hardware support, remote and branch office maintenance, professional and infrastructure services, hardware procurement and IT asset disposition. The company operates 100-plus service centers globally that it says meet international environmental disposition standards and security compliance requirements.

"That's an incredibly complete value proposition to any organization looking for a solution that in many regards is how they want to consume IT," Wozniak said to CRN in July.