Welcome to our journey at Dennis Tam Group, where our roots trace back to the early 2000s with Sevenspace, a pioneering remote IT multi-platform managed services firm based in Virginia, United States. We began as a proud member of Sevenspace’s Tier 3 Engineering Team, a position laid the foundation for our expertise in managing complex IT infrastructures. We assisted companies in the United States and the United Kingdom in ensuring their IT systems and networking infrastructures working smoothly and efficiently. We were frequently contacted to provide expert advice to their technical and consultation teams on IT operations or consulting initiatives.

In 2005, Sevenspace was acquired by Sun Microsystems, but this transition only strengthened our commitment and capabilities. Despite the changes, our team retained its proficiency in remotely monitoring and managing Sun Microsystems’ customers. By 2007, we had evolved further, taking the lead in a team of 40 Tier 3 engineers from our European awarded consulting partner. This marked a significant expansion of our responsibilities, encompassing the entire IT stack, including applications, software, systems, and network infrastructure, for Sun Microsystems’ remote managed operations customers in the UK and Europe (excluding France and Spain).

For example, we assisted one of our customers, International Management Group (IMG), and their client, The Royal and Ancient Golf Club (The R&A), in managing the sports event for The Open Championship (also known as The Open or the British Open) live in July 2007 to handle an extremely high volume of traffic to The Open official website. Since 2001, we have professionally planned, constructed, and managed a high performance secure web hosting infrastructure for our customer IMG, allowing all of IMG’s high-profile sports clients to run all of their digital media and official websites there.

At the core of our operations is a meticulous pre-sales engagement process. Solution Support Consultants internally consult us during the customer’s pre-sales stage, providing insights into the customer’s needs and expectations. We scrutinize details such as the number of applications, systems, devices, and required technologies. Our objective is to seamlessly support our customers, ensuring any potential gaps are identified and addressed before going live.

To guarantee operational readiness, we conduct internal technical team reviews, addressing skill-set requirements and providing necessary training when new technologies or IT environments are introduced. Following the customer’s go-live, we maintain regular contact with individual engineers and hold weekly Tier 3 operation team meetings, ensuring that our Sun Microsystems customers receive impeccable service.

Collaboration is key, and our Team Leads play a vital role in facilitating communication and ensuring engineers stay informed about new standards or transactions. In cases where adjustments are needed, whether in reorganization or support matrices, we approach it with a commitment to maintain operational efficiency.

Our Tier 3 engineers are the backbone of our operations, managing incidents, problems, modifications, challenges, and tasks on all technologies, 24/7, 365 days a year for customers. They are the pinnacle of competence, stepping in for the most urgent and complex projects after Tier 1 and Tier 2 engineers have exhausted their options.

The journey continued when Oracle acquired Sun Microsystems in 2010. The Tier 3 technology engineering teams persevered, solidifying each engineer as an unparalleled expert in their responsible technologies. This commitment ensures that every mission-critical IT infrastructure entrusted to us enjoys the highest uptime and finest remedies.

At Dennis Tam Group, we take pride in being a cornerstone of Oracle Advanced Customer Services, providing consulting service and engineering resources that define excellence in service offerings. Join us on this journey, where expertise meets commitment, and challenges transform into opportunities for success. We assist business owners and employees to adopt Oracle by utilizing Oracle products and services to ensure that their IT systems remain at peak performance while also working efficiently.