Every now and then, we also look on our website for footballers who have in the past – some close, others more distant – made their mark on the main Slovenian football stage. A few days ago

you could read

what is being added with former national team player Miral Samardzic, but this time we took a peek across the northern border, to Austria, where the jersey of one of the local clubs is worn by a quartet of Slovenians, who in

Telemach First League

played a total of 588 matches!

Vidmajer went elsewhere in winter

Jure Travner (290 PLT games), Robert Pušaver (140), Matic Črnic ( 134) and Denis Perger (24), together with their lesser-known compatriots Flan Šlamberger (who spent his youth in Maribor and later played for 2. SNL with 66 appearances) and Gal Zorko (former Celje player) share a dressing room at the Austrian club

SV Raiffeisen Wildon

. The latter is located in a small town of the same name not far from Leibnitz in Styria , Austria. Wildon is also the place where German troops retreated to in 1918 on the orders of General Rudolf Maister. It’s much quieter in Wilden now, of course, but the pitch is not as colourful as the club’s fans might like.

Tadej Vidmajer also played for SV RaiffeisenWildon in the autumn, but transferred to USV Wies in the winter.

SV Raiffeisen Wildon is not achieving the brilliant results one might have expected this season, given that it is represented by such aces as Jure Travner, who in the past was with, among others, the Ludogorets champion Bulgaria, in In England, he played for Watford and Reading, and Matic Črnic, who is still well remembered from his time at Maribor and Domžale (he later played for Olimpija, but was quickly sidelined by injury).

SV Raiffeisen Wildon is currently 11th in the fourth Austrian league, but the top is not far away. Third-placed Lebring is only five points ahead, which means it will be a busy spring. ASK Voitsberg is at the top of the standings, with Nino Pungaršek, who has also proved his worth in the past on the Telemach First League, earning his living this season. On Friday evening, ASK Voitsberg and SV Raiffeisen Wildon will compete.

Sandro Foda, son of former Austrian selector Franz Foda, also plays for SV Raiffeisen Wildon.

As for the Slovenians in Wilden, 38-year-old Jure Travner has played 17 games this season and scored twice. Matic Črnic played 12 times and scored once. Robert Pušaver has identical stats to Travner, Denis Perger has made 16 appearances but has yet to score a goal. Flan Šlamberger joined the club only in the winter, but he has already played in the two opening games of the year. Gal Zorko has 15 games and 6 goals and is the club’s top scorer.

This text was automatically translated using AI.

News

#legionarji