Sorry, my error, I wrote that at a very silly hour of the morning. I've updated my prior post. I meant to say:

"Matt Perger strongly recommended not to polish when tamping, in his blog a while ago. Primary reason, it seems, was there is no benefit to polishing, ..."

His Pergtamp is certainly not a copy of the Reg Barber tamper. It was designed strictly for the VST basket, with an exceptionally snug fit. Too snug, in fact. If the VST basket is dinged at all, the tamp won't fit. The tamp also has an exceptionally sharp edge. This is very different to the Reg Barber tampers. The Pergtamp was actually made by Pullman. I don't believe that Pullman would be associated with copying anyone and certainly not Reg Barber.

I understand that this tamp has been discontinued. Reasons - the one mentioned above (won't fit into the VST if at all dinged), too expensive and it shared a problem experienced by all tight fitting tampers - if you remove the tamper from the basket too quickly, a vacuum forms under the tamper base which causes the puck to lift. If the puck lifts, you are almost guaranteed channelling. So the failure of these types of tampers, is that by trying to get the perfect puck surface (to reduce the likelihood of channelling), they have introduced an increased risk of channelling. Perger has now released a new range of tampers that he has manufactured without any middlemen. Price is way cheaper, $50.

I have personal experience with these tampers. I have a Reg Barber tamper (brass base). It is beautiful to look at, but I don't use it. It just doesn't feel balanced to me. It also doesn't fit the basket at all well. 58mm tamper base in a VST basket - too sloppy. My Pulman tamper is wonderful - well balanced, fits the basket perfectly and has a lovely 'feel' with the rubber at the point your fingers touch the base.

I'm happy to spend money supporting the innovators in this coffee industry. I've tried many different tampers, the OCD device from Sasa Sestic, and more recently distribution tool designed by Denis Baseric from Kafetek. I've also just received a Kafetek Conical grinder. A beautiful piece of craftsmanship. The attention to detail and care in manufacturing is something to see. And he started this from home, because there are no quality commercial grinders that can truly single dose. He made a grinder for himself to his personal specification and the market came to him. It's a great story. And he is a true craftsman. And of course, I've committed to purchase one of Decent Espresso's machines - what an innovation! He is discovering stuff that the existing 'market leaders' haven't bothered trying to find out. I'm really hoping his business succeeds - he deserves it. And I feel he deserves my support.

We are very lucky to have a great and thriving coffee industry in Australia. We have a number of leaders emerging from Australia. I believe Sasa Sestic and Matt Perger deserve our support. And so do Denis Baseric and John Buckman for their innovation.

Yelta, You really don't seem to like innovation and leaders who are prepared to standup and do something different, or is this my imagination?