At 12:00 noon on Saturday, July 27, 2013, Wade Hill, Sr. peacefully went home to be with the Lord. He was born to the union of Dave and Everlena (Goolsby) Hill on May 18, 1932 in Wilkes County (Rayle), Georgia, the sixth of 15 children.

He was preceded in death by his parents as well as brothers and sisters, James, John Henry, Annie Cornelius, Claude, Everlena, Thomas, Susie Mae, John, Howard, Jimmy, Emily Ann, as well as daughter-in-law, Annie Towns.

As a child, Wade attended Lyonsville Baptist Church in Rayle, Georgia. As a teen, he came to Cincinnati, Ohio in 1951. He found employment at the Sargent Bischoff Company. He was later employed by the William Powell Valve Company until an injury rendered him disabled.

While in Cincinnati, he met and married the love of his life, Francine Wiley. They moved to Lincoln Heights, Ohio in 1953. He found employment at Kilgore’s Texaco on Lockland Road (now Mangham Drive) and from there to the Shepherd Lane location where he served as a Mechanic and Gas Attendant.

Wade was a music lover and at one time was Manager of the Blues group, Albert Washington and the Kings, and they traveled the country after their recording at the King Records Company in Evanston, Ohio.

Wade was a faithful member of Mt. Moriah Baptist Church in Lincoln Heights, Ohio, serv- ing on the Usher Board, Tape Ministry and Bus

Ministry as well as Trustee. In January of 2005, he was baptized in Jesus name and received the gift of the Holy Ghost according to John 3:5 and Acts 2:38 at the Greater Emanuel Apostolic Temple where he served faithfully until his death. He was a Sunday School member and served on the Usher Board.

Wade (Paw Paw) enjoyed having children, grandchildren and great-grandchildren at his home for dinners.

He is survived by: his devoted and faithful wife of 60 years, Francine Hill; his beloved chil- dren, Linda (Mark) Buckner, Lionel Hill of Baltimore, MD, James Towns of Rayle, GA, Gwendolyn (Gregory) Stemrick, Janet (Thayer Sr.) Blackwell, Wade (Vanessa) Hill, Jr. and Priscilla (Clarence) Price; 14 grandchildren, 30 great-grandchildren and two great-great-grand- children; three sisters of Atlanta, GA, Pearl Hill, Dorothy (Melvin) Grier and Martha Hill; and a host of nieces, nephews, cousins, other family members and many dear friends.

Wade had many friends; he met no strangers. He will be missed.