Obituary:

Claude Wilson Wright Jr., “Bill”, age 84, of South Hill, VA, completed his life’s journey to be with the Lord on July 16, 2024. He was preceded in death by his loving parents Claude Wilson Wright Sr and Virginia Dare Wright; his sister Elizabeth Wright Leggett; his son Todd Wilson Wright. He is survived by his beloved wife DeEtte Wright; children Tracy Wright (Aaron), Savory Turman, Jason Turman (Tiffany), Machel Moss (Sam), Greg Dooley (Brittany), and Dare Williams (Trevor); 21 grandchildren and 1 great granddaughter. He was a loving father and devoted “Pop”. Bill was a graduate of Park View High School. He went on to Virginia Tech University where he graduated with a Bachelor of Science in Animal Husbandry. He was an airman in the United States Air Force, spending majority of his time overseas in Newfoundland. He worked for Shell Oil Company before moving to ChemTreat Incorporated where he would later retire. Bill was steadfast in his faith in the Lord and his dedication remained constant throughout his life. He was a devoted deacon of Ephesus Baptist Church and spent his years sharing his wisdom and the gospel with everyone he came in contact with. He achieved his license into The Gospel Ministry in May 2015. He was also passionate about farming, running his rabbit dogs, coaching softball, and cracking a joke here and there. He will be remembered for his gracious, kind heart and loving spirit which helped him quickly make friends with whomever he met. He would always see the good in people and was a great man inside and out. “I love you but the Lord loves you more.” Visitation will be held at Ephesus Baptist Church on Wednesday, July 24, at 4:00pm with a memorial service following at 5:00pm, with full American Legion Post 79 Military Honors. In lieu of flowers, those wishing to honor Bill’s memory may consider making a donation to Hospice of Virginia, Farmville Office at 202 Clarke Street, Farmville, VA 23901. Online condolences may be made through our website, www.crowderhitecrews.com. Crowder-Hite-Crews Funeral Home and Crematory is serving the Wright family.