The photo camera is a piece of equipment in Phasmophobia. It is a digital camera that can be used to take pictures of objects in-game. While it is not used for gathering evidence, it is essential for acquiring photo rewards, as well as being necessary for certain objectives and tasks.

Usage[]

The photo camera automatically turns on while held outside the van. For the Tier II and III cameras, an additional display shows a preview of what the camera will capture at the moment it is used, and helps players frame the photo subject. Each photo camera can take an unlimited number of photos, but only the first 10 pictures taken will count towards earning photo rewards and completing objectives.

Upon taking a picture, the flash will go off, and a photo preview will show up on the camera for Tier II and III cameras. Any pictures taken of a reflective surface will show the lens flash in the picture, such as a television, or the axe that one of the possible ghost models wields. The cooldown between photo depends on the Tier of the photo camera (3 seconds for Tier I, 2 seconds for Tier II, and 1 second for Tier III).

When a ghost manifests during a ghost event or a hunt, the photo camera's display will be distorted, as well as any pictures taken. Pictures taken in this state will still be labeled in the journal if a valid subject is detected.

Holding a Tier II or III photo camera within 7.5 metres of a ghost (2.5 metres for the Yokai) during a hunt on the same floor will attract the ghost. The Tier I photo camera will only attract the ghost when a picture is taken. However, due to a bug, if a Tier I photo camera is cycled into the inventory within 2.13 seconds after taking a photo, it will stay electronic until another photo is taken with it.

Photo rewards[]

See also: Photo Rewards and Money

The first 10 labeled pictures recorded in the journal will reward the player with experience and points depending on the photo category and starring in the journal, added together as "photo evidence". A maximum of $110 and 110 XP can be obtained at the end of a contract. There are different limits on how many times each photo category will provide rewards. For example, only one photo of the bone or of the ghost will be credited, but an unlimited amount of different interaction photos can be taken and rewarded accordingly.

If there are no available slots for photos inside the journal (which can hold 10 photos for the whole team, stars or no stars), any further shots will not net any monetary gains.

Objectives[]

Main article: Objectives

Objective Actual requirements Capture a photo of the ghost -

Gallery[]

Trivia[]

Captured photos are intentionally not synced over with other players to improve performance, and are instead taken and rendered individually on each client. This can cause confusion, as this often leads to the photo angle being different and causing objects to be in frame for one person but not so for another.

The real-life camera models for each tier are:

Tier I: Polaroid OneStep 600 Flash (Polaroid "rebranded" as Polteroid)

Tier II: Sony W800 compact camera (Sony "rebranded" as Bony)

Tier III: Sony a7RV mirrorless camera body + Sony SEL2470GM2 lens (Sony "rebranded" as Bony)

History[]