Creating an automated collection involves defining conditions to match the products that you want in the collection. You can also apply a sort order and other details. You can create up to 5,000 automated collections.

Collections can have a maximum of 60 conditions.

If you already have a collection that has more than 60 conditions, then you can still use it. You can edit or delete its existing conditions, but you can't add any conditions when it's over the limit.

Before you update a collection, you can review the top of the page to ensure no other staff are making changes to the same collection.

Create an automated collection

If you don't want to publish the collection as soon as you create it, then you can set a specific date when the collection will be published to your online store. Learn more about future publishing.

You can create up to 5,000 automated collections.

You can add only entire products to a collection. You can't add specific variants.

Steps:

From your Shopify admin, go to Products > Collections.

Click Create collection.

Enter a title and description for the collection.

In the Collection type section, click Automated:

Select whether products need to match all conditions or any condition to be included in the collection.

Use the drop-down lists to set the collection conditions.

Click Save. In the Products section that is displayed, the products that match the conditions are automatically added to the collection.

Set the sort order for how you want the products to be sorted in your store. For more information about sorting, refer to Change the sort order for the products in a collection.

In the Sales channels section, select from your active sales channels where you want your collection to be available.

In the Collection image section, click Upload image to add an image for the collection. For information about the sizes of images that you can use, refer to Image sizes.

Optional: The Search engine listing preview section displays a preview of how the collection will be displayed in search results. If you want to edit this information, then click Edit website SEO. You can't change the URL and handle, because they're used to link the collection to your online store.

Click Save.

Add a link to your collection in your online store navigation so that customers can find and view the collection.

Add selection conditions for an automated collection

When you create an automated collection, you can add one or more conditions for it in the Conditions section. That section will also display any conditions that you've already added to the collection.

For more information about conditions, refer to Conditions for automated collections.

Steps:

In the first drop-down list, select a condition type.

In the second drop-down list, select how a product needs to match the condition to be included in the collection.

Enter a condition value in the third field.

If you want to add more than one condition, then click Add another condition and repeat the steps.

Click Save to add matching products.

You can set a specific publishing date for a collection to become available in your online store.

Steps:

From your Shopify admin, go to Products > Collections.

Click a collection.

In the Sales channels section, click the calendar icon beside Online Store.

Set the date and time that you want to publish the collection.

Click Save.

Change the contents of an automated collection

You can change the contents of an automated collection by editing the conditions or by editing a product so that it doesn't meet the conditions.

Steps:

From your Shopify admin, go to Products > Collections.

Click the name of the collection that you want to edit.

In the Conditions section, make any changes to the conditions.

Click Save to add matching products and remove products that don't match.

Replace a manual collection with an automated collection

You can't change a manual collection into an automated collection, but you can create a new automated collection to replace the existing manual collection.

Steps:

Add a tag to all of the products in your manual collection.

Create a new automated collection and set the tag as a condition.

After you set up the automated collection, you can delete the original manual collection.

Delete a collection

Steps:

From your Shopify admin, go to Products > Collections.

Click the name of the collection that you want to delete.

Click Delete this collection.

Click Delete in the confirmation box to delete the collection.

Links to deleted collections are automatically removed from online store menus. You can also delete more than one collection at the same time using a bulk action.