If you watch only one James Toback movie that isn't Karel Reisz's The Gambler, make it this one. There's no "separating the artist from the art" with Toback - if anyone's art is a direct extension of them, it's this man's - and I disconnected with most of his work following the MeToo-era revelations because the self-mythologizing likes of Harvard Man and The Pick-Up Artist feel a lot less cute when you know what they were obfuscating. One way to engage with art, especially art by highly morally compromised individuals, is to ask if it passes the "Show me something true" test. There are a lot of Toback movies that don't pass that test for me. But this one does.…

Harvey Keitel has long been one of the more daring actors in Hollywood. Known, like Robert DeNiro, for his early work with famed director Martin Scorsese, Keitel often took out of the way and unusual roles outside of the mainstream to balance his mainstream work. Always a character actor rather than a star, Keitel lent his presence to two raw depictions of troubled, despairing and sexually tormented humanity. The first of these was director James Toback’s Fingers and the second was director Abel Ferrara’s bleak Bad Lieutenant. These two films are the cornerstones of the actor’s career. Although both films are cult favourites, Fingers especially is something of a landmark in the development of American independent cinema. It is an…

Fascinating film and performance from Keitel as a brutish man-child who's a piano virtuoso, a vicious debt collector and a predatory cooze hound. No matter your thoughts on Toback personally, who it seems is also an accomplished sexual predator, his talent, at one time, was undeniable. There are traces of early Scorsese here, but Toback very much had his own vision and style. Fingers can get outright strange at times and just what the hell is with all the weird business Keitel is doing? I don't know, but it works. Despite being an incredibly churlish and unlikable character, I couldn't take my eyes off him.

I'm shocked no one has snapped this up for a remastered release. It feels ripe…

March/April 2023: Theme of the Month - Make/Remake

Fingers (1978) and The Beat That My Heart Skipped (2005)

James Toback's directorial debut - he also wrote the script - is a dark character study of a deeply troubled young man. Jimmy is torn between his desire to be a concert pianist (like his mentally-ill mother) and loyalty to his father, a Mafia loan shark who uses Jimmy to rough up deadbeats who renege on their debts. It's also a bravura performance by Harvey Keitel - perhaps one of his best - as Jimmy whose life spirals out of control as the film progresses.

Jimmy's not so much living between two worlds as living in his own internal world. He is…

In Fingers Jimmy (Harvey Keitel) wants to be a concert pianist, he wants to have a high-class life, he wants to have mingles with forward and tantalizing New York women. What he cannot prevent is that his debt collector daylights job, rendered by his own father, is what is impeding him from attaining the conventional success he so badly yearns in having. He chases the wrong women (he thinks they’re right on), he associates himself with the wrong types of street trash, he gets into conflicts that are unnecessary and deterring from him to becoming a better self. Keitel is a raging toxic male for this type of characterization, compellingly so. The movie, by James Toback who made this his…

You Have 90 Minutes To Comply 2: Brevity Rules

Disillusionment In Sun-Drenched 1970s American New Wave Cinema: A Watching Brief

You know, I've always wondered who was the person who invented walking down the street listening to a radio and if it was invented before the ghettoblaster became a thing.

Turns out it was Harvey Keitel in an obscure 1970s crime film where, among other things, he witnesses Jim Brown crack Tanya Roberts and Tisa Farrow's heads together because they object to sucking his nipples, tells his dad (Michael V. Gazzo, on the verge of a coronary as usual) that his dick hurts, and carries out a debt collection at a pizza restaurant to Angel in the Morning.

Before I…