Jeanine Patten-Coble:

info@littlepink.org

2442 Tribek Ct., Burlington, NC 27215

www.littlepink.org

Little Pink Houses of Hope was started by St. Mark’s member Jeanine Patten-Coble after she was diagnosed with breast cancer in 2009. God’s calling was clear and she responded by creating an organization that works tirelessly to reach out to families that are in the middle of the breast cancer crisis. The organization is unique in that it focuses on the entire family and wrapping them in God’s love, as opposed to a patient-only focus. Little Pink conducts local programming in Burlington, NC and is most well-known for its national program for breast cancer family retreats.

Project: Local Office / Clerical Volunteer

Description: Help us put together retreats and meet the day to day needs of the families that we serve.

Day & Time: M-F, anytime 9-4

Location: 2442 Tribek Ct., Burlington NC 27215

Requirements: Please fill out online application at www.littlepink.org, various skill levels needed.

Project: Retreat Week Volunteer

Description: Come serve alongside other volunteers in the mission trip of a lifetime. You will work directly with breast cancer families at one of our retreat locations.

Day & Time: All year

Location: Various Vacation Destinations (NC, SC, FL, AL, AZ, CA, US Virgin Islands)

Requirements: Please fill out online application at www.littlepink.org. Once selected, a 1.5 hour webinar training is scheduled. There is a week long commitment on the retreat itself.

Project: Family Intake Volunteer

Description: Call families that have recently been selected to gather their information, offer support, and make sure that their retreat week is perfect.

Day & Time: Anytime, all year

Location: On the phone, so you can do it from wherever.

Requirements: Please fill out online application at www.littlepink.org. 1 hour webinar training prior to being assigned a family.

Project: Birthday Card Partner

Description: Send 10 cards to birthday recipients of Little Pink’s programming.

Day & Time: Anytime, all year

Location: You can do it from wherever.

Requirements: Please fill out online application at www.littlepink.org. 20 minute webinar training prior to being assigned a family.