352

In News

Philippines journalist Maria Ressa and Russian journalist Dmitry Muratov won the 2021 Nobel Peace Prize.

About

They have bagged the award “for their efforts to safeguard freedom of expression, which is a precondition for democracy and lasting peace.”

Both journalists have faced several attempts from both Philippines and Russian governments to silence their publication.

Maria Ressa

Ressa is the Executive Editor and CEO of Rappler – an online news outlet – covering the policies and actions of Philippines President Rodrigo Duterte’s regime.

She established Rappler in 2012 with three other female founders and with a small team of 12.

The website became one of the first multimedia news websites in the Philippines – sweeping local and international awards.

In 2019, the journalist was arrested over a Rappler news story on businessman Wilfredo Keng, which was seen as politically motivated means to silence her.

Dmitry Muratov

Muratov is the editor-in-chief of Russian newspaper Novaya Gazeta. It was founded by him in 1993, and he edited the newspaper until 2017.

The newspaper has exposed several cases of abuse of power, human rights violation and corruption.

The Committee to Protect Journalists called his newspaper the “only truly critical newspaper with national influence in Russia today.”

He won the International Press Freedom Award from the Committee to Protect Journalists in 2007.

Three years later, he received the Legion of Honor order, France’s highest award, in the degree of Chevalier (Knight).

He also received for the Novaya Gazeta the Four Freedoms Award for Freedom of Speech in Middelburg, the Netherlands in 2010.

About Nobel Peace Prize

The Nobel Peace Prize is one of the five Nobel Prizes established by the will of Swedish industrialist, inventor, and armaments manufacturer Alfred Nobel.

Peace prize is along with the prizes in Chemistry, Physics, Physiology or Medicine, and Literature.

The first Nobel Peace Prize awarded In 1901.

The prize was shared between Henry Dunant of Switzerland, founder of the Red Cross, and the French parliamentarian and peace activist Frédéric Passy.

Selection of Nobel Prize laureates

The Norwegian Nobel Committee is responsible for the selection of eligible candidates and the choice of the Nobel Peace Prize laureates.

The Committee is composed of five members appointed by the Storting (Norwegian parliament).

The Nobel Peace Prize is awarded in Oslo, Norway, not in Stockholm, Sweden, where the Nobel Prizes in Physics, Chemistry, Physiology or Medicine, Literature and the prize in economic sciences are awarded.

How are the Nobel Prize laureates selected?

Source:IE