Stephen Bronfman gave the question his full attention. It was a time, after all, of tremendous change for Canada's premier business family and his interviewer wanted to know what he'd do to keep himself occupied.

"Maybe I'll be a baseball man," the son of Charles Bronfman said with a laugh. "Who knows?"

Lest any Montreal Expos fans get carried away, the comment was made in 1986. Bronfman was then working as an associate director of communications with the Expos -- a team owned by his father -- and the statement was made in a newspaper interview regarding a rift between Charles Bronfman and Stephen's uncle, Edgar, Sr. By then, it was accepted that it would be Stephen's cousin Edgar, Jr., who would ultimately ascend to the top of Seagram's, the family business.

A great deal has transpired since then -- one big deal in particular, considering yesterday's news of the Seagram Co. Ltd. merger with Vivendi SA and Canal Plus SA. And now Stephen Bronfman finds himself being pressured to step up and do something that his father did in the late 1960s, when against the advice of Samuel Bronfman -- Stephen's grandfather -- Charles became involved in a bid to bring major-league baseball to Montreal.

Now, with general partner Jeffrey Loria alienating his limited partnership by doing everything he said he'd do when the people who are now his antagonists trumpeted him as the saviour of baseball in Montreal, another generation of Bronfmans is being asked to assume more of a financial burden and help spearhead an attempted buyout.

Stephen Bronfman, 35, went against his father's advice last fall when he agreed to join Quebec pharmacy magnate Jean Coutu and Loblaw's at the forefront of a group that was supposed to help Loria refinance the Expos, with an eye toward construction of a new downtown ballpark.

The younger Bronfman, who put in a little more than $1-million toward helping buy out the shares of president Claude Brochu -- when Brochu threw in the towel on the Expos' future, agreed to an eventual investment of at least $10-million.

Among the things Stephen Bronfman has done to keep himself busy -- in addition to buying into and then selling Netstar Communications and TSN, and dabbling in the concert promotions business and broadband communications -- has been oversee some of his father's charitable interests in Canada and Israel, as part of his responsibilities with Claridge SRB Investments, the privately held company that manages the family's assets.

The Expos would be the ultimate act of charity. The club faces a cash crunch, has made no progress toward a new downtown ball park and is condemned to be battered by baseball's system of skewed economics. Put aside for the moment a fact that is often overlooked locally -- that Loria waited eight years to cherry-pick this franchise and doesn't have to sell his stake in the team. If Stephen Bronfman wanted so badly to run a major-league franchise, he could have done so at a much cheaper price last season. Or two years before, when the team was healthier financially.

Loria, the New York art dealer, was nobody's first choice to become general partner, just as he wasn't in 1991 when Brochu refused to answer overtures from Loria when Brochu was putting together the limited partnership that bought out Charles Bronfman. Jacques Ménard, who along with Bronfman is a co-chairman of the Expos partnership and who worked with Brochu in 1991, would have stopped looking if Stephen Bronfman had expressed an interest in running the team in 1999.

Want a hunch? Ménard and the other local businessmen working to keep the team here knew there would be tremendous emotional pressure on Stephen Bronfman to be their hole card in the likely event Loria revealed himself to be more interested in moving the team to the U.S. It may explain in part why Ménard says that when he was named Canada's baseball man of the year for 1999, he thought about not accepting the award.

Bronfman is the only Canadian partner with the name, the money and most importantly the flexibility to own and operate the Expos. His associates have spent the last few days saying that while he has the pockets for the job, the question is whether he has the stomach for it or an interest in it.

Somewhere, Charles Bronfman -- who foresaw the armageddon of the 1994 player's strike in his departing address to fellow owners -- is saying 'I told you so.'

It's unfortunate, and not just a bit telling, that an increased involvement in the Expos would amount to just one more charitable endeavour for the Bronfmans, as opposed to a sound business decision.

And it's ironic that on a day of massive change for the family, the name is once again being shouted out loud in Montreal baseball circles. Ironic, and just a little sad.