2. View On

Diardi’s Clouded Leopard

Neofelis diardi View in CoL

French: Panthere de Diard / German: Sunda-Nebelparder / Spanish: Pantera de la Sonda

Taxonomy. Neofelis diardi Cuvier, 1823 View in CoL ,

Sumatra.

Recent molecular and morphological analyses suggest two subspecies, one on Borneo and the other on Sumatra, but those populations have yet to be properly described.

Distribution. Borneo, Sumatra, and Batu Is. View Figure

Descriptive notes. Head-body 70-105 cm, tail 60-85 cm; weight 10-25 kg, adult males larger than adult females. Diardi’s Clouded Leopard, and Indochinese Clouded Leopard are similar enough in general appearance and size that the two were considered the same species until 2006. Molecular data indicate Dairdi’s Clouded Leopard has been isolated from mainland clouded leopards for 1-4-2-9 million years. The degree of differentiation between the two forms is similar to the differences between the five Panthera species. Recent studies of DNA and coat patterns, as well as cranial, mandibular, and dental morphology indicate that Diardi’s Clouded Leopards are as distinct from Indochinese Clouded Leopards as are otherspecies of felids from each other. Diardi’s Clouded Leopards have longer upper canines, and thicker upper carnassials than Indochinese Clouded Leopards. Compared with the mainland species, Diardi’s Clouded Leopard has smaller “cloud” markings with many distinct spots within the clouds. The fur is grayer and generally darker and there is a double dark dorsal stripe.

Habitat. Little is known ofits habitat requirements, but long thought to be strongly associated with primary evergreen tropical rainforest up to about 2000 m. However, recent reports suggest its ecological requirements may be more flexible, with observations of clouded leopards in logged forests, degraded secondary forest, scrub habitats, and mangrove swamps.

Food and Feeding. A variety ofterrestrial and arboreal vertebrates are reported as prey, but no detailed studies with large sample sizes to date. Prey items known to include young Sambar, muntjac, mouse deer, Bearded Pig, palm civet, Hose’s Langur ( Presbytis hoser), orangutan (Pongo), porcupine, birds, and fish. The cat’s long, thicktail, large paws, and short legs suggest it is well suited to an arboreal lifestyle, but the majority of sightings on Borneo are of clouded leopards walking on the ground. They are also known to use former or existing logging roads for hunting on Borneo.

Activity patterns. Thought to be primarily nocturnal, but high level of daytime activity reported on Borneo, where other large carnivores are absent. No camera-trap or radio-tracking data are available for Diardi’s Clouded Leopards on Borneo or Sumatra.

Movements, Home range and Social organization. Tracks and observations recorded on forest trails and logging roads on Borneo and Sumatra, but otherwise no details available on home range sizes and social organization. Like other felids, these cats are probably solitary, and outside of mating activity the only long-term association is between females and their offspring.

Breeding. Based on captive animals, gestation length varies from 85-109 days, generally 86-93 days.Litter size is 1-5 but 2-3 more common. Cubs begin to eat solid food between 7-10 weeks but continue to suckle until 11-14 weeks. Interbirth interval 10-2 months, range 7-13 months. Young reach sexual maturity at 20-30 months.

Status and Conservation. CITES Appendix I. Classified as Vulnerable on The IUCN Red Lust. No reliable estimates of abundance are available, although a recent study that relied on identifying tracks in Tabin Wildlife Reserve, Sabah, estimated there were nine cats per 100 km ®. On Sumatra Diardi’s Clouded Leopard seems to be present at lower densities than on Borneo. Habitatloss, degradation, and conversion to rubber and oil palm plantations have increased markedly in Sumatra and Borneo, the consequences of which can only negatively impact clouded leopards. It is not known whether clouded leopards are still present on the small Batu Islands near Sumatra.

Bibliography. Buckley-Beason et al. (2006), Christiansen (2008), Gordon etal. (2007), IUCN (2008), Kitchener et al. (2006), Rabinowitz et al. (1987), Santiapillai (1989), Santiapillai & Ashby (1988), Sunquist & Sunquist (2002), Wilting, Buckley-Beason et al. (2007), Wilting, Fischer et al. (2006).