Another 48 Hrs. is a 1990 American buddy cop film directed by Walter Hill and starring Eddie Murphy, Nick Nolte, Brion James, Andrew Divoff, and Ed O’Ross. It is the sequel to the 1982 film 48 Hrs. Nolte reprises his role as San Francisco police officer Jack Cates, who has 48 hours to clear his name from a manslaughter charge. To do so, he again needs the help of Reggie Hammond (Murphy), who is a newly released convict. At the same time, a mastermind known only as the Iceman has hired a biker gang to kill Reggie.

Times may change…but these guys don’t! Eddie Murphy (Shrek, Dr. Doolittle) and Nick Nolte (Hotel Rwanda, Cape Fear) are back on the streets in this smash sequel. Ex-con Reggie Hammond (Murphy) has just been released from prison, and he’s having his worst day ever…he’s got no money, his beloved Porsche was blown to bits and someone wants him dead. Hard-nosed cop Jack Cates (Nolte) isn’t having any better luck…he’s accused of manslaughter in a drug bust gone wrong, and may lose his badge. Fate has pushed these unlikely partners back together…one to fight for his job, and the other for his life. It’s another car-chasing, fist-flying, shoot-’em-up 48 hours in the city streets of San Francisco. And once again, Murphy and Nolte are in rare form as they team up to take the bad guys down!

Important to note, this movie was HEAVILY cut down by Paramount…..a literal week before its’ release, I’m not even kidding here…

The original workprint of the film was 145 minutes long. It was cut by either director Walter Hill or the Paramount studio down to 120 minutes, and a week before its summer theatrical release an additional 25 minutes were cut out by Paramount, making a final theatrical version 95 minutes long, but also creating lot of plot holes and continuity mistakes in the film. Frank McRae’s reprisal of his role from the original 48 Hrs. was entirely cut except for a brief, uncredited shot of him in the background of one scene in the police station. Also removed was a scene which was partially shown in the theatrical trailer in which Jack explains to Reggie that he has a deadline to track down the Iceman; as such, there is no mention of ’48 hours’ anywhere in the final film. Brion James, also returning from the original, saw his role severely cut down as well, to create a faster-paced action-comedy. In an interview, James said this about the cuts made on the film:

Total Recall came out a week before Another 48 Hrs. (1990) that summer, it made twenty-five million, became the number one movie in the country and the studio panicked because they had invested a lot in the 48 Hours films, but they felt that at well over two hours, that the movie might be too much. My stuff was in there until one week before the film opened; that is when they cut twenty-five minutes out of that movie, a week before it opened. It went from around 140 to down around 95 minutes. They said, “Cut all the behavior, action, comedy…” I lost every major scene I had. That’s the last time I ever cared about a movie because I went to the press screening and it was like getting kicked in the stomach, seeing what is not there. I was the third lead and now I looked like a dressed extra. All the stuff that they had in the set-up, stuff in the trailer, all those scenes were gone.

Think about that, everything you saw in that trailer, most of that stuff is not in the final cut of the movie…and it really shows, this is a really sloppy movie.

As much as Eddie Murphy and Nick Nolte’s chemistry can still get laughs and still works, it doesn’t help if the final movie is chopped down to hell and makes no logistical sense in the long run.

So, why did they do it? My only guess is that other action comedies like Lethal Weapon and Midnight Run were such critical and financial success and really took the buddy cop comedy to new levels than what the original 48 Hrs. did, despite the fact that the original 48 Hrs. was the buddy cop comedy that started the trend to begin with.

What you get is a sequel that is incredibly sloppy, poorly edited, lacking in good writing or comedy despite the chemistry of Nolte and Murphy, Another 48 Hrs. is a sequel that could’ve been so much more but studio interfence came into play and almost killed Eddie Murphy’s long standing relationship with Paramount.

Like with so many movies with so much material on the cutting room floor, there really needs to be a way to see that lost footage to see what was cut out and what could’ve made Another 48 Hrs. likely a good sequel but what we have is a lackluster sequel and one of Eddie Murphy’s worst movies.