48 Hrs. is the 1982 action film that launched the feature film career of Eddie Murphy, who stars as Reggie Hammond, a convict who is granted a temporary release from prison to assist SFPD Inspector Jack Cates (Nick Nolte) in tracking down an escaped prisoner who has stolen his gun and who has a past with Hammond. The film was directed by Walter Hill, who would return along with Murphy and Nolte for the 1990 sequel Another 48 Hrs..

The following weapons were used in the film 48 Hrs.:

WARNING! THIS PAGE CONTAINS SPOILERS!

Revolvers

Smith & Wesson Model 29

A 4" barreled Smith & Wesson Model 29 is the service handgun used by Inspector Jack Cates (Nick Nolte), until it is stolen by Albert Ganz (James Remar).

Smith & Wesson Model 24

At the beginning of the movie, Albert Ganz (James Remar) uses a blued Smith & Wesson Model 24 N-frame revolver in .44 Special. It is most likely a Model 24 as later in the movie Ben Kehoe (Brion James) mentions Ganz carries a .44 caliber revolver, just as Jack does (although Jack carries one chambered in .44 Magnum). The revolver shown used has a tapered barrel, and not the heavy 'bull' barrel of the Model 29 (Though the 'Mountain Gun' variant of the Model 29 has a tapered barrel, it was not available when the movie was filmed).

Smith & Wesson Model 15

Breaking up the fight between Jack and Reggie, an SFPD Patrol Officer (Chris Mulkey) deploys a Smith & Wesson Model 15.

Smith & Wesson Model 19 Snub Nose

A 2.5" barrel Smith & Wesson Model 19 Snub Nose is used by Reggie Hammond (Eddie Murphy) at the end of the movie.

Smith & Wesson Model 36

Casey (Margot Rose) is seen holding a Smith & Wesson Model 36 when Cates busts into her apartment.

Smith & Wesson Model 60

Detective Algren (Jonathan Banks) carries a Smith & Wesson Model 60, that he tries to use on Billy Bear after being shot.

Colt New Frontier

During the hotel shootout, Billy Bear (Sonny Landham) uses what appears to be a Colt New Frontier revolver with fixed sights instead of adjustable sights.

Colt New Service

Luther (David Patrick Kelly) carries a Colt New Service revolver as he's chased by Cates. Reggie Hammond (Eddie Murphy) takes the revolver away when Luther runs into a car door. An SFPD officer is also seen with one.

Pistols

Colt Government

Inspector Jack Cates (Nick Nolte) uses a Colt Government Model after his Model 29 is stolen.

Jennings J-25

In the cowboy bar, Reggie Hammond takes a Jennings J-25 off one of the patrons while frisking him. He gives it to Cates, who then proceeds to unload it.

Shotguns

Ithaca 37

Ithaca 37 shotguns are carried by 2 of the correctional officers at the beginning of the film. An SFPD officer is seen holding an Ithaca as well.

High Standard FLITE KING K-1200 Riot Shotgun