Cumulus Media Nashville as promoted Paul Mason to Spoken Word Programming Operations Manager as he adds day-to-day programming duties for “SuperTalk 99.7” WWTN in addition to his existing programming role for Sports “104.5 The Zone” WGFX and the Titans Radio Network.

Mason takes the WWTN programming role from Dan Mandis, who will focus on his morning duties at the station. Prior to joining WGFX in April 2020, he programmed Hubbard’s “Fox Sports 640” WMEN and Talk 850 WFTL West Palm Beach for three years. He previously spent fourteen years at iHeartMedia Cincinnati with roles including being Executive Producer for Jerry Springer’s syndicated talk show and 700 WLW’s afternoon show and Assistant Program Director of WLW from 2011-2017.

Mason commented, “SuperTalk 99.7 WTN’s reputation in the News/Talk format is among the elite. Dan Mandis has built a strong brand, and I look forward to working alongside not only Dan, but with the entire on-air staff (Chris Hand, Matt Murphy, and Brian Wilson), and our producers. The recent launch of SuperTalk TV has positioned WTN to continue to be a leader in News/Talk. WTN has loyal clients and listeners, and we are committed to bringing stories, news, and opinions in a meaningful and engaging way. I’m humbled and thankful for the trust Allison Warren, Brian Phillips, and John Dimick have in me to lead Spoken Word at Cumulus Nashville.”

Cumulus Nashville VP/Market Manager Allison Warren added, ““Paul Mason, a visionary leader who has successfully guided our Sports station for the past four years, is now poised to bring the same focus, passion, and energy to our News/Talk station – SuperTalk 99.7 WTN. With an exciting blend of local hosts delivering both local and national stories in an informative and engaging manner, Paul is ready to lead this station to new heights. As we recently launched the SuperTalk YouTube channel, we anticipate continued dominance in Spoken Word content under Paul’s steady guidance.”

Warren continued, “I would remiss if I did not at the same time thank Dan Mandis for his outstanding leadership of the station over the last 10 years. Dan has successfully managed both the station, especially through challenging times, and breaking news while maintaining hosting duties and we look forward to letting him settle into his weekday morning show.”