Last week Jerry Springer announced he was ending his syndicated liberal talk radio show. Now the local station that carried the show has dropped the progressive talk format altogether.

Clear Channel Cincinnati says that the "Revolution of Talk Radio" is gone, replaced replaced by "1360TheSource.Com", a website --and radio station-- devoted mostly to advice programs.

The station will carry a number of syndicated advice programs, including the return of the controversial "Dr. Laura" Schlessinger, who offers personal advice steeped in traditional morality. The station will also spend part of its weekday afternoons replaying locally-based weekend household advice shows that originally ran on sister station WKRC-AM. The station will also feature financial advice.

Program director Tony Bender said "Air America's been a tough sell", that progressive talk wasn't getting the ratings needed to make money, and that the new format will make more money and get higher ratings.

When asked if the station could earn 3 per cent in local ratings, Bender said that was reasonable, although the station shouldn't be expected to compare with market-leading sister station WLW. Bender said the format is not in response to new FM talk station "SuperTalk 96.5", which prominently features a financial advice show, and has been in the works for some time.

Clear Channel says the new station will feature an elaborate website. "1360THESOURCE.COM will launch a new direction for media in Cincinnati," Darryl Parks, Director of AM Operations for Clear Channel Cincinnati, said in a release. "Internet and radio will merge to create a new, more in-depth, entertainment experience for the consumer."

As of Monday, the website was up, but had limited information about the station.

Bender said the new station is expected to get a substantial part of its audience from people working in office building where the 1360 AM signal typically has poor reception. He said the progressive format had gotten a significant part of its listeners from that source, as well as from listeners from other cities without a local progressive talk outlet.

Ironically, Cincinnati listeners to that format are finding themselves in the same boat. The nearest station running a similar format is a low-powered station in Columbus.

Clear Channel debuted the progressive talk format two years ago on its station at 1530AM. Earlier this year, that format was swapped with the sports format previously on 1360. The ratings were usually below a couple per cent on either station.

Jerry Springer often originated his national radio talk show from Clear Channel's Kenwood studios, but by the time he quit the show this week, his affiliate count had plunged, while the number of outside opportunities increased after well-received appearances on ABC's "Dancing With the Stars". He continued his syndicated daily TV show while doing radio.

Bender said some shows from the previous incarnation of WSAI will remain on the new format: sponsored weekend advice programs that typically had little or nothing to do with the political talks shows that dominated the station.

Bender said there are not any changes in format expected for WKRC, which also carries advice programs, and originates some of the new programs for WSAI. He said they will soon announce a new local morning team for that station, where legendary host Jerry Thomas is about to retire. He wouldn't say if Thomas' co-host Craig Kopp will remain on the morning show.

Here's is the new weekday schedule for "1360TheSource.Com":