Introduction

This evening, I am reporting on Adam Smith-economist and free market protagonist.

Information on Adam Smith

About 4.0m people visit Edinburgh each year the vast majority of which will explore the famous Royal Mile. Near the top of this thoroughfare is a statue of Adam Smith which stands close to St Giles’ Cathedral. Unfortunately, only a tiny fraction of these visitors will have heard of Adam Smith or his influence. Smith was, arguably, the first economist of the modern era. His writings were instrumental in devising policies which generated huge wealth and personal liberty. These outcomes arose through free trade from the 19th century on-wards right through to modern-day.

Edinburgh is home to another monument to Smith in the form of a grave-marker. This can be found near the bottom of the Royal Mile in the burial ground of Canongate Kirk.

Adam Smith- a pocket biography

Adam Smith was a Scottish political economist and philosopher. He has become famous from his influential book The Wealth of Nations (1776).

Smith was the son of the Comptroller of the Customs at Kirkcaldy, Fife, Scotland. The exact date of his birth is unknown. However, he was baptized at Kirkcaldy on June 5, 1723, his father having died some six months previously.

Here is a summary of Adam Smith’s life:

Attended Glasgow University at age about 15 years where he studied moral philosophy.

Entered Balliol College, Oxford, England in 1740.

In 1748 he began delivering lectures in Edinburgh. By the time of Smith’s late 20s his views had evolved to expound his economic philosophy of natural liberty. He subsequently went on to write his Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations.

In 1751 Smith was appointed professor of logic at Glasgow University. in 1752 he transferred to the chair of moral philosophy.

In late 1763 Smith obtained a lucrative post as tutor to the young Duke of Buccleuch.

From 1764 to 1766 he travelled with his pupil, mainly in France where he connected with local intellectual leaders.

On return to Kirkaldy, Scotland he devoted much of the following ten years to his magnus opus. This was, of course, his Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations. The book was published in 1776.

In 1778 Smith was appointed Commissioner of Customs in Scotland and moved to Edinburgh.

Smith died at Edinburgh on July 17th 1790 following a painful illness.

The importance of Adam Smith

His Wealth Of Nations is considered to be one of the most influential books ever written. He argued that free trade was a far superior means to generating prosperity. The alternative being extensive systems of elaborate tariffs and controls which then existed.

Smith’s ideas had profound influence on politicians of the time. In turn this laid the foundation for economic expansion based on free trade.Resulting policies drove wealth creation from the 19th century on-wards.

More information for the visitor

The publication Visitors’ Guide to Scotland contains sections on facets of Edinburgh. The ISBN is 978-1-9161332-0-4. This book is also available via Kindle.