Spauldingfield’s YouTube channel puts together great character profiles. See her video at the link below and my description of Gus below that.

http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mcPSPwXUmXU&context=C23ae5ADOEgsToPDskKE0LTAj5s9HpBIC3ox7QxL

Gus Aitoro ~ Gus came to town as an FBI agent working the Santos case. He zeroed in on Danny and was determined to find something he could convict him with, even if he had to manufacture evidence to do it. Blake Marler eventually uncovered that he was really Nick Augustino/August who’s father had been killed by Fedrico Santos on orders from Miguel. This led directly to his crusade against Danny. At the same time he was starting to fall in love with Harley Cooper, who would have nothing to do with the vendetta both because Manny were her friends and her belief that the hatred would destroy Gus. After making himself obnoxious for a long time, Gus rescued Danny from Carmen’s warehouse fire, saving his life and later asked Danny’s help on how to let go of his crusade. Danny gave him good advice (everyone should listen to Danny) and Gus mostly put the hard feelings aside, even willingly helping Danny when he decided the only way to keep the rest of the family safe was to put Carmen and Maria behind bars where they couldn’t do any more harm. Gus discovers he was adopted and for awhile thinks he might be Miguel’s biological son (due to circumstances and a peanut allergy in common), but after a DNA test disproves it, he eventually discovered he was Alan Spaulding’s son (via one of Phillip’s ex- nannies, now a nun) and he moves into the Spaulding sphere of influence. He had left Harley to marry his high school sweetheart (Natalia, later of Otalia fame) with whom he had a son, at the time of his death in a motorcycle accident. His heart was transplanted into Olivia Spencer saving her life. (See Federico Santos, Harley Cooper, and Danny’s description)

http://www.soapcentral.com/gl/whoswho/augustus.php

Tags: Alan Spaulding, Alexandra Spaulding, GL, Guiding Light, Gus Aitoro, Harley Cooper, Miguel Santos, Natalia Rivera, Olivia Spencer