Sibila of Fortià(1350-1406)

She was daughter of Berenguer of Fortià and his wife Francesca of Palau. Sibila belonged to the lineage of Fortià, the lower nobility, with possessions in the rural Empordà, in the county of Ampurias. Sibila was a natural beauty in her early adulthood, but her education had been pitifully neglected, even it said she was illiterate. Sibila became a lady-in-waiting to Eleanor of Sicily, the third wife of King Peter IV of Aragon, during the royal couple’s stay in Sibila’s home of Empordà. Her marriage to the Aragonese nobleman Artal of Foces was arranged in the court. Artal had more than fifty years, was very rich, and a right-hand man of Peter IV. The marriage lasted three years and childless. Her husband died in 1474, and a year later, Queen Eleanor.

Shortly after the death of his third wife, the fifty-six year old monarch took the young and beautiful widow, Sibila of Fortià, as his mistress. She gave birth to a daughter, Isabella, in 1376. Sibila lived in Barcelona accompanied by a large entourage formed by her relatives, like her widow mother and her brother, Bernat, and much service. The king keeps his mistress with 3,000 gold florins. Sibila loved the luxury and jewelry, Her influence and dominion over Peter IV became so immense that any request to the king had to go through “Madama Sibila” and the fortune of the petitioner depended on the sympathies that the powerful royal mistress had in him.

At first, neither of Peter’s sons by Eleanor, not John, the Duke of Girona and heir apparent, nor his younger brother Martin, were much perturbed by their father’s choice of mistress, preferring it to a fourth marriage and all the delicate political diplomacy a new union would entail. The king’s sons radically changed their mind when Sibila married Peter IV in October 1377, at the time she was expecting the second child, Peter, who died in infancy. The royal wedding did not like to the king’s children, especially John, Duke of Girona. The royal family stayed away from the ceremony, and then of the court of the new queen.

Aware of the need to elevate his wife socially in the eyes of the older aristocracy, the king sought to surround Sibila with suitable female companions and tutors who would teach her to read. King Peter surrounded himself of nobles of Empordà and relatives of Sibila. She won Peter’s favor for the lesser nobility, among them her own brother, Bernat of Fortià, allowing them official positions in the court, to the outrage of many aristocrats.

To further legitimize his wife’s position, Peter had her crowned in January 1381 in a lavish ceremony in Zaragoza, despite the refusal of his two sons to attend the ceremony. Both princes found themselves in a difficult and unpleasant situation, for as one historian conjectures, “they could not tolerate that a woman, lacking in culture and gentility, who was not of the upper nobility, a common woman, as they believed her to be, had taken the place of their mother” (Bóscolo 102).

The tension between King Peter and son John, and between the lesser nobility (supporters of the Fortià) and the older aristocracy (supporters of Infant John and his second wife Violant of Bar), began to dominate the political arena. The contentious and complex disputes in the Aragonese crown surged, not between king and prince, father and son, but rather between Sibila and Violant and their respective factions. Meanwhile the senile Peter and weak John were unable to act because of their spouses’ clever manipulation of them, as Olivar Bertrand so clearly articulates: “The old king was dominated by his clever wife, and at the same time, duke John was guided always by the indications of his delectable and cunning little wife"

When Peter IV died in January 1387, he was alone and abandoned by all, including his heir. His wife, Sibila, realizing that her husband’s end was near and fearing reprisal from her stepsons, had fled the royal palace late one December night, a few short days before his death, with her brother and some friends and servants, taking with her all that she could of her possessions, in

search of refuge at the castle of Sant Martí Sarroca. After Peter IV’s death, John and Violant of Bar became King and Queen of Aragon. The new King’s brother, Infant Martin, Duke of Montblanc, received orden to depart without loss of time in persecution of the fugitives and bring them to justice immediately. King John I detained his stepmother for a time at the castle of Moncada (Valencia).

Accused of treason for having abandoned the sick king, as well as robberies in the palace and witchcraft, Sibila of Fortià was sentenced to death. She was not executed thanks to the pressures of the lesser nobility, the bourgeoisie, some prominent nobles, like count Hug Roger II of Pallars Sobirà and cardinal Peter of Luna, the future Pope Benedict XIII. Sibila quit the donations she had received from her deceased husband, King Peter, for a pension. Some of her companions in the escape from the palace, like Berenguer of Abella and Bartomeu Llunes, were executed.

Sibila was sent to live in Barcelona, but under close surveillance. King John died in 1396, and his brother Martin succeeded him. Sibila of Fortià died on 24 November 1406 at the convent of San Francisco in Barcelona, where she was buried. By order of King Martin, Sibila had a state funeral. She was later transferred to the pantheon of Poblet. When the convent was demolished, in the nineteenth century, Sibila and others were buried on 20 April 1852, at the Cathedral of Barcelona. Queen Sibila has been portrayed as a perverse stepmother, intriguing, ambitious, unscrupulous, endowed with evil powers, and a seductress who used her body to dominate her husband. Several historians agree that “the fame of the power of the new queen, who kept her husband enamored of her” was well know by their contemporaries.

Sources:

“Dones que feyan d'homens”: The Construction of Gender in the Writing of Medieval Catalan History by Dawn Bratsch-Prince

http://www.dbd.cat/fitxa_biografies.php?id=2010

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sibila_of_Fortia