Some of the best love stories never end … We’re celebrating the 70th Anniversary of Marc Anthony & Pussyfoot’s ‘Kiss Me Cat.’ Directed by Chuck M. Jones and written by Michael Maltese, this animated short was released on February 21, 1953.

A follow-up to ‘Feed the Kitty,’ Jones’s ‘Kiss Me Cat’ is a classic animated short that has captivated audiences since its release. The title is a play on the 1953 film Kiss Me, Kate. With voice characterizations by Mel Blanc and Bea Benaderet, it tells the story of a horrified Marc Anthony who hears his master is threatening to get rid of the adorable, blue-eyed kitten, Pussyfoot unless he starts catching mice. Marc Anthony must train the tiny charge in the art of mouse hunting and proper feline behavior to keep him in the household.

The two beloved Looney Tunes characters created by Chuck Jones have become synonymous with the classic animated shorts – Feed the Kitty (1952), Kiss Me Cat (1953), Go Fly a Kit (1957), and Cat Feud (1958). They also appear in Feline Frame-Up with Claude Cat (1954).

Since first appearing onscreen, the friendship of Marc Anthony and Pussyfoot is considered one of the most memorable collaborations in animation history. The Marc Anthony – Pussyfoot shorts showcase Jones’ masterful use of animation to bring these characters to life and tell their story in an entertaining yet heartfelt way.

The burly bulldog character, Marc Anthony is usually brown with a tan belly and black ears. While in contrast, Pussyfoot/Cleo/Kitty is a petite and extremely adorable, blue-eyed black-and-white tuxedo cat to whom Marc Anthony is utterly devoted. Chuck Jones once discussed the efforts to maximize the kitten’s sheer adorableness — all head and eyes, she is black with a white face and belly and a white tip on her fluffy tail.

We all make assumptions and have certain perceptions about things, and when encountering cartoon bulldogs, most are usually portrayed as aggressive bullies. But as in all the duo’s cartoons, Marc Anthony starts out as the stereotypical character, but he always casts aside his bullying behavior. Let’s face it. Underneath his tough exterior, he’s smitten with Pussyfoot. And who wouldn’t be? In the end, Marc Anthony always comes to the rescue as the defenseless kitten’s protector.

Because Marc Anthony’s emotions are very complex, they were difficult for Jones to capture in drawings. The bulldog’s feelings could only be properly expressed through subtle, detailed drawings that accurately conveyed the nuances of his inner turmoil. To do this effectively, Chuck Jones needed a deep understanding of Marc Anthony’s feelings to properly communicate them without overwhelming the viewer with too much detail or distracting from the overall message.

We’ve watched Pussyfoot climb casually up onto Marc Anthony’s back, curl up, and purr himself to sleep, provoking Marc Anthony’s surprise and curiously enough, tenderness. This smitten bulldog sweetly accepts the unusual role of the defenseless kitten’s protector. Another example is when Pussyfoot is kneading Marc Anthony’s back with its claws making the burly bulldog initially break out in a painful sweat. Simultaneously, he feels ambivalent happiness, easily understood by any parent or pet owner. This was a complex emotion for even the legendary animator to try to convey, but Jones made it work.

And all worthwhile animated drawings can cause a series of problems for even the greatest animators. The only dialogue in these shorts is the ordinary voice of a woman. Marc Anthony (and Chuck Jones) had to effectively convey everything through expressions, and it is these expressions that make the animation in these shorts so extraordinary.

According to Chuck Jones, “if anybody had looked in my wastepaper basket at the end of the day I did that drawing, they would have found fifty or more rejected drawings. I needed that drawing, and I knew it was somewhere between my memory and the tip of my pencil, but there was a sort of cornucopia of unsuitable drawings before I finally got the right one.”

In the end, Jones not only created the right drawing, but he developed two iconic Looney Tunes cartoon characters that are the archetypes of movie friendships appreciated throughout animation history.

This animated short is just one heartwarming story created by Chuck Jones that highlights the importance of friendship and acceptance. It’s a classic example of Chuck Jones’s artistry and wit. It also serves as an important reminder that no matter how different we may seem on the outside; we all have something in common – our need for love and companionship. Let us take this opportunity to celebrate ‘Kiss Me Cat’, one of Chuck Jones’ most beloved works!