Fiesta de Comiquitas

And let's start our journey into Mexico with...some U.S. releases. Originally dubbed and produced in 1982 for release in Argentina, the Fiesta de Comiquitas series was brought into North America in the late 1980s to serve as a Spanish alternative to the Looney Tunes Video Show collections.

When the first three volumes were reissued in 1992, Warner Home Video merely used the same packaging from its concurrent Looney Tunes Video Show reissues but with a corresponding Fiesta de Comiquitas hype sticker slapped onto the front. The back covers still listed the same seven cartoons as found on the English Looney Tunes Video Show releases, with the only other indication that the compilations may in fact be different being a small square label on the side panels showing a different runtime.

Opening titles were cut in various ways on each of the cartoons, sometimes starting right after WB shield zoom, sometimes at the Looney Tunes/Merrie Melodies title screen, sometimes at the "Bugs Bunny in" card, or sometimes simply at the short's title card. Inversely, in most cases the final "That's all Folks" end tag was also missing, usually appearing just after the final short (along with an overdub from Bugs wishing us farewell).

Some of the cartoons appear to have a distinct discolored look to them, which may or may not have been a result of reprocessing the PAL-formatted Argentinian compilations into the North American NTSC color system. For what it's worth, despite switching from PAL to NTSC, at least the cartoons play at their correct speed.

Fiesta de Comiquitas

1986 (right image is from the 1992 reissue)

Mutiny on the Bunny - A Mutt in a Rutt - Muzzle Tough

My Little Duckaroo - Napoleon Bunny-Part - A Mouse Divided

Mouse-Taken Identity - Caveman Inki - The Egg-cited Rooster

8 Ball Bunny - Feather Bluster - Feline Frame-Up

Zipping Along - Zoom and Bored

Mel Blanc's voice can still be heard as the puppy's barking and during some of Foghorn's "Camptown Races" scat-singing in Feather Bluster, while in My Little Duckaroo Porky's opening song and Daffy's "Whoa, Tinfoil!" line are both still in English.

Perhaps most interestingly, though, is that apart from the missing WB shield zoom, Caveman Inki runs completely intact and undubbed--not even an off-camera Spanish speaker reading over the title card. Which means that for about a decade, Warner Home Video had an otherwise verboten cartoon in print on cassette.

Fiesta de Comiquitas 2

1986 (image is from the 1992 reissue)

Run, Run, Sweet Road Runner - Ain't She Tweet - All Fowled Up

Ant Pasted - Awful Orphan - Baby Buggy Bunny

All A-Bird - Ballot Box Bunny - Rushing Roulette

Beanstalk Bunny - Bear Feat - Bell Hoppy

Baton Bunny - Bedevilled Rabbit

HAVE A GOOD SCAN OF THE ORIGINAL COVER? MESSAGE US ON FACEBOOK TO HELP OUT!

Fiesta de Comiquitas 3

1986 (right image is from the 1992 reissue)

A Bird in a Guilty Cage - Bone for a Bone - Boston Quackie

Bowery Bugs - Boyhood Daze - A Broken Leghorn

Broom-Stick Bunny - Bugs and Thugs - Canned Feud

Bugs Bonnets - Bugsy and Mugsy - Golden Yeggs

Bunny Hugged

HAVE A BETTER SCAN OF EITHER COVER? MESSAGE US ON FACEBOOK TO HELP OUT!

Fiesta de Comiquitas 4

1987

A Star Is Bored - Stooge for a Mouse - The Turn-Tale Wolf

Unnatural History - Rabbit Every Monday - Ali Baba Bunny

Bad Ol' Putty Tat - Duck Amuck - Duck Dodgers in the 24 1/2th Century

My Bunny Lies Over the Sea - Rabbit of Seville - Tweety's Circus

Really Scent

HAVE A BETTER SCAN OF THE COVER? MESSAGE US ON FACEBOOK TO HELP OUT!

Videotoons

1995

Released by Videovisa, this series served as a sort of stand-in for the Golden Jubilee series. Some of the volumes opened with an edited version of the Golden Jubilee animated intro (removing the close-up of the featured character's name), while the spines of some volumes outright stated that they were merely translated versions of their respective Golden Jubilee videos. As you will read, that was not the case.

The videos seemingly utilized European PAL video masters of the Spanish dubs that had been around since the early 1980s, either acquired from Europe or (likely) South America. Due to PAL's higher (quicker) frame rate, once these masters were transferred to NTSC the cartoons ended up playing about 4 percent faster.

Back in the United States, when Turner Broadcasting started acquiring the broadcast rights to the post-1948 Warner Bros. cartoons in 1996, Cartoon Network and its various international outlets needed dubbed copies for their Spanish audio feeds--so Warner Bros. supplied them with these same versions, resulting in even the English versions being sped up when broadcast. Unfortunately, these time-compressed transfers would become many of these shorts' go-to versions to show up on television until they were eventually remastered for DVD.

It is possible that the Bugs, Daffy, Porky, and Tweety volumes here are actually ported over from an even earlier series released in Chile in 1988, which would completely rewrite the history of the Spanish time-compressed cartoons. But until complete and more accurate information can be discovered about the Chilean series, then we'll err on the side of caution for now and say that the versions in question originated here.

Bugs Bunny

Bewitched Bunny - A-Lad-in His Lamp - Bedevilled Rabbit

Ballot Box Bunny - Rabbit of Seville - Rabbit Seasoning

One Froggy Evening - 14 Carrot Rabbit

In Rabbit of Seville all of the singing is dubbed in Spanish, which isn't usually the case for songs featured in English films or cartoons. Also, to incorporate One Froggy Evening, Bugs narrates the entire cartoon in Spanish in a manner similar to 1001 Rabbit Tales--yet Michigan's singing remains in English.

Daffy Duck

Beanstalk Bunny - Deduce, You Say - Drip-along Daffy

The Scarlet Pumpernickel - Design for Leaving - The High and the Flighty

Don't Axe Me - The Ducksters

This video is where the odd Cartoon Network edit of Drip-along Daffy originated, with the cartoon abruptly ending with Daffy pushing the sanitation cart. Porky's final line was removed because there was likely no satisfactory way to translate the joke into Spanish. The reason this version ended up on Cartoon Network for many years was, again, because it had a Spanish audio track ready to go.

Less offensive but equally bizarre is an edit occurring at the end of Don't Axe Me, with the short removing its final "That's all Folks" tag.

Porky Pig

Curtain Razor - Boobs in the Woods - Often an Orphan

Wearing of the Grin - Mouse Wreckers - Cracked Quack

My Little Duckaroo - Jumpin' Jupiter

In Boobs in the Woods Daffy's song is dubbed in Spanish, while in My Little Duckaroo Porky's opening song and Daffy's "Whoa, Tinfoil!" line are both still in English.

Curtain Razor, though, has the most anomalies. Both the grasshopper's opening operatta and his "I slayed 'em in Scranton!" comments are in English, while the entire sequence with the three crooner birds has been removed completely. The Mel Blanc Turtle's scene is also unique in that the impression medley remains undubbed, yet the punchline is rewritten to have Porky now object to his act because all of his voices are in English!

Sylvester and Tweety

Tweet and Lovely - Tweety and the Beanstalk - Tree for Two

Mouse-Taken Identity - Tweety's S.O.S. - Canned Feud

Hyde and Go Tweet - Catty Cornered

In Tree for Two, both Sylvester singing "The Charleston" and his subsequent "scared" version of the song are undubbed.

Speedy Gonzales

Cats and Bruises - Mexicali Shmoes - Assault and Peppered

Speedy Gonzales - Quacker Tracker - Tortilla Flaps

Here Today, Gone Tamale

No Golden Jubilee intro--just a black title card with Speedy's name in colored letters, and then again in white subtitles, for some reason.

Wile E. Coyote and the Road Runner

Zipping Along - Guided Muscle - Hook, Line and Stinker

Hot Rod and Reel! - Zoom and Bored - Hip Hip- Hurry!

Fast and Furry-ous - Lickety-Splat - Beep Prepared

No Golden Jubilee intro--just a black title card.

Foghorn Leghorn

All Fowled Up - Feather Bluster - The Egg-cited Rooster

A Fractured Leghorn - A Broken Leghorn - Henhouse Henery

Little Boy Boo - The Foghorn Leghorn

No Golden Jubilee intro--just a black title card.

Mel Blanc's voice can still be heard as the puppy's barking and on some of Foghorn's "Camptown Races" scat-singing in Feather Bluster and as Henery's dad's sinister laughter in The Foghorn Leghorn. Foggy's scat-singing in Henhouse Henery also remains in English, too.

Yosemite Sam

Rabbit Every Monday - Southern Fried Rabbit - Hare Lift

Ballot Box Bunny - Knighty Knight Bugs

(other content unknown)

HAVE A COMPLETE CONTENT LIST? MESSAGE US ON FACEBOOK TO HELP OUT!