Think you've seen it all? Think again. We've got another list of awful Looney Tunes to share with you. A sequel to my previous article, this lists some more of the worst of the worst Looney Tunes ever made. And boy do we have some stinkers for this list.

1. Buddy Cartoons

Let's start off a little lighter since these were in the development years. After Harmon and Ising left taking Bosko with them, Leon Schlesinger Studios had to form up a new Looney Tunes character. Buddy was a sadder attempt at competing with Mickey Mouse. This Big Boy looking character was your typical happy go lucky character of the 30's. The series was a failure, and was brought to an end after a couple years to be replaced by a new Looney Tunes gang. That is our next story.

2. Beans the Cat and Friends

Starting with I Haven't Got a Hat, a new series of cartoons were created to truly compete against the House of Mouse. Based off the Our Gang comedy shorts, the main character was Beans the Cat with his girlfriend Kitty along with co-stars Oliver Owl, Porky Pig, and Ham and Ex. Again though, this was during the development stage, and some of the cartoons were a little bit bland like Buddy, only lasting for about a year. However, enter Tex Avery, who started directing a Beans cartoon co-starring Porky. Avery knew there was something to this pig character and did a solo cartoon with Porky. Porky continued to be a co-star, but the rest, as they say, is history; Beans the Cat was out, and Porky Pig was in.

3. Good Night Elmer

Even classic era Looney Tunes had a few duds, but this one is so bad that even the company officially states "that it's frustratingly painful to watch." In this cartoon, Elmer Fudd is shown getting ready for bed but gets frustrated over a candle that won't burn out. That's it. The humor was badly timed and everything. It took a little time for Chuck Jones to find his style, but once he found it eventually, he hit it off. Still, it was a learning experience on what NOT to do.

4. Hare Breadth Hurry

What happens when the Road Runner sprains his ankle, you hire Bugs Bunny as his substitute. The worst Bugs Bunny cartoon has to be Pre-Hysterical Hare, but the second worst cartoon must be this one. Bugs Bunny is no stranger against Wile E Coyote, but those cartoons were normal Bugs Bunny cartoons as he outwits him like every other villain. Now, he's playing role as the Road Runner, needing to take pills to make him fast, and tried using the coyote as he would in the Road Runner shorts. First of all, Bugs Bunny hardly shuts up. Second, he breaks every rule what the Road Runner is not supposed to do. He makes harm to the coyote, whereas the coyote is to take harm by his own failures. Just a bad cartoon all around.

UPDATE: Recent research as to why the cartoon was this way came to light. According to Jerry Beck, this was meant to be the second episode of The Road Runner Show, a show that never came to light except for the pilot which became The Adventures of the Road Runner followed by being cut up into two, Zip Zip Horray and Road Runner a Go Go, and many scenes a part of future Road Runner cartoons. It would have been simply bridging sequences, hence why Bugs doesn't shut up and the pacing the way it was. For a stand alone Warner Bros. Cartoon however, it's still bad.

5. Warner Bros Seven Arts Cartoons

Warner Bros. opened up a new studio in the late 1960's since the original studio closed and Depatie Freleng could not handle taking care of the new load of cartoons. At the same time, Seven Arts bought out Jack Warner's stock in the company, hence why they're called Warner Bros. Seven Arts Cartoons. The cartoons include the last of the Speedy and Daffy cartoons and attempts to create new characters. The more somewhat successful ones were Merlin the Magic Mouse and Cool Cat. Some others were Chimp and Zee, the Red Baron, Norman Normal, Bunny and Claude, and Rapid Rabbit and Quick Brown Fox (now mistaken by the company as Bugs Bunny). I already covered the Daffy and Speedy cartoons in the previous post, but the rest of the cartoons, by themselves, are not too bad.