BETHANY Joy Lenz has had a successful career in the entertainment industry and is well-known for starring in the hit TV series, One Tree Hill.

Now, fans want to know more about the actress and her past relationship with her ex-husband, Michael Galeotti.

Who is Bethany Joy Lenz's ex-husband, Michael Galeotti?

Lenz and Galeotti were married for about seven years and welcomed one child together.

The former couple wed in 2005 before divorcing in 2012.

Their daughter, Maria Rose, was born in 2011.

There is little public information available on Galeotti's personal life.

Who is Bethany Joy Lenz?

Lenz was born in Hollywood, Florida, on April 2, 1981, to parents Cathie and Robert Lenz.

The actress and singer-songwriter has had an accomplished career in the entertainment industry.

She starred as Haley James Scott in the hit television show, One Tree Hill, for 9 seasons from 2003 to 2012.

The series debuted on The WB before becoming a program on The CW when the former merged with UPN.

According to Lenz's IMDb profile, the TV star is also known for appearing in the shows Dexter, Grey's Anatomy, Pearson, and Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.

She has also starred in many Hallmark holiday TV films, such as A Biltmore Christmas, An Unexpected Christmas, Five Star Christmas, and A Valentine's Match.

The popular actress was also featured in movies such as End of August, Extortion, and Blindfire.

Lenz hosts the Drama Queens podcast alongside fellow One Tree Hill alumni, Sophia Bush and Hilarie Burton Morgan.

She is also an author who wrote a new memoir, Dinner for Vampires,

When is the release of Bethany Joy Lenz’s memoir?

Lenz's new memoir, Dinner for Vampires, will be released by Simon & Schuster on October 22, 2024, and customers can now preorder it "wherever books are sold," per People.

The book details the star's decade-long experience in a cult.

On February 29, 2024, Lenz took to Instagram to announce the memoir's presale.

"Dinner for Vampires, my memoir about the decade i spent in an abusive, high-demand group (aka, cult) is on presale now with #SimonandSchuster @simonbooks LINK IN BIO," she captioned the post.

"Being a writer has been a great, private joy in my life since I was about 12. This isn’t the first book I thought I’d write, publicly, but as difficult as this subject matter is to untangle, I’m grateful I get to share my story, my way," she continued.

"It’s a story of forgiveness and a roadmap to how manipulation works, with heartache and humor along the way. We all make mistakes and I hope Dinner for Vampires reminds you that, no matter what weird roads you’ve gone down, you’re not alone ❤️‍🔥

ORDER TODAY #dinnerforvampires."

Simon & Schuster's website also includes a description of the book.

"A deliciously witty and inspiring memoir by One Tree Hill star Bethany Joy Lenz about her decade in a cult and her quest to break free," it states.

"In the early 2000s, after years of hard work and determination to breakthrough as an actor, Bethany Joy Lenz was finally cast as one of the leads on the hit drama One Tree Hill. Her career was about to take off, but her personal life was slowly beginning to unravel," it continues.

"What none of the show’s millions of fans knew, hidden even from her costars, was her secret double life in a cult.

"An only child who often had to fend for herself and always wanted a place to belong, Lenz found the safe haven she’d been searching for in a Bible study group with other Hollywood creatives.

"However, the group soon morphed into something more sinister—a slowly woven web of manipulation, abuse, and fear under the guise of a church covenant called The Big House Family.

"Piece by piece, Lenz began to give away her autonomy, ultimately relocating to the Family’s Pacific Northwest compound, overseen by a domineering minister who would convince Lenz to marry one of his sons and steadily drained millions of her TV income without her knowledge.

"Family 'minders' assigned to her on set, 'Maoist struggle session'–inspired meetings in the basement of a filthy house, and regular counseling with 'Leadership' were just part of the tactics used to keep her loyal.

"Only when she became a mother did Lenz find the courage to leave and spare her child from a similar fate. After nearly a decade (and with the unlikely help of a One Tree Hill superfan), she finally managed to escape the family’s grip and begin to heal from the deep trauma that forever altered her relationship with God and her understanding of faith.

"Written with powerful honesty and dark humor, Dinner for Vampires is an inspiring story about the importance of identity and understanding what you believe."

Lenz also spoke to People about Dinner for Vampires.

"I'm a writer at heart, so turning a phrase is easy for me. Exploring the memories, and really facing them, can be challenging — but I’m doing it," she said.

"Recovery looks different for everyone, depending on your experience of trauma. I had to start from a baseline of my personal understanding of God and the experiences I had had.

"And then there was a lot of going back to who I was before and remembering that, and then acknowledging that there was so much I just didn’t know."