Who is Michael Galeotti? Bethany Joy Lenz’s ex-husband, death, biography, age, and other updates.

Michael Galeotti was an American musician and actor best known as the keyboardist for the indie rock band Enation and as Bethany Joy Lenz’s ex-husband. He was a man of many ambitions, but his true passion was music: he was a gifted musician and pianist.

Michael Galeotti Biography & Profile Summary

Michael Galeotti Height & Weight

How tall is Michael Galeotti? He is a tall and attractive guy. Michael Galeotti’s height is currently measured to be 5 foot 10 inches. He has still held a muscular physique, with an overall body weight of 68 kg. His eyes are brown, and his hair is brown.

Michael Galeotti Net Worth 2023

What is the net worth of Michael Galeotti? Michael and his band were highly successful in the United States during his active years as a musician, performing on various live programs, including “Big Morning Buzz Live” and “The View,” among others, which helped to grow his riches. So, have you ever thought about how wealthy Michael Galeotti was at the time of his Death? According to reliable sources, Galeotti’s net worth was as high as $6 million, which is rather astounding.

Michael Galeotti Professional Life & Career

In 2004, Michael and Amber Sweeney joined the Enation band, which already included brothers Jonathan Jackson and Richard Lee. Amber departed the band in 2005, and they recruited Daniel Sweatt on bass. Michael worked on the band’s music from 2004 to 2011, when they published numerous albums, including the extremely popular “World In Flight” in 2008, which includes the song “Feel This,” which can be heard in the fifth-season finale of the “One Tree Hill” series, performed by Michael’s then-wife, Bethany. The band also performed in the aforementioned series and published the album “My Ancient Rebellion” in 2011, following which Michael left the band.

Michael Galeotti Marriage & Divorce

Who is Michael Galeotti’s Girlfriend? From 2005 until 2012, Michael was married to actress Bethany Joy Lenz; the pair met in December 2005 and married within a month. Six years into their marriage, the couple received their only child, a daughter Maria Rose Galeotti, but shortly after her birth, troubles inside the marriage surfaced, and they couldn’t hang on to one other any longer, resulting in divorce.

The couple divorced peacefully in 2012 and remained close friends for the sake of their kid. Bethany is an actress, singer, and director who was born on April 2, 1981, in Hollywood, Florida, USA. She is best known to the world as Haley James Scott in the TV drama series “One Tree Hill” and as a member of the band Everly. She is the only child of Robert George Lenz and Catharine Malcolm Holt Shepard. Furthermore, she began dabbling with the performing arts at a young age, singing at the Carpenter’s Church in Lakeland and has subsequently developed her abilities, including four years at Dallas Young Actors Studio.

Michael Galeotti Death

After divorcing Bethany Joy Lenz, Michael Galeotti became an alcoholic. He was arrested several times for driving under the influence (DUI). In addition, he started facing many serious health problems, including high cholesterol, diverticulitis, and high blood pressure. After that, he didn’t care about his health at all and ignored the doctor’s advice.

On January 11, 2016, Michael Galeotti was found dead at the age of 31 in his apartment by a friend who came to see him. An autopsy indicated the cause of death was atherosclerotic heart disease.

Michael Galeotti – Facts