Alex is an attorney in the Orlando and Boston offices of Fisher Phillips and is an integral member of the firm’s Labor Relations Practice Group. Alex advises and represents employers across the country in traditional labor matters related to union organization, collective bargaining, grievance arbitrations, contract interpretation, work stoppages and unfair labor practices. He regularly appears before the National Labor Relations Board on behalf of employers, representing their interests in union election matters and defending them against claims of unfair labor practices.

Alex is also a trusted advisor for non-unionized employers with respect to their employee relations and human resources concerns. He regularly counsels clients on issues including:

Hiring and Onboarding

Employee Handbook and Policy Review

Performance Management and Disciplinary Action

Supervisory Training

Human Resources Investigations

Requests for Medical Accommodations

Leaves of Absences

Restrictive Covenants and Proprietary Information

Termination and Severance Agreements

Despite their best efforts, inevitably for some employers, litigation cannot be prevented. When those unfortunate circumstances occur, Alex firmly defends employers of all sizes and across multiple industries before state and federal courts, administrative agencies, as well as in arbitration. Alex has significant experience litigating claims of discrimination, retaliation, breach of contract, wage and hour violations, and restrictive covenant/non-compete disputes.

In the past few years alone, Alex has obtained successful outcomes for clients in important matters, including:

Defeating a Class Action Arbitration in a Labor Dispute

Several Victories in Grievance Arbitrations Regarding Disputes over Contract Interpretation and Discipline/Discharge

Obtaining Summary Judgment in Single-Plaintiff Employment Discrimination Matters

Defeating a Motion for Conditional Certification in a Class Action Wage/Hour Matter

Alex is an avid speaker and writer, frequently traveling around the country to keep employers, labor relations and HR professionals informed about the ever-changing workplace landscape. For example, Alex has presented at the statewide HR Florida Annual Conference and has conducted multiple, full-day seminars for clients and prospective clients seeking to be prepared for a potential strike/work stoppage.

Recently, Alex was interviewed as part of the firm’s “Create Your Own Success Equation” initiative, and his story is featured on the firm’s Career Page. His story of becoming an active and vital member of the firm’s Labor Relations Practice Group was also highlighted as a part of the group’s “Boost the Bench” initiative designed to identify and develop the “next wave” of labor relations lawyers in the firm.

Outside the office, Alex serves on the Board of Directors for the Crohn’s and Colitis Foundation – Central and Northeast Florida Chapter.

*Alex is admitted in Florida, Massachusetts and Rhode Island. He is not admitted in Oregon but is supervised by a licensed bar member in this state.