Orlando Wedding Venues | The Portofino Wedding of Alexandra and Eric

In their search for Orlando wedding venues, Alexandra (Alex) and Eric discovered the beautiful Loews Portofino Bay Hotel. They quickly decided that it was the perfect wedding venue for them! Their late-January wedding took place in the hotel’s romantic Piazza Centrale. It looked and felt like they exchanged their vows in the center of a quaint Italian village!

After their lovely ceremony, the couple transitioned with their guests to a stunning reception in the Venetian Ballroom. We loved all of the soft gold touches Alex and Eric included in their event design! We thought it looked wonderful paired with the rich burgundy they chose as their primary theme color. From the sparkling lighting to the delicate gold sparkle on their wedding cake, it all enhanced their Tuscany-inspired event and make it everything they envisioned!

Read on for more fun details about this memorable Portofino Bay Hotel wedding.

THE I-DO CREW

Wedding Planner/On-Site Coordinator: Victoria Van Pelt, Just Marry!

Ceremony Site at the Portofino Bay Hotel: Piazza Centrale

Reception Site at the Portofino Bay Hotel: Venetian Ballroom

Officiant: Jay Newport, Family Friend

Photographer: Brittany Lee Photography

Florist: Fairbanks Florist

Ceremony and Reception Entertainment: Our DJ Rocks

Lighting: Our DJ Rocks

Hair and Makeup: Alyssa Perla, Family Friend

OUR FAVE PICS FROM THE WEDDING

WHAT WE LOVED

The Just Marry! Team greatly enjoyed working with Alex and Eric on their Portofino wedding! Here’s what their Just Marry! wedding planner, Victoria, shared about their event:

Most emotional moment

The couple’s first look. It was something Alex had anticipated from the moment she chose her wedding gown! They decided to have it on the Portofino’s grand spiral staircase and it turned out beautifully. It was such a sweet and tender moment between just the two of them!

A unique element I loved

I loved the 4-foot “LOVE” light up letters they displayed in their reception space! Those light-up letters paired with the romantic candle sticks on each guest table made the room absolutely stunning.

Resort where the couple stayed while in Orlando

Loews Portofino Bay Hotel

What the wedding party wore

The bridesmaids wore Lulus dresses and jewelry. The groom and groomsmen wore Calvin Klein. The bride wore a Casablanca Couture gown from Casablanca Bridal paired with Kate Spade shoes.

The couple’s choice of first dance song

“Then” by Brad Paisley

MORE LOEWS PORTOFINO HOTEL WEDDINGS

If you’re considering Orlando wedding venues, you really must confirm a Loews Portofino Bay Hotel wedding! Some of our favorite reasons include the Portofino’s Italian-inspired architecture and lovely European elegance, the option to enjoy a glass of wine and sumptuous gourmet food options at Harbor Nights on select nights, and Musica della Notte, a nightly live opera you can hear from your room or while enjoying a meal in the romantic Harbor Piazza. Check out some of our other events at this popular venue for even more inspiration:

Karina and Juan

Kara and Keisuke

Jeff and Marty

Micaela and Vicenzo

Marissa and Don

Taylor and Jon

Rachel and Timm

JOIN THE JUST MARRY! FAMILY

Are you researching Orlando wedding venues or looking for more information about a Loews Portofino Bay Hotel wedding? We can help! Whatever your planning needs may be, simply fill out the form below and a member of our planning team will reach out to you right away. We would love to welcome you to the Just Marry! family!

Orlando Wedding Venues | The Portofino Wedding of Alexandra and Eric