Newspaper Archives Online

Old newspapers hold secrets that are waiting to be discovered by you. NewspaperArchive has content from 16,154 publications and over 3,466 cities from all over the world—big cities, small towns, and everything in between—but we focus on staying close to home with newspaper publications from small towns, where you are more likely to find your family.

Large newspaper publications generally have articles detailing world news and big events in the city, but in smaller towns, everyone has a greater chance of being featured in the local paper. Newspapers in small towns usually include more details about everyday life—some articles might even mention who offered prayer at a local church event or which families left for vacation. Your family could be spotlighted several times in a small newspaper.

Find your family’s story in old newspaper articles, save clippings, and pass on your family legacy.

Search 9.1 Billion People

Keep track of ancestors, historical figures, and other important people by creating people. Or look through the many people already created and become a collaborator on their profile. Using the people feature, you can collect newspaper clippings and organize them by person. Using this tool will help you stay organized as you complete your family history or learn about historical figures.

Get to know your ancestors by saving and collecting their stories.

Find Your Person

Historical Obituaries

Obituaries are one of the greatest tools in genealogy research. In obituaries, you can find birth dates, death dates, and names of family members, enabling you to grow your family tree and trace your line back further.

Obituaries are also a great source for getting to know your ancestors. Read about the cherished qualities your ancestors possessed and get to know them by learning their interests and reading about their impact on family and community. Search our vast bank of more than 108 million obituaries and find family members, stories, and dates.

Search Obituaries

Free Historical Newspaper Clippings

Browse through millions of free clippings and pages from our vast newspaper archive. Our ever-expanding collection contains billions of articles, millions of pages, and thousands of publications covering centuries of history.

We continuously add new newspaper content to NewspaperArchive through partnerships with libraries, historical societies, and publishers. Most of the archive requires a membership for full access, but we provide free clippings and pages for every publication to give you a preview. The clippings are sorted into more than 20 popular categories like birth, marriage, and obituary to make browsing them easier.

As a valued visitor, you can check out the free clippings and pages from each newspaper before deciding whether to subscribe. A full membership unlocks the entire exclusive collection so you can explore centuries of headlines and history.