www.siouxcityjournal.com Sioux City Journal. Saturday. February 11. 2006-A5 SiouxlandState Wendt to seek third term in Legislature the work he and the Sioux City delegation have done to keep funding coming for the Iowa Statewide Poison Control Center, the Children's Specialty Health Clinic and for child protective services. Wendt said he still has the energy to be in the Legislature every day during the term and work the district at home as well .

Wendt noted he spent 44 years working as a teacher and administrator in the Sioux City School District and still has a strong interest added 30,000 people to Iowans who have health insurance and more needs to be done. Newer programs and initiatives Wendt said he backs are the Senior Living Trust Fund, which provides at-home care for the elderly; the governor's plan for universal preschool; and a border tax proposal that could aid border cities like Sioux City in their competition with neighboring states. Wendt said he is currently working on a property tax plan that will equalize the burden on schools and reduce property taxes. Wendt is the ranking member on the House Education committee and serves on the Human Resources, State Government, Veterans Affairs committees and on the Justice System Appropriations Subcommittee. Wendt said he does not anticipate any opposition in his run for the seat .

"That can always happen," he acknowledged. "It's America." He won his first term in 2002 and ran unopposed in 2004. Wendt's wife of 47 years, Anita, State Sen. Steve Warn-stadt, D-Sioux City, and a friend of the Wendts were present for the announcement at the library. The Wendts have two children and three grandchildren .

Their son is superintendent of schools in Le Mars, Iowa and their daughter teaches in Omaha. By Michele Linck Journal staff writer in education. He said he sees education, health care and jobs as the major issues facing the state right now. "We think of health care as a bis national State Rep. Roger Wendt announced Friday that he will seek a third term representing District 2 in the Iowa Legislature .

Speaking at the Sioux City Public Library, Wendt said, "Hopefully voters will see my last two terms as desirable and support me in this third term." Wendt, 72, D-Sioux City, noted Wendt issue," he said, but noted that Iowa Care has i A 4ft ALMANAC 1 7 AROUND SIQUXLAND Three die in Aurelia accident Three Aurelia women died Thursday in a two-vehicle crash about two miles south of Aurelia, Iowa. Theresa "Pauline" Fierk of Aurelia was driving north on County Road M21 at about 3:45 p.m. when she lost control on the snow-covered road and slid into the path of a southbound pickup driven by Jacob Kruckenberg, 16, of Aurelia, the Cherokee County Sheriff's Office reported. Fierk, 81, and two of her passengers, Elaine Bengtson, 80, and Dorothy Ann Harden, 8 1, all of Aurelia, were pronounced dead at the scene, authorities reported. Kruckenberg and a third passenger in the Fierk vehicle, Marjorie Jane Robar of Alta, were both taken to Cherokee Regional Medical Center .

Court date set in stand-off case The man and woman facing a felony charge after the January standoff at a North Sioux City motel where she was manager will make their initial court appearance on Feb. 23. William Schoen and Amanda Kappler, both of North Sioux City, will then have the opportunity to request counsel or enter a plea regarding the felony charge of misprison of a felony, said Jeff Rarick, deputy state's attorney for Union County. On Jan. 18, Eric Scott Hogie, 24, of Mitchell, S.D., was wanted by Sioux Falls police for an armed robbery two days earlier at Thanh Mai food store in Sioux Falls .

Hogie, armed with a semiautomatic handgun, had been tracked to the Super 8 Motel in North Sioux City, where he barricaded himself in a room. After four hours, Hogie gave himself up and came out peacefully. No one was taken hostage or injured in the stand-off. Kappler, Schoen's girlfriend, was manager of the Super 8 Motel, and the couple basically took in Hogie knowing of his alleged criminal activities, the Union County Sheriff's Office has reported. $200,000 Powerball winner ready for 'some fun' DES MOINES A Sioux City man will be able to "have some Jennifer Ring with the ACLU of the Dakotas listens to debate on the bill that would ban abortions in South Dakota in the State Capitol in Pierre .

(AP photo) Rounds would sign abortion bill District court Before Judge Duane E. Hoffmeyer Introduction of a controlled substance into a detention facility Frank Wesley Feese, 50, in a plea agreement pleaded guilty to the above charge and had a charge of possession of a controlled substance dismissed; five years prison, $750 fine plus surcharge, court costs, attorney fees. Second-degree theft Brandi Duerksen, 29, Sioux City, in a plea agreement pleaded guilty to the above charge and had a charge of first-degree theft dismissed; five years prison suspended, two years probation, $750 fine plus surcharge suspended, 75 hours community service, $1,145 restitution to Lauri Van Norman. Possession with the intent to deliver a controlled substance Kevin Montello Bogan, 19, Sioux City, in a plea agreement pleaded guilty to the above charge and had a charge of drug tax stamp violation dismissed; deferred judgment, two years probation. Possession with the intent to deliver a controlled substance, drug tax stamp violation Shawn David Lyons, 26, Sioux City, according to court documents on Jan .

23 possessed marijuana; pleaded not guilty, trial set March 21 $10,000 bond. Street alerts The Engineering Division announced on-street parking on the east side of Iowa Street between Fourth and Fifth streets will be closed beginning Monday for about three weeks. The parking closure is for the building construction on the northeast corner of Fourth and Iowa streets. The Engineering Division also announced Monday closure of the alley east of Pierce Street between Sixth and Seventh streets for about two weekss. This closure affects the first 60 feet of the alley east of Pierce Street for utility reconstruction .

Access to off-street parking areas located on this block can be made from Sixth, Seventh and Nebraska streets. Births Travis McPeek, Sioux Falls, S.D., and Sarah Pike, Sioux City, a daughter, Feb. 8, 2006, Mercy Medical Center Sioux City. In service Heidi L. Knight, daughter of Mary L .

Rogers of Mount Carroll, III. and Bernard C. Knight of Hospers, Iowa, recently enlisted in the U.S. Navy under the Delayed Entry Program at Navy Recruiting District, Omaha. Knight will report for basic training at the Navy's Recruit Training Center, Great Lakes, III .

She is completing her senior year at West Carroll High School. Meetings Dakota County Board of Commissioners, 1 :30 p.m. Monday, Dakota County Courthouse. Northwest Area Education Agency, 6 p.m. Monday, American Bank, Le Mars, Iowa .

Preceded by 5:30 p.m. budget hearing. Western Iowa Tech Community College and WITCC Education Association negotiating meeting, 4 p.m. Friday, Board Room, Robert H. Kiser Building, Sioux City .

Divorces Roxanne Marie Boulware, Kelly Joe Boulware, married July 9, 1995, in Iowa. Barbara Lynn Hutchinson, William Russell Hutchinson, married July 10, 2000, in Arizona. Mary Lynn Solma, Gregory D. Solma, married Nov. 15, 1980, in Iowa .

Beverly Jean Thoreson, Herbert Olene Thoreson, married June 3, 1972, in Iowa. Correction In Friday's paper, the Journal mistakenly ran a photo of Rick Snyder, a principal with FEH Associates Architects-Engineers office in Des Moines, and identified it as Rick Snyder, the new interim CEO at Gateway Inc. The correct photo of Snyder Gateway's Snyder is shown here. "sg SIOUX FALLS, S.D. (AP) -Gov .

Mike Rounds said Friday he'd "look favorably" on an abortion ban measure that's halfway through the Legislature if it addresses the concerns he raised when he vetoed a ban two years ago. Rounds told reporters at a news conference in Lead he has not read the bill that passed the South Dakota House on Thursday and that it "has a ways to go yet" before it lands on his desk. "Our goal is to save life. If the bills that are in question will do that, I will look favorably upon them," the governor said. After about an hour of debate, the House voted 47-22 to pass and send to the Senate HB1215, a bill that would ban nearly all abortions in the state .

Supporters think the measure would set up a legal challenge that could reverse the U.S. Supreme Court's 1973 Roe v. Wade decision legalizing abortion. The 2004 Legislature passed a METRO fun already now that he come up big playing Powerball. Ira Van Buskirk 63, of Sioux City won $200,000 in the Feb .

8, Powerball drawing. He purchased the winning ticket at Floyd Food and Fuel, 3241 Floyd Blvd. in Sioux City and claimed his prize at the Iowa Lottery's regional office in Storm Lake. The winning Powerball numbers for the Feb. 8 drawing were: 14-25-32-48-54 .

The Powerball was 10. The Power Play multiplier Van Buskirk i was 5. If Van Buskirk had chosen to play the Power Play, he would have won $1 million. Rock Rapids man charged in sex abuse A Rock Rapids, Iowa, man has been charged with sexually abusing a 5-year-old in Rock Rapids in January. Jeremy Joshua Baker, 18, was arrested by the Lyon County Sheriff's Office Sunday on a felony charge of sexual abuse second degree .

Sex offender's residence disclosed A convicted sex offender is now living in rural north Sioux City, the Plymouth County Sheriff's Office announced. Johnny Lee Meyers, 20, is residing at 22843 12 Hedge Ave. Meyers was convicted earlier this year of lascivious acts with a child in Woodbury County. 1 1 A I measure that would have banned nearly all abortions in South Dakota, but Rounds issued a technical veto because it would have eliminated existing restrictions while tied up in certain court challenges. The measure died because lawmakers failed to agree on changes Rounds had suggested .

"My understanding is that they have tried to address the issues that we brought out two years ago," Rounds said of this year's legislation. The main sponsor, state Rep. Roger Hunt, R-Brandon, has said a private benefactor has promised to donate $1 million to help finance the effort to fight legal challenges of the ban. The state can always take donations to the general fund, Rounds said. "We have the ability to accept those types of funds and I think that there could be arrangements made to make sure that money is used for that type of a purpose," he said .

POLICE Best Prices in Town! Huge Selection! 1 50 OFF CUSTOM DRAPERIES TOP TREATMENTS FROM OUR DESIGNER'S CHOICE COLLECTION Woodbury County Arrests The following people were booked into the Woodbury County Jail on felony andor serious charges, according to the Woodbury County Sheriff's Booking Statistical Recap provided by the Sioux City Police Department Records Division: Jesus Jimenez-Reyes, 36, 1624 Jackson St. No. 2, was arrested Sunday by the Sioux City Police Department on a felony charge of falsifying a public document and misdemeanor charges of public intoxication and making a false report simple. Cody Douglas White, 16, 2322 S. Henry was arrested Monday by the Woodbury County Sheriff's Office on a felony charge of sexual abuse second degree .

Daniel Baltazar Delgadillo, 20, 1717 Summit was arrested Monday by the Sioux City Police Department on a felony charge of criminal mischief second degree. Anthony Lee Hamar, 21 1607 Ingleside Ave. was arrested Monday by the Sioux City Police Department on a felony warrant for probation violation and a misdemeanor warrant for possession of marijuana. Bruce Edward Hamman, 36, 1318 Floyd was arrested Tuesday by the Sioux City Police Department on felony charges of methamphetamine possession with the intent to deliver, marijuana possession with the intent to deliver, possession of precursors with intent and two counts of drug tax stamp violations and misdemeanor charges of driving with license suspended, no vehicle insurance, two counts of stop sign violations, failure to operate a traffic control device, operating without registration, possession of drug paraphernalia and keeping a disorderly house. Jesus Palomarez, 25, a transient in Storm Lake, Iowa, was arrested Wednesday by the Sioux City Police Department on a felony charge of possession of a firearm as a felon and misdemeanor charges of driving while barred, no vehicle insurance and possession of drugs .

Patrick Neil Breaman, 36, Council Bluffs, Iowa, was arrested Wednesday by the Woodbury County Sheriff's Office on a felony warrant for failure to appear and a misdemeanor warrant for probation violation. Charlie Jay Hardnett, 37, South Sioux City, was arrested Thursday by the Sioux City Police Department on the felony charge of OWI third offense and misdemeanor charges of driving with license suspended, driving with license revoked, driving while barred, no vehicle insurance and failure to illuminate license plate. Martha Miranda, 19, South Sioux City, was arrested Friday by the Sioux City Police Department on felony charge of identity theft. POLICE LOG Police responded late Thursday afternoon for services regarding a person at 4208 Ridge Ave. yelling at parents as they parked in a No Parking Zone for a few minutes while picking up children at a private residence daycare at 4211 Ridge Ave .

It I fl: I 1 It i if 1 for a Cairn to have really good, solid feet, because they're dogs who wandered around Scotland all day long looking for little varmints and things. "He's really just a very, very pretty dog, and then he has this absolutely charming personality," Fedders said. Westminster isn't the first big show for the Le Mars women. They recently returned from Tampa, where they showed Watson in the Fifth Annual AKCEukanuba National Championships Jan. 14-15 .

For the Eukanuba breed show, a dog has to be in the top 25 to be invited. For the Westminster Show, only the top five dogs in each breed in the United States are invited. All must be champion dogs. the federal Community Development Block Grant program. Originally the council allocated $83,000 for the program .

Neighborhood Services found an additional $19,695 left over from other projects, bringing the total to $102,695. Councilman Jim Rixner; Terri Binneboese from United Way of Siouxland; Angel Wallace, management assistant; Cathy Olson, housing services division manager; and Darlynn McMullen from Neighborhood Services served on the review team. Lynn Zerschling mav be reached at (712) 293-4202 or SHOW Dog show from page A4 him out to Montgomery County (Pennsylvania) for the National Specialty and got an Award of Merit. He worked for me that weekend." He worked so well that he received an invitation to Crafts, the big dog show in England. Fedders has no plans for now to take in the English show .

Fedders said of Watson, "He's very much his own little person. He's beautiful to look at. He's a very elegant looking dog. He moves He has a good amount of bone. He has a gorgeous head .

Wonderful big digging feet. You look Grants from page A4 The grant will pay 40 percent of the rent on the house. Goodwill Industries, $4,600 to extend its "Shoes of Love" Christmas program. The grant will provide 400 Head Start preschool children and toddlers with shoes, socks, mittens and hats at the annual Shoe and Mitten Party. Until now, the program only provided supplies to 1,100 pupils in grades K-6 .

The grant funds comes from COLLECTIBLE TOY and the fftallinside: cltvlournal.oom r- I -W" Quality Guaranteed Any Size Window Free in-Home Consultation 800-543-5436 50 Years in the Custom Window Treatment Business SalB prica include fabric, lining, labnr ind Installation. Percentages olt represent savings on regular prices. Ooes not include Every Oay Low Price Items. Sales may or may not have been made at regular price. Major purchase plan available .

Custom Decorating available In most larger JCPenney stores. Sale prices eltectlve through Mink 04, 2006. 'Extra 10 oil applies to already-reduced sale prices. No Payments, No Interest Until January, 2007 on Custom Decorating purchases of $1 ,500 or more ty 1 frf I made 12252005-6302006 on your JCPenney Card." rLJleaJ "No Payments. No Interest Until January .

2007. Must request at time ot purchase. Offer innliB to Custom Decorating purchases ol .500 00 or more made 1 212 MOOS MO2006 Irom JCPenney Cuslnm Decorating Representatives on a JCPenney consumer credit can) accounl (excludes deposit on special orders. Outlet Store and CatalogInternet purcnasesl No finance charges assessed and no payments required on promotional purchases until promotion ends It minimum monthly payments on any other tabnees on your account linciuding optional credit insurance charges) are not paid when due Ofomolionai terms may be terminated Subred to credit approval by Monogram Credit Card Bank ot Georgia Standard account terms apply to non-promotional purchases and alter promotion ends to promotional purchases APR is 21 (Puerto Rko accounts 19 8S) unfcss (l) you have a Starter Accounl (23 9. APRI or (in you no reside in AK .

AR. CA. HI IL. KV, Ml. MO .

PA RI or Wl, Or It yoikhavi moved Irom II KV or WA after 9'30 Wl after WW oi any ot me other states isted above after 30.V, and you were advised lhai your APR is 23 or (ml you have been notified mat your APR is 1 2 9 An APR ot 24 (Puerto Rico Accounts 23.8) may apply it payment is not made when due. Minimum Finance charge Is $1 00 (none lot Puerto Rico Accounts). www.lcpenney.comcustomdecorating logoff i oftDUKhatesof WomwrthttiJ Hospital Nursing Home Delivery LEGENDS SPORTS CARD SHOW I Saturdav. February 18 lki DOLLAR ETC. Southern Hills Mall (Next to Sears) Z55-0300 LM lot' 9:30 a.m .

to 3:30 p.m. Admission $2.00 Kids under 12 FREE 8:45 a.m. Early Bird Admission $10.00 Sioux Empire Fairgrounds Armory Building Sioux Falls, SD 605-728-2339 for mor Info Have all of your questions answered in "ASK JEANNETTE" every Mori lav! 0 WWW.BIOU .