It’s five answers to five questions. Here we go…

1. Cheating in the office bake-off competition

This is more lighthearted but I am bothered by it. We’re having a departmental baking competition. There are about 70 people in the department and at least 10 are entering. One of my colleagues, Candice, is very talented and clearly the person to beat. Another colleague, Stuart, has been saying that he’ll get his nephew to bake his entry as his nephew is a semi-professional cake decorator. Stuart has mentioned it openly to a couple of people now, who have both jokingly said that’s cheating, but he seems quite set on the idea. He’s filling in the entry form right now.

If he does enter with a cake he didn’t make, should I mention it to the organizer? Only if he wins? How do I tell the organizer without sounding weird and petty? I would prefer not to create a bad atmosphere and be dramatic, but this really isn’t fair for the people who make their own cakes!

Why not just mention it to the organizer now and let her decide how to deal with it? You could just say, “Hey, if you only want people to enter with cakes they baked themselves, you should let people know that. Stuart is talking about entering with a cake made by his nephew, who decorates cakes professionally.”

I wouldn’t wait to see if he wins before speaking up — that’s likely to cause much more drama. The easiest thing would be for the organizer to head this off now.

2. My boss is advertising my job because I got sick before some pre-approved vacation time

A few months ago, I decided to make a big career move and change industries. I have been at my new job as an administrative assistant for just over two months. When I was offered this position, I made sure to notify my new boss of two upcoming trips that would require time off. When I officially accepted the job, my new boss had me write the two sets of dates on the calendar and wrote “approved” next to them. The Friday before my two days off (I was taking off Monday/Tuesday for an out-of-town wedding) I came down with a bad bug. I came into work feeling a little off, and slowly got worse as the morning went on. Due to my coughing and sneezing, my colleagues requested that I go home to ensure they did not catch my bug. After speaking with my boss, I was released for the day to go get well. Before I left, I reminded my boss that I would be out Monday and Tuesday and looked forward to seeing him Wednesday.

When I returned to work on Wednesday, I found a sent email (everyone in my office shares one email account) from my boss to our advertising partner asking to place an ad in the paper for an office admin (my job). I asked my colleagues if we were expanding the size of the staff and they said that due to my being sick and then taking two days of for my vacation, my boss didn’t feel like I was dedicated and was going to start looking “just in case.” I haven’t spoken to my boss because he is now out of town for the week. I have no idea how to address this situation when he returns. I am a good employee, I don’t have attendance issues, I didn’t ask to be sent home sick and he approved my vacation time almost three months ago when I was initially offered the position. My other already approved trip is for two weeks next month and I am worried for my job security. What is the best course of action here?

That is … not normal. Your boss decided to start looking “just in case” because you got sick and also had pre-scheduled vacation time? The only way this makes even a little sense is if you had already been out a lot in these first two months, which could give him reason to worry about your reliability. But since you noted that’s not the case, have there been any other signs that your boss is unreasonable or prone to leaping to wrong conclusions?

In any case, yes, talk to your boss as soon as he returns. Say something like this: “Do you have concerns about my reliability or commitment to the job? I hope I’ve shown a strong work ethic since I started, and I was alarmed to hear you’re advertising my position in case I don’t work out. Did I do something to cause that?” If he implies it’s a lot of time to miss when you’re new to the job, you can say, “When you offered me the job, I had two trips already scheduled, and I made sure to confirm with you that those would be okay before accepting the offer. And of course I couldn’t control the timing of when I got ill — and it was coworkers who asked me to go home so they didn’t get sick. Other than that, I haven’t missed any days. I take reliability very seriously. But I also have the two weeks off next month that you okayed when you offered me the position. I don’t want that to cause you to start looking for someone else to do my job.”

It’s hard to know how this is going to go — did he just forget that time was pre-approved? Is this a misunderstanding of some sort? Or is he wildly unfair and unreasonable? But having this conversation will get you a lot more data so you can figure out how to proceed.

3. How to weigh a refused reference

We recently interviewed someone who was qualified in ways we could evaluate in an interview, but had a short work history with a couple of interruptions. Both my boss and I were not very concerned about this, but other members of the hiring panel were, although it was not their job to assess work history.

We decided to ask the candidate for a single reference, not necessarily a supervisor, as kind of a hedge position, but I felt uncomfortable about doing so. When the recruiter was unable to contact the provided reference, they followed up with the candidate. The candidate, after contacting the reference themself, discovered that this person was uncomfortable providing a reference. The candidate then disclosed this information to us, and provided an alternative reference.

The recruiter believes this is a red flag. I believe that reference checks are not very reliable, and that without knowing why, the original reference’s discomfort isn’t anything to go off of. I’m somewhat biased because I made a lot of similar mistakes in the early days of my career–e.g., providing a reference without asking the reference first–and I was rarely if ever penalized. Am I being too lenient?

Short work history with multiple gaps, and the only reference he offered wasn’t comfortable giving one? Yeah, it’s a red flag. That doesn’t mean “definitely don’t hire this guy,” but it does mean that you shouldn’t hire him without doing a lot more digging. You should talk to at least two more references, and they should be managers. Maybe they’ll set your mind at ease — but maybe they’ll raise serious issues.

The issue isn’t that he offered you a reference without asking them first. It’s that the person he presumably thought would be his best reference refused to give one.

And remember, a good hire isn’t just someone who has the skills for the job (which is what it sounds like you evaluated in the interview), but also someone who is easy to work with, reliable, conscientious, honest, and lots of other things that you can’t know from a single interview, but which references can tell you about. Right now, you have someone who you think has the skills, but who has a short and checkered work history, and whose first choice of reference won’t vouch for his work. You need to keep digging.

4. Docking exempt employees’ pay

A previous employer used to require that salaried, exempt employees clock in and out every day. The stated reason was so that they could “keep track of everyone in case of an emergency.” However, in practice, payroll would make weekly calls to salaried, exempt employees if they hadn’t accumulated at least 40 hours during the previous week. For example, if an employee clocked in at 8:00 and out at 5:00, Monday through Thursday (they “allowed” an hour for lunch, whether you took it or not), but left at 3:00 on Friday because her child was vomiting at daycare and had to be picked up, payroll would ask if she wanted to have her pay docked for the “missing” time, or use 0.25 day of PTO. (However, if we had to work more than 40 hours in a week, we weren’t paid overtime, because we were salaried/exempt.)

This was their policy across the board for all salaried employees, regardless of the reason: if you went home sick after lunch, came in late because you had to meet the cable guy or take your dog to the vet, or for whatever reason didn’t have your butt in the chair for a minimum of 40 hours in any given week, it was either deducted from your PTO or your paycheck. Is this legal? It doesn’t meet my working definition of salaried, exempt employees, but I’m also not a lawyer or an HR expert, so I’m curious about your thoughts.

That is the very definition of treating exempt workers illegally. You cannot dock exempt employee’s daily pay except in very narrowly defined circumstances. If you do, you are essentially treating them as non-exempt, and thus you lose the exemption, meaning that you will need to pay them overtime whenever they work more than 40 hours in a week … and can be required to pay penalties and back wages.

If you’re exempt, they can require you to use PTO for that time. But they can’t make you take it unpaid.

5. Should I mail a copy of my resume after applying online?

I am a 48-year-old accountant currently poking around in the job market (employed) and wondered: When emailing and online job searching was fairly new, it was commonplace to submit your resume and cover letter online, then print out your documents on good quality paper, folded the correct way, and mail them (in an equal quality envelope, printed) via “snail mail.”

Is this still common practice? Should it be stamped “emailed XXdate”? Not at all? Bring your hard copy to the interview if you happen to score one?

Nope, definitely do not mail your materials. Apply online, and you’re done. If you mail them, it will look odd (why are you applying again when you’re already in their system from when you applied online?) and yes, a little dated (since nearly all hiring correspondence is done electronically these days), and it will even be mildly annoying to a lot of hiring managers.

But do bring a hard copy of your resume to the interview. They may or may not want it, but it’s good to have it with you in case you do. And it can be on regular paper; better quality resume paper is not an expected thing anymore.