Britain Before the First World War; Edward VII Q107143

Britain Before the First World War Portrait of the Prince of Wales, later King Edward VII, wearing full dress uniform in 1889.

Britain Before the First World War; Edward VII Q107145

Britain Before the First World War The Entente Cordiale: King Edward VII at reviews French regimental flags at Vincennes, France in 1903.

Hastings County Archives HC02499 (40501496061)

"Four generations" image of Queen Victoria, her son Edward, her grandson George and her great-grandson, Edward. Text on the back of the card reads "H. Shorey & Co. 1895 - Spring - 1895 Dear Sir, Our representat ... More

Edward VII and Alexandra after Gunn & Stuart

This image is a JPEG version of the original PNG image at File: Edward VII and Alexandra after Gunn & Stuart.png. Generally, this JPEG version should be used when displaying the file from Commons, in order t ... More

Edward VII and Alexandra after Gunn & Stuart

This PNG image has a thumbnail version at File: Edward VII and Alexandra after Gunn & Stuart.jpg. Generally, the thumbnail version should be used when displaying the file from Commons, in order to reduce the f ... More

King-Edward-VII (cropped) - coin, public domain photograph

Depicted person: Edward VII – King of the United Kingdom and the British Dominions, and Emperor of India (1841-1910) This is a retouched picture, which means that it has been digitally altered from its ... More

The Royal Family on the terrace of Osborne House by Leonida Caldesi

This set of images was gathered by User:Dcoetzee from the National Portrait Gallery, London website using a special tool. All images in this batch have been evaluated manually for evidence that the artist proba ... More

Queen Victoria Prince Albert and their nine children

Prince Albert, Queen Victoria and their nine children. From left to right: Alice, Arthur (later Duke of Connaught), The Prince Consort (Albert), The Prince of Wales (later Edward VII), Leopold (later Duke of A ... More

Queen Victoria and family at Coburg

Queen Victoria and family at Coburg on 21 April 1894, assembled for the wedding of Princess Victoria Melita of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha (1876-1936) and Ernest Louis, Grand Duke of Hesse (1868-1937), both grandchil ... More

King Edward VII and King Manuel II of Portugal shooting, 1909

Photograph of participants in a shoot with (left to right): Prince Arthur of Connaught and Strathearn (1883-1938); Prince George of Wales, later King George V (1865-1936); unidentified man with his back to the ... More

Brady, Mathew B. - Der Prinz von Wales mit Gefolge (Zeno Fotografie)

Deutsch: Brady, Mathew B.: Der Prinz von Wales mit Gefolge Public domain photograph of the board of directors, managers, group of men, portrait, office, committee, free to use, no copyright restrictions image ... More

Edward, Prince of Wales, visiting New Zealand Division at Beauvois, Fr...

Edward, Prince of Wales, visiting New Zealand Division at Beauvois, France, during World War I. Shows him on horseback (centre) with rows of soldiers in the background. Photograph taken ca 14 October 1918 by He ... More

Président de la commission anglaise au maréchal-président de la Républ...

Maréchal Mac Mahon visiting the British pavilion at the 1878 World Fair. The two men in the centre of the picture are the Prince of Wales (future Edward VII, standing on the left, with a black and white hat) an ... More

No-nb bldsa f1c015 - Norway. Public domain image

Norsk bokmål: Prins Albert Edward senere kong Edward 7., far til dronning Maud. Med dedikasjon. English: Prince Albert Edward, later King Edward the 7th, father of Queen Maud of Norway. With dedication. Deutsch ... More

Royal Party in Coburg

Royal Party in Coburg, April 1894 Group photograph showing from left to right, standing: Arthur, Duke of Connaught; Alfred, Duke of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha; Emperor William II of Germany; Edward VII, the Prince of ... More

The king, the duke, and some other people...

King Edward VII at Lismore, Co. Waterford in early May 1904. The king was visiting the Duke of Devonshire at his Irish seat (correct term?) at Lismore Castle. The Duke of Devonshire is apparently in this photo. ... More

The Prince of Wales and Shah of Persia

Edward, Prince of Wales, later King Edward VII, and Nasir al-Din Shah Qajar, Shah of Persia in an open top carriage outside Buckingham Palace, with the Persian Prime Minister Mirza Hosein Khan Moshir ad-Dowleh ... More

King Edward VII and Queen Alexandra

Photograph of King Edward VII and Queen Alexandra outside on the step of Buckingham Palace, on their way to an important event

H.M. King Edward VII and H.M. Queen Alexandra on the occasion of their...

H.M. King Edward VII and H.M. Queen Alexandra on the occasion of their first State Opening of Parliament

Family of Edward and Alexandra

Português: Eduardo e Alexandra com seus filhos em 1885. Em pé: Jorge, Alexandra, Eduardo e Vitória. Sentados: Maud, Alberto Vitor e Luísa. English: The Prince and Princess of Wales with their children Left t ... More

Wedding of Albert Edward Prince of Wales and Alexandra of Denmark 1863

Deutsch: Hochzeit von Prinz Albert Edward (später König Eduard VII.) und Alexandra von Dänemark, London, 1863English: The wedding of Albert Edward, Prince of Wales (later King Edward VII), and Alexandra of De ... More

Group photograph of Queen Victoria, Prince Albert, Albert Edward, Prin...

Group photograph of (from left to right) Prince Philippe, Count of Flanders; Prince Albert, Prince Consort; Princess Alice; Infante Luís, Duke of Porto, later King Luís I of Portugal; Queen Victoria; Albert Ed ... More

Edward VII and Alexandra at Parliament

Português: Eduardo VII e Alexandra da Dinamarca na Cerimônia de Abertura do Parlamento em 1901English: Edward VII and Alexandra of Denmark at the State Opening of Parliament in 1901

Edward VII and Prince George 1902

King Edward VII (right) of the United Kingdom with Prince George (left) in 1902. Deutsch: König Eduard VII. von Großbritannien mit Prinz Georg im Jahr 1902.

Albert Edward, Alexandra, Albert Victor, 1864

CDV of the future Edward VII as a young married man with his consort, the future Queen Alexandra, and their first born, Albert Victor.

King Edward arriving at Fredensborg Castle on the 8. of September 1901...

King Edward arriving at Fredensborg Castle on the 8. of September 1901

Kong Edward d. 7. ankommer på Fredensborg Slot d. 8. september 1901

Dansk: Kong Edward d. 7. ankommer på Fredensborg Slot d. 8. september 1901

Horse-breeder's handbook - together with a history of the rise and pro...

Identifier: horsebreedershan00osbo (find matches) Title: Horse-breeder's handbook : together with a history of the rise and progress of the British stud... Year: 1898 (1890s) Authors: Osborne, Joseph Subject ... More

Royal Baccarat Scandal - A black and white photo of a group of people

The cast of players involved in the Royal Baccarat Scandal. Photo taken at Tranby Croft, the country home of Sir Arthur Wilson. Among those pictured are: Sir William Gordon-Cumming (1848–1930); Lycett Green an ... More

Photograph by R. Welsh of the opening ceremony at Victoria Hospital, B...

Creator: Kamcke Papers (Depositor) Date: 27th July 1903 Original Format: Photographic prints Description: Reproduction of a photograph by R. Welsh of the opening ceremony at Victoria Hospital, Belfast, by Edwar ... More

Edward VII at Balmoral - A man standing next to a wall holding a cane

Picryl description: Public domain image of a castle, view, free to use, no copyright restrictions.

Albert Edward, Prince of Wales, Arthur, Duke of Connaught, and Alfred,...

The Prince of Wales and Duke of Connaught and Duke of Edinburgh in Uniform during Royal Wedding of Duke of York (GeorgeV)

Alexander Bassano (1829-1913) - Edward, Prince of Wales, later King Ed...

Picryl description: Public domain vintage artistic photograph, free to use, no copyright restrictions image.