52 Films Directed by Women 3: Days, Not Weeks

17/52

Since this documentary was made, Oliver O'Grady served a further three years in jail after leaving his laptop on a flight and it was discovered to contain multiple sexualised images of children.

A couple of years ago, he gave an interview where he said he was actively seeking the removal of information about him from the internet under the 'Right To Be Forgotten' rule.

Towards the end of Deliver Us from Evil, somebody makes the comment that the Catholic Church was in denial about the problems it faced with the sexual abuse of children from its priests. I don't agree with that, and I don't agree with that one bit.…

I clicked "Like" for this movie, but there is nothing to "like" about it. DELIVER US FROM EVIL is a harrowing documentary about the collateral damage of the Catholic Church's cover-up for its pedophilliac clergy. We get to meet several families who were all decimated by the indiscretions of Father Oliver O'Grady between 1976 and 1984 in the Lodi area of Central California. I clicked "like" because this is an expertly made and involving documentary about a subject matter that needs to be addressed loudly and often.

Amy Berg's work here starts with Father O'Grady, a charismatic man of the cloth. We discover that despite his multiple offenses -- maybe 50 children over those years -- he is still working…

Deliver Us From Evil is a documentary that portrays the story of a Catholic priest named Oliver O'Grady who was relocated to several parishes by the Catholic Church in an attempt to cover up his rape of dozens of children in the United States during the 70's. The film received an Academy Award nomination for Best Documentary, Features, unfairly losing against An Inconvenient Truth (2006). However, justice will be served someday...

It's a literally impossible task to watch and subsequently review a documentary without letting one's personal feelings to be either totally or partially involved. This documentary does not provide mere entertainment. It essentially looks for a reaction from the audience, regardless of their religion or their atheistic beliefs. However,…