Ever since his co-starring role as Brodie in Kevin Smith's second film, Mallrats, Jason Lee has had pretty steady work as an actor, appearing in all of Smith's films since then, the HBO film Weapons of Mass Distraction, Enemy of the State, Mumford, Almost Famous and a few other lower-profile films.

When we last talked to Lee (in our big 5-part, career-spanning interview, which starts here), he was finishing up filming Heartbreakers (which was released in Feb. 2001) and Big Trouble (which, after some scheduling changes, will be released on April 5, 2002). Since then he's been busy filming a string of films: Kevin Smith's Jay and Silent Bob Strike Back, Cameron Crowe's Vanilla Sky (showing up in theaters Dec. 14, 2001), a romantic comedy with Julia Stiles and Selma Blair entitled A Guy Thing, and a film opposite Tom Green tentatively titled You Promised (formerly known as Stealing Stanford), currently set for release in Spring, 2002.

Now Jason checks in with us to share his answers to our ten questions...

1. What is your favorite piece of music?

Right now, anything by the Icelandic band, Sigur Ros.

2. What is your favorite film?

Probably, Amadeus... (so far).

3. What is your favorite TV program, past or current?

Haven't watched TV in a long time, but South Park is one of the funniest shows ever. I watched King of the Hill a lot, too. I like Mike Judge.

4. What do you feel has been your most important professional accomplishment to date?

Can't single out anything. Everything I've done, even with skateboarding, has represented something important, in its own ways.

5. Which project do you feel didn¿t live up to what you envisioned?

They've all felt good or better than I expected.

6. What is your favorite book?

Ham on Rye, by Bukowski... (so far).

7. If you could change one thing about Hollywood, what would it be?

Nothing. It's really not that bad, so long as you stay away from "the scenes", etc.... and don't go to too many "Hollywood bashes"... although the food is good, and free.

8. If you could change one public perception of yourself, what would it be?

Nothing.

9. What is your next project?

Dreamcatcher, with Larry Kasdan.

10. What is the one project that you¿ve always wanted to do, but have yet to be able to?

Anything with the Coen Brothers.