MUMFORD — ** — Loren Dean, Hope Davis, Jason Lee, Alfre Woodard, Mary McDonnell, Pruitt Taylor Vince, Zooey Deschanel, David Paymer; rated R (profanity, nudity, drug use, vulgarity, sex, ethnic slurs); Carmike 12, Plaza 5400, Ritz 15 and Villa Theaters; Gateway 8 Cinemas; Loews Cineplex Broadway Centre and South Towne Center Cinemas.

It seems almost ironic that a movie about an impostor should suffer from an identity crisis of its own. But "Mumford" is just about as confused and confusing as a film can get — since its numerous shifts in tones and always-winding story lines lead absolutely nowhere.

Let's just say it's not an encouraging comeback for writer-director Lawrence Kasdan, who's filmmaking credits include such gems as "Silverado," "The Big Chill" and "Body Heat" — as well as such duds as "I Love You to Death" and "Wyatt Earp."

Careerwise, this comedy-drama falls somewhere between those groupings. While "Mumford" is not nearly as clever as Kasdan's best work, it does have its inspired moments. And a terrific ensemble cast makes sure it's not a total stinker.

Loren Dean ("Enemy of the State") stars as "Doc" Mumford, the new psychologist in a small town, which, curiously enough, is also named Mumford.

In a scant four months, he's already become one of the most popular men in town, and his business is growing steadily.

Among his patients are the town pharmacist (Taylor Pruitt Vince), one of its richest residents (Mary McDonnell), one of its most messed-up teens (Zooey Deschanel) — as well as the most important person in town, eccentric billionaire Skip Skipperton (Jason Lee).

But Doc is hiding a secret from his new patients and friends — namely that his name isn't really Mumford and that he's not really a therapist.

He's also considering spilling his guts to Sofie (Hope Davis), a chronically fatigued woman he's been treating — because he's fallen in love with her. But he's on the verge of being discovered.

That should be enough plot for Kasdan to concentrate on, but he makes the mistake of throwing in even more characters and subplots, many of which don't work — especially the contrived romance between Lee's character and Mumford's landlady, played by Alfre Woodard.

Also, the material is surprisingly sexual in nature — including a lengthy bit about Skip trying to invent a robotic "sexual surrogate," which not only isn't funny but which nearly brings the entire film down around it.

To his credit, Kasdan has selected a cast that almost makes the material work. Dean is appropriately charming and enigmatic, Davis again displays great comedic timing, and Lee provides ample evidence that his character alone might have made an interesting, if not better, movie.

(Not all the acting is swell, however. Ted Danson and Martin Short are particularly aggravating in small supporting roles.)

"Mumford" is rated R for profanity, female nudity (both real and mannequins), simulated drug use (marijuana and cocaine), use of crude slang and some sexual sight gags, simulated sex and use of one ethnic slur.