WASHINGTON (NNS) -- Chief of Naval Operations (CNO) Adm. Mike Gilday hosted Chief of Royal Australian Navy Vice Adm. Michael Noonan for a formal counterpart visit, Feb. 6-7.

During the two-day visit that included a full honors ceremony and discussions between the Australian delegation and senior U.S. Navy leadership, the two leaders focused on expanding and strengthening maritime security, particularly in the Indo-Pacific region.

“Australia is a great friend and our alliance is an anchor of peace and stability,” said Gilday. “Our two navies have worked together and fought together for more than 100 years and security cooperation has always been a cornerstone of our alliance. I look forward to the next 100 years working alongside the Royal Australian Navy.”

Noonan echoed Gilday’s sentiment.

“The important partnership between the Royal Australian Navy and the U.S. Navy is underpinned by our shared history, mutual respect and our commitment to the maintenance of global maritime security,” Noonan said.

“Our strong alliance underscores continued cooperation of our navies to increase interoperability, through exercises, operations, information sharing, capability development and building people-to-people links,” he continued. “I look forward to continuing to work with Admiral Gilday to further our shared commitment to a stable and secure Indo-Pacific region.”

From the Arabian Gulf where the two navies operate as part of the International Maritime Security Construct, to the Pacific, where they conduct operations like the Enforcement Coordination Cell, the two partners regularly work together to promote security and stability around the globe.

Additionally, the two navies conduct frequent cooperative deployments, and operate together during high-end exercises like Talisman Sabre 2019, the largest bilateral exercise with more than 34,000 military personnel participating from Australia and the United States.

During the visit, Gilday also noted the continued cooperation with Australia to build future fleets that are interchangeable so that the two navies can operate more closely together. A significant demonstration of this is the employment of the Aegis Combat System on board the soon-to-be commissioned Hobart-class air warfare destroyer, HMAS SYDNEY (DDG 42).

“We are excited for the future and are honored to work with the Royal Australian Navy day-in and day-out to preserve free and open maritime commons,” said Gilday. “Going forward, we will continue to explore ways to strengthen our relationship and more effectively respond to challenges together, both regionally and around the world.”