Ilona Szilágyi Princess consort of Wallachia

0 0

Justina Szilágyi de Horogszeg (Hungarian: horogszegi Szilágyi Jusztina; before 1455 – 1497) was a Hungarian noblewoman, who became the second wife of Vlad the Impaler, Voivode of Wallachia. She was the daughter of Ladislaus or Osvát Szilágyi and thus a cousin of Matthias Corvinus, King of Hungary. Corvinus first gave her in marriage to Wenceslas Pongrác of Szentmiklós. Pongrác had inherited estates in Upper Hungary (present-day Slovakia), but was forced to renounce them in exchange for landed property he and Justina jointly received in Transylvania following their marriage. After Pongrác died in 1474, the widowed Justina married Vlad, whom Corvinus acknowledged as the lawful voivode of Wallachia in 1475. Vlad seized Wallachia in late 1476, but soon died in battle. To strengthen her claim to her Transylvanian estates, she married Paul Suki, who was related to the former owners of those territories. After the death of Suki, in 1479, Justina was married to John Erdélyi of Somkerék, until her death in 1497.

Remarried royal consorts · 124T

15th-century Romanian women · 3T

15th-century Hungarian women · 14T

Marițica Bibescu Princess-consort of Wallachia

0 0

rank #2 · WDW

Marițica Bibescu, born Maria Văcărescu, also known as Marițica Ghica (August 1, 1815 – September 27, 1859), was the Princess-consort of Wallachia between September 1845 and June 1848. A boyaress by birth, she belonged to the Văcărescu family. Her father Nicolae, her grandfather Ienăchiță and her uncle Alecu were politicians and professional writers; Marițica herself was an unpublished poet. She was orphaned as a child, but was looked after by her relatives and her family friends, including Prince Alexandru II Ghica and philanthropist Zoe Brâncoveanu. Described by period sources as exceptionally beautiful, if also vain and ambitious, she married in 1834 the Prince's brother, Spatharios Costache Ghica. Her adoptive clan, the Ghicas, remained the leading Wallachian family until late 1842, when Alexandru II was deposed by the Ottoman Empire.

Nobility from Bucharest · 25T

Mistresses of Romanian royalty · 5T

19th-century philanthropists · 1,011T

Kalinikia Romanian, Royalty

0 0

rank #5 · WDW

Kalinikia, also spelled Ana Calina (Romanian: Ana-Călina) and better known as Lady Calinica (Romanian: Calinichia or Caliniţa, earlier in Bulgarian: Калиникіѧ, Kalinikĭę), was the second wife of Radu I, a 14th-century Wallachian voivode (nobleman). Calinica was the mother of Mircea I of Wallachia; she outlived her husband by 56 years.

14th-century Byzantine women · 25T

Women of medieval Wallachia · 3T

Women of the Byzantine Empire · 30T

Elena Năsturel Romanian princess consort

0 0

rank #8 ·

Doamna Elena (1598–1653) was a princess consort of Wallachia by marriage to Prince Matei Basarab. The sister of scholar Udriște Năsturel, she was known for her cultural patronage and introduced the first printing press in Wallachia. She was born to the Seneschal Radu Năsturel from Herăști and Calea Calomfirescu, who herself, was descended from Michael the Brave.