This vintage real photo postcard features French stage and film actress, Renee Adoree (1898-1933). She also appeared in silent movies produced by Hollywood in the 1910’s. Her most well known film was the melodramatic romance and war epic, “The Big Parade”. She played the love interest of John Gilbert. Renee’s parents were circus artists. She would perform with them at times. She was a dancer, acrobat artist, and bareback rider. She perfomed throughout Europe. She made her movie debut in 1918. In 1919, she went to New York City and played in a vaudeville-style musical. Several other stage appearances followed. In 1920, she began to perform in movies again. In total, Renee performed with John Gilbert nine times. She appeared with actor Ramon Novarro four times. In a 1928 Howard Hughes film, “The Mating Call”, Renee had a brief scene in which she swam in the nude. This act created much controversy. Renee’s personal life included two marriages and two divorces between 1921 and 1929. Renee, unlike many other actresses of her time, was successful in making the transition to sound film. She appeared in four “talkies” before her early death. In all, by the end of 1920, Renee had appeared in forty-five films. The IBDb reports that she appeared in two Broadway productions, both occurred in 1919, It was in 1930 that Renee was diagnosed with tuberculosis. Despite her doctor’s advice, she continued her participation in the filming of a movie. After completing the movie, she was rushed to an Arizona sanitorium. She was flat on her back for two years during her recovery. Post discharge, Renee’s health began to deteriorate until she died in 1933. She was only about 35 years old at the time of her death. This vintage postcard features Renee standing in front of a horse. She is holding the horse’s harness. Apparently, she liked animals and possessed a sense of humor. She had a dog named “Useless”, and a cat named “Worthless”. The logo for MGM can be seen in the lower right hand corner of the image. She was under contract with MGM from 1930 until her death. This postcard was published by “Ross Verlag” as part of a series (No.4350/1). Note sticker on reverse of card. This vintage postcard is in overall good condition. (see scans).