by Carl Omolo

Ka Umego

The first song off the EP is titled ‘Ka Umego’ which is in Sheng a playful way of saying ‘as you go.’ The song itself plays with the double meanings of the phrase throughout its runtime as it takes us through the misadventures in Kenyan youthfulness today.

“I even hit the green like ushago // *cultural context required

Those ones for

You guy, umeshago? // are you already gone (high)

Unaweza kata onions na avocado // you can cut the onions and avocado

Juu nyanya ni macho, ficha white ukifuego// *cultural context required

Use Colgate tukibrush meno // use colgate to brush your teeth

Na spray perfume ka umego // then spray your perfume as we go

Go ay ay, ka umego

It’s a tune with delightful wordplay interspersed throughout its structure. All the while, a crisp three tone beat plays in the background really selling and grounding the grunge but carefree experience captured in the lyrics.

This song could be dissected into three parts: two strong flows which transition into each other perfectly followed by a relatively slower and disjointed third which probably sticks out because of the beat switch.

Mahewa

Kenyan music connoisseurs’ hearts will be warmed by the reference to the E-Sir and Nameless track Boomba Train. Pretentious ones might even draw attention to a Little Simz call out used creatively on here. References aside, this track is laden with cultural significance as Prince.Wasabi not only employs the use of the Kikuyu language in the track but also gestures towards the significance of his hair as a heritage of his forefathers. It’s a track short but sweet that has its feet in the past and present looking towards the future.

Kamotee

In this track, Mr. Lu* leans heavily into Kikuyu and Sheng in order to enrich and elevate a love song.

“Siku nyingi babe umenishake jo // For many days you have dodged me

No love lost, no love found

Mapenzi yako Kamotee // Your love is a potion

Mapenzi yako sina say jo // In your love I have no say

Mara mingi tunaend up tukimengo // Most times we end up fighting

No love lost, no love found

Mapenzi yako Kamotee // Your love is a potion

The song betrays a yearning that cannot be comprehended. Our hero remains undaunted by the bad times and instead finds comfort in the memory of the good times when they would speak all night on the phone. In the end, our hero yields that they may have been bewitched by this love.

In the Clouds

“So I pray you’ll never play me

Love you when you say my name

I fell for you, fell in the clouds

This track is an electrifying portrayal of the Kenyan hiphop music scene. Its infectious fusion of R&B, vibrant instrumentals, and confident vocals creates the mesmerizing vibe that defines the Kenyan hiphop subgenre. Plus that outro man! Made it my favourite track on the album.

Final thoughts

From the spirited instrumentals to its captivating vocals, “KXMOTHERAPY” is a testament to the innovative and eclectic sounds emerging from the Kenyan music scene. It doesn’t just stop there though. If you take time to look, the picture of an intentional, methodical and meaningfully crafted emerges; from the dual spirit of the EP that shifts from the rap heavy Ka Umego and Mahewa and descends towards the more melodic Kamotee and In the Clouds, the crisp-clean transitions and even the art on each of the individual tracks.

The vibrant production, buoyant rhythms, and Mr. Lu*’s charismatic delivery make this track a standout representation of the melting pot that is the Nairobi creative scene.