My intention with this thread, starting next Monday July 27th, is to discuss the music of Prince, in all it's myriad guises, down all its side-streets and alleyways, on a song-by-song basis.

I will be going through all of Prince's songs, one by one: not only songs released under his own names but songs released under other names as well, and also songs that Prince wrote for other artists, whether he produced or was involved in their recording or not. I will also cover songs that Prince covered.

I do not plan to hold up songs that Prince may have been involved in otherwise: i.e., if he remixed a song for another artist or produced a song but did not write it for the other artist, I will probably skip it.

Now, this gets complicated, because credits are very strange in Prince-world, and sometimes he wrote songs that he did not get credit for (but usually owned). I will be using the information from princevault.com to aid me to this end, as well as the previous Prince album-by-album thread that was live some years ago.

But also I believe there are some knowledgeable folks here who will be able to help me with this mammoth undertaking.

I will be covering these on a semi-chronological order: by which I mean, I will not be ordering them according the date recorded, but rather I will group songs by album; and then I will add other songs/albums recorded in that general era after the discussion of the main album.

For example, when the time comes, I will go through all the songs on the 1999 album; then I will follow it up with attendant B-sides and outtakes that have been released since, on the Deluxe albums or elsewheires, and then follow those up songs which were written by Prince but released by other artists released in 1982 by other artists. In the case where Prince wrote or co-wrote entire albums for other artists, I will cover those other albums separately, as their own "chapters" so to speak. Thus 1982 will have three "chapters":

1999+B-sides and released outtakes,

Vanity 6, and

What Time Is It?,

plus an additional chapter for any random songs by other artists that Prince wrote in 1999.

For songs written by Prince that were covered by other artists, but which had otherwise little involvement from Prince in released form, we can discuss both versions together --(I.e., I won't hold up "You're My Love" by Kenny Rogers up separately from Prince's, because Prince's version has been released on Prince's Originals album and my understanding it is that Prince wrote the song but otherwise was no involved with Kenny Rogers' version; however, other songs that have only been released by other artists but which do not have a released Prince version of the song will be discussed, at the time of their release.

Some exceptions to this might apply: I probably will cover Prince's and Sheila E's "The Glamorous Life"" separately, for example. Of course, both versions can be discussed and referenced, let's not be ridiculous sticklers, but in general of course, we want to stick to the timeline of the songs being discussed and not venture too far ahead so that the thread doesn't become a mess.

This is a highly complex and vast discography, and of course, I will not to pretend to be the most knowledgeable expert of all of Prince's incredibly wide catalogue -- not even on this forum! But I do think I can reliably post one song per day and the experts will chime in and help me.

I will also be rating songs on a 1-5 scale, 5 being the best. I like doing this simply because, a) for some reason it helps me to focus my mind critically when I'm listening and b) although individual users ratings mean nothing, collectively, when averaged, they are an interesting statistic. And I like to make playlists from the more highly-rated songs!

Having said that one does not have to rate songs to participate in the thread. The main thing is to discuss the music for Prince, song-by-song and learn more about the music of this incredibly talented man.

One more thing: I do not play on holding up unreleased songs for rating; that does not mean that they cannot be discussed or referenced in their appropriate era by those who know about them; it only means that I won't make a separate entry for them.

For released songs that were released more than twice (say, ""I Can Never Take the Place of Your Man"", or ""We Can Funk"") I will hold those up separately.

__________________

I'm on holiday now and mostly camping; although I'm in a city for the next couple of days I will return to the wilderness on Thursday and while I'm sure I will have access to Internet I won't have much time to do much this week. That's why I'm not going to start until next Monday morning (Central European Time), with the For You album.

Before I start, though, I'd like to take this opportunity to ask if anybody knows of any recordings that Prince made prior to the release of For You that were later released officially released by Prince or his estate -- either in physical or digital media.

If so then I'll start with one of those songs on Monday...but otherwise, I will start with "For You" on Monday morning. ON Sunday night, I'll post an introductory essay to the album and start on the first song the next day.

For You

Prince Rogers Nelson, who had been recording demos both alone and with various musicians since 1976, was the son of a Minneapolis jazz pianist/band leader. His parents were divorced and he was thrown out of his mother's home at the age of 12 when his strait-laced stepfather found him in bed with a girl; basically homeless, he was taken in by the family of his friend Andre Cymone (nee Andersen), who, like Prince, was a talented multi-instrumentalist and with whom he started a teeth cutting band with sister Linda Andersen and schoolmate Morris Day on drums. The band, originally called Grand Central, changed their name to Champagne later, in 1975. At taht time both Andre Cymone and Prince also joined the funk Band 94 East, led by Prince's cousin's husband Pepe Willie.

His high school years were spent making music in the Cymones' basement and playing basketball. It is rumored also that he ghost-wrote many advertising jingles for local radio and TV commercials for cash, though he was not credited for them. He began recording demos as early as 1976.

A demo cassette of Prince's songs, solicited by his manager Owen Husney, eventually won him a recording contract with Warner Brother's record label; who, oddly, seemed to have "auditioned" him by watching him build a song from scratch in the recording studio.

For You, was recorded in October to December 1977 at The Record Plant in Sausalito, California and overdubs were recorded at Sound Labs in LA. As has been written in numerous biographies, Prince's ability to record a song completely on his own had so impressed the suits at Warner Brothers that they not only allowed him to record the album as a one man band but they also, grudgingly, allowed him to produce himself, a point on which he insisted, absolutely refusing to sign a contract otherwise. This was a highly unusual arrangement for an artist who was unknown outside of the R&B scene of late seventies Minneapolis. They assigned producer Tony Vicari to the album to oversee the production, (he is listed as "Executive Producer") but apparently Prince pointedly ignored anything he said and, in typical Prince fashion did not really talk to him or acknowlege him at all.)

Prince did have some uncredited assistance in the form of advice from recording engineer David Rivkin (whose brother would later play drums in the Revolution) and Patrice Rushen played synth on one song, also uncredited.

All of the other instruments on the album were played by Prince and all of the vocals sung by him as would be typical of most of his early work and, indeed, throughout his career.

Many of the songs on the album had been recorded in demo form earlier, some dating back to 1976

The album was expensive; though he had been given a budget of $180 000 that was to cover his first three albums, the cost of For You pretty much blew that, as it cost $170 000! Apparently Prince recorded many other songs and various versions of the song that appeared; various tracklists were considered before the final nine song tracklist was chosen.

The album was released in April 1998. It initially reached #163 on the American charts and by 1979 had sold somewhere between 150 000 and 200 000 copies. Since that time it has gone on to sell over two million copies worldwide and, after Princes' death in 2016, it re-entered the American album chart and charted at #138. At this time it also charted in the UK and France at #156 and #200 respectively.

The tracklist was:

For You (Prince)

In Love (Prince)

Soft And Wet (Prince, Chris Moon)

Crazy You

Just as Long as We're Together (Prince

Baby (Prince)

My Love Is Forever (Prince, Chris Moon[uncredited])

So Blue (Prince)

I'm Yours (Prince)

In addition to those above songs I plan to hold the following up for discussion:

Just Another Sucker (Prince, Pepe Willie) 94 East, recorded 1978 released 1986

I'd like to take this opportunity to ask anybody here if they know of any other songs that were recorded by Prince in 1978 (other than the other 94 East songs, which he did not write) that were released either in 1978 or in later years? If so I will add them.