AHMED ZEWAIL – AHMED ZEWAIL

8 min read

FIRST: INTRODUCTION:

Every nation has unforgettable days in its history, and one of these days is Tuesday, October 21, 1999 AD, the day on which the Egyptian scientist Ahmed Zewail won the Nobel Prize in Chemistry, becoming the first Egyptian and Arab to win the Nobel Prize in Science after his discovery of the femtosecond, which many considered a breakthrough. Scientifically, all of humanity enters a new phase in its history.

With this award, Ahmed Zewail becomes the 91st scientist to win the Nobel Prize in Chemistry since the establishment of this award. He is also considered one of the few scientists who won this award alone, as it is customary for more than one scientist to participate in winning the award in each branch of the different sciences. Zewail won this award because he was able, through his discovery, to monitor the movement of atoms within molecules during a chemical reaction using fast laser technology.

SECOND: BORN AND EDUCATION:

Ahmed Hassan Zewail was born on February 26, 1946 in the city of Damanhour in the Beheira Governorate, then he moved with his family to the city of Desouk in the Kafr El-Sheikh Governorate.

Dr. Zewail began his early education in the city of Damanhour, then moved with his family to the city of Desouq, his father’s workplace, where he completed his education until the secondary stage.

He joined the Faculty of Science at Alexandria University after graduating from high school and obtained a Bachelor of Science degree with excellent in 1967 in chemistry. He worked as a teaching assistant at the college and then obtained a master’s degree for research in the field of light science.

He travelled to the United States of America on a scientific scholarship and obtained a doctorate from the University of Pennsylvania in laser science in 1974.

THIRD: THE POSITION HE HELD:

He joined the research team at the University of Berkeley in California in 1974.

In 1976, he was appointed to Caltech University as an assistant professor of chemical physics. He was thirty years old at that time.

In 1982, he became a member of the American Academy of Sciences at the age of forty-three.

In 1982, he assumed the position of Professor of Chemistry at Calcutta University.

In 1990, he was honoured to obtain the position of first professor of chemistry at the Linus Pauling Institute.

Member of the Advisory Council at King Abdullah University of Science and Technology in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.

He published more than 350 scientific papers in specialized international scientific journals such as Science and Nature

He worked as a distinguished visiting professor in more than 10 universities around the world, in addition to the American University in Cairo.

He gave hundreds of scientific lectures all over the world, and his name was included in the list of honour in the United States of America, which includes the most important persons who contributed to the American Renaissance, and his name was number 18 out of 29 prominent persons as the most important laser scientists in the United States (this list includes Einstein , and Graham Bell).

FOURT: HIS SCIENTIFIC ACHIEVEMENTS:

ZEWAIL AND FEMTOCHEMISTRY:

Zewail brought the science of chemistry to what seemed impossibe before his appearance, and when the science of chemistry referred to two men who had the greatest contribution in its construction, Robert the Century, there was no one but “Linus Pauling,” the Nobel Prize winner, and Ahmed Zewail, who was described by the historian of science, “Robert Brad.” And sugar” with “Christopher Columbus for his world.”

Ahmed Zewail invented a camera to analyze femto-second spectroscopy, which enabled him to study chemical reactions with it, bringing everything into a new era that humanity had not expected to be able to achieve by monitoring atoms inside molecules during a clear interaction through fast laser technology. His studies and invention of this point also became a high level for a new science, femtochemistry (Fotochemesrty.

Zewail became “the first eyewitness to chemical events that occur in a time of one million billionth of a second.”

Zewail says that “it seems that fate has taken my mind to Caltech University and kept me away from any other place to put me in the right place, and then there was any suitable place and the right time to help achieve some of our goals.”, and Noel has many other Inventions.

FEMTOSECOND:

Researchers believed that it was not possible to study the movement of molecules when they collide and coalesce, as chemical reactions last for 10-100 femtoseconds, and a femtosecond is one millionth of a billionth of a second, i.e. 0.0000000000000001 seconds. However, in the late 1980s, Ahmed Zewail was able to depict the movement Atoms and molecules in the atom by inventing new laser technology, which enabled scientists to control the results of chemical reactions.

This technique is called femtosecond spectroscopy, and it is capable of producing light flashes within tens of femtoseconds. In this technique, molecules are mixed in a vacuum tube through which a laser is passed at a very high speed. Two pulses are transmitted, the first providing the interaction energy, while the second examines the movement of the molecules.

Because of this innovation, scientists from all over the world have become able to analyze femtosecond spectra in gases, liquids, and solids as well, in polymers, and on the surfaces of materials.

On Tuesday, October 21, 1999, Ahmed Zewail won the Nobel Prize in Chemistry for his unique invention.

ZEWAIL AND SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH:

Ahmed Zewail has published more than 350 internationally published articles in specialized journals and has written 600 published articles.

HIS MOST IMPORTANT WORKS:

Ahmed Zewail wrote many books, numbering 16, including The Age of Science, A Journey Through Time, and Dialogue of Civilizations. Among his most important books are:

Advances in Laser Spectroscopy I / published in 1977 AD.

Advances in Laser Chemistry / published in 1978 AD.

Photochemistry and Photobiology / published in 1983 AD.

Ultrafast Phenomena VII/ published in 1990 AD

The Chemical Bond/ published in 1992 AD

Ultrafast Phenomena VIII / published in 1993 AD.

Ultrafast Phenomena IX / published in 1994

Femtochemistry/ published in 1994 AD.

3D Visualization of Matter: Recent Collected Works / published in 2014 AD.

Reflections on World Affairs: Peace and Politics / published in 2015 AD.

A Journey Through Time: The Road to Nobel Prize, published in 2002.

The Age of Science, published in 2005 AD.

Time, published in 2007 AD.

Dialogue of Civilizations, published in 2007 AD.

Physical Biology: From Atoms to Medicine, published in 2008.

Four-dimensional electron microscopic imaging, published in 2010.

TECHNOLOGY CITY PROJECT:

Ahmed Zewail called for the formation of a scientific base in Egypt to carry out the development of scientific research and the educational process, and based on what was planned and dreamed by the distinguished scientist Prof. Dr. Ahmed Zewail, the Technology City project that bears his name was established.

Zewail City of Science and Technology is an independent, non-profit, innovative, educational, research institution. The foundation stone was laid on January 1, 2000, and the Prime Minister named the project Zewail City of Science and Technology and described it as “Egypt’s national project for the scientific renaissance.” On December 20, 2012, the city was granted a special law allowing students to apply to study at the University of Science and Technology in Zewail City, thus beginning a new era of modern development in Egypt in the field of scientific research and technology.

Research areas in the city include genetic medicine, energy, water sources, femto and nanotechnology, information technology, and others

The city consists of a technological university and research and development centers in the fields of future sciences.

The project was funded through donations from organizations and individuals.

FIFTH: AWARDS AND HONORS:

Dr. Ahmed Zewail received many international medals, medals, and awards for his pioneering research in laser science and femto science, for which he won 31 international awards, including:

1- AWARDS WON:

“Max Planck” Prize, the first in Germany.

The American Welch Award.

American “Harrion Howe” Award.

King Faisal International Prize in Science.

German Hochset Award.

Awarded the medal of the Dutch Academy of Sciences and Arts.

Excellence Award in the name of Leonardo da Vinci.

The Alexander von Humbolden Prize from West Germany is the largest scientific award there.

Buck and Tenney Award from New York.

King Faisal Prize in Science and Physics in 1989.

Prize in Chemistry in 1993.

Benjamin Franklin Award in 1998 for his work in studying chemical reactions in an extremely small time frame (Femto-Second).

Nobel Prize in Chemistry for his achievements in the same field in 1999.

The Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences said in the reasons for granting the award to Dr. Zewail:

“Dr. Zewail was honored as a result of the tremendous revolution in chemical sciences and the use of laser beams. Dr. Zewail’s research led to the birth of what is called femtosecond chemistry, and the use of high-speed imaging machines to monitor chemical reactions with a capacity of femtoseconds.”

Annual US Department of Energy Award in Chemistry.

“Kars” Prize from the University of Zurich, in Chemistry and Nature, which is the largest Swiss scientific award.

2- OTHER ASPECTS OF HONOR:

He was elected a member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences.

Zewail became a member of the American Academy at the age of forty-three, even though it only awards the smartest scientists over fifty-five.

He received an honorary doctorate from the University of Oxford in England, the American University in Cairo, and the University of Alexandria.

The Pontifical Academy elected him as the first Egyptian Arab to join its membership and receive its Golden Medal in 2000.

In April 2009, the White House announced the selection of Zewail to the US President Barack Obama’s Council of Advisors for Science and Technology, which includes 20 distinguished scientists in a number of fields.

SIXTH: SOCIAL LIFE:

Ahmed Zewail married Mrs. Dima Zewail (Al-Fahham), who is the daughter of the scholar Shaker Al-Fahham and works as a doctor, and he had four children with her.

SEVENTH: ILLNESS AND DEATH:

Dr. Ahmed Zewail was exposed to a health crisis, for which his treatment period abroad lasted for a year after his health had been affected since his arrival in Egypt. His illness began with back pain, and despite that, he decided to travel. Then he felt extremely ill after travelling to Switzerland and Germany, while giving a lecture.

The doctors hid the truth about his illness from Dr. Ahmed Zewail, but upon his return to America he discovered the truth, and that he was suffering from high levels of calcium. The Egyptian scientist later discovered that he had melanoma cancer, and Zewail was cured after passing the critical stage of the disease, and he was loved by the Egyptians. It had an impact on the improvement of his health and psychological condition, as he received thousands of letters during his absence, in addition to the warm reception he received at the airport, which indicates the strength of his countrymen’s attachment to him.

Dr. Ahmed Zewail passed away from our world on Tuesday, August 2, 2016, after a struggle with illness, at the age of seventy years in Pasadena – California – USA.

SEVENTH: REFERENCE

https://ar.wikipedia.org/wiki.

youm7/ (Online)

www.bbc.com/ BBC NEWS

AL ARABUA / (Online).

www.sis.gov.eg/ Online

SADA EL BALAD/ (Online).