This article's content is marked as Mature

The page contains mature content that may include coarse language, sexual references, and/or graphic violent images which may be disturbing to some. Mature pages are recommended for those who are 18 years of age and older.

If you are 18 years or older or are comfortable with graphic material, you are free to view this page. Otherwise, you should close this page and view another page.

Richard Ledge, also known as The Alphabet Killer, is the main antagonist of the 2008 crime/horror film The Alphabet Killer.

Ledge is the seemingly paraplegic lead counselor of a recovery support group, using the cover to hide being guilty of serial rapes and murders of preteen girls in Rochester, NY. The crimes were named "The Alphabet Murders" or "The Double Initial Murders" because each girl had the same initial for each of their first and last names, left dead in a city also starting with the same letter.

He was portrayed by Timothy Hutton, who also protrayed George Stark in The Dark Half.

Biography[]

Ledge was a math teacher at St. Michael's Church in Rochester, NY, later quitting and turning to mental health advocacy by leading a support group. ledge was also secretly a murderous pedophile, obsessed with raping and murdering girls who attended the same church. Using paraplegia as a cover, ledge gained enough prestige to never be suspected by the murders started.

Compulsively obsessed with the alphabet being incorporated in the crimes for reasons unknown, ledge started by luring Carla Castillo. She was abducted, but she escaped and ran into the woods, screaming for help as she ran from Ledge. Ledge eventually caught her and raped and killed her. She's left in Churchville to evoke her initials. Empathic local detective Megan Paige, who also suffers from epilepsy, insists a serial killer is in the loose, but her colleagues and boyfriend don't believe her.

By sheer shocking coincidence, when she's kicked off and tries to kill herself, she receives treatment under a regimen that includes attending Ledge's support group. Two years after Castillo's rape and murder, Wendy Walsh is raped and murdered, found in Webster. Melissa Maestro is ledge's final victim, found raped and killed in Macedon. Consistently throughout Paige treatments, Ledge manipulates her into giving her trust for the sake of throwing suspicion off himself and impeding the investigation. Ledge even gets her to confide in him the hallucinations of the dead girls she's having out of guilt and fear's she never going to close the case.

A young woman named Elizabeth Eckers is held hostage by a deranged citizen pretending to be the killer. Paige isn't convinced and tries to talk down the situation with negotiations, but the suspect is shot dead through a window and the "Alphabet Killer" is declared "dead" to the public. Unshaken from her convictions, and figuring the Webster Police Department planted the evidence to swiftly end the investigations. Paige has another nervous breakdown when she can't plead her case on the crimes. Once she recovers, she starts sleuthing independently. Finding out they all went to the same church, Paige personally visits. She can't talk to the pastor in time before she has another breakdown and gets hospitalized again.

Paige escapes and runs in Ledge's direction. Ledge offers hiding page at his home, and on top of finding out ledge previously taught math at the church and that he had a white cat, she realizes Ledge is the real killer. Ledge drops the ruse, even the "paraplegia", and incapacitates Paige and drives her out cold to the isolated wilderness near Genesee River. About to sedate her and throw her into the water, Ledge is lunged at by Paige when she breaks free, and the two scuffle. When Ledge pulls a gun, Paige snatches it and shoots ledge's foot out, causing Ledge to fall into the river and disappear.

Intermixed with Paige's longest breakdown and hallucinating the dead girls who beg for justice, leading to her more extensive commitment, ledge is revealed to be alive. Relocating and changing appearance, Ledge is in a new church receiving communion. Ledge turns and starts at a young girl who looks just the type Ledge would want as a victim. It's never revealed if Ledge raped and killed her or not.

Modus Operandi[]

Ledge targeted preteen girls in Rochester who went to the church ledge offered community services from. Fixating on girls with the same first and last initials, they would be abducted and driven to an isolated woods to prevent then from escaping. They would be beaten, raped, and strangled to death, compulsively left in or near cities also starting with the same letter as their initials. Ledge would use community prestige manipulate and avid suspicion, as well as try to impede the investigation. When Ledge tried to kill Paige, she was abducted and driven off to the same woods the other girls were killed at.

Victims[]

Carla Castillo (left in Churchville)

Wendy Walsh (left in Webster)

Melissa Maestro (left in Macedon)

Megan Paige (attempted; she resisted and shot Ledge into the lake instead)

Unidentified girl (targeted; possibly raped and murdered)

Trivia[]