Each week, Richard Brody picks a classic film, a modern film, an independent film, a foreign film, and a documentary for online viewing.

“The Alphabet Murders”

With Kenneth Branagh’s film version of Agatha Christie’s “Murder on the Orient Express” opening today, it’s worth looking at some other cinematic mysteries, starting with the Christie adaptation that I treasure above all, “The Alphabet Murders.” With this recommendation, from 1965, I break my own self-imposed rule stating the modern era of movies begins in 1968, because its director, Frank Tashlin, is ahead of even our own times. This adaptation of “The A.B.C. Murders” stars Tony Randall as Hercule Poirot, and, though Randall, playing the role with a comedic French accent, won’t dispel memories of Peter Sellers’s Inspector Clouseau, he brings an analytical nerdiness of his own that puts substance into the punctilious style. Above all, it’s Tashlin’s film: the former director of Looney Tunes animations turns the dialogue-heavy and detail-focussed plotting into a live-action cartoon, with distorting angles yielding outlandishly comedic juxtapositions and psychological disorientations, whether from the explosive results of a dish of kidneys flambé or during balletic antics at a bowling alley. Ultimately, Tashlin turns the murder-mystery plot into a giddily quotational parody of the films of Alfred Hitchcock: Tashlin’s subject isn’t so much the intricacies of bloody murder as the media-centric complexities of the subject’s irresistibly macabre allure.

Stream “The Alphabet Murders” on WarnerArchive.

“Beyond a Reasonable Doubt”

For his last American film, in 1956, Fritz Lang (who subsequently concluded his directorial career in West Germany) made a cold, cynical thriller with a Venus-flytrap plot, set in a milieu that fascinated and appalled him: journalism. It brings together the high and low sides of the practice in a story about a highly principled editor named Austin Spencer (Sidney Blackmer), an opponent of the death penalty, who recruits Tom Garrett (Dana Andrews), his future son-in-law, a sensationalistic writer looking for a scoop, for an elaborate hoax. Tom and Austin will fabricate evidence that will get Tom convicted of an unsolved murder—thereby proving, when they reveal the hoax, how easy it is for the state to execute the innocent. What’s more, in order to maintain the airtightness of the scheme, Tom can’t even confide in his fiancée, Susan Spencer (Joan Fontaine), which leads to romantic turmoil. In effect, Tom and Austin plot the perfect crime without actually committing it, and Lang looks at their imaginative and tightly plotted deceptions with a gimlet squint, wondering with a virtual smirk about what kind of person could even imagine such things.

Stream “Beyond a Reasonable Doubt” on Amazon, YouTube, Google Play, and Vudu.

“Insiang”

The Filipino director Lino Brocka wanted to make a film based on the true story of a young woman from a rough slum district of Manila who was raped by her mother’s lover and sought revenge, and he went outside the industry to do it, pitching the project to the prosperous businesswoman Ruby Tiong Tan. The film, “Insiang,” from 1976, was the first one from the Philippines to be screened at the Cannes Film Festival (Tiong Tan smuggled the reels there in her luggage), and its welcome restoration, thanks to Martin Scorsese’s World Cinema Project, reveals the fury of Brocka’s vision in all its closely observed texture. Hilda Koronel plays the title role, a hardworking young woman whose bitter, lonely mother (Mona Lisa)—whose life curdled when her husband and Insiang’s father ran off with another woman—takes up with the neighborhood’s swaggering bully, a gambler named Dado (Ruel Vernal), who has his eye on Insiang. Brocka, filming on location in the midst of real-life gang wars (with constant police guard for the production), shows a milieu of unquestioned and unaddressed poverty and unemployment giving rise to a wide range of frustrations and depredations—and shows one victim taking matters into her own hands with a scheme of grim and quiet brilliance.

Stream “Insiang” on FilmStruck (The Criterion Channel).

“Slack Bay”

Speaking of mysteries, the cinematic self-reinvention of Bruno Dumont is one of the artistic joys of recent years, starting with “Li’l Quinquin” and continuing with its spiritual if not literal sequel, “Slack Bay,” which was released in France in 2016 and came out here earlier this year. It’s set around 1910, in a seaside resort town on the northern coast of France, and it brings together three groups of characters: the local Brufort family of hardboiled laborers, ferrymen and fishermen, who are also cannibals; two unintentionally antic policemen, one big and bloviating, the other small and wry, who are investigating the disappearance of tourists; and the Van Peteghem family, aristocrats who arrive to summer at their villa overlooking the shore. The action is centered on the two families’ encounter—in particular, the relationship between two teen-agers, the phlegmatic Brufort scion with the odd name of Ma Loute (Brandon Lavieville) and the incisive, graceful Billie Van Peteghem (played by Raph), who sometimes dresses as a girl, sometimes as a boy. Dumont casts local non-actors as the Brufort family and as Billie, and blends their performances with the starry theatrics of such accomplished actors as Juliette Binoche, Fabrice Luchini, and Valeria Bruni Tedeschi, as the other Van Peteghems. He similarly blends earnest tenderness and grisly plots with majestic whimsy and loopy surrealism, filming the comedic drama of class and gender, power and pathology, with a grand and luminous serenity.

Stream “Slack Bay” on Netflix.

“The Witness”

One of the lingering mysteries of modern journalism is the story of Kitty Genovese, who was raped and murdered, in Queens, in 1964—not who did it (the perpetrator was convicted) but why it happened, given the report that dozens of her neighbors heard her screams yet never called for help. James D. Solomon’s extraordinary documentary “The Witness,” from 2016, delves deep into the events of that night and extends them in both directions—considering the life of Kitty Genovese and the journalistic and judicial aftermath of the attack—with the help of Bill Genovese, Kitty’s brother, who was unsatisfied with official and reported accounts of the events. The mysteries, as it turns out, are far different from those that have congealed into the modern myth of the indifferent urbanite—and in the process of illuminating them, the film sheds light on a wide range of experience, from Kitty Genovese’s experiences as a lesbian at a time when homosexuality was illegal, to the process by which a newspaper and its staff frame a story, to the internal processing of crime reports by the police. It also features that rarity among documentaries, reënactments that, far from banalizing or flattening the film’s first-person testimony, fuses with it and amplifies it.

Stream “The Witness” on Netflix.