As a society, we definitely have an obsession with true crime, which often serves as its own genre, completely separate from horror. Granted, the two can often overlap, with horror films based on real life murders, or even ones just inspired by them. And while fans will always debate whether something is horror or thriller, we can all agree that they fall under the same larger umbrella

One such entry into that crossover of subgenres is 2008’s The Alphabet Killer. Starring Eliza Dushku and Cary Elwes, The Alphabet Killer ends up being a strange blend of police procedural/serial killer thriller and borderline supernatural horror. It makes some strange choices, and may even be offensive to some people, but there’s no movie quite like it

Based On True Events

The infamous “Alphabet Murders” were an unfortunately real trio of murders that occurred in the Rochester, New York area between 1971 and 1973. The victims were 10-11 years old, and the only thing they had in common was that their first and last names began with the same letter. The film uses these events as a general premise, but isn’t directly based on anything factual from the real life cases.

We follow Meg (Eliza Dushku) as she has a complete nervous breakdown while investigating the first of the three Alphabet Murders. However, 2 years later, she’s ready to come back to the police force, with her ex-fiancé (Cary Elwes) as the captain, when the Alphabet Killer strikes again.

Structurally, it definitely feels like a typical crime thriller, boasting all the cliches of the reluctant partner who doesn’t want to work with her, the police admins who don’t take her seriously, and of course the killer being revealed as someone she knew very well.

Where it stands apart however, is in how Meg has constant hallucinations of the gruesome murders, and is even stalked by the ghosts of the victims. It’s very easy to see why nobody wanted her anywhere near this case, because her overall instability is a threat to not only the investigation, but the fellow police officers.

Rounded out with a very solid supporting cast, including the likes of Bill Moseley, Timothy Hutton, Carl Lumbly, Tom Noonan, and Michael Ironside, Eliza Dushku really shines as a character who’s genuinely struggling and just wants to do what’s right, even when she knows she’s in way over her head. It also does a lot to try and remove some of the stigma surrounding things like schizophrenia and other mental illnesses, something which horror has not always done so well in the past.

The Cost of Justice

One of the most fascinating things it explores is the cost that murder investigations can take on the mind and soul. Someone dealing with such gruesome things on a regular basis definitely can’t do it without being affected in some way or another. It’s the reason why unfortunately, you do see high rates of divorce and alcoholism among police, simply because the job takes such a toll on them.

It’s also why (in very select cases), you see police officers who are so desensitized to the violence that they become involved in officer related shootings of unarmed suspects. This is in now way to justify that ever, nor is it to suggest that all or most police do this. But we have to admit that dealing with murder on such a regular basis is very bad for mental health.

Granted, not everyone is haunted by the ghosts the same way that Meg is, but it’s a really interesting visual representation of it. And while this is never explicitly stated, it is implied that the hallucinations aren’t actually Meg’s schizophrenia, but an actual supernatural haunting. And it’s the not knowing for sure that makes things just a little bit more interesting.

Honoring vs. Exploiting

Whenever you’re adapting something based on real life tragedy, there’s a delicacy required so as not to offend or exploit the real people who were harmed. And it’s in that regard that this movie is kind of a gray area. All the characters are fictional, as are the circumstances around the murders. But they are still based on three real life deaths of three real young girls.

Their names are very slightly changed, but still all bear the same initials as the real life victims. It begs the question of whether it’s more or less ethical to be bound by truth when adapting something like this. On the one hand, most of this movie is fictional, only being loosely inspired by real events. But on the other, they could have changed more about the three young girls to further remove them from the true story as well.

You could easily have done this movie as purely fictional and just said it was inspired by this real life event. But the movie sort of wants to play it both ways. It wants to tell its very fictional story, but then at the end talks about how the killer was never apprehended, despite revealing in the movie who the killer actually was.

Granted, it’s a very ambitious movie in terms of everything that it tries to do, but whether or not it does those things successfully is very much up for debate…

What did you think of The Alphabet Killer? What are some of your favorite lesser known gems? Let us know in the comment!

For more reviews, horror news, rankings, and other fun horror/Halloween content, follow Halloween Year-Round on Facebook, Twitter, and YouTube!