Summary

Animal Crossing is an anti-grind game that offers a safe and stress-free space for players to take each day at a time, enjoying simple tasks like pulling weeds and making friends.

Animal Crossing: Wild World brought several innovations to the franchise, including the slingshot tool and the ability to place patterns on the ground, which allowed for the creation of paths.

Wild World revolutionized multiplayer in the series, making it convenient and enjoyable for both hosts and visitors, shaping the multiplayer experience in future games like New Horizons .

Animal Crossing is a franchise known for its cute animal characters and relaxing gameplay, but longtime fans of the series know there is more to the games than just that. It’s about carving out a space in a competitive, loud world — a space where the most exciting thing to happen is seeing a specific bug flying across the screen. Animal Crossing is, in a lot of ways, an anti-grind. This makes it into one of the more relaxing farm simulator games.

Animal Crossing: Wild World was the series’ first departure into handheld territory, and the game brought with it several innovations while staying true to the GameCube original. Even if City Folk went back to consoles, Wild World would inspire New Leaf and New Horizons after it. The franchise has stayed popular, but a lot of the more recent changes to the series — terraforming, for instance — have brought clutter to a franchise that was always intended to soothe.

Updated by Timothy Blake Donoho on January 29, 2024: Nintendo's Animal Crossing series has released across several platforms and systems, enduring throughout many generations of video games. These delightfully cute titles have charmed many, but it's the Nintendo DS entry that remains the high point. From features to versatility, this handheld game took things on the go in the best way. With new ventures such as an Animal Crossing LEGO set on the horizon, fans will likely look back fondly as the best Animal Crossing game nears its 20-year anniversary.

Wild World Brought Several Innovations

Animal Crossing has seen many changes in its entries, from the first game on the Gamecube getting the franchise started all the way to New Leaf. Long before these games or the more recent entry on the Nintendo Switch, handheld gamers who owned the Nintendo DS could get their hands on the best Animal Crossing game. Animal Crossing: Wild World brought several changes of its own that became mainstays to the franchise, cementing its place in Animal Crossing history.

Wild World added the slingshot as a tool, allowing the player to get random item drops throughout the day. Sometimes these drops would be new clothes or furniture that could be added to Nook’s catalog, and sometimes events could initiate, like knocking Pete out of the air or hitting Gulliver’s UFO. After hitting fourteen presents in a row, the golden slingshot could be obtained by shooting the fifteenth down. The golden slingshot would scatter three pellets at once, allowing the player to hit more objects.

Perhaps most importantly, Wild World was the first game that allowed players to place patterns on the ground, birthing a phenomenon that is still prevalent in Animal Crossing: New Horizons: paths. Paths allowed for the direct insertion of player creativity onto the game map, using original designs that mimicked brick, stone, or even chocolate pathways. Players could design clothes or the town flag, but something about creating paths resonated with Animal Crossing fans, and most players found their pattern slots full of paving squares. Back in the day, grainy pictures of paths would float around on the internet, allowing players to copy designs by hand. This pattern-sharing is reborn in New Horizons, where players without a Nintendo Online account share patterns in much the same way. Paths were made for the aesthetics of the player, certainly, but the creation and sharing of said creations brought the community together in wholesome ways.

Wild World Made Multiplayer Enjoyable

Animal Crossing for the Gamecube had ambitious expectations for multiplayer, but that was to be expected with the technology of that era. Players could visit each other if they remembered to bring their memory card, and more often than not, this was simply a good way to see a favorite (or least favorite) villager move out. With the Nintendo DS came online functionality: players could visit each other using the internet rather than having to meet in person. Multiplayer is still a large part of Animal Crossing today, and while the singleplayer mode is just as enjoyable, it just can't compare to repeatedly whacking a friend in the head with a bug net.

Animal Crossing: Wild World made multiplayer convenient for both the host and the visitor. Without that convenience, the appeal of visiting another town wouldn't have lasted for as long as it has. Multiplayer was the heart of Wild World, and even Nookington's is locked behind a visitor purchasing something from Tom Nook's store. The boxart features multiplayer prominently, as does most of the promotional art. For 2005, Wild World's multiplayer was pretty revolutionary, and the developers knew it. Sending mail to a friend, sharing patterns, convincing a dreamie to move into the player's town — it was all part of a carefully crafted experience that would one day shape New Horizons as it is today. Even after that game came out, however, its predecessor was still the best Animal Crossing game.

Wild World Was Simpler

It's easy to admit that Animal Crossing: New Horizons has more to do. The bills owed to Tom Nook are larger, so the player must obtain more money to pay them off. There are more insects, fish, fossils, and deep-sea creatures to collect, as well as furniture, accessories, and clothing. There are Nook Miles, and chore to earn Nook Miles, and Nook Miles tickets to grind if a player wants to find one of their favorite villagers. Houses can be relocated, paths rebuilt, terrain sculpted and unsculpted until it's just right. Different NPCs visit on different days with paintings, bugs to assess, turnips to sell, or other wares. These things are all enjoyable and make the game a pleasure to play daily. Still, it's also impossible to deny the fact that the older Animal Crossing games were simpler, and enjoyable in that simplicity.

When there's nothing to do, the player wanders. When this happens, players might encounter the villagers living on their small map. The beauty of Animal Crossing: Wild World is here, as each interaction gives the NPCs with something new to say, a game to play, or a quiz to answer. Villagers in Wild World have a lot of dialogue, and they're also more patient than their New Horizons counterparts, who will comment that "someone's feeling chatty" after speaking to them twice. Wandering around with no chores and doing what comes to mind makes Wild World's gameplay. This is also what makes it the best Animal Crossing game.

Wild World's charm may have increased due to simple nostalgia, but it's also a game that's just as complex as the player demands it to be. There's time to sit back and watch the days go by, watch the seasons change and villagers come and go, and to bask in a few contented hours away from the real world. Escapism is a large part of gaming, and no series exemplifies that more than Animal Crossing, which experienced a huge surge of popularity during the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic.