Horoscope and chart of Natasha Zvereva

Astrological portrait of Natasha Zvereva (excerpt)

Disclaimer: these short excerpts of astrological charts are computer processed. They are, by no means, of a personal nature. This principle is valid for the 68,212 celebrities included in our database. These texts provide the meanings of planets, or combination of planets, in signs and in houses, as well as the interpretations of planetary dominants in line with modern Western astrology rules. Moreover, since Astrotheme is not a polemic website, no negative aspect which may damage the good reputation of a celebrity is posted here, unlike in the comprehensive astrological portrait.

Introduction

Here are some character traits from Natasha Zvereva's birth chart. This description is far from being comprehensive but it can shed light on his/her personality, which is still interesting for professional astrologers or astrology lovers.

In a matter of minutes, you can get at your email address your astrological portrait (approximately 32 pages), a much more comprehensive report than this portrait of Natasha Zvereva.

N.B.: as this celebrity's birth time is unknown, the chart is arbitrarily calculated for 12:00 PM - the legal time for his/her place of birth; since astrological houses are not taken into account, this astrological profile excerpt is less detailed than those for which the birth time is known.

The dominant planets of Natasha Zvereva

When interpreting a natal chart, the best method is to start gradually from general features to specific ones. Thus, there is usually a plan to be followed, from the overall analysis of the chart and its structure, to the description of its different character traits.

In the first part, an overall analysis of the chart enables us to figure out the personality's main features and to emphasize several points that are confirmed or not in the detailed analysis: in any case, those general traits are taken into account. Human personality is an infinitely intricate entity and describing it is a complex task. Claiming to rapidly summarize it is illusory, although it does not mean that it is an impossible challenge. It is essential to read a natal chart several times in order to absorb all its different meanings and to grasp all this complexity. But the exercise is worthwhile.

In brief, a natal chart is composed of ten planets: two luminaries, the Sun and the Moon, three fast-moving or individual planets, Mercury, Venus and Mars, two slow-moving planets, Jupiter and Saturn, and three very slow-moving planets, Uranus, Neptune and Pluto. Additional secondary elements are: the Lunar Nodes, the Dark Moon or Lilith, Chiron and other minor objects. They are all posited on the Zodiac wheel consisting of twelve signs, from Aries to Pisces, and divided into twelve astrological houses.

The first step is to evaluate the importance of each planet. This is what we call identifying the dominant planets. This process obeys rules that depend on the astrologer's sensitivity and experience but it also has precise and steady bases: thus, we can take into account the parameters of a planet's activity (the number of active aspects a planet forms, the importance of each aspect according to its nature and its exactness), angularity parameters; (proximity to the four angles, Ascendant, Midheaven, Descendant and Imum Coeli or Nadir, all of them being evaluated numerically, according to the kind of angle and the planet-angle distance) and quality parameters (rulership, exaltation, exile and fall). Finally, other criteria such as the rulership of the Ascendant and the Midheaven etc. are important.

These different criteria allow a planet to be highlighted and lead to useful conclusions when interpreting the chart.

The overall chart analysis begins with the observation of three sorts of planetary distributions in the chart: Eastern or Western hemisphere, Northern or Southern hemisphere, and quadrants (North-eastern, North-western, South-eastern and South-western). These three distributions give a general tone in terms of introversion and extraversion, willpower, sociability, and behavioural predispositions.

Then, there are three additional distributions: elements (called triplicity since there are three groups of signs for each one) - Fire, Air, Earth and Water - corresponding to a character typology, modality (or quadruplicity with four groups of signs for each one) - Cardinal, Fixed and Mutable - and polarity (Yin and Yang).

There are three types of dominants: dominant planets, dominant signs and dominant houses. The novice thinks astrology means only "to be Aries" or sometimes, for example, "to be Aries Ascendant Virgo". It is actually far more complex. Although the Sun and the Ascendant alone may reveal a large part of the character - approximately a third or a half of your psychological signature, a person is neither "just the Sun" (called the sign) nor just "the first house" (the Ascendant). Thus, a particular planet's influence may be significantly increased; a particular sign or house may contain a group of planets that will bring nuances and sometimes weaken the role of the Ascendant, of the Sun sign etc.

Lastly, there are two other criteria: accentuations (angular, succedent and cadent) which are a classification of astrological houses and types of decanates that are occupied (each sign is divided into three decanates of ten degrees each). They provide some additional informations.

These general character traits must not be taken literally; they are, somehow, preparing for the chart reading. They allow to understand the second part of the analysis, which is more detailed and precise. It focuses on every area of the personality and provides a synthesis of all the above-mentioned parameters according to sound hierarchical rules.

Warning: when the birth time is unknown, which is the case for Natasha Zvereva, a few paragraphs become irrelevant; distributions in hemispheres and quadrants are meaningless, so are dominant houses and houses' accentuations. Therefore, some chapters are removed from this part.

For all paragraphs, the criteria for valuation are calculated without taking into account angles and rulerships of the Ascendant and of the Midheaven. The methodology retains its validity, but it is less precise without a time of birth.

Elements and Modes for Natasha Zvereva

Natasha Zvereva, Fire is dominant in your natal chart and endows you with intuition, energy, courage, self-confidence, and enthusiasm! You are inclined to be passionate, you assert your willpower, you move forward, and come hell or high water, you achieve your dreams and your goals. The relative weakness of this element is the difficulty to step back or a kind of boldness that may prompt you to do foolish things.

Like the majority of Earth signs, Natasha Zvereva, you are efficient, concrete and not too emotional. What matters to you is what you see: you judge the tree by its fruits. Your ideas keep changing, words disappear, but actions and their consequences are visible and remain. Express your sensitivity, even if it means revealing your vulnerability. Emotions, energy and communication must not be neglected; concrete action is meaningless if it is not justified by your heart, your intellect or your enthusiasm.

Air is under-represented in your natal chart, with only 3.53% instead of the average 25%. Air symbolizes the values of communication, exchanges with others, but also adaptability and flexibility abilities: if you don't get out of your cocoon to talk, to show interest in others, and to socialize, you may have problems understanding others. Because of your lack of flexibility or of your refusal to adapt yourself, you may be suddenly overwhelmed by events. You should get into the habit of talking, of phoning, and of thinking in terms of "mobility, flexibility, adaptability, change" in every circumstance. It will spare you so many troubles!

The twelve zodiacal signs are split up into three groups or modes, called quadruplicities, a learned word meaning only that these three groups include four signs. The Cardinal, Fixed and Mutable modes are more or less represented in your natal chart, depending on planets' positions and importance, and on angles in the twelve signs.

The Mutable mode is the most emphasized one in your natal chart, Natasha Zvereva, which indicates a mobile character that is curious and thirsty for new experiences and evolution. You are lively and flexible, and you like to react quickly to solicitations, but don't confuse mobility with agitation, since this is the danger with this configuration - and with you, stagnation is out of the question. Security doesn't matter as long as you are not bored. You optimize, you change things, you change yourself... all this in a speedy way.

Dominants: Planets, Signs and Houses for Natasha Zvereva

The issue of dominant planets has existed since the mists of time in astrology: how nice it would be if a person could be described with a few words and one or several planets that would represent their character, without having to analyse such elements as rulerships, angularities, houses, etc!

The ten planets - the Sun throughout Pluto - are a bit like ten characters in a role-play, each one has its own personality, its own way of acting, its own strengths and weaknesses. They actually represent a classification into ten distinct personalities, and astrologers have always tried to associate one or several dominant planets to a natal chart as well as dominant signs and houses.

Indeed, it is quite the same situation with signs and houses. If planets symbolize characters, signs represent hues - the mental, emotional and physical structures of an individual. The sign in which a planet is posited is like a character whose features are modified according to the place where he lives. In a chart, there are usually one, two or three highlighted signs that allow to rapidly describe its owner.

Regarding astrological houses, the principle is even simpler: the twelve houses correspond to twelve fields of life, and planets tenanting any given house increase that house's importance and highlight all relevant life departments: it may be marriage, work, friendship etc.

In your natal chart, Natasha Zvereva, the ten main planets are distributed as follows:

The three most important planets in your chart are Jupiter, Mars and Venus.

Jupiter, the planet of expansion, organization, power and benevolence, is quite emphasized in your chart. Like any Jupiterian, you are warm, open, sociable, consensual, active and optimistic. You can use your self-confidence to erase differences of opinion, and you leave the task of analyzing and perfecting things to specialists. Your role, and you know it since you were young, is to gather, to demonstrate your synthesizing and conciliatory mind, and to naturally reap its fruits - power.

You appreciate legality, social order but also order in general. With you as a leader, every plan or human entity can be organized and structured. You excel at supervising. The Jupiterian type is indeed the politician par excellence, and a positive Jupiter in your chart is synonymous with good integration into society, whatever the chosen path.

Is this idyllic picture really perfect? Certainly not: each planet's typology has its own weaknesses. One of yours is pride, like the Solarian, but your will of expansion at all costs may generate a form of exaggeration in everything, endless pleasure, inappropriate self-confidence that could lead you to rough materialism and the thirst for absurd material comfort - in the worst cases, of course.

Mars is one of your dominant planets and provides you with its efficient energy and enthusiasm: with a powerful Mars in your chart, action - but also will and ability to undertake - is not an empty word for you. You are active, dynamic, willing to fight, courageous, and you are never afraid to move mountains, even though risks are part of the adventures that you start with determination.

However, your patience is not always up to your boldness and a kind of feverishness, or even anger, can tarnish the quality of your achievements. That would be a pity since the Marsian is a champion in matters of efficiency! Mars symbolizes display of action, conquering spirit that favours discipline and order - beware of not being fussy - and lies at the frontier between action and brutality, between conquest and potential aggressiveness.

With Venus among your dominant planets, one of your first reflexes is... to please! Your look, your charm, and your seduction are omnipresent elements in your behaviour.

Your approach to things is connected to your heart, and for you, no real communication can flow if your interlocutors exude no sympathy or warmth. Cold and logical reasoning, clear thoughts and good sense are not important to you: if there is no affective bond with your environment, no connection can be established with the Venusian that you are, and nothing happens.

You have a strong artistic side, and you never neglect subjective but clear concepts such as pleasure, beauty, and also sensuality. However, sometimes to the detriment of efficiency, durability, logic, and... detachment.

In your natal chart, the three most important signs - according to criteria mentioned above - are in decreasing order of strength Sagittarius, Aries and Taurus. In general, these signs are important because your Ascendant or your Sun is located there. But this is not always the case: there may be a cluster of planets, or a planet may be near an angle other than the Midheaven or Ascendant. It may also be because two or three planets are considered to be very active because they form numerous aspects from these signs.

Thus, you display some of the three signs' characteristics, a bit like a superposition of features on the rest of your chart, and it is all the more so if the sign is emphasized.

Sagittarius, an adventurous and conquering fire sign, is dominant in your chart: you are enthusiastic, enterprising, optimistic, very sociable, and mobile - you have itchy feet both physically and mentally. Nobody gets bored with you because you are always planning things and suggesting excursions, at least... when you are around and not already gone on a trip! Obviously, so many movements for one woman may scare people off, and some of them may even criticize your brutality or your tendency to loose your temper, but you are so warm and genuine, so expansive, isn't this a good thing? And all the more so, since your sense of humour is overwhelming...

Arian blood runs through your veins! You have that enthusiasm, frankness, courage, and fastness which usually make you so likeable in spite of your somewhat rough, naive, or violent side. As a bonus, Aries' gushing fire always gives you the impetus to make a fresh start, should you stumble or undergo life hardship!

With the Taurus sign so important in your chart, you are constructive, stable, and sensual. Good taste, sense of beauty, manners, and unfailing good sense - all these qualities contribute to your charm and seductive power. Furthermore, if some people criticize your slow pace and your stubbornness, you rightly reply that this is the price for your security, and that you like the way it is - slow and steady....

After this paragraph about dominant planets, of Natasha Zvereva, here are the character traits that you must read more carefully than the previous texts since they are very specific: the texts about dominant planets only give background information about the personality and remain quite general: they emphasize or, on the contrary, mitigate different particularities or facets of a personality. A human being is a complex whole and only bodies of texts can attempt to successfully figure out all the finer points.

The Moon in Sagittarius: her sensitivity

Your nature is optimistic and emotional, Natasha Zvereva, and you are caught up in two incompatible longings: you are fond of exoticism and independence of movement, but at the same time, you feel comfortable in a form of middle-class attitude and conformism; in general, it translates into a succession of moods, now quiet and well adapted to the situations you experience, now marked by an irresistible desire for change and revival. You have a good and naïve nature, with a lot of self-confidence. Your emotionalism prompts you to live intensely a variety of numerous emotional experiences, a bit scattered, but with all the stimulations you need to be a balanced person. Your pleasant and welcoming attitude wins you some degree of popularity, all the more so because, despite your thirst for adventures that may scare away some people, you adjust to your environment's customs so easily.

Mercury in Taurus: her intellect and social life

Your mind is calm and balanced; even though you assimilate slowly, your memory is remarkable. Your judgment is based on reflection and reason and draws on past experiences. Natasha Zvereva, you are a good adviser, a reliable person whom people can confide in discreetly. You are full of good sense, cautious, methodical and disciplined and you are able to carry many good projects to a successful conclusion. You are very opinionated and determined in your actions. However, your tendency for intolerance and prejudices may offend your entourage. They wish that you exercised more flexibility instead of systematically refusing what cannot be immediately checked. You usually express yourself with a lot of charm and this is what allows you to get people to better accept your well-established habits.

Venus in Pisces and the Sun in Aries: her affectivity and seductiveness

In your chart, the Sun is in Aries and Venus, in Pisces. Paradoxical association: the enthusiasm and the spring freshness of the Aries Sun echo the subtlety and the distance of a Piscean Venus. Your aspirations (solar), prompt you to be carried away by your heart impulses and to exchange with spontaneity but your desires (Venusian) obey different rules that are elusive, and sometimes, irrational. Between the beginning and the end, the frontier is often tenuous and the balance is fragile. Your affective behaviour may seem disconcerting because you can abruptly shift from enthusiasm to renunciation. This is because your senses do not follow your ideals, because your desires do not match the patterns that appeal to you, as sincere as they may be. Your loved one does not necessarily resemble the conceptualized ideal you dream of. Attraction – or repulsion – is based on ineffable impressions that short-lived and sudden impulses cannot erase nor construct. Although you may show a certain naivety, your senses quickly discriminate between the one-night-stand illusory enthusiasm and the essential harmony without which two persons drift apart, sooner or later. Love is not simple! And if it were, indifference would rapidly triumph over the wildest feelings.

Compassion and self-sacrifice: you are fond of this romantic mode and you are willing to express your feelings, the intensity of which is unlimited, Natasha Zvereva. With excitement and imagination, you dream your amorous relationships as much as you actually live through them. The line between the concrete world and your huge hopes is so tenuous that you don't know anymore where it is, although your particularly rich sensuality prompts you to experience your feelings concretely. You want to share communion and passion with your partner. The lyrical flights of your feelings break from your heart as waves that you do not attempt to control because they give you a real, almost voluptuous and carnal joy. You give a lot – sometimes too much - without reservation, almost without propriety, totally revealing your vulnerability during your amorous exchanges because you are sure of the quality and the might of your feelings: they are so powerful and overwhelming that you are aware that nothing can resist them.

The Sun in Aries: her will and inner motivations

Your natural energy is cut-and-dried. It may prompt you to take the driver’s seat wherever you are. Were it not for the strange feeling of sympathy you arouse, you would seem to be arrogant. Charging ahead is not devoid of drawbacks. Your courage and your restlessness may hurt you and cause you to doubt, all of a sudden. As a consequence, your courage, your honesty, your enthusiasm and your straightforwardness may turn into aggressiveness, rebellion and vulnerability that were never suspected. Fortunately, the level of your dynamism is very high and your instinctive and pugnacious side, your particularly profuse energy will not leave you helpless for too long. The fire in your blood will put you back on the saddle towards new stampedes and conquests, as ambitious and glorious as they are perilous.

Because you are born under this sign, you are courageous, honest, enthusiastic, dynamic, swift, extroverted, straightforward, effusive, warm, impulsive, adventurous, bold, martial, competitive, but you may also be gullible, domineering, self-centered, impatient, foolish, thoughtless, childish, irascible, reckless, primary and a blunderer.

In love, Madam, you are a strong-minded intellectual woman: in general, the first thing that you do is to choose the man who pleases you and in all cases, you are the one to decide whether you want to stay or to leave! If you are a housewife, you are the one to take decisions over everything. Even though you may not be always easy to deal with, you are stimulating and, with you, something is always happening. You are active, optimistic and your entourage must move forward. If your partner invites you to share his business, it will have to be on an equal footing: And your energy, your undertaking and innovative abilities will work wonders.

Mars in Capricorn: her ability to take action

Natasha Zvereva, you are so resistant and so solid that you are able to cope with any challenge, any ordeal. You behave with persistence, rigour and discipline. You are so obstinate and patient that no effort is impossible to you, as if sensitivity and emotions were unable to divert you from your goals. With calm and lucidity, even coldness, you face up to things and you plan on a long-term basis. Nothing and no one can prevent you from fulfilling your responsibilities. You are a rock, a hard worker, and your iron will equals your resistance to blows. Your practical sense is at the service of your ambition which is real and energetic, even though it may not be obvious. Sexually, you are active and vigorous. If you show more warmth, you may become an excellent lover; indeed, being demonstrative is not your major concern.

Conclusion

This text is only an excerpt from of Natasha Zvereva's portrait. If you want to get your own astrological portrait, much more comprehensive that this present excerpt, you can order it at this page. Do you belong to the Jupiterian type, benevolent and generous? The Martian type, active and a go-getter? The Venusian type, charming and seductive? The Lunar type, imaginative and sensitive? The Solar type, noble and charismatic? The Uranian type, original, uncompromising and a freedom-lover? The Plutonian type, domineering and secretive? The Mercurian type, cerebral, inquiring and quick? The Neptunian type, visionary, capable of empathy and impressionable? The Saturnian type, profound, persevering and responsible? Are you more of the Fire type, energetic and intuitive? The Water type, sentimental and receptive? The Earth type, realistic and efficient? Or the Air type, gifted in communication and highly intellectual? 11 planetary dominants and 57 characteristics are reviewed, quantified, and interpreted; then, your psychological portrait is described in detail, in a comprehensive document of approximately 32-36 pages, full of engrossing and original pieces of information about yourself.

Astrological reports describe many of the character traits and they sometimes go deeper into the understanding of a personality. Please, always keep in mind that human beings are continuously evolving and that many parts of our psychological structures are likely to be expressed later, after having undergone significant life's experiences. It is advised to read a portrait with hindsight in order to appreciate its astrological content. Under this condition, you will be able to take full advantage of this type of study.

The analysis of an astrological portrait consists in understanding four types of elements which interact with one another: ten planets, twelve zodiacal signs, twelve houses, and what are called aspects between planets (the 11 aspects most commonly used are: conjunction, opposition, square, trine, sextile, quincunx, semi-sextile, sesqui-quadrate, quintile and bi-quintile. The first 5 aspects enumerated are called major aspects).

Planets represent typologies of our human psychology: sensitivity, affectivity, ability to undertake, will-power, mental process, aptitude, and taste for communication etc., all independent character facets are divided here for practical reasons. The twelve signs forming the space where planets move will "colour", so to speak, these typologies with each planet being located in its particular sign. They will then enrich the quality of these typologies, as expressed by the planets. The Zodiac is also divided into twelve astrological houses. This makes sense only if the birth time is known because within a few minutes, the twelve houses (including the 1st one, the Ascendant) change significantly. They correspond to twelve specific spheres of life: external behaviour, material, social and family life, relationship, home, love life, daily work, partnership, etc. Each planet located in any given house will then act according to the meaning of its house, and a second colouration again enriches those active forces that the planets symbolize. Finally, relations will settle among planets, creating a third structure, which completes the planets' basic meanings. A set of ancient rules, which has stood the test of experience over hundreds of years (although astrology is in evolution, only reliable elements are integrated into classical studies), are applied to organize the whole chart into a hierarchy and to allow your personality to be interpreted by texts. The planets usually analysed are the Sun, the Moon, Mercury, Venus, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune and Pluto, which means two luminaries (the Sun and the Moon) and 8 planets, a total of 10 planets. Additional secondary elements may be taken into account, such as asteroids Chiron, Vesta, Pallas, Ceres (especially Chiron, more well-known), the Lunar nodes, the Dark Moon or Lilith, and even other bodies: astrology is a discipline on the move. Astrological studies, including astrological portrait, compatibility of couples, predictive work, and horoscopes evolve and become more accurate or deeper, as time goes by.

Precision: concerning the horoscopes with a known time of birth, according to the Tradition, we consider that a planet near the beginning (called cuspide) of the next house (less than 2 degrees for the Ascendant and the Midheaven, and less than 1 degree for all other houses) belongs to this house: our texts and dominants take this rule into account. You can also choose not to take this shift into account in the form, and also tick the option Koch or Equal houses system instead of Placidus, the default houses system.

Warning: In order to avoid any confusion and any possible controversy, we want to draw your attention upon the fact that this sample of celebrities is very complete and therefore, it also includes undesirable people, since every category is represented: beside artists, musicians, politicians, lawyers, professional soldiers, poets, writers, singers, explorers, scientists, academics, religious figures, saints, philosophers, sages, astrologers, mediums, sportsmen, chess champions, famous victims, historical characters, members of royal families, models, painters, sculptors, and comics authors or other actual celebrities, there are also famous murderers, tyrants and dictators, serial-killers, or other characters whose image is very negative, often rightly so.

Regarding the latter, it must be remembered that even a monster or at least a person who perpetrated odious crimes, has some human qualities, often noticed by his/her close entourage: these excerpts come from computer programmes devoid of polemical intentions and may seem too soft or lenient. The positive side of each personality is deliberately stressed. Negative sides have been erased here - it is not the same in our comprehensive reports on sale - because it could hurt the families of such people. We are hoping that it will not rebound on the victims' side.

Numerology: Birth Path of Natasha Zvereva

Testimonies to numerology are found in the most ancient civilizations and show that numerology pre-dates astrology. This discipline considers the name, the surname, and the date of birth, and ascribes a meaning to alphabetic letters according to the numbers which symbolise them.

The path of life, based on the date of birth, provides indications on the kind of destiny which one is meant to experience. It is one of the elements that must reckoned with, along with the expression number, the active number, the intimacy number, the achievement number, the hereditary number, the dominant numbers or the lacking numbers, or also the area of expression, etc.

Your Life Path is influenced by the Master Number 11, Natasha, which indicates a strong, demanding, and uncompromising destiny. It is all about revelation and early calling. You feel that you are entrusted with a mission, with the certainty that no setback could endanger it, and your own certitudes prevail over any other motivation. You have a lot of strength, and sometime, intransigence. Short-lived fashions and life vagaries cannot weaken your beliefs. You pursue a set direction, in quest of an extraordinary destiny, with the help of your intelligence, your inspiration and the natural influence you have over people. Even though your entourage may not always understand your secret determination and perceive you mainly as an impatient person, your fortitude overcomes many a doubt and obstacle. You can sacrifice everything for the sake of your deep aspirations.

Natasha Zvereva was born under the sign of the Pig, element Metal

Chinese astrology is brought to us as a legacy of age-old wisdom and invites us to develop an awareness of our inner potential. It is believed that the wise man is not subjected to stellar influences. However, we must gain the lucidity and the distance without which we remain locked up in an implacable destiny. According to the legend of the Circle of Animals, Buddha summoned all the animals to bid them farewell before he left our world. Only twelve species answered Buddha's call. They form the Chinese Zodiac and symbolize the twelve paths of wisdom that are still valid nowadays.

The Asian wise man considers that a path is neither good nor bad. One can and must develop one's potentialities. The first step is to thoroughly know oneself.

You are a reliable and helpful person, honest through and through. Intellectual independence is an essential virtue: each and everyone must take one's responsibilities and accept the consequences of one's faults.

You avoid underhand manoeuvres and scheming like the plague! Your unfailing sincerity commands your entourage's consideration. You fight shams and all forms of hypocrisy.

In addition, you take your responsibilities when you have to, you make your choices and you confront facts with courage. You are capable of displaying an unwavering determination, no obstacle can stop you as you try to overcome pitfalls, one after the other. However, you do not like gratuitous struggles nor meaningless trials of strength: you are of a sociable nature and you avoid hurting your entourage as much as you can.

However, your kindness can never conceal your true feelings. In China, it is believed that the native of the Pig is a sensual and voluptuous person, more attached than other people to life's carnal aspects. A quality that spouses and partners will appreciate, unless they are shocked by this undeniable inclination for lust! You are credited with the merit of being unable to conceal your true nature, in all areas.

Chinese astrology has five elements, which are referred to as agents: Wood, Fire, Earth, Metal and Water.

You have a deep affinity with the agent Metal. In China, this element corresponds to the planet Venus, the white colour and the number 9.

Your nature is individualistic and determined, and you seldom shrink from obstacles. The only advice that can be given to you is to show more flexibility and diplomacy. Moreover, life's pitfalls often stimulate you. On the other hand, you are acknowledged for your decisiveness which commands admiration. You follow your ideas through, discarding external opinions and viewpoints and you bring your enterprises to a successful conclusion, even if it means that you go it alone.

Your decisions are so inflexible and your choices, so final, that your intransigence may bring about a few setbacks. Therefore, it is important that you develop the tolerance that you are naturally lacking. It is only at this price that you can achieve a harmonious social and intimate life.

The prevailing features are your persuasion powers, a faith that moves many a mountain and overcomes the most resistant obstacles. But so many struggles looming...

N. B.: when the birth time is unknown, (12:00 PM (unknown)), these portrait excerpts do not take into account the parameters derived from the time, which means, the domification (Ascendant, astrological houses, etc.). Nonetheless, these analyses remain accurate in any case. Regarding the sources of the birth data in our possession, kindly note that the pages we publish constitute a starting point for more detailed research, even though they seem useful to us. When the sources are contradictory, which occurs rarely, after having analysed them, we choose the most reliable one. Sometimes, we publish a birth date just because it is made available, but we do not claim that is it the best one, by no means.