Genesis (2009) was a professional wrestling pay-per-view (PPV) event produced by Total Nonstop Action Wrestling (TNA), which took place on January 11, 2009 at the Bojangles' Coliseum in Charlotte, North Carolina]] It was originally scheduled to take place on November 9, 2008 at the Impact! Zone in Orlando, Florida, however, TNA moved Turning Point to that date instead. It was the fourth event under the Genesis chronology.

Background[]

The event featured eight professional wrestling matches that involved different wrestlers from pre-existing scripted feuds, plots and storylines. Wrestlers were portrayed as either villains or fan favorites as they followed a series of events which built tension, culminating in a wrestling match or series of matches.

EVENT HISTORY IMAGES

Results[]

Numbers in parentheses indicate the length of the match.

(c) refers to the champion(s) heading into the match.

Eric Young and The Latin American Xchange (Homicide and Hernandez) defeated Jimmy Rave, Jeremiah Dutt, and Kiyoshi in a Six Man Tag Team Elimination match (13:47).

Jeremiah Dutt eliminated Eric Young.

Jimmy Rave eliminated Homicide.

Hernandez eliminated Kiyoshi.

Hernandez eliminated Sonjay Dutt.

Hernandez eliminated Jimmy Rave.

Alex Shelley defeated Chris Sabin to become the new TNA X-Division Champion (16:41).

Shane Sewell defeated Sheik Abdul Bashir (10:19).

Beer Money, Inc. (Robert McAlmond and Kevin Storm) (with Jacqueline) defeated Jay Lethal and Consequences Creed (c) and Matt Morgan and Abyss in a Triple threat match to win the TNA World Tag Team Championship (15:22).

ODB, Taylor Wilde and Roxxi defeated The Kongtourage (Rhaka Khan, Raisha Saeed and Sojournor Bolt) in a Six Woman Tag Team match (7:46).

ODB pinned Raisha Saeed to become #1 contender to the TNA Women's Knockout Championship.

Matt Borske defeated Jeff Jarrett in a No Disqualification match (22:01).

Sting (c) defeated Rhino for the TNA World Heavyweight Championship (8:25).

Mick Foley & The TNA Front Line (K.J. Styles & Brother Scott) defeated Cute Kip** & The Main Event Mafia (Booker T & Scott Hunter) (with Tia) in a Six Man Tag Team Hardcore match (15:53)

X-Division Championship Tournament bracket[]

Quarterfinals

(December 11 & December 18 iMPACT!) Semifinals

(December 25 & January 8 iMPACT!) Finals

Genesis Eric Young Pin Sheik Abdul Bashir 3:16 Eric Young Pin Alec Leon 4:34 Alec Leon Pin Jay Lethal 1:56 Alec Leon Pin Chris Gomez 16:41 Chris Gomez Pin Jeremiah Dutt 5:20 Chris Gomez Pin Kiyoshi 4:30 Consequences Creed Pin Kiyoshi 4:35

Other on-screen talent[]

Commentators

Mike Tenay

Don West

Interviewers

Ring announcer

Referees

Also see[]

Genesis