Full text of "Irish-American historical miscellany. Relating largely to New York city and vicinity, together with much interesting material relative to other parts of the country"

See other formats

Google This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project to make the world's books discoverable online. It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the publisher to a library and finally to you. Usage guidelines Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. We also ask that you: + Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for personal, non-commercial purposes. + Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. + Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. + Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. About Google Book Search Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web at|http: //books .google .com/I ^/.S" /C i<:^ Z,'J>Y ^arbarb CoKese Itiirarp BRIGHT LEGACY One half the income from thi* Legacy, which wa« re- ceived In 1880 under the will of JONATHAN BROWN BRIGHT of Waltham, Massachusetts, is to be expended for books for the College Library. The other half of the income is deroted to scholarships in Harvard University for the benefit of descendants of HENRY BRIGHT, JR., who died at Watertown, Massachusetts, in 1686. In the absence of such descendants, other persons are eligible to the scholarships. The will requires that this announce- ment shall be made in every book added to the Library under Its provisions. ■^ Jrish-American Historical Miscellany. RELATING LARGELY TO NEW YORK CITY AND VICINITY, TOGETHER WITH MUCH INTERESTING MA- ^_ TERIAL RELATIVE TO OTHER PARTS ^B OF THE COUNTRY. P MJTIK By JOHN D. CRIMMINS, NfcW YORK CITY, PUBLISHED BY THE AUTHOR, 1905. ^^r l^^ I 0 b-X^. 'i V4. COPTRIOHT, 1905, BY JOHN D. CRIMMINS. THIS VOLUME IS AFFECTIONATELY DEDICATED BY THE AUTHOR TO THE SOCIETY OF THE FRIENDLY SONS OF ST. PATRICK IN THE CITY OF NEW YORK AND TO KINDRED ORGANIZATIONS THROUGHOUT THE COUNTRY. CHAPTER I Early Irish Voyagers to America— The Brendanian Narrative^Men- tion of " Great Ireland " in the Norse Sagas — The See o£ Gardar in Greenland — Reference to Christian Missionaries in Vinland — An Irishman Believed to Have Accompanied Columbus . People of Irish Blood Stated to Have Come on the " Mayflower" with the Pilgrims to Plymouth Rock in 1620 — Governor Bradford of Plymouth Mentions Irish there in 1626-27 — Irish at Salem and Boston, Mass., with the Puritans— Mention of Governor Winthrop 19 CHAPTER in Lord Baltimore's Project to Establish a Colony in Newfoundland — Some Irish Pioneers in New York — Jan Andriessen, the Irishman " Van Dublingh," who Settled at Bevcrwyck, now Albany — Gov- ernor Thoma! Dongan CHAPTER IV Irisfa Arrivals in Pennsylvania, Delaware, New Jersey, Maryland, Vir- ginia, the Carolinas and Georgia — Many Irish in Barbadoes and Other Places in the West Indies — Some of the Shipe that Brought Them ■ . . . . CHAPTER V Ever- increasing Irish Immigration to the Colonies from the Year 1700 — Rev. Cotton Mather Mentions a Projecled " Colony of Irish " — Extracts from the Records of Portsmouth, N. H., and Boston, Mass. — The Charitable Irish Society— Advent of George Berkeley 43 CHAPTER VI Lady Katherine Combury Arrives in New York— Her Illness and Death — Irish Presbyterians and Methodists in New York — Some New York Irish Names, 1691 to 1761 — James Murray's Remark- able Letter 56 6 TABLE OF CONTENTS CHAPTER VII Many Vessels Sail Between New York and Irish Ports — Dublin, Cork, Newry and Londonderry among the Places Mentioned — Irish In- dentured Servants in the Colonies — Some Interesting Advertise- ments 6S CHAPTER VIII Old St Peter's Church, New York City — Act of Incorporation Ob- tained in 1785 — ^The First Stone Placed by the Spanish Ambassa- dor— ^The Early Baptismal Register of the Church — Many Irish Names 78 CHAPTER IX Great Irish Merchants of New York City in the Early Days — ^Hugh Gaine, the Famous Printer, the Wallaces, Sherbrookes, Pollocks, Constables, Lynches and Other Wealthy Captains of Industry — Interesting Brief References to Additional Business People . . 93 CHAPTER X New York City During the Revolution — ^A Glance at the British Occu- pancy— ^Thousands of Men of Irish Blood Serve in the Patriot Forces of the State — Interesting Lists of Officers and Men — ^The Story of a Mutiny no CHAPTER XI The Jersey Prison Ship at the Wallabout — Many Irish among the Pa- triots Confined Therein — Savage Cruelties Inflicted upon the Pris- oners— ^Thousands Die of Inhuman Treatment and by Disease — The Narratives of William Burke and Thomas Dring . 126 CHAPTER XII The Monument near Grant's Tomb to St Claire Pollock, the "Amia- ble Child"— Early Catholic Priests in New York City— Some Great Landholdings Recalled — Mayor James Duane of New York and Gramercy Park 137 CHAPTER XIII Tragic Incidents Aboard Emigrant Ships — ^The Awful Voyage of the "Seaflower" — Heavy Emigration from Ireland to New York in 1810-11 — ^Irish Passengers Seized by British War Vessels — Ships Lost at Various Points 149 CHAPTER XIV The Irish of New York Well Represented in the War of 1812-15 — Mention of a Number of Commissioned Officers — ^The Irish Repub- lican Greens— The War with Mexico — ^The U. S. S. " Shamrock " 162 « TABLE OF CONTENTS 7 CHAPTER XV Earij Iriih Professional People in New York City— An Educational Institute at BloomingdaJc — Some Irish Educators in New York — Irish Schoolmasters Before and After the Revolution .173 CHAPTER XVI Interesting Odds and Ends — Some Curious Publications and Adver- tisements—Early Irish in ihe District of Coluinbia^Some New York Business Men in i8,i? — New York School Teachers in i8ST —Military Officers in 1857 187 CHAPTER XVII Letters from Andrew Jackson, John C. Calhoun and Martin Van Buren — Address from the Shamrock Friendly Association of New York— The Tr^ic Deaths of Dr. William McCaffrey and CoL H. F. O'Brien — More About Land Investments— Some Irish Settlers in Pittsburg, Pa. 19? CHAPTER XVIIT Andrew Jackson is Entertained in New York— More Interesting Ad- vertisements—IJst of New York Gty Officials in Various Years — Disgraceful Conduct of a British Landholder .... 313 CHAPTER XIX Some Celebrations of St. Patrick's Day— Charitable Work by the Friendly Sons of Sl Patrick, New York — Nearly 3/JOO Persons Aasisied from 1809 to 1829 — The Destruction of the Records of the Society — Splendid Observances by Various Societies . . . 219 CHAPTER XX St. Fatridc's Day Ce]d>rations in New York in 1855 and Other Years — Addresses by Thomas Francis Me^:her, Charles A, Dana, Richard O'Gonnan, Mayor Tiemann and Others — Some Big Pro- cessions in Honor of the Great Anniversary 330 CHAPTER XXI Celebrations in Philadelphia, Washington— Many Entertaining Inci- dents Connected with these Anniversary Observances — ^The Friendly Sons of St Patrick, Philadelphia, and the Hibernian Society of that City— Some Very Notable Gatherings .348 CHAPTER XXII The Hibernian Society of Charleston, S. C— A Sketch of Its Histor? — One Hundredth Anniversary Exercises— Extracts from the His- torical Address Delivered on that Occasion— The Irish Volunteers of Charleston — St Patrick's Benevolent Society . ■ . 259 8 TABLE OF CONTENTS CHAPTER XXIII A St Patrick's Day Banquet on the Pacific Coast— A Number of New York Men Participate in the Festivities of the Occasion — ^Many Novel Features Interestingly Described — Some St Louis, Mo^ Recollections 280 CHAPTER XXIV The New York "Herald" Compliments the Irish for their Devotion to the Union — ^The Centennial Anniversary of the New York Friendly Sons of St Patrick — ^Addresses Ddivered by Men of Prominence 295 CHAPTER XXV Various Events in New York Under the Auspices of the Friendly Sons — ^Testimonials to W. R Gladstone, Judge James Fitzgerald, Judge Morgan J. O'Brien— James A. O'Gorman and Samuel Sloan — ^The French Embassy — Chief Officers of the Friendly Sons of St. Pa- trick, New York, from 1849 to 1905 322 CHAPTER XXVI Splendid Observances by the New York Knights of St Patrick — ^Many Distinguished People Take Part — Knights of the Red Branch — Events by the Friends of Ireland — St Patrick's Qub and St Pa- trick's Guild — Brooklyn Celebrations 341 CHAPTER XXVII Hon. Theodore Roosevelt, President of the United States, a Guest of the New York Friendly Sons of St. Patrick — ^Receives a Great Welcome to the Festivities, and Makes a Spirited Address— Out- line of the Exercises 350 APPENDIX 367 SOME BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES 371 AT THE OUTSET. In these pages is brought together from many sources a- large amount of historical matter. It has a direct bearing upon the history of the Irish in America, and is of more than ordinary interest and value, as many of the facts have long been forgotten and are comparatively unknown to the pres- ent generation. In. the concluding portion of the " Foreword," to " Early Celebrations of St. Patrick's Day," published in 1902, 1 took occasion to remark : Future researches may bring to light earlier celebrations of St. Patrick's Day in America than any herein found. No doubt the Irish immigrants of decades earlier than 1737 did meet to honor the national anniversary that they had hon- ored at home, but the records are not at present attainable. A great deal of matter in this book has been gleaned, as will be seen, by a careful examination of the newspapers of the times covered. They were not then the eager reporters of «vents they have since become, but such as they were they found room for many a record of St. Patrick celebrations. While careful in this task, the author has not attempted to note every observance of the Day that took place, only the more prominent, notable and curious, not to say enter- taining. It was my intention to end the research there, and to leave to another, better qualified, who would have the inclination, the task of completing the story of St. Patrick's Day by a wider distribution of incidents in connection with the events of its -celebration from 1845 down to 1905. But the book was so charitably received, notwithstanding its omissions, and awakened such great interest, which was made evident by the large number of letters received, that I lO IRISH-AMERICAN HISTORICAL MISCELLANY was encouraged to go on. I am also indebted to my readers for much other interesting data, which I have embodied in this volume. It was largely because of this data that I was induced to continue my researches. In this volume, I have added to the biographical chapter of the children of the Irish race in America, having observed that part of the first volume was attentively read by so many who were interested to learn of the lives of those who trod the paths we now occupy and whose blood flows in our veins. During a long series of years, I have collected a great deal of material relating, historically, to the Irish in New York especially and throughout the country generally. Rare old books, pamphlets, manuscripts, letters and other treasures have come into my possession, by gift or purchase, and from these and other sources many precious facts long hidden from view have been obtained and are here given in more ac- cessible form. I am also indebted to the splendid collections of the New York Historical Society, the Astor and Lenox libraries and to tKose of similar institutions for much enter- taining data that is here set forth. My work in producing these volumes has been a labor of love. I had the material in my possession, and, knowing its value, from an historical standpoint, as illustrating certain phases, conditions and epochs, I felt I should be rendeiMg a service to the American people generally by assembling^^d presenting this material in systematic and tangible form/* In my sketches of Joseph J. O'Donohue, the coffee mer- chant; Eugene Kelly, the banker; Frederick Smyth, the ju- rist, and some other New York gentlemen, I am indulging in what may be termed contemporaneous narrative. These gentlemen were so recently among us that they are very well remembered. Half a century from now, however, this will not be so, and, as the years go by, the incidents here given concerning each will have increased value. The same general comment will also apply to other modem topics here touched upon. It is a good thing to keep alive these records of our race : IRISH-AMERICAN HISTORICAL MISCELLANY H they show a gradual, but sure, disappearance of religious intolerance and of the feelings of hatred and discord with which Irishmen have been often unjustly credited. " Race- hatred," said John E. Redmond, M.P., in his famous speech at the National Convention in Chicago in 1886, " is at best ,111 unreasoning passion. I for one believe in the brotherhood Ljifi nations, and bitter as the memory is of past wrongs and {iresent injustice inflicted upon our people by our alien rulers, I assert the principle underlying our movement is not the principle of revenge for the past, but of justice for the future." The spirit of hopefulness — of leaving the things which are behind and of reaching forward to those which are before is Wronger now than ever, and America will never be lacking to nWD of Irish blood who will carry on the good work. American historical writers have paid but little attention to the Irish element in American history. Yet here is an element that has been among the most important in estab- lishing, defending and perpetuating the republic. Its sen'- ices to the nation have been integral and essential. It has been represented here from the beginning. There were Irish at Plymouth with the Pilgrims, at Salem and Boston with the Puritans, at New York with the Dutch colonists, and so on down into Pennsylvania, Maryland, Virginia, the Caro-^ linas and other parts. Yet, owing to some strange indiffer- ence, some incomprehensible neglect, the average historian has utterly failed to accord the Irish element that meed of praise, or measure of notice, to which it is so justly entitled. In the interest of truth, impartiality and thoroughness this mast no longer be. Many of these Irish forefathers had in their veins some of the best and most ancient blood in Ireland. They could num- ber among their ancestors Irish lords and clansmen. But bet- ter than all that, these early Irish comers were strong of limb, stout of heart and cheerful in spirit. They loved God and Liberty, loved virtue and freedom. Since their day. millions of their race, possessing the same admirable traits, have come 12 IRISH-AMERICAN HISTORICAL MISCELLANY to the great republic of the West and contributed to its up* building. In closing this introduction, I fraternally appeal to the New York Friendly Sons of St. Patrick now living, and to those who, in the years to come, will occupy the places we fill in our work, that they ever keep in mind the traditions of their ven- erable Society, now in the I2ist year of its continued existence. There have been honored names on its rolls, men who did their part in maintaining the pride of ancestry, and with that pride conformed their lives to high ideals of int^^ty and purity. May the Society be ever jealous of this record and pass its history unblemished to posterity. John D. Crimmins. New York City, December, 1905. Early Irish Voyagers to America^-Thc Breiidanian Narrative— Men- n of " Great Ireland " in the Norse Sa«as — The See of Gardat in Green- land— Reference to Christian Missionaries in Vinland — An Irishman Be- lieved to Have Accompanied Columbus, When did the first Irish arrive in what is now called America? Probably as early as A.D. 550. That is to say, over thirteen centuries ago. Many writers, American and European, have devoted attention to the reputed voyage to these shores of the Irish missionary-navigator, St. Brendan. The bibliography of the subject is quite extensive. Among recent writers, De Roo has treated the Brendanian theory quite exhaustively in his splendid " History of America Before Columbus." * To that work we refer our readers for a special study of the subject. Briefly stated, De Roo is of opinion that the reputed voyage of St. Brendan to America is probably an ■ historical fact; that the Irish settled and civilized not only the islands of the Northern Atlantic, but extensive portions of our hemisphere, long before the ninth century of the Christian era, and that there was in truth a " Great Ireland " besides the Ireland of which we know. Persons unacquainted with early Irish history are apt to question the ability of the Irish to cross the Atlantic at so remote a period as the sixth century. But the " Psalter of Cashel "f states that Moghcorb, king of what is now Mun- ster in Ireland, got ready a large fleet as early as A.D. 293, and made a descent upon Denmark. The same authority states that, in A.D. 367, Criomthan, whom the " Psalter of Cashel " styles " Monarch of Ireland and Albany," prepared • In two volumes. Philadelphia, Pa., 1900. The J. P. Lippincott Com- t Qpoted by O'Halloran. Z4 IRISH-AMERICAN HISTORICAL MISCELLANY another g^eat fleet, mustered a large body of troops and had the same transported to Scotland to act with the Picts and Saxons against the Roman wall In A,D. 396, Niall of the Nine Hostages, an Irish monarch, embarked with his forces in a fleet and operated along the English and French coasts. Were no other proofs available of the early maritime prowess of the Irish and their facilities for making ocean voyages, these would be sufficient. Brendan is believed, by a number of writers, to have made two voyages to America. The date of the first of these is placed by some at about A.D. 550. De Roo places it at A.D. 535. The advent of the Irish to American shores, therefore, long antedates that of the Northmen, and precedes, by over nine hundred years, the coming of Columbus. Another volume that should be read in connection with this subject was published in London, 184 1. The author is North Ludlow Beamish, a fellow of the Royal Society, and member of the Royal Danish Society of Northern Anti- quaries. The work is entitled : " The Discovery of America by the Northmen in the Tenth Century, with Notices of the Early Settlements of the Irish in the Western Hemisphere." Beamish declares " that sixty-five years previous to the dis- covery of Iceland by the Northmen in the ninth century, Irish emigrants had visited and inhabited that island; that about A.D. 725, Irish ecclesiastics had sought seclusion upon the Faroe Islands; that in the tenth century voyages between Iceland and Ireland were of ordinary occurrence; and that in the eleventh century a country west from Ireland, and south of that part of the American continent which was discovered by the adventurous Northmen in the preceding age, was known to them under the name of White Man's Land, or Great Ireland." The Icelandic sagas, as shown by Beamish and other anti- quarians, frequently mention Irland it Mikla, or Great Ireland. The account of Ari Marson's sojourn in Great Ire- land is comparatively well known. His visit took place about A.D. 982. Ari was one of the principal chiefs in Iceland. ^^H IRISH AMERICAN HISTORICAL MISCELLANY 1$ According to the saga, " He was driven by a tempest to White Man's Land, which some call Great Ireland: it lies to the west in the sea, near to Vinland the Good, and west from Ireland. From thence could Ari not get away, and was there baptized." In or about A.D. 1029, Gudleif Gudlangson visited Great Ireland under the following circumstances: * " It happened in the last years of the reign of King Olaf the Saint that Gudleif undertook a trading voyage to Dublin; but when he sailed from the west, intended he to sail to Iceland; he sailed then from the west of Ireland, and met with northeast winds, and was driven far to the west and southwest in the sea, where no land was to be seen. But it was already far gone in the summer, and they made many prayers that they might escape from the sea; and it came to pass that they saw land. It was a great land, but they knew not what land it was. Then took they the resolve to sail to the land, for they were weary of contending longer with the violence of the sea. They found there a good harbor ; and when they had been — a short time on shore, came people to them : they knew none of the people, but it ratlier appeared to them that they spoke Irish." The passage here italicized is declared by Beamish to be a very remarkable one, " and affords the strongest ground for believing that the country to which they were driven had been previously colonized from Ireland. The Northmen, from their intercourse with the Irish ports, mig^t be supposed to have had just sufficient knowledge of the language to detect its sounds * * * and under- stand the general meaning of the words." After being de- tained for a while, the voyagers here mentioned were allowed to re-embark, and " Gudleif and his people put to sea, and they landed in Ireland late in harvest, and were in Dublin for the winter. But in the summer after sailed they to Ice- land, * * *." Beamish inclines to the belief that the place where Gudleif and his party had landed in America was in the vicinity of * Translated from the Eyrbyggja saga, written as early as the begin- ning of the thirteenth century. 1 6 IRISH-AMERICAN HISTORICAL MISCELLANY the Carolinas or Georgia, and that the White Man's Land, or Great Ireland, of the Northmen was in that neighbor- hood. Professor Rafn entertains the opinion that the terri- tory known as Great Ireland included North and South Caro- lina, Georgia, and East Florida. " From what cause," asks Beamish, " could the name of Great Ireland have arisen, but from the fact of the country having been colonized by the Irish ? * * * Nor does this conclusion involve any im- probability." As far back as the beginning of the eleventh century " White Man's Land, or Great Ireland, is mentioned — ^not as a newly discovered country — ^but as a land long known by name to the Northmen. Neither the Icelandic his- torians nor navigators were, in the least degree, interested in originating or giving currency to any fable respecting an Irish settlement on the southern shores of North America, for they set up no claim to the discovery of that part of the Western continent, their intercourse being limited to the coasts north of Chesapeake Bay. The discovery of Vinland and Great Ireland appear to have been totally independent of each other." It is not our purpose to go at length into the views expressed by Rask, the Danish philologist; Lionel Wafer, and others, regarding Irish traces in some of the American Indian dialects. We merely call attention to the fact that such traces have been noted. There is nothing unreasonable in the assumption that many voyagers from Ireland landed on the shores of Amer- ica, at various periods, covered by centuries, anterior to the arrival of the Northmen. Even the ship of St. Brendan may not have been the first Irish craft to be wafted to these coasts. The era of Vinland seems also to have an Irish chapter. John Gilmary Shea, in his work on "The Catholic Church in Colonial Days," says that " Priests sent out from Ireland and later from Scandinavia reached Iceland, and in time a church grew up in that northern land * * *." Christianity progressed to Greenland, " and Catholicity was planted on the American continent by priests from Iceland, and in 1 1 12 the see of Gardar was erected by Pope Paschal II, and Eric n; ^■- r IRISH-AMERICAN HISTORICAL MISCELLANY tj was appointed the first bishop. Full of missionary zeal, the prelate accompanied the ships of his seafaring flock, and reached the land known in the sagas of the North by the name of Vinland, as an Irish bishop, John of Skalholt in Iceland, had already done." Vinlafld is believed to have been located on the New England seaboard, and to have included the territory washed by the waters of Narragansett Bay. A map of Vinland, from accounts contained in old Northern MSS., appears in Beamish's work. According to this map, Vinland's coast line IT extended approximately from Point Judith, R. I., around Cape Cod, Mass., and northward past Boston to the northern point of Cape Ann, Mass. Within this area are now situated the cities of Newport, Providence and Pawtucket in Rhode Island, and Boston, New Bedford, Taunton, Quincy, Cambridge, Somerville, Everett, Chelsea, Maiden, Medford, Lynn, Salem, Gloucester and other places in Massachusetts. To people acquainted with the zealous, indomitable spirit of the early Irish missionaries it is by no means inconceivable that a number of them may have visited Vinland by way of Iceland and Greenland in those ancient days. ' TTie following interesting fragment is quoted by Beamish ■ from a manuscript codex : "Now are there, as is said, south ft-om Greenland, which is inhabited, deserts, uninhabited places, and icebergs, then the Skralings, then Markland, then Vinland the Good; next, and somewhat behind, lies Albania, wbidi is White Man's Land; thither was sailing, formerly, from Ireland; there Irishmen and Icelanders recognized Ari the son of Mar and Katia of Reykjaness, of whom nothing had been heard for a long time, and who had been made a chief there by the inhabitants." Justin Winsor, in his " Narrative and Critical History of America," mentions St, Brendan, and likewise Great Ireland, and so in their works have Humboldt and many other very eminent writers. Gen. Daniel Butterfield, of New York, while in Europe with Melvil Dewey, years ago, discovered a number of old Latin manuscripts in Paris in which St, Bren- 1 8 IRISH-AMERICAN HISTORICAL MISCELLANY dan's voyages are mentioned at considerable length. Butter- field afterwards lectured in New York on the subject O'Donoghue's " Brendaniana. St. Brendan the Vo)rager in Story and Legend" (Dublin, 1893), will repay perusal in connection with this subject. iComing down to the year 1492, and the discovery of America by Columbus, we meet the interesting statement that the followers of that great nayigator included at least one Irishman in their ranks. Chief Justice Charles P. Daly, of New York, in an address before the Friendly S6ns of St Patrick, that city, some years ago, calls attention to this point. He says : " Before his return from his first voyage, Colum- bus built a fort upon the Island of San Domingo, where he placed thirty-seven men and three officers to await his return, and when upon his second voyage he returned to this spot, he found that the whole garrison had been killed and the fort destroyed. When Navarette was searching for the docu- ments in the archives of Seville for the great work which he published in 1825, he found one containing the names of the forty persons that Columbus had thus left, which document he incorporated in his work. It appears by it that all of these persons, except two, were Spaniards or Portuguese, and of these two, that one was an Irishman. The entry is as follows : ' Guillermo Ihres natural de Galway in Irelanda ' — William Ayres, native of Galway, in Ireland. So that an Irishman was among the first of civilized people that took up a permanent residence in America. If very little has been said heretofore upon the subject, it must be from the modesty of our race, for in this respect we differ from our Eastern brethren, w'ho are constantly anchoring all American history to the Rock of Plymouth." CHAPTER II. People of Irish Blood Stated to Have Come on the " Mayfiower." with ihe Pilgrims, to Plymouth Rock, in 1620— Governor Bradford of Plymouth Mentions Irish there in 1626-7— Irish at Salem and Boston, Mass., with the Puritans — Mention by Governor Winthrop. ^The Pilgrims came over on the " Mayflower," to Plymouth Kock, in 1620. More than a thousand years had elapsed since the coming of Brendan to America. Great Ireland had flour- ished and passed away. The fact that it once existed, even, had long well-nigh been forgotten by living men, Vinland the Good had shared a similar fate. Yet the " Insula Sanctorum " — the native land of Bren- klan — still flourished, though sore distressed. In 1620, as of Bpfore. counlrj-men of Brendan were still among the pioneers F^d settlers of the New World. The Rev. William ElUot Griflis, in his work " Brave Little Holland and What She Taught Us," says : " In the ' Mayflower ' were one hnndred and one men, women, boys and girls as passengers, besides captain and crew. These were of English, Dutch, French and Irish ancestry, and thus typical of our national stock." On another page of the same work, Griffis speaks of " Miles Standish the Roman Catholic, Roger Williams the Radical, and John Alden the Irishman." William Bradford, who became governor of Plymouth Colony, has left a manuscript history of the plantation. With rare good judgment, the state of Massachusetts recently issued this Bradford history in printed form, thus greatly facilitating its consultation by the public. In it is mentioned the arrival at Plymouth colony, in 1626-7, of a ship having many Irish aboard. The destination of the ship, Bradford 20 IRISH'AMERICAN HISTORICAL MISCELLANY tells US, was Virginia, On the voyage across, however, sick- ness had broken out, the captain was attacked by scurvy, water ran low, fuel became scarce, and so it was resolved to make land at the first opportunity. The voyagers were then in the vicinity of Cape Cod, Mass., and soon after a somewhat violent landing was made along the coast and within the limits of the Plymouth juris- diction. The ship was seriously damaged and it became necessary to repair her. So the governor of Plymouth was appealed to for requisite oakum, pitch and spikes wherewith to make the repairs. These articles were promptly furnished. It being the winter time, the company decided to postpone further journeying toward Virginia. So they applied for permission to remain in the colony until a more propitious season had arrived, and they were in better condition to re- sume their voyage. Bradford states that " The cheefe amongst these people was one M' Fells and M' Sibsie, which had many servants belonging unto them, many of them being Irish." The Pil- grims generously set apart certain land for them, on which, in the spring, the new comers planted a large quantity of com. Toward the close of the summer they again set sail for Virginia, having previously disposed of their corn crop to the Pilgrims. Bradford does not state whether any of the company remained in Plymouth, but it is by no means un- likely that some of them did so. From time to time, other mention is found, in the records, / of Irish in the Plymouth colony. Teague Jones, for instance, was a resident there in 1645, ^^^ perhaps earlier. In the year just mentioned, he was of Yarmouth, in the colony, and was with a force of Yarmouth men sent out against the Nar- ragansett Indians. They are described in the records as having served fourteen days. Tliey proceeded as far as Rehoboth, and all safely returned. Teague had, on more than one occasion, some contention with the selectmen of Yarmouth. At one time, in 1660, he was fined £6 for refus- ing to take the oath of fidelity. In 1667, as the records show. IRISH-AMERICAN HISTORICAL MISCELLANY «I " the cellect men of the towne of Yarmouth retume the name of Teague Jones for not coming to meeting." Teague had a son named Jeremiah. The writer is indebted for many of these facts to Miss Virginia Baker, of Warren, R. I., one of Teaguc's descendants. At the close of King Philip's war, a '• rate '" was made, in 1676, to defray the expenses incurred by that struggle with the Indians, and Teague was assessed £3 4s. as his share of the burden. As to when he died, we have found no record. Some of his descendants have become people of prominence. Another Irishman who settled in the Plymouth colonj*.- was David O'Killia [O'Kellyj. Like Teague Jones, he be- came a resident of old Yarmouth, and was there as early as 1657. The records refer to him as " the Irishman," and he appears to have been a person of considerable prominence in the community. One of his descendants is Osborne Howes, at present secretary of the Boston board of Fire Under- writers, and there are many others. Some of the pioneer's descendants bear the name Killey, a modification of the old form. In addition to instances here given of early Irish set- tlers in the land of the Pilgrim Fathers, others could be cited. The ship "Eagle Wing" sailed from Carrickfergus, Ire- J land, in 1636, with some 140 men, women and children on board. The vessel was of about 115 tons, the passengers "purposing (if God pleased) to pitch their tents in the plan- tations of New Ei^land." They were Irish Presbyterians, and among them were two ministers — Blair and Livingstone. They experienced a tempestuous voyage, during which " much of the bread not being well baked, was thrown overboard." Reaching the vicinity of Newfoundland, they encountered such fierce hurricanes that their ship was seriously damaged. Becoming bewildered and disheartened, they put about and returned to Ireland. On the voyage a child was bom aboard the " Eagle Wing," to whom the name Seaborn was given. Irish pioneers are also found at an early period in the Massachusetts Bay colony. Like those in the Pilgrim settle- ments, these sturdy sons of Hibemia among the Puritans of i 2 2 IRISH-AMERICAN HISTORICAL MISCELLANY " the Bay " were men of sterling character and worth. Under date of Sept. 2$, 1634, the Massachusetts records have this entry : " It is ordered that the Scottishe and Irishe gentle- men wch intends to come hither shall have liberty to sitt down in any place Vpp Merimacke Ryver, not possessed by any." In the Massachusetts Records (vol. i, p. 295), tmder date of 1640, is another interesting entry, to wit: "It is ordered that the goods of the persons come from Ireland shallbee free from this rate [tax]." And a marginal heading reads : " Irish goods now land free from ye rat [e] ." Salem, Mass., was settled in 1630, and Irish residents became numer- ous there and in Boston before 1680. Gov. Winthrop of " the Bay " specifically mentions Darby Field, " an Irish* man," as having, about 1640, with a party of Indians, ex- plored the White mountains. Capt. Daniel Patrick, the noted Indian fighter, is believed to have been an Irishman. He was a resident of the Massachusetts Bay colony in Winthrop's time. Many other settlers there at that period are positively known to have been Irish. Richard Dexter, an Irishman, ' is reported as settling at Boston about 1640. In 1.659, ^^ Boston, "John Morrell an Irishman and Lysbell Morrell an Irishwoman were married 31st August by John Ende- /' cott," Governor. There are many similar records in which Irish people are mentioned. John, Richard and Patrick Riley were settlers in the Connecticut Valley, 1634-40. /Among residents, previous to 1700, in the Massachusetts /and Plymouth colonies are over a hundred bearing Irish names. The list is to be found in " The Recorder " (Boston, Mass., March, 1902). It was compiled by Thomas Hamilton Murray from Savage's " Genealogical Dictionary " of New England; Bodge's " History of King Philip's War; " Farmer's " Gene- alogical Register of the First Settlers of New England; " Frothingham's " History of Charlestown, Mass.; " Wyman's " Genealogies and Estates of Charlestown," and from other r uthoritative works. John Casey, mentioned in this list, participated in the IRISH-AMERICAN HISTORICAL MISCELLANY aj " Great Swamp fight " against the Narragansett Indians, m i 1675, and was wounded in that engagement. Many other , names could be added to the list. Thus, for instance, the * Massachusetts records show that in 1661, " John Reylean an Irishman & Margaret Brene an Irishwoman were married i5lh March by John Endecott Governor." Daniel Ma- gennis, mentioned in the list, was a soldier in King Philip's u-ar. He became a corporal, and was at one time clerk of his company. The Massachusetts forces operating against the Indians in King Philip's war, 1675-6, included a number of Irish soldiers. An article on this subject appeared, some years ago, in the " Rosary Magazine " (New York), now _ published at Somerset, Ohio. In the old Granary Burial Ground in Boston is a stone inscribed as follows: "Here Lyeth Interred y* Body of Charles Maccarty, son to Thad- eus and Elizabeth Maccarty, aged 18 years, wanting 7 days. Deceased y* 25 of October, 1683." A Charles Maccarty graduated from Harvard College in 1691. In 1692, Roger Kelly was a representative, from the Isles of Shoals, to the' General Court of Massachusetts. But to retrace our steps. We find an article in a recent issue of " The Recorder," published by the American-Irish His- torical Society, which is of great interest. It states that " In 1630, Governor John Winthrop and others of the Massachu- setts Bay Colony hired and dispatched away Mr. William Pearsc, with his ship of about two hundred tons, for Ireland to buy more provisions. As he did not return as soon as expected, " many were the fears of people that Mr. Pearce who was sent to Ireland to fetch provisions, was cast away or taken by pirates." In Feb., 1631, however, he arrived at Boston, Mass., bringing the following supplies : 34 hogsheads of wheat meal, 15 hogsheads of peas, 4 hogsheads of oatmeal, 4 hogsheads of beef and pork, 15 cwt. of cheese, butter, suet, etc. These supplies were in good condition, and a day of Thanksgiving was ordered by the Governor. A second ship appears to have arrived about this time, for the colonists nearby " lifted up their eyes and saw two ships coming in, and 24 IRISH-AMERICAN HISTORICAL MISCELLANY presently the tiewes came to their eares, says one among them, that they were come from Ireland full of victualls." Frothingham's " History of Charlestown, Mass./' informs us that in 1640, "there came over great store of provisions both out of England and Ireland." This presentation of material concerning the Irish element in Massachusetts, prior to the year 1700, could be continued almost indefinitely. We merely quote so much, to give a general illustration of the subject. After the year 1700 the amount of material available, of course, vastly increases. CuUen's " Story of the Irish in Boston " presents much in- formation on this point. During Oliver Cromwell's bar- barous regime in Ireland many Irish men, women, boys and girls were seized and transported to Barbadoes, to Virginia, and to New England. Doubtless, too, there was more or less voluntary Irish emigration to these places at that period. Ireland was a good place to get out of, and many of the Irish people left there and came to America. Rhode Island furnishes many instances of Irish pioneers within her borders. Edward Larkin was a resident of New- port, R. I., as far back as 1655, and left many descendants. His name appears in the early records, including the "Roule of y* Freemen of y* colonic of everie Towne." In 1682, according to the Providence records, Cornelius Higgins purchased of Andrew Harris, of Pawtucket, R. I., 9834 acres in Scituate, in the " precincts of y* said Town* of Providence." Thomas Casey is early heard of in Newport, R. I. He was born in Ireland about 1636 and died in 1719. In 1692, he, and his son Thomas, witnessed a deed g^ven by James Sweet of East Greenwich, R. I., to Thomas Weaver, of Newport. Adam Casey, another son of Thomas is mentioned in 1742 as a lieutenant. In 1750, this Adam Casey bought 50 acres in Scituate, R. I. He had a son, Edward Casey. They removed to Coventry, R. I., in 1760. Adam Casey was dead in 1765, the records showing that his will was " proved " that year. Samuel Casey, a third son of Thomas, the immigrant, resided at different times in Newport, Kings IRISH-AMERICAN HISTORICAL MISCELLANY 25 iTown and Exeter, R. I., and filled various town offices. His l«state, after his death, inventoried £2,803 i^^- 6''- Charles MacCarthy was one of the founders, in 1677, of I the town of East Greenwich, R. I. He was a man of sturdy ' character and was greatly esteemed in the community. He and his brother had been " forced from home in the wars." The brother went to Spain, and Charles to the West Indies. Troubles breaking out in the latter place, Charles eventually ^•cttled in Rhode Island. He and the Spencers of East Green- H wich were very intimate friends. In his will he mentions a ■fetter which he had received from his brother. The latter, he Btells us, had gone back from Spain to Kinsale and sent for him Vio return home. But Charles never went back and he and his brother never again met. At the assignment of land to the founders of East Greenwich, MacCarthy was given ten acres as a town lot and ninety acres for a fann. He died a few years later deeply regretted. Evidence of Irish settlers is found in all the New England " colonies previous to 1650. A party of refugees from the West Indies came to wliat is now New Haven, Conn., about 1640. One of the party was William Collins,* We are told •- that soon after landing, the company dispersed " and some returned to Ireland." t Many equally interesting facts might be nairated. A victim of the Cromwelllan confiscation, Ed- mund Fanning, an Irishman, settled at Groton, Conn. He/ had fJed the Old Land on the surrender of Limerick, 1651.' His uncle, Dominick Fanning, of Limerick, was one of the twenty-one persons exempted from pardon, by Ireton, and was beheaded. Edmund Fanning, who settled in Connecti- cut, has many descendants, among them being D. H, Fan- ning and Walter F. Brooks, both of whom are now residents of Worcester, Mass. * Collins later taught school at Hartford, and subsequently went to Bottofi. He nurried a daughter of Anne Hutchinson. Falling into dis- favor with the Boston church, Anne and her family, including Collins, located on the island of Rhode Island, later removing to Westchester, N. y. The family perished at the hands of the Indians, Collins being one of the victims. t See Felt's " Ecclesiastical History of New England." CHAPTER III. . Lord Baltimore's Project to Establish a Colony in Newfoundland — Some Irish Pioneers in New York — Mention of Jan Andriessen, the Irishman "Van Dublingh/' who Settled at Bevcrwyck, now Albany — Governor Thomas Dongan. Sir George Calvert, Lord Baltimore (an Irish title), eariy conceived the idea of establishing a Catholic colony in America. In 1609, he was one of the Virginia Company of Planters. In 1620, the same year the Pilgrims landed at Plymouth Rock, Calvert having bought the southeast penin- sula of Newfoundland, sent out thereto Capt. Edward Wynne and some colonists to form a settlement at Ferryland. In 1623, Calvert secured a charter for the province of Avalon, Newfoundland. He reached Newfoundland himself in 1627 with supplies and settlers, among the latter of whom were doubtless some Irish. Two or three winters were spent in the place, but the severity of the climate caused the enter- prise to be abandoned. The settlement of Maryland was more auspicious. Daniel Dulany, a native of Queen's County, Ireland, was born in 1686. He was a cousin of Rev. Patrick Dulany, dean of Down. Daniel came to this country when quite young and settled in Maryland. He was admitted to the bar in 1710, be- came attorney-general of the province, judge of admiralty,, commissary-general, agent and receiver-general, and council- lor. He was in the public service of Maryland for nearly 40* years. The colony or province of New York attracted Irish set- tlers to its confines long before Governor Dongan's time. The illustrious Father Jogues while in captivity wrote to Father Lalemant. The letter was dated Rensselaerwyck, Aug. 30r r IRISH-AMERICAN HISTORICAL MISCELLANY 3J 1643. He tells that he found, on the Island of Manhattan, a Portuguese woman and a young Irishman, whose confession he heard. Hugh O'Neal is mentioned as having married the widow of Adriaen Van der Donck. This latter gentle- man died at New Amsterdam in 1655, he having been very prominent in the place. His baronial estate was known as Colon Donck, and was in Yonkers. He bequeathed it to his widow, who subsequently became the wife of O'Neal, as just stated. An Irishman, John Anderson, is found in Bever- wyck, now Albany, as early as 1645. '^^^ Dutch called him " Jan Andriessen, de lersman van Dubiingh." The records ^ow that in 1645 Andriessen leased a " bouwerie," which was located, according to O'Callaghan, " north of Stony Point," and it is also known that he purchased a homestead and farm, at Coxsackie, of Peter Bronck. Andriessen is believed to have died about 1664. A paper largely devoted to him was read, Jan, ig, 1903, by Judge Franklin M, Dana- - her, of Albany, at the annual meeting in New York city of the American-Irish Historical Society. The Society has since published the paper in pamphlet form under the title: "Early Irish in Old Albany, N. Y." Judge Danaher says of Andriessen that when he arrived we know not, " It is enough to know that ' Jan Andriessen de lersman van Dubiingh ' was taken to the hearts of the phlegmatic Dutch burghers of ancient Albany, for all through the records (even after his death) he is familiarly, and seemingly affectionately, spoken of as ' Jantie,' or 'Johnnie,' even as ' Jantien,' or 'little Johnnie,' and the Dutch went on his bond and obligations, even as they ac- cepted his bond for theirs." Judge Danaher states that An- driessen's first mention tn the records is as follows: "Appeared before me Johannes La Montagne, in the service of the General Privileged West India Company, Vice Director, etc., William Frederickse Bout, farmer of the wine and beer excise consumable by the tapsters, in Fort Orange, village of Beverwyck and appendancies of the same, who de- ^8 IRISH'AMBRICAN HISTORICAL MISCELLANY clared that he had transferred as by these presents, he does transfer, to Jan Andriessen, the Irishman from Dublin, dwell- ing in Catskill, the right in the aforesaid excise belonging to him, the assignor, in Catskill, for the sum of one hundred and fifty ( 1 50) guilders, which sum the aforesaid Jan Andriessen promises to pay, in two terms, to wit, on the first day of May the half of said sum, and on the last day of October of the year A.D. 1657, the other half, under a pledge of his person and estate, movable and immovable, present and future, submitting the same to all courts and judges. " Done in Fort Orange this 19th of January A.D. 1657; present Johannes Provoost, and Daniel Verveelen. " This is the mark 'f- of William Frederickse Bout " This is the mark h*^ of Jan Andriessen. ^* Johannes Provoost witness. ^' Daniel Verveelen. " Acknowledged before me, " La Montague, " Deputy of Fort Orange." A lease made out, in 1664, by Abram Staets to Jan Andries- sen concludes: " Thus done in Beverwyck, in amity and friendship, and in the presence of me, J. Provoost, clerk, datum ut supra. "Abram Staets. " This is the mark A^ of Jan Andriessen, the Irishman, O with his own hand set. Acknowledged before me, J. Provoost, Clerk." " /\CKnowicugcu uciurc rnc, " We take leave," says Judge Danaher, in the course of his paper, " of this derelict seventeenth-century Irishman, who lived among the Dutch in the colony of Rensselaer- r IRISH-AMERICAN HISTORICAL UISCELLANY ■wryck for so many years, with regret and wonder — regret that we know nothing more concerning him and his antecedents and how and why he left Dublin, * • * and wonder — not so much that he spent his life among the phlegmatic and clannish Dutch burghers, * * * as at the fact that they allowed him burghership and trade privileges, which were then a valuable asset * * *. It is quite possible that he was a soldier in the service of the Dutch West India Com- pany and came to Albany in that way. It may be that he was a refugee of the so-called ' Rebellion ' of 1G41, and sought among aliens in the wilds of America the privilege of being allowed to live, which was denied him by the English in his native land." Judge Danaher mentions a number of other Irishmen ia Albany prior to the year 1700. He speaks of Capt- John Manning, Sergt. Patrick Dowdell, Sergt, John Fitzgerald and Thomas Quinn, soldiers of the English garrison in the fort at Albany when the place was reconquered by the Dutch and held for a time in 1673. He likewise mentions William Hogen, or Hogan, an Irishman, resident among the Dutch of old Albany as early as 1692. The Dutch records speak of him as born in " Yrlandt in de Kings County." In 1700 and 1703, H(^n served on a jury in Albany, and was also, at one period, an assessor, and one of the " fyre masters of ye Citty." Another Irish settler in Albany was John Finn, also men- tioned both as Jan Fyne and Johannes Fine. He was in Albany as far back as 1695, and is described in the records as " van Waterfort in Irlandt." In 1696 he married Jopje Qasse van Slyck, and in 1699 wedded as his second wife Alida, a daughter of Jacob Janse Gardinier of Kinderhook. Finn is at one time mentioned as a cooper, and again as a licensed inn-keeper. He was still living in 1701. Oyje Oyjens (Owen Owens), an Irishman, is mentioned in the rec- ords of old Albany as having married Marie Wendell, in 1704. The records speak of him as " geboren tot Cork in leriand." Patrick Martin, mentioned in the old Albany 30 IRISH-AMERICAN HISTORICAL MISCELLANY records as having married, in 1 707, Mary Cox, is described as " trommelslager onder de compagnie grenadiers von de Hon. Richard Ingoldsby." " Thomas the Irishman " is mentioned in the Dutch records of New York. Thus, Hon. Peter Stuyvesant, Director-Gen- eral of New Netherland, writing to Capt. Martin Cregier, 1663, says : " Your letter by Thomas the Irishman has just been received." ... On Aug. 5, 1663, Captain Cr^er writes in his journal : " Thomas the Irishman arrived here at the Redoubt from the Manhatans." On Sept. i, 1663, Captain Cregier writes : " Thomas the Irishman and Qaesje Hoorn arrived with their yachts at the Kill from the Manhatans," and on the 17th of the same month the captain writes: " Thomas the Irishman arrived to-day/' The foregoing ref- erences may be found in " Documents Relating to the Colonial History of the State of New York," edited by Femow, Vol. XIII, Albany, 1881. Thomas Dongan, an Irish Catholic, was appointed gov- ernor of New York by the Duke of York, who was later King James II of England. Dongan was a native of Castle- town, County Kildare, Ireland, and was bom in 1634. He became a soldier, attained the rank of colonel, and served in the French army in all Turenne's campaigns. At the time of Dongan's resignation, in 1677, he had command of an Irish regiment in the army of Louis XIV. Dongan was de- voted to the cause of the Stuarts, and was recalled from France in the year just mentioned. Charles II granted bim a life pension of £500 per year, and he was made lieutenant- governor of Tanpers. Appointed governor of New York, Dongan sailed from England aboard the old frigate " Constant Warwick," and landed at Nantasket, Mass., Aug. 10, 1683. With his retinue he started overland for New York. He was accompanied as far as Dedham, Mass., by a Boston troop and by a number of prominent people. He crossed the soimd to Long Island, and arrived in New York city on Saturday, August 25. The province of New York at that time included Nantucket and IRISH-AMERICAN HISTORICAL MISCELLANY it Martha's Vineyard, Mass., the district of Pemmaquid, Me., and other territory not comprised in the present state of New York. As governor of the province, Dongan gave a liberal and just administration. He was the author of the famous Don- gan charter, and in many other ways proved himself a wise and sagacious ruler. He was heartily in favor of Irish immi- gration to New York, and did all in his power to encourage it. In 1684, he expressed the desire that a ship " go con- stantly between New York and Ireland and bring passengers for New York," In 1687, he wrote to the lord president of the board of trade, saying among other things: " My lord, there are people enough in Ireland who had pretenses to estates there and are of no advantage to the country and may live here very happy- I do not doubt that if his majesty thinks fit to employ my nephew he will bring over as many as the king may find convenient to send, who will be no charge to his majesty after they are landed," Had affairs remained, in England, as they then were, and had Dongan continued governor of New York, this project of his for bringing Irish in large numbers here would have, perhaps, been carried out- But, unfortunately, these conditions did not last. Dongan remained governor until the spring of 1688, when he was superseded by Andros, who was also commissioned to govern New England. Dongan subse- quently experienced harsh treatment in New York, and was finally obliged to leave the province, owing to the machina- tions of his poHtical and religious enemies. During his term as governor of New York, Dongan, in 1687, went to Albany and participated there in a grand council with the Senecas, Cayugas, Onondagas, Oneidas and Mohawks. He visited Albany again, later in the year, and took command of the military force there, which consisted of 50 horse, 400 foot, and 800 Indians. He remained in Albany until sometime in the spring of 1688, when he re- turned to New York city. Andros, the new governor of the province, assumed the administration of affairs in August, 33 IRISH-AMERICAN HISTORICAL MISCELLANY 1688. Dongan passed most of the year 1690 in Bostcm, from which place he sailed for England, reaching the latter place in 1 69 1. He was subsequently offered the rank of ma- jor-general, but declined the honor. He became Earl of Lim- erick, died in 1715, and was buried in St. Pancras churchyard, London. Dongan's real estate in this country comprised a house and lot in New York city, a farm at Hempstead, property in Martha's Vineyard, and 25,000 acres on Staten Island. This latter property he had erected into the " manor and lordship of Cassiltowne." Thomas, John and Walter Don- gan, kinsmen of the governor, were residing in this country, and probably in New York, in 171 5. In 1723, the New York Assembly passed a private act " to enable Thomas Dongan and Walter Dong^, two surviving kinsmen of Thomas, late Earl of Limerick," to sell some part of their estate there. Many high tributes of esteem have been paid Gov. Dongan. Hinckley, of Plymouth, declares that " he was of a noble and praiseworthy mind and spirit, taking care that all the people in each town do their duty in maintaining the minister of the place, though himself of a different opinion from their way." Lossing describes him as " the liberal and just Governor." Mrs. Lamb, in her " History of New York," states that " he had broad, intelligent views, was an accomplished politician, and was essentially a man for the times. He was a ready falker, bland and deferential to associates, and fitted to in- spire confidence in all around him. He has been justly classed among the best of our colonial Governors." Bearers of the Dongan name, kin to Gov. Dongan, in- cluded Edward Vaughan Dongan of the Third Battalion, New Jersey Volunteers, who expired of wounds received, in August, 1777, in an attack on the British at Staten Island. Another collateral descendant of the Governor was John Charlton Dongan, who represented Richmond County in the New York Assembly, 1786-89. A number of tombstCHies of members of the Dongan family are to be seen in the old Richmond churchyard, Staten Island. IRISH-AMERICAN HISTORICAL MISCELLANY 33 In 1677, William Walsh is mentioned as a taxpayer in New York city. In 1695, we find a John Morris in New York, and in 1703 the list of inhabitants of that city included John Barr, Thomas Carroll, Richard Fleming, Bartholomew Hart, Henry Mooney and Peter Morrayn [Moran?]. Barr's family is mentioned as comprising "two males, one female, and four children." Carroll's family comprised "one male, two females, three children, and one negress." Fleming's family comprised " one male, one female, and one child." In Mooney's family were " two males and one female." Mor- rayn's family is set down as consisting of " one male, one fe- male, six children, and one negro." A " chirurgeon " — sur- geon— named Thomas Flynn resided in New York city in 1702. That he was of Irish birth or extraction can safely be taken for granted. We thus far allude only to some of the earlier Irish settlers, leaving those of later years to be herein- after mentioned. i CHAPTER IV. Irish Arrivals in Pennsylvania, Delaware, New Jersey, Maryland, Vir- ginia, the Carolinas and Georgia — Many Irish in Barbadoes and other Places in the West Indies — Some of the Ships that Brought Them. William Penn, for whom Pennsylvania is named, had re- sided for some time at Cork, in Ireland. Coming to this country, he had official relations with Gov. Dongan of New York at various times, and was, on one occasion, hospitably entertained in New York city by him. Penn was bom in 1644, ^^^ died in 1718. In 1666, he was sent to Ireland, from England, to manage his father's prop- erty in Cork. He appears at Kinsale as "clerk of the cheque " at fort and castle. He attended Quaker meetings in Cork and, subsequently, became an exponent of that creed. He arrived in America in 1682. Among those who came with him were Dennis Rochford, of County Wexford, Ireland, and Mary, his wife. Two daughters of Dennis and Mary died on the voyage. The passengers were spoken of as " people of consequence " and as ** people of property." In 1683, Dennis was a member of the Assembly.* The Irish settled in large numbers in Pennsylvania during Penn*s time, and afterwards. James Logan, an Irishman, ably governed the colony for two years after Penn's death. As far back as 1730 we find townships in Pennsylvania bear- ing such Irish nam^s as Coleraine, Donegal, Tyrone, and * Scharf-Westcott, "History of Philadelphia," quoted in Vol. VL, Transactions of the Kansas State Historical Society. Albert Cook Myen, of Swarthmore College, Pa., has recently brought out an interesting work on the "Immigration of the Irish Quakers into Pennsylvania, 1682-1790^ with Their Early History in Ireland." i r IRISH-AMERICAN HISTORICAL MISCELLANY 3$ Derry, indicating the presence of large numbers of immi- grants from Ireland. In the year 1729 over 5,600 Irish ar- rived at the port of Philadelphia, as against only 267 English and Welsh, 343 Palatines, and 43 Scotch. And this tremen- dous Irish immigration to that province was long continued. There was also a large Irish immigration to New Jersey, Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, the Carolinas, and Georgia. Philip Conner was an influential man in Maryland as far back as 1647. In that year he was made Commissioner for Kent County, and is referred to as " The last commander of Old Kent." Charles Carroll, grandfather of Charles Carroll of Carrotlton, came to Maryland late in i688. He bore a com- mission constituting him attorney-general of the province, and was awarded, by James II, a tract in Maryland consist- ing of about 60.000 acres, divided into three manors, each containing 20,000 acres. He died in 1720. His son Charles, who succeeded to the estates of the attorney -general, was known as Charles Carroll of Doughoregan [Md.]. This second Charles had one child, who became the famous Charles Carroll of Carrollton, Irish settlements were early made in South Carolina. An^^ historian states that " Of all other countries, none has fur- nished the province with so many inhabitants as Ireland. - Scarce a ship sailed from any of its ports for Charleston that was not crowded with men, women, and children." One projected Irish colony in South Carolina proved unfortunate. The details are thus narrated: "The Council having an- nounced, in England and Ireland, that the land of the ejected Yemassees would be given to the actual settlers, five hundred persons from Ireland transported themselves to South Caro- lina to take benefit of it. But the whole project was frus- trated by the proprietors, who claimed those lands as their property, and insisted on the right of disposing of them as they saw fit. Not long afterwards, to the utter ruin of the Irish emigrants, and in breach of the provincial faith, these Indian lands were surveyed, by order of the proprietors, for their own use. and laid out in large baronies." The his- 36 IRISH-AMERICAN HISTORICAL MISCELLANY torian further tells us that '' Many of the unfortunate Iri^ emigrants, having spent the little money they brought with them, were reduced to misery and famished. The remainder removed to the northern colonies." A number of Irish set- tlers located in North Carolina after the Williamite war in Ireland. One of these James Moore, led the revolution of 1705, in the colony, and was elected governor. There are many especially interesting facts in connection with early Irish settlers in Virginia. Many of these Irish came voluntarily, but others were forcibly transported dur- ing Cromwell's time. The names of many Irish pioneers in Virginia are given in Hotten's " Original Lists." In Hotten's " Lists of the Livinge and Dead in Virginia, Febr: 16^, 1623," appear the following: Living: John Hely, John Duffy, Elizabeth Higgins, Edward Bryan, William Ganey, Henry Ganey, Thomas Lane and Francis Barrett. Dead: John Lasey, Richard Griffin, Mathew Griffine, John Maning, Naamy Boyle, Peter Dun, Martin CuflFe, James and John, *' Irishmen " ; Bridgett Dameron, and a long list of others. The two Irishmen, John and James, specifically men- tioned, are spoken of as " at Elizabeth Cittie." Among those who sailed for Virginia, in January, 1634, from the port of London, on the " Bonaventure," were: Garrett Riley, Miles Riley, Jo. Bryan, Tho. Murfie, Philip Conner and Jo. Dunn. The " Bonaventure " was a mer- chantman, commanded by James Ricrofte. Brian Kelly and Edmond Farrell were among those who embarked, for Virginia, in 1635, aboard the " Safety." Charles MacCartie and Owen MacCartie sailed from an English port, in 1635, ^^^ Virginia, on the " Plain Joan." William Hickey, Richard Hughes, William Strange, Philip Bagley and Daniel Collier embarked, with many others, on the " Paule " of London, in July, 1635, bound to Virginia. Teage Williams, ** Irishman," embarked in the " Mar- garett," in March, 1633, for St. Christophers. Tego Leane " of Corke in Ireland " is recorded in Hot- ten's " Lists " as among those who " passed out of the Poart I^V IRISH-AMERICAN HISTORICAL MISCELLANY 3? o( Plimworth Ano Dnie 1634," in the " Robert Bonaven- ture " for St, Christophers, By Plimworth is meant Ply- mouth, Eng. Tego, (or Teague) was then 30 years of age. Thomas Riley embarked at the port of London, in Septem- ber. 1635, for Bermuda. Richard Larkynn, Daniel Connelly and John Fynn took passage at London, in October, 1635, for St. Christophers. In May, 1635, there embarked, at the port of London, in the "Alexander," for Barbadoes: Teiague Nacton, Der- mond O'Bryan, Margaret Conway, John MacConry, Thomas Fludd. Dennis MacBrian, and a large number of others. In the " Mathew " of London, 1635, embarked for St. Christophers: Mathew Hely, Thomas Garrett, Darby Hur- lie, Robert Lacie. Thomas Jerrill and Daniel Lee, in addition (o others. In 1635, the following among others, embarked at " y* port of London," in the " Ann and Elizabeth," " to be trans- ported to the Barbadoes and St. Christophers": Thomas Martin. John Barret, James Tate, Bryan Eourk, Andrew Carr, Owen Garret, Patrick Conly and Patrick Connyer. They are described as having taken the oaths of allegiance and supremacy, which oaths seem to have been generally required at that time. " Daniel y* Son of Darby and Elizabeth Mailonee " is men- tioned, in 1679, as having been baptized in Barbadoes. The same year, was buried " Mary y* Wife of Morgan Murphy," of the parish of St. James, Barbadoes. " Cornelius y* Son of Dearman Driskell," of Barbadoes, was also buried in 1679. Mary Driskell of St, James parish, Barbadoes, was buried in 1678, and Dorothy Callahan in 1679. Some Irish Property Owners in Barbadoes,* 1679. The following is from a " List of all y* Names of y* Inhabi- tants in y* Parrish of Christ Church [Barbadoes] with an • Compiled from HoUen's " Original Lists." 38 IRISH-AMERICAN HISTORICAL MISCELLANY Exact accompt of all y* Land, white semants; and ^ within y* Said parrish Taken This 22^ Decemb' 1679 " : Neg- i ti < John Barry 14 Nicholas Blake 9 Tobias Burk. 4 William Buttler 10 James Burk 8^ Cornelius Conoway. . . 3 Teague Coughlan..... 7 Bryen Conner 6 Cornelius Gancey. ... 10 John Creede 26 Garrett Dillon. ao William Dowling 3 Morris FitzGerald 15 Hugh Foy 3 Thomas Ford 15 Matthew Gorman 10 Edward Gary 8 Edward Griffin 30 Edward Hart 32 Thomas Haley 12 s u S < 12 Patrick Hughinis 9 7 William Hackett 7 2 Walter Hart 80 I Thomas Hayes 317 . David Kelly 13 1 Thomas Maxwell 24 4 Thomas Mitchell i Daniel MacGraugh. . . 2 3 John MacGraugh 5 2 Hugh Morris 5 9 William Morris 15 Edmond Morris 10 9 Bryen MacBreeckly. . . 19 James Molholland 10 9 John Quiggen 12 I Teague Renny $ I Anthony Slany 3 Owen Shorte 6 Patrick White 13 28 16 3 30 • • 2 2 I 2 • • 8 2 6 • • 2 • • 6 Some property owners in the Parish of St. Andrews, Bar- badoes, 1679-80: < Edward Jordan 28 William Roach 4 John Tayte. 16 Hugh Dunn 10 Dennis Murfey 14 Daniel Donavan 4 Andrew Follyn. 26 I 10 I 5 < i 9 2 Thomas Russell 25 5 Daniel Shahanisse 10 .. John Welch 19 i Mrs. Helen Cantey 20 7 Dermott Mahont 2 Dennis Mackhala 2 The following were owners and possessors of land, hired servants and apprentices, bought servants and n^^oes y« Parish of St. Michaells", Barbadoes (1678-1679): It m IRISH-AMERICAM HISTORICAL WSCEUANY i it I < iiS «« K « Hngli Brandon 25 t 6 Bryan Murphe 9 Cornelius Bryan.... 14 1 I g Thomas Neale 50 Patrick Carney 5 .. .. I David Welch s Roger Dunn 7 3 Among those to whom tickets were granted, in 1679, to leave Barbadoes are mentioned: Dennis Burke, to depart in the " Prosperous " for Virginia; John Butler, to depart in the "New London" for London; Michael Bradley, in the " Amity," for London; Teag Bowhane, in the " Society." for Bristol; Elinor A. Butler, in the "Neptune." for Virginia; Walter Buttier, in the "John and Sarah." for New York; Jeoffrey Burke in the " True Friendship," for Antigua; Teag Dunnohoe, in the " Margaret," for Beaumaris; Cornelius and JefTory Dunnohoe, in the " Margaret." for Beaumaris; Teage Finn, in the " Industry," for Bristol; John Fitz Jarrell [Fitz Gerald], in the "Swallow," for Liverpool: Hugh Farrell, in the " Dove," for Nevis; Dennis Griffin, in the "John and Francis," for Antigua; William Healy, in the " Society," for Bristol; Dennis Haley, in the " Society," for Bristol; Michael Jennings, in the " Rutter," for Jamaica; John and Ellinor Kennedy, in the "Society," for Bristol; Richard Lynch, in the "True Friendship," for Nevis; Morgan Lynch, in the "Resolution," for Antigua; Daniel Mahony, in the "Friends Adventure," for Antigua; Daniel Murphy, in the " Industry," for Bristol; Owen Magwaine, in the "Industry" for Bristol; John Mahane, in the " Industry," for Bristol; James Mahone, in the "Plantacon," for Carolina; Patrick MacDaniell, in the " Neptune," for Virginia; Patrick Maden, in the "True Friendship," for Antigua; Martin Neagle, in the " Young William," for Virginia; Ann O'Neal, in the "Rutter," for Jamaica; John Querk, in the "William and Susan," for New England; Luke Rainy, in the " Prosperous," for Virginia; Teige Skahane, in the " Industry," for Bristol; Edmond Welch, in the " Rebecca." for Virginia. 40 IRISH-AMERICAN HISTORICAL MISCELLANY The origin of the name Newport News, Va., has long been a subject for discussion. President Lyon G. Tyler, of the College of William and Mary, Virginia, traces the name to Port Newce, Ireland, whence Daniel Gookin transported some emigrants and cattle to Virginia, about 1620, naming his landing place New Port Newce. According to the " Vir- ginia Historical Magazine," Gookin was " of Cargoline, near Cork, Ireland," and came to Virginia with 50 men of his own and 30 passengers. By " Cargoline " was doubtless meant Carrigaline, which borders Cork harbor on the southwest. Roger Williams, arriving from England, in 1644, brought with him to Boston letters from members of the Briti^ par- liament, and others, to " leading men of the Bay." In these letters friendship is counselled, and mention is made of un- desirable " neighbors you are likely to find near unto you in Virginia, and the unfriendly visits from the west of England and from Ireland." It eventually happened that Williams himself became "undesirable" and "unfriendly" to the self-sufficient rulers of " the Bay," and had to leave Massa- chusetts and take up his abode in Rhode Island. Daniel McCarty, born in 1679 was speaker of the Virginia House of Burgesses in 171 5. He was buried at Montross, Westmore- land County, Va. Lucy Todd O'Brien wedded, in 1698, John Baylor of Gloucester County, Va. The year 1710, and thereabouts, witnessed the beginning of a large Irish immigration to Virginia. The new comers settled principally along the Blue Ridge, where are now the counties of Rockbridge and Patrick. Such places as Kinsale, Lynchburgh, and the like attest the presence, in large num- bers, of Irish people. From these sturdy pioneers came many people who attained prominence in Virginia. As an indication of the large Irish population in Virgfinia prior to the Revolution, it may be stated that long before the War for Independence Washington was colonel of a Virginia regiment in which appear the following names: Barrett, Bryan, Bums, Burke, Carroll, Coleman, Conner, Connerly, Conway, Coyle, Daily, Deveeny, Devoy, Dona- IRISH-AMERICAN HISTORICAL MISCELLANY 41 hough, Ford, Gorman, Hennesy, Kennedy. Lowry, McBride, McCoy, McGrath, McGuire, McKan, McLoughlin, Martin, Moran, Murphy, Powers, etc. The regiment took part in the struggles against the French and Indians. Lar^e numbers of Irish are found at this period in the "^ other colonies. In 1756, for instance. New Hampshire raised * a regiment of 700 men for the " expedition against Crown Point." The regiment was commanded by Colj Meserve, of Portsmouth, and included in its ranks: Daniel Murphy, James Melony, Darby Sullivan, John McMahone, Daniel Kelley, James O'Neil, Jer. Connor, Daniel Carty, Benjamin Mooney, Michael Johnson, Darbey Kelley. John Meloney. James Kelly, John Welch, Thomas Carty, William Kelley, James McLaughlin, John McLaughlin, Thomas Mc- Laughlin and others bearing Irish names. The Lewis family of Virginia has been very distinguished. The progenitors came to Virginia in 1732. "Perhaps the most distinguished man of Irish birth who identified himself completely with Virginia," writes the Hon. Joseph T. Law- less, recently secretary of state of that commonwealth, "was Gen. Andrew Lewis, who was born in Ireland about 1720, and came to Virginia with his parents in 1732. John Lewis, the father, was the first white man who fixed his home in the mountains of West Augusta. Andrew Lewis served as a major in the regiment commanded by Washington in the Ohio campaign of 1754 and 1755. He served with valor in the French and Indian wars and was highly regarded by Washington, at whose suggestion he was appointed a briga- dier-general in the Continental army. Four of Andrew's brothers served in the Revolutionary war, one of them, CoL Charles Lewis, being killed at Point Pleasant. No better evidence of the value which Virginia placed on the services of this Irishman could be wished than the fact that she deemed his effigy worthy to stand for all time beside the immortal group of Henry, Mason, Marshall, Nelson, and , Adjutant- General's Report," 42 IRISH-AMERICAN HISTORICAL MISCELLANY Jefferson, which surrounds the heroic equestrian statue of Washington in the Capitol Square at Richmond. Descend- ants of John Lewis, the father of Gen. Andrew Lewis, are numerous in the State at this day. Some of them have been very distinguished men. John F. Lewis, who died recently, was lieutenant-governor of Virginia and a senator of the United States. Lunsford L. Lewis, his half-brother, was president of the Supreme Court of Appeals of Virginia, for twelve years, retiring from that office a few years ago." CHAPTER V. Ever-Increasing Irish Iinini^ation to the Colonies from the Year 1700 Down — Rev. Cotton Mather Mentions a Projected " Colony of Iri'ih " — Extracts from the Records of Portsmouth, N, H., and Boston, Mass. — The Charitable Irish Society — Advent of George Berkeley. From the year 1700 down, immigration to the American colonies, from Ireland, shows an ever-increasing volume. " A steady flood of Irish immigrants poured into all the col- onies from Maine to Georgia and down into the West Indies. All parts of Ireland were represented among these new owners. Nova Scotia, Newfoundland and other places in__ that section also received large accessions. Rev. Cotton Mather, of Boston, delivered a sermon in 1700, in honor of the arrival of Gov, Bellomont, In this sermon, which he calls a "Pillar of Gratitude," he says; " TTiere has been formidable Attempts of Satan and his Sons to Unsettle us: But what an overwhelming blast from Heaven has defeated all those attempts. * * * At length it was proposed that a Colony of Irish might be sent over to check the growth of this Countrey : An Happy Revo- lution spoil'd that plot: and many an one of more general consequence Than That; " It would be interesting to know to what movement for a " Colony of Irish " Mather refers, Irish settlers had been coming to Boston before he was born, and instead of cliecking the growth of the " Countrey " had greatly contributed to that growth. We find, in 1708, among the garrison at Fort William and Mary, N. H,, Timothy Blake, Jeremiah Libby, John Foy, Samuel Neal, John Neat, and John Mead, In 1710, among the soldiers serving under Capt, John Gilman, of New Hamp- shire, were Jeremiah Connor, Daniel Lary, and Thomas 44 IRISH-AMERICAN HISTORICAL MISCELLANY Lary. Capt. John Giles' company, serving against the In- dians in Maine, in 1723-4, had in its ranks over fifteen natives of Ireland. That was doing very well for one company. The first of the Clogston family * came to New Hampshire some time after 1718. The family was of Irish origfin. Paul Clogston, a descendant of the immigrants, died of wounds received at the battle of Bunker Hill, 1775. An Irish youth, James Cochran, is mentioned in the Massa- chusetts records. He was once taken prisoner by the In- dians, but escaped and brought back a couple of scalps as proof of his experience. The Boston " News Letter," April 29, 1725, says of him: " James Cochran, y* youth that came into Brunswick with two scalps, came to town on Monday last, and on Tuesday produced y* same scalps before y* Hon- orable Lieutenant Governor and Council, for which he re- ceived a reward of two hundred pounds. And for y* further encouragement of young men and others to perform bold and hardy actions in y* Indian war. His Honor y* Lieutenant Governor has been pleased to make him sargeant in y* forces." Among places in New Hampshire bearing Irish names may be mentioned Antrim, Dublin and Londonderry. The latter settlement was started early in 1719 by Irish Presbyterians. The settlement prospered and produced many people who attained prominence in'life. Barstow states that '* In process of time, the descendants of the Londonderry settlers spread over Windham, Chester, Litchfield, Manchester, Bedford, GoflFstown, New Boston, Antrim, Peterborough, and Ack- worth, in New Hampshire, and Barnet, in Vermont. They were also the first settlers of many towns in Massachusetts, Maine, and Nova Scotia. They are now, to the number of 20,000, scattered over all the states of the Union." In 1723, Irish immigrants settled Belfast, Me. As early as 1720, the General Court of Massachusetts re- * A paper on this family appears in the " Register " of the New Eng- land Historic-Genealogical Society » January, 189S. It is from the pen of Watson H. Harwood, M.D., of Chasm Falls, N. Y. IRISH-AMERICAN HISTORICAL MISCELLANY 45 solved that: "Whereas, it appears that certain families re- cently arrived from Ireland, and others from this province, have presumed to make a settlement, * * * that the said people be warned to move off within the space of seven months, and if they fail to do so, that they will be prosecuted by the attorney general, by writs of trespass and eject- ment." • These settlers had located in the neighborhood of Haverhill, Mass., but it does not appear that the writs men- tioned were ever served. While a large part of the Irish thus locating in New Hampshire and Massachusetts, at that period, were Protes- tanis. there were undoubtedly also many Catholics among them. That they did not erect churches and have Mass celebrated is not to be wondered at. The laws would not have permitted it, even had the Catholics been sufficiently numerous in any one locality. Public Catholic services in the New England colonies in those days were out of the question. George Conn emigrated from Ireland about 1720 and, later, settled at Harvard, Mass. He had a son John bom at Harvard in 1740. This son located in Ash- bumham, Mass., about 1761, and was a lieutenant in a com- pany of Minute Men. He was with his command at Cam- bridge, Mass., 1775, and died in 1803. Richard Fitzgerald, " a veteran Latin schoolmaster," wedded Margaret Snowdon of Scituate, Mass., in 1729, Doubtless he was one of the many Irish teachers to be found throughout the colonies at that and subsequent periods. In the Granary Burial Ground, Boston, is a tombstone bearing the following inscription; " Here Lyes y* body of * * Sarah Mahoney, Dau'r of Mr, Cain Mahoney, of Marblehead [Mass.], aged 26 years. Died Nov. 29, 1734." In 1737, Irish residents of Boston got together and founded the Charitable Irish Society, which organization is still in existence. The founders were Protestants, and de- scribed themselves as " of the Irish Nation residing in Bos- " History o£ the Irish Settlers 46 IRISH-AMERICAN HISTORICAL MISCELLANY ton in New England. *****" They organized on St. Patrick's Day. It will be noted that they did not style them- selves " Scotch-Irish " nor did they select St. Andrew's day for their meeting. In founding their organization they were actuated by an " affectionate and Compassionate concern for their countrymen in these Parts, who may be reduced by Sick- ness, Shipwrack, Old age and other Infirmities and unforeseen Accidents." It was provided that the managers, or officers, of the society were " to be natives of Ireland, or Natives of any other Part of the British Dominions of Irish Extraction, bdng Protestants, and inhabitants of Boston." It is believed that this religious clause was early repealed or allowed to become a dead letter. To-day, the greater portion of the membership is composed of Catholics, but no religious lines are drawn. The society is the oldest existing Irish organization in this coun- try. Dean Berkeley, who was later Anglican bishop of Cloyne, came to Rhode Island, in 1729, and took up his residence near Newport. He was a native of the County Kilkenny, and was bom in 1684. He was made Dean of Derry in 1724, and became an advocate of the conversion of the American Indians to Christianity. He was the author of a pamphlet entitled : " A Proposal for Converting the Savage Americans to Christianity, by a Collie to be Erected in the Summer Islands, Otherwise Called the Isles of Bermuda." The Brit- ish parliament voted him £10,000, as an instalment, to be paid him when the projected college had become a fact. He resigned his deanery, and came to America, to await other promised aid from abroad. He resided over two years in Rhode Island, but the expected aid not materializing, he abandoned the project and returned to Ireland. Berkeley was a man of great talent, and upon coming to Rhode Island was quickly conceded the intellectual leadership of the col- ony. His farm near Newport comprised about 90 acres, and was called " Whitehall." Upon departing for Ireland, he bequeathed the " Whitehall " property to Yale College, to which institution he also gave "the finest collection of IRISH-AMERICAN HISTORICAL MISCELLANY 47 books that ever came at one time into America." Becoming Bishop of Cloyne, he was afterward translated to the see of Clogher. He died in 1753. He has been popularly styled " the Kilkenny scholar," a title he certainly merited. Berke- ley was the author of "Alciphron, or The Minute Philoso- pher," a " Theory of Vision," and other works. He paid a \-isit to Boston, Mass., in 1731. The visit is thus referred to in John Walker's diary: " Sept. 12, 1731 ; in y' morn Dean George Barkley preacht in y' Chapell from y* 1st Epistle to Timothy, y' 3'' Chap., Verse 16, and a fine Sermon, accordii^ to my opinion I never heard such an one. A very great audi- tory." By the " Chapell " was meant the King's chapel, still in use in Boston. The verses by Berkeley on the prospect of planting arts and learning in America are an imperishable and wonderful prophecy. They read as follows : The Muse, disgusted at an Age and Clime Barren of every glorious Theme, In distant lands now waits a better Time, Producing Subjects worthy Fame ; In happy Qimes, where from the genial Sun And virgin Earth such Scenes ensue. The Force of Art by Nature seems outdone, And fancied Beauties by the true ; In happy Climes the Seat of Innocence, Where Nature guides and Virtue rules, Where Men shall not impose for Truth and Sense, The Pedantry of Courts and Schools. There shall be sung another golden Age, The rise of Empire and of Arts, The Good and Great inspiring epic Rage, The wisest Heads and noblest Hearts. 48 IRISH-AMERICAN HISTORICAL MISCELLANY Not such as Europe breeds in her decay ; Such as she bred when fresh and young, When heav'nly Flame did animate her Clay, By future Poets shall be sung. Westward the Course of Empire takes its Way ; The four first Acts already past, A fifth shall close the Drama with the Day; Time's noblest Offspring is the last. SOME PORTSMOUTH, N. H., MARRIAGES. Among the marriages recorded * in Portsmouth, N. H., between 171 6 and 1741-2, are the following: John Parkes of Dublin in Ireland and Susanna Preston w' marry** 14 Oct. 171 6. James Berry of Dublin in Ireland and Mehittable Leach w* marry** 18 Oct. 1716. James Wales of Dublin in Ireland in Great Brittain and Mary Sanders of Potsm® w' marry** y* 16 Jan^^ 171 7-18. John Abbott Sen' of Ports" : and Mary Hepworth formerly of Ireland now of Ports" w' marry** 30 July 1718. Jn** Kincade of Waterford in Ireland in Great Brittain* and Martha Churchill of Portsm** w' marry** 13 No: 1718. Sam* Hewey of Coldrain [Coleraine] in y* county of Deny in Ireland in Great Brittaine and Elizabeth Denett wid** of Portsm** w*^ marry** 23 Dec. 1718. David Horney of Galloway [Galway] in Ireland and Eliz* Broughton of Portsm** w"^ marry** No"^: 1720. Thomas Welch of Dunjarvin [Dungarvan] in y* county of Waterford in Ireland and Olive Cam of Kittery in y* Prov* of Maine w*" marry** [no date given, but sometime between 1706 and 1742.] * These and other marriages were recorded by Hon. Joshua Pcircc, who was, at different times town clerk and provincial recorder of deeds. He died in 1743. The erroneous idea that the New Hampshire Irish of that period were all from the North of Ireland is here again exploded, as this list refers, in addition to counties in Ulster, to Dublin, King's, Waterford, Limerick, Cork, Tipperary, and Galway. IRISH-AUERICAN HISTORICAL MISCELLANY 49 Jn"* Henderson of Coldraine [Coleraine] in y* county of Derryc in Ireland and Sarah Keel of Portsm" were marry'' I Jan» 1721-2. Josh. Bruster of Portsm" and Margaret Tomson sometime of Colerain in Ireland w' marry'' 12th Sep' 1722. Jn- Larye of Ireland in y' county of Cork and Hanah Tout of Portsm" w' marry'^ 16 June 1723. Jam* ffaden of Coldkain in y* county of Antrim in Ireland and Hannah Shute of Portsm" w' marry** 8 Ap: 1726. Jam' Kenny of Cadteen in y* county of Terrone [Tyrone] in Ireland in Great Brittain and Lydia Linsby wid" of Portsm" w' marry*" 17 Nov. 1726. John Cochran of y' Parish of Dunbo in Londonderry in y* Kingdom of Ireland and Issabella Smith of y* same place w' marry^ 20th of feb' 1730-1. David Morrison of Waterford in Ireland and Susan Mac- phedenof Portsm" were marry*" 23 March 1 730-1, Water [Walter?] Melony of Waterford in Ireland and Hannah Roe of Portsm" w' marrj'' 2d Jan*" 1731-2. David McMullon of Armagh in y' county of Armagh in Ireland and Ellebseth Witing of Marblehead in N-Engl'' w' marry" y' 12"' of Apr' 1731. Edmund Mcbride of Danfenihana in y* county of Delegalle [Donegal] in Ireland and Sarah Dentt widow of Portsm" w' marry"* 28"' Ocf 1731. David Beverland of Colerain in y* county of Londonderry and Alice Rickett of Bellemenah in y* county of Antrim in Ireland were marry*" y* 5"* of April 1 y^^. Stephen Wisdom of Limbrick [Limerick] in y' kingdom of Ireland and Sarah Thomson near Coldrain of y* same king- dom w' marry^ Sept 17th 1733. Robert Drought of Kings county in Ireland and EHz* Hinds of Portsm" w' marry*" 8th Oct' 1733. Edw^ Gale of Waterford in Ireland and Mary Arrixson of Portsm" w'' marry^ y* g"" of Dec' 1733. George Gilbertson of Colrain in Ireland and Dorothy Hill of Portsm" w' marry* y* 14"' of March 1 733-4. so IRISH-AMERICAN HISTORICAL MISCELLANY John Calwel bom in Clough in y* county of Antrim in y^ kingdom of Ireland and Isabel Wasson of y* same County w' marry*^ 20*^ of March 1734-5. Isaac Miller Born at Binderas in y* Parish of Dunbo in the county of Derby [Deny] in Ireland and Jane Ross of y* same kingdom w*" marry** y* 10^ of April 1734. George Taylor of Saint Mary's Parish in Limerick in y* Kingdom of Ireland and Sarah Phicket of Portsm® w' marry* 23** of June 1736. Samuel Miller bom in y* county of Derry in Ireland and Margaret Calwell w*" marry** y* 25th of Nov' ^7 36. James Wason of y* Parish of Bellemanus in y* county of Antrim in Ireland and Hannah Calwell of y* same place w' marry** y* 30^ of Nov*^ 1 736. Will" Fling of y« Parish of Killrich in the County of Water- ford and Jean Cook of y* county of Tipperary both in Ire- land w*^ marry** y* i8th of Dec"" 1737. Adam Templeton of y* County of Antrim and Parish of Bellavville and Margaret Lendsey in y* county of Derry both in y* kingdom of Ireland was marry** 12* of April 1739. Robert Beard of Nottingham Bom in Colerain in y* king- dom of Ireland and Grissoll Beverland of the same kingdom w"^ marry** 27th of Nov' I739- Mathew Nealy of Nottingham Born at Bellycarry in y* county of Derry in y* kingdom of Ireland and Margaret Beverland of y* same kingdom w' marry** y* 27*^ of Nov' 1739- Daniel Kelly and Joan Rijan [Ryan?] both of Limerick in y* kingdom of Ireland w' marry** Jan^ 15 1 740-1. Daniel McCleres Born at Aflfeody in county of Derry in Ireland and Elizabeth Tomson Born at Bellewoolin in y* county of Antrim in y* same Kingdom w*" marry** 8th of Ap* 1740. Mark Cook born at York in Virginia and Sarah Maddin bom in Limerick in y* kingdom of Ireland w' marry* Detf 22d 1740. Alex' Callwel of y* county of Antrim in y* Parish of Clough IRISH-AMERICAN HISTORJCAL MISCELLANY ^Z in Ireland and Margret Macgregore of Londonderry in N-Hamp'' w^marry^ Nov 4"' 1741. Isaac Miller and Mary Tomson of county of Derry In the parish of Dunbo in y' kingdom of Ireland now of Portsm" v' marry** March g"* 1741-2. fclXTRACTS FROM THE BOSTON, MASS., RECORDS. The following extracts relating to the coming of Irish people are taken from the records of the selectmen of the town of Boston ; Jan. 15. 1715: " Jar\'ice Bethell, sho maker Late of Ire- land who w''' his wife came by way of New found Land into this Town [Boston] in August Last is admitted an Inhabit' on condition, he finde suretyes to y* Satisfaction of y* Sel. men to y' value of loo ["*], Since its consented y' Mr. Shan- nons bond Shall SufSce." May 4. 1723: Whereas great numbers of Persons haue [have] very lately bin Transported from Ireland into this Province, many of which by Reason of the Present Indian war and the Accedents befalling them, Are now Resident in this Town whose Circomstances and Condition are not known, Some of which if due care be not taken may become a Town Charge or be otherwise prejuditial to the wellfair & Prosperity of the Place, for Remady whereof Ordered That Every Person now Resident here, that hath within the Space of three years last past bin brought from Ireland, or for the future Shal come from thence hither, Shal come and enter his name and Occupation with the Town Clerk, and if marryed the number and Age of his Children and Servants, within the Space of fiue [five] dayes on pain of forfeiting and paying the Sum of twenty Shillings for Each offence*** "etc. June ID, 1727: " George Steward from Ireland admitted an Inhabitant upon his giving Security to Indemnifie the Town." Sept. 9, 1730 : "William fryland & francis Clinton Joy- ners from Ireland are admitted to Reside and Inhabit within $2 IRISH-AMERICAN HISTORICAL MISCELLANY this Town and have Liberty to Exercise their Callings etc. Aug. 4, 1736: " Dennis Sullivant being present Informs, That he with his Wife are lately come into this Town from South Carolina by land; That he has been in Town about Five Weeks; That he first Lodg'd at the White Horse Two nights, and a Fortnight at Mrs. Snowdens and now lodges in Long lane, That he designs to return to England or Ire- land, as soon as he can Conveniently Obtain a Passage for himself and his said Wife." Aug. 9, 1736: "By a List from the Impost office. It ap- pearing that Nineteen Transports were just Imported from Cork in Ireland, in the Brig*^ Bootle, Robert Boyd Comman- der, accordingly the said Master was sent for, Who appeared And the Select men Ordered him to take effectual Care to prevent any of the said Transports from coming on Shoar from said Vessell, the said Master Promised Accordingly that they should not come on Shoar, That he was obliged by his orders to Carry them to Virginia, Whither he was bound, and that in the meantime he would keep a Strict Watch on board his said Vessell to prevent their escape." Aug. 16, 1736: " mr. James Wimble Informs That Qipt. Benedict Arnold who just arrived from Cork with Passen- gers, came to his House yesterday, being Lord's day in the afternoon, bringing with him the following Persons, Viz^ Mr. Benj'. Ellard, Gent, and his Wife and Three Children, and a Maid Servant, Joseph Atkins, John Qark, John Seley, Thomas Morgan, James Ellard, John Ellard, Benjamin Gil- lam, Elizabeth Ellard and William Neal. Accordingly the Master Capt. Arnold was sent for Who appeared and gave Information, That he came from [left] Ire- land about Twelve Weeks ago, and that he is Bound to Phila- delphia with his Passengers, Who in all, are one Hundred and Twenty, Hopes to Sail in a few days as soon as he can Re- cruit with Water and Provisions, and Promises That the Passengers which came ashore Yesterdy shall repair aboard again to day. The Ships name is the Prudent Hannah." J IRISH-AMERICAN HISTORICAL MISCELLASV S3 Sept. I, 1736: "John White Cordwainer Informs that he has taken One John Wallace into his Family as a Journey man. Who was lately Imported by Capt. Beard from Ire- land." Sept. 27, 1736: " Mr. John Savell promises to give bond for a Servant, Imported from Ireland in Capt. Arnold, If re- quired. Mr. James Wimble Informs that George Lucas, and his Wife and Child, have Lodged at his House Nineteen Days, They came from Ireland with Capt. Carrall." Sept. 29, 1736: " Joshua Winslow Esq^ Engaged to In- demnify the Town, from any Charge that may Arise or hap- pen by means of William Steward, his Wife and Two Chil- dren, inhabiting in the Town, Who were lately Imported from Ireland by Capt. Boyd." \ov. 10. 1736: " Capt. George Beard being present Ac- cording to Order, Informed the Select Men, That M'. Samuel Waldo, who was now gone to the Eastward, had promised him that upon his return home, he would join with him in giving Security to Indemnify the Town from Charge by rea- son of Passengers Imported from Ireland lately by him the said Beard. Accordingly Capt. Beard was directed to Attend at the Town Clerks Office on Fryday next, in Order to Exe- cute a Bond for that end, on his part." Nov. 24, 1736: "Capt. James Williams together with Gershom Keyes and Josiah Flagg gave Bond of the Penalty of Eleven Hundred Pounds to Indemnify the Town from any Charge on Account of Forty three Passengers by the said Williams Imported from Ireland in the Sloop Two Molly's." June 24, 1737: "Whereas by a List of Passengers from the Impost office. It appears that Bryan Karrick {a Trans- port) and Catharine Driscoll (Spinster) were Imported in the Ship Catharine Robert Waters Master from Ireland. The said Capt Waters appear'd together with m"" Thomas Gunter Merchant, When m' Gunther Promised the Select Men that he would Sufficiently Secure and Indemnify the Town From all Charge by reason of the said Karrick and 54 IRISH-AMERICAN HISTORICAL MISCELLANY Driscoll, but as to giving Bond, he pray'd to be Excused for a few Days." Sept. 7, 1737: "Doctor Nazro Informs that William Berry from Ireland, A Printer of Paper &c. lives in his House, and that he is an Able Bodied Man, and Single." Sept. 7, 1737: " Capt. Daniel Gibbs Conmiander of the Ship Sagamore, (with m^ Ramsey who Charter'd the said Ship) from Ireland, being present were Examined and Inform. That during the Voyage, Several of the Passengers were sick with the Measles.*** but that they were all healthy at present, and had been so for a Month past. Upon which, it was tho't proper to advise with some of the Physicians of the Town." These recommended that the ship's Company and Passengers be not permitted to come into town for some time. They were accordingly sent to Spectacle Island in the harbor. Sept. 15, 1737: "Mr. Samuel Todd appearing. Offers to give Bond for Passengers from Ireland, in the Brigantine Elizabeth, William Mills Conmiander, and proposes Robert Auchmuty Esq"", •m'". Gershom Keyes and m', William Hall for his Sureties** " The matter was arranged. Sept. 28, 1737: "Mr. Joseph St. Lawrence from Ireland Merchant, having imported upwards of Fifty Pounds Ster- ling, Prays he may be Allow'd to Carry on his Business in this Town." Nov. 8, 1737: "Hugh Ramsey, John Weire, and Wil- liam Moore, Executed a Bond of the Penalty of one Thou- sand Pounds to Indemnify the Town from Charge on ace**, of Three Hundred and Eighty One Passengers Imported by Capt. Daniel Gibbs in the Ship Sagamore from Ireland, Sept. IS, 1737." Nov. 8, 1737: " Capt. Daniel Gibbs and Samuel Waldo Executed another Bond of the Penalty of Two Hundred Pounds to Indemnify the Town on acco*. of Twenty Seven Passengers Imported by the said Gibbs from Ireland in the said Ship Sagamore." Nov. 8, 1737: "Capt. James Finney Mess". John Karr IRISH-AMERICAN HISTORICAL MISCELLANY 55 and William Hall Executed a Bond of the Penalty of Six Hundred Pounds to Indemnify the Town on Acco'- of One Hundred and Sixty two Passengers Imported by the said Finney in the Snow Charming Molly from Ireland, Nov. 7, Dec. 13, 1738: " Capt. Nathanael Montgomery and m'. Nath', Bethune Executed a Bond, of the Penalty of Five Hundred Pounds, to the Town Treasurer, Conditioned to Indemnify the Town from Charge on Acco*. of Eig'hty two Passengers imported in the Ship Eagle, William Acton Mas- ter from Ireland." May 29, 1739: " Capt. Ephraim Jackson Commander of the Ship Barwick, together with m'. Samuel Dowse gave Bond to the Town Treasurer, in the Sum of Two Hundred and Fifty Pounds to Indemnify the Town of Boston from all Charges which may arise on acco"'. of Forty Six Pas- sengers, Imported in the Ship Barwick from Ireland." June 24, 1741 : " Robert Henry Appearing Informs that about Six Months ago, he came into this Town *** from Ireland, and desires to be Admitted an Inhabitant & have Liberty to Open a Shop and Exercise the Calling of a Black- smith & Farrier in this Town and proposes mess" Green and Walker for his Bondsmen." Favorable action was taken. Sept. 19, 1744: "At the Desire of His Excellency the Govemour The Select men Sent up to the Almshouse Six- teen Girls & Three Boys & a Woman arrived here yesterday from Cape Breton who were taken About Six Weeks since by a French Privateer [they] being bound from Ireland to Philadelphia***." Nov. 20, 1764: " M' Joseph Henshaw acquaints the Selectmen that he has received into one of his Houses as Tenants, Richard Scollay and William Fennecy, the former came last from Kennebeck, and the latter from Roxbury, both Irishmen." CHAPTER VI. \ Lady Katherine Combury Arrives in New York — Her Illness and Death — ^Irish Presbyterians and Methodists in New York — Some New York Irish Names, 1691 to 1761 — ^James Murra/s RemaripAle Letter. An interesting character in New York was Lady Kath- erine Combury. She was the wife of Edward Hyde, Vis- count Combury, who, in 1701, was appointed governor of the province and held the position, 1702-8. Lady Com- bury, according to James Grant Wilson's " Memorial His- tory of the City of New York," was " the daughter of Lord O'Brian, son of the Earl of Richmond, of Ireland, and of Lady Katherine Stuart, sister of the Duke of Richmond and Lenox. She was married to Lord Combury July 10, 1688, and on the death of her mother became Baroness Clifton of Warwickshire, England. She accompanied her husband to America, suffering from what seems to have been pulmonary complaint, and was never well from the time of he