Vyacheslav Valeryevich Solovyov, known as The Yaroslavl Poisoner, was a Russian serial killer and poisoner. He poisoned six people, including his wife and daughter.

Vyacheslav Solovyov was born on March 12, 1970, in Yaroslavl, Yaroslavl Oblast, Russia. His birth geographical coordinates are 57° 37’ 48” North latitude and 39° 52’ 25” East longitude. Vyacheslav Solovyov passed away at the age of 38 in 2008.

Astrologically, Vyacheslav Solovyov falls under the Sun sign of Pisces, with Cancer as his Ascendant, Taurus as his Moon sign, and Leo as his Black Moon Lilith sign.

Planets

Planets represent different aspects of personality, life themes, and energies within a birth chart, influencing individual characteristics, motivations, and experiences.

Planets in Signs

Planets in a zodiac sign denote how the energies and qualities associated with those planets express themselves within the context of the themes and attributes of that particular zodiac sign.

Sun Pisces Moon Taurus Ascendant Cancer Midheaven Pisces Mercury Pisces Venus Aries Mars Taurus Jupiter Scorpio Saturn Taurus Uranus Libra Neptune Sagittarius Pluto Virgo Ceres Pisces Chiron Aries Eros Capricorn Hygiea Gemini Juno Pisces Pallas Aquarius Vesta Leo Black Moon Lilith Leo North Node Pisces South Node Virgo Part of Fortune Virgo Vertex Sagittarius

Sunin Pisces21° 22’ 48”

The Sun in Pisces in the Natal Chart makes you a sensitive and mystical healer. You are aligned with your subconscious wisdom and can be […] Read more »

Moonin Taurus22° 20’ 44”

The Taurus Moon in the Natal Chart makes you sensual and reasonable. You are empathetic and can be rational and down to earth. You are […] Read more »

Ascendantin Cancer21° 37’ 45”

Cancer Ascendant in the Natal Chart makes you emotional and expressive. You can’t hide your feelings and are transparent about your vulnerable nature. You have […] Read more »

Midheavenin Pisces13° 8’ 54”

Pisces Midheaven in the Natal Chart makes you emotional and intuitive in your career path. You are emotional and can be sensitive to other people’s […] Read more »

Mercuryin Pisces11° 16’ 19”

Mercury in Pisces in the Natal Chart makes you spiritually focused. You think about your higher mission and can be idealistic. You are subtle and […] Read more »

Venusin Aries2° 41’ 14”

Aries Venus in the Natal Chart makes you passionate about your desires. You are assertive and willing to pursue your dreams. You seek satisfaction by […] Read more »

Marsin Taurus3° 48’ 24”

Taurus Mars in the Natal Chart is an ideal placement for security and stability. You are passionate about helping others to set a foundation for […] Read more »

Jupiterin Scorpio5° 19’ 3”

Scorpio Jupiter in the Natal Chart relates to a generation born with the mission to expose hidden secrets and find empowerment and vision. You are […] Read more »

Saturnin Taurus5° 55’ 32”

Taurus Saturn in the Natal Chart is a placement shared by people born within three years of each other. They are part of a cohort […] Read more »

Uranusin Libra7° 24’ 48”

Libra Uranus in the Natal Chart indicates a generation that aspires to live up to their higher ideals. You are born at a time when […] Read more »

Neptunein Sagittarius0° 52’ 2”

Sagittarius Neptune in the Natal Chart indicates you are part of a generation born to help society expand. You help others grow and push boundaries. […] Read more »

Plutoin Virgo26° 11’ 6”

Pluto in Virgo in the Natal Chart indicates a generation dedicated to exposing secrets related to misuse of power in agriculture, healthcare, and service industries. […] Read more »

Ceresin Pisces18° 5’ 53”

Ceres in Pisces in the Natal Chart indicates a loving and mystical generation. You are part of a cohort that follows your ideals and can […] Read more »

Chironin Aries5° 25’ 28”

Aries Chiron in the Natal Chart brings passion and persuasiveness. You help others heal from old wounds by showing your strength and tapping into your […] Read more »

Erosin Capricorn3° 21’ 55”

What does Eros in Capricorn mean for your personality? You are comforting and sensual. You are affectionate and can be gentle and romantic. You have […] Read more »

Hygieain Gemini5° 28’ 58”

Hygiea in Gemini in the Natal Chart gives you a broad perspective. You understand the importance of mental and physical health. You advocate for hygiene […] Read more »

Junoin Pisces6° 7’ 26”

Juno in Pisces in the Natal Chart makes you empathetic and imaginative in love. You fall in love quickly and can put your partner on […] Read more »

Pallasin Aquarius22° 24’ 44”

Pallas in Aquarius in the Natal Chart makes you explosive and creative. You can be eager to pursue your futuristic vision and motivated by your […] Read more »

Vestain Leo12° 2’ 32”

Vesta in Leo in the Natal Chart makes you fiery and intense. You go to extremes to show your creative side. Your sacred mission involves […] Read more »

Black Moon Lilithin Leo10° 35’ 31”

Leo Black Moon Lilith in the Natal Chart makes you spontaneous and impulsive. You are dramatic and use your creative gifts to compensate for fears […] Read more »

North Nodein Pisces11° 33’ 38”

Pisces North Node in the Natal Chart makes you more open to your spiritual mission. You are influenced by your moods and can be prone […] Read more »

South Nodein Virgo11° 33’ 38”

Virgo South Node in the Natal Chart indicates you are a humble and comforting person. You have a grounded personality and can be gentle and […] Read more »

Part of Fortunein Virgo22° 35’ 41”

Virgo Part of Fortune in the Natal Chart makes you a perfectionist with a desire to serve others. You have high standards, but this helps […] Read more »

Vertexin Sagittarius2° 40’ 26”

Sagittarius Vertex in the Natal Chart makes you friendly and optimistic. You are encouraging and have a gift for helping others expand their minds. You […] Read more »

Planets in Elements

Planets in elements denote how the fundamental energies and qualities associated with those planets interact with the elemental nature of the signs they inhabit, shaping an individual’s overall temperament and approach to life.

Water Element

Astrologers and other occultists study the water element to understand emotional healing. This element relates to love and compassion. Numerous planets in water signs in […] Read more »

Earth Element

The earth element in astrology is associated with practicality and grounding. This element is associated with career and wealth. Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorn are signs […] Read more »

Fire Element

The fire element in astrology is associated with passion and motivation. This element brings creativity and intensifies planets and natal houses. Your competitive nature comes […] Read more »

Air Element

The air element in astrology corresponds to three signs; Gemini, Libra, and Aquarius. This element is associated with new insights and perspectives. The air element […] Read more »

Planets in Qualities

Planets in qualities signify how the inherent attributes and tendencies of those planets align with the modalities of the signs they occupy, influencing an individual’s style of action, decision-making, and engagement with the world.

Mutable Quality

The third Quality astrological signs are grouped into is mutable. Mutable Signs come at the end of a season. Mutable Signs are associated with flexibility […] Read more »

Fixed Quality

The second Quality in astrology is the Fixed modality. Fixed Signs follow the Cardinal Signs, bringing strength and endurance. These signs build upon the foundation […] Read more »

Cardinal Quality

The Cardinal quality in astrology is associated with new seasons and initiative. Cardinal signs mark the equinoxes and solstices. The Cardinal modality represents the extremes […] Read more »

Planets in Houses

Planets in a zodiac house signify where in life’s areas and experiences the energies and influences of those planets are predominantly focused and expressed.

Sun Tenth House Moon Eleventh House Mercury Ninth House Venus Tenth House Mars Eleventh House Jupiter Fifth House Saturn Eleventh House Uranus Fourth House Neptune Fifth House Pluto Fourth House Ceres Tenth House Chiron Tenth House Eros Sixth House Hygiea Eleventh House Juno Ninth House Pallas Ninth House Vesta Second House Black Moon Lilith Second House North Node Ninth House South Node Third House Part of Fortune Fourth House Vertex Fifth House

Aspects

Aspects reveal the dynamic relationships and interactions between planets within a birth chart, influencing the way their energies combine and manifest in an individual’s life experiences and personality traits.

Within this birth chart, there are 22 major aspects, alongside 23 minor aspects, as well as 6 extra aspects.

Major Aspects

Major aspects highlight significant connections between planets, providing insights into key dynamics, challenges, and potentials shaping an individual’s life journey and psychological makeup.

Sun Trine Ascendant Sun Sextile Moon Moon Sextile Ascendant Jupiter Opposite Saturn Saturn Quincunx Uranus Mercury Conjunct Midheaven Venus Trine Neptune Mars Opposite Jupiter Mars Conjunct Saturn Venus Quincunx Jupiter Mars Quincunx Neptune Moon Trine Pluto Mercury Quincunx Uranus Mars Quincunx Uranus Sun Opposite Pluto Pluto Sextile Ascendant Mercury Sextile Saturn Venus Opposite Uranus Neptune Sextile Pluto Mercury Trine Jupiter Venus Opposite Pluto Jupiter Trine Midheaven

Explore detailed articles on the major aspects in this birth chart, gaining deeper insights into this cosmic identity. Dive into each aspect and uncover how it shapes Vyacheslav Solovyov ‘s life journey.

Sun Trine Ascendantorb: 0°

The Sun trine Ascendant is a fortunate placement in the Natal Chart. This aspect leads you to feel comfortable with your identity and personality. You […] Read more »

Sun Sextile Moonorb: 1°

The Sun’s sextile Moon in the Natal Chart makes you easygoing and friendly. You are optimistic and share your charming nature without overwhelming others. You […] Read more »

Jupiter Opposite Saturnorb: 1°

Jupiter opposite Saturn in a chart typically creates tension within a person. One side of them might be enthusiastic and adventurous, while the other side […] Read more »

Saturn Quincunx Uranusorb: 1°

Saturn quincunx Uranus in a chart typically indicates there is a strong push and pull between security and change. It can be challenging to balance […] Read more »

Mercury Conjunct Midheavenorb: 2°

Mercury conjunct Midheaven in the Natal Chart makes you intellectual and outgoing. Your career brings opportunities to express your creativity and intelligence. You are thoughtful […] Read more »

Mars Opposite Jupiterorb: 2°

Mars opposite Jupiter in a chart typically indicates that a person has the potential to be highly successful. They will face challenges but are often […] Read more »

Mars Conjunct Saturnorb: 2°

Mars conjunct Saturn in a chart typically indicates that a person is incredibly determined and hard-working. They have a lot of energy and stamina, allowing […] Read more »

Venus Quincunx Jupiterorb: 3°

Venus quincunx Jupiter in a chart can set someone up to develop people-pleasing tendencies. They may not be able to tell others no. They have […] Read more »

Mars Quincunx Neptuneorb: 3°

Mars quincunx Neptune in a chart can create an overinflated sense of self. An inability to set realistic goals and follow reasonable boundaries causes someone […] Read more »

Moon Trine Plutoorb: 4°

The Moon trine Pluto in a chart typically indicates that someone can develop profound connections with themselves, others, and the universe. Someone with this trine […] Read more »

Mercury Quincunx Uranusorb: 4°

Mercury quincunx Uranus in a chart typically indicates that someone can be rebellious, but they are a bit impractical and scattered regarding what they rebel […] Read more »

Mars Quincunx Uranusorb: 4°

Mars quincunx Uranus in a chart typically creates a unique personality and a desire to be seen as different in some way. People with this […] Read more »

Sun Opposite Plutoorb: 5°

The Sun opposite Pluto in a Natal Chart is an intense placement. You come across as severe to others. You can be intense and have […] Read more »

Mercury Sextile Saturnorb: 5°

What does Mercury sextile Saturn mean? When Mercury and Saturn are connected in this way, a person will likely have a more serious, organized, and […] Read more »

Venus Opposite Uranusorb: 5°

Venus opposite Uranus in a chart creates a zest for life and excitement in romance. Any person with this in their chart will need a […] Read more »

Mercury Trine Jupiterorb: 6°

Mercury trine Jupiter in a chart typically indicates that a person has a positive view of life but is also intelligent and grounded enough not […] Read more »

Venus Opposite Plutoorb: 7°

Venus opposite Pluto in a chart creates intensity regarding romance, attraction, and relationships. There is also a darkness in this opposition. The intense love and […] Read more »

Minor Aspects

Minor aspects represent subtler connections between planets, offering additional nuances and layers of interpretation to understand more detailed influences on an individual’s personality and experiences.

Moon Square Pallas Moon Trine Part of Fortune Mercury Conjunct North Node Mercury Opposite South Node Venus Trine Vertex Mars Trine Eros Jupiter Quincunx Chiron Jupiter Quincunx Hygiea Saturn Sextile Juno Sun Opposite Part of Fortune Pallas Quincunx Ascendant Ascendant Sextile Part of Fortune Vesta Quincunx Midheaven Mercury Quincunx Vesta Mercury Quincunx Black Moon Lilith Venus Square Eros Mars Quincunx Vertex Jupiter Trine Juno Midheaven Conjunct North Node Midheaven Opposite South Node Uranus Opposite Chiron Uranus Trine Hygiea Neptune Conjunct Vertex

Discover additional layers of meaning with this collection of articles on the minor aspects found in Vyacheslav Solovyov ‘s birth chart. Delve deeper into these cosmic nuances to gain a richer understanding of this astrological profile.

Mercury Conjunct North Nodeorb: 0°

Mercury conjunct the North Node makes you curious about your spiritual purpose. You are attracted to learning about mystical paths and may find Karmic release […] Read more »

Mercury Opposite South Nodeorb: 0°

Mercury opposite the South Node in a chart calls for someone to move beyond the views they learned in childhood and their natural wisdom. If […] Read more »

Jupiter Quincunx Chironorb: 0°

Jupiter quincunx Chiron in a chart creates a disconnect between inner wounds and the potential for growth. It can be difficult for a person to […] Read more »

Jupiter Quincunx Hygieaorb: 0°

Jupiter quincunx Hygiea in a chart can indicate that someone is preoccupied with the health of others around them. They might care specifically about the […] Read more »

Sun Opposite Part of Fortuneorb: 1°

The Sun opposite Part of Fortune in the Natal Chart makes you second-guess your best attributes. You often miss opportunities because you downplay your gifts. […] Read more »

Ascendant Sextile Part of Fortuneorb: 1°

The Ascendant sextile of the Part of Fortune in the Natal Chart makes you creative and resourceful. You are open to adapting to changing situations, […] Read more »

Mercury Quincunx Vestaorb: 1°

Mercury quincunx Vesta in a chart typically indicates that a person feels a tense dynamic between their intellect and their potential for devotion to others […] Read more »

Midheaven Opposite South Nodeorb: 2°

The Midheaven opposite the South Node in the Natal Chart makes you eager to pursue your higher ambitions and career. You seek fame and prosperity. […] Read more »

Neptune Conjunct Vertexorb: 2°

Neptune conjunct the Vertex in a chart can lead to a focus on art, inspiration, spirituality, and intuition. This conjunction often has psychic or healing […] Read more »

Extra Aspects

Extra aspects, though less emphasized than major or minor aspects, contribute subtle nuances and intricacies to the overall astrological interpretation, offering additional insights into an individual’s personality traits and life experiences.

Chiron Sextile Hygiea Pallas Quincunx Part of Fortune Vesta Quincunx North Node Hygiea Square Juno Vesta Conjunct Black Moon Lilith Black Moon Lilith Quincunx North Node

Explore how these extra aspects contribute to the intricate tapestry of Vyacheslav Solovyov ‘s life path through subtler influences. Dive into each extra aspect and uncover the hidden gems that shape a unique cosmic identity.

Vesta Conjunct Black Moon Lilithorb: 1°

Vesta conjunct Black Moon Lilith in a chart aligns someone’s inner flame with their shadow. They might connect to the darker side of spirituality and […] Read more »

Black Moon Lilith Quincunx North Nodeorb: 1°

Black Moon Lilith quincunx the North Node in the Natal Chart makes you reluctant to own your power. You are intense and feel awkward asserting […] Read more »

Houses

A house starting in a zodiac sign indicates the area of life where the qualities and themes of that sign are particularly emphasized and influential within an individual’s birth chart.