(As of 17 December 2014…)

General Information

Eddie Peng was born on 24 March 1982 in Penghu, an island in the Republic of Taiwan. At the age of 13, he migrated to Canada with his family. He was enrolled in the University of British Columbia, majoring in Economics.

In 2002, he returned to Taiwan from Canada to attend the funeral of his maternal grandmother. He was then discovered by Director Yang Da Qing and was casted to star in his debut drama “The White Paper of Love”.

In 2005, he gained attention through the character Tang Yu that he starred as in the drama <Chinese Paladin>.

In 2006, Eddie made his debut in the filming industry through the film “Exit No. 6” as the male lead of the film.

In 2007, Eddie was nominated as The Best Newcomer in the 44th Taiwan Golden Horse Awards based on the film “My DNA Says I Love You”. He also produced a short clip for Golden Horse Award’s short film category section, which is a representative work of him as a director.

In 2009, due to dispute in contract with his former management company, his career went into a slump. When the dispute was settled, Eddie made a comeback, releasing an EP called <Must Love>.

In 2011, Eddie played the main lead in a film called <Jump! Ashin!> and it became the turning point of his career. He was nominated as The Best Male Lead in the 48th Taiwan Golden Horse Awards based on this film. Eddie then also filmed <Cold War>, <A Wedding Invitation>, <Unbeatable>, and so on. He was nominated as The Best Supporting Actor in the 50th Taiwan Golden Horse Awards and 33rd Hong Kong Film Award.

In 2014, he starred in <Rise of The Legend> as the new generation Huang Fei Hung, following Jet Li and Vincent Zhao who also played Huang Fei Hung before. The romance film <Fleet of Time>, which Eddie starred in, that was based on a famous novel, the television drama <Sound of The Desert>, and the film <Rise of The Legend> all received high attention. His movies and dramas were released back to back in October, November and December of 2014, marking the peak of his career so far. He also plays the main lead in <To The Fore>, a film directed by Dante Lam, which was expected to be released in the summer of 2015.

Chinese Name : Peng Yu Yan (彭于晏)

English Name : Eddie (Edward) Peng Yu Yan

Nickname : Doggie, Eddie, YanYan

*Doggy – In a drama which Eddie participated in as Cheng Tian, he had a unique ability, which is the sense of smell that is as sensitive as a doggy’s. Cheng Tian’s father called him Doggy in the drama and that was how the nickname came about.

Nationality : Canada

Country of birth : Penghu, The Republic of Taiwan

Ethnicity : Han

Birthday : 24 March 1982

Blood Type: AB

Horoscope : Aries

Height : 182cm

Weight : 72kg

Occupation : Singer, Actor, Model

Graduating University : University of British Columbia

High School : Sir Winston Churchill Secondary School (Grad 2000) as Edward Peng

Language : Chinese, English, Sign Language

Favourite Male Artist: Takuya Kimura, Jay Chou, and Craig David

Favourite Female Artist: Vivian Hsu and Coco Lee

Favourite Type of Music: Techno, Pop, and Hip Hop

Favourite Movie: Educational and Meaningful Movies

Favourite Food: Beef Steak, Taiwanese Snack, and Fruit

Most Hated Food: Anything sweet

Hobbies: Basketball, Singing, Dancing, Acting, Skiing, Swimming, and Reading Comics

Embarrassing Moment: Slipped in a toilet and his whole body was covered with feces

Biggest Wish: To live a simple and happy life

Early Experience

As a child, Eddie has the experience of filming over 10 advertisements, making him a child star.

Personal Life

Eddie was born into a single-parent family. His parents were divorced when he was a child, so he lacked parental love but his love and attachment for his mother is very deep. From when Eddie’s memory began forming, his father was never by his side. Instead, his mother was a hardworking career woman, having to earn money to support him and two of his older sisters. Every day, she had to work till 2-3am in the middle of the night before being able to get some rest. Therefore, the heavy responsibility of taking care of Eddie was handed over to his maternal grandmother. As the only male offspring in the family, Eddie was loved and doted on dearly so his personality turned out to be optimistic and pure. His maternal grandmother used all her savings on migrating to Canada with him. Having lived in Canada with his mother and his two older sisters for many years, Eddie originally pursued tertiary education in the University of British Columbia, majoring in Economics. However, in order to enter the showbiz industry, he was willing to give up his academics and leave his family to develop his career in Taiwan.