The Pentozali or Pentozalis (Greek: Πεντοζάλης) is the trademark folk dance of the island of Crete. It takes its name from its five (πέντε pente) basic steps and its sprightly and ultimately very fast pace.The Pentozali is a war dance, vigorous, with high jumping movements and allows for much improvisation. It starts at a moderate pace and accelerates progressively. The dancers hold each other by the shoulders and form an incomplete circle, which rotates counterclockwise very slowly, or sometimes not at all, because most of the lively steps are semistationary. Pentozali music is instrumental: the main tune is played by the pear-shaped, bowed Cretan lyre, to the accompaniment of a lute, played not in a melodic but in a percussive-like fashion. It is the lyre player who usually directs the flow of the dance. The Cretan expressed through the "pentozali" their undying desire for liberation, their fighting spirit and their heroic soul. The difference from the other Cretan war dances is that it is mainly a revolutionary dance. Its historical, revolutionary, heroic and symbolic character is confirmed by its dynamic and explosive style and its historical-folklore background. As years went by women started dancing the pentozali as well. According to old musicians and dancers the dance spread to the rest Crete in the 1920s. The accompanying music in 2/4 time is played either by a violin or lyra together with a lute or mandolin (or ascompadoura in the mountainous areas). According to tradition the first dancer in the "pentozali" does not take individual and skilful initiatives but he is one of the dancers with the same and homogeneous movement. However, the first dancer often takes the initiative and creates a group of men only, in front of the women, which does not follow the basic steps of the whole group, does not dance in a circle but performs at the same time the step variations of the dance in a straight line. The "paties", the multiple stabs of the feet on the ground, are the main characteristic of these variations. It is said that they stand for the volley of bullets from the Cretan weapons in the battles against the Turks.[Cretan Music and Dance]

The war dance Maleviziotis, which is also called "kastrinos pidichtos", nowadays known all over Crete, may be coming from the ancient Cretan dance "Orsitis". The term "orses" or "ortses" describe the usual jumps and twisting movements of the first dancer and is very adequately used for the dance. The dance has both a rural and an urban version, with minor variations in the basic steps and the accompanying music. It is called "Maleviziotis" because it appeared for the first time (in it its present form) in the countryside and specifically in the region of "Maleviziou" within the Herakleion prefecture. Later it was also called "kastrinos pidichtos" because it was danced inside the old town of Herakleion, the Kastro. This is obvious from its name "kastrinos"="kastrianos", namely the one inside the castle. A popular couplet is: "We are going to play both the "kastrinos" and the "maleviziotis" which is danced by those who are young" As it has already been mentioned, it a dance of central Crete and it is said that it was spread both to the west and the east in the 1920s. It should be noted that in Chania it was also called "kastrini sousta". It is danced by both men and women, who are holding each other´s hands at the height of their shoulders having their arms bended, First they dance in a circle and then in a straight line. The basic steps of the dance are sixteen (eight forward and eight backwards). The accompanying music, in 2/3 time is performed by a lyra or violin accompanied by a lute or mandolin or bulgari (or ascombandoura in the mountainous areas). Any dancer can "lead" the dance by leaving the circle and going to the front. In other cases, two dancers, at the same time, leave their positions in the circle and the one goes to the front and becomes "first" while the other goes to the back? Among all the Cretan dances "maleviziotis" distinguishes itself both for its individuality and its tendency to check the dancers. Its dance structure allows the first dancer to develop so many improvisations that they become the main theme of his dancing performance. In this dance the "first dancer" can show his skill and his skilful creativity. If he has mastered the technique of the Cretan dances, he will vary his step with skilful jumps, sittings down, with multiple taps of the hands on the feet, with stampings of the feet on the ground, with pauses, with jumps and tapping of the hands on the feet (the so-called talimia), he will detach himself form the circle, he will turn around, he will turn around even in the air (the so-called orses), he will turn around and sit down, he will move in the space with high jumps and tapping of his hands on his feet etc.[Cretan]

Kritikos syrtos means "syrtos from Crete." There are many variations to the dance; every village does it slightly differently. The choreography we use for performances has been developed for a specific piece of Cretan music. The movements of the Cretan Syrtos are calm, sober, and gentle. They constitute the respite before the battle, the resting of the soul, and calming of thoughts. The Syrtos is danced in a manner reminiscent of a religious ceremony that expresses the mystical aspects of life and death, passion and grief of the Cretan spirit. It is a ceremonial and revolutionary dance, modest and dynamic simultaneously, which has been linked to the Cretan life and is present in every dance activity. In this dance, as well, the improvisations of the "first dancer" are present, however, his turns, his "tsakismata" (the bend of the waist) and the "talimia" are few, modest and controlled.[Cretan]

Sousta, the Cretan love dance, which is danced by one or more couples (a man dances facing a woman) incorporates plenty of elements from the ancient pyrrhic dance. This is proved by the way in which it is danced. Women and men dancers, one after the other, form a semicircle, holding each other´s hands at the height of their shoulders with their arms bended. After dancing a whole circle they are split in two teams (one of men and one of women), the one facing the other and having a distance of approximately three metres between them. Then, the men approach the women and a kind of a dance dialogue takes place between them. During the dance they touch each other, they part, the one passes under the arms of the other, they embrace, they come closer but then they go away. All these make a beautiful and amorous dance.The man and the woman, standing the one opposite the other "battle" to conquer each other, to fall in love with each other and finally to love each other. The man with vivid hand gestures and virile steps full of lust tries to make her respond to his invitation. The woman with cute mincing steps, beautiful subtle hand movements and passionate head bows, sometimes encourages the man while others she lets him down. Sometimes she approaches him and gives him hope while others she avoids him. In the end, however, the desirable union is achieved. The three basic steps of the dance which look like little jumps and make the dancers´ bodies look like being pushed by a spring, must be the reason that the dance during the Venetian sovereignty (1204-1669) changed its name into "sousta" from the Italian word susta, which means spring. The quick rhythm of the accompanying music, which can accept a lot of variations allows the couple a great freedom of initiatives and movements in the space and less austerity in expression. The accompanying music, in 2/4 time is played either by a lyra or a violin, accompanied by a lute or mandolin (or ascompandoura in the mountainous regions). The main characteristic of "sousta" is the hand movements. The hands become a principal means of expression, since there are some hand movements which are combined with foot movements. The couple must also match appropriately so as to form the traditional dance patterns. The interdependence of the two imposes a relationship of responsibility and respect on each other.[Cretan Music and Dance]