Pentozali in English dictionary

Pentozali

Sample sentences with "Pentozali"

Declension Stem

Antonis had the feeling that Anna had offered herself to him for more than a pentozali.

Others have also crossed boundaries and are known beyond the regions where they originated; these include the Pentozali from Crete, Hasapiko from Constantinople, Zonaradikos from Thrace, Serra from Pontos and Balos from the Aegean islands.

The man was a human pentozali.

If you like to hear the music of the most popular cretan dances click to download the following mp3s Pidihtos(Maleviziotis) Syrtos Pentozalis Sousta Syganos Appartementen Pauleva Aanvlieghaven: Heraklion Ligging: dit uit 3 gebouwtjes bestaande complex is uitstekend gelegen, in het sfeervolle centrum van Koutouloufari.

Greek music Greek dances Sousta Greek folk music Pentozali Syrtos List of folk dances sorted by origin Google video of lerikos Dance instructions Alternative visual instructions

Crete has a well known folk dance tradition, which comes from ancient Greece and includes swift dances like pentozalis and other like sousta, syrtos, trizali, katsabadianos, chaniotikos, siganos, pidichtos Lasithou, maleviziotikos, tsiniaris, ierapetrikos and laziotikos.

The Cretan dances (pentozalis, haniotikos, maleviziotikos) and the "madinades" and "rizitika" songs are still part of the life in Crete and not just a distant relic of the past or something touristic.

The island is known for its Mantinades-based music (typically performed with the Cretan lyra and the laouto) and has many indigenous dances, the most noted of which is the Pentozali.

On Crete there are many kinds of traditional dances, like Maleviziotis, Pentozalis, Sousta, Syrtos and Syganos.

Ntames Pentozali (siganos & grigoros) Pidikhtos (Anogeianos & Ethianos) Sousta (Rethemniotiki) Syrtos, like in the music of mainland Greece is a dance in 4/4 time.

The “pentozali” is a kind of a memorial service to Daskalogiannis, his men and the revolution and for for this reason modesty and respect should be shown.

Pentozalis Dancers from the tholos tomb at Kamilari

Accounts which have been preserved say that up till the early 1960’s, the people of the provinces of Kissamos and Selinos, while dancing the pentozali, on hearing each tune of the dance music, used to call out the name of the captain that corresponded to the music phrase, in this way honouring the memory of Daskaloyiannis, his chief comrades and their revolt.

Siganos - Pentozalis (Greek music from the isle of Crete)

At County Hall Chania found yesterday morning Spyros Prevezanos, inspired the idea to make a human chain of dancers to dance slow Cretan pentozali, Sunday, August 7 and 8 pm, Chania to Agios Nikolaos, to meet me representatives of the Prefecture of Chania Prefecture of cultural associations and discuss the organizational aspects of the event. Mr. Prevezanos, president of the association "Planet Crete,"

Demonstration – Presentation – History of traditional dances as sousta, maleviziotis, pentozali, by dancers of traditional Cretan dance.

The Pentozalis is danced all over Crete, varying slightly from place to place.

Pentozalis (Greece folk Dances)

Pentozalis (Grèce / Documents recueillis par Domna Samiou)

The spontaneous musical call led Greek and foreign passers dancing the traditional "pentozali" from side to side in the old port... journey along its beaches

It comes after Siganos Pentozalis and it is danced at a slow pace and in a circle, with the arms of ach dancer put on the shoulders of his fellow dancers.

Tonight the whole of Crete, from one end to another to join in an enormous chain and dancing to the rhythm of pentozali to send a message around the world peace, love, brotherhood, a day after the 65th anniversary of the crime with the release of atomic bomb on Hiroshima.

Pentozali dance song (Greek Traditional Music 1 / Tunes and songs of Crete)

Through the centuries women started dancing the pentozali as well.

The main Cretan dances are ‘pentozalis’, dating back to the ancient ‘Pyrrhic’ [a male coming-of-age initiation ritual dance linked to a warrior victory celebration], ‘kastrinos pidichtos’, ‘sousta’, ‘siganos syrtos’ and ‘chaniotikos syrtos’.

Available translations

French

Authors