David Bowie's death on Sunday night cast a long shadow over the week, and it's not getting any brighter. British actor Alan Rickman, known for his roles in Die Hard and the Harry Potter movies, died today at the age of 69 after a battle with cancer.

Rickman began his career as a stage actor with the Royal Shakespeare Company and Royal Court Theatre and earned Tony and Drama Desk Award nominations for his performance in Les Liaisons Dangereuses. He eventually came to prominence in America thanks to his role as Hans Gruber in Die Hard, but he will likely be most remembered for his integral roles in two beloved science fiction and fantasy films.

To an entire generation raised on J.K. Rowling's Harry Potter novels and their film adaptations, he’ll always be the dour, vindictive, and ultimately tragic Hogwarts Professor Severus Snape. Apocryphal stories say producers initially wanted Tim Roth to play the part, but Roth took the makeup-heavy lead villain role in Tim Burton’s bizarre remake of Planet of the Apes instead. It was a fortuitous turn of events, as now it’s impossible to think of anyone but Rickman swishing those black robes, his every word soaked with jealousy and dripping with venom for Harry "The Chosen One" Potter. In a franchise that seemingly tapped every single notable British actor of multiple generations to play supporting roles, from Emma Thompson and David Thewlis to Maggie Smith and John Hurt, Rickman shone above all others. And though book purists bemoaned changes that film directors and screenwriters made to the books, no one could find fault in Rickman's realization of the character.

As for science fiction, Rickman got the best part in the satirical masterpiece Galaxy Quest, the best film about Star Trek fandom ever made and one stealthily better than most of the films in that franchise. As Leonard Nimoy stand-in Alexander Dane, he played a former stage actor reduced to spouting quippy catchphrases as Dr. Lazarus, the hyper-intelligent "Mak'tar" alien. ("By Grabthar’s hammer, by the suns of Warvan, you shall be avenged!") It's a part finely tuned to Rickman's gifts for comedic disdain and rousing emotion, and his begrudging acquiescence to the intergalactic plot mirrors the audience's journey from skeptical wonder to total commitment. There is no replacing Nimoy, but Rickman's turn as Dane came the closest to summarizing Nimoy’s pop-culture predicament post-Spock and earning boatloads of laughs while doing it.

The 61 Best Movies on Disney+ Right Now

Jim Henson: Idea Man, Taylor Swift: The Era’s Tour (Taylor’s Version), and Let It Be are just a few of the movies you should be watching on Disney+ this month.

The 51 Best Shows on Disney+ Right Now

The Acolyte, X-Men ’97, and World Eats Bread are just a few of the shows you should be watching on Disney+ this month.

The 28 Best Movies on Max (aka HBO Max) Right Now

Mad Max, Stop Making Sense, and Dune are just a few of the movies you should be watching on Max this month.

The 19 Best Movies on Amazon Prime Right Now

The Idea of You, Road House, and American Fiction are just a few of the movies you should be watching on Amazon Prime Video this week.

The 29 Best Shows on Apple TV+ Right Now

Sunny, Constellation, and Presumed Innocent are among the best shows on Apple TV+ this month.

The 39 Best Shows on Max (aka HBO Max) Right Now

House of the Dragon, The Sopranos, and Fantasmas are just a few of the shows you need to be watching on Max this month.

The 49 Best Shows on Netflix Right Now

Bridgerton, Scavengers Reign, and Sweet Tooth are just a few of the shows you need to watch on Netflix this month.

The 21 Best Movies on Apple TV+ Right Now

Fancy Dance, Argylle, Mad Max: Fury Road, and Blade Runner 2049 are just a few of the movies you should be watching on Apple TV+ this month.