“Gothic poetess, comic young-adult author, robust adventure-fantasy novelist: Tanith Lee has more writing personas than Sybil. But in her short fiction, all these aspects come gloriously together. Such stories as ‘Antonius Bequeathed’ or ‘The Persecution Machine,’ with their death-defying mixture of prose poetry, genre trope reversals and ominous wit, could be written by no one else.”–from my tribute in Weird Tales.

I just learned that Tanith Lee passed away on Sunday.

I first encountered her writing in 1986, with the novel Delirium’s Mistress and the short story collection, Dreams of Dark and Light. Her poetic prose and soaring imagination astounded me. She was a versatile storyteller who wrote in many different modes. She published children’s and young adult, mystery, horror, science fiction, historical and fantasy.

I got in contact with her when she published Fatal Women, her collection of dark magical realist tales of lesbian fiction she channelled as Esther Garber. I met her shortly after in London during a con. We kept in touch via email and the occasional surprise snail-mail post. I had the honor of working on Disturbed By Her Song, a second collection of channelled fiction, which included work by Esther’s half-brother, Judas.

I will miss her fiction, and her lovely correspondence.

I am keeping her husband, John Kaiine, in my thoughts.

I just came from a wonderful weekend spent at the World Horror Convention in Atlanta.

I’ve never considered myself as a horror writer. My elevator pitch description to folks who ask me what I write is often “magical realist” or “contemporary fantasy.” But there is a streak of darkness that runs through my fiction. Maybe I’m more “dark fantasy,” but I have written some horrific things.

Below is a list of my published horror fiction

In Sea, Swallow Me & Other Stories

“The Safety of Thorns”: African elder gods (or spirits) live in the briar patch on a plantation in the antebellum South. The story is about the encounter between them and a young enslaved boy.

“Etiolate”: A homoerotic horror story about a kind of incubus set in the 90s goth scene in Baltimore. It has a David Lynchian feel.

“Catch Him by the Toe”: A Southern Gothic tale about a town haunted by a demonic ghost.

In Skin Deep Magic

“Death and Two Maidens”: A penny dreadful set in Victorian London about an Afro-British charwoman’s misadventures in the afterlife.

“Sugardaddy”: Set in a housing project in DC, this is the story of a teenage girl’s bizarre transformation. It takes the form of journal entries, and is partially a homage to Robert Aickman’s “Pages from a Young Girl’s Journal.”

Last November at World Fantasy, I met the folks at Valancourt Books. They specialize in reprints of both supernatural fiction and long lost gay classics. I told them about a book that melded those two things together: In the Eyes of Mr. Fury by Philip Ridley. It’s a kind of a dark gay fairytale in the magical realist mode, set in London. Full of dream logic, it’s a homoerotic coming of age story, something Angela Carter might write if she were a gay men.

Anyway, Valancourt is reprinting the novel–along with Ridley’s other work. And the new cover is glorious!

Last evening, I got some good news. Bereft, my YA novel about bullying, won a Silver Independent Book Publisher Award (IPPY). This is in addition to the Bronze Moonbeam Award. This is truly the Little Book That Could.

Below is a video review of Bereft I found a while ago on YouTube. (Thanks to the reviewer!)

Thanks to my publisher (Tiny Satchel Press) and everyone who read the book!