Quick Facts

Official Name: Republic of Nicaragua / República de Nicaragua

Capital: Managua

Official Languages: Spanish

Recognised Languages: English, Misikito, Rama, Sumo, Misikito Coastal Creole, Garifuna, Rama Cay Creole

Population: 6,071,045 (2012 census)

Currency: Córdoba (NIO)

Time Zone: CST (UTC-6)

Embassy of Nicaragua in the UK

Suite 31, Vicarage House, London, W8 4DP

Website: http://nicaragua.embassyhomepage.com/

Nicaragua Travel Insurance

Get travel insurance to Nicaragua from Direct Travel Insurance. We offer low cost and high quality travel insurance to Nicaragua and most of the world.

Direct Travel Insurance Guide to Nicaragua

Nicaragua is a Spanish-speaking country in Central America, home to just over six million people. The population is multi-ethnic, including indigenous peoples, Europeans, Africans, Asians, and people of Middle Eastern origin. Many native tribes on the east coast of the country speak their own languages.

The capital city, Managua, is nicknamed Novia del Xolotlán (“The Bride of Xolotlán”), as it sits on the southwest shore of Lake Xolotlán (also known as Lake Managua). 2,100 year old footprints have been discovered preserved in the volcanic mud on the shores of Lake Managua, and are known as the Ancient Footprints of Acahualinca.

The rainy season in Nicaragua runs from May to November, and the country can be affected by hurricanes during this time. Much of Western Nicaragua, including the capital, has a tropical climate. Temperatures throughout the year average between 28 and 32 degrees. Temperatures are highest in March, April, and May, at an average of 34 degrees.

Banks in Nicaragua cannot change sterling (GBP) currency. You can exchange US dollars in cash or travellers cheques. ATMs will allow you to withdraw US dollars or Cordobas.

There is no British Embassy in Nicaragua. You should contact the British Honorary Consul in Managua via the British Embassy, Costa Rica, if you need emergency consular assistance.

British nationals can visit Nicaragua for up to three months without a visa, however, you may be asked to provide proof of your onward travel. There is an arrival tax, which should be paid in cash. Passports should be valid for a minimum of 6 months from the date of entry into Nicaragua.