Philip Rivers at Carter-Finley Stadium in 2002. [Photo from NC State Athletics.]

NOTE: This story was originally published in the Greensboro News & Record during Philip Rivers' freshman year at NC State, when he was still new on the scene. He and his family spent a few hours over a handful of days getting to know them and learning what made him so competitive. He never changed one bit during his four years at NC State or his 17 seasons in the NFL. I dug this story up when he announced his retirement on Wednesday and revealed that he immediately will begin his high school coaching career back in Alabama, where, like his father, he will coach his sons.

If you enjoy reading "One Brick Back" and would like to help offset research expenses for stories such as this one, please make a small donation to the cause and help keep posts like this free of ads.

© Landmark Communications, 2000

BY TIM PEELER

When Philip Rivers arrived at halftime of his father's junior varsity football game at Wakefield High School on Thursday night, he went right to the end zone where Steve Rivers was dissecting the Wolverines' first-half performance.

When the third quarter began, Philip followed his dad to the sideline, where his 6-foot-5 frame was a head taller than the ninth- and 10th-grade players in their cleats and helmets. He gave the officials what-for every now and again and tried to will Wakefield back from a 13-point deficit, just as he has rallied the undefeated Wolfpack in three of its first four games.

It didn't happen.

Millbrook's junior varsity whipped Raleigh's newest school, which has no seniors and only a handful of juniors among its student body, 27-0. It was the first loss this season for Steve or Philip, who had been a combined 6-0 before Thursday night.

It was a little bit hard to take, because nobody in this family likes to lose. At anything.

Philip, the 18-year-old freshman quarterback who has led N.C. State to a 4-0 record, remembers marathon video games against his maternal grandfather, a man 56 years his senior. They would play so long that Bob Gunner's fingers would turn black from the metal disk and keypad used in the primitive Mattel Intellivision NFL game.

"Even though I was little, he wasn't easing up on me," Philip says. "He probably did at first, but it got to him."

Joan Rivers, 40, usually is a little bit shy, but that doesn't mask the competitive fire she shows at football games or family competitions.

"I would tell them, no matter what you do, you have to make a game out of it and compete," she says. "I think he got his skills and his talents from his dad's side of the family and his competitiveness from my side."

Philip still hears echoes of his mother's sweet voice from weekend outings. She would stand quietly on the sideline -- until he dropped a pass.

"Come on, Philip, I could have caught that one," his demure mother would yell.

Joan always has been that way.