The Rivers clan continues to grow.

Former NC State and former NFL star quarterback Philip Rivers and his wife, Tiffany, have announced they are expecting their 10th child. Rivers confirmed the news with Ben Thomas of AL.com, noting the four-year difference between the couple's last child the largest since they started having children 21 years ago.

“We’ve had one pretty much every two years and now this is the longest gap,” Rivers told AL.com. “We are all fired up. Everyone was pulling for a boy. Even our girls wanted a boy.”

Rivers wrapped up a legendary career at the NFL level with the San Diego/Los Angeles Chargers and Indianapolis Colts following the 2020 season at the age of 39. He finished with 63,440 passing yards, 421 passing touchdowns and 5,277 pass completions -- all Top 10 in NFL history.

Philip and Tiffany had their first child, Halle, when they were still attending NC State University after they got married following Philip's freshman year. After having Halle, the couple had two other daughters -- Carolina and Grace -- before Tiffany gave birth to their first son, Gunner. In total, they have seven daughters -- Sarah, Rebecca, Clare and Anna are the other four -- and two sons with Peter being the youngest boy.

Rivers admitted the plan was to continue his family tradition of having nine children. But you know what they say -- We plan, God laughs.

“We thought we would be the third generation of nine, but we decided to go double digits – or I should say we didn’t decide it. God decided,” he said.

Rivers also put together an illustrious career with the Wolfpack, earning ACC Rookie of the Year, ACC Player of the Year, ACC Athlete of the Year while shattering nearly every NC State record for a quarterback. Now he's coaching at the high school level with St. Michael Catholic High School in Fairhope, Ala., where he's entering his third season.

Want to congratulate Rivers and his family on their 10th child or thank him for everything he did throughout his career? He'll be back in Raleigh this week for the Savage Wolves and Pack of Wolves NIL Collective Celebration Event. Sign up here to join the event this coming Wednesday, June 19!

Not a VIP subscriber to Pack Pride?Sign up now to get access to everything R. Cory Smith, Michael Clark and the entire Pack Pride team have to offer on all things NC State and access to the No. 1 site covering the Wolfpack.

Sign up for FREE text alerts to get breaking news on commitments, decommitments, transfers, injuries, coaching changes and much more with our NEW text alert system available to all registered users and VIP subscribers.Click Here to become a FREE registered user andClick Here if you are already a VIP subscriber.