Finnish mobile-communications and networking giant Nokia has emerged from its rocky recent history; it was only a few short years ago that it suffered at the hands of mobile handset industry disruption.

Today, the future for one of Finland’s oldest and best-loved companies seems more assured, with CEO Rajeev Suri plotting a more focused path. The company’s vision statement explains that focus concisely, “…we are an innovation leader in the technologies that connect people and things”.

A key part of the refocus is to separate procurement into two functions – the first, moving into operations and the business units, will focus on traditional procurement and sourcing activities. The second, will focus purely on Supplier-Enabled Innovation.

We caught up with CPO Miguel Caulliez to hear more.

SEIC: Explain the transformation in detail, including the structure of the new organization.

Miguel Caulliez: The transformation deals with the elevation of procurement in the Nokia Group organization, and the creation of a new CPO position.

This new function sits in a group entity which is also new, named CIOO and led by the Chief Innovation & Operating Officer, who reports to the CEO.

This is going beyond a transformation. We are talking about a disruption, as it’s breaking the traditional codes of what is the core of a procurement organization such as category, stakeholder and supplier relationship management. We are entering into a new era.

This is now about innovation and ecosystem steering and moving Nokia Procurement four or five ahead of schedule versus the original roadmap.

While the evolution of the function internally went very fast in just a few years, moving from a focus on cost and cash; to a focus on supply chain agility and flexibility to support growth; to a focus on top- (and bottom-) line contribution; this new structure allows us to focus 100% of time and resources on innovation and ecosystem steering only.

The former procurement units will stay in global operations and the business groups, which is separated from this new, elevated procurement entity with a strong line, but still attached through a new procurement leadership team involving all procurement leaders across the company.

How many people will be in the organization and what sort of pay grade and seniority?

To focus on innovation and ecosystem steering, the team has been structured to allow us to follow the innovation value chain from scouting to execution.

This led to the creation of the following streams:

Innovation scouting

Process innovation

R&D engagement

Innovation execution; and

Innovation control

This is all supported by separate streams playing the role of enablers; such as supplier relationships management (now in charge of supervising the ecosystem), data sharing and intelligence and planning.

The number of people is not relevant here. What matters is the added value each new comer brings in terms of entrepreneurship, risk taking and an innovation-driven focus. The profile is completely different from a category manager, for instance, and more than 50% of the new team does not have any procurement background. Diversity is a key success factor.

SEIC: What are the main drivers for such a transformation?

MC: The main drivers are to position procurement as a main lever to achieve our ambitious company goals.

With this new position, the new procurement is not only at the crossroads of unlimited possibilities, but is now mainly a driver in managing Supplier-Enabled Innovation, and an enabler in facilitating open co-innovation with the ecosystem.

In short procurement is no longer a support function, it is part of the engine.

Last, but not least, time is also of the essence. Focusing on innovation requires us to approach deliverables with a longer-term perspective, and targets have been set with a 2020 horizon for procurement. This is obviously very different from the timeframe used by Operations, who are following the annual financial framework.

SEIC: Who are the main sponsors internally for the project?

MC: The main sponsor is the Chief Innovation & Operating Officer, Marc Rouanne, who made this new setup an ambition and also a reality. The mandate has been shared and supported by the whole group leadership team including the CEO, which represents the highest level of management within the organization.

SEIC: Has the acquisition of Alcatel-Lucent provided the platform for change, or is it something wider?

About the integration of Alcatel-Lucent, it is definitively providing the right platform for change. We are now a new leader in the technologies that enable our connected lives, with number 1 or 2 positions in multiple segments.

We have combined two financially strong companies into a market leader, and have a bigger and better portfolio as well as a great geographical presence.

Our innovation capacity is also amplified, and through our Bell Labs and FutureWorks research arms, we are deploying the technologies that will help to shape the new connected world. This brings the right environment for new enablers, orchestrators and contributors like procurement.

SEIC: What are the objectives, targets and timeframes have you set yourself in terms of delivering value to the organization?

MC: This new procurement organization has to achieve three main targets, with a timeline of 2020 and with progressive annual contributions.

Incremental CoGS reduction

R&D business model optimization

Ecosystem renewal

This contribution is incremental to what the operations are already providing to the business. While the start in 2016/2017 will be slow in terms of contribution, it will then significantly increase in 2018.

SEIC: Is there a risk that by splitting tactical procurement from a value-based function the latter will become isolated?

MC: Yes there is a risk but if you do not take risks, if you do not try something different, you are limiting your opportunity to evolve the organization and to drive it to the next level.

What I do know is that I would have no chance to think long term and to engage in innovative programs if I was still dealing with day-to-day operational deliverables. This used to be 80% of my agenda, but is now less than 20%. The change freed up my calendar big time and allowed me to think about delivering something different.

Some people are questioning the split to have procurement on one side focusing on innovation and global operations on the other side focusing on procurement delivery and execution.

But there is room to decrease the risk. For example, one of the first things I did when being appointed as a CPO was to invite all procurement streams to join my leadership team. My role is to ensure consistency among the entire procurement community, wherever it is located in the organization, and I quickly identified a few topics which could gather this new community around a common direction.

As a general comment, there is nothing more exciting than to try something new; and to be a pioneer in inventing the next generation of procurement. I am very grateful to my management who gave me a chance to disrupt the way we were contributing.

This is the future, this is the right thing to do in the right environment and at the right time.

SEIC: How are you staffing the new function?

MC: I have no specific limit in the way I would like to staff the new function, but I prefer to be cautious – start small and look for growth when the first contributions are coming. It is like I am running my own business and using my own money. A light structure is now in place, fostering innovation. People are being recruited internally, as with more than 100,000 employees in the new Nokia, there is no doubt we can find the right profiles and talents.

SEIC: What skills and capabilities are important for team members working in this new function?

MC: The level of maturity and seniority of people in their individual competence area is very high. I am looking for very different profiles and am a fan of diversity (my leadership team is 50% women and 50% men, for example) but also skills diversity.

What is critical in my team is to ensure we have people with an “entrepreneur” mindset and DNA who are willing to try and who are not afraid to fail. So I have recruited people with venture capital, start-up creation skills, or who are very technology-driven and passionate about discovering new applications for advanced technologies.

SEIC: How will you decide on which suppliers to partner with at this new level of collaboration? Do you have specific segmentation methods and tools?

MC: Ecosystem steering is a clear focus of the new procurement organization. We decided to extend the scope of so-called Supplier Relationship Management (which is more about the management of a supplier’s portfolio) into a broader scope that includes partners, SMEs, start-ups, universities and so on.

The objective is to clearly link the ‘customer perceived value’ with the ‘supplier perceived value’ and to really create the bridge and value chain between customers and suppliers.

We focus on ‘suppliers who matter’ with several dimensions that help to define this:

Strategic fit between the supplier and Nokia strategies

Innovation value proposition

Category segmentation including Nokia and supplier view

Supplier status

Future business opportunities

SEIC: What other methodologies / frameworks have you developed to help you along on this journey?

MC: To develop a framework when you start from scratch requires a couple of weeks, or even months, and these are the areas which have been recently completed or which are in progress:

The preparation of an elevator speech and communication of an aspiration

Recruitment, with a new outlook and capacity ambition

The setting of clear objectives

Selection of the right topics in line with company strategy

Getting the right balance between quick wins and long-term exploration topics

Establishing data intelligence to be equipped with the right tools to capture inflows and outflows

Planning the right governance bodies

Getting a good understanding of our end-customer requirements

Creating an entrepreneur mindset: manage networking, document and continuously improve the learning path, experiment, fail and finally succeed.

As you can see, this is a long and diverse to-do list, but each item matters.

SEIC: Can you talk about investment levels and expected returns on investment?

MC: the new team is an investment in itself; the investment is mainly human even though a digital transformation is also a requirement.

While targets are set up for 2020, we cannot wait for 2020 to show a return. Hence I shared expectations in a way that each leader joining the team feels concerned about his or her own ROI in the first months, as if he or she is running his or her own company.

This is where the paradigm is – to work on long-term deliverables while having a sense of urgency and to quickly show a euro-contribution.

SEIC: How will you measure success?

MC: I will measure the success based on our euro-contribution to the P&L. There are obviously other KPIs we are developing but this will remain the primary one. We shall translate each other KPI in a euro-contribution anyway.