On Thursday, November 14th, Princess Nokia walked the red carpet at the historic United Palace Theater in Washington Heights to celebrate the world premiere of her feature film debut Angelfish. Princess Nokia stars in this romantic drama, written and directed by Peter Lee, alongside co-star Jimi Stanton.

Angelfish is a Bronx love story set in the year 1993 in which Brendan (Jimi Stanton), a high school drop-out with a manipulative mother and unstable brother, falls in love with Eva (Princess Nokia), a smart young first generation immigrant about to start college. As the young couple develop their relationship, complications in their home lives, cultural divides and dreams for the future set against familial responsibilities threaten their fragile love.

Despite the plot following patterns of predictability, Princess Nokia and Stanton both conveyed beautifully vulnerable and sensitive performances that kept the audience empathising with every moment of the story. The soundtrack by Tom Bromley was particularly striking as moments of music seamlessly recurred to underscore the emotions of key scenes.

The architecturally stunning United Palace, recently renovated in part by Lin Manuel Miranda, being situated steps away from the Bronx proved the perfect setting to immerse in this intimate love story.

Other cast members in attendance at the premiere included Alejandra Ramos Riera, Claire McClanahan, Erin Davie, Kaelyn Ambert-Gonzalez, Kyle Glenn, Lucy Bermudez, Pedro Morillo Jr., Rosie Berrido, Sandy Tejada, Sean Rogers, Stanley Simons and Tommy Playboy, who is also Princess Nokia's backup dancer. Celebrity guests in attendance included Patrick Byas, Lexi Lawson, Jari Jones and Carol Maraj.

A Q&A session with director Peter Lee, Princess Nokia and Jimi Stanton followed the screening during which they discussed the key role that improvisation played in the rehearsal and shooting process to create, in Lee’s words, “real, authentic, performances” that could connect with people. The director further elaborated: “That’s why I make films, it’s about connecting with people, so if there was one person in this audience who was like ‘Wow I connected with that,’ then that’s it for me.”

Delicious food and drink accompanied by lively music was offered at a VIP reception at Rincon Mexicano across the street from the theater, followed by the official Angelfish after party hosted by NOW WHAT?? at Lucky Seven.

Angelfish is available on iTunes and on-demand as of Tuesday November 19th.

Watch the trailer here.