Nokia, the world’s largest mobile phone manufacturer, today announced it has partnered with actress Jennifer Love Hewitt to open new avenues for increasing Nokia’s brand awareness among a growing, trend-setting and stylish crowd of wireless phone users in the United States. Beginning as early as July, Hewitt will be featured in a national print, outdoor and magazine promotional campaign as well as in regional point-of-purchase carrier programs.

In one of Nokia’s key target age groups, young adults (18-34 year olds), Jennifer Love Hewitt’s Q-rating of 37 establishes her as the most popular actress on television today. The Q-rating, administered by Marketing Evaluations, Inc., is the preeminent measure of a celebrity’s popularity rated against his/her peers through a quarterly, random survey of 1,800 individuals ages six and over in the United States.

Similar to Nokia’s advertisements featuring supermodel Niki Taylor as a fashion symbol, this new campaign, based on product functionality and style, will tout Hewitt as a symbol of youthfulness and wholesomeness. Hewitt, who is known for her starring roles in the FOX television shows “Time of Your Life,” “Party of Five,” ABC’s television movie, “The Audrey Hepburn Story,” and the blockbuster hits “I Know What You Did Last Summer” and “I Still Know What You Did Last Summer,” was Nokia’s top choice because of her high recognition/visibility and her fresh image. She is currently in production on MGM’s feature film, “Breakers.”

In addition to the advertising campaign, Hewitt will support Nokia’s charitable efforts with Big Brothers Big Sisters of America. In a 30-second Public Service Announcement, Hewitt will stress the importance for young adults to communicate with parents and friends and to “connect with someone who cares.”

“My partnership with Nokia is a perfect match because we both have the common goal of striving to connect with other people,” said Jennifer Love Hewitt. “I am particularly excited about becoming involved in Nokia’s partnership with Big Brothers Big Sisters organization, and encouraging kids to stay connected and to keep the lines of communication open between parents and friends, and people who care about them.”

“Jennifer Love Hewitt perfectly fits an audience that has already identified Nokia as the coolest brand,” said Debra Kennedy, director, consumer marketing for Nokia. “Her incredible success as an actress reflects her widespread appeal, talent and down-to-earth attitude and Nokia is excited to be working with her.”

Since its 1994 introduction as the first Finnish company to be listed on the New York Stock Exchange, Nokia has become one of the strongest brands both in North America and Internationally in both brand awareness and image. In a survey by Interbrand in June 1999, Nokia was ranked No. 11 in the “Top 20 Global Brands.” And, in a recent poll by Bolt Lab among teenagers aged 13 to 19, Nokia was overwhelming named as the “coolest” mobile phone brand. Nokia has already achieved success in its branding efforts by developing wireless phones with unique design and stylish options that are viewed as lifestyle accessories that can stand out in the most fashionable crowds.

Nokia’s partnership with Jennifer Love Hewitt is another example of the company’s ongoing brand building efforts. Some of Nokia’s other partnerships and sponsorships include a partnership with Gen Art that is designed to showcase fashionable technology with up-and-coming designers, filmmakers and artists; a fashion association with supermodel Niki Taylor; the Nokia Sugar Bowl; 2000 Grammy Awards; 2000 Teen Choice Awards; 52nd Annual Primetime Emmy Awards; FUBU; Essence Music Festival; U.S. Youth Soccer Organization; the Indy 500 and the FIS Snowboard World Cup.

About Nokia

Nokia is paving the way to the mobile information society with its innovative products and solutions. The company is the leading mobile phone supplier and a leading supplier of mobile, fixed and IP networks and related services, as well as multimedia terminals. In 1999, Nokia's net sales totaled EUR 19.8 billion (USD 19.9 billion). Headquartered in Finland, Nokia is listed on the New York (NOK), Helsinki, Stockholm, London, Frankfurt and Paris stock exchanges and employs more than 56,000 people.

For media information, please contact:

Megan Matthews

Corporate Communications

Nokia Americas

Phone: +1 972 894 4267

megan.matthews@nokia.com

Keith Nowak

Corporate Communications

Nokia

Phone: +1 972 894 6182

keith.nowak@nokia.com