Back to GetFilings.com

- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------

- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------

UNITED STATES

SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION

WASHINGTON, D.C. 20549

--------------------------

FORM 10-K

ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d)

OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934

FOR THE FISCAL YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2000

COMMISSION FILE NO. 0-14680

--------------------------

GENZYME CORPORATION

(Exact name of Registrant as specified in its Charter)

MASSACHUSETTS 06-1047163

(State or other jurisdiction of (I.R.S. Employer Identification No.)

incorporation or organization)

ONE KENDALL SQUARE

CAMBRIDGE, MASSACHUSETTS 02139

(Address of principal executive office) (Zip Code)

(617) 252-7500

(Registrant's telephone number, including area code)

--------------------------

Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(b) of the Act:

NONE

Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(g) of the Act:

GENZYME GENERAL DIVISION COMMON STOCK, $0.01 PAR VALUE ("GENZYME GENERAL STOCK")

GENZYME BIOSURGERY DIVISION COMMON STOCK, $0.01 PAR VALUE ("BIOSURGERY STOCK")

GENZYME MOLECULAR ONCOLOGY DIVISION COMMON STOCK, $0.01 PAR VALUE ("MOLECULAR

ONCOLOGY STOCK")

GENZYME GENERAL STOCK PURCHASE RIGHTS

BIOSURGERY STOCK PURCHASE RIGHTS

MOLECULAR ONCOLOGY STOCK PURCHASE RIGHTS

Indicate by check mark whether the Registrant (1) has filed all reports required

to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Act of 1934 during the

preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the Registrant was required

to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for

the past 90 days. YES X NO

Indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to Item 405

of Regulation S-K is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the

best of Registrant's knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements

incorporated by reference in Part III of this Form 10-K or any amendment to this

Form 10-K.

Aggregate market value of voting stock held by non-affiliates of the Registrant

as of March 1, 2001:

$8,889,677,071

Number of shares of Genzyme General Stock outstanding as of March 1,

2001: 95,853,496

Number of shares of Biosurgery Stock outstanding as of March 1,

2001: 36,400,580

Number of shares of Molecular Oncology Stock outstanding as of March 1,

2001: 15,906,376

--------------------------

DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE

Portions of the 2000 Genzyme General, Genzyme Biosurgery and Genzyme Molecular

Oncology Annual Reports are incorporated by reference into Parts I, II and IV of

this Form 10-K. Portions of the Registrant's Proxy Statement for the Annual

Meeting of Stockholders to be held on May 31, 2001 are incorporated by reference

into Part III of this Form 10-K.

- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------

- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------

NOTE REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS

This Annual Report on Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements,

including statements regarding our:

- projected timetables for the pre-clinical and clinical development of,

regulatory submissions and approvals for, and market introduction of, our

products and services;

- estimates of the potential markets for our products and services,

including the anticipated drivers for future growth;

- sales and marketing plans;

- assessments of competitors and potential competitors;

- estimates of the capacity of manufacturing and other facilities to support

our products and services;

- expected future revenues, operations and expenditures;

- projected cash needs; and

- plans to divest the Snowden-Pencer-Registered Trademark- product lines and

to sell our manufacturing facility in Quebec, Canada.

These statements are based upon the current assumptions of our management and

are only expectations of future results. These statements are also subject to

risks and uncertainties, and our actual results may differ significantly from

those that are described in this report. These risks and uncertainties include:

- our ability to successfully complete preclinical and clinical development

of our products and services;

- our ability to manufacture sufficient amounts of our products for clinical

trials and commercialization activities;

- our ability to obtain, maintain and successfully enforce adequate patent

and other proprietary rights protection of our products and services;

- the content and timing of submissions to and decisions made by the FDA and

other regulatory agencies;

- the impact of the expiration of the orphan drug status of

Cerezyme-Registered Trademark- and Ceredase-Registered Trademark- enzymes

on May 2001 on our revenues from these products;

- our ability to satisfy the FDA's request for additional data and

clarification in connection with our Biologics License Application

submission for Fabrazyme-TM- enzyme;

- our ability to resolve manufacturing issues related to

Renagel-Registered Trademark- tablets and expand manufacturing capacity

for sevelamer hydrocloride for Renagel-Registered Trademark- capsules and

tablets;

- our ability to optimize dosing and improve patient compliance with

Renagel-Registered Trademark- capsules and tablets;

- our ability to successfully increase market penetration for

Synvisc-Registered Trademark- as a treatment for osteoarthritis of the

knee and other joints;

- the accuracy of our estimates of the size and characteristics of the

markets to be addressed by our products and services, including growth

projections;

- market acceptance of our products and services;

- our ability to obtain reimbursement for our products and services from

third-party payors, and the extent of such coverage;

2

- our ability to establish and maintain strategic license, collaboration and

distribution arrangements;

- the continued funding of our joint ventures;

- our ability to identify purchasers for, and successfully negotiate

purchase and sale agreements regarding, our

Snowden-Pencer-Registered Trademark- product lines and manufacturing

facility in Quebec, Canada; and

- the accuracy of our information regarding the products and resources of

our competitors and potential competitors.

We have included more detailed descriptions of these risks and uncertainties in

Exhibit 99.2, "Factors Affecting Future Operating Results," to this Annual

Report on Form 10-K. We encourage you to read those descriptions carefully.

NOTE REGARDING REFERENCES TO GENZYME DIVISIONS

Throughout this Annual Report on Form 10-K, the words "we," "us," "our" and

"Genzyme" refer to Genzyme Corporation and all of its operating divisions taken

as a whole, and "our board of directors" refers to the board of directors of

Genzyme Corporation. In addition, we refer to our three operating divisions as

follows:

- Genzyme General Division = "Genzyme General;"

- Genzyme Biosurgery Division = "Genzyme Biosurgery;" and

- Genzyme Molecular Oncology Division = "Genzyme Molecular Oncology."

NOTE REGARDING INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE

The Securities and Exchange Commission allows us to disclose important

information to you by referring you to other documents we have filed with the

SEC. The information that we refer you to is "incorporated by reference" into

this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Please read that information.

NOTE REGARDING TRADEMARKS

Genzyme-Registered Trademark-, Cerezyme-Registered Trademark-,

Ceredase-Registered Trademark-, Thyrogen-Registered Trademark-,

N-geneous-Registered Trademark-, Contrast-Registered Trademark-,

InSight-Registered Trademark-, AFP3-Registered Trademark-,

MASDA-Registered Trademark-, Snowden-Pencer-Registered Trademark-,

Pleur-evac-Registered Trademark-, Thora-Klex-Registered Trademark-,

Tevdek-Registered Trademark-, Polydek-Registered Trademark-,

Deklene-Registered Trademark-, SaphLITE-Registered Trademark-,

Sepragel-Registered Trademark-, Carticel-Registered Trademark- and

Epicel-Registered Trademark- are registered trademarks of Genzyme.

Fabrazyme-TM-, NeuroTrack-TM-, SmartStroke-TM-, SAGE-TM-, SPHERE-TM-,

NextStitch-TM-, Sahara-TM-, GlyPro-TM-, Immobilizer-TM-, Sepra-TM-,

Seprafilm-TM-, Sepramesh-TM- and Seprapack-TM- are trademarks of Genzyme.

AFP4-SM- is a service mark of Genzyme. Renagel-Registered Trademark- is a

registered trademark of GelTex Pharmaceuticals, Inc.

Synvisc-Registered Trademark-, Hylaform-Registered Trademark-,

Hylashield-Registered Trademark- and HsS-Registered Trademark- are registered

trademarks and Hylashield Nite-TM- and Hylasine-TM- are trademarks of Genzyme

Biosurgery Corporation. Welchol-TM- is a trademark of Sankyo Pharma, Inc.

NeuroCell-TM--PD is a trademark of Diacrin/Genzyme LLC.

FocalSeal-Registered Trademark--L is a registered trademark of Focal, Inc.

Provisc-Registered Trademark- is a registered trademark of Alcon

Laboratories, Inc. TNKase-TM- is a trademark of Genentech, Inc.

AVONEX-Registered Trademark- is a registered trademark of Biogen, Inc.

Aldurazyme-TM- is a trademark of BioMarin/ Genzyme LLC. Replagal-TM- is a

trademark of Transkaryotic Therapies, Inc. Foznal-TM- is a trademark of Shire

Laboratories, Inc. Interceed-Registered Trademark- is a registered trademark and

Intergel-TM- is a trademark of Johnson & Johnson Corporation.

Orthovisc-Registered Trademark- is a registered trademark of Anika Research,

Inc. Hylagan-Registered Trademark- is a registered trademark of

Sanofi-Synthelabo Inc. Artz-TM- is a trademark of Seikagaku Kogyo Kabushiki

Kaisha. Express-Registered Trademark- and Oasis-Registered Trademark- are

registered trademarks of Atrium Medical Corporation. Supartz-TM- is a trademark

of Smith & Nephew Orthopedics.

3

TABLE OF CONTENTS

PAGE

----

PART I

ITEM 1. BUSINESS.................................................... 5

Introduction................................................ 5

Genzyme General--Products and Development Programs.......... 5

Genzyme Biosurgery--Products and Development Programs....... 13

Genzyme Molecular Oncology--Technology Platforms and

Development Programs...................................... 18

Competition................................................. 21

Patents, License Agreements and Trademarks.................. 26

Government Regulation....................................... 27

Employees................................................... 31

Financial Information Regarding Segment Reporting........... 31

Research and Development Costs.............................. 31

Sales by Geographic Area, Significant Customers and

Products.................................................. 31

ITEM 1A. EXECUTIVE OFFICERS OF THE REGISTRANT........................ 32

ITEM 2. PROPERTIES.................................................. 33

ITEM 3. LEGAL PROCEEDINGS........................................... 35

ITEM 4. SUBMISSION OF MATTERS TO A VOTE OF SECURITY HOLDERS......... 36

PART II

ITEM 5. MARKET FOR THE REGISTRANT'S COMMON EQUITY AND RELATED

STOCKHOLDER MATTERS....................................... 37

ITEM 6. SELECTED FINANCIAL DATA..................................... 38

ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION

AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS................................. 39

ITEM 7A. QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURES ABOUT MARKET

RISK...................................................... 39

ITEM 8. FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND SUPPLEMENTARY DATA................. 39

ITEM 9. CHANGES IN AND DISAGREEMENTS WITH ACCOUNTANTS ON ACCOUNTING

AND FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE.................................. 39

PART III

ITEM 10. DIRECTORS AND EXECUTIVE OFFICERS OF THE REGISTRANT.......... 39

ITEM 11. EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION...................................... 40

ITEM 12. SECURITY OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS AND

MANAGEMENT................................................ 40

ITEM 13. CERTAIN RELATIONSHIPS AND RELATED TRANSACTIONS.............. 40

PART IV

ITEM 14. EXHIBITS, FINANCIAL STATEMENT SCHEDULES AND REPORTS ON

FORM 8-K.................................................. 40

14(a)(1) Financial Statements............................... 40

14(a)(2) Financial Statement Schedules...................... 42

14(a)(3) Exhibits........................................... 42

14(b) Reports on Form 8-K................................... 42

14(c) Exhibits.............................................. 43

4

PART I

ITEM 1. BUSINESS

INTRODUCTION

We are a biotechnology and human healthcare company that develops innovative

products and provides services for major unmet medical needs. We were founded as

a Delaware corporation in June 1981 and became a Massachusetts corporation in

1991. We currently have three operating divisions. Each of our divisions has a

related series of common stock that is intended to reflect its value and track

its financial performance. Our three divisions are:

- Genzyme General, which develops and markets therapeutic products and

diagnostic products and services with an emphasis on genetic disorders and

other chronic debilitating diseases with well-defined patient populations.

Genzyme General Stock is listed on the Nasdaq National Market under the

symbol "GENZ."

- Genzyme Biosurgery, which develops and markets instruments, devices,

biomaterials and biotherapeutic products to improve or replace surgery,

with an emphasis on the orthopaedics and cardiothoracic markets.

Biosurgery Stock is listed on the Nasdaq National Market under the symbol

"GZBX."

- Genzyme Molecular Oncology, which is utilizing its functional genomics and

antigen discovery technology platforms to develop novel cancer products

focused on cancer vaccines and angiogenesis inhibitors, and to generate

partnering revenue. Molecular Oncology Stock is listed on the Nasdaq

National Market under the symbol "GZMO."

We allocate all of our products, services, programs, assets and liabilities

among our divisions for purposes of financial statement presentation; however,

Genzyme, the corporation, continues to own all of the assets and is responsible

for all of the liabilities allocated to each of the divisions.

GENZYME GENERAL--PRODUCTS AND DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS

Genzyme General primarily consists of our Therapeutics and Diagnostics

business units and our wholly-owned subsidiary GelTex Pharmaceuticals, Inc.,

which we acquired in December 2000. The Therapeutics business unit focuses on

developing and marketing products for genetic diseases and other chronic

debilitating diseases, including a family of diseases known as lysosomal storage

diseases, and specialty therapeutics. The Diagnostics business unit develops,

markets and distributes IN VITRO diagnostic products and genetic testing

services. GelTex develops non-absorbed polymer drugs that bind and eliminate

targeted substances in the gastrointestinal track and small-molecule

pharmaceuticals consisting of novel polyamine analogues and metal chelators.

THERAPEUTICS

Genzyme General's Therapeutics business unit currently has three therapeutic

products on the market and several other therapeutic products in varying stages

of development. Genzyme General also sells synthetic phospholipids, synthetic

peptides and amino acid derivatives, which are used in research as raw materials

for pharmaceutical manufacturers. It also produces and sells bulk hyaluronan for

a number of applications. Under an agreement with Alcon Laboratories, Inc.,

Genzyme General supplies pharmaceutical grade hyaluronan powder to Alcon for

incorporation into Provisc-Registered Trademark-, an ophthalmic

5

surgical aid product. In addition, hyaluronan is sold to a number of customers

for various research and development applications.

PRODUCT INDICATION STATUS LICENSOR

- ---------------------------------------- ----------------------- ----------------------- -----------------------

CEREZYME-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- Type I Gaucher disease Ceredase-Registered Trademark- None

(IMIGLUCERASE FOR INJECTION) AND marketed since 1991;

CEREDASE-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- Cerezyme-Registered Trademark-

(ALGLUCERASE FOR INJECTION) marketed since 1994;

available in over 55

countries

RENAGEL-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- (SEVELAMER Reduction of serum Marketed since 1998; None*

HYDROCHLORIDE) phosphorus in patients approved in the U.S. in

with end-stage renal 1998, Israel in 1999

disease on hemodialysis and in Europe in 2000

THYROGEN-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- Adjunctive diagnostic Marketed since 1998; None

(THYROTROPIN ALFA FOR INJECTION) agent in the follow-up approved in the U.S. in

of patients with well- 1998, in Puerto Rico in

differentiated thyroid 1999 and in Europe,

cancer Israel and Brazil in

2000

FABRAZYME-TM- (AFGALSIDASE BETA FOR Fabry disease BLA submitted to the Mt. Sinai School of

INJECTION) FDA in June 2000; MAA Medicine

submitted to the EMEA

in July 2000

ALDURAZYME-TM- (LARONIDASE FOR MPS-I One phase 3 trial BioMarin

INJECTION) successfully completed; Pharmaceutical, Inc.**

a confirmatory phase 3

trial initiated in 2000

RENAGEL-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- (SEVELAMER Reduction of serum Phase 3 trial ongoing Chugai Pharmaceuticals,

HYDROCHLORIDE) phosphorus in patients Inc.

with end-stage renal

disease on hemodialysis

(in Japan)

AVONEX-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- Relapsing forms of Phase 3 trial ongoing Biogen, Inc.

(INTERFERON-BETA 1A) multiple sclerosis (in

Japan)

ALPHA-GLUCOSIDASE Pompe disease Phase 1-2 pilot trial; Pharming Group N.V.**

phase 2 trial planned

for 2001

NEUROCELL-TM--PD Parkinson's disease Final analysis of phase Diacrin Inc.**

2 trial ongoing to

determine whether

further development is

warranted

DX 88 Hereditary angioedema Phase 2 trial ongoing Dyax Corp.

SMALL MOLECULE Multiple sclerosis IND filing planned for None

2001

SMALL MOLECULE Cystic fibrosis Preclinical None

PEPTIDE THERAPY Pemphigus vulgaris Preclinical None

ACID SPHINGOMYELINASE Type B Niemann-Pick Preclinical Mt. Sinai School of

disease Medicine

6

PRODUCT INDICATION STATUS LICENSOR

- ---------------------------------------- ----------------------- ----------------------- -----------------------

TGF-Beta ANTAGONISTS Systemic sclerosis Preclinical Cambridge Antibody

Technology Ltd. **

SMALL MOLECULE Autoimmune disease Preclinical None

SMALL MOLECULE Lysosomal storage Preclinical University of Michigan

diseases

GENE THERAPY Lysosomal storage Preclinical Targeted Genetics

diseases and genetic Corporation

diseases

- --------------------------

* We acquired GelTex Pharmaceuticals, Inc., our joint venture partner, in

December 2000.

** If you would like information about our strategic collaborations, you should

read Note I., "Investments," to our consolidated financial statements, which

are contained in Exhibit 13.1 to this Annual Report on Form 10-K (our

"Consolidated Financial Statements") and are incorporated into this

discussion by reference.

We have provided more details on our therapeutic products and our late-stage

development programs below.

CEREZYME-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- (IMIGLUCERASE FOR

INJECTION)/CEREDASE-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- (ALGLUCERASE FOR

INJECTION). Treatment with Cerezyme-Registered Trademark- or

Ceredase-Registered Trademark- enzyme replacement therapy currently represents

the only safe and effective treatment available for Type I Gaucher disease, a

lysosomal storage disease. We entered the market in 1991 with

Ceredase-Registered Trademark- enzyme. Because production of

Ceredase-Registered Trademark- enzyme was subject to supply constraints, we

developed Cerezyme-Registered Trademark- enzyme, a recombinant form of human

beta glucocerebrosidase, the enzyme that is deficient in Gaucher patients.

Recombinant technology uses specially engineered cells to produce enzymes, or

other substances, by inserting into cells of one organism the genetic material

of a different species. In the case of Cerezyme-Registered Trademark- enzyme,

Chinese hamster ovary cells are engineered to produce human beta

glucocerebrosidase. We stopped producing Ceredase-Registered Trademark- enzyme,

except for small quantities, in 1998 after substantially all patients who

previously used Ceredase-Registered Trademark- enzyme were converted to

Cerezyme-Registered Trademark- enzyme.

Genzyme General is marketing these products directly to physicians,

hospitals and treatment centers worldwide through a highly trained sales force.

This marketing effort is directed at identifying and initiating treatment for

the estimated 5,000 to 10,000 Gaucher patients Genzyme General believes exist

worldwide. Cerezyme-Registered Trademark- enzyme is currently distributed in

over 55 countries worldwide. Our results of operations are highly dependent on

sales of these products. Sales of Cerezyme-Registered Trademark- and

Ceredase-Registered Trademark- enzymes totaled approximately $536.9 million in

2000, which represented approximately 66% of our consolidated revenue in that

year. Sales of these products totaled approximately $478.4 million, or 70% of

our consolidated revenue, in 1999 and approximately $411.0 million, or 67% of

our consolidated revenue, in 1998.

RENAGEL-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- (SEVELAMER

HYDROCHLORIDE). Renagel-Registered Trademark- capsules and tablets are used for

the reduction of serum phosphorus in patients with end-stage renal disease on

hemodialysis. There are an estimated 280,000 end-stage renal disease patients in

the United States, approximately 95% of whom receive a phosphate control

product. There are also an estimated 170,000 end-stage renal disease patients in

Europe. Genzyme General is marketing Renagel-Registered Trademark- capsules and

tablets directly to nephrologists, renal dieticians and payors through a

dedicated sales force. The launch of the tablet formulation in September 2000

was intended to help nephrologists manage patients into the normal serum

phosphorus range. Sales of Renagel-Registered Trademark- capsules and tablets

totaled approximately $56.0 million in 2000 and approximately $19.5 million in

1999.

7

Genzyme General believes that the worldwide opportunity for

Renagel-Registered Trademark- capsules and tablets is greater than originally

anticipated. It expects that at least four fundamental factors will contribute

to the growth of this product opportunity:

- the establishment of the Renagel-Registered Trademark- products as a

preferred first-line treatment for dialysis patients;

- appropriate adjustment of daily doses of the Renagel-Registered Trademark-

products by physicians to lower patient phosphorus levels into the normal

range and improve patient compliance;

- substantial growth in the dialysis patient population, which Genzyme

General estimates is currently approximately 1 million people worldwide

and expects to reach approximately 1.7 million by 2009; and

- the potential for the Renagel-Registered Trademark- products to lower the

overall cost of caring for dialysis patients.

Genzyme General is taking several steps to support its belief about the market

potential for these products. Genzyme General is currently conducting a

three-year study comparing Renagel-Registered Trademark- capsules to the

standard calcium binders. It also initiated a 2,000-patient study designed to

demonstrate the ability of the products to improve patient morbidity and

mortality in 2001.

THYROGEN-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- (THYROTROPIN ALFA FOR

INJECTION). Thyrogen-Registered Trademark- hormone was developed by Genzyme

General to allow patients to continue taking their thyroid hormone supplements

while they are being screened for residual of recurring thyroid cancer. This

allows patients to avoid the debilitating effects of hypothyroidism. In the

United States, physicians order approximately 135,000 thyroglobulin tests and

25,000 radioiodine imaging whole body scans each year for thyroid cancer

patients. Genzyme General is marketing Thyrogen-Registered Trademark- hormone in

the United States through a direct sales force. Brazil has the highest incidence

of thyroid cancer in the developed world, outside of the United States.

Physicians order approximately 28,000 thyroglobulin tests and 12,000 radioiodine

imaging whole body scans each year in Brazil for thyroid cancer patients.

Biobras S.A. exclusively distributes and markets the product in Brazil.

FABRAZYME-TM- (ALGALSIDASE BETA FOR INJECTION). Genzyme General is

developing Fabrazyme-TM- enzyme, a recombinant form of the human enzyme

alpha-galactosidase, as a treatment for Fabry disease. Fabry disease is a

lysosomal storage disease that is estimated to affect 1 in 40,000 males

worldwide, with an estimated 2,000 to 4,000 patients worldwide. We filed for

marketing approval for Fabrazyme-TM- enzyme in the United States and in Europe

in 2000. We also began treating patients in France with Fabrazyme-TM- enzyme

under an Authorisation Temporaire d'Utilisation from the French Medicines

Agency, which allows patients in France to receive treatment before marketing

authorization for the therapy is granted in the European Union.

In March 2001, the Committee for Proprietary Medicinal Products, commonly

referred to as the CPMP, issued a positive opinion of our Marketing

Authorization Application for Fabrazyme-TM- enzyme for Fabry disease. The

proposed labeling recommended by the CPMP includes the following indication:

"Fabrazyme-TM- is indicated for long-term enzyme replacement therapy in patients

with a confirmed diagnosis of Fabry disease (galactosidase A deficiency)." The

CPMP is the scientific body composed of representatives from the 15 member

states of the European Union that provides advice to the European Medicines

Evaluation Agency, commonly referred to as the EMEA, on the approval of

medicinal products.

We are currently preparing a response to the FDA's request for additional

data and clarification related to our Biologics License Application for

Fabrazyme-TM- enzyme. We expect action on the U.S. regulatory submissions this

year. In addition, Genzyme General initiated a phase 4 trial of Fabrazyme-TM-

enzyme in January 2001, which is required under the FDA's accelerated approval

mechanism.

ALDURAZYME-TM- (LARONIDASE FOR INJECTION). Genzyme General and BioMarin

have formed a joint venture to develop Aldurazyme-TM- enzyme, a recombinant form

of the human enzyme

8

alpha-L-iduronidase, to treat a lysosomal storage disease known as

mucopolysaccharidosis I, or MPS-I. Approximately 2,000 to 3,000 people in the

developed world have been diagnosed with MPS-I. BioMarin has completed a phase

1-2 trial of Aldurazyme-TM- enzyme, and the joint venture initiated a

confirmatory phase 3 trial in December 2000, which is expected to conclude in

the third quarter of 2001.

AVONEX-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- (INTERFERON-BETA 1A). In September 1998, we

entered into an agreement with Biogen Inc. under which Genzyme General will

commercialize and, following regulatory approval, exclusively distribute

AVONEX-Registered Trademark- in Japan. AVONEX-Registered Trademark- is Biogen's

treatment for relapsing forms of multiple sclerosis. Genzyme General is managing

the clinical development program for AVONEX-Registered Trademark- in Japan and

is working to obtain registration and reimbursement approvals for the product.

Genzyme General estimates that there are at least 5,000 multiple sclerosis

patients in Japan.

ALPHA-GLUCOSIDASE. Genzyme General and Pharming Group N.V. are developing a

recombinant form of the human enzyme alpha-glucosidase produced in Chinese

hamster ovary cells for the treatment of Pompe disease. Pompe disease is a

lysosomal storage disease that is estimated to affect between 5,000 to 10,000

people worldwide. We licensed this product from Synpac (North Carolina), Inc. in

March 2000. Genzyme General and Pharming expect to initiate a phase 2 trial of

this product in infants in 2001.

NEUROCELL-TM--PD. Genzyme General and Diacrin, Inc. are developing

NeuroCell-TM--PD for the treatment of Parkinson's disease. NeuroCell-TM--PD is a

cellular approach that involves the transplantation of porcine fetal neural

cells to attempt to replace cells lost to disease. We have completed a

preliminary analysis of results from the phase 2 trial of NeuroCell-TM--PD.

Patients were evaluated at baseline and at three-month intervals for at least

18 months following surgery using a broad range of clinical measurements. The

trial's primary endpoint was the difference between the treated group and the

control group in the change in total score on the Unified Parkinson's Disease

Rating Scale in the off state (more than 12 hours since last medication)

obtained pre-operatively and 18 months after surgery. Both the treatment group

and the control group, on average, showed improvement from baseline. There was

no difference, however, between the treatment and the control group. Genzyme

General and Diacrin expect to complete additional analysis of the phase 2 data

as quickly as possible and to reach a decision within a few months whether to

proceed with additional clinical studies of NeuroCell-TM--PD. Based on the

preliminary analysis of the trial results and the need for additional analysis,

a phase 3 trial of NeuroCell-TM--PD will not be initiated before June 30, 2001.

Under the terms of the transfer agreement between Genzyme General and Genzyme

Biosurgery, Genzyme General, at its election, may require Genzyme Biosurgery to

return to Genzyme General a $20.0 million prepayment. This refund, together with

accrued interest, will be due within 90 days of receipt of Genzyme General's

notice of its election. This payment may be made in cash, Biosurgery designated

shares, or a combination of both, at Genzyme Biosurgery's option. Biosurgery

designated shares are authorized but unissued shares of Biosurgery Stock that

can be sold or distributed for the benefit of Genzyme General without allocating

any of the proceeds to Genzyme Biosurgery.

ANTI-THROMBIN III. Genzyme General and Genzyme Transgenics Corporation

formed a joint venture in 1998 for the development and commercialization of

recombinant human antithrombin III, also known as rhATIII, a protein naturally

produced by the body that, when bound to heparin, prevents blood clotting.

Genzyme General and Genzyme Transgenics were developing transgenically-produced

rhATIII through the joint venture to restore heparin sensitivity in

heparin-resistant patients undergoing elective heart surgery requiring pulmonary

bypass. Transgenic proteins are produced by inserting human DNA into animal

cells so that the target protein, or drug, is secreted into the milk of female

offspring during lactation. Representatives of the joint venture held a meeting

with the FDA in February 2001 to discuss the status of the clinical development

program for rhATIII. As a result of this meeting, Genzyme Transgenics announced

that the joint venture no longer expected to actively pursue additional

development of rhATIII for this indication due to the level of expense and time

involved in developing

9

the additional data required by the FDA, which was not justified by the

potential market size of the heparin resistance indication.

DIAGNOSTICS

DIAGNOSTIC PRODUCTS

Genzyme General develops, markets and distributes IN VITRO diagnostic

products, with an emphasis on point-of-care, clinical chemistry and rapid test

products. Genzyme General sells its diagnostic products through its technical

sales representatives in the United States and Europe and through distributors

in Japan.

CARDIOVASCULAR PRODUCTS. Genzyme General sells devices and reagents for the

measurement of low-density lipoprotein, or LDL, and high-density lipoprotein, or

HDL, cholesterol levels. Genzyme General's N-geneous-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- LDL

and Liquid N-geneous-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- HDL tests measure cholesterol levels

directly without the labor intensive pretreatment steps that were previously

needed and are easily adaptable to automated chemistry analyzers.

N-geneous-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- LDL was the first homogenous LDL test available

for sale in the United States. Both tests are being distributed in the United

States by Genzyme General under an agreement with the manufacturer of the tests,

Daiichi Pure Chemicals Co., Ltd., of Tokyo. In addition to the United States,

Genzyme General is also the exclusive marketing partner for the

N-geneous-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- LDL and Liquid N-geneous-REGISTERED TRADEMARK-

HDL tests in Europe and the rest of the world, with the exception of Asia, where

we hold co-exclusive distribution rights.

GLYPRO-TM- TEST. Genzyme General's GlyPro-TM- test is a tool for monitoring

diabetes. The GlyPro-TM- test measures blood sugar levels over two to three

weeks, which is a valuable resource for reducing diabetes-related complications.

Test results supplement the "snap shot" view provided by daily glucose

monitoring, enabling physicians to more accurately understand and guide the

diabetic patient behavior.

RAPID TESTS. Genzyme General's product portfolio includes patented

Contrast-Registered Trademark- rapid tests for pregnancy, Strep A, infectious

mononucleosis and GIARDIA/CRYTOSPORIDIUM determination. It also introduced the

first combination rapid test for the two most common causes of parasitic

intestinal disease.

DIAGNOSTIC INTERMEDIATES. Genzyme General produces and sells intermediates

such as diagnostic enzymes, substrates and reagents for use in diagnostic kits

used for sample analysis in clinical chemistry laboratories. One area of

emphasis is pancreatic function, where Genzyme General provides enzymes,

substrates, bulk reagents, finished devices and patented methodologies for

amylase and lipase determination to diagnostic kit manufacturers. Genzyme

General is also a primary supplier of cholesterol enzymes used in testing for

coronary heart disease.

DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS. Genzyme General and SYN-X Pharma Inc. are

collaborating on a point of care product called NeuroTrack-TM--SmartStroke-TM-

to aid in the diagnosis and differentiate stroke patients. SYN-X and Genzyme are

developing the product, and Genzyme General will exclusively manufacture and

market the product worldwide following approval. Stroke is the third leading

cause of death in the United States, affecting approximately 700,000 people

annually, with a similar incidence in Europe. Approximately 150,000 Americans

die as a result of stroke each year.

Genzyme General is also developing point-of-care products for infectious

diseases. Other development programs include a homocysteine test to determine

cardiovascular disease risk and a liquid lipase test for pancreatitis.

GENETIC DIAGNOSTIC SERVICES

Genzyme General applies advanced biotechnology to develop and provide high

quality, sophisticated genetic diagnostic services in the United States and

internationally through a national

10

network of laboratories and a direct sales force as well as through joint

ventures in Germany and Japan. Genzyme General offers three types of genetic

diagnostic services:

- biochemical testing services, which consist primarily of a widely used

screening test known as AFP3-Registered Trademark- to determine if further

prenatal genetic testing is appropriate;

- classical and molecular cytogenetic testing services, which involve the

analysis of fetal cells obtained through amniocentesis or a process known

as chorionic villi sampling to evaluate chromosomal abnormalities; and

- DNA testing, which is performed to determine the likelihood that the

patient has, or is a carrier of, a specific genetic disorder, such as

cystic fibrosis and/or Gaucher disease.

Genzyme General employs over 70 board certified genetics professionals who

interpret results and provide genetic counseling and support services to medical

practitioners and their patients.

In July 2000, we entered into an agreement with Healtheon/WebMD that allows

Genzyme General's customer network of approximately 5,000 clinicians to use an

application located on WebMD's internet site to order laboratory tests and

acquire test results. Our customer network includes obstetricians,

perinatologists, geneticists, pediatricians, hematologists and oncologists. The

arrangement with Healtheon/WebMD offers convenience and secure access to medical

professionals who use Genzyme General's genetic testing services.

We have described some of Genzyme General's genetic diagnostic tests and

development programs below.

AFP4-SM- TEST. Genzyme General added this advanced screening test to its

comprehensive prenatal genetic services program during the fourth quarter of

1999. This test is more accurate than the AFP3-Registered Trademark- test in

detecting mutations associated with fetal risk of Down Syndrome, and other

genetic defects.

INSIGHT-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- TEST. Genzyme General's

InSight-Registered Trademark- test is a cytogenetic test to be used as an

adjunct to traditional chromosome analysis that permits identification of the

most frequently occurring chromosomal abnormalities within 48 hours, which is

significantly faster than the one to three weeks required to perform classical

cytogenetic testing (karyotyping). The InSight-Registered Trademark- analysis is

provided in conjunction with a complete karyotype.

MASDA-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- SERVICE. Genzyme General's patented multiplex

allele-specific diagnostic assay, which is known as the

MASDA-Registered Trademark- Service, can analyze in a single test up to 500 DNA

samples simultaneously for over 100 known gene mutations. The

MASDA-Registered Trademark- Service not only analyzes different patient samples

for different disease indications in a single test, it also identifies multiple

mutations in one or more genes in a single patient's DNA sample. Genzyme General

is pursuing a number of commercialization strategies for the

MASDA-Registered Trademark- Service. In addition, the

MASDA-Registered Trademark- Service is also being used to provide genetic

profiling services for clinical trials being conducted by pharmaceutical

companies.

HEREDITARY NONPOLYPOSIS COLON CANCER. Genzyme General introduced a test

that screens for mutations associated with the most common form of hereditary

colon cancer, hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer, which is also known as Lynch

Syndrome. Lynch Syndrome accounts for between approximately three and six

percent of all colorectal cancers in the United States, or an estimated 4,000 to

8,000 cases every year.

ADENOMATOUS POLYPOSIS COLI. Genzyme General's APC I1307K test screens for a

gene mutation associated with an increased risk of colorectal cancer in

Ashkenazi Jewish families. The specific gene mutation occurs more frequently in

this population and has been found in approximately 28% of Ashkenazi Jewish

individuals who have both a personal history and family history of colon cancer.

CF86 TEST. Genzyme General's CF86 test screens for 86 genetic mutations

associated with cystic fibrosis.

11

DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS. Genzyme General is developing additional platforms

for complex mutational analysis and conducts research and development programs

in such areas as genomics and rare cell separation and analysis methods. It is

developing an HER-2 gene amplification assay, new predispositional colon cancer

tests and an inherited thrombophilia panel. Genzyme General is also developing a

multiple disease carrier test using the MASDA-Registered Trademark- technology

and integrated scanning sequencing approaches for rapid detection of both

previously characterized and unknown gene mutations.

GELTEX PHARMACEUTICALS, INC.

TECHNOLOGY PLATFORMS

POLYMER BASED NON-ABSORBED PRODUCTS. During the digestive process, the

intestinal tract delivers nutrients and water to the bloodstream and eliminates

waste products and indigestible materials through the bowel. Absorption of

nutrients, electrolytes, water and certain digestive substances such as bile

acids is controlled by the intestinal wall, which acts as a gateway from the

intestines to the bloodstream, allowing small molecules to pass from the

intestinal tract into the bloodstream and preventing larger molecules from

entering circulation. Orally administered drugs are either absorbed through the

intestinal wall into the bloodstream, or are non-absorbed and achieve their

intended therapeutic effect by acting in the intestinal tract. Non-absorbed

drugs are less likely to cause the toxicities associated with many absorbed

drugs.

GelTex's product development approach represents an advance in the use of

polymers as pharmaceuticals. Its technology enables GelTex to combine

commercially available or novel monomers that have distinct structural qualities

to create proprietary, non-absorbed polymers that selectively bind target

molecules. GelTex designs its polymers to carry a high density of binding sites

for the targeted molecules, making them potent at low dosage levels. Its

products are designed to be orally administered in capsule or tablet form. The

compounds are not broken down during the digestive process and are too large to

be absorbed through the intestinal wall and into the bloodstream. As the

polymers pass through the stomach and into the intestines, they bind targeted

molecules and pass easily through the intestinal tract and, with the attached

target molecules, are excreted from the body.

GelTex believes that its enabling technology offers the following benefits:

- GelTex believes its enabling technology is applicable to a broad range of

diseases and conditions treatable through the intestinal tract, such as

elevated LDL cholesterol, obesity and certain infectious diseases;

- since GelTex's products are designed to act only in the intestinal tract

and are not absorbed into the bloodstream, they are less likely to cause

the toxicities associated with many absorbed drugs; and

- GelTex's polymer-based products are designed to be potent enough to permit

oral administration in a convenient capsule or tablet form.

POLYAMINES AND METAL CHELATORS. Polyamines are naturally occurring

compounds found in human cells that remain as metabolically distinct entities

within the cells. Research indicates that these polyamines bind to nucleic acids

and promote the integrity and fidelity of many of the functions of nucleic acids

that are necessary for cellular proliferation to occur. GelTex's polyamine

analogue compounds are structurally similar to the cell's naturally occurring

polyamines and, as a result, these analogues are recognized as natural

polyamines by the cell's polyamine uptake system and gain entry to the cell.

Once inside the cell, GelTex's polyamine analogues cause the cell to shut down

the enzymes that would normally make natural polyamines and to increase

production of the enzyme that is responsible for the breakdown and export of

natural polyamines from the cell. The combined effect on the enzymes controlling

the proper level of polyamines in the cell results in a reduction in the amount

of natural polyamines in the cell and a corresponding increase in the amount of

analogues in the cell.

12

Metal chelators are drugs that bind tightly to certain metals, such as iron,

in the bloodstream and inside cells. They eliminate quantities of metals in

excess of the body's needs, thereby helping to avoid damage to vital organs such

as the liver, heart and pancreas. Chelators are administered to enhance the

body's ability to get rid of excess metal concentrations.

PRODUCT AND DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS

PRODUCT INDICATION STATUS COLLABORATOR OR LICENSOR

- --------------------- --------------------- --------------------- ------------------------

WELCHOL-TM- Reduction of elevated Marketed since 2000; Sankyo Pharma Inc.

(COLESEVELAM LDL cholesterol in approved in the U.S.

HYDROCHLORIDE) patients with primary in 2000

hypercholesterolemia

GT160-246 CLOSTRIDIUM DIFFICILE Pilot trial ongoing; None

colitis larger phase 2 trial

to be initiated in

2001

POLYAMINE ANALOGUE Psoriasis Phase 1-2 trial University of Florida

ongoing

POLYMER Oral mucositis IND filing planned None

for 2001

ORAL IRON CHELATOR Iron overload IND filing planned None

disorders for second half of

2001

FAT ABSORPTION Anti-obesity Research None

INHIBITOR

We have described GelTex's product and most advanced development program

below.

WELCHOL-TM- (COLESEVELAM HYDROCHLORIDE). GelTex received marketing approval

for WelChol-TM- from the FDA in May 2000. WelChol-TM- is approved for

administration alone or in combination with an HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor, also

known as a "statin," as adjunctive therapy to diet and exercise for the

reduction of elevated LDL cholesterol in patients with primary

hypercholesterolemia. While the risks of hypercholesterolemia are well

recognized, the condition remains significantly under-treated worldwide. An

estimated 25 million Americans require drug therapy to achieve adequate

reductions in cholesterol levels. However, only approximately 8 million

Americans are receiving cholesterol-reducing drugs, and it is estimated that

more than 60% of this population is not at their appropriate National

Cholesterol Education Program LDL cholesterol goal. Worldwide, approximately

one-third of the individuals who should be receiving cholesterol-reducing drugs

are receiving therapy. WelChol-TM- is being marketed in the United States by

Sankyo Pharma. Sankyo Pharma launched WelChol-TM- in September 2000.

GT 160-246 FOR C. DIFFICILE COLITIS. GelTex's leading product currently in

development is a toxin binder for CLOSTRIDIUM DIFFICILE, also known as C.

DIFFICILE. C. DIFFICILE is a major cause of antibiotic associated colitis, a

condition common in hospitals and nursing homes. C. DIFFICILE is estimated to

affect over 500,000 patients each year in the United States, resulting in

prolonged hospital stays and increased costs, and is the cause of an estimated

5,000 deaths annually. GelTex is conducting a pilot phase 2 trial of GT160-246

and plans to initiate a large phase 2 trial by the end of 2001.

GENZYME BIOSURGERY--PRODUCTS AND DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS

We created Genzyme Biosurgery in December 2000 by combining two of our

former divisions, Genzyme Surgical Products and Genzyme Tissue Repair, and

simultaneously acquiring Biomatrix, Inc. Genzyme Biosurgery is organized into

three business units: Orthopaedics, Cardiothoracic and

13

Biosurgical Specialties. Its product and development program portfolio consists

of biomaterials, biotherapeutics, traditional devices and surgical closures, as

well as advanced devices for minimally invasive cardiovascular surgery. Genzyme

Biosurgery's sales force markets products directly to surgeons and hospital

administrators throughout the United States and Europe. It also uses a network

of distributors to sell products in Europe, Asia and Latin America.

In February 2001, we announced our intention to divest the

Snowden-Pencer-Registered Trademark- surgical instruments product lines. These

product lines include hand-held reusable instruments and endoscopic instruments

for general, plastic and gynecological surgery. We also announced our intention

to terminate the production of Synvisc-Registered Trademark- in Canada and sell

our manufacturing facility in Pointe-Claire, Quebec, Canada. We expect these

transactions to be completed during the second half of 2001.

ORTHOPAEDICS

SYNVISC-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- (HYLAN G-F20). Synvisc-Registered Trademark-

is an hyaluronan-based biomaterial used to treat osteoarthritis of the knee to

reduce pain and improve joint mobility. When injected into the knee joint,

Synvisc-Registered Trademark- supplements the synovial fluid to restore

lubrication and cushioning. Synvisc-Registered Trademark- is approved in over 50

countries and is sold in more than 35 countries through marketing and

distribution agreements with major pharmaceutical companies, including

Wyeth-Ayerst Laboratories in the U.S., Germany, Portugal and Turkey. In 2000, we

completed a pilot clinical trial in which Synvisc-Registered Trademark- was

evaluated for the treatment of osteoarthritis of the hip. A pivotal trial for

this indication is planned for 2001. Genzyme Biosurgery plans to conduct

additional clinical studies evaluating Synvisc-Registered Trademark- in other

joints in the future.

CARTICEL-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- (AUTOLOGOUS CULTURED

CHONDROCYTES). Carticel-Registered Trademark- chondrocytes are used to treat

damaged articular knee cartilage. Genzyme Biosurgery employs a proprietary

process to grow autologous--a patient's own--cartilage cells for use in

repairing damaged knee cartilage in patients who have had an inadequate response

to a prior surgical procedure. Genzyme Biosurgery also sells biopsy kits and a

variety of reusable disposable instruments and sutures that are typically used

in the Carticel-Registered Trademark- procedure.

The FDA has required Genzyme Biosurgery to conduct two confirmatory

post-marketing studies of Carticel-Registered Trademark- chondrocytes. The first

study, which was successfully completed in 2000 ahead of schedule, measured

outcomes of patients in Genzyme Biosurgery's registry who did not respond to

other treatment before being implanted with Carticel-Registered Trademark-

chondrocytes. Outcomes before and after implantation were compared. The second

study is designed to compare the long-term clinical effect of treatment with

Carticel-Registered Trademark- chondrocytes to other treatments. Genzyme

Biosurgery received protocol approval for this study in the first quarter of

2000. Investigators will evaluate approximately 100 patients in the study and

will follow these patients for four years.

Genzyme Biosurgery markets Carticel-Registered Trademark- chondrocytes to

orthopedic surgeons in the United States and Europe directly and through

distributors. Genzyme Biosurgery also trains orthopedic surgeons, collects and

analyzes outcomes data through a registry, and assists physicians and patients

in obtaining reimbursements from third-party payors. Approximately one-fourth of

its 85-person U.S. sales and reimbursement staff is involved directly in claims

processing and educating insurers about the appropriate uses of the product.

Genzyme Biosurgery expects that Carticel-Registered Trademark- sales may be

lower in the summer months as fewer operative procedures are typically performed

during those months.

CARTICEL-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- II. Carticel-Registered Trademark- II, which

is currently in development, is a next-generation product based on the

development of a pre-formed autologous cartilage tissue implant. The implant is

intended to allow the procedure to be performed arthroscopically. If it is

successfully developed, Carticel-Registered Trademark- II could significantly

decrease rehabilitation time for patients and allow surgeons to treat larger

cartilage defects. In connection with the development of

Carticel-Registered Trademark- II, Genzyme Biosurgery obtained an exclusive

worldwide license in 2000 from Sentron Medical, Inc., for technology and related

intellectual property

14

rights that include autologous chondrocyte graft technology to produce cartilage

tissue on a supporting membrane IN VITRO.

OTHER DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS. Genzyme Biosurgery is conducting preclinical

studies of a small molecule therapy for the treatment of osteoarthritis. Genzyme

Biosurgery is conducting basic research and development into the biology of

cartilage and the cartilage repair process. The objective of this research is to

identify biologic materials that promote more rapid regeneration of articular

cartilage, to develop new methods for the repair of arthritic joints and large

surface area cartilage defects and to enable the implantation procedure to be

performed less invasively. Genzyme Biosurgery is also committing resources to

meet requirements specified by the FDA for validation of certain product

manufacturing parameters.

CARDIOTHORACIC

DEVICES AND SUTURES. Genzyme Biosurgery's products for traditional

cardiothoracic surgery include a comprehensive portfolio of products, including

fluid management (chest drainage) systems and sutures. Its line of fluid

management systems consists primarily of self-contained, disposable chest

drainage devices used to drain blood from the chest cavity following open-heart

and lung surgery. Genzyme Biosurgery also sells autotransfusion devices that

allow the collection of blood lost by the patient and its reinfusion

postoperatively, which eliminates the risks associated with blood transfusions.

Genzyme Biosurgery's self-contained, disposable Pleur-evac-Registered Trademark-

chest drainage unit was introduced in 1967 and is the market leader in chest

drainage devices. Genzyme Biosurgery also sells a line of dry suction-

controlled chest drainage and autotransfusion devices under the Sahara-TM- and

Thora-Klex-Registered Trademark- brand names. In 2000, Genzyme Biosurgery

entered into selling agreements for its chest drainage devices with Novations,

LLC, Amerinet, Inc. and Health Services Corporation of America, which are large

hospital group purchasing organizations representing approximately 45% of the

hospitals in the United States. Genzyme Biosurgery also markets sutures,

including the Tevdek-Registered Trademark- and Polydek-Registered Trademark-

valve sutures and Deklene-Registered Trademark- bypass sutures. Genzyme

Biosurgery received 510(k) clearance from the FDA to market the NextStitch-TM-

cardiovascular valve suture for use in heart-valve replacement surgery in

November 2000. NextStitch-TM- cardiovascular valve suture incorporates two

suture strands into each needle, which allows surgeons to significantly reduce

the time and increase the efficiency of valve suturing. Additionally, Genzyme

Biosurgery sells aortic punches, which are used during coronary artery bypass

graft surgery to make clean, round openings in the aorta prior to grafting.

MINIMALLY INVASIVE CARDIOVASCULAR SURGERY SYSTEMS. Genzyme Biosurgery

markets products for minimally invasive cardiovascular surgery, with a focus on

beating-heart surgery and vein harvesting. In beating-heart surgery, procedures

are performed on the heart without stopping the heart and without the use of a

heart/lung machine to circulate blood and supply oxygen. This allows surgeons to

avoid the complications often associated with the use of heart/lung machines.

Genzyme Biosurgery launched its Immobilizer-TM- System, its third-generation

platform for beating-heart surgery, in August 2000. The Immobilizer-TM- System

combines reusable retractors with disposable devices such as stabilizers,

sutures and punches. Genzyme Biosurgery also introduced the next generation of

its SaphLITE-Registered Trademark- system in August 2000. Genzyme Biosurgery's

new SaphLITE-Registered Trademark- system is used to remove the saphenous vein

from a patient's leg in a minimally-invasive procedure for use as a graft during

a coronary artery bypass graft operation.

BIOMATERIALS. Genzyme Biosurgery launched FocalSeal-Registered Trademark--L

in North America in 2000 for use in pulmonary procedures.

FocalSeal-Registered Trademark--L is a biomaterial developed by Focal, Inc. for

the prevention of air leaks following lung surgery. Genzyme Biosurgery has the

exclusive rights to market FocalSeal-Registered Trademark--L in North America

for cardiovascular and gastrointestinal procedures. Approximately 70,000 lung

surgeries are performed in the United States annually, with almost all patients

at risk for debilitating air leaks.

15

Genzyme Biosurgery's cardiothoracic sales force is initially targeting the top

150 thoracic hospitals in the United States. This force is augmented by Focal

sales specialists.

Genzyme Biosurgery obtained CE Mark approval in the European Union for its

CV Seprafilm-TM- II adhesion barrier, which is designed to reduce the formation

of adhesions (scar tissue) following open-heart surgery. CV Seprafilm-TM- II

adhesion barrier is part of a portfolio of products based on hyaluronan known as

the "Sepra-TM- products" that are being developed and marketed by Genzyme

Biosurgery. Hyaluronan is a substance that is naturally created in the body to

lubricate and protect tissue. We are developing the Sepra-TM- products on behalf

of Genzyme Development Partners, L.P., and market the products in the United

States and Canada on behalf of Genzyme Ventures II, our joint venture with

Genzyme Development Partners. In January 2001, we purchased all of the Class A

limited partnership interests in Genzyme Development Partners for an upfront

cash payment of $35,000 per interest (or $17,500 for each half-interest) and

royalties on sales of the Sepra-TM- products for ten years. The purchase of the

Class A interests was allocated to Genzyme Biosurgery. If you would like more

information about our relationship with Genzyme Development Partners and the

joint venture, you should read Note M., "Research and Development Agreements,"

to our Consolidated Financial Statements, which we are incorporating into this

discussion by reference.

BIOTHERAPEUTICS. In 2000, Genzyme Biosurgery initiated a phase 1 trial of a

proprietary gene therapy designed to promote the growth of new blood vessels

around blocked coronary arteries. The novel gene therapy is based on an

engineered form of the gene known as HIF-1 alpha, which has been shown in

preclinical studies to turn on the expression of many proteins associated with

blood vessel formation. The HIF-1 alpha product is being administered in

patients with coronary artery disease undergoing bypass surgery who have an area

of the heart that is not suitable for surgical revascularization. Genzyme

Biosurgery is also conducting a phase 1 trial to evaluate the use of the HIF-l

alpha to treat patients with severe peripheral vascular disease. In addition,

Genzyme Biosurgery is conducting research on other gene therapy approaches to

congestive heart failure and restenosis.

BIOSURGERY SPECIALTIES

BIOMATERIALS. Genzyme Biosurgery has an extensive line of biomaterial

products on the market and in development for the general surgery market,

including many of the Sepra-TM- products. Genzyme Biosurgery sells the Sepra-TM-

products in the United States and Europe primarily through its own sales force

and in Japan through a distributor.

PRODUCT INDICATION STATUS

- ----------------------------- ----------------------------- -----------------------------

SEPRAFILM-TM- BIORESORBABLE Prevention of adhesions after Approved and marketed in the

MEMBRANE abdominal/pelvic surgery U.S. and Europe since 1996;

approved in Canada and Israel

since 1997 and in Japan since

1998; approved and marketed

in several other countries

SEPRAFILM-TM- BIORESORBABLE Prevention of small bowel Phase 4 clinical trial

MEMBRANE obstructions ongoing

SEPRAFILM-TM- II ADHESION Prevention of adhesions after Marketed in Europe since 1999

BARRIER abdominal/pelvic surgery

SEPRAMESH-TM- BIOSURGICAL Hernia repair Approved and marketed since

COMPOSITE 2000 in the U.S., Europe and

Canada

16

PRODUCT INDICATION STATUS

- ----------------------------- ----------------------------- -----------------------------

HYLAFORM-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- Facial wrinkle and deep scar CE Mark approval received in

repairs 1995; approved in Canada,

Israel and Chile in 1997, in

Argentina in 1998 and in

Australia and China in 1999

SEPRAPACK-TM- PRODUCT Sinus packing Available for sale in the

U.S. in 2000

HYLASHIELD-REGISTERED TRADEMARK-, Ease pain caused by dry-eye Marketed in Canada and Europe

HYLASHIELD NITE-TM- AND and facilitate ophthalmic

HSS-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- surgical procedures

SEPRAGEL-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- Sinus packing Received 510(k) approval in

SINUS (FORMERLY HYLASINE-TM-) the U.S. in 2000

SEPRAGEL-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- Prevention of adhesions after In development

BIORESORBABLE GEL open and laproscopic surgery

SEPRAGEL-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- Spinal surgery In development

SPINE

Seprafilm-TM- bioresorbable membrane is a solid form of modified hyaluronan

that is used to separate and protect tissues and organs that have been damaged

during abdominal and pelvic surgery. It is the only product approved by the FDA

that is clinically proven to reduce the incidence, extent and severity of

postsurgical adhesions in the abdomen and pelvis. To build further clinical

evidence of the safety and effectiveness of Seprafilm-TM- bioresorbable

membrane, Genzyme Biosurgery has initiated a 25-center, 1,700-patient phase 4

trial to test the ability of the Seprafilm-TM- product to reduce the incidence

of bowel obstructions. The study will track patient outcomes for two years after

surgery.

Seprafilm-TM- II adhesion barrier is a modified form of Seprafilm-TM-

bioresorbable membrane designed to have increased plasticity and, thus, improved

handling and overall ease of use. Seprafilm-TM- II adhesion barrier currently is

marketed in Europe for use in open and laproscopic surgery to reduce the

incidence of postoperative abdominal and pelvic adhesions.

In 2000, Genzyme Biosurgery received 510(k) marketing clearance from the FDA

for Sepramesh-TM- biosurgical composite, a mesh product that is coated with

modified hyaluronan for use in hernia repairs and other soft tissue repairs such

as bladder neck suspensions.

Hylaform-Registered Trademark- is a hyaluronan-based biomaterial that is

used to correct facial wrinkles and deep scars by injection directly into the

dermal tissue. It is part of the portfolio of products based on hyaluronan we

acquired through our acquisition of Biomatrix. It is distributed by Inamed

Corporation, formerly called Collagen Aesthetics, Inc., in Europe, Canada,

Japan, Australia, Israel and other select countries worldwide. Inamed also has

the exclusive distribution rights to Hylaform-Registered Trademark- in the

United States, subject to an additional payment and FDA approval.

EPICEL-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- (CULTURAL EPIDERMAL AUTOGRAFTS). Genzyme

Biosurgery's Epicel-Registered Trademark- skin grafts are cultured autologous

skin cells used for permanent skin replacement for patients with severe burns.

Epicel-Registered Trademark- skin grafts were first introduced in 1987. These

epidermal grafts are grown from a patient's own skin cells and, therefore, are

not rejected by the patient's immune system. Most burn wounds involving less

than 60% body surface area are covered with conventional skin grafts within the

three to four weeks it currently takes to grow skin grafts produced using the

Epicel-Registered Trademark- process. The primary candidates for

Epicel-Registered Trademark- skin grafts are the approximately 800 patients each

year in the U.S. who survive burn injuries covering more than 60% of their body

surface area. Genzyme Biosurgery markets Epicel-Registered Trademark- skin

grafts to burn centers in the United States and parts of Europe through its own

direct sales force and in Japan

17

through a distributor. Sales of Epicel-Registered Trademark- skin grafts

fluctuate from quarter to quarter depending on a number of unpredictable

factors, including the number and survival rate of severe burn patients prior to

treatment with Epicel-Registered Trademark- skin grafts.

PLASTIC SURGERY PRODUCTS. Genzyme Biosurgery also manufactures products for

the plastic surgery market. This distinct product line consists of hand-held

instruments, endoscopic plastic surgery equipment, sutures and surgical

compression garments.

GENZYME MOLECULAR ONCOLOGY--TECHNOLOGY PLATFORMS AND DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS

Genzyme Molecular Oncology is developing a new generation of cancer

therapeutics based upon the growing understanding of the molecular basis of

cancer. It believes that these therapeutics have potential to treat multiple

types of cancer, minimize toxicity and side effects, and complement both

existing and novel therapies. Genzyme Molecular Oncology supplements its

internal resources through collaborations with some of the world's preeminent

scientists and clinicians in the field of cancer.

TECHNOLOGY PLATFORMS

ANTIGEN DISCOVERY. Genzyme Molecular Oncology is seeking to stimulate a

cellular immune response against tumors by using vaccines to present

tumor-specific antigens to the immune system. Antigens are molecular markers in

tumor cells that enable the body's immune system to recognize and respond to

these cells as being foreign. Genzyme Molecular Oncology has built a

proprietary, state-of-the-art antigen discovery platform that combines

identification and validation in one step. It is using this platform to rapidly

and efficiently identify and validate target antigens for incorporation into

novel antigen-specific peptide and gene cancer vaccines. For example, Genzyme

Molecular Oncology plans to analyze the tumor tissue extracted from responding

patients in its ongoing clinical trials using its antigen discovery technologies

in order to identify the antigens associated with the tumor and expand the

development of its antigen-specific vaccines. It plans to file an

Investigational New Drug application for its first proprietary cancer antigen

fragments in 2001. Genzyme Molecular Oncology also established an antigen

discovery and licensing collaboration with Purdue Pharma L.P. in October 2000

related to the discovery and validation of up to 20 cancer antigens.

Building on the success of this platform, Genzyme Molecular Oncology is

beginning to expand its antigen discovery technologies in the field of

infectious disease. In January 2001, it entered into an HIV antigen discovery

and research collaboration with Dr. Bruce Walker of Massachusetts General

Hospital. Dr. Walker and Genzyme Molecular Oncology will perform studies to

identify novel peptides that may be used as HIV vaccines. Genzyme Molecular

Oncology's ability to develop and commercialize novel peptides identified during

this collaboration is subject to the execution of a further agreement with

Massachusetts General Hospital, which is currently being negotiated.

SAGE-TM-. Genzyme Molecular Oncology's SAGE-TM- (Serial Analysis of Gene

Expression) technology is a patented high-throughput, high efficiency method of

simultaneously detecting and measuring the expression level of virtually all

genes expressed in a cell at a given time. The SAGE-TM- technology detects and

quantifies expression of novel as well as known genes and, because of its high

efficiency and sensitivity, SAGE-TM- technology can detect genes expressed at

low levels. Some of the uses of the SAGE-TM- technology are comparison of

disease tissue with healthy tissue, comparison of genes expressed at different

stages of disease, elucidation of disease pathways and measurement of response

to and toxicity of drug candidates. Genzyme Molecular Oncology enhances the

power of its SAGE-TM- technology through software and bioinformatics

development, technology improvements, database expansion and the integration of

the SAGE-TM- technology with other genomics tools, such as microarrays.

18

Genzyme Molecular Oncology has used its SAGE-TM- technology to analyze the

most prevalent types of cancer and corresponding normal tissue and also has

access to SAGE-TM- data generated in the laboratories of Drs. Bert Vogelstein

and Kenneth Kinzler at The Johns Hopkins University. Genzyme Molecular Oncology

has accumulated from its proprietary analyses, its collaborators and the Cancer

Genome Anatomy Project at the National Cancer Institute a database of over

3.5 million SAGE-TM- gene sequence identification tags, representing over

125,000 unique transcripts. In August 2000, The Johns Hopkins University

published data from a study in which its researchers had used the SAGE-TM-

technology to identify 79 genes, including 14 novel genes differentially

expressed in tumors versus normal vasculature. Of the 79 genes, 46 were

specifically involved in tumor angiogenesis. Genzyme Molecular Oncology has

rights to the intellectual property related to the genes found in this study

under a sponsored research agreement with the laboratory of Dr. Kinzler.

Genzyme Molecular Oncology also employs its SAGE-TM- technology extensively

in its own drug discovery and development efforts to identify genes that are

functionally relevant. In cancer vaccines, Genzyme Molecular Oncology combines

the SAGE-TM- technology with other proprietary tools to identify tumor-specific

antigens. In angiogenesis inhibition, Genzyme Molecular Oncology is using the

SAGE-TM- technology to dissect the genetic pathways for angiogenesis and to

explore and understand the mechanism of action of drug candidates discovered in

functional assays.

Genzyme Molecular Oncology is using the SAGE-TM- technology and its

proprietary SAGE-TM- database to generate revenues through licenses and database

collaborations. For example, in 2000, Genzyme Molecular Oncology licensed its

SAGE-TM- technology to Pfizer, Syngenta, Medical Molecular Research Collogne,

NeuralStem Biopharmaceuticals and Invitrogen. Genzyme Molecular Oncology also

granted Celera Genomics co-exclusive worldwide rights to market the SAGE-TM-

database to Celera customers on a revenue-sharing basis. The arrangement allows

customers to combine SAGE-TM- expression data with Celera's Genome Reference

Database, providing them with powerful means to more rapidly and efficiently

move drug discovery forward by associating genes with tissues and disease

states.

DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS

Genzyme Molecular Oncology is developing products primarily focused on

vaccines that treat cancer by stimulating the body's immune system to fight

tumor cells and angiogenesis inhibitors that treat cancer by preventing the

formation and development of blood vessels that tumors require for growth. The

following chart describes the status of Genzyme Molecular Oncology's development

programs.

PROGRAM TYPE(S) OF CANCER STATUS

- ----------------------------- ----------------------------- -----------------------------

CANCER VACCINES

DENDRITIC/TUMOR CELL FUSION Breast Phase 1-2 trial ongoing

VACCINES (CHEMICAL Melanoma Phase 1-2 trial ongoing

PROCESS) Kidney Phase 1-2 trial ongoing

DENDRITIC/TUMOR CELL FUSION Melanoma Preclinical

VACCINES (ELECTROFUSION Kidney Preclinical

PROCESS)

MELAN-A/MART-1 AND GP100 Melanoma (EX VIVO) Phase 1-2 trial ongoing

ANTIGEN-SPECIFIC CANCER Melanoma (IN VIVO) Phase 1-2 trial ongoing

VACCINES

SPHERE-TM- PEPTIDES Multiple Preclinical

NY-ESO-1 ANTIGEN Multiple Preclinical

19

PROGRAM TYPE(S) OF CANCER STATUS

- ----------------------------- ----------------------------- -----------------------------

ANGIOGENESIS INHIBITORS

AAATIII* Multiple Preclinical

SMALL MOLECULES Multiple Research

GENE THERAPY Multiple Research

- ------------------------

* Genzyme Molecular Oncology is co-developing aaATIII with ATIII LLC, a joint

venture between Genzyme General and Genzyme Transgenics Corporation. If you

would like additional information concerning this joint venture, please read

Note I., "Investments," to our Consolidated Financial Statements, which we

are incorporating into this discussion by reference.

CANCER VACCINES

Genzyme Molecular Oncology believes that the most successful cancer vaccines

will be those that activate a cellular immune response directed at the tumor.

Its program features two types of vaccines for generating a tumor-specific

cellular immune response:

- where the specific tumor antigens are not known, a cell therapy product is

created by using a technique that fuses the patient's own tumor cells with

dendritic cells, the specialized immune system cells that capture antigens

and present them to T cells--the immune system's cellular response to

disease--which are then able to selectively recognize and destroy the

tumor cells; and

- where specific tumor antigens have been identified as targets of the

cellular immune response, Genzyme Molecular Oncology uses gene-based or

peptide-based tumor vaccines.

Genzyme Molecular Oncology believes that both of these vaccine types will

provide clinical benefit and have commercial potential. Development of

antigen-specific vaccines, however, is currently limited by the lack of known

tumor-specific antigens. Therefore, cell fusion may have broader applicability

in the near term. Over time, as Genzyme Molecular Oncology identifies more

tumor-specific antigens, it anticipates having the ability to provide

off-the-shelf vaccines that are customized based on the set of specific antigens

present in the patient's tumor.

FUSION-BASED CANCER VACCINES.

BREAST CANCER FUSION VACCINE. Working with the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute

and the Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center in Boston, Genzyme Molecular

Oncology initiated a phase 1-2 trial for the treatment of metastatic breast

cancer in September 1999. A chemical process is being used in this trial to fuse

the patient's tumor cells with dendritic cells. The end points for this trial

are safety, immunologic response and clinical response.

MELANOMA AND KIDNEY CANCER FUSION VACCINES. Genzyme Molecular Oncology

accelerated its fusion vaccine program following the publication by an academic

group in Germany of promising clinical data for the treatment of advanced kidney

cancer with a vaccine produced using electrofusion to combine a patient's cancer

cells with dendritic cells derived from another source. Two additional phase 1-2

trials for cell fusion vaccines were initiated in 2000, one in advanced kidney

cancer and one in metastatic melanoma. Both of these trials employ the chemical

fusion process. Genzyme Molecular Oncology plans to initiate two more

fusion-based vaccine trials in 2001 using the electrofusion process employed by

the German group.

20

ANTIGEN-SPECIFIC CANCER VACCINES.

MELAN-A/MART-1 AND GP100 ANTIGEN-SPECIFIC VACCINES. In collaboration with

Dr. Steven Rosenberg at the National Cancer Institute, Genzyme Molecular

Oncology has conducted two phase 1 trials. In these trials, adenoviral gene

delivery vectors carrying either the Melan-A/MART-1 or gp100 gene were evaluated

for safety, immunologic reactivity and potential therapeutic effect when

administered IN VIVO alone or in conjunction with recombinant interleukin-2. The

results from these clinical studies indicated that the adenoviral vectors were

safe and well tolerated, and that a small but notable number of both the 36

patients immunized with Melan-A/MART-1 and the 18 patients treated with gp100

showed clinically significant tumor regression. These responses were seen in

very late stage (stage 4) metastatic disease patients, who are a heavily

pre-treated patient population not expected to mount a robust immune response

and who, as a group, have a very short life expectancy.

In April 1999, Genzyme Molecular Oncology initiated a phase 1-2 trial in

melanoma patients at Massachusetts General Hospital. This trial involves

extracting dendritic cells from the patient and combining these cells with a

vaccine containing Melan-A/MART-1 and gp100 EX VIVO. The treated cells are then

injected into the patient. In this trial, Genzyme Molecular Oncology will assess

safety, immunologic response and clinical response. Throughout the trial,

Genzyme Molecular Oncology will be performing a comprehensive analysis of the

patient's immune response to the vaccine to help it to understand better why

some patients respond well to the therapy while others do not.

Genzyme Molecular Oncology also initiated a phase 1-2 IN VIVO melanoma trial

in September 2000. This study utilizes both the Melan-A/MART-1 and gp100 tumor

antigens delivered intradermally. In this trial, Genzyme Molecular Oncology

intends to monitor patient immune responses in order to further elucidate the

immunology of cancer to enhance its antigen-specific vaccine development

efforts.

SPHERE-TM- PEPTIDE VACCINES. Genzyme Molecular Oncology has identified

numerous proprietary peptides, or antigen fragments, through its antigen

discovery program. It is currently evaluating peptides for multiple cancer

indications in preclinical studies, and plans to file an Investigational New

Drug application for a phase 1 trial in melanoma using its SPHERE-TM- peptides

later in 2001.

NY-ESO-1 ANTIGEN-SPECIFIC VACCINES. NY-ESO-1 is an antigen expressed in a

subset of a number of different tumor types, including breast cancer, melanoma

and lung cancer. Genzyme Molecular Oncology is conducting pre-clinical

development to support a phase 1-2 trial for NY-ESO-1-positive tumors to be

performed in collaboration with the Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research.

ANGIOGENESIS INHIBITORS

Genzyme Molecular Oncology is pursuing multiple approaches to

anti-angiogenesis - the treatment of cancer by cutting off the blood supply that

tumors need to survive. In 2000, Genzyme Molecular Oncology's collaborators at

The Johns Hopkins University used the SAGE-TM- technology to identify 46 genes

implicated in the growth of tumor blood vessels. These genes may yield targets

for the development of cancer therapeutics. In addition, Genzyme Molecular

Oncology is continuing its collaboration with Dr. Judah Folkman's laboratory at

Boston's Children's Hospital around aaATIII, a modified form of antithrombin III

that has been shown in preclinical studies to act as a potent angiogenesis

inhibitor.

COMPETITION

We are engaged in segments of the human healthcare products industry that

are extremely competitive. Our competitors in the United States and elsewhere

are numerous and include major pharmaceutical, surgical device and biotechnology

companies. Some of these competitors may have more extensive research and

development, regulatory, manufacturing and production capabilities. Some

competitors may have greater financial resources. These companies may succeed in

developing products

21

that are more effective than any that we have or may develop and may also prove

to be more successful than we are in producing and marketing products and

services. In addition, technological advances or different approaches developed

by one or more of our competitors may render our products obsolete, less

effective or uneconomical.

Each of our products and services faces different competitive challenges,

and we have described many of them below.

CEREZYME-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- AND CEREDASE-REGISTERED TRADEMARK-

ENZYMES. Although Genzyme General is not aware of any current effective

alternative to its products for the treatment for Gaucher disease, competition

potentially could come from other protein replacement therapies, small molecules

or gene therapy. Genzyme General believes that its proprietary production

techniques and, to a certain extent, the orphan drug status of its products,

which provides market exclusivity in the United States until May 2001, give it a

number of advantages over potential competitors using protein replacement

therapy for the treatment of Gaucher disease. Gene therapy techniques are still

in experimental stages. Genzyme General believes that the principal factors that

will affect competition for Cerezyme-Registered Trademark- and

Ceredase-Registered Trademark- enzymes will be clinical effectiveness and

absence of adverse side effects.

RENAGEL-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- CAPSULES AND TABLETS. Phosphate binders are

currently the only available treatment for hyperphosphatemia. There are several

phosphate binders available or under development. A prescription calcium acetate

preparation is currently the only other product approved in the United States

for the control of elevated phosphorus levels in patients with chronic kidney

failure. Other products used as phosphate binders include over-the-counter

calcium- and aluminum-based antacids and dietary calcium supplements. Calcium

acetate and calcium carbonate, the most commonly used agents, must be taken at

sufficient doses to achieve adequate reductions in phosphate absorption, which

can lead to constipation and patient noncompliance. In addition, calcium therapy

requires frequent monitoring because its use can cause hypercalcemia. Aluminum

hydroxide is more effective at lower doses than calcium acetate or calcium

carbonate, but it is infrequently used because aluminum absorbed from the

intestinal tract accumulates in the tissues of patients with chronic kidney

failure, causing aluminum-related osteomalacia, anemia and dialysis dementia.

Genzyme General is aware of one other company, Shire Pharmaceuticals, Inc., that

is developing a phosphate binder for the treatment of hyperphosphatemia in

patients with chronic renal failure. Shire licensed this product, Foznal-TM-,

from AnorMed, Inc. and has filed for marketing approval in Europe and is

expected to file for approval in the United States in early 2002.

WELCHOL-TM-. In the cholesterol-reduction field, products are currently

available that address many of the needs of the market. These products include

other bile acid sequestrants, HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors, fibric acid

derivatives and niacin-based products. In 2000, sales of HMG-CoA reductase

inhibitors represented more than 95% of the market for cholesterol-reducing

drugs sold in the United States. Combined worldwide sales of HMG-CoA reductase

inhibitors were an estimated $16.0 billion in 2000. The most widely prescribed

bile acid sequestrant in the United States is cholestyramine, a polymer resin.

FABRAZYME-TM- ENZYME. Genzyme General is aware of other companies

developing products for the treatment of Fabry disease. Transkaryotic

Therapies Inc., for example, submitted its application for marketing approval

for its Replagal-TM- product for Fabry disease to the FDA approximately one week

before we submitted our application for Fabrazyme-TM- enzyme. If Transkaryotic

Therapies or any other company receives FDA approval for a Fabry disease therapy

with orphan drug designation before we receive FDA approval for Fabrazyme-TM-

enzyme, the Orphan Drug Act may preclude us from selling Fabrazyme-TM- enzyme in

the United States for up to seven years. Similarly, we submitted our application

for marketing approval of Fabrazyme-TM- enzyme with the EMEA within a short time

of Transkaryotic Therapies' filing. In March 2001, the CPMP issued positive

opinions of the Marketing Authorization Applications for both our Fabrazyme-TM-

enzyme and Transkaryotic Therapies' Replagal-TM- product on the

22

same day. If Transkaryotic Therapies or any other company receives EMEA approval

for a Fabry disease therapy with orphan drug designation before we receive EMEA

approval for Fabrazyme-TM- enzyme, the European equivalent of the Orphan Drug

Act may preclude us from selling Fabrazyme-TM- enzyme in the European Union for

up to ten years. We are currently involved in litigation with Transkaryotic

Therapies related to its product. For more information about this litigation,

you should read the section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K entitled "Item 3.

Legal Proceedings."

OTHER LYSOSOMAL STORAGE DISEASES. Genzyme General is aware of other

companies and institutions that are researching and developing enzyme

replacement therapies, small molecules and gene therapies for lysosomal storage

diseases. These include products for Fabry, Pompe, MPS-I and other lysosomal

storage diseases Genzyme General and its collaborative partners are currently

pursuing.

NEUROCELL-TM--PD. While there currently are no effective long-term

therapies for advanced Parkinson's disease, Genzyme General is aware of other

companies and institutions pursuing research and development of alternative

treatments for the diseases. Experimental therapies under development for

Parkinson's disease include surgical destruction of certain portions of the

brain (pallidotomy), gene therapy, cell therapy, the use of growth factors and

neuroprotectant therapy.

DIAGNOSTIC PRODUCTS. Genzyme General acts as a primary supplier of enzymes

and substrates, and generally does not compete with its customers in the sale of

complete diagnostic kits. The market in the diagnostic products industry is

mature and competition is based on price, reliability of supply and the purity

and specific activity of products.

GENETIC DIAGNOSTIC SERVICES. The U.S. market for prenatal cytogenetic and

biochemical testing is divided among approximately 500 laboratories, many of

which offer both types of testing. Of this total group, less than 20

laboratories market their services nationally. Genzyme General believes that the

industry as a whole is still quite fragmented, with the top 20 laboratories

accounting for approximately 50% of market revenues, and with no individual

company accounting for more than 18% of the total other than Genzyme, which

accounts for approximately 22% of the total. Genzyme General believes, however,

that the industry will experience increasing consolidation as smaller

laboratories face the challenges of more complex and stringent regulation. The

Secretary of Health and Human Services Advisory Committee on Genetic Testing

recently published recommendations for increased oversight by the Centers for

Disease Control and the FDA for all genetic testing. This oversight will be

similar to that of the current non-genetic diagnostic products. It requires

systems and expertise not normally found in small clinical laboratories.

Competitive factors in the genetic diagnostics services business generally

include reputation of the laboratory, range of services offered, pricing,

convenience of sample collection and pick-up, quality of analysis and reporting

and timeliness of delivery of completed reports. Genzyme General believes that

its research and development program, which has enabled it to develop and

introduce testing services based on new technology, and its active sales and

marketing force have played significant roles in the growth of its genetic

diagnostics services business.

FLUID MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS AND SUTURES. The principal methods by which

Genzyme Biosurgery competes in the fluid management and sutures markets are:

- continued innovative product development;

- the performance and breadth of its product lines;

- brand name recognition;

- sales force training; and

- educational services, including sponsorship of training programs in

advanced surgical techniques.

23

Its chief competitors in the fluid management market are Atrium Medical

Corporation and Sherwood-Davis & Geck, a division of Tyco International, Ltd. We

have initiated a lawsuit against Atrium related to its chest drainage systems.

For more information about this litigation, you should read the section of this

Annual Report on Form 10-K entitled "Item 3. Legal Proceedings." U.S. Surgical

Corporation, a division of Tyco, and the Ethicon division of Johnson & Johnson

are Genzyme Biosurgery's primary competitors in the cardiovascular sutures

market.

SURGICAL INSTRUMENTS. Genzyme Biosurgery competes against a wide range of

companies in the traditional general, cardiovascular and plastic surgery

instrument markets. In the general surgical instrument area, U.S. Surgical and

Ethicon Endosurgery are Genzyme Biosurgery's primary competitors. In the

traditional cardiovascular instrument market, Genzyme Biosurgery competes

primarily with V. Meuller, the Pilling-Weck Surgical Instruments division of

Teleflex, Inc. and the Codman division of Johnson and Johnson Ltd. The plastic

surgery instrument market is more highly fragmented with primary competition

arising from Karl Storz Surgical Instruments, Walter Lorenz Surgical and Padgett

Instruments.

MINIMALLY INVASIVE CARDIOVASCULAR SURGERY. Genzyme Biosurgery faces

competitors in the minimally invasive cardiovascular surgery field.

CardioThoracic Systems, Inc., which was recently acquired by Guidant

Corporation, was founded solely to pursue minimally invasive cardiovascular

surgery and was among the first companies to draw national attention to the

technology. Several other major surgical products companies have also entered

the minimally invasive cardiovascular surgery market, including

Medtronic, Inc., U.S. Surgical and Ethicon.

CELL THERAPIES FOR CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE. Genzyme Biosurgery is aware of a

number of companies and institutions that are developing or considering the

development of tissue engineering products for the treatment of cardiovascular

disease. These activities include programs for heart muscle regeneration

utilizing autologous skeletal muscle cells, autologous bone marrow derived

stromal cells and embryonic stem cells. Among a number of organizations, Genzyme

Biosurgery is aware of product development work in these areas at Diacrin, Inc.,

Biohart, Inc., Cardion, AG and research programs at Duke University and Indiana

University. These organizations may develop products or technology that could

directly compete with products and technology currently under development within

Genzyme Biosurgery.

THERAPIES FOR ISCHEMIC HEART DISEASE. There is considerable competition in

the development of protein and gene therapies to induce angiogenesis for the

treatment of ischemic heart disease. Several companies have initiated clinical

trials of gene and protein therapies for ischemic heart disease, and other

companies have products that are still in pre-clinical development. Genzyme

Biosurgery is aware of ongoing research in cell-based approaches to restoring

cardiac function to infarcted tissue. Academic institutions and private

companies are also conducting research to develop mechanical devices to reduce

ventricular size, to minimize ventricular dilation and to perform coronary

functions.

THERAPIES FOR PERIPHERAL VASCULAR DISEASE. There is considerable

competition in the development of protein and gene therapies to induce

angiogenesis for the treatment of periopheral vascular disease.

THERAPIES FOR CONGESTIVE HEART FAILURE. Many pharmaceutical and

biotechnology companies have programs to identify new therapies to manage

congestive heart failure. Many of these programs are targeted toward optimizing

drugs already used for disease management. Since the formation of scar tissue, a

consequence of myocardial infarction, is one of the causes of congestive heart

failure, scar tissue repair may provide significant benefit to the congestive

heart failure patient. As discussed above, Genzyme Biosurgery is aware of

several research programs involving cell-based approaches to restoring cardiac

function and a research program involving a gene therapy approach to converting

myofibroblasts into cardiac muscle.

24

SEPRA-TM- PRODUCTS. Genzyme Biosurgery believes that its technology,

expertise, and proprietary manufacturing processes in developing and producing

hyaluronan-based materials will give it a competitive advantage in the marketing

of the Sepra-TM- products. Its anti-adhesion products may face significant

competition, however, from other products based on hyaluronan as well as from

other products and changes in surgical techniques that may obviate the use of

hyaluronan. Genzyme Biosurgery believes that the principal factor that will

affect competition in this area is acceptance of the product by surgeons, which

depends, in large part, upon product performance, safety and price.

Seprafilm-TM- bioresorbable membrane does not have significant direct

competition in the colorectal surgery market. Ethicon markets

Interceed-Registered Trademark-, an anti-adhesion barrier that may have

properties similar to the Seprafilm-TM- product, but is indicated only for

selected gynecological indications. Interceed-Registered Trademark- has been

shown to lose its anti-adhesion properties in the presence of blood. Lifecore

Biomedical, Inc. and Ethicon's Intergel-TM- product, a gel-based anti-adhesion

product, is marketed in Europe. Gliatech, Inc. has completed pivotal clinical

trials of Adcon-A and Adcon-P, which are designed to limit adhesions after

abdominal and pelvic surgery. Life Medical Sciences, Inc. is developing REPEL

for gynecological surgery and REPEL-CV for cardiovascular surgery. These

adhesion barrier membranes are in early clinical trials.

SYNVISC-REGISTERED TRADEMARK-. Competition for

Synvisc-Registered Trademark- consists primarily of products based on earlier

technology, including Hylagan-Registered Trademark-, produced by Fidia S.p.A.

and marketed in the United States by Sanofi-Synthelabo,

Orthovisc-Registered Trademark-, produced by Anika Therapeutics, Inc. and

Artz-TM-, a Japanese product marketed in Japan and Europe which was recently

approved in the United States and will be sold under the name Supartz-TM- by

Smith & Nephew Orthopedics. To the best of Genzyme Biosurgery's knowledge, there

are no other viscosupplementation products on the market, or in development,

which like Synvisc-Registered Trademark-, have the physical properties of

viscosity, elasticity or molecular weight that are comparable to the physical

properties of healthy synovial fluid.

CARTICEL-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- CHONDROCYTES. Genzyme Biosurgery is aware of

two other companies, Verigen, Inc., and Co.don Berlin, which are culturing

autologous chondrocytes for cartilage repair in Europe. In addition to Verigen,

Genzyme Biosurgery knows of three other companies, Advanced Tissue

Sciences, Inc., in conjunction with Smith & Nephew PLC, Integra LifeSciences

Corp. and LifeCell Corp., which are engaged in research on cultured cartilage

products. In addition, a surgical technique known as osteochondral grafting may

be competitive to Carticel-Registered Trademark- chondrocytes. This procedure,

which can be performed arthroscopically, involves transferring plugs of low

weight bearing cartilage and bone to the area of a defect. Smith & Nephew,

Arthrex, Inc. and Innovasive Devices, Inc. are known to have programs relating

to this procedure.

EPICEL-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- SKIN GRAFTS. Genzyme Biosurgery is the only

commercial provider of cultured skin grafts that have been shown to provide

permanent skin replacement for burn patients in the United States. However,

Genzyme Biosurgery may face competition from companies using other approaches to

culture skin tissue. Integra is marketing a collagen-based dermal replacement

product for severely burned patients. This product will still require a skin

graft from the patient or Epicel-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- skin grafts to close a

full-thickness wound, however, and therefore will not compete directly with

Epicel-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- skin grafts. Advanced Tissue Sciences, Inc. has

received approval for a temporary wound covering for burns. Organogenesis, Inc.

has submitted a Pre-Marketing Application for a product to be used for the

closure of venous stasis ulcers. LifeCell Corp. currently has freeze-dried

enzymatically processed human cadaver dermis on the market.

CANCER. Competition in the field of cancer therapeutics is intense. Genzyme

Molecular Oncology faces, and will continue to face, significant competition

from organizations such as large pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies,

universities, government agencies and other research institutions.

25

Competition can arise from the use of the same or similar technologies as

those currently used or contemplated to be used by Genzyme Molecular Oncology,

as well as from existing therapies. Any or all of these may be more effective or

less expensive than those developed by Genzyme Molecular Oncology.

Genzyme Molecular Oncology relies on its collaborators for support in some

of its cancer research and development programs and intends to rely on these

partners for preclinical evaluation, clinical development and marketing of its

potential products and services. Its partners may develop technologies or

products that are competitive with those that Genzyme Molecular Oncology is

developing. Genzyme Molecular Oncology's product candidates, therefore, may be

subject to competition with a potential product under development by one of its

partners.

PATENTS, LICENSE AGREEMENTS AND TRADEMARKS

In general, we pursue a policy of obtaining patent protection both in the

United States and in selected foreign countries for subject matter we consider

patentable and important to our business. In addition, a portion of our

proprietary position is based upon patents that we have licensed from others

either through collaboration or traditional license agreements, including

patents relating to:

- Fabrazyme-TM- enzyme;

- Aldurazyme-TM- enzyme;

- AVONEX-Registered Trademark- (Interferon-beta 1a);

- NeuroCell-TM--PD;

- alpha-glucosidase;

- acid sphingomyelinase;

- autologous chondrocyte graft technology;

- EPI-KAL2;

- small molecules for lysosomal storage diseases;

- the HNPCC and APC I1307K tests;

- TGF- antagonists;

- HIF-1 alpha;

- Cohn Cardiac Stabilizer-TM- device;

- NextStitch-TM- sutures;

- Epicel-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- skin grafts;

- photoactive tissue welding technology;

- SAGE-TM- technology;

- cell fusion technology;

- viral and non-viral gene therapy technology;

- drug delivery technology; and

- various cancer related genes such as p53, MDM2, APC, MSH2 and MelanA.

26

These collaboration and license agreements generally require us to share profits

with our collaborative partners or pay royalties to our licensors upon

commercialization of products covered by the licensed technology. Generally,

patents issued in the United States are effective for:

- the longer of 17 years from the date of issue or 20 years from the

effective filing date of the corresponding patent application if filed

prior to June 8, 1995; and

- 20 years from the filing date for applications filed after June 8, 1995.

In some cases, the patent term can be extended to recapture a portion of the

term lost during FDA regulatory review. The duration of foreign patents varies

in accordance with applicable local law.

We also rely on trade secrets, proprietary know-how and continuing

technological innovation to develop and maintain a competitive position in our

product areas. We require our employees, consultants and corporate partners who

have access to our proprietary information to sign confidentiality agreements.

Our patent position and proprietary technology are subject to certain risks

and uncertainties. We have included information about these risks and

uncertainties under the subheading "Factors Affecting Future Operating Results"

in the following sections:

- "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Genzyme Corporation and

Subsidiaries' Financial Condition and Results of Operations" in the 2000

Genzyme General Annual Report; and

- "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Genzyme Molecular Oncology's

Financial Condition and Results of Operations" in the 2000 Genzyme

Molecular Oncology Annual Report.

We encourage you to read these sections, which we are incorporating into this

discussion by reference.

Our products and services are sold around the world under brand-name

trademarks and service marks. Trademark protection continues in some countries

as long as the mark is used; in oth