Back to GetFilings.com

- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------

- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------

UNITED STATES

SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION

WASHINGTON, D.C. 20549

------------------------

FORM 10-K

ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(D)

OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934

FOR THE FISCAL YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 1999

COMMISSION FILE NO. 0-14680

------------------------

GENZYME CORPORATION

(EXACT NAME OF REGISTRANT AS SPECIFIED IN ITS CHARTER)

MASSACHUSETTS 06-1047163

(STATE OR OTHER JURISDICTION OF (I.R.S. EMPLOYER IDENTIFICATION NO.)

INCORPORATION OR ORGANIZATION)

ONE KENDALL SQUARE 02139

CAMBRIDGE, MASSACHUSETTS (ZIP CODE)

(ADDRESS OF PRINCIPAL EXECUTIVE OFFICE)

(617) 252-7500

(REGISTRANT'S TELEPHONE NUMBER, INCLUDING AREA CODE)

------------------------------

Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(b) of the Act:

NONE

Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(g) of the Act:

GENZYME GENERAL DIVISION COMMON STOCK, $0.01 PAR VALUE ("GENZ STOCK")

GENZYME MOLECULAR ONCOLOGY DIVISION COMMON STOCK, $0.01 PAR VALUE ("GZMO STOCK")

GENZYME SURGICAL PRODUCTS DIVISION COMMON STOCK, $0.01 PAR VALUE ("GZSP STOCK")

GENZYME TISSUE REPAIR DIVISION COMMON STOCK, $0.01 PAR VALUE ("GZTR STOCK")

GENZ STOCK PURCHASE RIGHTS

GZMO STOCK PURCHASE RIGHTS

GZSP STOCK PURCHASE RIGHTS

GZTR STOCK PURCHASE RIGHTS

Indicate by check mark whether the Registrant (1) has filed all reports

required to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Act of 1934 during

the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the Registrant was

required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing

requirements for the past 90 days. YES /X/ NO / /

Indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to Item

405 of Regulation S-K is not contained herein, and will not be contained, to the

best of Registrant's knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements

incorporated by reference in Part III of this Form 10-K or any amendment to this

Form 10-K / /.

Aggregate market value of voting stock held by non-affiliates of the

Registrant as of March 1, 2000:

$5,874,532,711

Number of shares of the Registrant's GENZ Stock outstanding as of March 1, 2000:

84,710,732

Number of shares of the Registrant's GZMO Stock outstanding as of March 1, 2000:

13,514,512

Number of shares of the Registrant's GZSP Stock outstanding as of March 1, 2000:

14,854,067

Number of shares of the Registrant's GZTR Stock outstanding as of March 1, 2000:

28,524,138

------------------------

DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE

Portions of the 1999 Genzyme General, Genzyme Molecular Oncology, Genzyme

Surgical Products and Genzyme Tissue Repair Annual Reports are incorporated by

reference into Parts I and II of this Form 10-K. Portions of the Registrant's

Proxy Statement for the Annual Meeting of Stockholders to be held on May 25,

2000 are incorporated by reference into Part III of this Form 10-K.

- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------

- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------

NOTE REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS

This Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements, including statements

regarding our:

- Projected timetables for the preclinical and clinical development of,

regulatory submissions and approvals for, and market introduction of our

products and services;

- Estimates of the potential markets for our products and services;

- Sales and marketing plans;

- Assessments of competitors and potential competitors;

- Estimates of the capacity of manufacturing and other facilities to support

our products and services;

- Planned creation of a new division;

- Planned acquisition of Biomatrix, Inc.;

- Expected future revenues, operations and expenditures; and

- Projected cash needs.

These statements are based upon the current assumptions of our management and

are only expectations of future results. These statements are subject to risks

and uncertainties, and our actual results may differ significantly from those

that are described in this Form 10-K. These risks and uncertainties include:

- Our ability to successfully complete preclinical and clinical development

of our products and services;

- Our ability to manufacture sufficient amounts of our products for

development and commercialization activities;

- Our ability to obtain and maintain adequate patent and other proprietary

rights protection of our products and services;

- The content and timing of decisions made by the FDA and other regulatory

agencies;

- The accuracy of our estimates of the size and characteristics of the

markets to be addressed by our products and services;

- Market acceptance of our products and services;

- Our ability to obtain reimbursement for our products and services from

third-party payors;

- Our ability to establish and maintain licenses, strategic collaborations

and distribution arrangements;

- The continued funding of our joint ventures;

- The accuracy of our information regarding the products and resources of

our competitors and potential competitors; and

- The likelihood that the regulatory and other approvals required to create

a new division and to complete the Biomatrix acquisition will be obtained.

We have included more detailed descriptions of these risks and uncertainties

in Exhibit 99.2, "Factors Affecting Future Operating Results," to this

Form 10-K. We encourage you to read those descriptions carefully.

2

NOTE REGARDING REFERENCES TO GENZYME DIVISIONS

Throughout this Form 10-K, the words "we," "us," "our" and "Genzyme" refer

to Genzyme Corporation and all of its operating divisions taken as a whole, and

"our board of directors" refers to the board of directors of Genzyme

Corporation. In addition, we refer to our four operating divisions as follows:

- Genzyme General Division = "Genzyme General;"

- Genzyme Molecular Oncology Division = "Genzyme Molecular Oncology;"

- Genzyme Surgical Products Division = "Genzyme Surgical Products;" and

- Genzyme Tissue Repair Division = "Genzyme Tissue Repair."

NOTE REGARDING INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE

The Securities and Exchange Commission allows us to disclose important

information to you by referring you to other documents we have filed with the

SEC. The information that we refer you to is "incorporated by reference" into

this Form 10-K. Please read that information.

NOTE REGARDING TRADEMARKS

Genzyme-Registered Trademark-, Cerezyme-Registered Trademark-,

Ceredase-Registered Trademark-, Thyrogen-Registered Trademark-,

N-geneous-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- LDL, N-geneous-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- HDL,

Contrast-REGISTERED TRADEMARK-(), InSight-Registered Trademark-,

MASDA-Registered Trademark-, Sepra Film-Registered Trademark-,

Pleur-evac-Registered Trademark-, Thora-Klex-Registered Trademark-,

Tevdek-Registered Trademark-, Polydek-Registered Trademark-,

Deklene-REGISTERED TRADEMARK-(), Cohn Cardiac

Immobilizer-REGISTERED TRADEMARK-(), SaphLITE-REGISTERED TRADEMARK-(),

Sepragel-REGISTERED TRADEMARK-(), Diamond-Line-REGISTERED TRADEMARK-(),

Diamond-Flex-REGISTERED TRADEMARK-(), Diamond-Touch-REGISTERED TRADEMARK-() and

Carticel-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- are registered trademarks of Genzyme.

Fabrazyme-TM-, Afp4-TM-(), GlyPro-TM-, SAGE-TM-, EndoCABG-TM-, Sahara-TM-,

Genzyme OPCAB Elite-TM-, Cohn Cardiac Stabilizer-TM-, Switch-Blade-TM-,

Seprafilm-TM-, Sepracoat-TM-, Sepramesh-TM-, SepraPak-TM-, CV Seprafilm-TM-,

Epicel-TM- and QuickTack-TM- are trademarks of Genzyme.

Genzyme-Registered Trademark- is a service mark of Genzyme.

Renagel-Registered Trademark- is a registered trademark of GelTex

Pharmaceuticals, Inc. NeuroCell-TM--PD and NeuroCell-TM--HD are trademarks of

Diacrin, Inc. FocalSeal-Registered Trademark--L is a registered trademark of

Focal, Inc. Provisc-Registered Trademark- is a registered trademark of Alcon

Laboratories, Inc. Pulmozyme-Registered Trademark- is a registered trademark of

Genentech, Inc. AVONEX-Registered Trademark- is a registered trademark of

Biogen, Inc. Synvisc-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- is a registered trademark of

Biomatrix, Inc. Aldurazyme-TM- is a trademark of BioMarin/Genzyme LLC.

3

TABLE OF CONTENTS

PAGE

--------

PART I

ITEM 1. BUSINESS.................................................... 5

General..................................................... 5

Recent Development.......................................... 5

Genzyme General--Products and Development Programs.......... 6

Genzyme Molecular Oncology--Development Programs and

Services.................................................... 11

Genzyme Surgical Products--Products and Development

Programs.................................................... 15

Genzyme Tissue Repair--Products and Development Programs.... 18

Competition................................................. 19

Patents, License Agreements and Trademarks.................. 23

Government Regulation....................................... 24

Employees................................................... 27

Research and Development Costs.............................. 27

Sales by Geographic Area, Significant Customers and

Products.................................................... 28

ITEM 1A. EXECUTIVE OFFICERS.......................................... 28

ITEM 2. PROPERTIES.................................................. 30

ITEM 3. LEGAL PROCEEDINGS........................................... 31

ITEM 4. SUBMISSION OF MATTERS TO A VOTE............................. 31

PART II

MARKET FOR THE REGISTRANT'S COMMON EQUITY AND RELATED

STOCKHOLDER MATTERS......................................... 32

ITEM 5.

ITEM 6. SELECTED FINANCIAL DATA..................................... 34

ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION

AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS................................... 34

ITEM 7A. QUANTITATIVE & QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURES ABOUT MARKET RISK.... 34

ITEM 8. FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND SUPPLEMENTARY DATA................. 34

ITEM 9. CHANGES IN AND DISAGREEMENTS WITH ACCOUNTANTS ON ACCOUNTING

AND FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE.................................... 35

PART III

ITEM 10. DIRECTORS AND EXECUTIVE OFFICERS OF THE REGISTRANT.......... 35

ITEM 11. EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION...................................... 35

ITEM 12. SECURITY OWNERSHIP OF CERTAIN BENEFICIAL OWNERS AND

MANAGEMENT.................................................. 35

ITEM 13. CERTAIN RELATIONSHIPS AND RELATED TRANSACTIONS.............. 35

PART IV

ITEM 14. EXHIBITS, FINANCIAL STATEMENT SCHEDULES AND REPORTS ON FORM

8-K......................................................... 36

14(a)(1) Financial Statements............................... 36

14(a)(2) Financial Statement Schedules...................... 37

14(a)(3) Exhibits........................................... 38

14(b) Reports on Form 8-K................................... 38

14(c) Exhibits.............................................. 38

4

PART I

ITEM 1. BUSINESS

GENERAL

We are a biotechnology company that develops innovative products and

services for major unmet medical needs. We were founded in 1981 and became a

Massachusetts corporation in 1991. We currently have four operating divisions.

Each of our divisions has its own outstanding series of common stock that is

intended to reflect its value and track its financial performance. Our four

divisions are:

- Genzyme General, which develops and markets therapeutic products and

diagnostic products and services, with an emphasis on therapies for

genetic diseases. Genzyme General Division Common Stock is listed on the

Nasdaq National Market-TM- under the symbol "GENZ."

- Genzyme Molecular Oncology, which is developing cancer products, with a

focus on cancer vaccines and angiogenesis inhibitors. It is shaping these

new therapies through the integration of its genomics, gene discovery,

cell therapy, gene therapy, small molecule drug discovery, and protein

therapeutic efforts. Genzyme Molecular Oncology Division Common Stock is

listed on Nasdaq under the symbol "GZMO."

- Genzyme Surgical Products, which develops and markets a portfolio of

devices, biomaterials and biotherapeutics for the cardiothoracic and

general surgery markets. Genzyme Surgical Products Division Common Stock

is listed on Nasdaq under the symbol "GZSP."

- Genzyme Tissue Repair, which develops and markets biological products for

orthopedic injuries, such as cartilage damage, and severe burns. Genzyme

Tissue Repair Division Common Stock is listed on Nasdaq under the symbol

"GZTR."

We allocate all of our products, services, programs, assets and liabilities

among our divisions for purposes of financial statement presentation; however,

Genzyme, the corporation, continues to own all of the assets and is responsible

for all of the liabilities allocated to each of the divisions.

RECENT DEVELOPMENT

In March 2000, we announced our intention to create a new division called

Genzyme Biosurgery by combining Genzyme Surgical Products and Genzyme Tissue

Repair in tax-free stock exchanges to form one division, and then acquiring

Biomatrix Inc. in an exchange of stock and approximately $245 million in cash.

Biomatrix is a worldwide leader in the development and manufacture of

viscoelastic biomaterials for use in orthopedic and other medical applications.

The new division will have its own newly created series of stock that will be

traded on Nasdaq.

The transaction will unite three leaders in the rapidly emerging market for

sophisticated biomaterials and biotherapeutics products that are used in

surgical and medical procedures. Its focus will be on bio-cardiology,

bio-orthopedics and neurology platforms. The new division will begin with a

portfolio of 22 significant marketed products, including Biomatrix's

Synvisc-Registered Trademark- treatment for osteoarthritis of the knee, and a

strong pipeline of ten products in various stages of development.

We expect the transaction to close by the end of June 2000, pending

regulatory and shareholder approvals. Our board of directors and the Board of

Directors of Biomatrix each have unanimously approved the merger. The merger is

subject to clearance under the Hart-Scott-Rodino Antitrust Improvements Act. The

transaction will require the approval of Biomatrix's shareholders and all of our

shareholders, including separate approvals of Genzyme Surgical Products and

Genzyme Tissue Repair shareholders, and is subject to customary closing

conditions.

5

GENZYME GENERAL--PRODUCTS AND DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS

Genzyme General primarily consists of two business units, Therapeutics and

Diagnostics. The Therapeutics business unit focuses on developing and marketing

products for genetic diseases, including a family of diseases known as lysosomal

storage diseases, and specialty therapeutics. The Diagnostics business unit

develops, markets and distributes IN VITRO diagnostic products and genetic

testing services.

THERAPEUTICS

The Therapeutics business unit currently has three therapeutics products on

the market and several other products in varying stages of development. The

following chart contains information about many of these products and product

candidates.

PRODUCT INDICATION STATUS COLLABORATOR OR LICENSOR

- ---------------------------------------- --------------------- --------------------- ------------------------

CEREDASE-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- Type I Gaucher Marketed since 1991 None

(ALGLUCERASE FOR INJECTION) AND disease and 1995,

CEREZYME-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- respectively;

(IMIGLUCERASE FOR INJECTION) available in 55

countries

RENAGEL-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- CAPSULES Reduction of serum Marketed since 1998; GelTex Pharmaceuticals,

(SEVELAMER HYDROCHLORIDE) phosphorus in approved in the U.S. Inc.*

patients with in 1998, Israel in

end-stage renal 1999 and in Europe in

disease 2000

THYROGEN-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- HORMONE Use in follow-up Marketed since 1998; None

screening of patients approved in the U.S.

who have been treated in 1998 and Brazil in

for thyroid cancer 2000

FABRAZYME-TM- (AFGALSIDASE BETA FOR Fabry disease Pivotal trial None

INJECTION) completed; BLA

submission planned

for first half of

2000

TRANSGENIC ANTITHROMBIN III Heparin resistance One Phase III trial Genzyme Transgenics

successfully Corporation*

completed; a

confirmatory Phase

III trial ongoing

ALDURAZYME-TM- (ALRONIDASE FOR Mucopolysaccharidosis-I One Phase III trial BioMarin Pharmaceutical,

INJECTION) successfully Inc.*

completed; a

confirmatory Phase

III trial planned for

2000

RENAGEL-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- TABLETS Dialysis Phase III trial GelTex Pharmaceuticals,

ongoing Inc.*

RENAGEL-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- CAPSULES Hemodialysis (Europe) Phase III trial GelTex Pharmaceuticals,

ongoing Inc.*

AVONEX-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- Relapsing/remitting Pivotal trial planned Biogen, Inc.

(INTERFERON-BETA 1A) forms of multiple for first half of

sclerosis in Japan 2000

6

PRODUCT INDICATION STATUS COLLABORATOR OR LICENSOR

- ---------------------------------------- --------------------- --------------------- ------------------------

NEUROCELL-TM--PD Parkinson's disease Phase II trial Diacrin, Inc.*

completed

NEUROCELL-TM--HD Huntington's disease Phase I trial Diacrin, Inc.*

completed

TRANSGENIC ALPHA-GLUCOSIDASE Pompe disease Phase II pilot trial Pharming Group N.V.*

in Europe ongoing

GENE THERAPY Gaucher disease Phase I trial ongoing University of Pittsburgh

DHA DERIVATIVE (GENZ 66055) Cystic fibrosis Clinical trial Beth Israel Deaconess

planned for 2000 Medical Center

EPI-KAL2 Hereditary angioedema Clinical trial Dyax Corp.

planned for 2000

ACID SPHINGOMYELINASE Type B Niemann-Pick Clinical trial Mt. Sinai School of

disease planned for 2000 Medicine

PEPTIDE THERAPY Pemphigus vulgaris In development None (added program

through our acquisition

of Peptimmune, Inc. in

July 1999)

GENE THERAPY Cystic Fibrosis In development University of Michigan

and the Hospital for

Sick Children in

Toronto, Ontario

GENE THERAPY Lysosomal storage In development Genovo, Inc.

diseases

- ------------------------

* If you would like information about our strategic collaborations marked with

an asterisk, you should read Note I to our consolidated financial

statements, which we are incorporating into this discussion by reference.

Genzyme General also sells synthetic phospholipids, synthetic peptides and

amino acid derivatives, which are used in research as raw materials for

pharmaceutical manufacturers. It also produces and sells bulk hyaluronic acid

for a number of applications. Under an agreement with Alcon Laboratories, Inc.,

Genzyme General supplies pharmaceutical-grade hyaluronic acid powder to Alcon

for incorporation into Provisc-Registered Trademark-, an ophthalmic surgical aid

product. In addition, hyaluronic acid is sold to a number of customers for

various research and development applications.

We have provided more details on our therapeutic products and our late-stage

development programs below.

CEREZYME-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- (IMIGLUCERASE FOR

INJECTION)/CEREDASE-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- (ALGLUCERASE FOR

INJECTION). Treatment with Cerezyme-Registered Trademark- enzyme or

Ceredase-Registered Trademark- enzyme replacement therapy currently represents

the only safe and effective treatment available for Type I Gaucher disease, a

lysosomal storage disease. We entered the market in 1991 with

Ceredase-Registered Trademark- enzyme. Because production of

Ceredase-Registered Trademark- enzyme was subject to supply constraints, we

developed Cerezyme-Registered Trademark- enzyme, a recombinant form of human

alpha glucocerebrosidase, the enzyme that is deficient in Gaucher patients.

Recombinant technology uses specially engineered cells to produce enzymes, or

other substances, by inserting into cells of one organism the genetic material

of a different species. In the case of Cerezyme-Registered Trademark- enzyme,

Chinese hamster ovary cells are engineered to produce human alpha

glucocerebrosidase. We stopped producing Ceredase-Registered Trademark- enzyme,

except for small quantities, during 1998 after substantially all patients who

previously used Ceredase-Registered Trademark- enzyme were converted to

Cerezyme-Registered Trademark- enzyme.

7

Genzyme General is marketing these products directly to physicians,

hospitals and treatment centers worldwide through a highly trained sales force.

This marketing effort is directed at identifying and initiating treatment for

the estimated 5,000 Gaucher patients Genzyme General believes exist worldwide.

Genzyme General received marketing approval for Cerezyme-Registered Trademark-

enzyme in five countries as well as the 15 countries forming the European Union

and for Ceredase-Registered Trademark- enzyme in 13 countries. Our results of

operations are highly dependent on sales of these products. Sales of

Cerezyme-Registered Trademark- and Ceredase-Registered Trademark- enzymes

totaled approximately $479 million in 1999, which represented approximately 70%

of Genzyme's product revenue in that year. Sales of these products totaled

$411 million, or 67% of Genzyme's product revenue, in 1998 and $333 million, or

67% of Genzyme's product revenue, in 1997.

RENAGEL-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- (SEVELAMER

HYDROCHLORIDE). Renagel-Registered Trademark- capsules are used for the

reduction of serum phosphorus in patients with end-stage renal disease. There

are an estimated 280,000 end-stage renal failure patients in the United States,

approximately 95% of whom receive a phosphate control product. There are also an

estimated 170,000 end-stage renal failure patents in Europe. In connection with

our joint venture with GelTex Pharmaceuticals, Genzyme General is marketing

Renagel-Registered Trademark- capsules directly to nephrologists, renal

dieticians and payors through a dedicated sales force. It plans to launch

Renagel-Registered Trademark- capsules on a country-by-country basis in Europe

during 2000 following receipt of pricing and reimbursement approvals. Genzyme

General and GelTex Pharmaceuticals are also developing a new tablet form of the

RenaGel-Registered Trademark- product designed to have a higher potency and to

be smaller and more convenient than the capsule form.

THYROGEN-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- (THYROTROPIN ALFA FOR

INJECTION). Thyrogen-Registered Trademark- hormone was developed by Genzyme

General to allow patients to continue taking their thyroid hormone supplements

while they are being screened for metastases. This allows patients to avoid the

debilitating effects of hypothyroidism. In the United States, physicians order

approximately 135,000 thyroglobulin tests and 25,000 radioiodine imaging whole

body scans each year for thyroid cancer patients. Thyrogen-Registered Trademark-

hormone is being co-marketed in the United States under an agreement with Knoll

Pharmaceutical Company. Brazil has the highest incidence of thyroid cancer in

the developed world, outside of the United States. Physicians order

approximately 28,000 thyroglobulin tests and 12,000 radioiodine imaging whole

body scans each year in Brazil for thyroid cancer patients. Biobras S.A. will

exclusively distribute and market the product in Brazil.

FABRAZYME-TM- (ALGALSIDASE BETA FOR INJECTION). Fabrazyme-TM- enzyme is a

recombinant form of the human enzyme alpha-galactosidase. Genzyme General is

developing Fabrazyme-TM- enzyme as a treatment for Fabry disease. Fabry disease

is a lysosomal storage disease that is estimated to affect 1 in 40,000 males

worldwide, with an estimated 2,000 to 4,000 patients worldwide. Genzyme General

has completed a multi-center pivotal clinical trial of Fabrazyme-TM- enzyme and

intends to file for regulatory approval in the United States in the first half

of 2000.

ANTITHROMBIN III. Antithrombin III, also known as ATIII, is a protein

naturally produced by the body that, when bound to heparin, prevents blood

clotting. Genzyme General and Genzyme Transgenics are developing

transgenically-produced recombinant ATIII. Transgenic proteins are produced by

inserting human DNA into animal cells so that the target protein, or drug, is

secreted into the milk of female offspring during lactation. Genzyme General and

Genzyme Transgenics successfully completed a Phase III clinical trial of

transgenic ATIII to restore heparin sensitivity in heparin-resistant patients

undergoing elective heart surgery requiring cardiopulmonary bypass. An on going

confirmatory Phase III clinical trial is designed to compare transgenic ATIII to

plasma-derived ATIII and is scheduled to conclude in 2000. Genzyme currently

owns approximately 30% of the outstanding shares of Genzyme Transgenics common

stock.

ALDURAZYME-TM- (ALRONIDASE FOR INJECTION). Genzyme General's partner

BioMarin Pharmaceutical successfully completed a Phase III clinical trial of

Aldurazyme-TM- enzyme, a recombinant form of the human enzyme

alpha-L-iduronidase. Aldurazyme-TM- enzyme is designed to treat a lysosomal

storage

8

disease known as mucopolysaccharidosis I, or MPS-I. A confirmatory Phase III

clinical trial is scheduled for 2000. Approximately 2,000 to 3,000 people in the

developed world have been diagnosed with MPS-I.

AVONEX-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- (INTERFERON-BETA 1A). In September 1998,

Genzyme entered into an agreement with Biogen Inc. under which Genzyme General

will commercialize and exclusively distribute AVONEX-Registered Trademark- in

Japan, following regulatory approval. AVONEX-Registered Trademark- is Biogen's

treatment for relapsing/remitting forms of multiple sclerosis. Genzyme General

is managing the clinical development program for AVONEX-Registered Trademark- in

Japan and is working to obtain registration and reimbursement approvals for the

product. Genzyme General estimates that there are at least 5,000 multiple

sclerosis patients in Japan.

Genzyme General has several other research and development programs in

process. It is dedicated to capitalizing on its expertise in proteins, gene and

cell therapy, and small molecules to grow its pipeline. It recently formed an

Emerging Technology Group to focus on using this expertise to accelerate

internal development programs, form additional strategic collaborations and

pursue out-licensing opportunities.

DIAGNOSTICS

DIAGNOSTIC PRODUCTS

Genzyme General develops, markets and distributes IN VITRO products, with an

emphasis on point-of-care, clinical chemistry and rapid test products. Genzyme

General sold its bioreagents and ELISA immunochemistry product lines to an

operating unit of Sybron Laboratory Products Corp. in July 1999 and the primary

assets of its research products business to Techne Corporation in July 1998.

These sales reflect the sharpened focus of the diagnostic products business.

Genzyme General sells its diagnostic products through its technical sales

representatives in the United States and Europe and through distributors in

Japan.

CARDIOVASCULAR PRODUCTS. Genzyme General sells devices and reagents for the

measurement of low-density lipoprotein, or LDL, and high-density lipoprotein, or

HDL, cholesterol levels. Genzyme General's N-geneous-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- LDL

and Liquid N-geneous-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- HDL tests accurately measure

cholesterol levels directly without the labor intensive pretreatment steps that

were previously needed and are easily adaptable to automated chemistry

analyzers. Both tests are being distributed in the United States by Genzyme

General under an agreement with the manufacturer of the tests, Daiichi Pure

Chemicals Co., Ltd., of Tokyo. In addition to the United States. Genzyme General

is also the exclusive marketing partner for the N-geneous-REGISTERED TRADEMARK-

LDL and Liquid N-geneous-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- HDL tests in Europe and the rest

of the world, with the exception of Asia, where Genzyme General holds

co-exclusive distribution rights.

GLYPRO-TM- ASSAY. Genzyme General's GlyPro-TM- test is an improved tool for

monitoring diabetes. The GlyPro-TM- test measures blood sugar levels over

several weeks, which is a valuable resource for reducing diabetes-related

complications.

DIAGNOSTIC INTERMEDIATES. Genzyme General produces and sells intermediates

such as diagnostic enzymes, substrates and reagents for use in diagnostic kits

used for blood analysis in clinical chemistry laboratories. One area of emphasis

is pancreatic function, where Genzyme General provides enzymes, substrates, bulk

reagents and patented methodologies for amylase and lipase determination to

diagnostic kit manufacturers. Genzyme General is also a primary supplier of

cholesterol enzymes used in testing for coronary heart disease.

RAPID TESTS. Genzyme General's product portfolio includes its patented

Contrast-TM- rapid tests for pregnancy, Strep A and infectious mononucleosis

determination. It also introduced the first combination rapid test for the two

most common causes of parasitic intestinal disease.

9

DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS. In October 1999, Genzyme General and Skye

PharmaTech Inc. formed a collaboration to develop and market a point-of-care

stroke diagnostic product. Skye is developing the product, and Genzyme General

will exclusively manufacture and market the product worldwide following

approval. Stroke is the third leading cause of death in the United States,

affecting approximately 700,000 people annually, with a similar incidence in

Europe. Approximately 150,000 Americans die as a result of stroke each year.

Genzyme General is conducting research programs for point-of-care products

for diabetes and infectious diseases. Other development programs include

homocysteine and Lpa-cholesterol tests to determine cardiovascular disease risk

and a liquid lipase test for pancreatitis.

GENETIC DIAGNOSTIC SERVICES

Genzyme General applies advanced biotechnology to develop and provide high

quality, sophisticated genetic diagnostic services in the United States and

internationally through a national network of laboratories and a direct sales

force as well as through joint ventures in Germany and Japan. Genzyme General

offers three types of genetic diagnostic services:

- Biochemical testing services, which consist primarily of a widely used

screening test known as AFP3 to determine if further prenatal genetic

testing is appropriate;

- Classical and molecular cytogenetic testing services, which involve the

analysis of fetal cells obtained through amniocentesis or a process known

as chorionic villi sampling to evaluate chromosomal abnormalities; and

- DNA testing, which is performed to determine the likelihood that the

patient has, or is a carrier for, a specific genetic disorder, such as

cystic fibrosis and Gaucher disease.

Genzyme General employs over 90 board certified genetics professionals who

interpret results and provide genetic counseling and support services to medical

practitioners and their patients.

We have described some of Genzyme General's genetic diagnostic tests and

programs below.

AFP4-TM- TEST. Genzyme General added this advanced screening test to its

comprehensive prenatal genetic services program during the fourth quarter of

1999. This test is more accurate than the AFP3 test in detecting mutations

associated with Down syndrome and is expected to replace triple marker screening

over time.

INSIGHT-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- TEST. Genzyme General's

InSight-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- test is a molecular cytogenetic test that permits

identification of the most frequently occurring chromosomal abnormalities within

48 hours, which is significantly faster than the one to three weeks required to

perform classical cytogenetic testing (karyotyping). The

InSight-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- analysis is provided in conjunction with a

complete karyotype.

MASDA-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- TECHNOLOGY. Genzyme General's patented

multiplex allele-specific diagnostic assay, which is known as the

MASDA-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- technology, is used for simultaneous analysis of up

to 500 DNA for over 100 genetic mutations in a single test. The

MASDA-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- technology not only provides high-throughput

analysis of different patient samples for different genetic diseases, but also

identifies multiple mutations in a single patient's DNA sample. Genzyme General

is pursuing a number of commercialization strategies for the

MASDA-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- technology. In addition, the

MASDA-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- technology is being used to provide genetic

profiling services for clinical trials being conducted by pharmaceutical

companies.

HEREDITARY NONPOLYPOSIS COLON CANCER. Genzyme General introduced a test

that screens for mutations associated with the most common form of hereditary

colon cancer, hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer, which is also known as HNPCC

or Lynch Syndrome. HNPCC accounts for between

10

approximately 3 and 6% of all colorectal cancers in the United States, or an

estimated 4,000 to 8,000 cases every year. Genzyme General introduced this test

in July 1999.

ADENOMATOUS POLYPOSIS COLI. Genzyme General's APC I1307K test, also

introduced in 1999, screens for a gene mutation associated with an increased

risk of colorectal cancer in Ashkenazi Jewish families. The specific gene

mutation occurs more frequently in this population and has been found in

approximately 28 percent of Ashkenazi Jewish individuals who have both a

personal history and family history of colon cancer.

CF86 TEST. Introduced in 1999, Genzyme General's CF86 test screens for 86

genetic mutations associated with cystic fibrosis.

DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS. Genzyme General is developing additional platforms

for complex mutational analysis and conducts major research and development

programs in such areas as genomics and rare cell separation and analysis

methods. Genzyme General is also developing a multiple disease carrier test

using the MASDA-Registered Trademark- technology and integrated scanning

sequencing approaches for rapid detection of both previously characterized and

unknown gene mutations.

GENZYME MOLECULAR ONCOLOGY--DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS AND SERVICES

Genzyme Molecular Oncology is developing a new generation of cancer

therapeutics based upon the growing understanding of the molecular basis of

cancer. Genzyme Molecular Oncology believes that these therapeutics have the

potential to treat multiple types of cancer, minimize toxicity and side effects,

and complement both existing and novel therapies. It uses its functional

genomics tools and draws upon capabilities in gene therapy, cell therapy,

protein therapy and small molecule drugs to select and pursue the most

appropriate of these approaches for each cancer target. Genzyme Molecular

Oncology complements its internal resources through collaborations with some of

the world's preeminent researchers in cancer research.

DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS

Genzyme Molecular Oncology is developing products in the following three

therapeutic classes:

- vaccines that treat cancer by stimulating the body's immune system to

fight tumor cells;

- angiogenesis inhibitors that treat cancer by preventing the formation and

development of blood vessels that tumors require for growth; and

- pathway regulators that treat cancer by regulating one or more of the

metabolic processes in cancer cells necessary for tumor cells to grow and

survive.

11

The following chart describes the development status of Genzyme Molecular

Oncology's development programs:

PRODUCT/PROGRAM TYPES OF CANCER STATUS

- --------------- --------------- ------------------------

CANCER VACCINES

Dendritic/tumor cell fusion Breast Phase I/II trial ongoing

Melanoma IND filed

Kidney Preclinical

Melan-A/MART-1 and gp100 antigens Melanoma Phase I/II trial ongoing

NY-ESO-1 antigen Multiple Preclinical

ANGIOGENESIS INHIBITORS

aaATIII Multiple Preclinical

Small molecules Multiple Research

Gene therapy Multiple Research

CANCER PATHWAY REGULATORS

Small molecules Multiple Research

Genzyme Molecular Oncology owns all commercial rights to each of these programs

other than aaATIII, which it is co-developing with ATIII LLC, the joint venture

between Genzyme General and Genzyme Transgenics.

CANCER VACCINES

Genzyme Molecular Oncology believes that the most successful cancer vaccines

will be those that activate a cellular immune response directed at the tumor.

Its program features two types of vaccines for generating a tumor-specific

cellular immune response:

- where the specific tumor antigens are not known, Genzyme Molecular

Oncology uses a technique that fuses the patient's own tumor cells with

dendritic cells, creating a cell therapy product; and

- where specific tumor antigens have been identified as targets of the

cellular immune response, Genzyme Molecular Oncology uses gene-based or

peptide-based tumor vaccines.

Antigens are molecular markers in tumor cells that enable the body's immune

system to recognize and respond to these cells as being foreign. Dendritic cells

are specialized immune system cells that capture antigens and present them to T

cells that selectively recognize them. T cells are the immune system's cellular

response to disease.

Genzyme Molecular Oncology believes that both of the vaccine types described

above will provide clinical benefit and have commercial potential. Development

of antigen-specific vaccines, however, is currently limited by the lack of known

tumor-specific antigens. Therefore, cell fusion may be more broadly applicable

in the near term. Over time, as Genzyme Molecular Oncology identifies more

tumor-specific antigens, it anticipates having the ability to provide

off-the-shelf vaccines that are customized based on the set of specific antigens

present in the patient's tumor.

BREAST CANCER FUSION VACCINE. Working with the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute

and the Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center in Boston, Genzyme Molecular

Oncology initiated a Phase I/II clinical trial for the treatment of metastatic

breast cancer in September 1999. The vaccine used in this trial is produced

using a chemical fusion process to combine the patient's own cancer cells and

dendritic cells

12

derived from the patient. The end points for this trial are safety, immunologic

response and clinical response.

KIDNEY CANCER AND MELANOMA FUSION VACCINES. An academic group in Germany

has recently published clinical data for the treatment of kidney cancer with a

vaccine produced using electrofusion to combine a patient's cancer cells with

dendritic cells derived from another source. The clinical response rate reported

in that study was significantly higher than has been achieved with standard

therapy in that patient population.

Because of the positive results reported in the German study, Genzyme

Molecular Oncology plans to commence four additional Phase I clinical trials for

cell fusion vaccines in 2000. These trials will be in kidney cancer and in

melanoma. For each type of cancer, Genzyme Molecular Oncology intends to conduct

two trials, one using vaccine produced in the manner used in its breast cancer

trial and one using vaccine produced in the manner used in the German study.

These trials should provide Genzyme Molecular Oncology insight into the safety

and efficacy of cell fusion vaccines in a variety of cancer indications, as well

as a comparison of these two processes for producing cell fusion vaccines.

MELAN-A/MART-1 AND GP100 ANTIGEN-SPECIFIC VACCINES. In collaboration with

Dr. Steven Rosenberg at the National Cancer Institute, Genzyme Molecular

Oncology has conducted two Phase I clinical trials. In these trials, adenoviral

gene delivery vectors carrying either the Melan-A/MART-1 or gp100 gene were

evaluated for safety, immunologic reactivity and potential therapeutic effect

when administered IN VIVO alone or in conjunction with recombinant

interleukin-2. The results from these clinical studies indicated that the

adenoviral vectors were safe and well tolerated, and that a small but notable

number of both the 36 patients immunized with Melan-A/MART-1 and the 18 patients

treated with gp100 showed clinically significant tumor regression. These

responses were seen in very late stage (stage IV) metastatic disease patients,

who are a heavily pre-treated patient population not expected to mount a robust

immune response and who, as a group, have a very short life expectancy.

In April 1999, Genzyme Molecular Oncology initiated a Phase I/II trial in

melanoma patients at Massachusetts General Hospital. This trial involves

extracting dendritic cells from the patient and combining these cells with a

vaccine containing Melan-A/MART-1 and gp100 EX VIVO. The treated cells are then

injected into the patient. In this trial, Genzyme Molecular Oncology will assess

safety, immunologic response and clinical response. Throughout the trial Genzyme

Molecular Oncology will be performing a comprehensive analysis of the patient's

immune response to the vaccine to help it to understand better why some patients

respond well to the therapy while others do not.

Genzyme Molecular Oncology is also conducting pre-clinical studies to

support a Phase I/II IN VIVO melanoma trial expected to begin early in the

second half of 2000. For this study, Genzyme Molecular Oncology plans to utilize

both the Melan-A/MART-1 and gp100 tumor antigens. In this trial, Genzyme

Molecular Oncology intends to monitor patient immune responses in order to

further elucidate the immunology of cancer to enhance its antigen-specific

vaccine development efforts.

NY-ESO-1 ANTIGEN-SPECIFIC VACCINES. NY-ESO-1 is an antigen expressed in a

subset of a number of different tumor types, including breast cancer, melanoma

and lung cancer. Genzyme Molecular Oncology is conducting pre-clinical

development to support a Phase I/II clinical trial for NY-ESO-1-positive tumors

to be performed in collaboration with the Ludwig Institute. In this trial,

Genzyme Molecular Oncology plans to enroll patients with tumors that express

NY-ESO-1 regardless of the location of the tumor. In this way, the trial will

offer an opportunity to shift the paradigm for treating cancer from one based on

the anatomical location of the tumor to one based on the antigenic profile of

the tumor.

13

ANGIOGENISIS INHIBITORS

Genzyme Molecular Oncology is pursuing proteins, small molecules and gene

therapies for use as angiogenesis inhibitors. Angiogenesis is the growth of new

blood vessels. A modified form of ATIII that is known as aaATIII is Genzyme

Molecular Oncology's lead development candidate in its angiogenesis inhibition

program. While ATIII does not inhibit angiogenesis, preclinical studies have

shown that when it is modified to aaATIII, the modified compound acts as a

potent angiogenesis inhibitor.

CANCER PATHWAY REGULATOR

Cancer pathway regulators treat cancer by regulating one or more metabolic

processes required for growth and survival of cancer cells. Genzyme Molecular

Oncology has early stage programs focusing on small molecule drugs. Genzyme

Molecular Oncology's small molecule drug discovery effort relies upon its access

to extensive libraries of compounds and multiple high-throughput assays. The

number of small molecules in Genzyme's libraries of chemical compounds now

exceeds two million compounds. Genzyme Molecular Oncology also has access to

compound libraries of other companies.

SAGE-TM- TECHNOLOGY PLATFORM

Genzyme Molecular Oncology's SAGE-TM- technology is a patented

high-throughput, high efficiency method of simultaneously detecting and

measuring the expression level of virtually all genes expressed in a cell at a

given time. The SAGE-TM- technology detects and quantifies expression of novel

as well as known genes and, because of its high efficiency and sensitivity,

SAGE-TM- technology can detect genes expressed at low levels. Some of the uses

of SAGE-TM- technology are comparison of disease tissue with healthy tissue,

comparison of genes expressed at different stages of disease, elucidation of

disease pathways and measurement of response to and toxicity of drug candidates.

Genzyme Molecular Oncology continues to enhance the power of its SAGE-TM-

technology through software and bioinformatics development, technology

improvements, database expansion and the integration of the SAGE-TM- technology

with other genomics tools, such as microarrays.

Genzyme Molecular Oncology has used its SAGE-TM- technology to analyze the

most prevalent types of cancer and corresponding normal tissue and also has

access to SAGE-TM- data generated in the laboratories of Drs. Bert Vogelstein

and Kenneth Kinzler at The Johns Hopkins University. Genzyme Molecular Oncology

has accumulated from its proprietary analyses, its collaborators and the Cancer

Genome Anatomy Project at the NCI a database of over 3.5 million SAGE-TM- gene

sequence identification tags, representing over 125,000 unique genes.

Genzyme Molecular Oncology is also using its SAGE-TM- technology extensively

in its drug discovery and development efforts to identify genes that are

functionally relevant. In cancer vaccines, Genzyme Molecular Oncology combines

the SAGE-TM- technology with other proprietary tools to identify tumor-specific

antigens. In angiogenesis inhibition, Genzyme Molecular Oncology is using the

SAGE-TM- technology to dissect the genetic pathways for angiogenesis and to

explore and understand the mechanism of action of drug candidates discovered in

functional assays. In cancer pathway regulation, Genzyme Molecular Oncology is

using the SAGE-TM- technology to identify targets to use in high-throughput

screens.

In addition to using the SAGE-TM- technology in its drug discovery and

development programs, Genzyme Molecular Oncology is using the SAGE-TM-technology

and its proprietary SAGE-TM- database to generate revenues through licenses and

service agreements and database collaborations.

ANTIGEN DISCOVERY PLATFORM

Genzyme Molecular Oncology is seeking to stimulate a cellular immune

response against tumors by using vaccines to present tumor-specific antigens to

the immune system. Genzyme Molecular

14

Oncology has built a proprietary, state-of-the-art antigen discovery platform

that combines identification and validation in one step. Genzyme Molecular

Oncology is using this platform to rapidly and efficiently identify and validate

target antigens for incorporation into novel antigen-specific cancer vaccines.

Genzyme Molecular Oncology plans to analyze the cancer cells extracted from the

patients in its on-going cell fusion vaccine clinical trials using its antigen

discovery technologies in order to identify the antigens associated with

anti-tumor and expand the development of its antigen-specific vaccines.

GENZYME SURGICAL PRODUCTS--PRODUCTS AND DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS

In addition to providing traditional devices and closures for the

cardiothoracic, general and plastic surgery markets, Genzyme Surgical Products

develops and markets products for minimally invasive cardiovascular surgery,

biomaterials and biotherapeutics. Genzyme Surgical Products' sales force markets

products directly to surgeons and hospital administrators throughout the United

States and Europe. It also uses a network of distributors in Europe, Asia and

Latin America.

Genzyme Surgical Products' biomaterials program includes products based on

hyaluronic acid that are intended to reduce the incidence and extent of

adhesions (scar tissue) that form after surgery. Hyaluronic acid is a substance

that is naturally created by the body to lubricate and protect tissue. These

products are known as the Sepra family of products and are being developed on

behalf of Genzyme Development Partners, L.P. Genzyme Surgical Products has the

exclusive right to sell the Sepra family of products in the United States and

Canada on behalf of our joint venture with Genzyme Development Partners and the

exclusive right to sell these products outside the United States and Canada for

its own benefit. Genzyme Surgical Products sells the Sepra family of products in

Luxembourg, Germany, Austria, Switzerland and Japan through distributors. If you

would like more information about our relationship with Genzyme Development

Partners and the joint venture, you should read Note M to our consolidated

financial statements, which we are incorporating into this discussion by

reference.

CARDIOTHORACIC SURGERY

TRADITIONAL INSTRUMENTS AND DEVICES. Genzyme Surgical Products'

cardiothoracic surgery business consists of a comprehensive portfolio of

products, including fluid management and chest drainage systems, sutures and

cardiovascular instruments. Its line of fluid management systems consists

primarily of self-contained, disposable chest drainage devices used to drain

blood from the chest cavity following open-heart surgery, other surgical

procedures and trauma. Genzyme Surgical Products also sells autotransfusion

devices that allow the collection of blood shed by the patient and its

reinfusion postoperatively, which eliminates the risks associated with blood

transfusions. Genzyme Surgical Products' self-contained, disposable

Pleur-evac-Registered Trademark- chest drainage unit was introduced in 1967 and

is the market leader in chest drainage devices. Genzyme Surgical Products also

sells a line of dry suction-controlled chest drainage and autotransfusion

devices under the Sahara-TM- and Thora-Klex-Registered Trademark- brand names.

It markets sutures, including the Tevdek-Registered Trademark- and

Polydek-Registered Trademark- valve sutures and Deklene-Registered Trademark-

bypass sutures. Genzyme Surgical Products also sells aortic punches, which are

used during coronary artery bypass surgery to make clean, round openings in the

aorta prior to grafting. Finally, its Diamond-Line-Registered Trademark-

portfolio of hand-held, reusable instruments includes needleholders, scissors,

forceps, graspers, dissectors and retractors.

MINIMALLY INVASIVE CARDIOVASCULAR SURGERY SYSTEMS. Genzyme Surgical

Products markets products for minimally invasive cardiovascular surgery, with a

focus on beating-heart surgery. In beating-heart surgery, procedures are

performed on the heart without stopping the heart and without the use of a

heart/lung machine to circulate blood and supply oxygen. This allows surgeons to

avoid the complications often associated with the use of heart/lung machines.

Genzyme Surgical Products' newest product in this line is known as the Genzyme

OPCAB Elite-TM- beating-heart platform. The Genzyme OPCAB Elite-TM- system is

designed to allow surgeons to conduct multi-vessel coronary artery bypass

15

surgery while the heart continues to beat. It combines reusable retractors with

disposable devices such as stabilizers, sutures and punches. A central component

of the system is the Cohn Cardiac Stabilizer-TM- device, which allows surgeons

to isolate and stabilize a small section of the heart to have clear access to

the blood vessels.

In addition, Genzyme Surgical Products has introduced minimally invasive

saphenous vein harvest and valve replacement instruments. For example, its

SaphLITE-Registered Trademark- II system is used to remove the saphenous vein

from the leg for use as a graft in coronary artery bypass procedures.

BIOMATERIALS. Genzyme Surgical Products has obtained the exclusive right to

distribute FocalSeal-Registered Trademark--L in North America for pulmonary,

cardiovascular and gastrointestinal procedures following regulatory approval of

the product. FocalSeal-Registered Trademark--L is a biomaterial developed by

Focal, Inc. for the prevention of air and fluid leaks following surgery.

FocalSeal-Registered Trademark--L recently received approval in Canada, and

Genzyme Surgical Products expects it to be approved in the United States in

2000. Approximately 70,000 lung surgeries are performed in the United States

annually, with almost all patients at risk for debilitating air leaks.

Genzyme Surgical Products recently obtained approval in the European Union

for its CV Seprafilm-TM- cardiovascular adhesion barrier, which is designed to

reduce the formation of adhesions following open-heart surgery. In addition, it

has completed the safety phase of a clinical trial for this product in the

United States in infants undergoing multi-stage procedures for the repair of

congenital heart defects.

BIOTHERAPEUTICS. Genzyme Surgical Products also has several biotherapeutic

products in various stages of research and development. It is developing HIF-1

alpha, which is a naturally occurring compound that has been shown to trigger

the expression of many proteins associated with angiogenesis. Genzyme Surgical

Products is conducting a Phase I clinical trial of HIF-1 alpha in patients with

peripheral vascular disease, a condition caused by blocked arteries in the

limbs. Following review of a protocol by the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee

of the National Institutes of Health, Genzyme Surgical Products also plans to

begin a second Phase I clinical trial of the product in patients with coronary

artery disease undergoing bypass surgery who have an area of the heart that is

not suitable for surgical revascularization.

Genzyme Surgical Products is conducting research on other gene therapy

approaches to congestive heart failure and restenosis. In addition, through a

collaboration with a research group at the Toronto Hospital in Canada, Genzyme

Surgical Products is also conducting research on cell therapy approaches to

congestive heart failure.

GENERAL SURGERY

Genzyme Surgical Products has established a growing presence in the general

surgery market through its biomaterials and endoscopic instruments.

16

BIOMATERIALS. Genzyme Surgical Products has an extensive line of

biomaterial products on the market and in development for the general surgery

market, including many products included in the Sepra family of products.

PRODUCT INDICATION STATUS

- ------- ----------------------------- -----------------------------

SEPRA FILM-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- Abdominal/pelvic surgery Marketed in the U.S. since

BIORESORBABLE MEMBRANE 1996; approved in the U.S.

and Europe in 1996, in Canada

and Israel in 1997, in Japan

in 1998 and in several other

countries

SEPRA FILM(-REGISTERED TRADEMARK-) Small bowel obstructions Phase IV clinical trial

BIORESORBABLE MEMBRANE ongoing

SEPRA FILM(-REGISTERED TRADEMARK-) II Abdominal/pelvic surgery Marketed in Europe since 1999

ADHESION BARRIER

SEPRACOAT-TM- COATING SOLUTION Open surgery Marketed in Europe since 1996

SEPRAMESH-TM- PRODUCT Hernia repair Received 510(k) clearance in

2000

SEPRAPAK-TM- PRODUCT Sinus packing Listed with the FDA

SEPRAGEL(-REGISTERED TRADEMARK-) Open and laproscopic surgery In development

BIORESORBABLE GEL

Genzyme Surgical Products' lead product in the general surgery market is

Sepra Film-Registered Trademark- bioresorbable membrane. It is currently

conducting a Phase IV clinical trial to test the ability of the Sepra

Film-Registered Trademark- product to reduce the incidence of bowel

obstructions. Genzyme Surgical Products is also marketing Sepra

Film-Registered Trademark- II adhesion barrier, a second generation Sepra

Film-Registered Trademark- product designed to have increased plasticity, as an

adhesion prevention product for open and laparoscopic surgery in Europe. In

addition, Genzyme Surgical Products has developed the Sepramesh-TM- product, a

prosthetic surgical mesh product for use in hernia repairs.

Other Sepra products are in earlier stages of development. Genzyme Surgical

Products is developing Sepragel-Registered Trademark- bioresorbable gel for use

during laparoscopic surgery as well as in open surgery as a complement to the

Sepra Film-Registered Trademark- product. Genzyme Surgical Products is also

currently developing anti-adhesion products for other surgical applications.

ENDOSCOPIC INSTRUMENTS. Genzyme Surgical Products carries an extensive line

of high-quality endoscopic instruments for general and gynecological surgery.

Its Diamond-Line-Registered Trademark- technology extends to a full portfolio of

retractors, forceps, scissors, needle-holders, graspers and clamps. The leading

products in the portfolio are its Diamond-Flex-Registered Trademark- and

Diamond-Touch-Registered Trademark- instruments.

Diamond-Flex-Registered Trademark- retractors and forceps are the only reusable

instruments on the market with articulating heads that allow gentle

repositioning of organs and tissue at varying angles. The

Diamond-Touch-Registered Trademark- instruments provide ergonomically designed

contoured handles for superior positioning, comfort and control. Genzyme

Surgical Products' Switch-Blade-TM- tips are the second major component of its

endoscopic surgery portfolio. Switch-Blade-TM- tips are disposable scissor tips

that are attached to reusable shafts.

OTHER PRODUCTS

Genzyme Surgical Products also manufactures products for the plastic surgery

market. This distinct product line consists of hand-held instruments, endoscopic

plastic surgery equipment, sutures and surgical compression garments.

17

GENZYME TISSUE REPAIR--PRODUCTS AND DEVELOPMENT PRODUCTS

Genzyme Tissue Repair is a leading developer of biological products for the

fields of orthopedics and burn care. Over the course of the last year, Genzyme

Tissue Repair has taken several steps to streamline its operations and focus its

business strategy, including transferring the NeuroCell-TM- program to Genzyme

General. Genzyme Tissue Repair is dedicated to expanding and improving its

Carticel-Registered Trademark- product and accelerating its bio-orthopedic

development programs.

CARTICEL-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- AUTOLOGOUS CULTURED CHONDROCYTES. Genzyme

Tissue Repair's lead product, Carticel-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- chondrocytes, is

used to treat damaged articular knee cartilage. Genzyme Tissue Repair employs a

proprietary process to grow autologous--a patient's own--cartilage cells for use

in repairing damaged knee cartilage.

The FDA has required Genzyme Tissue Repair to conduct two confirmatory

post-marketing studies of Carticel-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- chondrocytes. The FDA

approved new clinical designs for these trials in February 2000. The first study

measures outcomes of patients in Genzyme Tissue Repair's registry who did not

respond to other treatment before being implanted with

Carticel-Registered Trademark- chondrocytes. It will compare outcomes before and

after implantation. Genzyme Tissue Repair expects to complete this study in

2000. The second study is designed to compare the long-term clinical effect of

treatment with Carticel-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- chondrocytes to other treatments.

Genzyme Tissue Repair believes that for Carticel-REGISTERED TRADEMARK-

chondrocytes to be commercially successful, it must be routinely used by a large

number of orthopedic surgeons. It markets Carticel-REGISTERED TRADEMARK-

chondrocytes to orthopedic surgeons in the United States and Europe directly and

through distributors. Genzyme Tissue Repair also trains orthopedic surgeons,

collects and analyzes outcomes data through a registry, and assists physicians

and patients in obtaining reimbursements from third-party payers. The commercial

success of Carticel-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- chondrocytes will also depend on its

ability to increase the approval rate for reimbursement of the product from

third-party payers. For this reason, approximately one-third of its 59-person

U.S. sales and reimbursement staff is involved directly in claims processing and

educating insurers about the appropriate uses of the

Carticel-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- chondrocytes. Genzyme Tissue Repair expects that

Carticel-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- sales may be lower in the summer months as fewer

operative procedures are typically performed during those months.

EPICEL-TM- SKIN GRAFTS. Genzyme Tissue Repair's Epicel-TM- skin grafts are

cultured autologous skin cells used for permanent skin replacement for patients

with severe burns. Epicel-TM- skin grafts were first introduced in 1987. These

epidermal grafts are grown from a patient's own skin cells and, therefore, are

not rejected by the patient's immune system. Most burn wounds involving less

than 60% body surface area are covered with conventional skin grafts within the

three to four weeks it currently takes to grow skin grafts produced using the

Epicel-TM- service. Therefore, Genzyme Tissue Repair believes that the primary

candidates for Epicel-TM- skin grafts are the approximately 800 patients each

year in the U.S. who survive burn injuries covering more than 60% of their body

surface area. Genzyme Tissue Repair markets Epicel-TM- skin grafts to burn

centers in the U.S. and parts of Europe through its own direct sales force and

in Japan through a distributor. Sales of Epicel-TM- skin grafts fluctuate from

quarter to quarter depending on the number of unpredictable factors, including

the number and survival rate of severe burn patients who are treated with

Epicel-TM- skin grafts.

CARTICEL-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- II. Carticel-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- II is a

next-generation product based on the development of a pre-formed autologous

cartilage tissue implant. The implant is intended to allow the procedure to be

performed arthroscopically. If it is successfully developed,

Carticel-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- II could significantly decrease rehabilitation

time for patients and allow surgeons to treat larger cartilage defects. Genzyme

Tissue Repair plans to complete preclinical studies of

Carticel-REGISTERED TRADEMARK-() II in 2000.

QUICKTACK-TM- PERIOSTEAL FIXATION SYSTEM. QuickTack-TM- is a small device

designed to be used instead of sutures during the Carticel-REGISTERED TRADEMARK-

implant procedure. It is expected to simplify the procedure and

18

significantly decrease the time needed for surgery. Genzyme Tissue Repair plans

to submit a 510(k) application for the Quick Tack-TM- periosteal fixation system

to the FDA in the first half of 2000.

OSTEOARTHRITIS. Genzyme Tissue Repair has is conducting pre-clinical

studies of an innovative small molecule therapy for the treatment of

osteoarthritis.

PHOTOACTIVE TISSUE WELDING TECHNOLOGY. Genzyme Tissue Repair is conducting

proof of concept studies of a photoactive tissue welding technology it licensed

from PhotoBioMed Corp. It intends to seek a partner to develop and commercialize

this technology.

OTHER DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS. Genzyme Tissue Repair has a number of ongoing

development programs supporting Carticel-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- chondrocytes.

Genzyme Tissue Repair is conducting basic research and development into the

biology of cartilage and the cartilage repair process. The objective of this

research is to identify biologic materials that promote more rapid regeneration

of articular cartilage, to develop new methods for the repair of arthritic

joints and large surface area cartilage defects and to enable the implantation

procedure to be performed less invasively. Genzyme Tissue Repair is also

committing resources to meet requirements specified by the FDA for validation of

certain product manufacturing parameters.

COMPETITION

We are engaged in a segment of the human health care products industry that

is extremely competitive. Our competitors in the United States and elsewhere are

numerous and include major pharmaceutical, surgical device and biotechnology

companies. Some of these competitors may have more extensive research and

development, regulatory, manufacturing and production capabilities. Some

competitors may have greater financial resources. These companies may succeed in

developing products that are more effective than any that we have or may develop

and may also prove to be more successful than we are in producing and marketing

products and services. In addition, technological advances or different

approaches developed by one or more of our competitors may render our products

obsolete, less effective or uneconomical.

Each of our products and services faces different competitive challenges:

CEREZYME-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- ENZYME AND CEREDASE-REGISTERED TRADEMARK-

ENZYME. Although Genzyme General is not aware of any current effective

alternative to its products for the treatment for Gaucher disease, competition

potentially could come from other protein replacement therapies, small molecules

or gene therapy. Genzyme General is aware of other companies attempting to

develop alternative treatments for Gaucher disease. However, Genzyme General

believes that its proprietary production techniques and, to a certain extent,

the orphan drug status of its products, which provides market exclusivity in the

United States until May 2001, give it a number of advantages over potential

competitors using protein replacement therapy for the treatment of Gaucher

disease. Gene therapy techniques are still in experimental stages. Genzyme

General believes that the principal factors that will affect competition for

Cerezyme-Registered Trademark- enzyme and Ceredase-Registered Trademark- enzyme

will be clinical effectiveness and absence of adverse side effects.

RENAGEL-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- CAPSULES. Phosphate binders are currently the

only available treatment for hyperphosphatemia. There are several phosphate

binders available or under development. A prescription calcium acetate

preparation is currently the only other product approved in the United States

for the control of elevated phosphorus levels in patients with chronic kidney

failure. Other products used as phosphate binders include over-the-counter

calcium- and aluminum-based antacids and dietary calcium supplements. Calcium

acetate and calcium carbonate, the most commonly used agents, must be taken at

sufficient doses to achieve adequate reductions in phosphate absorption, which

can lead to constipation and patient noncompliance. In addition, calcium therapy

requires frequent monitoring because its use can cause hypercalcemia. Aluminum

hydroxide is more effective at lower

19

doses than calcium acetate or calcium carbonate, but it is infrequently used

because aluminum absorbed from the intestinal tract accumulates in the tissues

of patients with chronic kidney failure, causing aluminum-related osteomalacia,

anemia and dialysis dementia.

ANTITHROMBIN III. Individuals who have a deficiency of ATIII are treated

currently with plasma-derived ATIII. Genzyme General and Genzyme Transgenics

believe transgenic ATIII may represent a more attractive therapeutic than the

current plasma-derived product in light of:

- the risks of viral transmission from pooled plasma products in general;

- the limited volume of ATIII available from plasma; and

- the impracticality of producing sufficient quantities of ATIII in cell

culture systems.

NEUROCELL-TM- -PD AND NEUROCELL-TM- -HD. While there currently are no

effective long-term therapies for advanced Parkinson's disease and no effective

treatments for Huntington's disease, Genzyme General is aware of other companies

and institutions pursuing research and development of alternative treatments for

the diseases. Experimental therapies under development for Parkinson's disease

include surgical destruction of certain portions of the brain (pallidotomy),

gene therapy, cell therapy, the use of growth factors and neuroprotectant

therapy.

CYSTIC FIBROSIS. There are a number of academic and commercial

organizations engaged in developing therapies to treat either the symptoms of

cystic fibrosis or the cause of the disease. Several groups are developing gene

therapy approaches to the disease and also have received approval from the FDA

and the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee to initiate limited human studies of

cystic fibrosis gene therapy. In addition, other organizations are investigating

pharmacological and biological agents that would treat cystic fibrosis. One such

product, Pulmozyme-Registered Trademark-, which was developed by

Genentech, Inc., is currently on the market. These groups may succeed in

developing gene therapy products before Genzyme General, in obtaining patent

protection blocking Genzyme General from commercializing its cystic fibrosis

products or in developing other drug therapies that relieve the symptoms of

cystic fibrosis.

DIAGNOSTIC PRODUCTS. Genzyme General acts as a primary supplier of enzymes

and substrates, and generally does not compete with its customers in the sale of

complete diagnostic kits. The market in the diagnostic products industry is

mature and competition is based on price, reliability of supply and the purity

and specific activity of products.

GENETIC DIAGNOSTIC SERVICES. The U.S. market for human genetic testing is

divided among approximately 500 laboratories. Of this total group, less than 20

laboratories market their services nationally. Genzyme General believes that the

industry as a whole is still quite fragmented, with the top 20 laboratories

accounting for approximately 50% of market revenues, and with no individual

company accounting for more than 18% of the total other than Genzyme, which

accounts for approximately 22% of the total. Genzyme General believes, however,

that the industry will experience increasing consolidation as smaller

laboratories face the challenges of more complex and stringent regulation.

Competitive factors in the genetic diagnostics services business generally

include reputation of the laboratory, range of services offered, pricing,

convenience of sample collection and pick-up, quality of analysis and reporting

and timeliness of delivery of completed reports. Genzyme General believes that

its research and development program, which has enabled it to develop and

introduce testing services based on new technology, and its active sales and

marketing force have played significant roles in the growth of its genetic

diagnostics services business.

CANCER. Competition in the field of cancer therapeutics is intense. Genzyme

Molecular Oncology faces, and will continue to face, significant competition

from organizations such as large pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies,

universities, government agencies and other research institutions.

20

Competition can arise from the use of the same or similar technologies as

those currently used or contemplated to be used by Genzyme Molecular Oncology,

as well as from existing therapies. Any or all of these may be more effective or

less expensive than those developed by Genzyme Molecular Oncology. For instance,

other companies provide genomics services that are competitive with the SAGE-TM-

technology.

Genzyme Molecular Oncology relies on its collaborators for support in some

of its cancer research and development programs and intends to rely on these

partners for preclinical evaluation and clinical development of its potential

products and services. In addition, certain of its partners are conducting

multiple product development programs in the same fields as those in which they

are collaborating with Genzyme Molecular Oncology. Genzyme Molecular Oncology's

product candidates, therefore, may be subject to competition with potential

products under development by one or more of its partners.

CHEST DRAINAGE AND FLUID MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS, INSTRUMENTS AND SUTURES. The

principal methods by which Genzyme Surgical Products competes in the

cardiothoracic and general surgery markets are:

- continued innovative product development;

- the performance and breadth of its product lines;

- brand name recognition;

- sales force training; and

- educational services, including sponsorship of training programs in

advanced surgical techniques.

Its chief competitors in the chest drainage and fluid management market are

Atrium Medical Corporation and Sherwood-Davis & Geck, a division of Tyco

International, Ltd. Genzyme Surgical Products primarily competes with Karl Storz

Endoscopy America, Inc., Scanlan International, Inc., Pilling Weck Surgical

Instruments and the Codman division of Johnson & Johnson Ltd. in the reusable

instruments market. U.S. Surgical Corporation, a division of Tyco, and the

Ethicon division of Johnson & Johnson are Genzyme Surgical Products' primary

competitors in the cardiovascular sutures market.

MINIMALLY INVASIVE CARDIOVASCULAR SURGERY. Genzyme Surgical Products faces

competitors in the minimally invasive cardiovascular surgery field.

CardioThoracic Systems, Inc., which was recently acquired by Guidant

Corporation, was founded solely to pursue minimally invasive cardiovascular

surgery and was among the first companies to draw national attention to the

technology. CardioThoracic Systems is also the leader in both the minimally

invasive direct coronary artery bypass and off-pump coronary artery bypass

markets. Several major surgical products companies have also entered the

minimally invasive cardiovascular surgery market, including Medtronic, Inc.,

U.S. Surgical and Ethicon.

THERAPIES FOR ISCHEMIC HEART DISEASE. There is considerable competition in

the development of protein and gene therapies to induce angiogenesis for the

treatment of ischemic heart disease. Several companies have initiated clinical

trials of gene and protein therapies for ischemic heart disease, and other

companies have products that are still in preclinical development.

Genzyme Surgical Products is aware of ongoing research on cell-based

approaches to restoring cardiac function to infarcted tissue. Academic

institutions and private companies are also conducting research to develop

mechanical devices to reduce ventricular size or to minimize ventricular

dilation.

THERAPIES FOR PERIPHERAL VASCULAR DISEASE. There is considerable

competition in the development of protein and gene therapies to induce

angiogenesis for the treatment of peripheral vascular disease.

ADHESION BARRIERS. Genzyme Surgical Products believes that its expertise in

developing proprietary fermentation processes and its access to proprietary

strains of micro-organisms used in its hyaluronic

21

acid production process will give it a competitive advantage in the marketing of

the Sepra family of products. Its anti-adhesion products may face significant

competition, however, from other products based on hyaluronic acid as well as

from other products and changes in surgical techniques that may obviate the use

of hyaluronic acid. Genzyme Surgical Products believes that the principal factor

that will affect competition in this area is acceptance of the product by

surgeons, which depends, in large part, upon product performance, safety and

price.

Sepra Film-Registered Trademark- bioresorbable membrane does not have

significant direct competition in the colorectal surgery market. Ethicon markets

Interceed-Registered Trademark-, an anti-adhesion barrier that may have

properties similar to the Sepra Film-Registered Trademark- product, but is

indicated only for selected gynecological indications.

Interceed-Registered Trademark- has been shown to lose its anti-adhesion

properties in the presence of blood. Lifecore Biomedical, Inc. and Ethicon's

Intergel-TM- product, a gel-based anti-adhesion product, is marketed in Europe.

Gliatech, Inc. currently markets Adcon-L for the prevention of adhesions

following lumbar surgery. In addition, it has initiated clinical trials of

Adcon-A and Adcon-P, which are designed to limit adhesions after abdominal and

pelvic surgery. Life Medical Sciences, Inc. is developing REPEL for

gynecological surgery and REPEL-CV for cardiovascular surgery. These adhesion

barrier membranes are in early clinical trials.

PLASTIC SURGERY AND ENDOSCOPIC SURGERY INSTRUMENTS. Genzyme Surgical

Products' main competitors for the market in plastic surgery instruments are

Karl Storz, Padgett Instruments, Inc., the V. Mueller division of Allegiance

Corporation and Walter Lorenz Surgical, Inc. In the endoscopic plastic surgery

market, its competitors include Circon Corporation, OLYMPUS Winter & Ibe GmbH,

Stryker Corporation, and Karl Storz.

CARTICEL-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- CHONDROCYTES. Genzyme Tissue Repair is aware

of two other companies, Verigen, Inc. and Codon, which are both culturing

autologous chondrocytes for cartilage repair in Europe. In addition, Genzyme

Tissue Repair knows of three other companies, Advanced Tissue Sciences, Inc. in

conjunction with Smith & Nephew PLC, Integra LifeSciences Corp. and LifeCell

Corp., which are engaged in research on cultured cartilage products. In

addition, a surgical technique known as osteochondral grafting may be

competitive to Carticel-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- chondrocytes. This procedure,

which can be performed arthroscopically, involves transferring plugs of low

weight bearing cartilage and bone to the area of a defect. Smith & Nephew,

Arthrex, Inc. and Innovasive Devices, Inc. are known to have programs relating

to this procedure.

EPICEL-TM- SKIN GRAFTS. Genzyme Tissue Repair is the only commercial

provider of cultured skin grafts that have been shown to provide permanent skin

replacement for burn patients in the U.S. However, Genzyme Tissue Repair may

face competition from companies using other approaches to culture skin tissue.

Integra is marketing a collagen-based dermal replacement product for severely

burned patients. This product will still require a skin graft from the patient

or Epicel-TM- skin grafts to close a full-thickness wound, however, and

therefore will not compete directly with Epicel-TM- skin grafts. Advanced Tissue

Sciences, Inc. has received approval for a temporary wound covering for burns.

Organogenesis, Inc. has submitted a Pre-Market Approval application for a

product to be used for the closure of venous stasis ulcers. LifeCell Corp.

currently has freeze-dried enzymatically processed human cadaver dermis on the

market.

22

PATENTS, LICENSE AGREEMENTS AND TRADEMARKS

In general, we pursue a policy of obtaining patent protection both in the

United States and in selected foreign countries for subject matter we consider

patentable and important to our business. In addition, a portion of our

proprietary position is based upon patents that we have licensed from others

either through collaboration or traditional license agreements, including

patents relating to:

- Renagel-Registered Trademark- capsules;

- Transgenic ATIII;

- Aldurazyme-TM- enzyme;

- AVONEX-Registered Trademark- (Interferon-beta 1a);

- NeuroCell-TM--PD and NeuroCell-TM--HD;

- Alpha-glucosidase;

- DHA derivative;

- Acid sphingomyelinase;

- EPI-KAL2;

- the HNPCC and APC I1307K tests;

- TGF-(2);

- SAGE-TM- technology;

- cell fusion technology;

- viral and non-viral gene therapy technology;

- drug delivery technology;

- various cancer related genes such as p53;

- HIF-1 alpha;

- Cohn Cardiac Stabilizer-TM- device;

- Epicel-TM- skin grafts; and

- photoactive tissue welding technology.

These collaboration and license agreements generally require us to share

profits with our collaborative partners or pay royalties to our licensors upon

commercialization of products covered by the licensed technology. Generally,

patents issued in the United States are effective for the longer of 17 years

from date of issue or 20 years from the effective filing date of the

corresponding patent application if filed prior to June 8, 1995; and 20 years

from the filing date for applications filed after June 8, 1995. In some cases,

the patent term can be extended to recapture a portion of the term lost during

FDA regulatory review. The duration of foreign patents varies in accordance with

applicable local law.

We also rely on trade secrets, proprietary know-how and continuing

technological innovation to develop and maintain a competitive position in our

product areas. We require our employees, consultants and corporate partners who

have access to our proprietary information to sign confidentiality agreements.

Our patent position and proprietary technology are subject to certain risks

and uncertainties. We have included information about these risks and

uncertainties in Exhibit 99.2, "Factors Affecting

23

Future Operating Results," to this Form 10-K. We encourage you to read those

descriptions, which we are incorporating into this discussion by reference.

Our products and services are sold around the world under brand-name

trademarks and service marks. Trademark protection continues in some countries

as long as the mark is used; in other countries, as long as its registered.

Registrations generally are for fixed, but renewable, terms. We consider our

registered trademarks Genzyme-Registered Trademark-,

Cerezyme-Registered Trademark-, Ceredase-Registered Trademark-,

Thyrogen-Registered Trademark-, N-geneous-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- LDL,

N-geneous-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- HDL, Contrast-REGISTERED TRADEMARK-(),

InSight-Registered Trademark-, MASDA-Registered Trademark-, Sepra

Film-Registered Trademark-, Pleur-evac-Registered Trademark-,

Thora-Klex-Registered Trademark-, Tevdek-Registered Trademark-,

Polydek-Registered Trademark-, Deklene-REGISTERED TRADEMARK-(), Cohn Cardiac

Immobilizer-REGISTERED TRADEMARK-(), SaphLITE-REGISTERED TRADEMARK-(),

Sepragel-REGISTERED TRADEMARK-(), Diamond-Line-REGISTERED TRADEMARK-(),

Diamond-Flex-REGISTERED TRADEMARK-(), Diamond-Touch-REGISTERED TRADEMARK-(), and

Carticel-REGISTERED TRADEMARK-(), together with our trademarks Fabrazyme-TM-,

Afp4-TM-(), GlyPro-TM-, SAGE-TM-, EndoCABG-TM-, Sahara-TM-, Genzyme OPCAB

Elite-TM-, Cohn Cardiac Stabilizer-TM-, Switch-Blade-TM-, Seprafilm-TM-,

Sepracoat-TM-, Sepramesh-TM-, SepraPak-TM-, CV Seprafilm-TM-, Epicel-TM- and

QuickTack-TM-, in the aggregate, to be of material importance to our business.

GOVERNMENT REGULATION

Regulation by governmental authorities in the United States and other

countries is a significant factor in the development, manufacture and

commercialization of our products and services.

FDA REGULATION

We expect that all of our products and services will require approval of the

FDA and corresponding agencies in other countries before they can be marketed.

In the United States, the FDA classifies products as either "devices," "drugs"

or "biologics." Products that do not achieve their principal intended purpose

through chemical action within or on the body and which are not dependent upon

being metabolized by the patient's body in order to be effective are classified

by the FDA as "devices" while other products are classified as "drugs" or

"biologics."

The activities required before drugs or biologics may be marketed in the

United States include:

- pre-clinical laboratory tests, IN VITRO and IN VIVO pre-clinical studies

and formulation and stability studies;

- the submission to the FDA and approval of an application for human

clinical testing, which is known as an Investigational New Drug

application;

- adequate and well controlled human clinical trials to prove the safety and

effectiveness of the drug or biologic;

- the submission of a New Drug Application for a drug or a Product License

Application for a biologic or a Biologic License Application for biologics

identified by the FDA as "Specified Biologics;" and

- the approval by the FDA of the New Drug Application, Product License

Application or Biologic License Application.

In addition to product approval, the manufacturer of the product may have to

obtain an establishment license (for a biologic that is not considered well

characterized) or a pre-approval Good Manufacturing Practices inspection (for a

drug or well-characterized biologic) from the FDA. Since any license granted by

the FDA is both site and process specific, any material change by a company in

the manufacturing process, equipment or location necessitates additional FDA

review and approval.

Products that are classified as devices also require FDA approval prior to

marketing. Devices are classified as Class I, II or III, depending upon the

information available to assure their safety and effectiveness. In general,

Class I and Class II devices are devices whose safety and effectiveness can

reasonably be assured through general or specific controls, respectively.

Class III devices are life

24

sustaining, life supporting or implantable devices or new devices which have

been found not to be substantially equivalent to legally marketed devices. The

steps required for approval of a Class III device include:

- pre-clinical laboratory tests and IN VITRO and IN VIVO pre-clinical

studies;

- the submission to the FDA and approval of an Investigational Device

Exemption application to allow initiation of clinical testing;

- human clinical studies to prove safety and effectiveness of the device;

- the submission of a Pre-Marketing Application; and

- the approval by the FDA of the Pre-Marketing Application.

Typically, clinical testing of devices involves initial testing to evaluate

safety and feasibility and expanded trials to collect sufficient data to prove

safety and effectiveness. In addition, the procedures and the facilities used to

manufacture the device are subject to review and approval by the FDA.

A device (other than a Class III device) which is proven to be substantially

equivalent to a device marketed prior to May 28, 1976, when government

regulations for devices were first introduced, can be marketed after approval of

a 510(k) application rather than the filing of an Investigational Device

Exemption application and a Pre-Marketing Application. The 510(k) application

must contain a description of the device, its methods of manufacture and quality

control procedures and the results of testing to demonstrate that the device is

substantially equivalent to the device already marketed.

In May 1996, the FDA published a new guidance document that provided for the

regulation of products such as Carticel-Registered Trademark- chondrocytes that

use manipulated autologous structural cells. Under these regulations, companies

that currently are not marketing autologous cultured chondrocytes would likely

be required to provide a prospective randomized blinded control study comparing

the treatment to alternative treatments. Genzyme Tissue Repair estimates that it

could take eight years for any competitor to complete a study of this nature

that would demonstrate the clinical efficacy of its proposed treatment. In

August 1997, the FDA granted Genzyme Tissue Repair a Biologic License

Application under these regulations for Carticel-Registered Trademark-

chondrocytes. Genzyme Tissue Repair has initiated discussions with the FDA

regarding an application for Epicel-TM- skin grafts, which has been on the

market as an unregulated medical device. Genzyme Tissue Repair expects that the

FDA will permit Epicel-TM- skin grafts to remain on the market until its

regulatory status is resolved.

The time and expense required to perform the clinical testing necessary to

obtain FDA approval can far exceed the time and expense of the research and

development initially required to create the product. Even after initial FDA

approval has been obtained, we could be required to conduct further studies to

provide additional data on safety or to gain approval for the use of a product

as a treatment for additional clinical indications. In addition, use of these

products during testing and after marketing approval has been obtained could

reveal side effects which, if serious, could delay, impede or prevent marketing

approval, limit uses, force a recall of the product or expose us to product

liability claims.

REGULATION OUTSIDE OF THE UNITED STATES

For marketing outside the United States, we are subject to foreign

regulatory requirements governing human clinical testing and marketing approval

for our products. These requirements vary by jurisdiction, differ from those in

the United States and may require us to perform additional pre-clinical or

clinical testing whether or not FDA approval has been obtained. The amount of

time required to obtain necessary approvals may be longer or shorter than that

required for FDA approval. In many foreign countries, pricing and reimbursement

approvals are also required.

25

Our initial focus for obtaining marketing approval outside the United States

is typically Europe. European Union Regulations and Directives generally

classify healthcare products either as medicinal products or devices. For

medicinal products, marketing approval may be sought using either the

centralized procedure of the Committee for Proprietary Medicinal Products or the

decentralized, mutual recognition process. The centralized procedure results in

a recommendation in all member states, while the European Union multi-state

process involves country by country approval. European Union regulations for

products classified as devices have been implemented for some devices. Devices

such as the Sepra family of products must receive market approval through a

centralized procedure, where the device receives a CE Mark allowing distribution

to all member states of the European Union. For those devices where European

Union regulations have not been implemented, marketing approval must be obtained

on a country by country basis. The CE Mark certification requires us to receive

International Standards Organization certification for each facility involved in

the manufacture or distribution of the device. This certification comes only

after the development of an all inclusive quality system, which is reviewed for

compliance to International Quality Standards by a licensed "Notified Body"

working within the European Union. After certification is received a product

dossier is reviewed which attests to the product's compliance with European

Union directive 93/42/EEC for medical devices. Only after this point is a CE

Mark granted.

Autologous products are specifically exempt from the European Device

Directive and Pharmaceutical Directive promulgated by the European Union.

Therefore, each European country is free to impose its own regulations on the

marketing of these products. To date, Genzyme Tissue Repair has not encountered

any local registration requirement for market introduction of

Carticel-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- chondrocytes. During September 1997, the Spanish

national health system approved Carticel-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- chondrocytes for

use by public hospitals, representing the first broad approval of the product by

a reimbursement authority in Europe. Genzyme Tissue Repair is assessing the

regulatory requirements for commercialization of Carticel-REGISTERED TRADEMARK-

chondrocytes in Japan.

OTHER GOVERNMENT REGULATION

GOOD MANUFACTURING PRACTICES. All facilities and manufacturing techniques

used for the manufacture of products for clinical use or for sale must comply

with applicable "Good Manufacturing Practices," the FDA regulations governing

the production of pharmaceutical products.

ORPHAN DRUG ACT. The Orphan Drug Act provides incentives to manufacturers

to develop and market drugs for rare diseases and conditions affecting fewer

than 200,000 persons in the United States at the time of application for orphan

drug designation. The first developer to receive FDA marketing approval for an

orphan drug is entitled to a seven-year exclusive marketing period in the United

States for that product. However, a drug that the FDA considers to be clinically

superior to or different from another approved orphan drug, even though for the

same indication, is not barred from sale in the United States during the

seven-year exclusive marketing period. Similar legislation was adopted in the

European Union in the beginning of 2000, but the market exclusivity granted in

Europe is for ten years.

Legislation periodically has been introduced in recent years to change the

U.S. Orphan Drug Act to shorten the period of automatic market exclusivity and

to allow marketing rights to simultaneous developers of a drug. We cannot be

sure of whether the Orphan Drug act will be amended or, if amended, what effect

the changes would have on us.

REGULATION OF DIAGNOSTIC SERVICES. The Clinical Laboratories Improvement

Act provides for the regulation of clinical laboratories by the U.S. Department

of Health and Human Services. Regulations promulgated under the act affect our

genetics laboratories.

26

REGULATION OF GENE THERAPY PRODUCTS. In addition to FDA requirements, the

National Institutes of Health has established guidelines providing that

transfers of recombinant DNA into human subjects at NIH laboratories or with NIH

funds must be approved by the NIH Director. The NIH has established the

Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee to review gene therapy protocols. We expect

that all of our gene therapy protocols will be subject to review by the

Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee. In the U.K., our gene therapy protocols will

be subject to review by the Gene Therapy Advisory Committee.

The recent death of a patient undergoing gene therapy using an adenoviral

vector to deliver the therapeutic gene has been widely publicized. As a result

of the death, the U.S. Senate has commenced hearings to determine whether

additional legislation is required to protect volunteers and patients who

participate in gene therapy clinical trials. Additionally, the Recombinant DNA

Advisory Committee has discussed extensively the use of adenoviral vectors in

gene therapy clinical trials and intends to issue a report in March 2000 on the

adverse events reported by investigators using adenoviral vectors. Increased

scrutiny could delay or increase the costs of our gene therapy product

development efforts or clinical trials.

TISSUE AND ORGAN BANK LAWS. A federal criminal statute that prohibits the

transfer of any human organ for valuable consideration for use in human

transplantation, but which permits recovery of reasonable costs associated with

transplant activities. This statute has not been applied to

Carticel-REGISTERED TRADEMARK- chondrocytes or Epicel-TM- skin grafts. Certain

states have laws requiring the licensure of tissue and organ banks and laws

governing the sale of human organs and the safety and efficacy of drugs, devices

and biologics, including skin. These state laws could be interpreted to apply to

Genzyme Tissue Repair's production and distribution of cultured tissue products.

Provisions in certain states' statutes prohibit the receipt of valuable

consideration in connection with the sale of human tissue by a tissue bank, but

permit licensed tissue banks, including companies, to recover their reasonable

costs associated with human tissue sales. The application of these or other

regulations to Genzyme Tissue Repair could result in significant expense to

Genzyme Tissue Repair, limit reimbursement for Genzyme Tissue Repair's services

and otherwise materially adversely affect Genzyme Tissue Repair's results of

operations.

OTHER LAWS AND REGULATIONS. Our operations are or may be subject to various

federal, state and local laws, regulations and recommendations relating to safe

working conditions, laboratory and manufacturing practices and the purchase,

storage, movement, use and disposal of hazardous or potentially hazardous

substances used in connection with our research work and manufacturing

operations, including radioactive compounds and infectious disease agents.

Although we believe that our safety procedures comply with the standards

prescribed by federal, state and local regulations, the risk of contamination,

injury or other accidental harm cannot be eliminated completely. In the event of

an accident, we could be held liable for any damages that result and any

liabilities could exceed our resources.

EMPLOYEES

As of December 31, 1999, we had approximately 3,800 employees, including all

of our consolidated subsidiaries and excluding Genzyme Transgenics. None of our

employees are covered by collective bargaining agreements. We consider our

employee relations to be excellent.

RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT COSTS

We have provided the information required by Item 101(c)(1)(xi) of

Regulation S-K in Part II, Item 8, "Consolidated Financial Statements and

Supplementary Schedules" and specifically in the Genzyme Corporation and

Subsidiaries Consolidated Statements of Operations and in Note M.,

27

"Research and Development Agreements" to our consolidated financial statements

set forth in Exhibit 13.5 to this Form 10-K. We are incorporating that

information into this section by reference.

SALES BY GEOGRAPHIC AREA, SIGNIFICANT CUSTOMERS AND PRODUCTS

We have provided the information required by Items 101(c)(1)(i) and

(vii) and 101(d) of Regulation S-K in the 1999 Genzyme General Annual Report

under the heading "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Genzyme Corporation

and Subsidiaries' Financial Condition and Results of Operations" and in Note Q.,

"Segment Information" to our consolidated financial statements set forth in

Exhibit 13.5 to this Form 10-K. We are incorporating that information into this

section by reference.

ITEM 1A. EXECUTIVE OFFICERS

Our current executive officers are as follows:

NAME AGE TITLE

- ---- -------- -----

Henri A. Termeer........................................ 54 Chairman of the Board,

President and Chief

Executive Officer

Russell J. Campanello................................... 44 Senior Vice President, Human

Resources

Earl M. Collier, Jr..................................... 52 Executive Vice President;

President, Genzyme Surgical

Products

David D. Fleming........................................ 51 Group Senior Vice President,

Diagnostic Products

Richard A. Moscicki, M.D................................ 48 Chief Medical Officer;

Senior Vice President,

Clinical, Medical and

Regulatory Affairs

Alan E. Smith, Ph.D..................................... 54 Chief Scientific Officer;

Senior Vice President,

Research

G. Jan van Heek......................................... 50 Executive Vice President,

Therapeutics and Genetics

Peter Wirth............................................. 49 Chief Legal Officer;

Executive Vice President;

Clerk

Michael S. Wyzga........................................ 45 Chief Financial and

Accounting Officer; Senior

Vice President, Finance

MR. TERMEER has served as our President and a Director since October 1983,

as Chief Executive Officer since December 1985 and as Chairman of the Board

since May 1988. For ten years prior to joining us, Mr. Termeer worked for Baxter

Travenol Laboratories, Inc., a manufacturer of human health care products. Mr.

Termeer is a director of ABIOMED, Inc., AutoImmune Inc., Diacrin, Inc., GelTex

Pharmaceuticals, Inc. and Genzyme Transgenics Corporation, and a trustee of

Hambrecht & Quist Healthcare Investors and Hambrecht & Quist Life Sciences

Investors.

MR. CAMPANELLO joined us in February 1998 as Senior Vice President, Human

Resources. Prior to joining us, from March 1996 to February 1998, Mr. Campanello

served as Vice President of Nets Incorporated, an internet-based marketin