“As people who have been involved with and think of the Price College of Business like a family, I’ve seen firsthand that Tamara genuinely treats it like her family,” said Ashley Burke. “She is a crucial team member of the Price College of Business community. She deserves to be recognized for her dedication and commitment to Price and to Daniel. Admirably, she is engaged at almost every Price event with students and alumni while also raising her young family. That is not an easy task. She put a successful legal career on pause while maintaining the same pride and professionalism for Price. She is also an example to young people in Price of being dedicated to a team & successfully managing multiple duties. I am proud to honor her with this gift and no one deserves it more!”

The Tamara Pullin Partners in Learning Program was designed to provide financial assistance to faculty and student collaborations in the College. This unique program provides funds for a student scholarship and a faculty stipend to work together over an academic year on a research project to generate valuable insights into the most important business issues of our time. In this way, intergenerational relationships will be deepened, the faculty member’s research will be advanced and the student will acquire the essential critical thinking and data analytics skills necessary for the 21st century. In each case, both faculty and student will enhance their ability to impact the world in the context of building a successful life and career.

Price College alumnus Ron Gold (1966) and his wife, Marleen, also chose to give.

“Marleen and I contributed to Tamara’s fund due to her efforts to represent OU in her many appearances in giving lectures to inspire women to reach their potential,” Gold said. “Our contribution was a way of helping all students to reach their potential.”

In the fall of 2018, a fundraising initiative in support of this fund was launched. Due to the extraordinary generosity of our alumni and friends, over $51,000 has been raised to date. If you are interested in participating by making a gift to this meaningful fellowship, you may do so by visiting the OU Foundation page set up for the program.

Please direct any questions to:

Kristen Lazalier

Executive Director

Price College Office of External Relations

klazalier@ou.edu or (405) 325-7670