The name Princesse Tam Tam pays homage to a film starring Josephine Baker, released in 1935. The spirit of this character embodies a woman that fights prejudice, a feminist, long before it was acceptable. Therefore, we can imagine the Warhol Princess collection will be edgy with some sexuality.

Each design offers several bra and panty styles to include half-cup bra, triangle bra, or push up bra. For the panties the bottoms come in hipster bikini, thong bikini, and boxer shorts. You have the option to choose your favorite combination. Tres chic! The printed stretch satin and delicate lace leave us wanting more.

The Parisian company also makes homewear (lounge wear as we know it) in the same colorful, whimsical style as their lingerie.

I am especially dying for the ANDY items, I LOVE the printed stretch satin in the Street Grey colorway!!

More soon on the Princesse Tam Tam site.

In honor of Bastille Day – July 14th – celebrate French style with sweet little somethings by French designers like Lejaby, Princesse Tam-Tam & Chantelle.

French Lingerie

Online lingerie purveyor figleaves.com offers a selection of French lingerie. From sexy and lacey to sweet and flirty, the French have a style for every desire. Beautiful lace is crafted into seductive styles by Lejaby, while floral prints and eyelet give a softer touch by Princesse Tam-Tam and Aubade. A bamboo blend by Chantelle is eco-chic with simple lines and a sporty shape.

From left to right:

“Follement Sage” lingerie set by Lejaby at figleaves.com – $105 for bra, $85 for brief

“Morea” lingerie set by Elixir de Lingerie at figleaves.com – goes up to an F cup – $140 for bra, $58 for brief

“Sofia la Glamourese” eyelet lingerie by Aubade at figleaves.com – $103 for bra, $54 for thong

“Fougere” plant-print lingerie by Princesse Tam-Tam at figleaves.com – $75 for bra, $45 for brief

“Bamboo” balcony bra and boyshort by Chantelle at figleaves.com – $80 for bra, $45 for boyshort

French Swimwear

Look fabulous on the beach with French swimwear brands at figleaves.com. Princesse Tam-Tam offers sporty silhouettes in teals and grays while new swimwear designer Fifi Chachnil combines whimsy with retro.

From left to right:

“Arty” swimsuit by Princesse Tam-Tam at figleaves.com – $184

“Audrey” bikini by Princesse Tam-Tam at figleaves.com – on sale for $47.50 for the bandeau, $50 for the bikini brief

“La Rochelle” skirted swimsuit by Fifi Chachnil at figleaves.com – $192

“Ferry Boat Lace” halter bikini by Fifi Chachnil at figleaves.com – $160 for halter, $116 for bikini brief

All of this available at FIGLEAVES.COM!

Dolce V is a new designer lingerie store. Unlike the upscale designer selling their own wares, Dolce V is offering a broad range of designers including Adorisadora, Anna and Boy, Beau Bra, Belabumbum, Chantelle, Cosabella, Damaris, Fauve, Fleur T, Freya, Guia La Bruna, Huit, Margherita Mazzei, Mimi Holliday, Miss Mandalay, Nearly Nude, Ondademar, Princesse Tam Tam, Verde Veronica, and Verdissima. Some of these designers are very hard to find and currently Dolce V is the sole online retailer of Adorisadora.

Lucia Mizzoni hopes that Dolce V “will become addictive; one of those little secrets you will want to share with all your friends even though a side of you will want to keep it for yourself only!” Lucia Mizzoni spent nearly 8 years as the marketing manager of L’Oreal UK. Before L’Oreal she had a distinguished education including a Fullbright scholarship in 1998 for International Relations at Syracuse University. The Dolce V business started in January of 2008 and the online shop launched shortly there after. Head over to Dolce V and join their club for free. You’ll get a satin tape measure so you can measure your own bust and make sure you are getting the best fit. When you get your tape measure, use the Dolce V bra size calculator with three simple steps. Once you know your size, Dolce V handily offers a way to search their store for your size. If you are a fuller figured women, you may find that Dolce V offers a decent selection through 38E or 38F via brands like Freya and Fauve. I imagine that with early success, Dolce V will offer even more sizes in the future.The site is easy to navigate and offers search to help find pieces that interest you.

Each designer is broken out as a search filter and you can also shop by occasion or department. This level of flexibility is often skipped as some retail sites don’t break out by designer or don’t offer search. Dolce V offers tips for men and a break out section focusing on hot trends including a short Flash video. Unlike many online lingerie retailers, Dolce V offers free returns, so you can buy with the extra confidence that returns won’t be a hurdle.

One feature of the site I haven’t seen before is integrated zooming. Many sites open another window and launch a separate client to zoom in on details. Dolce V is using a technique to keep the zooming inside the same screen as the product details. When you land on a product page, you will see a medium size picture and two thumbnails. As the page loads, a larger version of the thumbnails is downloaded in the background. You can use the medium size picture to zoom in on details and use the thumbnails to change the picture. Besides having some great designers, I think this zoom feature makes online shopping easier and for now, makes Dolce V different than their competitors.

Lucia is offering a discount code DOLCE108L for 10% off. Go over to the site and buy some goodies.