John Tory

Mayor, City of Toronto

John Tory is the 65th Mayor of Toronto. Born and raised in Toronto, Mayor Tory has spent his career promoting and giving back to the city he loves. As a lawyer, talk show host, businessman, Member of Provincial Parliament and Leader of the Official Opposition at Queen’s Park, and finally as Mayor, he has long believed that the diversity of Toronto is its strength. As Mayor, John’s focus will be on bringing the city together as One Toronto.

Among Mayor Tory’s top priorities are tackling transit and traffic congestion. He is focused on taking action to reduce commute times so Toronto residents can get to work on time and home to their families sooner. Mayor Tory is also getting to work on Toronto’s transit crisis by getting on with the Scarborough subway and beginning work on the SmartTrack line, a 53 kilometre, 22-station surface subway that would provide all day, two-way service across the city and bring needed relief to the congested Yonge subway.

The early years of Mayor Tory’s career were spent practicing law in Toronto, and he was later elected as a managing partner of one of Canada’s biggest law firms. In the 1980’s he served as Principal Secretary to Premier Bill Davis and as Associate Secretary of the Ontario Cabinet. In September 2004, Mayor Tory was elected leader of the Progressive Conservative Party of Ontario. In 2005, as PC Party Leader, Mayor Tory would serve as the Leader of the Official Opposition at Queen’s Park.

Mayor Tory has an extensive background in volunteer community service. He served as volunteer Chairman and Commissioner of the Canadian Football League and has chaired fundraising campaigns for St. Michael’s Hospital and the United Way. He has also held leadership positions in a wide range of charitable organizations ranging from Canadian Paraplegic Association, Crimestoppers, St. Michael's Hospital, Toronto Association for Community Living, the United Way, and the Women's Legal Education & Action Fund (LEAF).

Mayor Tory’s community work has been widely recognized. Mayor Tory was a founding Board Member and Chair of the Greater Toronto CivicAction Alliance. He is a recipient of both the Paul Harris and Mel Osborne Awards from the Rotary and Kiwanis organizations respectively and was named a Life Member of the Salvation Army Advisory Board. He is also the recipient of an African Canadian Achievement Award and the Harry Jerome Award. Mayor Tory was recently awarded the Order of Ontario for being a “consummate champion for the Greater Toronto Region."