Police officers, staff and volunteers from forces across the country have been recognised in the Queen’s Birthday Honours List.

Police Scotland Chief Constable Iain Livingstone has received a Knighthood while the chief constables of Avon and Somerset Constabulary, Gwent Police and North Yorkshire Police have all received the Queen’s Police Medal (QPM).

The deputy chief constables of Nottinghamshire Police and Hertfordshire Constabulary have also been awarded the QPM.

Chair of the National Police Chiefs’ Council, Martin Hewitt, said: “I congratulate all of those recognised for their service to policing in the Queen’s Birthday Honours List, and am pleased to see so many officers, staff and volunteers from across the country being awarded for their contributions to local communities and public safety.

“The awards highlight the commitment and hard work of policing to protect and keep our communities safe all year round and everyone should be rightly proud to be recognised in this way.”

Alongside the chief constable, three other members of Police Scotland received awards. Police Constable Stephen Tanner and recently retired Superintendent Irene Ralston were awarded the QPM while Health and Safety Manager James Bertram received a British Empire Medal for services to policing and to the community in Ayrshire.

Sir Iain said: “Our committed and professional officers and staff are the key to the success of Police Scotland and this important recognition is tribute to the effective public service they provide every day, right across the country.

“I pay heartfelt thanks to everyone who contributes to protecting the people of Scotland and offer my warmest congratulations to those recognised today. I am personally, and on behalf of policing in Scotland, deeply honoured and extremely grateful.”

Chief Constable Sarah Crew of Avon and Somerset Constabulary said: “Receiving such recognition is truly humbling. The fact that it is Platinum Jubilee year makes it even more so.

“In truth, this award is a mark of the dedicated work of many people over many years, fellow officers and staff as well as colleagues in other organisations, in the voluntary sector and in our communities. I am honoured to accept it on their behalf and because it gives me the opportunity to bring to wider attention their selfless efforts and achievements in the service of others.

“I say thank you and pay tribute to the fantastic people with whom I have had the privilege to work on some truly transformational and life changing projects.”

Eight members of the Metropolitan Police Service (MPS) received awards. Acting Commissioner Sir Stephen House, said: “I am delighted that so many Metropolitan police officers and police staff have been recognised by Her Majesty The Queen in the Birthday Honours. They should be very proud of their dedicated service, wonderful achievements, and the positive impact they have had in so many different ways in keeping London and its communities safe.”

Seven officers from the National Crime Agency were honoured – the highest number to have been recognised in a single set of the Queen’s Birthday Honours.

Director General Graeme Biggar said: “I congratulate them, and know that all in the NCA can be proud of their skill and determination.

“Their achievements showcase the quality and breadth of the NCA’s response to serious and organised crime, and I hope they inspire others to consider a role with the agency.”

The full list:

Knighthoods

Iain Thomas Livingstone QPM, Chief Constable, Police Service of Scotland. For services to Policing and the Public (Fife)

Officers of the Order of the British Empire (OBE)

Osman Ahmed, Senior Officer, National Crime Agency. For services to Law Enforcement (London, Greater London)

Anne Marie Farrelly, Senior Officer, National Crime Agency. For services to Law Enforcement (London, Greater London)

Neville Lewis, Officer, National Crime Agency. For services to Law Enforcement (London, Greater London)

John George Marnock, Police Staff and Chair, National Surveillance User Group, Thames Valley Police. For services to Policing (Thatcham, Berkshire)

Linda Jayne Waters, Assistant Chief Officer and Director of Finance, Thames Valley Police. For services to Policing (Oxfordshire)

Members of the Order of the British Empire (MBE)

Jordan Beecher, Officer, National Crime Agency. For services to Law Enforcement (London, Greater London)

Barry Adam Boffy, Head of Inclusion and Diversity, British Transport Police. For services to Policing (Bristol, City of Bristol)

Melissa Dark, Casualty Bureau Manager and Disaster Victim Identification Coordinator, City of London Police. For services to Policing (Manningtree, Essex)

Marcia-Yvette Hinkson-Gittens, Police Staff, South Wales Police. For services to Diversity in Policing (Barry, South Glamorgan)

Keith Jarrett, Police Staff, British Transport Police. For services to Policing and to Diversity (London, Greater London)

Shaun Philip Johnson, Lately Arson Taskforce Coordinator, Northamptonshire Police. For services to Policing (Finedon, Northamptonshire)

Timothy Mann, National Volunteer, Police Cadets Coordinator. For services to Young People (London, Greater London)

Edward Orr, Officer, National Crime Agency. For services to Law Enforcement (London, Greater London)

Sujitha Trowsdale, Senior Officer, National Crime Agency. For services to Law Enforcement (London, Greater London)

Medallists of the Order of the British Empire (BEM)

Leanne Victoria Louise Barnett, Deputy Director, Strategic Communications and Engagement, Police Service of Northern Ireland. For services to Policing (Belfast, City of Belfast)

James Bertram, Health and Safety Manager, Police Scotland and Community First Responder, Scottish Ambulance Service. For services to Policing and to the community in Ayrshire (Largs, Ayrshire)

Paula Cooper, Police Constable, Volunteer Police Cadets Coordinator, Metropolitan Police Service. For services to Policing (London, Greater London)

Sudath Leon Dias, Special Superintendent, Essex Police. For services to Policing (Colchester, Essex)

Jonathan Neil Gray, Special Constable, Northumbria Police. For services to Policing (Ponteland, Northumberland)

Susan Hill, Training Unit Manager, Metropolitan Police Service. For services to Policing (Basingstoke, Hampshire)

Varsha Kumari Mistry, Forensic Practitioner, Metropolitan Police Service. For services to Diversity and Inclusion in Policing and to the Hindu Community (London, Greater London)

Sharron Moverley-Holmes, Special Chief Officer, North Yorkshire Police Special Constabulary. For services to Policing (Boroughbridge, North Yorkshire)

Michael Scott, Special Constable, Northumbria Police. For services to Policing (Hexham, Northumberland)

Queen’s Police Medal

ENGLAND AND WALES

Q.P.M.

Antony Ashton, Sergeant, West Midlands Police.

Rachel Alison Barber, Deputy Chief Constable, Nottinghamshire Police.

Sarah Jane Crew, Chief Constable, Avon and Somerset Police.

Matthew Howard Evans, Constable, West Midlands Police.

Karen Marie Geddes, lately, Superintendent, West Midlands Police.

Timothy James Gray, lately, Detective Superintendent, Metropolitan Police Service.

Catherine Hankinson, Assistant Chief Constable, West Yorkshire Police.

William Alexander Jephson, Deputy Chief Constable, Hertfordshire Constabulary.

Pamela Charlotte Kelly, Chief Constable, Gwent Police.

Glen Mayhew, Assistant Chief Constable, Devon and Cornwall Police.

James McAllister, Constable, Metropolitan Police Service.

Ian McDonald, Constable, Northamptonshire Police.

Timothy James Needham, Superintendent, Civil Nuclear Constabulary.

Simon Samuel Nelson, Superintendent, Sussex Police.

Michael Anthony Wallace, Constable, Metropolitan Police Service.

Victoria Rose Washington, lately, Detective Superintendent, Metropolitan Police Service.

Clifton John Williams, lately, Detective Chief Inspector, Merseyside Police.

Lisa Jayne Winward, Chief Constable, North Yorkshire Police.

POLICE SCOTLAND

Q.P.M

Irene Ralsston, Superintendent, Police Scotland

Stephen Tanner, Police Constable, Police Scotland

NORTHERN IRELAND

Q.P.M.

Grahame Wilson Sillery, Detective Constable, Police Service of Northern Ireland.

Richard Samuel Taylor, Constable, Police Service of Northern Ireland.

Darren Welsh, Sergeant, Police Service of Northern Ireland.