LONDON, February 20, 2012 /PRNewswire/ --

Keyhaven, the global reputational and crisis management consultancy, is pleased to announce that Sir Paul Stephenson, the former Commissioner of the Metropolitan Police, has been appointed as a senior advisor.

Commenting on the appointment John Deverell, Keyhaven's CEO, said, "We are delighted that Sir Paul has agreed to join us as an advisor. He brings singular experience of an enormous range of crises from his long and distinguished career as a one of the most experienced police officers in the world."

Keyhaven Chairman Hugh Morrison added, "There is a clear demand for a service capable of delivering an integrated crisis and reputation response. Having someone of the calibre of Sir Paul as part the team allows us to draw on his considerable expertise and underlines Keyhaven's credentials in helping stakeholders to mitigate against and manage crises."

Sir Paul Stephenson said, "I am delighted to make Keyhaven my first appointment since leaving the Met. I have been very impressed by my discussions with John and the rest of the Keyhaven team and am greatly looking forward to working with them."

Biographical Note

Sir Paul Stephenson QPM is one of the most experienced police officers in the world. He joined Lancashire Constabulary in 1975 and was appointed to the rank of Superintendent in February 1988. He was appointed Assistant Chief Constable Merseyside Police in October 1994, with responsibility for Territorial Policing Operations. In May 1999 he was appointed Deputy Chief Constable Lancashire Constabulary, responsible for the operations and operational support portfolios. In July 2002 he was appointed Chief Constable of Lancashire Constabulary, responsible for an organisation of over 5,600 staff and the provision of policing services to one and a half million residents and visitors. In March 2005 Sir Paul was appointed Deputy Commissioner of the Metropolitan Police Service. His role included the function of Chief Operating Officer and in particular oversight of strategy, organisational performance and diversity. Sir Paul was awarded the Queen's Policing Medal for services to policing in May 2000 and he received a knighthood in June 2008. In December 2008 Sir Paul became the Acting Commissioner of the Metropolitan Police Service, and in January 2009 Sir Paul became Commissioner of the Metropolitan Police Service. He retired in July 2011, and was appointed as a senior adviser to Keyhaven, the crisis consultancy, in January 2012.

About Keyhaven

Keyhaven (http://www.keyhaven.cc) is a specialist global reputational and crisis management company with an advisory team drawn from the highest levels of the international business and public service communities and a technical team with specialist experience including cyber and information security, IP and brand protection, human rights and anti-corruption compliance, financial crime, health and safety, pandemics, medical and evacuation support, geopolitical and business intelligence, cultural and negotiation specialists, due diligence and investigations and wider security.