Pizza 73 is committed to safeguarding the personal information entrusted to us by our customers. We manage your personal information in accordance with Alberta’s Personal Information Protection Act and other applicable laws. This policy outlines the principles and practices we follow in protecting your personal information.

This policy applies to Flying Pizza 73 Inc. and the joint venture companies operating under the trade name of Pizza 73. The policy also applies to any person providing services on our behalf.

A copy of this policy is available on our website at www.pizza73.com and will be provided to any customer on request.

We collect only the personal information that we need for the purposes of providing services to our customers, including personal information needed to:

Store and retrieve your order. Pizza 73 uses information such as your phone number or email address to retain your order history for up to one year. So, when you order again we remember what you ordered last time.

Deliver food to you. We need your address and type of dwelling to find the closest shop and deliver the food to you.

Follow up with our customers to determine satisfaction with products and services.

Notify our customers of upcoming specials, if requested by the customer (online only).

Process payment for an order, such as payment type and credit card information to pre-authorize an amount.

Grant credit.

Correspond with our customers. When you send us e-mail or when you ask us to respond to you by e-mail, we learn your exact e-mail address and any information you have included. We use your e-mail address to acknowledge your comments and reply to your questions; and we may store your communication and our reply in case we need to correspond further.

When you order online we may set and access cookies on your computer.

We normally collect information directly from our customers. We may collect your information from other persons with your consent or as authorized by law. For example, Pizza 73 may purchase a publicly available phone directory listing for a city.

We inform our clients, before or at the time of collecting personal information, of the purposes for which we are collecting the information. The only time we don’t provide this notification is when a client volunteers information for an obvious purpose (for example, producing a credit card for purchase when the information will be used only to process the payment).

We ask for consent to collect, use or disclose client personal information, except in specific circumstances where collection, use or disclosure without consent is authorized or required by law. We may assume your consent in cases where you volunteer information for an obvious purpose.

We ask for your express consent for some purposes and may not be able to provide certain services if you are unwilling to provide consent to the collection, use or disclosure of certain personal information. Where express consent is needed, we will normally ask clients to provide their consent orally (in person, by telephone) or electronically (by clicking a button).

A client may withdraw consent to the use and disclosure of personal information at any time, unless the personal information is necessary for us to fulfil our legal obligations. We will respect your decision, but we may not be able to provide you with certain products and services if we do not have the necessary personal information.

We may collect, use or disclose client personal information without consent only as authorized by law. For example, we may not request consent when the collection, use or disclosure is reasonable for an investigation or legal proceeding, to collect a debt owed to our organization, in an emergency that threatens life, health or safety, or when the personal information is from a public telephone directory.

We use and disclose client personal information only for the purposes for which the information was collected, except as authorized by law. For example, we may use customer contact information to deliver goods. The law also allows us to use that contact information for the purpose of collecting a debt owed to our organization, should that be necessary.

If we wish to use or disclose your personal information for any new business purpose, we will ask for your consent.

We will not sell or rent your personally identifiable information to anyone.

We make every reasonable effort to ensure that our customer information is accurate and complete. We rely on our customers to notify us if there is a change to their personal information that may affect their relationship with our organization, such as a delivery address change or change in phone number. If you are aware of an error in our information about you, please let us know and we will correct it on request wherever possible.

We protect client personal information in a manner appropriate for the sensitivity of the information. We make every reasonable effort to prevent any loss, misuse, disclosure or modification of personal information, as well as any unauthorized access to personal information.

We use appropriate security measures when destroying client personal information, including shredding paper records and permanently deleting electronic records.

We retain client personal information only as long as is reasonable to fulfil the purposes for which the information was collected or for legal or business purposes. Again, in the case of customer orders we retain your personal information for one full year.

Customers of Pizza 73 have a right of access to their own personal information in a record that is in our custody or under our control, subject to some exceptions. For example, organizations are required under the Personal Information Protection Act to refuse to provide access to information that would reveal personal information about another individual. Organizations are authorized under the Act to refuse access to personal information if disclosure would reveal confidential business information.

If we refuse a request in whole or in part, we will provide the reasons for the refusal. In some cases where exceptions to access apply, we may withhold that information and provide you with the remainder of the record.

You may make a request for access to your personal information by writing to address listed below. You must provide sufficient information in your request to allow us to identify the information you are seeking.

You may also request a correction of an error or omission in your personal information.

We will respond to your request within 45 calendar days, unless an extension is granted. We may charge a reasonable fee to provide information, but not to make a correction. We will advise you of any fees that may apply before beginning to process your request.