There’s a new patient on Ward 2 and Dr. Brewer isn’t sure just what to make of him. prot (intentionally lower-case to show just how insignificant a single being is in the universe) claims to be from the planet K-PAX in the constellation Lyra. We’re never told exactly how he ended up in a mental hospital, but the changes he makes happen while he is there are nothing short of remarkable. Is he really an alien? Or does he have multiple personality disorder, as Dr. Brewer suspects? We’re never really quite sure, but what we do know is that prot has helped to change the lives of people around him. And because of that, we like him.

There is a movie based on Gene Brewer’s book K-PAX, starring Kevin Spacey and Jeff Bridges, but apparently Mr. Brewer did not write the screen play for it and it is significantly different from the stage version. I wouldn’t know as this is yet another movie I’ve never seen. However, I must say that I enjoyed the Geneva Underground Playhouse’s version so much that I would really like to see the movie now. I honestly didn’t know what to expect. I mean, I knew there was a mental patient who thought he was an alien, but that was it. I thought there would be several people in tin foil helmets running around the stage! That couldn’t be further from the case. In fact, Betty (Angelicque Cate) even references those crazies who come to the hospital with their antennae and tin foil belts in her monologue. So this was not that story. This was a genuine sci-fi story where we never are completely sure of what is real and what prot would like us to believe.

First I would like to say “Well done” to director Eric Peter Schwartz and GUP for picking a new script to produce. This is the North American premiere, so you have never seen this done before. In fact, even the author is excited about this and will be at a special showing and reception on May 16th. (If you would like to be a part of it, and I suggest that you should, go here for more info.) Mr. Schwartz is also to be recognized for some very solid direction. Pacing was great, characterizations marvelous, movement and focus spot on…it was a very well-directed show.

Of course the stand-out performances of the night were those of Pat Able as Dr. Brewer and Scott Surowiecki as prot. Able was a little hesitant right at the start of the show, I’m afraid maybe some his lines weren’t as solid as they should have been, but he was soon on a roll and he played the part of the psychiatrist brilliantly. It was one of the more natural portrayals I’ve seen lately. Surowiecki’s characterization of prot as a very one-dimensional, nothing-could-bother-him alien from another planet was also great. And when those personality changes in the script happened Surowiecki made them strong and almost shocking. The hypnosis scenes were outstanding for both actors and made me wish for more of those insights into prot’s head. prot is a fascinating character, and Surowiecki captures the intrigue wonderfully.

Betty (Cate), Ernie (Russ Devereaux), Chuck (Steve Lord), Bess (Angela Bend) and Giselle (Kathy Richardson) all gave good, strong performances as well. As I’ve already said, Mr. Schwartz obviously spent a lot time making sure each of them had developed a strong character that the audience could identify. However, the only one to receive applause after his monologue was Howie (Peter Lemongelli). And boy, did he deserve it! He was funny and touching all at the same time, and considering the monologue is about parents and this was Mother’s Day weekend, I think it hit home with a lot of the audience members, too. Lemongelli took some risks, though, getting right into the audience, breaching the 4th wall completely, and the audience responded. They raised their hands to answer. They squirmed when he hit a little too close to home. They felt his failure. And they couldn’t stop themselves from applauding as he exited the stage.

This is a hard show to say specifically what things I would have changed. The non-acting parts, like set, lights, costumes, were all about what you would expect for the setting. GUP uses the same basic set for every show, and it was dressed appropriately for a mental hospital. Scene changes were quick and efficient. I didn’t notice any technical glitches. In general, the technical side was very good. And the things I didn’t like as much in the acting were really down to personal preference in how it was portrayed and not because it wasn’t done well. For example, I found that occasionally prot’s sing-song way of talking was a bit irritating to me, but as it fit with the rest of the character it’s not really something I want to criticize. Or another example was Betty’s southern accent. It was the only accent on stage and as such stood out a little too much in my opinion. However, Cate did it well and owned it, so again I don’t actually want to criticize it. As I said, it’s more personal preference than execution.

I did have one bone to pick with the script itself, though, and if someone can answer this for me, please do!! Why is Dr. Brewer so concerned that prot says he is leaving on a specific day? If Dr. Brewer really believes he has MPD and is only human, why would he buy into the whole “I’m leaving in two weeks” thing and actually attend a farewell party for prot? Why does he get so desperate to solve the mystery before that date? To me, it doesn’t fit with the rest of Dr. Brewer’s character and doesn’t make sense.

This was another outstanding performance of a little known show. I highly recommend seeing it, especially if you are a sci-fi type. It’s not about the special effects, but about the acting and there is a lot here to admire. And if I didn’t already have five million things happening next Sunday, I’d go back for the chance to talk to the author. I hope many of you are able to advantage of that opportunity.