Brewer brings back the 357-year-old visitor from another planet who first appeared in his debut novel, K-Pax (1995).

In 1985, slaughterhouse worker Robert Porter returned home to find his wife and daughter murdered by an intruder, whom Porter subsequently killed before attempting to drown himself. While a patient at Manhattan Psychiatric Institute, Porter was invaded by a being named "prot"—or, for those who take the psychiatric view, he split off an alter ego and became a divided personality. Then prot returned to the planet K-Pax, and Porter became catatonic, remaining in a fetal position for five years. Now prot inhabits Robert again and imparts such pearls of wisdom as, "Many humans feel sorry for the dolphins who are trapped in tuna nets. Who weeps for the tuna?" Will Porter's psychiatrist, Gene Brewer, get him out of the catatonic ward and on the long road to recovery? Astronomers who earlier had found their understanding of space revised by prot's ideas now want to go on mining him for new insights. Prot tells Brewer that he plans to return to K-Pax with a hundred humans, but in the meanwhile speaks easily with many otherwise intractable patients, including Lou, a black homosexual who's "pregnant" and should deliver in three months. Under hypnosis the mute Robert reveals his submerged past; he really wants to get well, although he now has two additional personalities named Paul and Harry. Prot talks to animals on a visit to the zoo—or does he? How does prot, on a TV show, actually disappear and reappear across the stage? Can Brewer, helped by Robert, integrate all of his patient's personalities?

Will you wonder if the very smart prot is real when you finish? Only if you're as young as Drew Barrymore in E.T.: The Extra-Terrestrial.

Are we not men? We are—well, ask Bigfoot, as Brooks does in this delightful yarn, following on his bestseller World War Z(2006).

A zombie apocalypse is one thing. A volcanic eruption is quite another, for, as the journalist who does a framing voice-over narration for Brooks’ latest puts it, when Mount Rainier popped its cork, “it was the psychological aspect, the hyperbole-fueled hysteria that had ended up killing the most people.” Maybe, but the sasquatches whom the volcano displaced contributed to the statistics, too, if only out of self-defense. Brooks places the epicenter of the Bigfoot war in a high-tech hideaway populated by the kind of people you might find in a Jurassic Park franchise: the schmo who doesn’t know how to do much of anything but tries anyway, the well-intentioned bleeding heart, the know-it-all intellectual who turns out to know the wrong things, the immigrant with a tough backstory and an instinct for survival. Indeed, the novel does double duty as a survival manual, packed full of good advice—for instance, try not to get wounded, for “injury turns you from a giver to a taker. Taking up our resources, our time to care for you.” Brooks presents a case for making room for Bigfoot in the world while peppering his narrative with timely social criticism about bad behavior on the human side of the conflict: The explosion of Rainier might have been better forecast had the president not slashed the budget of the U.S. Geological Survey, leading to “immediate suspension of the National Volcano Early Warning System,” and there’s always someone around looking to monetize the natural disaster and the sasquatch-y onslaught that follows. Brooks is a pro at building suspense even if it plays out in some rather spectacularly yucky episodes, one involving a short spear that takes its name from “the sucking sound of pulling it out of the dead man’s heart and lungs.” Grossness aside, it puts you right there on the scene.

A tasty, if not always tasteful, tale of supernatural mayhem that fans of King and Crichton alike will enjoy.

A tightly wound caseworker is pushed out of his comfort zone when he’s sent to observe a remote orphanage for magical children.

Linus Baker loves rules, which makes him perfectly suited for his job as a midlevel bureaucrat working for the Department in Charge of Magical Youth, where he investigates orphanages for children who can do things like make objects float, who have tails or feathers, and even those who are young witches. Linus clings to the notion that his job is about saving children from cruel or dangerous homes, but really he’s a cog in a government machine that treats magical children as second-class citizens. When Extremely Upper Management sends for Linus, he learns that his next assignment is a mission to an island orphanage for especially dangerous kids. He is to stay on the island for a month and write reports for Extremely Upper Management, which warns him to be especially meticulous in his observations. When he reaches the island, he meets extraordinary kids like Talia the gnome, Theodore the wyvern, and Chauncey, an amorphous blob whose parentage is unknown. The proprietor of the orphanage is a strange but charming man named Arthur, who makes it clear to Linus that he will do anything in his power to give his charges a loving home on the island. As Linus spends more time with Arthur and the kids, he starts to question a world that would shun them for being different, and he even develops romantic feelings for Arthur. Lambda Literary Award–winning author Klune (The Art of Breathing, 2019, etc.) has a knack for creating endearing characters, and readers will grow to love Arthur and the orphans alongside Linus. Linus himself is a lovable protagonist despite his prickliness, and Klune aptly handles his evolving feelings and morals. The prose is a touch wooden in places, but fans of quirky fantasy will eat it up.

A breezy and fun contemporary fantasy.