Eryue He’s Emperor Yongzheng (serialised between 1990-92) is a fictionalised life story of the early Qing emperor. The second part of a trilogy that also covers his father and son, it was adapted into a landmark television series. Andy Hei, an antiques dealer and founder of the Fine Art Asia and Ink Asia art fairs, who followed his father into the business, explains how the book changed his life.

I read Emperor Yongzheng after the first traditional Chinese version was published in Taiwan [in 2000]. I was travelling a lot between Hong Kong, New York and London, and I always carried the book with me.

I hadn’t read any of Eryue He’s books but when I picked up this one, it was so good that I couldn’t put it down. I read it two or three times, then I read the first one in the series [Kangxi Emperor, 1984-88] and then the third [Qianlong Emperor, 1994-96]. They’re about the three generations of the early Qing dynasty, when China was very strong.

I’m a big fan of historical fiction. My background is in Chinese antiques dealing, but this has been a personal interest of mine since I was in high school. The book really flipped my understanding of this emperor and society versus what I’d read in textbooks. My impression of this emperor changed from a bad one to a very good one.

Many themes of the book can also be seen in modern Chinese history. For example, China was at its peak, then it hit rock bottom. How? China still faces some of the same problems, such as corruption and the buying of offices.

Yongzheng was emperor only for a few years (from 1723 to 1735) – his father and son each spent more than 60 years in the position – but he worked hard, turn­ing the country away from corruption and dealing with problems in the political system.

I was impressed when (former premier) Zhu Rongji recommended this book. Zhu even went to the author’s funeral a few months ago (Eryue He, whose real name was Ling Jiefang, died in December, aged 73).

The lively way Eryue He describes the characters reminds me of (classic 14th-century Chinese historical novel) Romance of the Three Kingdoms. Some of the scenes remind me of stories I heard from my father. He came from Beijing to Hong Kong in 1949, and often told me about the lives of people in earlier days.

I was surprised to find out that the lives of ordinary people didn't change much from the early Qing period to the founding of the Republic of China – and then there were suddenly huge changes. And some things the book describes, such as details on a table or a bed, are (on the sort of items) my father dealt with and what I still deal with today.

My father wasn’t a patient man, so he didn’t read the book, but he loved the TV show when I introduced it to him.