Month: December 2018

New year’s statement by Wang Dan (2)

In my posting a couple of days ago, the autocorrect removed the all-important 不 in the phrase 真人不露相, 露相不真人.

Scott Savitt <scottsavitt@gmail.com>

China thwarts US promotion of American culture on campuses

Source: NYT (12/30/18)

China Thwarts U.S. Effort to Promote American Culture on Campuses

By Jane Perlez and Luz Ding

BEIJING — The American ambassador to China, Terry Branstad, wanted to make what in most nations would have been a routine trip.

One of his favorite schools, Iowa State University, had opened a center to promote American culture in an inland Chinese province, and the laid-back former governor of Iowa was eager to take questions from Chinese students.

The center’s program, largely financed by the State Department, was deliberately benign so as not to offend Chinese government sensibilities. Politics was off the agenda. English lessons focused on fashion, music and sports. An essay-writing contest was called “Bald Eagle & Panda” after well-known fauna in both countries. Continue reading China thwarts US promotion of American culture on campuses →

Eryue He dies at 73

Source: China Daily (12/17/18)

Literati mourn author of ‘Emperor’ series

By Yang Yang | China Daily

Elites from the world of literature and fans nationwide have been paying tribute to novelist Ling Jiefang, better known by his pen name Eryue He, who died on Saturday morning at age 73.

Ling, who was dean of the College of Liberal Arts at Zhengzhou University in Henan province, was best known for his Emperor series, which was released between 1989 and 1996, and consists of 5 million characters.

After his death, fans shared a couplet－a traditional form of two-line poetry－that includes the line, “Er yue he kai ling jie fang”, which translates as “The Yellow River’s frozen surface breaks in February, the ice is liberated.”

The poem, which quickly went viral, cleverly combines the author’s birth name and pen name. Continue reading Eryue He dies at 73 →

China discourse report 2018

Source: China Media Project (12/30/18)

CHINA DISCOURSE REPORT 2018

by Qian Gang

For 2018, we could say that the most important testing point (测试点) in China’s political discourse arena was the contraction of President Xi Jinping’s political “banner term,” or qizhiyu (旗帜语), “Xi Jinping Thought of Socialism With Chinese Characteristics for a New Era” (习近平中国特色社会主义思想), which was formally introduced at the 19th National Congress of the Chinese Communist Party in November 2017.

What do I mean by contraction?

This long and unwieldy political phrase is meant to be Xi Jinping’s political brand, forming and consolidating his legacy, and it is set apart from the banner terms of Xi’s predecessors, Hu Jintao and Jiang Zemin, by including his name, an important mark of Xi Jinping’s power. But to become a phrase on par with previous legacy phrases like Mao Zedong Thought (毛泽东思想) or Deng Xiaoping Theory (邓小平理论), both of which “crown” (冠名) top Party leaders, this latest banner term would need to undergo a process of contraction. And of course the contraction we should expect is “Xi Jinping Thought,” which was strategically imbedded in the expanded “Xi Jinping Thought of Socialism With Chinese Characteristics for a New Era.” Continue reading China discourse report 2018 →

Mental hygiene

Posted by: Anne Henochowicz <annemh2@gmail.com>

Source: Aeon (12/17/18)

Collective psychiatry

Chinese psychiatry remains committed to the political ideal of mental hygiene, long after its discrediting in the West

By Emily Baum

[Emily Baum is an associate professor in history at the University of California, Irvine. She is the author of The Invention of Madness: State, Society, and the Insane in Modern China (2018). Published in association with The University of Chicago Press an Aeon Strategic Partner]

In English, the term ‘mental hygiene’ likely sounds a bit stale. Having gained a brief but widespread ascendancy in the first half of the 20th century, the phrase gradually faded from popular memory and was replaced by the expression ‘mental health’ in the 1950s. In Chinese, however, mental hygiene is still alive and well. Translated as xinli weisheng or jingshen weisheng, the phrase has been a mainstay in Chinese psychiatric policy for close to a full century.

At its most basic level, mental hygiene refers to the branch of medicine that aspires to prevent psychiatric disorders. The term was first coined in the late-19th century and became commonplace by the turn of the 20th. In contrast to mental health (the expression used by the World Health Organization today), early mental hygiene consisted of a prophylactic approach to insanity through education and eugenics, rather than a holistic emphasis on self-actualisation and self-care. Mental hygienists, promising an easy fix to mental illness, gained almost universal support by the 1920s and ’30s. Yet the Second World War changed the course of their trajectory. Following the development of antipsychotic drugs and the discovery of Nazi war crimes, the discipline became both medically irrelevant and politically unpalatable. Continue reading Mental hygiene →

New year’s statement by Wang Dan (1)

I’m the translator. I didn’t ask not to be identified [nor to be identified]. Wang Dan has a new think tank: http://www.dialoguechina.com. It’s in that capacity that he issued the statement. You can post this info, I don’t care if I’m credited, 真人不露相，露相不真人.

新年快樂，

Scott Savitt <scottsavitt@gmail.com>

New year’s statement by Wang Dan

Not sure about the original source of this statement by Wang Dan, but apparently the translator has asked not to be identified.–Kirk

New Year statement by Wang Dan 王丹

元旦聲明: 重建記憶，重新出發—-關於紀念“六四”三十週年的呼籲

New Year’s Statement by Wang Dan

Revive Memory, Start Anew—An Appeal Regarding the Commemoration of the Thirtieth Anniversary of the 1989 Tiananmen Square Democracy Protests and June 4 Military Crackdown

今年，是八九民主運動和中共血腥的“六四”鎮壓的三十週年。我們這些當年那場運動的當事者，那場屠殺的見證人，在此對全球所有關心中國發展，所有期待中國能夠實現民主憲政的朋友發出公開呼籲如下：

This year marks the 30th anniversary of the bloody repression of the 1989 Tiananmen Square democracy protests with the military massacre of June 4, 1989. Those of us who participated in the movement and witnessed the massacre issue a public appeal to all who care about China’s development and hope that democratic constitutionalism can be achieved. Continue reading New year’s statement by Wang Dan →

Mass arrests in Xinjiang continue (1)

Follow-up on my post about the targeted arrests of Uighur musicians:

Today the Concerned Scholars of Xinjiang, @XJscholars reminds us [https://twitter.com/XJscholars/status/1078636936162492416] about the pop singer ABLAJAN AWUT AYUP, 33, disappeared into the camps since Feb 2018. He is especially prominent for his Uyghur language songs for children. They give a fabulous example from Youtube:

Uyghur Song 2016 | Soyvmlvk Muellim | By : Ablajan Awut Ayup. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fFRolBeXHEc

The reason Chinese authorities is cracking down on indigenous musicians like this, is they want to destroy the culture. This is a figure that inspires pride and joy in being Uyghur and happy — and BTW, perfectly happy to include Han Chinese “pengyou” and foreign English, in the images.

And a viable, healthy, confident, strong Uighur identity is precisely what can’t be allowed now under the ultra-extremist Chinese regime. Harrassing cultural icons and disappearing them goes with the mass arresting of parents and grandparents and hauling the “orphaned” children off to Chinese-only orphanages.

–cf. also today, another article about how as one small part of the state terror campaign, they’re painting over all bilingual signs in Uighur on university campuses, so that there will be CHINESE ONLY. See pictures:

https://bitterwinter.org/the-orwellian-life-in-xinjiang-campuses/

Magnus Fiskesjö <magnus.fiskesjo@cornell.edu>

Top reality show of 2018: Dunk of China

Source: The World of Chinese (12/27/18)

Top Reality Show of 2018: Dunk of China

The smash-hit variety show combined basketball with pop culture to lure millions into watching

By Eduardo Baptista (苏昂)

As 2019 approaches, so does the usual array of lists and round-ups for the dwindling year. In the spirit of variety, The World of Chinese has endeavored to chronicle the countdowns that others don’t. Try elsewhere (or, indeed, everywhere) for your everyday 2018 listicles—here you will find the stories, characters and pratfalls that the rest of the English-language media has largely overlooked.

“A basketball variety show?” recalls Zhu Mingzhen, a 22-year old finalist in the first season of Dunk of China, a web-based reality series which aired on Youku.com between August 25 and November 1. “It sounded like a scam to me.”

The pairing of judges [and singers] Jay Chou and Li Yifeng, though, along with CBA star Guo Ai Lun and revered Taiwanese-American NBA player Jeremy Lin would earn Dunk of China an 8.4 rating on Douban for its first season. Zhu reckons Chou and Li’s participation “converted a lot of Chinese girls into basketball fans.” Continue reading Top reality show of 2018: Dunk of China →

Mass arrests in Xinjiang continue

The arrests of indigenous musicians continue as part of the Chinese government’s targeting of Uighur (Uyghur) and other cultures for destruction, in Xinjiang, by way of mass-arresting famous indigenous cultural icons such as artists, scholars, clerics, poets, writers, publishers, and so on, evidently as a way to humiliate and break the spirit of the people.

A stream of reports on such disappearances/arrests has emerged over the last few months; one count already places the number of disappeared/arrested cultural icons well over 200.

They now include famous musicians such as Sanubar Tursun (Seneber Tursun), 49, reportedly sentenced to 5 yrs imprisonment. She is a folk musician and Muqam singer who performed at the opening ceremony of 2015 World Music Shanghai, and is described as the preeminent Uyghur female singer-songwriter. She has collaborated on stage with world musicians such as Chinese pipa player Wu Man. (There are no reports of expressions of solidarity from Wu Man).

Here is a movie about Sanubar Tursun and Wu Man’s collaboration just a few years ago: “Wu Man and Sanubar Tursun: Musical encounters on Central Asian Frontiers”, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MNrBAwjEkUI&feature=youtu.be Continue reading Mass arrests in Xinjiang continue →

Chthonic live streams to HK after visa rejection

Source: Focus Taiwan (12/26/18)

Taiwan band Chthonic live streams to HK after visa rejection

By William Yen

Taipei, Dec. 26 (CNA) A Taiwanese heavy metal band performed for their fans in Hong Kong by live video streaming a performance Tuesday, after their frontman, a pro-Taiwan independence lawmaker, was denied a work visa to perform in the special administrative region.

Freddy Lim (林昶佐), a legislator from Taiwan’s New Power Party and his band Chthonic jammed over Facebook Live with Canto-pop star Denise Ho on the second to last day of a music festival the band was invited to perform at. Continue reading Chthonic live streams to HK after visa rejection →

Nonfiction stories of 2018

Source: Sup China (12/25/18)

Chinese Corner: Best Of 2018 — The Nonfiction Stories That Captured China’s Reading Public

By JIAYUN FENG

This year, SupChina launched a new weekly column called “Chinese Corner,” where we introduce and review interesting nonfiction writing from the Chinese internet. A little more than six months into its existence, we’ve built a solid collection of impressive investigative pieces, thought-provoking commentaries, and emotion-filled personal essays that chronicle some of the biggest events in 2018 and illuminate how the public reacted to them.

We’ve selected our favorite articles from the past six months and broken them down into categories. Just scrolling through the topics provides a good sense of what Chinese people read and discussed in 2018 (sometimes quite different from what overseas media focus on — though this generally applies more to educated, middle-class Chinese). If you read Chinese yourself, we think these are among the most interesting essays from the past year to help you understand what is on the Chinese public’s mind heading into 2019.

Happy reading!

Best profile writing:

The “Chinese medicine god” who is in doubt 令人生疑的“中国药神”

Diagnosed with leukemia, Lu Yong 陆勇 ditched his job, bankrupted himself, and became a drug smuggler. This summer, his legendary tale was told in the hit movie Dying to Survive (我不是药神 wǒ bùshì yào shén). But his real-life story is way more complicated than what’s shown on the big screen.

靳锦 | GQ报道 | July 5, 2018

Zhang Haichao: Enslaved by a lung “肺奴”张海超

Zhang Haichao 张海超 lost a lung from his construction job. But he was lucky enough to get a new one.

王瑞锋 | 新京报 | July 24, 2018

The evolution of Yang Chaoyue: This is not my world 杨超越变形记：这不是我的世界

In a new age of entertainment, awfulness can be the key to success.

洪蔚琳 | GQ报道 | June 24, 2018

Hu Bo: The absent one 胡波：缺席的人

Inside the sad life of Hu Bo 胡波, a gifted filmmaker who died tragically young.

陈楚汉 莫南 | 谷雨实验室 | November 17, 2018

The death of ‘Brother Long’ and the underworld in Kunshan he once ruled “被反杀者”刘海龙的昆山江湖

A local gangster got fatally slashed by a random cyclist over a minor dispute. His death became a curious case for Chinese internet users.

王一然 | 后窗工作室 | September 2, 2018

Continue reading Nonfiction stories of 2018 →

Bulletin of the Institute of Modern History, no. 101

The latest issue of Bulletin of the Institute of Modern History, Academia Sinica, Vol. 101 is now available online at:http://www.mh.sinica.edu.tw/bulletins.aspx

Contents

[Articles]

Casting the Territory: A Study of Two Cabinets of Coins from the Qianlong Period in the State Hermitage Museum in St. Petersburg

By Lai Yu-chih

Wang Guowei and Hu Shi on Literary Revolution

By Joseffin Sae-Chen

Lessons from Japan’s Governance in Taiwan: An Analysis of Fujian’s Official Taiwan Surveys and Investigations, 1911-1933

By Lin Wenkai

[Book Reviews]

Wu Jen-shu, “Paradise” after Disaster: City Life in Suzhou during the Anti-Japanese War, Reviewed by An Shaofan

Posted by: Jhih-hong JHENG <bimhas60@gmail.com>

Translators needed

Dear List Members,

We are looking for some more scholars to translate introductory notes and footnotes from English to Chinese. The book is on traditional Chinese literature, and it is in English. We are working on a Chinese version of the book. If you would like to contribute, for each passage, you need to help find the original Chinese text according to the original Chinese title and the English translation, and then translate the English introductory notes and footnotes into Chinese. If you are interested in the project, please contact me at Liyan.Shen@outlook.com for more information.

Liyan Shen