When I visited the "Dragon chip" team at the Chinese Academy of Sciences, I saw Party members put a sign on their desks that read: "I'm a Party member". This is a reminder that they hold themselves to the standards of a Communist Party member and are accountable to the nation when conducting scientific research.

Fang Xin, deputy Party chief of the Chinese Academy of Sciences

A prosperous society should give rise to good literature. As a Party member, I hope I can live up to the social responsibilities of a writer. Our harmonious society is derived from thousands of years of Chinese tradition and has become an integral component of today's culture. We should understand it, extol it and promote it.

Ling Jiefang, a.k.a. February River (Eryue He), a best-selling author of historical novels

The core of scientific development is human needs. When the economy grows, we must use the fruits to improve the living conditions of the people. We have 40,000 people working here as migrant workers. We are building 978 residential units for them. If you are a farmer but have a business in our county, you'll be eligible for one.

Jiang Zhinong, Party secretary of Pingguo County, Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region

In recent years, coal mines have invested a lot in safety, but accidents still happen. It is high time we implement new safety guidelines.

Yang Cunzhi, team leader of Shanxi Tongmei Group, who works 24 days a month in a mine

Our roots are in the countryside. We must serve the farmers and meet their needs. The responsibility is heavy, and I should speak more for the rural public.

Wu Xiufen, Party secretary of Tianjin Dongli Rural Cooperative Bank, which has helped 2,293 farmers secure small loans

I want to set up a high school for girls that does not charge tuition. All the girls who live in the mountains will be able to go there. That's my dream. People here are poor because they don't have much education. We pin our hope on the 17th Party congress that there will be preferential policies for these kids.

Zhang Guimei, a teacher at Yunnan Lijiang Huaping County Ethnic High School, who also heads an orphanage

(China Daily October 18, 2007)