In lieu of an abstract, here is a brief excerpt of the content:

His publications forcefully show that David Grose was a remarkable scholar of Roman glass, but he was also remarkably loyal to the colleagues who worked in the same vineyard and the institutions he and they served. He took on the study of the glass from Cosa at the invitation of its chief excavator, the late Frank Edward Brown, in 1969, not long before financial difficulties interrupted the regular flow of publications by the American Academy in Rome that included the results of these excavations. Despite the climate of uncertainty, however, he persevered with the Cosa glass, as he did with other projects, even though it did not receive the ultima manus before his death in 2004. That was to come from the Director of the Corning Museum of Glass, David B. Whitehouse, who had generously agreed to see it readied for publication thereafter. But a cruel stroke of fate suddenly deprived the world of late Roman and medieval studies of one of its champions, cuius desiderio etiam nunc angimur, in early 2013. In these circumstances, the Cosa glass is being published as written and so reflects the state of the discipline at that time. It also reflects the author’s long and profitable association with Professor Jennifer Price (Durham University) from the early 1970s until his death. Her contributions to the work in gestation were many and various. Of the originality and abiding relevance of David’s work she has written as follows: This work was commenced at a time when the study of glass from archaeological sites was in its infancy, and no comparable assemblages had yet been published from Roman towns in Italy or elsewhere in the western provinces. It is now difficult to comprehend that even the forms of glass vessels were then not widely recognised, and that there was no tradition of studying techniques of manufacture and decoration or of standard terms to describe glass fragments. Thus David’s study of the Cosa glass was truly pioneering and a major advance in the subject. He had to devise a suitable means of sorting, examining, recording and identifying the large quantity of very broken glass vessels before he could begin to set the material in context. To a great extent he invented his own methods, with guidance from Donald Harden and Gladys Weinberg. Despite the near-absence of comparable published data, David’s approach to the study of the Cosa glass was confident and mature. He wrote fluently and the finished manuscript demonstrates excellent scholarship and wide research, presenting a detailed study of a diverse body of material surviving from more than a millennium of occupation. His acute observations and his careful interpretation of problem pieces were also ahead of his time. From the outset he recognised the value of studying fragments in settlements as well as vessels deposited in burials, and was innovative in demonstrating that examination of groups of glass in closed deposits could lead to the better understanding of their economic and social significance as well as their chronology. Preface PREFACE xiv David rapidly became a leading authority on Hellenistic and early Roman glass. His work always aimed to show what the study of glass could contribute to wider issues of social and economic activity, investigating topics then much debated but now commonplace, such as the western evidence for the introduction of blown glass, and the formation and innovative nature of the early Roman glass industry. His argument that glass production became an important industry in Italy during the reign of Augustus is now taken for granted, and much of our current understanding of the diversity and complexity of the traditions of glass production in the early empire has also developed from his writings in the 1970s and 1980s. The Hellenistic, Roman, and Medieval Glass from Cosa will now take its place as a foundation publication among his works. Professor Price also made suggestions for the improvement of this final product, including the listing of the most important works on Italian glass that have appeared since Grose’s own publication of the ancient glass in the Toledo Museum of Art in 1989, and Katherine Larson (Ph.D. University of Michigan, 2015) has been most important to realizing this end. Karol Wight and Tom Knotts of the Corning Museum of Glass, along with Elizabeth Whitehouse, have also rendered great service in tracking down materials pertinent to the work that came to the museum along with other papers of David Grose after his death. These efforts...