Address

Kottur Sri Kozhundeesar Temple, Kottur. Mannargudi Circle. Thiruvarur District.PIN – 614 708 PH:04367-294640

Diety

Kozhundeeswarar-(Akraparameswarar) Amman:Thenar Mozhi Ammai- Thenambikai, Madhura Bashini

Introduction

Kottur Kozhundeeswarar Temple is a Hindu temple dedicated to Lord Shiva located at Kottur in Thiruvarur District of Tamilnadu. Presiding Deity is Swayambu Lingam known as Kozhundeeswarar / Sameevaneswarar / Akraparameswarar and is facing west. Mother is called as Mathupaashini / Thenar Mozhiyal / Thenambal / Madhura vachanambika and is facing east. The historical name of the place is Indirapuram. It is one of the shrines of the 276Paadal PetraSthalams – Shiva Sthalams glorified in theearly medieval Thevaram poems by Tamil Saivite Nayanar Tirugnanasambandar.There are two temples in this village; the one on the west side has been glorified by the Thevaram while the other is praised by Thiruvisaippa (Keezhkotur Mani Ambalam). This is the 228th Devaram Paadal Petra Shiva Sthalam and 111th Sthalam on the south side of River Cauvery in Chozha Nadu. This Shivastalam is located in the vicinity of Thirukkalar. Sthala Vriksham is Vanni tree. There are nine Theerthams for the temple, like Mulliaru, Sivagangai, Brahma, Siva, Amudhu, Indra, Vishwakarma, Mandai and Aramba Theertham. Thala Virutcham : Vanni Theertham : 9 Theerthas – Mulliyaru, Sivaganga, Parama, Shiva Mandai, Amudha, Indra, Vishwakarma and Aramba

Puranic Significance

Indra made Vajrayudha from the back bone of Sage Thatheesi: Demon Vruddhasura was harassing the Devas in a terrible way. Their king Indira appealed to Lord Brahmma for protection. He said that Indira had to get the back bone of Sage Thatheesi, make a Vajrayudha weapon of it and should apply it on the demon and that alone could kill him. Lord Brahmma also explained the secret of the strength of the back bone of the sage. Before joining the churning the milk ocean, all the Devas entrusted their weapons with the sage. The sage simply put all their weapons safely in his mouth and continued his penance then. All the weapons melted and merged with his back bone making it miraculously strong. When Indira approached the sage and expressed his purpose and wish, the sage calmly parted with his back bone. Indira killed the demon with the weapon but incurred the Brahmahatti Dosha the impact of the highest sin. Indira approached his Guru for solution. He advised him to go to earth and perform Shiva puja and that he would find a Shivalinga at a place under a Vanni tree made of drops of nectar. Guru also advised Indira to create a spring and perform abishek to Lord with the water then. Indira followed the advice of the Guru scrupulously and freed himself from the sin. As Indira worshipped Lord here, the place was named Indirapuram and also Kottur as his white elephant Iravadham drew a line (kodu in Tamil) in the place. Celestial Dancer Ramba performed severe penance here: Noted dancer of the celestial world Ramba was cursed to go to Earth for some wrongs she committed. She performed severe penance facing the Lord of the temple pressing her left leg, bending the right and placing the left hand on the right leg and the right hand on the head surrounded by burning fire to go back to her place. Worshipped by Devas, Brahma, Indra, Airavatam and Indrasena Airaavateeswaram: The divine elephant Airavatam is associated with this temple and hence the name Airaavateeswaram.

Beliefs

Rituals for ancestors can be performed in this place. Devotees perform abishek, archanas and offer vastras to Lord.

Special Features

The Temple is having three tiered Rajagopuram and is facing west. There are two inner corridors, Prakara in this temple. At the entrance, Dwajasthambam and Nandi in front facing main sanctum can be seen. Presiding Deity is Swayambu Lingam known as Kozhundeeswarar / Sameevaneswarar / Akraparameswarar and is facing west. Mother is called as Mathupaashini / Thenar Mozhiyal / Thenambal / Madhura vachanambika and is facing east. Shiva faces West and Ambal faces East in the Upadesam Sannidhi formation.February-March. Narthana Ganapathy, Dhakshinamoorthy, Lingothpavar, Brahma, Durgai and Sandeswarar are the Koshta Idols. Natarajar, Sivakami and Manickavasagar Idols are found in the Sabha Mandapam. These Idols are found in a village Mayilaerupuram during ploughing. Sthala Vriksham is Vanni tree. There are nine Theerthams for the temple, like Mulliaru, Sivagangai, Brahma, Siva, Amudhu, Indra, Vishwakarma, Mandai and Aramba Theertham. There are shrines for Vinayaka, Muruga, Viswanathar,Visalakshi, Vishnu with his consorts, Chandran, Naalvar, Lord Muruga, Rambha in penancing style, Gajalakshmi, Bhairava, Dakshinamurthy, Lingodhbava, Akoraveerabadra, Nandikeswara, Vallaba Ganapathi, Nataraja, Brahmma, Mahishasuramardhini, Navagrahas Umamaheswarar, Arthanareeswarar, Meenakshi Sundareswarar and Chandikeswarar. At around 1 km east of this temple there is a Thiruvisaippa temple, sung by Karuvur Thevar. The main deity is called Iravatheeswarar. This is the place where the bell of Airavatam, the elephant fell. Aani Pournami is the day on which the Lord performed his dance.

Festivals

Six worship services are offered in this temple each day. Vaikasi Visakam Brahmmotsavam (May-June), Aadi Pooram (July-August), Navarathri (September-October), Karthikai (November-December) and Vaikasi Visagam are the festivals celebrated in the temple. An image of Arthanareeswarar can be seen on the Shivalingam when it is bathed with milk, during festival days such as Maasi Magam.

Century/Period/Age

1000-2000 years old

Managed By

Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments (HRCE)

Nearest Bus Station

Kottur

Nearest Railway Station

Thiruvarur

Nearest Airport

Trichy