Croatian Radiotelevision (Croatian: Hrvatska radiotelevizija, HRT) is a Croatian public broadcasting company. It operates several radio and television channels, over a domestic transmitter network as well as satellite. As of 2002 , 70% of HRT's funding comes from broadcast user fees with each house in Croatia required to pay 79 HRK, kuna, per month for a single television), with the remainder being made up from advertising.[3]

Croatian Radiotelevision has three organizational units, three sister companies - the Croatian Radio (Hrvatski radio), the Croatian Television (Hrvatska televizija) and Music Production (Glazbena proizvodnja).

Contents

1 History

2 Television

2.1 Channels

2.2 Popular TV programs

2.2.1 Former shows

2.2.2 Upcoming shows

3 Currently airing

3.1 Internationally created shows currently broadcast by HRT (July 2011)

3.2 Nationally created shows currently broadcast by HRT (July 2010)

3.3 Coming soon on HRT

4 Radio

5 See also

6 References

7 External links

History

Croatian Radiotelevision is a direct successor of Zagreb Radiostation (Radio stanica Zagreb) that started broadcasting on 15 May 1926. During the first 14 years of its existence, Zagreb Radiostation was owned by a private corporation Radio Zagreb which was nationalized on 1 May 1940. During the Independent State of Croatia, the station was known as Hrvatski krugoval. After World War II it began to operate as a state owned Radio Station.

Zagreb Radiostation was the first public broadcasting facility in South East European area, including countries of former Yugoslavia.

At the end of the first year of operation, Radio Zagreb company had little over four thousand subscribers.

On the 30th anniversary of the establishment of Zagreb Radiostation, on 15 May 1956, the first television programme was broadcast from the transmitter built at Sljeme. For the next two years this was the only TV broadcasting service in the southeast European area.

In June 1990, the Croatian Parliament renamed the company from Radiotelevizija Zagreb to Hrvatska radiotelevizija. On 1 January 1993, HRT was admitted as a full active member of the European Broadcasting Union.[2]

The television programme was aired under the name "Croatian Television", Hrvatska televizija (HTV) between 1990 and 1994. Since then, the current name is used. The radio broadcast unit is still referred to as "Croatian Radio", Hrvatski radio (HR).

Television

Channels

HRT 1 (or Prvi program) - HRT's primary TV channel, previously known as TVZ 1.

HRT 2 (or Drugi program) - HRT's secondary channel, nowdays primarily used for sports broadcasts and entertainment program.

HRT 3 - family channel (coming soon)

HRT 4 - news and documentary channel (coming soon)

HRT plus - HRT's satellite channel, which is also transmitted via cable and IPTV.

Slika Hrvatske - Free-to-air international channel, broadcasting an 8-hour programming block aimed at the Croatian diaspora, on air during the non-broadcasting hours of HRT Plus.

In the 1980s there was a third channel called Z3 and later HTV Z3. It was taken off air on 16 September 1991 when its main transmitter, the Sljeme TV tower, was damaged in an air raid. On 7 November 1994 the channel came back on air, this time called HRT 3. The channel was later shut down with its frequency de-nationalized and out up for lease in a public tender in 2004 (it has been used by RTL Televizija ever since).

Popular TV programs

Dnevnik HRT ("Daily News"), popular midday, evening and midnight news program

Nedjeljom u dva ("Sundays at two o'clock"), weekly talk show

Dobro jutro, Hrvatska ("Good morning, Croatia"), mosaic morning show

Hrvatska uživo ("Croatia live"), mosaic afternoon show

Transfer, show about the alternative culture and arts (visual arts, music and web culture)

U istom loncu ("Ready Steady Cook"), cooking game show

Kod Ane ("At Ana's"), cooking show

Zvijezde pjevaju ("Just the Two of Us"), big Saturday singing show

Ples sa zvijezdama ("Dancing with the Stars"), Saturday dancing show

TV kalendar, long-running daily historical documentary television series

Former shows

Male tajne velikih majstora kuhinje ("Small secrets of big chefs") (cooking show), aired in the 1980s

Kviskoteka (quiz show) hosted by Oliver Mlakar, aired in the 1980s and 1990s, later briefly aried on Nova TV

Slika na sliku ("Frame on frame") (political magazine), aired in the 1990s

Upitnik ("Question mark") (quiz show) hosted by Joško Lokas, aired in the 2000s, later briefly aired on Nova TV

Željka Ogresta i gosti ("Željka Ogresta and guests") (talk show), aired in the start of 1990s and later in start of 2000s

Motrišta ("Points of view") (political informative magazine), aired in the 1990s

Turbo Limach Show (kids Saturday show) hosted by Siniša Cmrk

Dan za danom ("Day after day"), mosaic afternoon show

The Pyramid (Croatian TV series), weekly show hosted by Željka Ogresta, winner of Rose d'Or (Golden Rose) aired 2004-2008.

Upcoming shows

Dancing on Ice

Big Saturday Live (Saturday night show)

Friends (children's Sunday program)

Talks with Coffee (talk show)

Sunday Afternoon

School work (educational school morning magazine)

Currently airing

Internationally created shows currently broadcast by HRT (July 2011)

Original name Croatian translation Origin Gossip Girl Tračerica United States The Scent of Rain in the Balkans Miris kiše na Balkanu Serbia Dirty Sexy Money Prljavi seksi novac United States Without a Trace Bez traga United States Law & Order: Criminal Intent Zakon i red: Zločinačke nakane United States Wire in the Blood Struna u krvi United Kingdom Ghost Whisperer Šaptačica duhovima United States Beverly Hills 90210 Beverly Hills 90210 United States Full House Pun Doma United States House Doktor House United States Midsomer Murders Umorstva u Midsomeru United Kingdom Curb Your Enthusiasm Bez oduševljenja, molim United States Soy tu dueña Gospodarica tvoga srca Mexico McLeod's Daughters McLeodove kćeri Australia 101 Dalmatians 101 dalmatinac United States Xiaolin Showdown Šaolinski obračun United States Garfield and Friends Garfield i prijatelji United States Beverly Hills, 90210 Beverly Hills United States The Simpsons Simpsoni United States Red Dwarf Crveni patuljak United Kingdom Star Trek: Enterprise Zvjezdane staze: Enterprise United States Jeeves and Wooster Jeeves i Wooster United Kingdom

Nationally created shows currently broadcast by HRT (July 2010)

Original name Format Origin Bitange i princeze sitcom Croatia Dolina sunca soap opera Croatia Stipe u gostima sitcom Croatia Mamutica crime show Croatia

Coming soon on HRT

Original name Croatian translation Origin Veronica Mars Veronica Mars United States Studio 60 on the Sunset Strip Studio 60 na Sunset Stripu United States Lie to me Lagati mi United States Fringe Resa United States Mar de amor More ljubavi Mexico Ashes to Ashes Pepeo u pepeo United Kingdom

Radio

The Croatian Radio (Hrvatski radio) runs three national and eight local (county-level) stations.[4]

National stations

The three national stations are available throughout the country and are streamed live via the Internet.

HR 1 - The primary national-level station, mainly serious programming broadcasting news every full hour.

HR 2 - Mostly airs entertainment programming, with news usually at the half-hour mark.

HR 3 - Mainly airs classical music and radio drama.

Regional stations

HR Dubrovnik - Based in Dubrovnik, covers the Dubrovnik-Neretva County.

HR Knin - Based in Knin, covers the Šibenik-Knin County.

HR Osijek - Based in Osijek, covers the Osijek-Baranja County.

HR Pula - Based in Pula, covers the Istria County.

HR Rijeka - Based in Rijeka, covers the Primorje-Gorski Kotar County.

HR Sljeme - Based in Zagreb, covers the city and the surrounding Zagreb County.

HR Split - Based in Split, covers the Split-Dalmatia County.

HR Zadar - Based in Zadar, covers the Zadar County.

International service

Voice of Croatia (Glas Hrvatske) - Airs programming for Croatians living abroad, Croatia's minority groups and the international community. While mostly in the Croatian language, the station also features short news and segments in English, German, Italian, Hungarian, and Spanish at different times of the day.

The mediumwave transmitter at Zadar was at onetime one of the most powerful in Europe and at nighttime could be heard throughout most of the continent with JRT (Yugoslav) and later HR (Croatian) programming from Zagreb and Pula. However it was badly damaged during the fighting in the early 1990s, and has operated on somewhat reduced power since on 1134 kHz.

See also

List of radio stations in Croatia

References

Official website (Croatian) (English)

Zakon o Hrvatskoj radioteleviziji (Croatian) (Croatian Radiotelevision Act)

Statut Hrvatske radiotelevizije (Croatian) (Statute of Croatian Radiotelevision)