Logo descriptions byThisisanswer

Background: Croatian Radiotelevision (Hrvatska radiotelevizija) is the main radio and television provider in Croatia. Founded in 1926 and starting television broadcasts in 1956, it was formerly part of the JRT (Yugoslav Radio Television), where it was known as RTZ and was the first to broadcast in the country. After 1990, where Croatia split from Yugoslavia, it was renamed to HRT and became a full member of the EBU. There are currently 5 main channels: HRT 1 (Founded in 1956), HRT 2 (Founded in 1972), HRT 3 (Founded first in 1989 as Z3, then HTV Z3 before it went off for 3 years after an air raid struck its transmitter. Relaunched in 1994 as HRT 3, before going off the air again and returning in 2012.), HRT 4 (Founded in 2012, currently the international channel since 2015), and HRT 5 (Founded in 2018). Unlike most other public providers, HRT doesn't have any active HD channels.

RTZ

1st Logo

(1956-1980's?)

Logo: On a grey background or a superimposed picture of Zagreb, a white tube shape is seen. In it are several dots connected by rods, forming the letters "rtz". Below it is "radio televizija zagreb" in a roundish font.

Variants:

Sometimes, there isn't any text, leaving just the logo on either the grey background, or on another one with rings surrounding it.

The logo may be all black and placed smaller on a strange flower-like design background.

The logo may be position to the right, with smaller copies over it and text on the left, with the text stacked on the right.

When HRT 2 started broadcasting, both channels got the logo with copies getting smaller to the right. To the bottom right was the text "1/2. program".

FX/SFX: Probably none, considering that there is no video evidence.

Music/Sounds: Unknown, probably an announcer.

Availability: Completely extinct. Outside of some photos on the Logopedia page, no other evidence of this logo exists, especially considering that Yugoslavia was a Communist nation.

Editor's Note: None.

Televizija Zagreb

2nd Logo

(1980's-1990)

Logo: On a black background, a shot of the Earth with part of it obscured zooms in. When it comes to a full stop, rows of the blue text "TELEVIZIJA ZAGREB" scroll up below the Earth. A bigger, bolder version of the text then slowly scrolls up as the blue text behind it disappears.

FX/SFX: The Earth zooming in, the text scrolling.

Music/Sounds: An ambient space synth tune.

Availability: Extinct. Seen at the startup and closedown of the channel. Unlike the first logo, this has some video evidence.

Editor's Note: The darkness and synth tune may unnerve some, but its harmless.