About Hrvatska radiotelevizija – HRT

Croatian Radio-Television (croat. Hrvatska radiotelevizija – HRT) is an independent media service marking two important anniversaries this year – 92 years of Croatian Radio (HRT – HR) and 62 years of Croatian Television (HRT – HTV). Croatian Radio-Television broadcasts programs on four national television channels and on international satellite channel, three national radio channels, eight regional radio channels and the Voice of Croatia international radio channel, as well on its teletext and web pages and through the HRTi multimedia service.

Through its work and program content Croatian Radio-Television is obliged to inform the public about the work of government and public institutions and all topics of importance for the Republic of Croatia and society as a whole and to preserve national identity, language and culture, foster the development of civil society and democracy, promote tolerance and respect for diversity, support entrepreneurship and foster solidarity and humanity. It fulfils these socially important tasks on a daily basis through numerous public media contents which educate, inform and entertain its users.

It comprises a Symphony Orchestra, Jazz Orchestra, Tamburitza Orchestra and HRT Choir, as important worldwide promoters of Croatian music and culture. In 2012 Croatian Radio-Television’s television program archives, radio program archives and sheet music collection were awarded the status of cultural property. Croatian Radio-Television is a full member of the European Broadcasting Union.

For more about HRT visit hrt.hr

Press Igor Cutuk Tel: + 385 1 634 3735 igor.cutuk@hrt.hr

About Eutelsat Communications

Founded in 1977, Eutelsat Communications is one of the world's leading satellite operators. With a global fleet of satellites and associated ground infrastructure, Eutelsat enables clients across Video, Data, Government, Fixed and Mobile Broadband markets to communicate effectively to their customers, irrespective of their location. Over 6,800 television channels operated by leading media groups are broadcast by Eutelsat to one billion viewers equipped for DTH reception or connected to terrestrial networks. Headquartered in Paris, with offices and teleports around the globe, Eutelsat assembles 1,000 men and women from 44 countries who are dedicated to delivering the highest quality of service.

Eutelsat Communications is listed on the Euronext Paris Stock Exchange (ticker: ETL).

For more about Eutelsat go to www.eutelsat.com

Press

Marie-Sophie Ecuer Tel: + 33 1 53 98 37 91 mecuer@eutelsat.com

Christina Darvasi Tel: +52 55 2629 5847 cdarvasi@eutelsat.com

Investors and analysts

Joanna Darlington Tel. : +33 1 53 98 35 30 jdarlington@eutelsat.com

Cédric Pugni Tel. : +33 1 53 98 35 30 cpugni@eutelsat.com