Illinois Institute of Technology - Overview & Background

Illinois Institute of Technology, founded in 1890, is a private research university. In 1940, a merger between Armour Institute and Lewis Institute led to the creation of Illinois Institute of Technology – a private University that focuses on technology-focused research.

Today, the University offers undergraduate and graduate degrees in:

Engineering

Architecture

Science

Business

Human sciences

Design

Applied technology

Law

It is also a Ph.D. granting technical University. Its Engineering College, The Armour College of Engineering, is pretty good for Electrical and Computer Engineering.

With students from nearly 100 countries studying at the Illinois Institute of Technology, the international student body is quite strong here and nearly 62% of the total student population consists of international graduate students.

Illinois Institute of Technology Virtual Tour

Infrastructure

Spread across four campuses in downtown Chicago, Forbes included the campus of Illinois Institute of Technology in its list of “America’s most beautiful college campuses”. In fact, the main campus (Mies Campus) of the school is on the National Register of Historic Places of the country. The campus also houses an independent, not-for-profit, contract research organization focusing on the life sciences.

Residing Options

Though the Illinois Institute of Technology offers campus accommodation, most students choose to live off-campus. This is because off-campus accommodation is much cheaper. A majority of students live near the city, even though it increases their travel time.

Faculty and Pedagogy

Illinois Institute of Technology has scholars, experts, researchers, and teachers who are passionate about imparting education and are dedicated to helping their students succeed. The Armour College of Engineering itself has 91 full-time faculties on staff.

Jobs and Placements

During the first semester, students can get in touch with a Career Development Coach of the university to develop a career plan. They can then take the help of a resume guide to create a high quality professional resume. Students are also allowed to open a Handshake account for posting their CVs and going through the job listings.

The institute also organizes workshops to provide students with interview tips and more information about their possible career paths. The university also organizes events and job fairs for the benefit of the students.

The average salary of a Master of Computer Science graduate is $85,834; Master of Mechanical Engineering (MME) graduate, $81,313. MS graduates make on average $84,101 annually whereas Master of Engineering (MEng/ME) graduates make $75,626 annually on average. The boys make between $47,650 - $93,606 and girls make between $53,896 - $107,468. Around 565 pass outs from IIT found their jobs extremely satisfying and rated 5 out of 5.

Notable Alumni

Some famous alumni from Illinois Institute of Technology include :

Jack Steinberger, Corecipient of the 1988 Nobel Prize in Physics "for the neutrino beam method and the demonstration of the doublet structure of the leptons through the discovery of the muon neutrino."

Valdas Adamkus, Highly decorated President of the Republic of Lithuania, who served two terms, the first from 1998 to 2003 and again from 2004 to 2009.

Julius Hoffman, Presiding judge in the Chicago Seven conspiracy trial.

David V. Miller, Former U.S. Air Force Major General

Joseph M. Mleziva, Wisconsin farmer and state legislator

John Calamos, Listed on Forbes' 400 Richest Americans list as #281. Founder and CEO of Calamos Asset Management. Conferred as one of BusinessWeek's

Martin Cooper, Inventor of the mobile phone while working at Motorola. He is a former CEO, co-founder, and current Chairman of ArrayComm.

Lina Nilsson, Co-founder of Tekla Labs and open source lab technology developer

Verdict

Though Illinois Institute of Technology is not a high ranking institute, some of its courses have made their mark and thus the institute is increasingly being looked like a viable option by many prospective students.

More Universities For You

New York Institute of Technology

QS Ranking

RNP

Annual Fees

23000

Country

United States

Living Expenses

₹ 10000

Explore Details

Northeastern University

QS Ranking

378

Annual Fees

24000

Country

United States

Living Expenses

₹ 9000

Explore Details

Michigan Technological University

QS Ranking

NA

Annual Fees

18000

Country

United States

Living Expenses

₹ 5000

Explore Details

George Mason University

QS Ranking

NA

Annual Fees

29000

Country

United States

Living Expenses

₹ 8000

Explore Details

Student Diversity & Preferred Profile

Illinois Institute of Technology is a public research university in Cook County, Illinois.

Mechanical Engineering (82 degrees granted)

Computer Science (68 degrees)

Information Technology

Were the most popular Bachelor's Degree concentrations at Illinois Institute of Technology in 2016. (58 degrees).

In 2019, Illinois Institute of Technology granted 2,370 degrees across all undergraduate and graduate programmes. Women received 37.3% of these degrees, while men received 62.7%. White people (519 degrees) were the most prevalent race/ethnicity group among degree recipients, with 3.04 times more than the next closest race/ethnicity group, Asian people (171 degrees).

The Illinois Institute of Technology has a total of 6,515 students enrolled. Illinois Institute of Technology has 5,616 full-time students and 899 part-time students enrolled. This means that 86.2% of Illinois Institute of Technology students are full-time students.

At Illinois Institute of Technology, 31.3% of undergraduate and graduate students are white, 10.7% are Hispanic or Latino, 9.88% are Asian, 4.02% are Black or African American, 2.19% are Two or More Races, 0.0921% are American Indian or Alaska Native, and 0.046% are Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islanders.

White Males (26.5%), Hispanic or Latino Males (11.9%), and White Females (11.9%) are the most common students enrolled in full-time Undergraduate programmes at Illinois Institute of Technology (11%). White Males (11.5%), White Females (10.2%), and Asian Females are the most common students enrolled in full-time Graduate programmes (2.34%).

White is the most common race or ethnicity, with 2,039 students; Hispanic or Latino has 695 students; and Asian has 644 students.

At Illinois Institute of Technology, 31.3% of students are white, 10.7% are Hispanic or Latino, 9.88% are Asian, 4.02% are Black or African American, 2.19% are Two or More Races, 0.0921% are American Indians or Alaska Natives, and 0.046% are Native Hawaiians or Other Pacific Islanders. This comprises graduate and undergraduate students along with the full-time and part-time students. In comparison, 50.3 percent of Doctoral University students are white, 14.3% are Hispanic or Latino, and 9.48% are black or African American.

Women got 604 fewer degrees from Illinois Institute of Technology in 2019 than men. Men at Illinois Institute of Technology in 2019 were awarded 1,487 degrees, which is 1.68 times the number of degrees awarded to women (883).

Men received 228 degrees in Computer Science from Illinois Institute of Technology in 2019, which is 2.43 times more than the 94 women who received the same degree.

In 2019, 120 women got law degrees from Illinois Institute of Technology, compared to 109 men who received the same degree.

At Illinois Institute of Technology, white males are the most common race/ethnicity and gender grouping (316 degrees awarded). White males received 1.56 times more than white females, the next closest race/ethnicity category (203 degrees).

Campus & Accommodation

Friendships endure a lifetime in college, and students will find them in IIT's residence halls. They'll find their own space—and the freedom to be themselves. When you need to be alone, there are quiet places to go, and when you want to relax, there are places to relax. Simply by strolling down the hall, you can make instant pals. In the lounge, have a late-night debate. Get a bunch together for a pick-up game.

At Illinois Tech, there are nine residence halls and three apartment complexes where 1,400 students can make their "home away from home" while pursuing their education. The residence halls provide a focused and active atmosphere for living and learning. In addition, the Office of Residence Life works with a number of university-affiliated Greek houses to coordinate operational efforts.

All of Illinois Tech's national and international students have access to a variety of housing options. Residents can choose from a number of room types and sizes.

Single-gender floors, shared rooms, coed floors, and other types of accommodations are available.

Hall of Residence: The following are the types of residence halls:

McCormick Student Village (MSV)

Jeanne and John Rowe Village

Gunsaulus Hall

Carman Hall

Kacek Hall

These Accommodations Offer the Following Facilities

Maintenance of the room

Request for laundry services

Hawk card

Shuttle bus

Parking for students

The housing rates for different residence halls are given below. They vary with the type of accommodation the student applies for:

McCormick Student Village (MSV) - The semester rate lies between $6,842.00 and $7,486.00 while the summer rate ranges between $3,421.00 and $3,748.00

Jeanne and John Rowe Village - The academic year rate lies between $8,388.00 and $13,420.00 while the semester rate ranges between $4,194.00 and $6,710.00

Gunsaulus Hall - The academic year rate lies between $7,610.00 and $9,260.00 while the semester rate ranges between $3,805.00 and $4,630.00

Carman Hall - Shortly coming

Kacek Hall - The academic year rate is approx. $8,388.00 while the semester rate is approx. $4,194.00

Comparison with other Universities

The Illinois Institute of Technology is a technology-focused private research institution that offers undergraduate and graduate degrees in:

Business

Engineering

Human sciences

Architecture

Science

Design

Applied technology

Law

Illinois Institute of Technology has encouraged students and staff researchers to seek beyond the obvious, to push the boundaries of what is possible, and to stretch their imaginations since its founding in 1890.

Illinois Tech is one of the 22 colleges that make up the Association of Independent Technological Universities (AITU), and it provides excellent training for careers that need technological complexity, and innovative attitude, and an entrepreneurial spirit.

Illinois Tech is addressing tomorrow's grand challenges through a technological lens, with research ranging from robots to genomics, big data to urban sustainability. The Illinois Tech research community is supported by a diverse range of field and lab initiatives, strong mentorship, and access to world-class facilities, allowing the next generation of researchers to pursue their own ambitious ideas.

Illinois Tech undergraduate and graduate students are engaged in research that aims to improve the world through science and technology. International collaborations, cutting-edge lab work, a summer immersion programme, stipends to work alongside faculty, research symposia, and other research opportunities are available to students.

Scholarships & Financial Aid

It's critical to think about the long-term benefit of your education as well as the cost. Illinois Tech provides possibilities in the most in-demand disciplines, and the graduates' success in the profession and in their daily life has been extensively documented.

Types of Financial Aid

Loans and Grants

Students should fill out the Free Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA) to be evaluated for grants and loans (FAFSA). Grants need not to be repaid. Students’ Expected Family Contribution determines their grant eligibility each year. The availability of loans is to both undergraduate and graduate students.

Federal Pell Grant

State of Illinois MAP Grant

Federal Supplemental Educational Opportunity Grant (SEOG)

Graduate Loans and Grants

Fellowships are just a few of the Grants and Loans available.

Federal work-study

The Federal Work-Study programme allows qualified students to obtain work experience while also earning income to help pay for their education. Students who participate in work-study benefit from the opportunities for networking which is gained more by working alongside professionals in a classroom setting. Students can use their work-study dollars to benefit others while learning vital work and life skills.

Illinois Tech awards work-study to students based on financial need as assessed by the Free Application for Federal Student Aid. There are a limited number of funds available, and they are distributed on a first-come, first-served basis.

Scholarships:

Illinois Tech offers a number of competitive scholarship opportunities for both undergraduate and graduate students. Beyond any fellowships that they may obtain, graduate students in certain degree programmes may be considered for additional special scholarships.

ACE ScholarshipTech

Edge Scholarship

IIT College Scholarship

Data Science Excellence Scholarship

and many more graduate awards are available.

Placement Details & Recruiting Companies

People with a degree in one of Illinois Institute of Technology's five most specialised majors are most likely to work in the following jobs:

Software developers (939,543 people)

Other managers (400,045 people)

Miscellaneous engineers: including Civil engineers (279,868 people), nuclear engineers (364,963 people) and Mechanical engineers (216,044 people).

Surgeons, Securities, commodities, and financial services sales agents, Physicians, Lawyers, and judges, magistrates, and other judicial workers, and Cardiovascular technologists and technicians are the highest paying jobs for people with a degree in one of the five most specialized majors at Illinois Institute of Technology.

People with a degree in one of Illinois Institute of Technology's five most specialized majors work in the following industries:

Computer Systems Design (954,768 people)

Engineering, Architectural & related services (579,792 people)

Construction (346,560 people)

Professional schools, Colleges and universities including junior colleges (244,112 people)

Scientific, technical and Management consulting services (185,128 people)

Eighty-one percent of graduates were hired full-time in their intended fields within six months of graduation.

Graduates start with an average pay of $77,848 per year and a median salary of $70,000 per year.

Graduates work for a variety of enterprises and organizations, including start-ups, early-stage companies, and Fortune 500 companies.

Some of them include :

Amazon

Interlake Mecalux

CCC Information Services

Motorola Mobility - a Lenovo company

Tata Consultancy Services

Google, Inc

Integra Technologies LLC

ComEd

Argonne National Laboratory

HERE Technologies

Deloitte

Microsoft

Ferrovial Agroman US Corp.

IBM

AZTech Technologies

Sinocontech

Intel Corporation

Qualcomm

Mediterranean Shipping Company

Motorola Solutions, Inc.

Illinois Institute of Technology Location

The university is located in Illinois, Chicago. If you wish to visit the city by air, you need to either use the O'Hare International Airport (an hour by car) or the Midway International Airport (20 minutes). Public transportation is available from both the airports; and a limousine or taxi can take you to the campus.

The Amtrak and Metra commuter rail trains run to the Union Station, with additional Metra commuter trains running to Ogilvie Transportation Center. Visitors can then take the Rock Island Metro train from LaSalle Street Station to the "Lou" Jones Station and thereafter the public transport to visit the campus.

The CTA bus lines can also take you to the campus. The buses service the routes frequently. Chicago is amongst the largest cities in the USA and is known for the number of skyscrapers across the skyline. In your free time, you can visit Millennium Park, The Art Institute or the John Hancock Observatory. You also visit the Navy Pier or the Riverwalk. The city has a large number of cafes, restaurants and budget hotels to hang out. Interested in the city nightlife? Visit the numerous bars and discotheques

Illinois Institute of Technology Map Location

Address: 10 W 35th St, Chicago, IL 60616, United States