About Illinois Institute of Technology

The Illinois Institute of Technology is a private research university focused on technology. It offers undergraduate and graduate degrees in engineering, science, architecture, business, design, human sciences, applied technology, and law. Illinois Tech is one of 22 institutions that make up the Association of Independent Technological Universities (AITU). It provides excellent preparation for careers that require technological sophistication, an innovative mindset, and an entrepreneurial spirit. It has a vibrant student community with a beautiful campus. Let’s learn more about Illinois Institute of Technology campus life!

Why study at the Illinois Institute of Technology?

Here’s why you should study at the Illinois Institute of Technology-

Its one-of-a-kind Elevate Your Future program guarantees you hands-on experience, a personalized academic and career plan, and the skills you need to succeed in the twenty-first century. Anticipation, an innovative mindset, and an entrepreneurial spirit are all necessary.

Illinois Tech is your gateway to the Chicago corporate, nonprofit, research, and startup communities. It is a global network of more than 86,000 alumni.

Illinois Tech students and faculty are conducting research that harnesses the power of technology and innovation for the betterment of humanity.

Less than a mile from beautiful Lake Michigan, their historic Mies Campus was voted one of the country’s ‘most beautiful college campuses.’

Interesting facts about the university

Illinois Tech ranked 122 among National Universities and 42 among Best Value Schools in the 2022 U.S. News & World Report Best Colleges rankings.

According to the most recent PayScale rankings, Illinois Tech is the best-value private college in Illinois (after they award aid).

Among the innovations associated with Illinois Tech faculty and alumn are the cell phone, magnetic recording, tall building architecture, and barcode technology.

S. R. Crown Hall, which houses Illinois Tech’s College of Architecture, is a National Historic Landmark and is famous as one of the iconic structures designed by legendary architect Ludwig Mies van der Rohe.

The TFE Times ranks the Master of Mathematical Finance Program as the 22nd best in the country.

Campus and housing

‘Location is the king’ perfectly sums up the Illinois Tech campus and residential experience. Illinois Tech’s historic Mies Campus, located less than a mile from beautiful Lake Michigan beaches, is known as one of the country’s most beautiful college campuses.

Access to convenient public transportation allows you to travel anywhere in the Chicago metropolitan area. In the vibrant, global city, there are an infinite number of restaurants, parks, sports, cultural, entertainment, and professional opportunities.

The peaceful, tree-lined campus is just a few miles from downtown. When you arrive, the residences will greet you with amenities such as various dining options and 24-hour security to make you feel at ease. It’s everything you expect from a renowned university.

Services and resources at Illinois

Illinois Tech offers various services that allow students to study and live in a healthy, stress-free environment. These services include academic and financial assistance and resources to support students’ physical and mental well-being. Some services are as follows-

Academic Resource Center

Access, Card, and Parking Services

Career Services

Campus Business Services Center

Commuter Student Resources

English Language Services

Galvin Library

Illinois Tech Bookstore

International Center

Office of Technology Services

Student Health and Wellness Center

Student organizations

College is demanding. You need to work hard. Illinois makes sure you have time for fun after work. As an Illinois Tech student, you will have numerous opportunities to pursue your interests. Illinois Tech has more than 150 student organizations, ranging from professional organization university chapters and the Student Government Association to a student-run radio station and esports. If you don’t see anything you like, create your own! Some of the student organizations are as follows-

33rd Street Productions – Arts

AAAEA – Cultural

Active Minds – Professional

American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics – Architecture

Asian American Student Association – Cultural

Art Club – Arts

Black Student Union – Cultural

Coffee Club – Social

Female Empowerment Movement – Women’s

Fencing – Athletic

Graduate Student Advisory Council of MMAE Department – Engineering

Helping Hands – Service

Indian Student Association – Cultural

Multicultural Greek Initiative – FSL

Photography Club – Arts

Writers at Illinois Tech – Professional

Athletics at the university

At Illinois Tech, athletics have a long and proud tradition of competition that reflects the university’s commitment to academic excellence and vibrant student experience. The university’s student-athletes develop the interpersonal, ethical, and leadership skills necessary to compete at the highest level in whatever endeavor they choose through its athletic programs, classrooms, and research labs.

Students at Illinois Tech can also participate in various intramural and recreational activities. You can find almost anything that interests you, from cricket to yoga, flag football to martial arts. They also have 17 varsity women’s and men’s sports at Illinois Tech.

Living in Chicago

You will have access to a thriving metropolis with a rich cultural history as a student in Chicago. Chicago is one of the world’s largest cities. It is a fantastic place for entertainment and culture, from sporting events to art museums and everything in between. Chicago is a fantastic global city. You will find Google, Grubhub, Boeing, Orbitz, or any of the thousands of other companies with headquarters here.

The Ed Kaplan Family Institute for Innovation and Tech Entrepreneurship is at Illinois Tech. It provides maker spaces, mentorship programs, events, and other programs that instill an entrepreneurial spirit in all Illinois Tech students and assist students in turning their ideas into viable businesses. The Kaplan Institute also connects students with leaders in the Chicago tech sector, such as startup entrepreneurs and other mentors.

Key takeaway

Illinois Institute of Technology in Chicago is a vibrant and welcoming university.

You have a lot to explore at the Illinois Institute of Technology campus. The housing, services, and more are phenomenal. It helps you cope with university life.

Services like Access, Card, Parking Services, Career Services, English Language Services, Illinois Tech Bookstore, and more provide the necessary information students might need.

Companies like Google, Grubhub, Boeing, and Orbitz have their base in Chicago. It makes it easy for students to find a job right after graduation.

Did you find this blog helpful? Do share your perspectives in the comments below. Please contact us by clicking here for more information on the Illinois Institute of Technology campus life. We would be happy to assist you with your queries.

Liked this blog? Read next: Pacific University | Rankings, programs, fees, and more

FAQs

Q1. How are undergraduate applications accepted for the Illinois Institute of Technology?

Answer- International undergraduate students can apply to the Illinois Institute of Technology using the Common Application, which costs USD 75.

Q2. What GPA do you need to get into the Illinois Institute of Technology?

Answer- Illinois Institute of Technology accepts students with an average GPA of 3.92 on a 4.0 scale, indicating that they are primarily A-level students.

Q3. How many recommendation letters are necessary from international students for admission at IIT Chicago?