The Illinois Institute of Technology (IIT) is a private institution of higher education with a main campus on the south side of Chicago, Illinois. It also has two campuses in downtown Chicago and two in the suburbs. The Illinois Institute of Technology was established in 1940 through the merger of the Armour Institute of Technology (founded in 1890) and the Lewis Institute (1895). The Institute of Design was founded as the New Bauhaus in 1937 by Hungarian painter and photographer László Moholy-Nagy. It became part of IIT in 1949. Chicago-Kent College of Law joined the institute in 1969. The main campus features many buildings designed by Ludwig Mies van der Rohe, who was long the director of the Institute’s architecture school. The McCormick Tribune Campus Center was designed by Dutch architect Rem Koolhaas. It includes a stainless steel tube through which elevated trains pass.

Total enrollment consists of several thousand students, most of whom are graduate students. IIT conducts bachelor’s, master’s, and doctoral programs through the School of Applied Technology, the College of Architecture, the Stuart School of Business, the Institute of Design (featuring such concentrations as photography, product design, and visual communications), the Armour College of Engineering, the Chicago-Kent College of Law, the College of Psychology, and the College of Science and Letters.

The most popular undergraduate major is engineering; IIT’s offerings include aerospace, architectural, biomedical, chemical, civil, computer, electrical, materials science, and mechanical engineering. Most other students major in the sciences, architecture, or business. Many students participate in cooperative education, which combines classroom study with hands-on work experience. IIT awards master’s degrees in more than 70 disciplines and doctoral degrees in more than 20. Research facilities associated with the institute include the National Center for Food Safety and Technology, the Fluid Dynamics Research Center, the Center for Electrochemical Science and Engineering, and the IIT Research Institute.

The institute’s varsity sports teams compete in the National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics (NAIA). School colors are scarlet and gray, and IIT’s mascot is the Scarlet Hawk.