PUFFER, Greta Evelyn (nee Nielsen)

1926 - 2021

Greta passed away peacefully at home on September 15, 2021. Greta, the daughter of the late Marius "Morris" and Ellen (nee Stricker) Nielsen, was born in Vegreville, Alberta. Her family moved to Olds, Alberta where she met her late husband William "Bill" Puffer. Greta had a love for travel and traveled extensively throughout Canada, the US as well as Europe, Mexico, The Bahamas and New Zealand. Her last adventure was moving to Lakeshore, Ontario to live with her son and daughter-in-law. At her request, cremation has taken place and there will be no service held. In lieu of flowers, memorial donations may be made to the Alzheimer's Association or the Heart and Stroke Foundation. Arrangements entrusted to Marcotte Funeral Home (519-735-2830).

Published online September 18, 2021

Plant a Living Memorial

In Memory of GretaHow does it work?

Send Flowers: When Is the Ordering Deadline?

Next-Day Delivery

ANY DAY OF THE WEEK

Order any time up till the day before

Same-Day Delivery

MON-FRI Order by 2:00PM

SAT & SUN Order by noon

Morning Delivery

TUES-SAT Order by 3:00PM

The day before

SAT & SUN Order by Saturday

Note: These are general guidelines; some florists may not be able to operate within these timelines. During peak periods such as Valentine’s Day, Memorial Day and most holidays, florists are not always able to keep up to demand. Tribute will contact you if there are any issues.

Plant a tree: How does it work

When your purchase is complete, a post will be made on the tribute wall of the deceased signifying the planting of a memorial tree.

An official certificate recognizing your purchase will be included with your email receipt. You can then forward the email to the family or print it and give it to them personally.

After an order is placed, our forestry partners will plant the tree in the area of greatest need (nearest the funeral home), according to the planting schedule for the year.

Due to seasonal conditions, the tree planting takes place during the spring and summer.

Tree Planting Timeline

Orders placed in:

January - May

Planting will take place in Spring or Summer of the same year.

June - December

Planting will take place in Spring of the following year.

Hide Detail

In Memory of Greta

Plant a tree How it Works Plant a tree