LACOMBE — The measure of a truly effective police force may be that its citizens can take it for granted. However, that doesn’t mean the police can ever become complacent, says Steve Murray, chief of a police force created in 1900 for the fledgling Village of Lacombe.

Siding 12 on the rail line connecting Edmonton and Calgary was a bustling prairie crossroads during the late 19th century, when new homesteaders were seeking their claims and the province that would become Alberta was still a part of the Northwest Territories. Various rail lines intersected at the site and it lay alongside the C&E Trail, forerunner of Hwy 2.

The 17 members of the Lacombe Police still walk the same beat 113 years later, watching for trouble in the shadows of buildings that were erected as the small village, established in 1896, grew to a city of nearly 12,000 people today.

Throughout those years, Lacombe Police have never lost a member in the line of duty, nor has there been a homicide within municipal limits in the 27 years since Aug. 13, 1986, when Ron Nowichin found the body of his 20-year-old wife, Loreen, in the attic of their home.

Investigators found no solid leads at the time and the case was reopened last year but remains unsolved, says Murray.

While Lacombe’s police may not be overburdened with major crime, they have a history that can best be described as colourful, says Bob Huff, a citizen at large on the Lacombe Police Commission.

Members started packing .357 Magnum handguns in the mid-1970s after successful lobby efforts by then police chief Orest Schur, who felt that the .38-calibre pistols they had been issued did not provide effective firepower.

The true burden of packing heavy heat came to bear on a December night in 1992, when citizens stepped up to help a lone police officer chase down a pair of teenaged suspects. Recounting the event later on, Const. Darcy Kuhn told the Advocate that he felt encumbered by heavy gear, including “20 pounds of gun and ammunition” in the six-block chase.

One citizen was able to catch one of the suspects while a second citizen pointed Kuhn to the other suspect’s hiding place.

The heavy revolvers were replaced later by 10-mm Glocks, which are much lighter and can be equipped with a 15-round clip.

Lacombe Police have also exchanged their shotguns for light rifles that are safer among crowds, says Const. Bryan Zens, son of former chief Bill Zens.

Schur’s legendary exploits as police chief came to an abrupt end in 1985, just as he was preparing for retirement, over allegations that he had failed to report key details arising from a shooting incident involving one of his officers.

The police commission fired the chief after finding him guilty of deceit, neglect in the care and handling of exhibits, and neglect in the care and handling of drugs.

Represented by Red Deer lawyer Herbert Fielding, Schur steadfastly held that he was unaware of the incident that brought rise to the charges. However, he was unsuccessful in subsequent attempts to be reinstated and clear his name.

The Lacombe Police Commission felt they had found a suitable replacement in 1986, when they promoted veteran street cop Gordon Rear to lead the force.

Interviewed by the Advocate shortly after his promotion, Lacombe’s new police chief compared policing in Lacombe to living in a fishbowl.

“In a town like Lacombe, there are eight police watching 6,000 people — and 6,000 people watching eight police,” he told reporter Lynn McDowell.

Seven years later, in the spring of 1993, Rear lost his job at about the same time as he was charged with assault in connection with an off-duty attack on a teenager at the Lacombe Hotel.

Bob Jenkins, who was secretary of the police commission, said at the time that Rear’s dismissal had nothing to do with the brawl, but that he had been let go after a routine performance review.

Rear pleaded guilty to assault in Lacombe provincial court that fall and was fined $350. Defence counsel Andy Advani said Rear had taken offence and lost his temper when the teenager made a sarcastic remark about a handgun that had been stolen from his house.

Losing two police chiefs in a row was the trigger that led Lacombe town council to decide whether it should continue with its own police force or sign a contract with the RCMP, says Judy Gordon, who was mayor at the time.

Gordon still believes council made the right decision in choosing to maintain and support its own police force, pointing to their good working relationship with the RCMP. Lacombe Police have a mutual aid agreement for major incidents and are also able to use RCMP equipment and resources that the city could not afford on its own, says Gordon.

Over the past 20 years, Lacombe Police have focused on community policing as a preventive measure, stepping in front of crime as much as possible so fewer resources must be expended on chasing criminals, say both Murray and Huff.

A key element in that philosophy has been the establishment of school resource officers, supported by the city, Lacombe County and the Wolf Creek School Board, says Huff, a former social studies teacher and owner of the historic Puffer Chung building in the city centre.

Besides relieving teaching staff of having to deal with criminal complaints inside the school system, the school resource officer plays an integral role in establishing positive relationships with young people and may even help encourage some of them to seek careers in policing, says Huff.

Former school resource officer Bryan Zens, now assigned to other duties, says he took special pleasure in having a chocolate Lab puppy as his partner in the program, raising and training her on the job as a drug specialist.

Over the three years that Koda worked with Zens in the schools, she was never intended for enforcement, but as a deterrent for students who were all aware that she was being trained to sniff for drugs.

Students who were hesitant to engage with a police officer warmed quickly to the dog and, on those occasions when he chose to leave her in the truck, would demand that he bring her inside.

There is no way to measure the success of a program aimed at preventing crime, says Huff.

Chatting in the alley with members of the Lacombe Police, Huff at first has trouble recognizing one of his former Lacombe Composite High School students.

“Take off your hat,” he says, smiling broadly and reaching forward for a handshake when he recognizes Const. Dave Barsness.

That kind of connection between the community and the police is what makes it work and it’s what makes working in Lacombe so much different than working for the RCMP, says Murray, who was a Mountie posted in Drayton Valley before moving to Lacombe about 16 years ago.

“Policing is more than just a line in a budget. It’s about quality of service. It’s about community commitment. It’s about partnerships. I think we just are given the ability to make those things happen.”

He says the key difference for him and the officers he leads is the investment they have made in choosing to make a permanent home in Lacombe.

“Somebody once gave me the analogy about who washes a rented car? You drive the crap out of it, you get it very dirty and you hand it back, right?

“As soon as it becomes your home, your outlook completely changes, because now you have a vested interest. Now, your kids are growing up there, you’re going to be interacting with the community and families in a whole different way, and you know that relationship is going to last a long time.

“I actually wanted to come here. It’s a great location. Lacombe’s a beautiful community. I love its old buildings and its tree-lined streets. I love that fact that it’s really geared towards families and a lifestyle that I think is enviable.”

Murray believes the fact that Lacombe’s municipal police are able to provide 24-hour service, seven days a week, should be considered a drawing card for economic development in the city.

He then points to the virtually seamless relationship between the police and the citizens, including the various ways police officers interact with the community when they’re off duty.

For example, there’s a BMX track at the north side of the city, built largely through the efforts of former police chief Gary Leslie. Leslie wanted to see the track developed as a means of providing healthy activity for the city’s youth, says Murray.

BMX racing is not as popular as it was in the past, he says. But putting those kids on their bikes and giving them a place to play is just one more way of keeping them busy, healthy and out of trouble.

bkossowan@www.reddeeradvocate.com