Fresh off the court from one of their best games of the season, the Toronto Raptors face off Tuesday night at the Air Canada Centre against the visiting Minnesota Timberwolves, a team they shut down in their last nine confrontations.

Tuesday's matchup will be the first time the Timberwolves tackle a bolstered Toronto squad that includes newly acquired forward Shawn Marion.

The four-time all-star shed his Miami jersey last week to officially join Toronto's roster.

Minnesota's lineup has also shifted. The team is suffering the absence of star centre Al Jefferson, who is sidelined with a torn ACL. The Timberwolves also recently added Shelden Williams and Bobby Brown to the roster. The team has lost seven of its last eight matchups.

The last meeting between Toronto (22-36) and Minnesota (18-37) was Feb. 10, when the Raptors posted a 110-102 victory.

With Marion now on board, Tuesday's matchup looks promising. Marion scored 16 points with 15 rebounds and five assists in Sunday's 111-100 win over the New York Knicks.

Marion was the second highest scorer for Toronto in Sunday's game and one of four Raptors to register a double double — his second since joining the team.

Also recording a double double were Andrea Bargnani, Jose Calderon and Chris Bosh, who recently returned from a five-game absence due to knee injury.

Sunday's win was sweet revenge for the Raptors, who fell 127-97 to the same New York squad Friday at Madison Square Garden.

Friday's loss, the second defeat for the Raptors after Marion was added, didn't make the acquisition look promising. But Sunday's dazzling performance — Toronto's best offensive showing since a 113-97 victory against Sacramento in late January — seemed to indicate the new lineup is beginning to mesh.

"When you're able to do that the game comes naturally, it starts to feel better," Marion said. "That's when you start feeling the rhythm and everything starts to flow."

To acquire Marion, the Raptors gave up Jermaine O'Neal, Jamario Moon and a draft pick. The move was made in hopes of boosting a struggling offence. Before the Marion deal was made, Toronto was averaging 96.9 points per game.