Wole Soyinka was born on July 13, 1934, as Akinwande Oluwole Babatunde Soyinka (Famous People). He was born into a Yorùbá family in Abeokuta, Nigeria (Britannica). Playwright, writer, activist, teacher, a man of many names. Soyinka’s work has impacted the world, and his fight has changed the literary world and countries around Africa in their fight for democracy.

Soyinka grew up in a Christian family in southwest Nigeria, where his father, Samuel Ayodele Soyinka, was an Anglican minister and headmaster. As a boy, Soyinka attended St. Peter’s Primary School and then Abeokuta Grammar School, where he began to be recognized for his literary talent. In 1952, he graduated from Government College and then went to University College in Ibadan. In 1954, he moved to England and attended the University of Leeds. He later went on to teach at many prestigious universities (Famous People). While in England, he worked at the Royal Court Theatre in London as a dramaturgist for 6 years (Nobel Prize).

Some of Soyinka’s works include The Lion and the Jewel (1959), A Dance of the Forests (1963), a play about Nigeria’s Independence Day, and the novel, The Interpreters (1965). These works present political issues under British colonialism (Famous People). Some memoirs of his are, Season of Anomy (1973), Aké: The Years of Childhood (1981), and You Must Set Forth at Dawn: A Memoir (2006). The names of some of his poetry are as follows, Idanre and Other Poems (1967), Poems from Prison (1969) or A Shuttle in the Crypt (1972), Ogun Abibiman (1976), Mandela’s Earth and Other Poems (1988), and Selected Poems (2001) (Poetry Foundation).

In 1986, Soyinka became the first African to receive the Nobel Prize in Literature. In addition, he was also the prize’s first Black winner. When giving this prize to Wole Soyinka, the committee said he was one “who in a wide cultural perspective and with poetic overtones fashions the drama of existence” (Nobel Prize).

Soyinka’s involvement in political situations has resulted in exiles, imprisonments, and a sentence to death in 1997 that was later lifted (Poetry Foundation). Most famously, he was imprisoned for his views on the Nigerian government by criticizing the particularly cruel Nigerian military dictator, General Sanni Abacha (Famous People). He is a proponent of Nigerian democracy and at some point was involved in many political groups such as the National Democratic Organization, the National Liberation Council of Nigeria, and Pro-National Conference Organizations (PRONACO). He also founded the Democratic Front for a People’s Federation (Britannica).

“The man dies in him who stands silent in the face of tyranny.”

The Man Died: Prison Notes of Wole Soyinka

Wole Soyinka has a fire for justice inside of him that cannot be contained and spills out in every word he puts on paper. Passionate about worldwide justice, he refuses to stand down, and even in the smallest of ways, he pushes back. From his satirical plays to tearing up his U.S. green card when Donald Trump became president of America. His activism and writing coexist and cannot be without each other (New York Times).

Soyinka wrote this beautiful poem called “The Child Before A Mirror of Strangers.”

Photo courtesy of Lindau Nobel Laureate Meetings

Works Cited:

Maclean, Ruth. “Wole Soyinka Is Not Going Anywhere.” The New York Times, The New York Times, 25 Sept. 2021, New York Times.

“The Child Before a Mirror of Strangers: A Poem by Nigerian Nobel Laureate, Prof. Wole Soyinka.” UNICEF, 2019, UNICEF.

“The Nobel Prize in Literature 1986.” NobelPrize.org, Nobel Prize.

“Who Is Wole Soyinka? Everything You Need to Know.” Famous People, Famous People.