The Craft is a 1996 American horror film directed by Andrew Fleming and starring Fairuza Balk, Neve Campbell, Rachel True and Robin Tunney. The film's plot centers on a group of four teenage girls who pursue witchcraft and use it for their own gain. The film was released on May 3, 1996 by Columbia Pictures.

Plot[]

Four girls at a Los Angeles Catholic school form a coven of witches that cast spells on their classmates and each other. Their new powers overwhelm them, leading to an internal power struggle.

Sarah Bailey, a sixteen year old troubled teenager with a painful past and history of suicidal tendencies and hallucinations, moves to L.A. with her father and stepmother to start a new life. She is soon enrolled into a Catholic school where she comes into contact with three unlikely friends, Bonnie, Nancy and Rochelle. The three girls dabble in occult practices, and when they notice that Sarah has the powers of a natural witch, they talk her into joining their coven. After Sarah agrees to accompany the girls in their group, they soon discover that with a fourth witch in the coven, they are able to cast spells more powerful than they could before, and begin to amend all the things wrong in their lives. However, like everything else in life - things come with a price.

Reception[]

The movie was a sleeper hit. According to BoxOfficeMojo, The Craft is the 8th highest-grossing movie since 1980 dealing with the genre of witches.

A straight to DVD sequel was in the works, but it was terminated.

Characters[]

Actor Role Description Robin Tunney Sarah Bailey Sarah is a natural witch with a painful past. After moving to Los Angeles with her father and stepmother, Sarah was introduced to the strength of her powers after joining Nancy’s coven. Fairuza Balk Nancy Downs Nancy was a spiritual witch with a painful past of abuse and neglect by her alcoholic mother and her molesting stepfather. After Nancy began dabbling with the occult, she and her friends, Bonnie and Rochelle, decided to form a coven. Neve Campbell Bonnie Harper Bonnie was a spiritual witch with no self-confidence who suffered bullying after being severely burnt in a house fire. Bonnie was a close friend of Nancy who convinced Bonnie to join her coven. Rachel True Rochelle Zimmerman Rochelle was a spiritual witch who suffered bullying and racism, due to the fact she was the only African-American student in her high school. Rochelle was a close friend of Nancy who convinced Rochelle into joining her coven. Skeet Ulrich Chris Hooker Chris is a womanizing playboy who falls under the spell of Sarah and her coven, after publicly humiliating Nancy and Sarah. Christine Taylor Laura Lizzie Laura is a mean and popular girl who took great pleasure in tormenting Rochelle. Assumpta Serna Lirio Lirio is a natural witch and the owner of a local occult shop in Los Angeles. Lirio is seen as a mentor of sorts to Bonnie, Nancy, Rochelle, and Sarah as she teaches them about the beauty and danger of witchcraft, although they often dismiss her teachings.

Trivia[]