Below is the final Pythagorean table for the 2010-11 French Ligue 1 which concluded today. The league Pythagorean exponent is 1.70.The table indicates that Lille were deserved winners and PSG finally played up to its potential after several underperforming seasons. The conventional wisdom says that Sochaux had a great season to finish in the top […]

Yesterday was the 22nd anniversary of the most dramatic league decider in the history of English football, and perhaps the most dramatic match of its kind anywhere: Liverpool vs Arsenal in 1989. Arsenal had led for most of the season until the closing weeks when Liverpool charged past them into first place with a match […]

As I transition from my current job to my startup, I've started to think about my professional society memberships. Overall they have been useful in personal and professional networking with other professionals in my field, presenting technical publications, and receiving member discounts. I plan on maintaining membership in most of them, but some will be […]

Below is the final Pythagorean table for the 2010-11 Turkish Süper Lig which concluded today. The Pythagorean league exponent is 1.70.The new champions Fenerbahçe were the biggest surprise of the season with a +10 Pythagorean residual. Their defensive record (goals allowed variance of 1.0) was not that great compared to champions from the other European […]

Below is the final Pythagorean table for the 2010-11 Italian Serie A that concluded today. As always I use the league Pythagorean exponent of 1.70.Milan had such a dominant season in the league that it obscured the very good seasons of Inter and Napoli. Napoli's overachievement made the difference in their passage into next season's […]

Below is the final Pythagorean table for the 2010-11 English Premier League which concluded today. As always, the league Pythagorean exponent is 1.70. League Table Pythagorean Team GP W D L GF GA GD Pts W D L Pts Δ Manchester United 38 23 11 4 78 37 +41 80 23 8 7 77 […]

In anticipation of requests from those performance analysts who follow this site, below is the final Pythagorean table for the 2010-11 English Football League Championship. The Pythagorean league exponent is 1.70, as usual. QPR were clear winners but the table appears to say that the second automatic promotion place was a wash between Norwich and Swansea. […]

Now that the 2010-11 La Liga season is over, it's time to post the final weighted goalscorers list. This is the original version of the metric without any consideration of marginal utility, just the number of goals and the ranking of the opponent at the start of the matchday. I used the weighting function defined […]

Below is the final Pythagorean table for the 2010-11 Spanish Primera División which concluded today. As always the Pythagorean league exponent is 1.70. The Pythagorean table confirms the huge gap between Barcelona, Real Madrid and the rest of the league. There is also a sizeable gap between Valencia and the Europa League representatives but not as […]

In addition to the two sub-categories for the soccer Pythagorean, I decided to add a category for posts that link to my soccer analytics papers, whether preprints or published articles. It's called "Soccermetrics Publications" and you can find it in the category list on the right-hand side of the page.