The IT sector is one of the fastest growing industries in the country and worldwide. Since its existence, it has greatly impacted other companies and industries and presented new challenges to them. And new challenges arise with this impact. In the past, business managers rarely had to take on so much and on top of that, they have to be agile in order to keep up with this evolution every step of the way.

Through our campaign FOKUS IT we want to make companies feel confident about taking steps towards digitalization. We bring the digital leaders together and together with them, we decipher the code of innovation.

Fujitsu is all about ‘turning dreams into reality’. This is where they put their technology to work. On the one hand, to create an atmosphere of hyperconnectivity in order to facilitate companies. On the other hand, to enable people, information and things to come together in unique ways. This sense of digital transformation towards a ‘connected’ business allows businesses to take full advantage of current technological shifts and gives a unique perspective on an organization. And that is exactly what the brand struggled with: raising awareness about that digital transformation and the position of the Internet of Things (IoT) within that shift. They were looking for the right format and solution to get the right message across to the right target group, which consisted of a large group of decision makers.

Smart Media’s native advertising provides the ideal solution for companies wanting to boost interaction, thought leadership, and sharing. Therefore, with Fujitsu’s goal to raise awareness in mind, the publication of a native article in print and online, in which an expert and winner from the Start-up spoke on hyperconnectivity, was the perfect solution. The print article was positioned next to the editorial by Danielle Jacobs, General Manager at Beltug, the largest Belgian association of Digital Technology Leaders, and aligned perfectly with its subject.

After working together on identifying where the ideal target group was located, the multichannel approach, crucial to getting our message across to the right people, did its job. Within a very short period of time, the print and the online article were picked up by the right target group of decision makers. The goal of 3000 readers was highly overachieved in 8 days time. The average reading time of 2.5 minutes showed there was a big interest from our readers. By creating valuable content and showcasing it in relevant channels, Fujitsu empowered their – potential – clients, were able to build up relevance, and succeeded in making the brand top-of-mind in IoT-solutions.