‘A comfort zone is a beautiful place, but nothing ever grows there.’ A sentiment that Les Roches student Mandy Lin lives by – here she shares the story of her second internship and the benefits of heading outside the C zone.

“When you are on top of the world, stay humble; when you’ve hit the low, stay hopeful.” Every challenge I take, I tend to exceed the limit, reaching higher and going beyond my goals. Every person has their own story, and my story is not only colorful but also vivid and alive. This is Mandy Lin, I am currently doing my second internship at Fujitsu Belgium as a Field Marketing Trainee.

From luxury apparel to IT services

From working at a luxury boutique; Moncler, as a Sales Advisor, to an IT company as a Marketing Trainee. My journey completely changed 180 degrees. I wanted to know what I was capable of, and I wanted to see how far I could reach, and luckily, my fate took me to Brussels, to a company I never thought I was able to work for.

It was tough to be recognized at a company that’s full of all sorts of wizards, skilled professionals. I knew nothing about Blockchain, Artificial Intelligence, Hybrid IT, Quantum Computing before I step a foot inside this company.

[quote]But I knew one thing, if I was willing to learn, I will push myself as far as I can, and I will make sure I don’t disappoint anyone.[/quote]

Everyday in the office is filled with challenges, rainstorms and rainbows, and lots of hot chocolate. Every month there’s a new task, and there’s a new opportunity to be creative to impress my manager. Saskia Degelin; my manager, is an extraordinary woman. She is the type of superwoman I would like to be. By this, it says a lot about my respect towards her. Under her guidance, I am able to learn more than just marketing, but life, and how to survive in a company.

People may say IT seems boring, but if you look around, it’s 2019 and we are all surrounded by technologies. It is time to jump ahead of others and starting looking at what’s in your palm now. Having the privilege to be at a company like this, I am more than lucky. Being able to implement the knowledge that I learn at Les Roches in a different world, this is what Les Roches is able to offer me.

Mandy Lin, BBA student and intern at Fujitsu Belgium

Discover more from the internship series: