•Download as PPTX, PDF•

2 likes•473 views

This document discusses Fujitsu's vision of a "Human Centric Intelligent Society" where technology empowers people. It notes that the world is becoming increasingly connected, with rising amounts of data and devices. Fujitsu advocates using the power of human-centric information and communication technology to build a safer, more prosperous, and sustainable society through human empowerment, connected infrastructure, and creative intelligence. The key to success is ensuring technology places people first and optimizes business and social infrastructure for human needs.

Related slideshows

Everyone has a fitbit... Now What? M3 Conference 2014

Everyone has a fitbit... Now What? M3 Conference 2014

IBM relevance with Government Agencies

IBM relevance with Government Agencies

AdTech 2017 Sydney

AdTech 2017 Sydney

Fujitsu Belgium: Human Centric Innovation

1. Shaping tomorrow with you How will the world be different? Human Centric Innovation Frederik De Breuck Presales Director and head of Business Assurance Fujitsu BeLux

2. Shaping tomorrow with you Our vision of a Human Centric Intelligent Society Copyright 2015 Fujitsu Belgium - STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL1 A new world is emerging. It is a world of connectivity. People and the things around us, all linked together, sharing information.  More collaboration  Vanishing boundaries  Changes to the way businesses work  Changes how society creates value  Risk and uncertainty

3. Shaping tomorrow with you 40TB 20TB 10TB 3,6TB 10 Billion 50 Billion 2013 2020 Per second of experimentation at CERN Per hour by an operating jet engine Of text in the books of the US Library of Congress Per hour from a self- driving car Connected Devices Hyperconnected devices and places

4. Shaping tomorrow with you If cutting-edge Technology on itself is not sufficient and technologies are so accessible, what is the key to success in this hyperconnected world? PEOPL

5. Shaping tomorrow with you Use the power of Human Centric ICT to build a safer, more prosperous and sustainable society Human Centric Intelligent Society

6. Shaping tomorrow with you Connect People and empower Connect everything and optimize business and social infrastructure Create knowledge from information Human Empowerment Connected Infrastructure Creative Intelligence Human Centric Innovation

7. Shaping tomorrow with you 6 Organizations have started to realize innovation

8. Shaping tomorrow with you A new ecosystem: Distributed and Connected Business

9. Shaping tomorrow with you Copyright 2015 Fujitsu Belgium - STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL8 Distributed businesses use the scale and diversity of the ecosystem to provide low cost services with high value, tailored to meet the needs of individuals in their context

10. Shaping tomorrow with you Why is this vision human centric and not machine-centric?

11. Shaping tomorrow with you IMHDS embarked on a project to improve group-wide productivity. Comparison of data showed that the top sales assistants had more customer interactions and spent up to 1.5-2 times longer with customers, resulting in a corresponding difference in the sales generated. The data also revealed that the best sales assistants tended to wait for customers in positions with a good view of the entire sales floor.

12. Shaping tomorrow with you Copyright 2015 Fujitsu Belgium - STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL11 Overhauling Water Facility Maintenance Using Augmented Reality Technology together with Metawater

13. Shaping tomorrow with you Panasonic envisages applying big data analytics to smart appliance use data collected at the Point of Use (POU). The pilot project leverages their respective strengths, namely, Panasonic’s data collected from smart appliances and Fujitsu’s cloud technology for efficient analysis and visualization of the data.

14. Shaping tomorrow with you End of Document … ‘shaping tomorrow with you’ is our brand promise. It’s how we behave, what we do every day. It’s who we are. Copyright 2015 Fujitsu Belgium