They’re still going strong!

Gene Hackman and his wife, Betsy Arakawa, made a rare appearance on Thursday when they stepped out for their first public outing together in 21 years.

The “French Connection” actor, 94, and Arakawa, 62, enjoyed an early dinner at Pappadeaux Seafood Kitchen in Albuquerque, N.M., according to exclusive photos obtained by Page Six.

Hackman was seen holding onto his much younger wife’s arm with one hand and using his other hand to lean on his walking cane.

The couple appeared in good spirits as Arakawa assisted her husband out of the casual restaurant.

Hackman looked cozy in a gray fleece vest layered over a plaid button-down.

He also wore olive green cargo pants and lace-up hiking boots to provide a sturdy step for the Hollywood legend. He also wore a beige baseball cap and sunglasses on his head.

Meanwhile, the classical pianist wore a colorful Western-style paisley-print shirt, jeans and brown suede boots.

She accessorized the look with dangly earrings and carried a navy jacket in her free hand.

That same day, Hackman was also spotted hitting a convenience store, where he picked up a hot cup of coffee and an apple pie.

For more Page Six you love…

Listen to our weekly “We Hear” podcast

Shop our exclusive merch

The last time the lovebirds were seen in public together was when they walked the red carpet at the Golden Globe Awards in 2003.

The “Bonnie and Clyde” star retired from his acting career the next year and has been laying low in Santa Fe ever since.

The reclusive two-time Oscar winner materialized for the first time in years when he was spotted looking in tip-top shape while doing yard work in March 2023.

Hackman and Arakawa initially met when she worked part-time at a Los Angeles gym that he used to frequent, according to the New York Times.

They tied the knot in 1991 and live together in their rustic Southwestern-style Santa Fe ranch, which was featured in Architectural Digest.

While the private couple never welcomed any children together, Hackman shares three adult children — Christopher, 64, Elizabeth, 61, and Leslie, 57 — with his ex-wife, Faye Maltese

Hackman and his first wife were married for 30 years until their divorce in 1986.