Lausanne, SWITZERLAND and San Francisco, CA, USA, 26 March 2024

Asceneuron SA, a clinical stage biotech company dedicated to targeting the root causes of neurodegenerative diseases, today announces that it has joined the Critical Path Institute’s, Critical Path for Alzheimer’s Disease (CPAD) Consortium. With its highly experienced leadership team and world class Scientific Advisory Board of leading experts in neurodegenerative diseases, Asceneuron is well positioned to contribute to the consortium.

Asceneuron has an exemplary pipeline of O-GlcNAcase (OGA) inhibitors in clinical development that have the potential to halt disease progression in neurodegenerative diseases. Its lead asset, ASN51, is a potential best-in-class, orally administered, OGA inhibitor targeting tau aggregation and will be progressing into Phase II clinical development later this year. The CPAD consortium is proceeding to advance important biomarkers for Alzheimer’s disease (AD), such as tau Positron Emission Tomography (PET) and is accelerating the pathway for approval of promising new therapies. As a member of CPAD, Asceneuron will work collaboratively with the consortium to help address the large unmet medical need of patients and families suffering due to neurodegenerative diseases.

Ryan Schubert, Senior Vice President Research and Development at Asceneuron, said:

“We are honored to be collaborating with the CPAD consortium alongside esteemed fellow members, all of whom are dedicated to accelerating drug development to improve patients’ lives. CPAD has gathered high quality data and experts from industry, academia and regulatory agencies with a focus on bringing new treatment options to patients suffering with AD. We look forward to contributing to and impacting the treatment pathway for AD as we advance our lead intracellular tau-targeting asset, ASN51, into Phase II clinical development later this year. Further information will be shared at upcoming scientific conferences.”

Yashmin Karten, PhD, MBA, Associate Director at Critical Path for Alzheimer’s Disease, added: “C-Path is proud to welcome Asceneuron as the newest member of its CPAD Consortium. Asceneuron’s research on molecules that prevent the formation of toxic tau aggregates in the brain to slow down or stop the progrecision-making tools to advance drug development and improve the lives of those living with AD and related dementia (ADRD).

CPAD’s mission is to accelerate the drug development process for patients with chronic neurodegenerative disease leading to dementia. Its primary focus is on AD. CPAD works with industry, regulatory authorities, academia, and patient advocacy organizations to aggregate anonymized patient-level data consensus standards with the aim of advancing drug development tools for evaluating drug efficacy and safety, to optimize novel clinical trial designs, and facilitating the regulatory review process.”

CPAD’s integrated and standardized patient-level database comprises over 100,000 patient level records across 73 separate clinical trial datasets. These records are utilized by over 370 institutions worldwide. Alongside its biotech and pharmaceutical company members, the initiative incorporates feedback from all its stakeholders, including government and regulatory agencies. CPAD has ongoing efforts as part of its pre-competitive working groups to evaluate the potential of tau PET as a reliable surrogate endpoint, with the aim of enhancing efficiency in Alzheimer’s disease drug development.

Lausanne, SWITZERLAND and San Francisco, CA, USA, 18 December 2023 – Asceneuron SA, a clinical stage biotech company dedicated to targeting the root causes of neurodegenerative diseases with its exemplary pipeline of O-GlcNAcase (OGA) inhibitors, is pleased to announce the appointment of Abbas Hussain as new Chair to its Board of Directors.

Abbas Hussain has over 35 years of experience in the healthcare industry, building and growing businesses across the globe. He has a strong track record across the pharmaceutical value chain in both mature and emerging markets. Abbas has held various senior leadership positions at world leading pharma companies including GlaxoSmithKline, where he was President of Global Pharmaceuticals with responsibilities for operations in Europe, US, Asia and emerging markets and Eli Lilly, where he was President of Europe. He was Chief Executive Officer of Vifor Pharma which was acquired by CSL Limited in 2022 for $11.7 billion in one of the largest health care deals of the year.

Henrijette Richter, Managing Partner of Sofinnova Partners and Vice Chair of the Board of Directors of Asceneuron, commented: “Abbas has fantastic experience and a proven track record in the pharma industry which will be invaluable as we take Asceneuron into its next stage of growth and accelerate development of these potentially transformative therapies. On behalf of the whole board and company, I would like to thank Peter Van Vlasselaer for his expertise and guidance over the past 5 years.”

Barbara Angehrn Pavik, Chief Executive Officer of Asceneuron, said: “The recent significant advances in neurodegeneration therapies have reinvigorated interest and excitement in this challenging field. We are delighted to welcome Abbas. His experience will be invaluable as we further advance our lead clinical OGA inhibitors into the next stage of development for the benefit of patients.”

Abbas Hussain, Chair of the Board of Directors of Asceneuron, remarked: “There have been tremendous advances in the treatment of neurodegenerative disorders which impact millions of people globally every year. Asceneuron is developing potentially transformative therapies that have the potential to slow disease progression and I am delighted to be joining the team at a pivotal time of transition and growth.”

Abbas currently holds various Non-Executive Director and Advisor roles at Alfasigma SpA, 4Bio Capital, C-Bridge Capital and GLG Institute. He previously held various Non-Executive Director roles at Cochlear Limited, CSL Limited, Teva Pharmaceutical, Immunocore and advisory roles with Hikma Plc, Cell Research Corp, Abingworth and Indegene Inc. In addition, Abbas also provides expert advisory services to private equity and venture capital firms focused on the healthcare sector.

He holds a Bachelor of Science in Medicinal and Pharmaceutical Chemistry from Loughborough Institute of Technology (UK) and is a graduate of the Stanford Executive Program at Stanford University (California, USA).

Asceneuron’s evolving pipeline is focused on new chemical entities designed to address the high unmet medical needs of neurodegenerative proteinopathies such as Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s disease. Its proprietary clinical pipeline consists of in-house developed OGA inhibitor ASN90 and potential best-in-class OGA inhibitor ASN51 which are demonstrating potential as a game changer in halting disease progression in neurodegenerative diseases.

Asceneuron’s leadership team will be attending the upcoming 42nd Annual J.P. Morgan Healthcare Conference in San Francisco, 8-11 January 2024.

Lausanne, SWITZERLAND, 6 Oct. 2023 – Asceneuron SA, a clinical stage company dedicated to targeting the root causes of neurodegenerative diseases, today announced the appointment of Barbara Angehrn Pavik as the new Chief Executive Officer (CEO), as part of a leadership transition poised to propel the company into its next phase of growth, with two compounds in clinical development.

Dirk Beher, co-founder of Asceneuron, its original Chief Scientific Officer, and CEO since 2014, will transition to the key role of Chief Scientific Advisor.

“Dirk’s leadership and unwavering dedication has been a cornerstone of Asceneuron, enabling the company to become a true pioneer in our field,” said Peter Van Vlasselaer, the Board Chair. “With interest in this therapeutic area accelerating, we’re seeing a surge in momentum for the company and an opportune moment to bolster Asceneuron’s position. Barbara’s appointment will help us capitalize on this pivotal moment.”

Angehrn Pavik is an industry stalwart with more than 20 years of experience who has held key leadership roles in EU and US companies, including Amgen, Onyx, Exelixis, and was the Founder and CEO of Stepstone Pharma. Most recently, as the Chief Business Officer at Vifor, Angehrn Pavik played a key role in the company’s acquisition by CSL Limited.

“I am deeply honored to be joining the Asceneuron team at this transformative juncture,” Angehrn Pavik said. “Moving into clinical development is a pivotal step, and I’m eager to build on the strong foundation laid by Dirk and the Asceneuron team.”

Beher added, “It’s been a journey of passion and commitment at Asceneuron, and I am confident that under Barbara’s leadership, the company will soar to new heights. I look forward to supporting her vision in my capacity as the Chief Scientific Advisor.”

Lausanne, SWITZERLAND and San Francisco, CA, USA, 4 May 2022 –Asceneuron SA, a clinical stage company dedicated to targeting the root causes of neurodegenerative diseases, today announces that it has been awarded a second grant from The Michael J. Fox Foundation for Parkinson’s Research (MJFF) to accelerate the study of its clinical stage O-GlcNAcase (OGA) inhibitor ASN51 as a potential new treatment for Parkinson’s disease (PD).

Parkinson’s disease is caused by a loss of dopamine producing nerve cells in the substantia nigra. This leads to a reduction in the signalling mediated by the neurotransmitter dopamine in the brain causing the characteristic motoric dysfunction in PD. An estimated seven to 10 million people worldwide suffer from PD. Although there is no current cure for PD, Asceneuron is discovering and developing therapeutics for the high unmet medical needs of patients experiencing neurodegenerative disorders.

The grant will fund a preclinical proof-of-concept study to assess the disease-modifying properties of Asceneuron’s OGA inhibitor ASN51 in a preclinical model of inherited PD. The genetic model is characterized by the overexpression of a-synuclein harbouring the A53T mutation known to cause early-onset, familial PD in humans. Aggregated forms of a-synuclein are the main component of the characteristic Lewy body pathology and thus thought to be causative of the loss of dopaminergic neurons in PD.

The aim of this study is to extend previously published findings demonstrating a reduction of motor impairment with Asceneuron’s OGA inhibitors (e.g., Permanne et al., ACS Chem. Neurosci. 2022) to this alternative genetic disease model. The results will further interrogate the mechanism of action of OGA inhibitors with respect to a-synuclein toxicity and aggregation and provide support for the clinical exploration of ASN51 in PD patients. The project will begin immediately, with results expected in the fourth quarter of 2022.

Dirk Beher, Chief Executive Officer, Co-Founder of Asceneuron, commented:“We are pleased to have been awarded further funding support from The Michael J. Fox Foundation to progress research on our next generation O-GlcNAcase inhibitor ASN51. ASN51 has the potential to make a meaningful impact on patients suffering with Parkinson’s disease to improve quality of life and slow progression. We are proud to receive the continued support from a foundation that contributes meaningfully towards development of improved therapies for those living with Parkinson’s disease.”

“The Michael J. Fox Foundation is dedicated to unlocking the complex biology of Parkinson’s disease and unearth novel breakthrough treatments to improve patient lives and slow disease progression,” said Luis Oliveira, PhD, Senior Associate Director of Research Programs, MJFF. “We are pleased to award Asceneuron a grant to support further research in the O-GlcNAcase inhibitor, ASN51, as a potential modifier of a-synuclein toxicity.”