Nathan Phelps is a boy who lost his parents to violent murders. When he killed his mother's murderer, his defense resulted in legal battles regarding exposure to violence and weapons control.

Background[]

Nathan grew up in dangerous and impoverished areas, losing his father to being stabbed to death some years earlier. He and his mother Monica would receive charity donations from My Salvation Charities, run by Ted Carthage, who Nathan always referred to as "the good people". One of the family's closest friends was Gina Arroyo, who was another patron.

Nathan's mother would have sex with men she would bring home, forcing Nathan to sleep in the closet so he wouldn't be present. Nathan didn't know one man was Carthage, a serial sexual abuser of women and girls assisted by the charity, including Monica, every one of them bribed with additional kickbacks in exchange for sexual services.

Infected[]

One night, Nathan heard and saw through the door Carthage's and Monica's latest tryst, before they start to argue and Monica tries to force Carthage out. Carthage pulls his gun and calls Monica a "whore", and despite her pleas for her live, Monica was brutally raped and shot, the bullets narrowly missing Nathan when they fly through the closet. When police arrive and hear Nathan wasn't at school, they open the door and see him curled in a ball, knowing Monica is dead. He's walked out and covered so he doesn't see Monica, then treated at an ambulance.

Nathan mentions Gina, who's also found shot dead the same way with the same weapon, a package with a lot of cash in her possession just like Monica. Carthage is finally suspected when his sexual exploitation is exposed, Carthage being arrested in a sting when about to rape a girl named Katie for another payment. As the only witness, Nathan was brought up for a voice lineup, never seeing the men to not bias his ID as he didn't see Carthage shoot Monica but new him personally. Unfortunately, Nathan got the ID wrong, and Carthage was released. When Nathan saw Carthage walking out and realized his mistake, Nathan ran right out into traffic and nearly died from being hit by a car to get Carthage back in custody, narrowly being saved by Benson, with whom he established a bond.

To make it right out of his own regret, Nathan personally made it all the way to the charity headquarters, stole Carthage's own gun, and shot him dead with it, forcing everyone out of the office. Benson arrived while Nathan was crouched behind a desk and still holding the weapon. Benson took the weapon away when she had the chance. When Nathan was taken to trial for murder, his lawyer, Sophie Devere, tried to argue in front of Elizabeth Donnelly Nathan wasn't guilty because of his exposure to violence from his parents' separate murders throughout his childhood.

As Donnelly was about to cast her verdict at the end of the trial, NRA lawyer Mike Geddes barges into the courtroom and takes the case to higher courts, ready to sue over grounds that gun violence didn't make Nathan commit a shooting, but Nathan's own choices did. Nathan was forced to testified on the stand, and once badgered enough by Geddes, Nathan admitted he hated Carthage, which should've warranted evidence that Nathan killed Carthage on his own accord.

However, to get back at the NRA, and to give Nathan a second chance, Devere prepared to motion to Donnelly to dismiss Nathan's murder charges offer his self-incrimination rights being violated. Donnelly granted the motion, which left the NRA lawsuit null from no preceding legal grounds active, let alone in record as a judicial verdict. Geddes protested, but presiding judge Joseph Malloy accepted Geddes opened the door for the perfectly legal sabotage and threw the case out.