Released in 1993, 'Last Action Hero' was an action-packed, meta-curiosity: a young movie fan is transported into a parallel dimension, where he must work alongside the star of a series of action films to stop the villain of those films when he escapes into the real world. Arnold Schwarzenegger plays a fictional version of himself, the star of the "Jack Slater" series of movies within the movie, which is filled with all sorts of satirical winks and nods to the world of cinema. While the film performed poorly at the box office, it's become something of a cult favorite over time. 20 years later, we take a look back at this truly unique release and see what Schwarzenegger and friends are up to now.

Arnold Schwarzenegger, Jack Slater/Himself

Then: Action icon Arnold Schwarzenegger played a fictional version of himself, who plays a character named Jack Slater -- a guy who comes to life through a bit of movie magic and teams up with a kid to help stop an evil movie villain.

Now: After acting as Governor of California for several years and taking a break from acting, Schwarzengger has finally returned to the big screen -- this year he appeared in 'The Last Stand' and 'Escape Plan,' and can be seen next in 'Sabotage.'

Austin O'Brien, Danny Madigan

Then: Austin O'Brien played Danny Madigan, a young film fan who especially loves the Jack Slater series of movies and is delighted when he finds himself transported into Slater's world.

Now: O'Brien went on to star in 'My Girl 2' and 'The Baby-Sitters Club,' as well as the TV series 'Promised Land.' He hasn't acted as much in recent years and currently lives in Los Angeles, where he runs his own photography company.

Charles Dance, Benedict

Then: Charles Dance played Benedict, the villain of the Jack Slater films who crosses over into the real world. Dance had previously appeared in the films 'The Golden Child' and 'Alien 3.'

Now: You know him best as another villainous character -- Tywin Lannister on HBO's 'Game of Thrones.'

Tom Noonan, The Ripper/Himself

Then: Tom Noonan played The Ripper, an axe-wielding character from one of the Jack Slater films who killed Slater's son. Noonan also plays a fictional version of himself in the film.

Now: Noonan appeared in the first two seasons of the AMC series 'Hell on Wheels,' and recently appeared on the new NBC series 'The Blacklist.'

Bridgette Wilson, Whitney Slater/Meredith Caprice

Then: Former model and Miss Teen USA Bridgette Wilson played Whitney Slater, Jack Slater's daughter, and Meredith Caprice, the actess who plays Whitney in the Slater films. 'Last Action Hero' was her first film role.

Now: Wilson went on to star in 'Mortal Kombat,' 'I Know What You Did Last Summer,' and 'House on Haunted Hill,' but she hasn't appeared in any films since 2009. She's married to tennis star Pete Sampras, with whom she has two children.

F. Murray Abraham, John Practice

Then: F. Murray Abraham played John Practice, a friend of Slater's who ends up betraying him. Abraham had previously won an Academy Award for his role in 'Amadeus.'

Now: Abraham recently had a small role in 'Inside Llewyn Davis' and stars in the upcoming Wes Anderson film 'The Grand Budapest Hotel.' He is currently appearing on the Showtime series 'Homeland.'

Ian McKellen, Death

Then: Ian McKellen made a cameo appearance as Death a character from Ingmar Bergman's 'The Seventh Seal,' who comes to life during a screening of the film.