Sampling sites

The sampling sites were located in the municipality of Santiago Comaltepec, Oaxaca, in a steep hillside that harbors the greatest number of tree fern species in Mexico (8–10 species) along an elevation gradient spanning 1,100–2,300 masl (Fig 1A). We established 26 sites along the elevation gradient with a 50-m difference in elevation between successive sites. Five main trails (“Relámpago”, “San Bernardo”, “La Esperanza”, “Vista Hermosa” and “Puerto Antonio”) were covered to achieve the desired elevation intervals, but for inaccessible elevation intervals we established roadside sites. Due to the steep slope, it was extremely difficult to establish replicate sites along the gradient. This made it impossible to test the consistency of species turnover pattern at different locations. Despite this, the sampling scheme resulted in the inclusion of pairs of species that shared the same elevation range (or significant intervals). This allowed us to evaluate the consistency of both the morphological patterns along the elevational gradient at the species level and the pattern of species turnover, the latter by identifying factors that limit species distribution at the inter-specific level. The areas above 2,300 m are dominated by Quercus and Pinus and were not included in this study due to the absence of tree ferns; the area below 1,100 m (tropical rain forest) was not included due to the high human disturbance of the landscape [45].

a. Geographic localization in the municipality of Santiago Comaltepec. The map was created using the software QGIS (version 3.12.2-Bucuresti). b. Vegetation profile of the elevation range. c. Concentration of three main soil nutrients along the gradient. d. Weekly measurements of relative humidity and temperature for three elevations reflecting environmental conditions of three zones (low, intermedial, high).

https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0291945.g001

We placed nine data loggers (HOBO U23 Pro v2) at three sites along the elevation gradient (1,400, 1,900, and 2,300 meters above sea level (masl hereafter); three loggers per site) to register hourly temperature (°C) and relative humidity over one year (2015–2016); recorded values were downloaded using the program HOBOware v3.7.14 (Onset Computer Corporation 2002–2018). Since temperature is linearly related to elevation [46], an interpolation of temperature was performed for the other sites along the gradient. The elevation gradient can be divided into two zones according to vegetation type: highly conserved cloud forests (CF: 1,400–2,300m) and a transition zone between tropical rain forest and cloud forest (TZ: 1,100–1,400m) (Fig 1B). Based on the climatic data, the elevation gradient was divided in a high zone (HZ), an intermediate zone (IZ), and a low zone (LZ), reflecting differences in temperature (°C) and relative humidity along the gradient (Fig 1D). The temperature presented variation in all the zones along the year, decreasing towards autumn and reaching lowest values in the winter. Mean temperature at the top of the HZ (2300 m), IZ (1900 m), and LZ (1400 m) was 13.0, 15.2, and 17.1°C respectively. Data loggers were lost for the plot at 1100 m, but interpolation suggest an approximate measure of 18.9°C. At 1400 m (the top of the transition zone), relative humidity dropped dramatically from summer to winter. The RH data obtained here appear to be severely affected by a relatively unexpected weather event. At the Sierra of Juárez, the forest structure is negatively affected by strong winds (> 80 km / h) about once every 10 years [47]. These strong winds cause massive tree falls and landslides, changing environmental and landscape conditions in the different zones of the elevation range (S1 Fig). In our study, such climatic event could explain the unexpected low RH values obtained by the data loggers, which makes characterization of the gradient difficult. However, based on our accumulated experiences from previous visits, we believe that differences shown here reflect, at least, clear differences in RH between the cloud forest (CF; 1400–2300 m) and the transition zone (TZ; 1100–1400 m).

Soil nutrient concentrations per site were characterized using six variables: total carbon (C), total nitrogen (N), total phosphorus (P), and C:N:P ratios; soil samples were taken by triplicate per site. Each sampling point was located 30 cm away from any tree fern and soil samples were taken at 30 cm of depth; soil samples were stored at -60° C. Soil nutrient concentrations were analyzed at the Instituto de Investigaciones en Ecosistemas y Sustentabilidad de la Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México (Morelia, Michoacán). Soil nutrients did not show significant differences between zones or vegetation types (S1 Table). Soil C and N showed a very similar behavior along the gradient (r = 0.931, p < 0.001) with the highest mean values in the IZ (1400–1700 m), in the lowest part of the cloud forest; the highest average soil P values were found at the top of the LZ (Fig 1C), which marks the transition zone into cloud forest. Soil P showed a weakly, but significant correlation with C (r = 0.198, p < 0.001) and N (r = 0.350, p < 0.001). Shared patterns of soil C and N, as well as differences with soil P, are well documented in the literature with consistency at different spatial scales [48–50]. These patterns are supported by a similar origin of C and N, both strongly determined by the organic matter in the soil, with external inputs occurring in ecological timescales, while P has an origin in bedrock and the weathering of primary minerals [51], with negligible external inputs occurring at that scale [50]. The variation in C:N:P ratios along the gradient is illustrated in S2 Fig.

Fern physiology and morphology

Variation in morphometric traits appear to be strongly influenced by allometric relationships. In the five tree fern species studied, blade length was correlated with stipe length and trunk diameter, which agrees with previous observations for the tree fern C. caracasana in the Andes [41], a species closely related to C. divergens [71]. These observations suggest a consistent allometric relationship between leaf and trunk size in tree ferns. Interestingly, trunk diameter and blade length exhibited significant correlations with stomatal traits, particularly with stomatal density.

Evidence suggests that the adaptation of fern species to different habitats may be explained by a combination of leaf hydraulic vulnerability and hydraulic adjustments of ferns fronds, both with consequences on leaf hydraulic conductance (Kleaf) [72,73]. Among hydraulic adjustments, variation in vein density (Dvein) has been strongly associated with Kleaf (via a negative correlation with hydraulic resistance of leaf), as well as with stomatal conductance, photosynthetic capacity, and stomatal density [74–76]. Zhang et al. [35] found a significant association between Dvein and stomatal density, even after phylogenetic correction. In turn, Dvein can also limit the diameter growth rates of tropical trees through constrains to the xylem water transport capacity [77]. These associations offer a way to explain the observed correlations between trunk diameter and stomatal density; adjustments to stomatal density in response to environmental changes may require (or be controlled by) adjustments to other phenotypic traits (in this case size) to keep the supply of photosynthetic resources and avoid water stress.

Similar adjustments in trunk diameter in response to variation in stomatal size could also be supported by a relationship between Dvein and stomatal size [78]. In our study, only G. salvinii showed a significant correlation between stomatal size and trunk diameter (r = 0.287, p = 0.004). This species exhibited relatively small stomata (length x width) at low densities (lowest), which, however, can reach relatively high stomatal conductance (S5 Table). A relatively high stomatal conductance could be due to a higher stomatal length that might require hydraulic adjustments (e. g. diameter). However in C. fulva, with similar stomatal length, the correlation between trunk diameter and stomatal size is very low (r = 0.015, p = 0.890), which suggest that this relationship may depend on the stomatal shape (strongly elongated in G. salvinii; S5 Table) and/or the environmental context. It is known that variation in stomatal shape can affect stomatal conductance and resistance to diffusion [79,80, see other references in 81]. On the other hand, the fact that A. firma (r = -0.214, p = 0.178) and C. divergens (r = -0.120, p = 0.321) showed an opposite correlation between these traits may evidence the relevance of the environmental context.

Some variation in stomatal traits at the community level was expected across the elevation range, with a steep temperature gradient and (at least) two different forests types that affect humidity and light levels. The preference for humid environments and the low control of evaporative potential in ferns in comparison with angiosperms has been well documented [36,82,83]. Gas exchange efficiency during photosynthesis is strongly determined by the interdependence between stomatal density and size, since both characters define the maximum diffusive conductance gsmax [84] that determines the photosynthesis process [85], although a limited ability to control stomatal opening and closing is also relevant [36]. The lower variation in stomatal size (20%) and density (15%) compared to morphometric traits (20–50%) appears to reflect higher levels of genetic determination [18,35,86]. Our results support these observations, showing that stomatal size is mostly determined by inter-specific differences (Table 2) and that variation in stomatal traits associated with environmental changes appears to be almost limited to adjustments in stomatal density. In addition, a low correlation between stomatal size and density, also observed in temperate ferns [87], suggested that these two traits are not controlled by the same mechanisms in ferns. However, this result was influenced by how we estimated stomatal size, as stomatal density was correlated with stomatal length (r = -0.261, p < 0.001) and stomatal width (r = 0.358, p < 0.001), indicating that the degree of interdependence of these stomatal traits may vary among fern species.

Contrasting environments in terms of temperature and humidity at the low edge of the cloud forest appear to have a large effect on morphometric traits. A warmer, less humid environment, and more open forest structure towards the transition zone supports plants with larger leaves (blade and stipe), while more humid and colder environment support plants with smaller leaves; this is reflected in the consistent pattern observed for A. firma and C. divergens. Accordingly, Bernabe et al. [28] found evidence of larger leaf sizes and higher growth rates at forest edges in A. firma, Lophosoria quadripinnata, and Sphaeropteris horrida. Likewise, Arens and Baracaldo [41] observed the same patterns in C. caracasana across a successional mosaic in the tropical Andes. Furthermore, our results reflect a differential effect of relative humidity on species morphology. Species restricted to the cloud forest zone, where relatively humidity is more constant, showed little to no trends in blade length compared to species that inhabit zones where relative humidity is more heterogeneous and with more pronounced changes (at the edge of the cloud forest zone). Riaño and Briones [39] observed that tree ferns within closed and more humid habitats had smaller fronds without substantial changes in size with varying levels of humidity; on the contrary, in open sites, the presence of larger fronds was influenced by humidity levels, suggesting that a combination of light availability and humidity drives variation in frond size in tree ferns. Although we could not explore the effect of light incidence, the close agreement between morphometric and stomatal trait variation at the low edge of the cloud forest zone suggests a strong influence of relative humidity and light. In ferns, shade-tolerant plants have been proposed to display low phenotypic plasticity in response to changes in light availability compared to sun-tolerant plants [see references in 88]. However, in our study, A. firma, a shade-tolerant species, showed great variation (similar to that of C. divergens, a sun-tolerant species) in both morphometric and stomatal traits among different types of vegetation with a clear contrast in light environments. Light intensity has been strongly associated with the variation of stomatal density, stomatal conductance and photosynthesis capacity in ferns [36,39,89,90]. Although it is an inconsistent pattern among tree ferns [91,92], light intensity has also been associated with higher stomatal density in A. firma and C. divergens [38]. This could explain the increase in stomatal density towards more open zones with increased light incidence in G. salvinii and A. firma. In addition, light incidence is associated with variability in blade and stipe length, in which the development of larger fronds is a strategy to compete for light resources [39,41]. However, the positive relationship between light incidence and relative growth rates is not consistent among studies [93,94].

The more pronounced pattern for stomatal density appears to reflect contrasting humidity environments at the lower edge of the cloud forest zone. Similar to the morphometric traits, stomatal density in A. firma decreases from the transition zone to the lower zone of the cloud forest. This may suggest the same regulatory mechanism for both types of traits. This mechanism could be supported, again, by the role of Dvein. A negative association between Dvein and humidity conditions has been found in both angiosperms and ferns [see references in 18]. Our study did not estimate Dvein, however, lower values of SD (strongly correlated with Dvein in ferns) and TD (potentially limited by Dvein), coincide with the most humid area within the elevation range of A. firma, while a contrasting pattern arises towards the transition zone. Theoretically, high Dvein in the transition zone could promote higher Kleaf, stomatal density, stomatal conductance, and higher rates of gas exchange per leaf area [74–76]. In the cloud forest, in shaded sites with a high water supply, low Dvein could promote “a reduced construction cost, and also correspond to a lower vein projected area and volume, and thus to less displacement or shading of photosynthetic mesophyll” [Sporck and Sack cited in 76]. Based on this, a combination between adjustments in the hydraulic system and a great capacity to compete for light resources [28,37,39] could determine the distribution of A. firma. However, not all the species are equally sensitive to changes in relative humidity [95] and in some species Dvein does not correlate with Kleaf [see references in 76]. This might explain the dissimilar patterns of variation in stomatal density and trunk diameter displayed by C. divergens and A. firma in the same area and could reflect a phylogenetic component. But, because C myosuroides and C. fulva were not distributed in contrasting humidity environments along the studied range, the consistency of this pattern in Cyathea species could not be verified. Cyathea myosuroides did not show significant trends for any trait probably because only the upper part of its distribution was sampled (1,100–1,250 m). Interestingly, C. myosuroides inhabits warmer and less humid areas than any other species in our study and showed the lowest combined values of stomatal size and density (S5 Table), which theoretically lead to lower stomatal conductance [84]. Evidence suggests that low stomatal conductance may represent and advantage in more arid conditions [96].

The patterns of morphometric and stomatal variation reported here allowed a partial understanding of how the phenotypic response to environmental change may be associated with community composition and structure by determining both the factors driving this variation and the adaptive potential of species in a context of interspecific competition and ecological differentiation. Environment stability in terms of light and humidity availability has a significant effect on trait-environment relationship trends at the intraspecific level and on species distribution ranges at the interspecific level. The fact that only A. firma and C. divergens inhabit both the low edge of the cloud forest and the transition zone (A. firma only a small interval) seems associated with the ability to make significant adjustments in combined morphometric and stomatal traits to maintain adequate gas exchange efficiency and photosynthetic capacity in contrasting environments. Previous evidence suggested that the performance of tree fern species is associated with their position within the forest, such that some species (e. g. C. divergens) show high growth rates (frond length) at the forest edge, while other species perform best at the interior of the forest [28]. Interestingly, in our study, the significant trends in morphometric variation in species distributed within the cloud forest seem to respond to other environmental factors (a decrease in temperature and a theoretical increase in light incidence towards the top of the gradient). Derived from the above discussion, it is clear that local environmental selection promotes different phenotypic adjustments along the elevation gradient, establishing a relationship between elevation and the type and level of variation that allows for the formulation of hypotheses about how species might respond to different environmental scenarios (e. g. due to climate change), and how the community structure could be affected. For example, although ferns have a reduced ability to control stomatal opening and closing compared to angiosperms, distribution ranges of C. fulva, C. divergens and C. myosuroides, from top to bottom of elevation gradient, may be associated with stomatal size, where large stomata (e. g. C. fulva) have been associated with low responsiveness in rapidly changing conditions and small stomata (e. g. C. myosuroides) have been associated with conditions of higher rates of gas exchange [97].