Real world article

(written from a Production point of view)

Dayton Ward (born 7 June 1967; age 57) is a writer and software developer based out of Kansas City, Missouri. He has written a large number of Star Trek novels and short stories, specifically Star Trek: Starfleet Corps of Engineers. Ward has written two Trek reference works for Insight Editions and often collaborates with Kevin Dilmore.

Ward was born in Tampa, Florida. After leaving high school, he joined the US Marine Corps, where he served for almost eleven years. He is married and has two daughters.

Dayton Ward has been nominated for a Scribe Award six times, winning twice. He won the award in 2016 for Armageddon's Arrow and in 2019 for Drastic Measures, and was also nominated in 2010 for Open Secrets; in 2014 for From History's Shadow; in 2017 for Elusive Salvation; and in 2021 for Agents of Influence.

Star Trek credits[]

Strange New Worlds – "Reflections"

Strange New Worlds II – "Almost… But Not Quite"

Strange New Worlds III – "The Aliens Are Coming!"

In the Name of Honor

Interphase, Part One †

Interphase, Part Two †

The Aliens Are Coming!

No Limits – "Loose Ends"

Foundations, Book One, Book Two, and Book Three †

A Time to Sow †

A Time to Harvest †

Tales of the Dominion War – "Field Expediency" †

Home Fires †

Grand Designs †

Where Time Stands Still †

Distant Early Warning †

Summon the Thunder†

Mere Anarchy – Things Fall Apart †

Constellations – "First, Do No Harm" †

Turn the Page †

Glass Empires – "Age of the Empress: The Rise of Sato I" *

Shards and Shadows – "Ill Winds" †

Open Secrets ‡

Seven Deadly Sins – "The First Peer" †

Paths of Disharmony

Declassified – "Almost Tomorrow"

What Judgments Come †

That Which Divides

In Tempest's Wake

From History's Shadow

Peaceable Kingdoms

Point of Divergence †

Armageddon's Arrow

All That's Left †

Purgatory's Key †

Elusive Salvation

Hidden Universe Travel Guide: Vulcan

Hearts and Minds

Hidden Universe Travel Guide: The Klingon Empire

Drastic Measures

IncrediBuilds: Star Trek - USS Enterprise Deluxe Book and Model Set

IncrediBuilds: Star Trek: The Next Generation - USS Enterprise Deluxe Book and Model Set

Available Light

Star Trek: Kirk Fu Manual

Agents of Influence

Moments Asunder

Somewhere to Belong

† – with Kevin Dilmore

‡ – story with Kevin Dilmore

* – with Kevin Dilmore, story by Michael Sussman

[]