Adventure Genre Definition – What’s the best definition for the adventure fiction genre? The adventure genre consists of books where the protagonist goes on an epic journey, either personally or geographically. Often the protagonist has a mission and faces many obstacles in his way. A good example would be The Lord of the Rings series. The adventure genre often pairs up with the action genre, since long epic journeys have a lot of action in them. The adventure genre can be combined with almost any other genre; it’s versatile like romance and drama in that it can be meshed with almost any other genre and still work.

Scroll below now to see 25 adventure fiction genre examples,

or click here to see all fiction genres.

* * *

Adventure Genre Definition – Examples

Review this list of popular examples to help you get a better understanding of the adventure fiction genre.

1. The Hunger Games by Suzanne Collins

2. Catching Fire by Suzanne Collins

3. The Hobbit by J.R.R. Tolkien

4. Mockingjay by Suzanne Collins

5. Treasure Island by Robert Louis Stevenson

6. The Da Vinci Code by Dan Brown

7. Angels & Demons by Dan Brown

8. Shock Wave by Clive Cussler

9. Pacific Vortex! by Clive Cussler

10. Sahara by Clive Cussler

11. Dragon by Clive Cussler

12. Flood Tide by Clive Cussler

13. Inca Gold by Clive Cussler

14. Trojan Odyssey by Clive Cussler

15. Harry Potter and the Sorcerer’s Stone by J.K. Rowling

16. Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban by J.K. Rowling

17. Arctic Drift by Clive Cussler

18. Black Wind by Clive Cussler

19. Polar Shift by Clive Cussler

20. Iceberg by Clive Cussler

21. Treasure by Clive Cussler

22. The Return of the King by J.R.R. Tolkien

23. Valhalla Rising by Clive Cussler

24. Night Probe! by Clive Cussler

25. Treasure Of Khan by Clive Cussler

* * *

Adventure Genre Definition – Related Book Genres

* Action Genre Definition

* Adventure Genre Definition

* Drama Genre Definition

* Epic Fiction Genre

* Fantasy Fiction Definition

* Science Fiction Genre Definition