Once Upon a Time (OUAT) is many things: fairy tale retelling, family drama, superhero story, action/quest adventure. One might call it an “interdisciplinary” show, drawing on many genres and sources of narrative influence to craft its story of fairy tale characters marooned in our world in the little town of Storybrooke, Maine. OUAT also possesses many female and male characters who qualify as superheroes, especially the central character Emma Swan (Jennifer Morrison), daughter of Snow White (Ginnifer Goodwin) and Prince Charming (Josh Dallas). It is Emma and her connections to multiple genres that I wish to discuss today, as she is the character who unifies the sources of influence OUAT takes from the chick flick, superhero, and fairy tale genres.

While difficult to define precisely, the “chick flick” is one of those things we supposedly know “when we see it.” Films like The Princess Diaries, Legally Blonde, Bridget Jones’s Diary, Freaky Friday, Leap Year, Letters to Juliet, The Devil Wears Prada, Steel Magnolias, and Fried Green Tomatoes…all of these could be (and have been) described as chick flicks. One might define the chick flick as a film addressing topics popular among/aimed at female viewers; a film with mostly female lead characters; a film whose target audience is primarily female; a film with a feminist-influenced protagonist, etc. There is no singular definitive way to describe a chick flick.

One of the aspects of the “chick flick” label that may trouble some critics is its stereotypical bent: suggesting that these films are only “women’s” films or that they merely fulfill highly conventional, feminized formulas. Chick flicks as a category have been popularly criticized for reproducing feminine stereotypes and reinforcing traditional binary gender codes. However, as the contributors to the anthology Chick Flicks: Contemporary Women at the Movies (2008, eds. Suzanne Ferriss and Mallory Young) prove, each chick flick is a case unto itself. Criticizing chick flicks as a homogenous category is not useful because to do so ignores the surprising diversity found among these films. Some chick flicks are, indeed, quite conservative – but others are equally subversive and progressively minded.

Basically, the link I am drawing between chick flicks and OUAT is the presence of strong female characters who dictate much of the show’s plot.

Moving on to the second genre influencing OUAT: the superhero. Besides the obvious presence of the superhero figure, this genre offers OUAT elements of the heroic quest, sci-fi genre elements such as time travel and heroes with special powers, and apocalyptic events.

The third genre, the fairy tale, provides not only the foundation of OUAT but also the specific elements of magic, family and children-oriented morality tales, and character types such as princesses, princes, witches, evil queens, magicians, and so on.

These three sets of criteria and source elements coalesce in the character of Emma Swan, who resembles the female protagonist of many chick flick films, and who is also a superhero and a fairy tale princess. It’s not terribly surprising today to see such a character, one that draws from multiple sources and meets the criteria of multiple genres. Emma, though, is one of the first of what I call a “second wave” of female superheroes who started appearing in film and television roughly around 2011-2012. The “first wave” of Hollywood female superheroes occurred roughly between 2003 and 2007, although a couple examples (such as James Cameron’s Dark Angel series) appeared earlier starting in 2000 and a couple later (such as Joss Whedon’s Dollhouse), lasting through 2009 and 2010. Female superheroes’ presence did noticeably decrease for a few years in between these two “waves,” supposedly because female superheroes were not marketable enough compared to their male equivalents.

Emma Swan and her fellow second-wave female superheroes differ from their first-wave predecessors in that they more clearly and more readily embody multi-genre traits such as those I’ve described for Emma in OUAT. Unlike the first wave, these second-wave female characters have proven to be much more successful: TV characters such as Emma, Black Canary (Arrow), Abbie Mills (Sleepy Hollow), Skye and Melinda May and Jemma Simmons (Marvel’s Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.), and Bo Dennis and Kenzi (Lost Girl) belong to shows that have run multiple seasons and/or received high viewership and fan/critical ratings. In film, Black Widow (Avengers), Pepper Potts (Iron Man 3), and Alice of the Resident Evil franchise (Alice is one female superhero whose films have survived since her first appearance in 2002 all the way to the present, continuing in 2004, 2007, 2010, 2012, and another upcoming sequel) belong to incredibly popular and financially lucrative movie franchises.

By bringing together many elements from diverse genres, Emma represents the success of the more complex female superhero of recent years, indicating why these second-wave female superheroes are proving more successful than the first wave. Their cross-genre nature allows them a much wider appeal, reaching audiences of diverse interests. OUAT as a specific example is capable of appealing not just to families and children/young audiences but also to older fans of superheroes, adventure, and fairy tale traditions. The emphasis on a female protagonist and her many strong female relatives, friends, and opponents – including Snow White, Regina the Evil Queen (Lana Parilla), the Blue Fairy (Keegan Connor Tracy), Ruby/Red Riding Hood (Meghan Ory) and her grandmother (Beverley Elliot), and many others – is a strong appeal to female viewers along the lines of the chick flick’s female ensemble. The action/adventure elements target the late teen and post-teen group, while the show’s family-friendly attitude is a sure appeal to cross-generational viewing groups.

Certainly, it could very well be the case that viewers in recent years have simply caught up with the fact that female superheroes are just as cool as male ones. Or, perhaps it’s Hollywood that has done the catching up, making recent female superheroes and their stories more complex and more interesting to viewers. The most notable female superhero films from ten years ago, particularly the notorious Catwoman of 2004 (which received a Razzie award) and Elektra of 2005 (hailed, alongside Catwoman, by some critics as one of the worst superhero films ever made), were hugely unsuccessful. My own analysis suggests that Catwoman and Elektra are actually two of the best and most forward-thinking of 21st-century female superhero films – but perhaps that’s what turned people away. Catwoman and Elektra both include, among other unusual elements, an extremely progressive (one might also label it decidedly feminist) ending in which the female superhero walks away from the proffered settled family life in favor of maintaining her independence and freedom as a superhero. (“Oh no!” frightened viewers must have said as they ran from the theater!)

In contrast, the more complex, cross-genre female superhero of recent years seems to be finding the right balance of unconventional female behavior (sadly, “hero” is still overwhelmingly a masculine-coded label) and recognizing the need to appeal to a diverse audience that without a doubt includes women. Some are definitely better attempts than others: OUAT, Arrow, Marvel’s Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D., Lost Girl, Sleepy Hollow, and Fringe (another wave-spanner) are among the best in television for their inclusion and treatment of female superheroes, while in film Marvel Studios’ Avengers franchise (surprise, surprise!) has done much to steadily increase the importance of its female characters since the franchise began with 2008’s Iron Man.

Looking ahead to the next year or so, OUAT, ARW, MAOS, and SH are set to continue, with the (SUPER EXCITING) addition in January 2015 of Marvel’s Agent Carter, which will bring back Agent Peggy Carter from Captain America: The First Avenger (2011) to tell her story after Cap’s disappearance in the 1940s. The recently announced, long-awaited Black Widow film is also on the horizon; potentially, a solo Wonder Woman film as well (if DC can get their act together!).

The increased complexity of the new female superheroes, building on the enormous current popularity of superheroes in general, is finally giving viewers the female superheroes they deserve as well as the ones they need. (Sorry, couldn’t resist throwing in a Dark Knight reference! It fit in so well…) Emma Swan and her fellow female warriors at last seem to be making a real impact on the stories, traditions, and viewers of the 21st-century superhero.