Viaplay Group, Antenna Studios, Lionsgate, Mediawan, Sky, Big Light Productions, Windlight Pictures, Beta Film, Firefly Productions, Lumière, Bulgarian National Television, Croatian HRT, Nova TV, RTL Hrvatska, 24sata and Drugi plan as well as European Broadcasting Union and Sarajevo Film Festival confirmed participation.

Zagreb will once again become a central gathering place for successful producers, screenwriters, production companies and representatives of FTA television, pay-TV channels, streaming services, and other content creators.

NEM Zagreb 2022 is returning - an event focused on content development of the TV industry in Central and Eastern Europe. A program full of panels, Q&A’s, presentations, successful business practices, speakers, and other special events has been announced. Under the slogan All about content creation, the second edition of the event will be held from December 7th to 9th at the Esplanade Zagreb Hotel.

World-renowned professionals will discuss current topics of the industry during various panel discussions:

Low-production countries are encouraged to co-produce in general while high-production countries prefer to choose bigger countries. What do large production companies look for in partners from countries where production is not that developed?

Being a good leader is not an easy task, especially in situations of higher production costs and reduced budgets, implementation of new technologies and dynamic business trends. What are the biggest challenges leaders face?

Titles based on true events are very popular. How much can screenwriters and producers deviate from the facts, but still have their content fit into the category "based on a true story"?

Writers create stories, write scripts, and help determine what the episodes will look like. What does that creative process entail, what are the challenges and why do good scripts sometimes underperform?

A Scandinavian model of co-production in Adria region - a real possibility or completely impossible? Can Adria region adapt to Scandinavian business practices?

The conversation about the TV industry will continue during several Q&A interviews through the following topics:

The impact of streamers on non-English content

Originals from Bosnia and Herzegovina producers

Special programs for presenting original content and successful business practices

During the central part of the program called Content Showcase, top original content in various stages of development will be presented. The program will consist of several presentations by the largest European and regional companies such as Viaplay Group, Firefly Productions, 24sata and RTV Slovenia. Also, CineLink Drama will present the original content of BH Telecom and hold a showcase of selected projects.

Co-production Business Practice

NEM Zagreb is also organizing a special program called Co-production Business Practice during which the renowned Big Light Productions and Lumière will present their successful business practices.

To get into the Christmas spirit, Pickbox, the Croatian company managing Pickbox NOW and Pickbox TV, will organize an exclusive Christmas Party for partners and clients.

TV Writing Contest

NEM Zagreb will close with an awards ceremony for the winners of the TV Writing Contest. More than 50 submitted works in scripted and unscripted categories are currently being evaluated by an expert jury from the companies Beta Film, Rai, Zig Zag Productions, Script Angel, Joyrider, Croatian Radiotelevision (HRT), Radio Televizija Srbije (RTS), Telekom Srbija and CineLink Industry Days, the creative branch of Sarajevo Film Festival.

In the days leading up to the event, there will be a workshop under the leadership of Script Angel and lecturer Hayley McKenzie. Elements of the workshop are screenwriting, creating an original script, story development, character development, ideas, creating a story world, various exercises and assignments and pitching.

Development of the TV industry in the region

As an event focused on the CEE region and countries with lower production capacity within the region, NEM Zagreb is aiming to bring together regional audiovisual professionals and key decision makers from the rest of the Europe. Knowledge exchange and a unique opportunity for networking with TV industry experts are essential parts of every New Europe Market (NEM) edition.

Find more details on the official NEM Zagreb 2022 website as and secure your participation.

BBC Studio Showcase, NEM