his text deals with the transformation of Croatia’s public service, Croatian Radio Television in the context of the integrated media and building a converged newsroom. I compare the newsroom workflow at HRT with the daily routines of its strongest commercial competitor – Nova TV and the good practices of selected public service companies. At the end of 2012 the public service media provider, Croatian Radio Television (HRT) published a new set of rules and regulations and announced its reorganisation. The new HRT is primarily looking for a new approach to the media and wishes to show that a public service is no longer just radio and television, but a joint effort which acts as new media. According to the new restructuring plan, the greatest challenge is to establish the convergent integrated newsroom and consequently the establishment of a single news media service. In view of its resources: technical, human and financial, but also in view of the modes of financing (TV licence fees and advertisements), it is naturally expected for Croatian Radio Television not only to become a role model media that provides accurate, authentic information in the public interest, but also to endorse innovation and the use of new technologies. An enormous effort has to be undertaken to prove that the convergence is not only about the quantity of journalistic content, but also could bring quality. HRT is at the beginning of the changing process, yet its goals and vision have not been communicated effectively. Most of the HRT staff has not embraced the new vision, nor the professional, economic, and logic argumentation that stands behind it. Most of them are sceptical and this can slow down the speed of integration. It seems that for HRT, it is not enough just to have a restructuring plan in place, but also a well thought out plan of how to break down the resistance of its employees and motivate them to abandon old habits. There is a lot to be done to create a working environment that could fulfil the proclaimed mission to produce high-quality, trusted and varied journalism (media content) that serves the society and democracy.

We live in a multimedia world and media convergence is our everyday reality. Technological improvements cause important transformations in society and the economy, and the media are the first to be changed. Digitisation transforms the media, especially television, into new media with numerous possibilities for new products and services. The main characteristic of this process in Croatia is the fact that implementation precedes development strategies or plans. Furthermore, the lack of public discussion enables these processes to remain far away from citizens who do not understand them or are not motivated to understand them. The proliferation of new digital channels (terrestrial, cable, satellite or broadband) as well as fragmentation of the mass audience make this process even more complex. Technological improvements have produced a new multimedia environment breaking down the traditional boundaries between telecommunications, computers and the audiovisual industries. As in many countries in the region, the public service television in Croatia is faced with a program identity crisis and at the same time is fighting for stable financing. Regarding the process of general digitization and media convergence, we must ask if it is possible to predict the future of the ‘old media’, especially of television, which is still the most influential. If it wants to survive, public service television has to reorganize and redefine itself as a converged, multimedia public service.

The present scientific study focuses on the issue of radio news in the 21 st century. The ambition is to evaluate, at the time of writing this study, the current situation concerning news coverage in the most listened radio entities in the Slovak Republic. In this context, the basic characteristics of a public radio broadcaster and a private radio entity are also described. The results focus on the current state of radio news and its diverse interpretation in selected radio entities in Slovakia based on quantitative content analysis. The study details information on the nature of broadcast news in our research sample of the main news programmes of a public and a private radio broadcaster in Slovakia. It also sets out research questions and hypotheses focusing on the representation of news with a domestic and foreign focus, as well as which foreign countries dominate the foreign news coverage, and the themes in the foreign news coverage. The study summarizes the results of the research, generalizes the data, and also formulates conclusions that define radio news in the 21 st century. The research section also includes interviews with executives from two selected media entities to support the results of the quantitative content analysis.

The paper examines the programming and organisational responses of FM radio to a dual crisis situation in the Republic of Croatia. At the very beginning of the national COVID-19 lockdown, on 22 March 2020, the capital city of Zagreb was struck by the strongest earthquake in the last 140 years. With the purpose of ‘recording’ the situation at the time when the disaster was actually occurring, the research aims to question how the radio stations in the area acted under such unprecedented crisis circumstances. Methodologically, it is a qualitative and descriptive research based on the analysis of questionnaire answers. Open-ended questions are grouped into three main topics: organization and programme changes, sources of information and the role of digital platforms. The results reveal that radio stations tended to retain their formatted programme content regardless of the dual crisis. This finding indicates the necessity to re-examine the overall role of FM radio in a modern democrati...