About Hon

Nick Greiner was Premier and Treasurer of New South Wales from 1988-1992. Since his retirement from politics he has been heavily involved in the corporate world.

Nick is currently Chairman of Bradken, The Nuance Group, QBE Australia and Accolade Wines as well as Deputy Chairman of CHAMP Private Equity. He is also Chairman of the Advisory Council for Degremont and Senior Advisor and Chairman, Council of Advisors, Rothschild Australia Limited.

Nick is a Director of the European Australian Business Council (EABC) and a Member of the Board of Governors, Committee for Economic Development of Australia (CEDA). He is also a Trustee of the Sydney Theatre Company Foundation; a member of the Advisory Committee of the Andrew & Renata Kaldor Centre for International Refugee Law; the Advisory Board for the John Grill Centre for Project Leadership; and also the Harvard Business School Asia-Pacific Advisory Board.

In the Queen?s Birthday Honours List of 1994 he was awarded a Companion of the Order of Australia for public sector reform and management and services to the community and in 2001 the Centenary Medal.

Nick holds an Honours Degree in Economics from Sydney University and a Master of Business Administration with High Distinction from Harvard Business School. He is a Life Fellow of the Australian Institute of Company Directors and a Life Member of the South Sydney Rugby League Club.

Enquire Here +

Unsure which keynote speaker will best suit your event? We excel at helping our clients identify the right speaker. Whether your occasion requires motivation from an industry leader, laughs and a chance for your staff to relax or the thrill of being in the same room as one of their heroes, we can connect you with the right speaker.

We have an unrivalled International client list, and after being in operation for over ten years we have catered for all sorts of occasions. Our aim is make your event truly memorable. For more information on any of our speakers or the services International Speakers Group provide, enquire below. We look forward to hearing from you.