Multiplayer survival horror game Dead by Daylight is getting a film adaptation from Atomic Monster and Blumhouse.

As reported by Variety, the two horror movie powerhouses are teaming up with developer Behaviour Interactive to create the film, though haven't shared any details outside of it being an expansion of the Dead by Daylight universe.

The film is also likely still a few years away, as Atomic Monster's James Wan and Blumhouse's Jason Blum have only just started searching for a director and screenwriter. Wan, Blum and Behaviour's executive vice president Stephen Mulrooney will act as producers.

Loading

Play

"We couldn’t be more thrilled to work with Jason Blum and James Wan, two giants of the horror film industry, to further expand the Dead by Daylight universe,” said Mulrooney "At Behaviour, our motto is to create unique moments, together, forever. Atomic Monster and Blumhouse are the ideal partners to craft Dead by Daylight’s killer entrance onto the big screen."

Wan said he and his team at Atomic Monster are big fans of Dead by Daylight, which is "perfect for a scary cinematic adaptation" thanks to its "building of an incredible environment teeming with atmosphere and terrifying villains".

For those worried the film might lose the essence of what Dead by Daylight is all about, Blum added that the team is hoping to find a director and screenwriter who is already a fan. "[We] think it’s imperative we find someone who appreciates and loves the world as much as we do, to help us bring the game to the big screen," he said.

Wan and Blum have been responsible for some of the biggest modern horror franchise including Saw, Paranormal Activity, and The Conjuring, and having announced that Atomic Monster and Blumhouse are merging, will be teaming up for good going forward.

This Dead by Daylight perhaps isn't the video game and film crossover fans were expecting, however, as Blumhouse announced last month that it would be also going the opposite way by making video games.

Ryan Dinsdale is an IGN freelancer and acting UK news editor. He'll talk about The Witcher all day.