16 January 2024

We can proudly announce that with collaboration from Italian game studio LKA and Swedish film-production company Studios Extraordinaires, we have started an exclusive partnership for a feature film adaptation of the video game “Martha Is Dead”.

Set in the picturesque yet war-ravaged landscape of Tuscany in 1944, “Martha Is Dead” weaves a haunting narrative against the backdrop of World War II. Player’s step into the shoes of Giulia, a young woman ensnared in a chilling mystery following the death of her twin sister, Martha.

“Every element of ‘Martha Is Dead’ was created with extraordinary precision and care. The narrative’s complexity was meticulously planned, visualized, and even shaped with a cinematic quality in mind,” says Luca Dalcò, Founder and Director of LKA, writer and designer of “Martha Is Dead”. “Bringing this to life as a film is a dream come true.”

Celebrated for its breath-taking detail and realism, “Martha Is Dead”, has garnered worldwide critical acclaim for its ability to blend the lines between reality, superstition, and the tragedy of war, into a captivating mystery that keeps players on edge until the very end of the game.

“The game’s gripping narrative and unique setting make it a perfect candidate for a film adaptation,” says Leo Zullo, Managing Director, Wired Productions. “We’re thrilled to join forces with Studios Extraordinaires to create a landmark cinematic experience, merging the artistry of gaming and filmmaking in an unprecedented way.”

The adaptation will be spearheaded by Studios Extraordinaires, a creative powerhouse by André Hedetoft and Andreas Troedsson that specializes in crafting high-end action, horror, and science-fiction films from original stories and extraordinary games.

“’Martha Is Dead’ is a narrative masterpiece, expertly weaving a spellbinding murder mystery from a young woman’s perspective in a way that’s never been done before,” says André and Andreas at Studios Extraordinaires. “We’re eager to bring this haunting tale to life, offering both fans and newcomers a cinematic tour-de-force, while staying true to the game’s soul-stirring essence.”

Currently in active development, the film adaptation of “Martha Is Dead” is being shaped in close collaboration with Luca Dalcò, Founder and Director of LKA, and the Creator of Martha Is Dead. André Hedetoft and Andreas Troedsson are attached to the feature film as co-directors. Alongside directing, André brings additional expertise as the screenwriter penning the script, while Andreas Troedsson is also taking on the role of cinematographer, ensuring both a visually stunning and meticulously crafted adaptation.

More details will be released soon!

Martha is Dead was released on the 24th of February 2022. The game is available on PC (Steam, GOG, EGS), PlayStation 4 & 5, and on Xbox One & Series X|S.