Less shapeless than a movie attuned to a very specific sense of alienation. It is fascinating has it acknowledges all those known biopics beats (particular when it comes to Parker's flaws) only it organizes them into an echo structure that complete ignores the usual rise and fall for the rambling movements of man who never quite feels comfortable in any moment of his life as portrait on the film. The film ideologically tiptoes harder than it should about how much that alienation is linked with post war US society, although period work is impressive unsentimental and devoid of nostalgia. It is a little self-conscious arty as Eastwood can get sometimes, and very self-aware of its importance as an affirmation of…

“Bird” sees Clint Eastwood blowing up his signature style of simplicity to awards-worthy epic length.

Eastwood proves himself an immediate adept at (yet another) genre in the music biopic. But “Bird” is so unwieldy and ambitious, that something of the director’s personal intimacy is lost in the blaring bebop.

The first of Eastwood’s films to attract major attention from the film festivals of the world, “Bird” tracks the life story of jazz saxophonist Charlie “Bird” Parker. As these sorts of stories typically go, his was not one of personal or professional stability.

Forest Whitaker gives a laudably unshowy performance as Parker; always in a state of collapse. The role is one that the hammiest of method actors would no doubt…

Clint Eastwood A Retrospective - Week 33

Director Clint Eastwood, a noted jazz aficionado, directs this heartfelt study of pioneering bop saxophonist Charlie Parker (Forest Whitaker). Moving forward and backward through Parker's brief life before his death of a heroin overdose at age 34, the film foregrounds the saxophonist's difficult relationship with his wife, Chan Parker (Diane Venora), but also features lengthy scenes of Parker improvising on stage, lit with the neon and cigarette smoke of vintage jazz clubs.

Jazz for me is a style of music and an art form that I do not particularly enjoy. I can admire the virtuosity and the musicianship but I just can’t get on board with the music. That just about sums up…

jazz has always been in the background of clint's filmography, so it's cool to see him dedicate a whole big movie to one of the great titans of the genre. forest whitaker and diane venora make an incredible pair with natural chemistry, and this goes out of its way to avoid the typical music biopic structure by shattering charlie parker's life into a fluid shotgun blast of memories overlapping and interrupting each other. usually i find these sorts of films to be an insider-only thing, where you have to already dig the artist to dig what's on screen, but even at nearly three hours i enjoyed the hell out this, it's so moody and darkly lit, with some of eastwood's…

The Outlaw Charlie Parker

Western films and jazz music have an engine for newness that runs parallel. They've both had to be re-invented to stay relevant. The western story moved from the hero who holds down order in a town, to the anti-hero drifter who passes through town with his own burdens and secrets. Then it shifted to modern areas of Mexico, Texas, etc. where rifles, saloons and ten-gallon hats weren't out of place. And then it finally appropriated into modern police procedurals. Jazz went from swing, to beebop, to free jazz and then into hip-hop samples.

It's obvious in Bird that Clint Eastwood loves Charlie Parker's music. Clint Eastwood is a "failed" jazz musician in that his own piano…

Why I watched this one? I am a huge Clint Eastwood fan. Of his 56 movies he has starred in or directed I had seen 51 of them. Bird was one of the few that I had not seen. Plus this is the movie that changed Eastwood's career....as it was the first critically acclaimed award winning movie he directed. It one won an Oscar...and Clint picked up a Golden Globe for Best Director for this movie.

What is this one about? The troubled life and career of the jazz musician, Charlie "Bird" Parker.

My thoughts on this one? A huge negative for me going into this movie...is the fact that I am not a music fan at all. So watching…

Wasn't expecting Clint Eastwood to do something so radical with the musical biopic formula, but he pulls it off for the most part. The story is told as interweaving flashbacks, one memory or line of dialogue leading to another in a different place and time. It surprises, changes pace, and continually feels like it's making up the story as it goes along. So in other words, the movie acts like a Jazz song. I'm not completely sure that I could sit down and write an essay about what Charlie Parker did, but I certainly got a sense of the man, and what his life was like. This is thanks to both the structure of the movie, and Forest Whitaker's performance.…