Spanish newspaper Marca have launched another scathing attack on Real Madrid forward Gareth Bale, labelling him a 'parasite' and accusing him of 'sucking' the club's money despite him helping them to win 14 trophies during his stint.

Bale, 32, has been no stranger to criticism from the press since arriving at the Bernabeu in 2013 - with his recent years at Madrid marred by a string of injuries, below-par performances and off-field antics that have angered supporters.

He is almost certain to leave at the end of the season when his contract runs down, and is set to play only a bit-part role with Carlo Ancelotti's side closing in on the LaLiga title. However, Marca have opted to tear into him once again this week.

Journalist Manuel Julia Dorado, writing in a column for the publication, has taken the astonishing step of likening the veteran to a parasite. He also declared that the transfer was a 'misfortune', and appears to be counting down the days until he exits.

His rant read: 'The Bale parasite came from the cold and rainy Britannia.

'He settled in Spain, at Real Madrid, where, masked, he first showed diligence and love for the guest, but then his nature led him to suck blood without giving anything in return. Well, more than blood, he sucked, and sucks, the club's euros.

'Unlike others of its kind, such as the flea, the louse or the bedbug, the Bale parasite does not cause itching or illnesses in its host, but after sucking, it laughs and makes fun of it, showing a jocular contempt for the one from whom he lives.

'He laughs, applauds, throws himself on the ground, sings, as a kind of humiliating ceremony, which, luckily, has an expiration date, like all misfortunes.'

Accompanying the article is a mock-up of Bale as a mosquito, further underlining the paper's belief that the Welshman has drained the club's resources over the years.

Marca also singled out Bale in the wake of Madrid's humiliation at the hands of Barcelona in El Clasico, despite him not making the squad. The hosts were thrashed 4-0 in front of their own crowd and Bale was blasted for being problematic.

He was savaged for being more focused on international duty than his club, presenting Madrid with a £25,000 invoice for medical treatment in England - which was not paid to him - and 'disappearing with amazing ease' from daily activities.

Bale has played just 69 minutes across two matches since August, leading Marca to claim that boss Ancelotti is 'counting down the days' until the winger leaves. They also declare that he has caused 'more problems than joy' during his time in Spain.

But despite the recent storm, the former Tottenham talisman has insisted that he takes no notice of the criticism and waved away suggestions it will grind him down.

'I don't listen to any of them, it's a waste of time,' he told Sky Sports, after being questioned on the new onslaught from the media in Spain while away with Wales.

The reporter followed up by asking Bale if the words still could affect him, to which he succinctly replied: 'Not when you don't read it, so it doesn't matter what they write. I could say something but it's better not to.'

At Madrid, Bale has won four Champions League titles among the 14 overall gongs.

Yesterday, he dodged questions over what may come next in his career, while Wales' fortunes over the next three months may significantly impact on his plans.

'I haven't thought about that at all,' he insisted. 'Since we knew we were going to be in this situation (the play-offs) my sole focus has been on this game.

'Thinking about the future can cause doubts in your own mind. Whatever happens in the future I'll decide in future. I haven't thought about anything other than this game or planned for anything after it yet.'

Marca's grievance over Bale not playing for Madrid against Barcelona but then training with Wales just days later raised eyebrows. The player himself and national team boss Rob Page refused to clarify exactly why he had missed the derby.

But when invited to clear up the situation, Bale said: 'I don't need to clarify that because I don't need to tell anyone what was up. I don't need to give anyone anything to use against me. Everything is fine now, I have no issue.'