Unidad Editorial, the company behind MARCA, and Al Fasceela Management (AFM), have reached a strategic agreement that will see MARCA content published across the Arabic-speaking world.

Based in Bahrain, AFM will be responsible for rolling out MARCA throughout the Arab countries and North Africa, producing both the online and print versions of the newspaper in Arabic. The plans include printing a weekly newspaper, of which publication will begin in late 2013 or early 2014, as well as expansion into the states of the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) in the medium term.

Having recently launched a similar project in Colombia, the agreement with AFM is the latest step in MARCA's international expansion.

MARCA's Arabic edition will be produced by a dedicated team integrated into the company's main news desk in Madrid, ensuring consistency with the parent newspaper in terms of style, format and original editorial content. At a later stage, original content related to Arab football and the target markets will also be created.

After signing the agreement, Mohammed H. Al-Nusuf, the founder and CEO of AFM, commented: "MARCA in Arabic will strive to bring this part of the world more than simply news articles and in-depth analysis of every sport. It will act as an educational tool, fostering sporting culture. This new project aims to become a benchmark for sports coverage. Our aim is to export MARCA's extensive sporting knowledge so that it can be accessed and enjoyed by the citizens of the Arab countries."

Similarly, the president of Unidad Editorial, Antonio Fernandez Galiano, noted: "One of the cornerstones of our strategic plan is the internationalisation of the MARCA universe, which we initiated a few months ago with our Colombian project and which we are now continuing with this launch in the Arab world. The major investment made in Europe and Spain from the GCC region cannot be ignored. Furthermore, with several major sporting events taking place there in the next few years, the Middle East is set to become a major focus for the world of sport. We are honoured and delighted to have the opportunity to partner with AFM on the launch of this new project, which we are convinced will be a huge success".