Marca.com is a popular website in the Recreation category. As per our analysis, we believe that Marca.com is a reliable website and we trust the legitimacy of the website. Please note that this does not constitute an endorsement of their business, and we are not liable for any bad experience you may personally experience with them.

Why We Think Marca.com Is Legit

To study if Marca.com is a legit business or not, we looked at the authority rating granted to them by various third party services like Moz and Majestic:

Marca.com has a Moz Domain Authority of 93, and a Majestic Trust Factor of 73

There are over 92846 backlinks pointed at various pages on Marca.com

Marca.com has been shared over 222385 times on Facebook.com

Here is a more detailed analysis of our inspection.

Marca.com Website Authority

Domain authority is a metric used by various website analysis tools like Moz, Ahrefs, and Majestic to measure the “authority” level of a website. It is typically a score between 0 to 100 – new, and unreliable websites typically have low scores while large, established websites have a high score, of more than 50.

Here is how Marca.com’s numbers stack up:

Moz Domain Authority: 93

Moz Page Authority: 66

MozRank: 9.3

Majestic Trust Flow: 73

Majestic also ranks the trust factor of Marca.com across different categories. Here is how they rank this website:

TOPIC Topical Trust Flow Recreation 72 Sports/Soccer 38 Health/News and Media 36

All these numbers indicate a strong possibility for Marca.com to be a legitimate and reliable business.

Marca.com Social Authority

Social authority is a measure how often websites get shared on social media platforms. Trustworthy websites typically shared more often than low-trust and scammy websites. However, it is important to note that this metric can be easily manipulated.

Here are some social authority metrics for Marca.com

Number of Facebook Shares: 222385

Number of Pins on Pinterest: 8

Marca.com Backlink Profile

Backlinks refer to hyperlinks pointed from one website or webpage to another. Just like citation in academic journals, more backlinks generally mean that the website being linked to is legit and more authoritative. Again, backlinks can be manipulated and thus do not give you the complete picture.

However, generally speaking, scammers seldom rely on backlink profile to establish credibility since it is a long-drawn process. There are easier ways to scam.

Here is a general overview of Marca.com’s backlink profile.

Backlinks to Marca.com according to Moz: 92846

Backlinks to Marca.com according to Majestic: 6539929

Unique domains pointing to Marca.com (Majestic): 47421

Number of times Marca.com was linked by Educational websites: 4141

Number of times Marca.com was linked by Government websites: 13

Is Marca.com safe?