Soccerex are pleased to announce a new media partnership with MARCA, the biggest sports news publication in Spain, for the inaugural Soccerex China, which will take place in Zhuhai, Guangdong, on the 17th and 18th of April this year.

MARCA, the leading sports newspaper in Spain, will feature in Soccerex China's conference programme alongside world renowned organisations such as LaLiga and Real Madrid, who have also confirmed their participation as speakers in Soccerex China.

MARCA's Deputy Director, Gerardo Riquelme, will be hosting a session called 'LaLiga data centre: match fixing and data distribution strategies' and MARCA will be providing exclusive coverage of Soccerex China, both promoting the event throughout the build up and with coverage throughout the event. Alfredo Lorenzo, Integrity Security Director of LaLiga, Silvestre Jos, Technology Services Manager of LaLiga and Jake Marsh, Head of Integrity of Perform Group, will be speaking in this conference session.

Furthermore, Real Madrid will be discussing their strategy in China and LaLiga representatives Sergi Torrents, Country Manager in China, and Adolfo Bara, Sales & Marketing Managing Director, will be joining league strategy and sponsorship panel discussions, respectively, alongside international organisations such as NFL, OCEANS Sports, Desports and Hublot.

Gerardo Riquelme is Deputy Director of MARCA, the leading Spanish sports newspaper with over seven million daily online readers from all over the globe. He has developed his entire professional career in MARCA since 1991, when he joined as an intern. Since then, Gerardo has covered six Olympic Games, from Atlanta 1996 to Rio 2016, and he has interviewed some of the biggest sports legends of our time including names such as Muhammad Ali and Pelé. Currently, he is leading the international expansion of MARCA in countries such as Mexico and Colombia as well as projects in the Asian region.

Soccerex's Marketing Director, David Wright, said: "This is another important for Soccerex to continue to grow their awareness throughout Europe. This partnership with MARCA will help Soccerex to promote and create more awareness in Spanish speaking territories and, as an added bonus, it helps us reinforce our relationship with LaLiga."

MARCA's Deputy Director, Gerardo Riquelme, said: "We are very delighted to sign this agreement with Soccerex to participate in the summit of Zhuhai. MARCA is firmly convinced about the power of football, especially Spanish football, but, at the same time, people need to be conscious of the threat of match fixing nowadays".

About MARCA:

MARCA is a Spanish national daily sport newspaper owned by Unidad Editorial. The newspaper focuses primarily on football, in particular the day-to-day activities of Real Madrid, Atlético Madrid and Rayo Vallecano. It has a daily readership of over 2,500,000, the highest in Spain for a daily newspaper, and more than half of sports readership. Since February 2001, there has also been an associated 24-hour/day sports radio station, Radio MARCA.

About Soccerex:

Established in 1995, Soccerex is the leading provider of business events for the global football community. Bringing together key industry decision makers from the world of football, Soccerex provides a unique commercial environment where delegates can benefit from exclusive business opportunities, networking and bespoke educational content. Since the first event in 1996, Soccerex has hosted over 40 events across five continents. The Soccerex portfolio includes an annual Global Convention complimented by continental Forums and regional Seminars.