Information about «Marca» media

Newspaper Name: Marca Newspaper name in English: The Mark Owner: Unidad Editorial Información Deportiva, S.L.U. Country / Region: Spain (Madrid) Language: Spanish Format type: Newspaper Category: Sport Political alignment: None Frequency: Daily Publication Years (print version): 1938 — now (85 years) Publication Years (digital version): 1995 — now (28 years) Circulation: 382,000 (2015) Official Pages: Official Apps: Website: marca.com [read with translation]

«Marca» is the leading daily sports newspaper in Spain and one of the most popular and widely circulated Spanish newspapers in general. In local circulation ratings, the newspaper is in second place after the free «20 Minutos». It is mostly devoted to football. The newspaper was founded in 1938 in San Sebastian as a weekly, and since 1942 it has been published daily. In 1995, the newspaper became available on the Internet, when its official website was opened, and at the moment it is the most visited sports electronic resource in Spain. Since 2001, the newspaper also owns the sports radio station «Radio Marca», and in the period 2010-2013 it had its own television channel «MARCA TV». Every year, the newspaper distributes many football awards in various categories: teams, players, coaches.

The publication mainly focuses on coverage of Spanish national, international and regional football, it is the Euroleague bulletin, the newspaper also represents the interests of local football clubs: Real Madrid, Atletico Madrid, Rayo Vallecano. In second place in the publication are other popular sports in Spain: basketball, auto racing, motorcycle racing, cycling, boxing, golf, rock climbing, athletics. Depending on the season, more or less attention is paid to each sport, but there is always a brief overview of international sporting events. A separate section in the electronic version of the newspaper (eSport) is devoted to computer sports games.

The traditional newspaper format consists of 4 main parts with many sections:

Futbol (Soccer):

Noticias (Review, News), Resultados (Results), LaLiga (Calendario, Clasificacion, Santander, SmartBank), Champions League, Europa League (European League), Supercopa de Espana (Spanish Super Cup), Copa del Rey (Yachting), Futbol Internacional (International Football), America (American Football), Awards (Balon de Oro / Golden Ball, Premios Marca / Mark's Award), Futbol femenino (Women's Football), Eurocopa (European Cup), Futbol Sala.

Baloncesto (Basketball):

Liga Endesa, NBA, Euroliga, Eurocup, FIBA Champions League, Mundial, Copa del Rey, Basket FEB.

Motor (Auto Racing, Motorcycle Racing):

Formula 1, MotoGP, Dakar (Dakar Rally), Rallies, Wec (FIA World Endurance Championship), Mas motor.

Polideportivo (Various sports):

Tenis (Tennis), Ciclismo (Cycling), Balonmano (Handball), Athletismo (Athletics), Golf, Rugby, Turf (Horse Racing), Boxeo (Boxing), MMA (Wrestling), Natacion (Swimming), Padel (Padel Tennis), NFL, Aventura (Adventure, Extreme Sports), Triathlon, Olimpismo (Olympic sports).

This newspaper is also published in Mexico in the local version of «Récord Mexico».

Detailed information about «Marca» media

On this page you can find information about Spanish newspaper «Marca»: short info, statistics and historical facts, founder and owner info, years of publications, area of circulation, actions, dates, interesting moments and others. Detailed Information contains more data and actual info about issue and showed in table view. Short description of the «Marca» contains only general facts about media (founder, owner, publisher, years, political alignment).

If you want to read Spanish newspaper «Marca» in original language in digital version, just click here and you will be redirected to the official website of the media. You can read «Marca» on any PC, Tablet or Smartphone in your web browser or in special software applications. Many newspapers offers official software for Apple and Android users, some also for Windows Mobile. For Windows desktop users available RSS reader.

You also may to read Spanish newspaper «Marca» in English in translation. Did you known that any newspaper or magazine, journal, periodicals daily (weekly, monthly) can be translated on any language instantly? Press translation is provided by on of the machine translators which located in Internet-based platform from well-known brands like Google, Yandex, Systran. Any online user can receive access to our translation system for free. We offer a full list of a translators that make localisation of selected media. Request a free translation of the «Marca» latest issue by clicking one button.