The Killing Fields (film) is a television show that was first aired in 1970 . The Killing Fields ended its run in 1970.

It features David Puttnam, and Iain Smith as producer, Mike Oldfield in charge of musical score, and Chris Menges as head of cinematography.

The Killing Fields (film) is recorded in English, French, and Khmer and originally aired in United Kingdom. Each episode of The Killing Fields (film) is 141 minutes long. The Killing Fields (film) is distributed by Warner Bros., and Columbia-EMI-Warner.

The cast includes: Sam Waterston as Sydney Schanberg, Haing S. Ngor as Dith Pran, Patrick Malahide as Morgan, Craig T. Nelson as Military Attache, Julian Sands as Jon Swain, and John Malkovich as Al Rockoff.

The Killing Fields (film) Quotes

Julian Sands as Jon Swain

(Julian Sands) "Where do they get this crap?"

(John Malkovich) "That guy across the gate there. The little guy. Could we all not look at once, please? I have it on reliable sources that that's none other than Hugh Elder."

(Julian Sands) "You're kidding --"

(John Malkovich) "He's disguised, but I got a little suspicious about it, you know what I mean?"

(Haing S. Ngor) "How does he get his copy out?"

(John Malkovich) "How does he get his copy out? Specially trained hens. Yeah, the BBC has commissioned them to walk past the Khmer Rouge like they're regular fowl, and then they've been crossing the border into Thailand every day and every night."

(Julian Sands) "Look, excuse the pun, but we're either staying; or we're living."

(Julian Sands) "If the going gets rough, I heard our best bet's the French embassy."

(Sam Waterston) "Who told you that?"

(Julian Sands) "The British embassy."

Haing S. Ngor as Dith Pran

(Haing S. Ngor) "The wind whispers of fear and hate. The war has killed love. And those that confess to the Angka are punished, and no one dare ask where they go. Here, only the silent survive."

(Haing S. Ngor) ""Sidney. No more fighting. No more war.""

Craig T. Nelson as Military Attache

(Craig T. Nelson) "Where ya goin', Schanberg?"

(Craig T. Nelson) "Well, up the Cooper-Church Amendment's ass."

Sam Waterston as Sydney Schanberg

(Sam Waterston) "If anybody ever gets to read about this, you won't be able to look them in the face."

(Sam Waterston) "Cambodia. To many westerners it seemed a paradise. Another world, a secret world. But the war in neighboring Vietnam burst its borders, and the fighting soon spread to neutral Cambodia. In 1973 I went to cover this side-show struggle as a foreign correspondent of the New York Times. It was there, in the war-torn country side amidst the fighting between government troops and the Khmer Rouge guerrillas, that I met my guide and interpreter, Dith Pran, a man who was to change my life in a country I grew to love and pity."

(Sam Waterston) "You forgive me?"

(Haing S. Ngor) "Nothing to forgive, Sydney. Nothing."

Patrick Malahide as Morgan

(Patrick Malahide) "For chrissakes, Sydney, why didn't you get him out then you had the chance? You had no right to keep him here. Funny sense of priorities."

(Haing S. Ngor) "I'm a reporter too, Morgan. I know his heart. I love him like my brother, and I'd do anything for him. Anything."

Add or Update Quotes

If you have a quote to add or change and want to let us know, please fill in the form below. Include the time in the film/video if possible so we can find it.