THE KILLING FIELDS Celebrates Its 30th Anniversary With A Blu-ray Release This January!

Three time Academy Award winning picture The Killing Fields is finally coming to Blu-ray for its 30th anniversary. The film took home Best Supporting Actor, Best Editing and Best Cinematography at the 1985 Oscars (for films released in 1984). It was also nominated for four other major categories that year including Best Picture, Screenplay, Actor and Director. The film is directed by Roland Joffe, whom most recently I remember directed that Elisha Cuthbert horror movie Captivity, and has a cast of Sam Waterston, John Malkovich, Craig T Nelson, Julian Sands and Haing S Ngor (who won the Oscar for this role). I’ve never seen The Killing Fields, but am excited to experience it for the first time on this new Blu-ray transfer. It drops in less than a month, so be sure to pre-order your copy from the link below today. The following is the official word from Warner Bros regard the release.

“Unforgettable. A movie to haunt your memory.”

—CBS Morning News

THE KILLING FIELDS

CELEBRATES 30TH ANNIVERSARY

WITH BLU-RAY™ DEBUT JANUARY 7

36-page Blu-ray Book Packaging for Movie Bestowed with Seven Oscar® Nominations and Three Wins

Burbank, Calif., September 9, 2013 – In celebration of its 30th anniversary, The Killing Fields, the haunting war story based on true events from the 1975 Khmer Rouge takeover of Cambodia, will make its Blu-ray™ HD debut on January 7. Warner Bros. Home Entertainment (WBHE) is releasing the film which stars Sam Waterston (TV’s “The Newsroom”), Haing S. Ngor (Heaven & Earth), and John Malkovich (In the Line of Fire). The Killing Fields was directed by Roland Joffé (The Mission ) and produced by David Puttnam (Chariots of Fire).

The Killing Fields won three Oscars® (1984) for Best Supporting Actor (Ngor), Best Cinematography (Chris Menges) and Best Editing (Jim Clark) as well as nominations for Best Picture, Best Screenplay (Bruce Robinson), Best Director (Roland Joffé) and Best Actor in a Leading Role (Waterston).

Synopsis:

This emotional and brutally honest true story follows Pulitzer Prize-winning New York Times reporter Sydney Schanberg (Waterston), who remains in Cambodia in 1975 after the government falls. He convinces his friend and translator Dith Pran (Ngor) to stay with him to report on the bloodbath perpetrated by one of the most brutal regimes of the 20th century and on the United States ‘ role in precipitating the horror. The two continue to work until the Khmer Rouge, the terrorist government that killed nearly 3 million, arrests them. Schanberg is eventually released and returns to New York . Pran is sent for execution but barely manages a daring escape from the killing fields and from Cambodia . With the help of Schanberg, Pran emigrates to the U.S. and becomes a staff photographer for the New York Times.

Special Features: