There are so many great music venues of all sizes in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania to catch local bands and international music acts. The music scene in Pittsburgh continues to get stronger year after year and so do the venues that host the shows. From the monster rock palace of Acrisure Stadium to the smallest of venues like... Mr. Small's theater, Pittsburghers have many options to listen to live music in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.

Acrisure Stadium

The Monster Rock Colosseum in Pittsburgh is Acrisure Stadium. The 68,400 seat venue is where "Rock Royalty" come to play when in town. Heinz field has hosted legendary rock groups like Metallica, U2, Guns and Roses, country star Kenny Chesney and everyone's favorite parrot head - Jimmy Buffet. Even local music heroes like the Clarks have performed numerous times on stage at Acrisure Stadium. So, if you are up for stadium sized concert grandeur, then Acrisure Stadium is the place to be.

Visit Acrisure Stadium

PPG Paints Arena

Home to the Pittsburgh Penguins and music sibling to Heinz Field in the Pittsburgh music scene is arena rock venue PPG Paints Arena. Recent shows included performances by the late Tom Petty, entertainer extraordinaire Bruno Mars and country music sensation Eric Church. The arena seats 19,758 and is a phenomenal place to catch an electrifying indoor concert, circus or ice show.

Visit PPG Paints Arena

The Pavilion at Star Lake

If you want to catch an outdoor concert then The Pavilion at Star Lake is Burgettstown, Pennsylvania is the place to be. The amphitheater seats about 23,000 with both canopy and lawn seating available. The Pavilion at Star Lake is where summer concert memories are made.

Visit The Pavilion at Star Lake

But some of the best shows in Pittsburgh can be seen at more localized smaller bars, concert halls and unique places. If you are looking for an intimate music experience then try and catch a show at one of these smaller Pittsburgh concert venues.

Mr. Smalls

Mr. Smalls is not only one of the most unique concert venues in Pittsburgh but one of the most extraordinary places to visit in the city. The concert hall is housed in an old church located in Millvale, PA about 5 minutes from downtown. Mr. Smalls hosts all sorts of bands and shows from local favorites Rusted Root to punk rock royalty - The Misfits. The theater offers a wide spectrum of music and events to satisfy local music and art connoisseurs and truly provides an awesome experience with rocking sound, magical lighting and intimate stage show.

Past Shows Include:

Dinosaur Jr.

The Strumbellas

The Mountain Goats

Visit Mr. Smalls

Stage AE

Stage AE resides on the North Shore of Pittsburgh in the shadow of stadium rock Valhalla - Acrisure Stadium but certainly holds its own as a major concert venue in Pittsburgh. Stage AE is uniquely constructed as a hybrid indoor and outdoor concert venue so shows can go on year-round. The venue is divided into three separate concert spaces: indoor music hall, indoor club and the outdoor amphitheater. Stage AE hosts a myriad of bands and festivals throughout the year - from metal to rap; Pittsburgh concert goers are never disappointed at one of the loudest places in town.

Visit Stage AE

Jergel's Rhythm Grille

Jergel's is a bar, grill and foremost a great place to see a show. Jergel's is located about 20 minutes north of Pittsburgh in Warrandale, PA and has a more local flavor and a laid back and enjoyable atmosphere. From country western to classic rock, Jergel's Rhythm Grille is a rock and roll paradise with a craft beer in Pittsburgh's North Hills.

Visit Jergel's

If you would like to add a concert venue, local band or any other Pittsburgh event please post it for free at Pittsburgh.net.