1) The Clarks continue to build on their foundation of playing solid working-class rock. The group gained a strong local following in the early ’90s gigging at clubs like Graffiti Nick’s Fat City and have remained together and active long after nearly every other band on the scene during that era called it quits. After over 35 years, 11 albums, countless gigs and zero line-up changes, The Clarks have gone from being a regional favorite to a local institution. And the band members, who formed The Clarks at Indiana University of Pennsylvania, have never forgotten their home turf. Their most recent studio album is 2018’s, Madly in Love at the End of The World, released on the Clarkhouse Entertainment label. The Clarks have a new single out, “Supernatural.” Several possibly annual concerts for The Clarks are the Fayette County Fair (mentioned in their song “Cigarette”) and the Heinz Field Kickoff and Rib Festival, and tonight’s show at Stage AE. Special guest is Tiny Wars. Doors open at 6:30 p.m. Indoors. Stage AE, 400 North Shore Dr., North Shore. (R.H.)

2) The Silencers were one of Pittsburgh’s top bands in the early 1980’s and featured a talented lineup of rock and rollers that included Frank Czuri (vocals), the late Warren King (guitar), and the late Byrd Foster (drums). The group’s original material combined rock, new wave, R&B, soul, and reggae. Their main claim to fame was a video of the Silencers’ medley “Peter Gunn Theme/Remote Control/Illegal” which aired on MTV on the very day the network premiered in 1981. The video won several awards. The group released two major-label albums and three singles. Billboard magazine said of the Silencers’ debut LP Rock’n’Roll Enforcers: “The Silencers are armed with a hard hitting debut. Fronted by the aggressive vocals of Frank Czuri…the Silencers show an amazing command of rock history…This is slashing rock which goes for the jugular.” The Silencers have reloaded and you can celebrate the 45th Anniversary of these outstanding Pittsburgh rockers tonight at 7:30 p.m. at City Winery. Spinning Jenny opens. 1627 Smallman St., Strip District.

3) Wouldn’t it be cool to get a deeper look inside interesting, and normally off limits sections of Downtown buildings? That’s the idea behind Doors Open Pittsburgh. “Two long-time participants as well as sponsors for the Downtown event are back again this year. Dollar Bank, the longest-operating bank in Pittsburgh’s financial district also houses an amazing historic center paying homage to that history; and Koppers Inc, a top floor experience with amazing views. New additions to the event this year include the Drury Plaza Hotel and its impressive vault; the private and exclusive Allegheny HYP Club and the Hertz Gateway Center, a crown jewel of architecture during Pittsburgh Renaissances.” Doors Open Pittsburgh was founded in 2016 by former television executive Bonnie Baxter. She will be leaving the organization she founded and wants to go out on a high note. For all the doors that will be open and more info visit their website. Today it’s OK to be nebby! 10 a.m. to 4 p.m. Continues tomorrow. Downtown.

Share on Social Media