Rob Brydon talks to Dominic Cavendish about his alter-ego in the TV comedy, Annually Retentive

The morning I meet Rob Brydon, I arrive to find him 20 feet up in the air suspended by a rope-harness and clinging to a wall embedded with imitation molluscs. We're at an indoor climbing centre in north London, where he's filming a TV ad for a company called Deep Sea Finance. What with his large hard-hat and a grin that turns into a grimace as the retakes pile up, he looks pitiful and ridiculous.

So it's just as well that the ad is bogus - a teasing tragicomic scenario concocted to form part of an episode in a new BBC3 series of Rob Brydon's Annually Retentive, in which the Welsh funnyman presents himself as the host of a lame news-based quiz show and a comedian whose career is dangling by a thread.

The uninitiated should picture a poor man's Have I Got News For You (making comedy out of headlines from years gone by rather than the week just been) spliced with cringe-making behind-the-scenes shots reminiscent of Extras or Alan Partridge. The whole thing feels at once flagrantly derivative and highly distinctive.

"This was Paul Duddridge's idea," says Brydon cheerily as he staggers into a sofa, arms shaking. "He saw a photo of me and my wife abseiling in Australia. He thought I looked very foolish and wondered how we could make use of that."

Duddridge, a long-time collaborator and co-writer on Annually Retentive, has helped Brydon forge a successful career out of the comedy of failure. Together they took his best-known creation, painfully chipper divorcee Keith Barret, from a back-seat slot on the BBC as a video-diary novelty (Marion and Geoff) to a chat-show king in his own right, advising celebrity couples on relationship issues.

The best thing that BBC3 put out last year, Annually Retentive entails a different level of risk: it presents Brydon as a has-been without the get-out clause of an obvious character mask. In the deadpan production meeting clips that pepper each episode, we're lured into thinking that the "real Rob Brydon" is venting his frustrations and revealing his insecurities.

He criticises the guests that his bookers have lined up. ("Patrick Kielty - he's lost it. Did he have anything to lose in the first place? We can't be sure.") He bristles at the ignorance of his far younger production staff and worries about his public profile. "I'm going to go from being unknown for shows that I respect to unknown for a show that I have utter contempt for," he lamented at the start of the first series, adding with a nonsensical flourish: "I preferred being unknown for good stuff."

Given that it took Brydon, now 41, way into his thirties to achieve recognition - he spent years on Radio Wales, worked for a time on a cable shopping channel and succeeded mainly as a voice artist, doing ads - you can't help wondering why he'd tempt fate like this. What's the fascination with flaunting fictional shortcomings?

"I don't quite know," he admits, as we retire to the catering coach. "I've always been interested in failure. Is this what I think about myself? I must do, to a degree. The 'me' in the show has many of my qualities, but they're exaggerated. What I've always done with my work is taken things I've either felt myself or observed in others, then warped them until they become funny."

The whole exercise in knowing self-abasement could come across as the height of in-jokey navel-gazing. Yet Brydon's glinting warmth as a performer offsets the project's inherent coldness. And the series as a whole performs an invaluable satirical role in lampooning a shallow televisual culture.

Brydon's pretend fears of falling out of the limelight seem entirely reasonable in an age when a newsreader as cherished as Moira Stuart can be axed from view. "It's remarkable the amount of emphasis that's put on simply being young, with no regard for accrued wisdom," says Brydon. "The pressing question we ask of our presenters is, 'Does their skin look smooth and shiny?' " He's devoting one episode of the new series to a visit to the trichologist and a panic about his pock-marked looks.

Jimmy Mulville, managing director of Hat Trick, makers of Have I Got News For You - in which the panellists' banter is edited down but not scripted - confirms that, "With most of these shows they bring in writers who are like old hookers: they will take on fresh comedians and say: 'I think you should say this then and that then.' "

"Most of these shows are not to be trusted," agrees the comedian Dave Gorman, a team captain on Annually Retentive. "There's normally some artifice behind the scenes that the audience is not let in on."

"We're not making a Panorama on corruption within the game-show world, exposing its hypocrisy," says Brydon. "But some of these panel shows are pretty poor and some of the comics on them I personally don't rate. You might think from watching this show that I would wish them ill. I don't."

Were he saying that in character as "Rob Brydon", it would be impossible to take his remarks at face value. But the saving grace of Brydon in the flesh is that he comes across as modest, serious and remarkably sincere. As Keith Barret's catchphrase has it, Annually Retentive is "just a bit of fun". Very postmodern, very clever, but fun all the same. Now it just needs to find the audience it deserves.

Series two of 'Rob Brydon's Annually Retentive' begins on BBC3 at 10.30pm on Monday. Series one will be released on DVD next month.

The best panel shows

Have I Got News For You (BBC)

Now in its 33rd series, the granddaddy of British comedy panel shows often looks far fresher than its imitators, thanks to the enduring chemistry between team leaders Paul Merton and Ian Hislop.

Never Mind the Buzzcocks (BBC)

While the arrival of fresh-faced Simon Amstell as host has given this pop trivia quiz a fillip, after more than 10 years it's all beginning to look very pre-mp3 generation.

8 Out of 10 Cats (Channel 4)

Built around unusual statistics, this vehicle for stand-offish stand-up Jimmy Carr should rightly itself become another statistic - and join all the other mediocre examples of the genre in the bin. Such is its inexplicable popularity, though, it looks set to continue ad nauseam.

29 Minutes of Fame (BBC)

A short-lived attempt to do for celebrity tittle-tattle what HIGNFY did for news. "Very stressful, very tense," according to one contestant - and it showed.