Perrier-winning Dominic played a writer in both series of Rob Brydon’s Annually Retentive on BBC3. He’s also just finished recording a new series, Holland Shorts for BBC R4. His film, TV and radio work also includes, The Small World of Dominic Holland (BBC R4), which was named as one of the station’s listeners most popular comedy shows when broadcast in 2000. His other credits include Young Persons’ Guide to Becoming a Rock Star and the film Tube Tales, directed by Armando Iannucci.

He also writes for Harry Enfield, Lenny Henry, On the Spot, What If (BBC R2), and Clive Anderson (BBC), in which he also appeared giving a comedic slant to the weeks news topics and is a regular guest on Five’s ‘The Wright Stuff’ and C4’s ‘Richard and Judy Show’ as well as Boom Bang a Bang- the National Lottery Draw Show.

His first novel, Only In America, was published in 2002 to excellent reviews, and his follow-up, The Ripple Effect, the following year. He has written two episodes of an animated sitcom called, The Wild World of Warren, being produced by Baby Cow Productions for ITV.

In addition, Dominic has made numerous guest appearances on such television shows as Have I Got News For You, The Clive James Show, The Brian Conley Show, The Des O’Connor Show, The Stand Up Show, Edinburgh Nights, Best of Edinburgh, The Royal Variety Show and Never Mind the Buzzcocks.

Dominic has performed five critically-acclaimed sell out one-man shows at the Edinburgh Festival. He won the Perrier Best Newcomer Award in 1993 followed by a Perrier Nomination in 1996.

Dominic has an acute eye for people’s idiosyncrasies, weaving minute details and observations into his material. His engaging stage presence gives his shows a real intimacy and warmth.

As one of the country’s most respected comedians, playing regularly at The Comedy Store and Jongleurs and performing at theatres all over the country.

“One of television’s quickest wits” - The Daily Telegraph “The British Jerry Seinfeld” - Time Out

PLUS a great supporting line-up: JOE WELLS • KEVIN McCARTHY (MC) • ANTHONY AYTON • SALLY FIRTH

Venue: The Marquee

Time: Door/bar opens at 6pm. Comedy at 7pm.

Age restriction: 18+

All shows contain adult humour, so be prepared for some naughty jokes and strong language!

Tickets: £16.00 (includes £1.00 booking fee)

GROUP TICKET SAVERS NOW AVAILABLE - BRING YOUR FRIENDS!

Tickets are non-refundable unless the event is cancelled or rescheduled due to government restrictions, in which case you will be offered an exchange to another date, or a refund. By purchasing tickets, you agree to these terms.

Our Comedy Nights are organised in association with House of Stand Up.

Grazing Platters.

We are now offering grazing platters to enjoy throughout the evening alongside the jokes! These are supplied to us by Joëlle’s of Chislehurst, an independent delicatessen specialising in continental meat and cheese platters. If you would like to order one, simply buy a ticket for the platter you would like (in addition to your event ticket), and it will be ready for you at The Beaverwood when you arrive for the Comedy Night. Please note that orders need to be placed 48 hours ahead of the event and platters cannot be purchased on the night.

If you have any queries regarding the contents, please contact Joelle on 07778 800504.

The price is £15.50 per person.

For more information about our Comedy Nights and grazing platters, click here.

Attending events

Please remember, it is important that you do not attend The Beaverwood if you have Covid. If notified in advance, we can transfer your ticket to another Comedy Night so you will not lose out!

Access

The Club House has now been demolished and is being redeveloped - please excuse our appearance while we build a fantastic new venue! Access is via a flat footpath with handrail approximately 70 metres long. It is suitable for wheelchairs.