Shoegaze, the indie-alternative subgenre full of reverb and foot pedals stemming from the late ’80s and early ’90s, has seen a resurgence in popularity among younger listeners in recent years. Slowdive’s “everything is alive” is a long-awaited album by one of the genre’s founding bands. “everything is alive” is the group’s fifth studio album overall and their second since their reunion in 2017 after their breakup in 1995. The band’s downfall can be attributed to their experimental sound during an era where Brit-pop ruled. But it is exactly that experimental sound that has left them with a dedicated and growing fanbase. The release of “everything is alive” signals a new era for Slowdive, a new era that will hopefully last.

The album is synth-heavy with often mumbled, slightly inaudible lyrics. It has a classic shoegaze sound with modern production value. It’s easy for alternative bands of the ’80s and ’90s to lose some of their original grit and style when it comes to putting out albums for a new generation of listeners, falling into the trap of making radio-friendly tracks. Slowdive has managed to hold onto their unique, atmospheric sound while still creating a high production value record.

Every track on “everything is alive” is layered, ethereal and utterly unreal while still having classic woeful, alternative undertones. From frontmen Neil Halstead and Rachel Goswell’s soft vocals to the dreamy, melancholic synth, every track feels almost hymnal. That hymnal vibe feels right at home with the religious imagery that can be heard throughout the album. The fourth track on the album, “andalucia plays,” features the lyrics, “The prayers of Saint Christopher / Travelers and stones / And ghosts on the river / Days fold into the end / Know I ran the Roman head / And you are the heart / The prayer I remember.” The mention of Saint Christopher, the patron saint of travelers, is perfect given that “everything is alive” will make the listener feel like they are being uprooted and taken on a surreal, psychedelic pilgrimage.

Possibly one of the most stand-out tracks on the album, “kisses” feels like it’s straight out of a dream. Slowdive’s classic otherworldly instrumentals mix perfectly with surreal lyrics, such as, “Maybe there’s a car there / Driving away from here / Taking all the ghosts, the hurt / Well, everything starts anew / Tell mе what you need, what’s right / Whatever is just enough / Is living with thе truth, a start / Maybe it’s just enough.” “kisses” feels like driving with the windows down with your friends on a cool summer night, sticking your head out the window and letting the breeze overtake you. In fact, that’s how practically every song on “everything is alive” feels. The album itself washes over the listener transporting them into a lucid dreamlike state.

The song “skin in the game” also continues the surreal lyricism that can be seen in “kisses.”

“Blood in the highs and count the sun / Poise in the heart will go so far,” Halstead sings as the song comes to a close. While Slowdive’s distinct, artful lyricism can be seen throughout “everything is alive,” the majority of the album is instrumental. The ambiance of “everything is alive” is perhaps what Slowdive does best. While their lyrics are beautifully written and sung, it is the practically unearthly instrumentals that make the album stand out. Slowdive has mastered the art of synthesizers and reverbed guitars and has taken their classic sound to a whole new level with “everything is alive.”

The dreamlike state that Slowdive pulls you into isn’t necessarily a happy one, and it shouldn’t be. The album is melancholic and gloomy at its core. This gloom is a defining feature of Slowdive’s sound, and fans will be delighted to see that they have managed to hold onto it. The band hasn’t given up on its signature alternative sound, and the high production value of the album definitely does not equal high energy. Slowdive hasn’t compromised their original sound to make music for a new generation — if anything, they have amplified it.“everything is alive” is the perfect soundtrack for both a dingy house party and a beautiful dreamscape. Slowdive has managed to produce what might just be the best alternative album of the year while also keeping shoegaze alive and in the cultural zeitgeist.