The UK band Slowdive is now considered one of the most influential shoegaze bands in the world.

Bass player Nick Chaplin has been a member of Slowdive since its formation and talks to Maggie Tweedie about the release of their fifth album - Everything Is Alive.

The genre name shoegazing was coined by audiences noting musicians staring at their pedal boards (or shoes) while experimenting with guitar effects. Bands like Jesus and the Mary Chain, My Bloody Valentine, Ride, and Lush were all bands playing this style of music during the late 80’s and early 90’s.

“There was a period of time..maybe 12 months. Where Slowdive released the first three EP’s. We had a slightly softer sound than those bands, we were slightly more classic and orchestral…. It all just felt like a bunch of mates”.

The band is now scattered around London and carves out time to meet, rehearse, and write new music. Christian Savill and Nick Chaplin are still in the Reading area, where the band first formed in 1981.

“Simon’s in Cambridge and Rachel and Neil are down in the South West living in Devon and Cornwall, living the country life down there”.

The result is a brand new LP, Everything Is Alive which they will take on tour through Canada and the USA in October. 2023 marks 30 years since Slowdive released their second studio album Souvlaki.

A record that continues to amass interest from contemporary musicians today. Surprisingly that album when it was released, wasn't received well by the press.

“Certainly in the United Kingdom, it didn't do that well in terms of sales”.

Eventually, the band would take a hiatus, stepping away from music altogether before deciding to reform in 2014.

It seems over that time period the reception for Souvlaki soared, earning the record its shoegaze stars.

“Over the years it's seemingly become this kind of seminal shoegaze record that all other shoegaze records are judged against. When the Sun Hits and Alison are always within the top three on Spotify. Both of those songs are from Souvlaki.”

Slowdive’s music has had another life online.

While Chaplin is unsure how the group became famous on TikTok, he acknowledges the trickle-down effects are positive. Embracing seeing younger generations enjoying Slowdive.

“My daughter is 12, she talks about how her friends at school know who Slowdive are because of TikToks. None of my daughter's friends had any idea that one of the members of the band was her dad”.

Prayer Remembered is a beautiful instrumental track that sits so aptly on the new record. Chaplin acknowledges it’s refreshing to lean into that side of the band.

“My only regret about that song is that it could be two minutes longer."

The Slab concludes the album on a heavier note.

“That’s probably my favourite track on the record. We made the drums a lot louder and harder, and the synths were doomy and funereal”.

Slowdive just played a sold-out show at The Powerstation in Auckland in July. The band has also been announced to headline Primavera South America, alongside The Cure, Blur, and Pet Shop Boys.