Bio Radek Štěpánek is a professional tennis player from the Czech Republic. His career-high singles ranking is World No. 8 and best doubles ranking is World No. 4. Štěpánek's biggest achievements are reaching two Masters 1000 event finals and the quarterfinals of Wimbledon in 2006, as well as winning the deciding match for Czech Republic's Davis Cup winning team in 2012 and again in 2013.

In doubles, he won his first major title at the 2012 Australian Open, along with Indian partner Leander Paes, defeating the Bryan Brothers in the final. Paes and Stepanek also won the Men's Doubles title at the 2013 US Open, defeating the Bryan Brothers in the semi-finals and Bruno Soares and Alexander Peya in the finals.

Born in Karviná, Moravia-Silesia, Stepanek began playing tennis at age three with his father Vlastimil, who was a tennis coach. Štěpánek's brother is a policeman and his mother a librarian. His cousin is Jaromír Blažek, who represented the Czech Republic as a football goalkeeper. Stepanek grew up admiring Czech tennis player Ivan Lendl, particularly noting "he was the one who brought professionalism to the sport with his conditioning."

Štěpánek turned professional in 1997. He started on tour as a doubles specialist, winning 12 ATP titles. Since 2002, Štěpánek has focused on being a better singles player while still playing top-level doubles. He is known for his after-the-shot grunting, his over-the-top celebrations and his many relationships with WTA players.

Štěpánek first came to mainstream notice when he defeated former World No. 1 Gustavo Kuerten in five sets on his way to the third round of the 2003 Australian Open. He enjoys playing on all surfaces, considers that his serve as best shot. Since 2001, has worked with countryman Petr Korda in Bradenton, Florida part-time.

Best friend on tour is countryman Jiri Novak.

Hobbies are playing soccer, floorball and hockey (wanted to be a goalie as a youngster). His favorite NHL players are countrymen Jaromir Jagr and Dominik Hasek.

source:wiki